does just the opposite of what one expects; but if she does accept you,
she will--as an honest man I ought not to conceal it from you--she will
give you many a riddle to guess.  Whims and freaks are as plenty with her
as buttercups in spring turf; but you can't find a more pious girl in all
Ratisbon.  From ancient times the motto of the Blombergs has been 'Faith,
Courage, and Honour,' and for that very reason it seems to me highly
improbable that Wawerl would advise you to accept an office which, after
all, will force you to yield to the will of heretical superiors.  The
high pay alone will hardly win her."

"It will not?" asked Wolf in astonishment.  "It is for her alone, not for
myself, that I value the increased income."

"For her?" repeated the old man, shrugging his shoulders incredulously.
"Open your eyes, and you will see what she cares for gold and jewels."

"The splendid bouquet there--do you suppose that she even looked at it?
Bright pinks, red roses, and stately lilies in the centre.  Where were
they obtained, since April is scarcely past?  And yet she threw the
costly birthday gift aside as if the flowers were apple parings.  It was
not she, but I, who afterward put them in the pitcher, for I can't bear
to see any of God's creatures thirst, even though it is only a flower.
Besides, we both know that the fullest purse in the city, and a man
worthy of all respect to boot, are attached to the bouquet.  Yes, indeed!
For a long time she has been unwilling to share my poverty, and if Herr
Peter had remained loyal to our holy religion, I would persuade her
myself."

Here, exhausted by his eager speech, he paused with flushed cheeks--for
it was a hot day--and raised his long arm to take his hat from the hook,
to refresh his dry palate at the tavern.

But, after a brief pause for reflection, he restored it to its place.

He had remembered that he had not stirred a finger that morning, and had
promised to have an inscription on a jug completed early the next day.
Besides, the baker had not been paid for four weeks, so, sighing heavily,
he dragged himself to the workbench to move the burin with a weary hand.

Wolf had followed him with his eyes, and the sight of the chivalrous
hero, the father of the girl whom he loved, undertaking such a wretched
occupation, in such a mood, pierced him to the heart.

"Father Blomberg," he said warmly, putting his hand on his shoulder, "let
your graver rest.  I am a suitor for your child's hand.  We are old
friends, and if from my abundance I offer you----"

Here the hot-blooded old man furiously exclaimed: "Don't forget to whom
you are speaking, young fellow!  How important he feels because he gets
his living at court!  True, there is no abundance here; but I practise
this art merely because I choose, and because it cools my hot blood in
this lukewarm time of peace.  But if on that account," he added
threateningly, while his prominent eyes protruded even farther than
usual, "you ever again venture to talk to me as though I were a day
labourer or a receiver of alms----"

Here he hesitated, for in the midst of his outbreak Barbara had
noiselessly entered the room.  Now she approached him, and, in a more
gentle and affectionate tone than she had ever used before, entreated him
to rest.

The captain, groaning, shook his head, but Barbara stepped lightly upon
the low wooden bench on which he sat, drew his gray head toward her, and
tenderly stroked his hair and beard, whispering: "Rise, father, and let
somebody else finish the engraving, it is so cool and shady in the green
woods where the birds are singing, and only yesterday you praised the
refreshing drink at the Red Cock."

Here he impatiently, yet with a pleased senile, endeavoured to release
himself from her arms, but she interrupted his exclamation, "Don't you
know, Miss Thoughtless," with the whispered entreaty: "Here me out
first, father!  Maestro Appenzelder asked me to add my voice to the boy
choir a few times more, and yesterday evening the treasurer told me that
the Queen of Hungary had commissioned him to give me as many ducats as
the boys received pennies."

She spoke the truth; but the old man laughed heartily in his deep tones,
cast a quick glance at Wolf, who was looking up at his weapons, and,
lowering his voice, cried gaily, "That's what I call a feminine
Chrysostomus or golden mouth, and I should think----"

Here he hesitated, for a doubt arose in his chivalrous mind whether it
was seemly for a young girl who belonged to a knightly race to accept
payment for her singing.  But the thought that it came from the hand of
royalty, and that even the great Duke of Alba, the renowned Granvelles,
and so many princes, counts, and barons received golden wages for their
services from the Emperor's hand, put an end to these scruples.

So, in a happier frame of mind than he had experienced for a long time,
he said in a low tone, that he might not be understood by their guest:
"Greater people than we rejoice in the gifts which emperors and kings
bestow, and--we can use them, can't we?"

Then he rubbed his hands, laughed as if he had outwitted the people of
whom he was thinking, and whispered to his daughter: "The baker will
wonder when he gets paid this time in glittering gold, and the butcher
and Master Reinhard!  My boots still creak softly when I step, and you
know what that means.  The soles of your little shoes probably only sing,
but they, too, are not silent."

The old man, released from a heavy burden of care, laughed merrily again
at this jest, and then, raising his voice, told his daughter and Wolf
that he would first get a cool drink and then go outside the gate
wherever his lame foot might carry him.  Would not the young nobleman
accompany him?

But Wolf preferred to stay with Barbara, that he might plead his cause in
person.  There was something so quiet and diffident in her manner.  If
she would not listen to him to-day, she never would.  In saying farewell,
the captain remarked that he would not meddle in the affair of the
Council.  Wawerl alone must decide that.

"When I return home," he concluded, "you will have come to an agreement,
and, whatever the determination may be, I shall be satisfied.  Perhaps
some bright idea may come to me, too, over the wine.  I'll go to the
Black Bear, where I always meet fellow-soldiers."

Then he raised his hand with a gay farewell salute, and left the room.




CHAPTER XVII.

As soon as the captain's limping steps died away on the stairs, Wolf
summoned all his courage and moved nearer to Barbara.

His heart throbbed anxiously as he told himself that the next few minutes
would decide his future destiny.

As he saw her before him, fairer than ever, with downcast eves, silent
and timid, without a trace of the triumphant self-assurance which she had
gained during his absence, he firmly believed that he had made the right
choice, and that her consent would render him the most enviable of happy
mortals.  If she refused him her hand--he felt this no less plainly--his
life would be forever robbed of light and joy.

True, he was no longer as blithe and full of hope as when he entered her
plain lodgings a short time before.

The doubt of the worthy man, behind whom the house door had just closed,
had awakened his doubts also.  Yet what he now had it in his power to
offer, since his conversation with the syndic, was by no means trivial.
He must hold fast to it, and as he raised his eyes more freely to her
his courage increased, for she was still gazing at the floor in silent
submission, as if ready to commit her fate into his hands; nay, in the
brief seconds during which his eyes rested upon her, he perceived an
expression which seemed wholly alien to her features, and bestowed upon
this usually alert, self-assured, vivacious creature an air of weary
helplessness.

While he was generally obliged to maintain an attitude of defence toward
her, she now seemed to need friendly consolation.  So, obeying a hasty
impulse, he warmly extended both hands, and in a gentle, sympathizing
tone exclaimed, "Wawerl, my dear girl, what troubles you?"

Then her glance met his, and her blue eyes flashed upon him with an
expression of defiant resistance; but he could not help thinking of the
young witch who was said to have resembled her, and a presentiment told
him that she was lost to him.

The confirmation of this foreboding was not delayed, for in a tone whose
repellent sternness startled him, she angrily burst forth: "What should
trouble me?  It as ill becomes you to question me with such looks and
queries as it pleases me."  Wolf, in bewilderment, assured her that she
had seemed to him especially charming in her gracious gentleness.  If
anything had happened to cloud her fearless joyousness, let her forget
it, for the matter now to be considered concerned the happiness of two
human lives.

That was what she was saying to herself, Barbara replied in a more
friendly tone, and, with newly awakened hope, the young knight informed
her that the time had now come when, without offending against modesty,
he might call himself a "made man."

With increasing eagerness and confidence he then told her what the
councillor had offered.  Without concealing her father's scruples, he
added the assurance that he felt perfectly secure against the temptations
of which there would certainly be no lack while he was in the service of
a Protestant magistracy.

"And when you, devout, pure, true girl, stand by my side," he concluded
with an ardour which surprised Barbara in this quiet, reserved man, "when
you are once mine, my one love, then I shall conquer the hardest obstacle
as if it were mere pastime, then I would not change places with the
Emperor, for then my happiness would be----"

Hitherto she had silently permitted him to speak, but now her cheeks
suddenly flamed with a deep flush, and she warmly interrupted: "You
deserve to be happy, Wolf, and I could desire nothing more ardently than
to see you glad and content; but you would never become so through me.
How pale you grow!  For my sake, do not take it so much to heart; it
grieves me to see you suffer.  Only believe that.  It cuts me to the
heart to inflict such great sorrow upon one so loyal, good, and dear,
who values me so much more than I deserve."

Here Wolf, deeply agitated, wildly called her name, and besought her
not to cast aside so harshly the wealth of love and fidelity which he
offered.

His own anguish of soul, and the pain inflicted by the cruel blow which
crushed his dearest hopes, robbed him of fortitude and calmness.  With
tears in his eyes, he threw himself on his knees before her and gazed
into her face with anxious entreaty, exclaiming brokenly: "Do not--do not
inflict this suffering upon me, Wawerl!  Rob me of everything except
hope.  Defer your acceptance until I can offer you a still fairer future,
only be merciful and leave me hope!"

Tears now began to glitter in Barbara's eyes also, and Wolf, noticing it,
hastened with reviving courage to assure her how little it would cost him
to reject, once for all, to please her, the tempting position offered
to him here.  He could soon obtain a good office elsewhere, since their
Majesties were not only favourably disposed toward him, but now toward
her also.  True, to him even the most brilliant external gifts of life
would be valueless and charmless without her love.

But here Barbara imperatively commanded him to rise, and not make his own
heart and hers still heavier without avail.

Wolf pressed his hands upon his temples as violently as if he feared
losing his senses; but the young girl voluntarily put her arm around his
shoulders, and said with sincere emotion: "Poor Wolf!  I know how
thoroughly in earnest you are, but I dare not even leave you hope--I
neither can nor ought.  Yet you may hear this: From my childhood you have
been dearer to me than any one else, and never shall I forget how firmly
you cling to me, how hard it is for you to give me up."

Then Sir Wolf vehemently asked to know what stood between them; and
Barbara, after a brief pause for reflection, answered, "Love for
another."

The confession pierced him like a dagger thrust, and he passionately
entreated her to tell him the name of the man who had defrauded him of
the happiness to which he possessed an older and better right than any
one else.

He paced the room with long strides as he spoke, gazing around him as if
he imagined that she had his rival concealed somewhere.

In doing so his glance fell upon Herr Schlumperger's bouquet, and he
wildly cried: "He?  So, after all, wealth----"

But this was too much for Barbara, and she stopped him with the
exclamation: "Fool that you are!  As if You did not know that I am not to
