her duties in the Netherlands--which she ruled as regent in the name of
her imperial brother--and devote herself to hunting, to her heart's
content, if the condition of the monarch's health had not detained her
near him.

She pitied Charles because she loved him, yet she was weary of playing
the sick nurse.

She had just indignantly informed Quijada what an immense burden of work,
in spite of the pangs of the gout, her suffering brother had imposed upon
himself ever since the first cock-crow.  But he would take no better care
of himself, and therefore it was difficult to help him.  Was it not
utterly unprecedented?  Directly after mass he had examined dozens of
papers, made notes on the margins, and affixed his signature; then he
received Father Pedro de Soto, his confessor, the nuncio, the English and
the Venetian ambassadors; and, lastly, had an interview with young
Granvelle, the Bishop of Arras, which had continued three full hours, and
perhaps might be going on still had not Dr. Mathys, the leech, put an end
to it.

Queen Mary had just found him utterly exhausted, with his face buried in
his hands.

"And you, too," she added in conclusion, "can not help admitting that if
this state of things continues there must be an evil end."

Quijada bent his head in assent, and then answered modestly:

"Yet your Majesty knows our royal master's nature.  He will listen calmly
to you, whom he loves, or to me, who was permitted to remain at his side
as a page, or probably to the two Granvelles, Malfalconnet, and others
whom he trusts, when they venture to warn him--"

"And yet keep on in his mad career," interrupted Queen Mary with an angry
gesture of the hand.

"Plus ultra--more, farther--is his motto," observed Quijada in a tone of
justification.

"Forward ceaselessly, for aught I care, so long as the stomach and the
feet are sound!" replied the Queen, raising her hand to the high lace
ruff, which oppressed the breathing of one so accustomed to the outdoor
air.  "But when, like him, a man must give up deer-stalking and at every
movement makes a wry face and can scarcely repress a groan--it might move
a stone to pity!--he ought to choose another motto.  Persuade him to do
so, Quijada, if you are really his friend."

The smile with which the nobleman listened to this request plainly showed
the futility of the demand.

The Queen noticed it, threw her arm aloft as if she were hurling a
hunting spear, and exclaimed "I'm not easily deceived, Luis.  Whether you
could or not, the will is lacking.  You shun the attempt!  Because you
are young yourself, and can still cope with the bear and wild boar, you
like the motto, which will probably lead to new wars, and thereby to
fresh renown.  But, alas!  my poor, poor brother, who--how long ago it
is!--could once have thrown even you upon the sand, what can he do, with
this accursed gout?  And besides, what more can the Emperor Charles gain,
since there is no chance of obtaining the sovereignty of the world, of
which he once dreamed?  He must learn to be content!  Surely at his age!
It is easy to calculate, for his life began with the century, and this is
its forty-sixth year.  Of course, with you soldiers the years of warfare
count double, and he--Duke Alba said so--was born a general.  One need
not be able to reckon far in order to number how many months he has spent
in complete peace.  And then he attained his majority at fifteen, and
with what weighty cares the man of the 'plus ultra' has loaded his
shoulders since that time!  You, and many others at the court, had still
more to do, but, Luis, one thing, and it is the hardest burden, you were
all spared.  I know it.  It is called responsibility.  Compared with
this all others are mere fluttering feathers.  Its weight may become
unendurable when the weal and woe of half the world are at stake.  Thus
every year of government was equal to three of war; but you, Luis--the
question is allowable when put to a man-how old are you?"

"Within a few months of forty."

"So young!" cried the Queen.  "Yet, when one looks at you closely, your
appearance corresponds with your years."

Quijada pointed to the gray locks on his temples, but the Queen eagerly
continued:

I noticed that at Brussels.  And do you know what gave you those few
white hairs?  Simply the responsibility that so cruelly shortened the
Emperor's youth, and which at least grazes you.  As I saw him to-day,
Luis, many a man of sixty has a more vigorous appearance."

"And yet, if your Majesty will permit me to say so," Quijada replied with
a low bow, "he may be in a very different condition to-morrow.  I heard
Dr. Mathys himself remark that the life of a gouty patient was like a
showery day in July--gloomy enough while the thunder-storm was raging,
but radiant before and afterward until the clouds rose again.  Surely
your Majesty remembers how erect, how vigorous, and how knightly his
bearing was when he greeted you on your arrival.  The happiness of having
his beloved sister again restored his paralyzed buoyancy speedily enough,
although just at present there is certainly no lack of cares pressing
upon him, and notwithstanding the disastrous conditions which we found
existing among the godless populace here.  That this cruel
responsibility, however, can mature the mind without harming the body
your Majesty is a living example."

"Nonsense!" retorted the regent in protest.  "From you, at least, I
forbid idle flattery!"

As she spoke she pointed with the riding whip, which, on account of her
four-footed favourites, she carried in her hand, to her own hair.  True,
so far as it was visible under the stiff jewelled velvet cap which
covered her head, the fair tresses had a lustrous sheen, and the braids,
interwoven with pearls, were unusually thick, but a few silver threads
appeared amid the locks which clustered around the intellectual brow.

Quijada saw them, and, with a respectful bow, answered.

"The heavy burden of anxiety for the Netherlands, which is not always
rewarded with fitting gratitude."

"Oh, no," replied the Queen, shrugging her shoulders contemptuously.
"Yes, many things in Brussels rouse my indignation, but they do not turn
my hair gray.  It began to whiten up here, under the widow's cap, if you
care to know it, and, if the Emperor's health does not improve, the locks
there will soon look like my white Diana's."

Here she hesitated, and, accustomed both in the discharge of the duties
of her office and during the chase not to deviate too far from the goal
she had in view, she first gave her favourite dog, which had leaped on
Don Luis in friendly greeting, a blow with her whip, and then said in a
totally different tone:

"But I am not the person in question.  You have already heard that you
must help me, Luis.  Did you see the Emperor yesterday after vespers?"

"I had the honour, your Majesty."

"And did not the conviction that he is in evil case force itself upon
you?"

"I felt it so keenly that I spoke to Dr. Mathys of his feeble appearance,
his bowed figure, and the other things which I would so gladly have seen
otherwise."

"And these things?  Speak frankly!"

"These things," replied the major-domo, after a brief hesitation, "are
the melancholy moods to which his Majesty often resigns himself for
hours."

"And which remind you of Queen Juana, our unhappy mother?" asked the
Queen with downcast eyes.

"Remind is a word which your Majesty will permit me to disclaim," replied
Quijada resolutely.  "The great thinker, who never loses sight of the
most distant goal, who weighs and considers again and again ere he
determines upon the only right course in each instance--the great general
who understands how to make far-reaching plans for military campaigns as
ably as to direct a cavalry attack--the statesman whose penetration
pierces deeper than the keen intelligence of his famous councillors--the
wise law-giver, the ruler with the iron strength of will and unfailing
memory, is perhaps the soundest person mentally among all of us at court-
nay, among the millions who obey him.  But, so far as my small share of
knowledge extends, melancholy has nothing to do with the mind.  It is
dependent upon the state of the spirits, and springs from bile----"

"You learned that from Dr. Mathys," interrupted the royal lady, "and the
quacks repeat it from their masters Hippocrates and Galen.  Such parrot
gabble does not please me.  To my woman's reason, it seems rather that
when the mind is ill we should try a remedy whose effect upon it has
already been proved, and I think I have found it."

"I am still ignorant of it," replied Quijada eagerly; "but I would swear
by my saint that you have hit upon the right expedient."

"Listen, then, and this time I believe you will have no cause to repent
your hasty oath.  Since death robbed our sovereign lord of his wife, and
the gout has prevented his enjoyment of the chief pleasures of life--
hunting, the tournament, and the other pastimes which people of our rank
usually pursue--in what can he find diversion?  The masterpieces of
painters and other artists, the inventions of mechanicians and clock-
makers, and the works of scholars have no place here, but probably----"

"Then it is the noble art of music which your Majesty has in view,"
Quijada eagerly interrupted.  "Admirable!  For, since the days of King
Saul and the harper David----"

"There is certainly no better remedy for melancholy," said the Queen,
completing the exclamation of the loyal man.  "But it could affect no
one more favourably than the Emperor.  You yourself know how keen a
connoisseur he is, and how often this has been confirmed by our greatest
masters.  Need I remind you of the high mass in Cologne, at which the
magnificent singing seemed fairly to reanimate him after the defection of
the heretical archbishop--which threatens to have a disastrous influence
upon my Netherlanders also--had robbed him of the last remnant of his
enjoyment of life, already clouded?  The indignation aroused by the
German princes, and the difficult decision to which their conduct is
forcing him, act upon his soul like poison.  But hesitation is not in
my nature, so I thought: Let us have music--good, genuine music.  Then
I sent a mounted messenger to order Gombert, the conductor of his
orchestra, and the director of my choir of boys, to bring their musicians
to Ratisbon.  The whole company will arrive this evening.  Dash forward
is my motto, and not only while in the saddle during the chase.  But,
Luis, you must now tell me--"

"That your Majesty's sisterly affection has discovered the only right
course," cried Quijada, deeply touched, pressing his lips respectfully to
the flowing sleeve of her robe.

The  major--domo's  assurance  undoubtedly sprang from the depths of his
heart, yet the doubts which the hasty action of the vivacious sovereign
aroused in his mind compelled him to represent to her, though with the
courteous caution which his position demanded, that her bold measure
might only too easily arouse the displeasure of the person whom it was
intended to benefit.  The expense it would entail especially troubled
Quijada, and the Queen herself appeared surprised when he estimated the
sum which would be required for the transportation of the band and the
boy choir from Brussels to Ratisbon and back again.

Forty musicians, twelve boy singers, the leaders, and the paymaster must
be moved, and in their train were numerous grooms and attendants, as well
as conveyances for the baggage and the valuable instruments.

Besides, the question of accommodation for this large number in the
already crowded city now arose, for the Queen confessed that, in order
to make the surprise complete, no one had been commissioned to find
lodgings.
