suitable opportunity to make his declaration in due form, which done he
would be prepared to deal with Foy and Martin.

Towards evening it was Elsa's custom to walk abroad. As at that hour Foy
left the foundry, naturally he accompanied her in these walks, Martin
following at a little distance in case he should be wanted. Soon those
excursions became delightful to both of them. To Elsa, especially, it
was pleasant to escape from the hot house into the cool evening air,
and still more pleasant to exchange the laboured tendernesses and
highly coloured compliments of Adrian for the cheerful honesty of Foy's
conversation.

Foy admired his cousin as much as did his half-brother, but his attitude
towards her was very different. He never said sweet things; he never
gazed up into her eyes and sighed, although once or twice, perhaps by
accident, he did squeeze her hand. His demeanour towards her was that of
a friend and relative, and the subject of their talk for the most part
was the possibility of her father's deliverance from the dangers which
surrounded him, and other matters of the sort.

The time came at last when Adrian was allowed to leave his room, and
as it chanced it fell to Elsa's lot to attend him on this first journey
downstairs. In a Dutch home of the period and of the class of the Van
Goorl's, all the women-folk of whatever degree were expected to take
a share in the household work. At present Elsa's share was to nurse to
Adrian, who showed so much temper at every attempt which was made
to replace her by any other woman, that, in face of the doctor's
instructions, Lysbeth did not dare to cross his whim.

It was with no small delight, therefore, that Elsa hailed the prospect
of release, for the young man with his grandiose bearing and amorous
sighs wearied her almost beyond endurance. Adrian was not equally
pleased; indeed he had feigned symptoms which caused him to remain in
bed an extra week, merely in order that he might keep her near him. But
now the inevitable hour had come, and Adrian felt that it was incumbent
upon him to lift the veil and let Elsa see some of the secret of
his soul. He had prepared for the event; indeed the tedium of his
confinement had been much relieved by the composition of lofty and
heart-stirring addresses, in which he, the noble cavalier, laid his
precious self and fortune at the feet of this undistinguished, but rich
and attractive maid.

Yet now when the moment was with him, and when Elsa gave him her hand
to lead him from the room, behold! all these beautiful imaginings had
vanished, and his knees shook with no fancied weakness. Somehow Elsa did
not look as a girl ought to look who was about to be proposed to; she
was too cold and dignified, too utterly unconscious of anything unusual.
It was disconcerting--but--it must be done.

By a superb effort Adrian recovered himself and opened with one of the
fine speeches, not the best by any means, but the only specimen which he
could remember.

"Without," he began, "the free air waits to be pressed by my cramped
wings, but although my heart bounds wild as that of any haggard hawk, I
tell you, fairest Elsa, that in yonder gilded cage," and he pointed to
the bed, "I----"

"Heaven above us! Heer Adrian," broke in Elsa in alarm, "are you--are
you--getting giddy?"

"She does not understand. Poor child, how should she?" he murmured in a
stage aside. Then he started again. "Yes, most adorable, best beloved,
I am giddy, giddy with gratitude to those fair hands, giddy with worship
of those lovely eyes----"

Now Elsa, unable to contain her merriment any longer, burst out
laughing, but seeing that her adorer's face was beginning to look as
it did in the dining-room before he broke the blood vessel, she checked
herself, and said:

"Oh! Heer Adrian, don't waste all this fine poetry upon me. I am too
stupid to understand it."

"Poetry!" he exclaimed, becoming suddenly natural, "it isn't poetry."

"Then what is it?" she asked, and next moment could have bitten her
tongue out.

"It is--it is--love!" and he sank upon his knees before her, where, she
could not but notice, he looked very handsome in the subdued light of
the room, with his upturned face blanched by sickness, and his southern
glowing eyes. "Elsa, I love you and no other, and unless you return that
love my heart will break and I shall die."

Now, under ordinary circumstances, Elsa would have been quite competent
to deal with the situation, but the fear of over-agitating Adrian
complicated it greatly. About the reality of his feelings at the moment,
at any rate, it seemed impossible to be mistaken, for the man was
shaking like a leaf. Still, she must make an end of these advances.

"Rise, Heer Adrian," she said gently, holding out her hand to help him
to his feet.

He obeyed, and glancing at her face, saw that it was very calm and cold
as winter ice.

"Listen, Heer Adrian," she said. "You mean this kindly, and doubtless
many a maid would be flattered by your words, but I must tell you that I
am in no mood for love-making."

"Because of another man?" he queried, and suddenly becoming theatrical
again, added, "Speak on, let me hear the worst; I will not quail."

"There is no need to," replied Elsa in the same quiet voice, "because
there is no other man. I have never yet thought of marriage, I have no
wish that way, and if I had, I should forget it now when from hour to
hour I do not know where my dear father may be, or what fate awaits him.
He is my only lover, Heer Adrian," and as Elsa spoke her soft brown eyes
filled with tears.

"Ah!" said Adrian, "would that I might fly to save him from all dangers,
as I rescued you, lady, from the bandits of the wood."

"I would you might," she replied, smiling sadly at the double meaning of
the words, "but, hark, your mother is calling us. I know, Heer Adrian,"
she added gently, "that you will understand and respect my dreadful
anxiety, and will not trouble me again with poetry and love-talk, for if
you do I shall be--angry."

"Lady," he answered, "your wishes are my law, and until these clouds
have rolled from the blue heaven of your life I will be as silent as the
watching moon. And, by the way," he added rather nervously, "perhaps
you will be silent also--about our talk, I mean, as we do not want that
buffoon, Foy, thrusting his street-boy fun at us."

Elsa bowed her head. She was inclined to resent the "we" and other
things in this speech, but, above all, she did not wish to prolong this
foolish and tiresome interview, so, without more words, she took her
admirer by the hand and guided him down the stairs.



It was but three days after this ridiculous scene, on a certain
afternoon, when Adrian had been out for the second time, that the
evil tidings came. Dirk had heard them in the town, and returned home
well-nigh weeping. Elsa saw his face and knew at once.

"Oh! is he dead?" she gasped.

He nodded, for he dared not trust himself to speak.

"How? Where?"

"In the Poort prison at The Hague."

"How do you know?"

"I have seen a man who helped to bury him."

She looked up as though to ask for further details, but Dirk turned away
muttering, "He is dead, he is dead, let be."

Then she understood, nor did she ever seek to know any more. Whatever he
had suffered, at least now he was with the God he worshipped, and with
the wife he lost. Only the poor orphan, comforted by Lysbeth, crept from
the chamber, and for a week was seen no more. When she appeared again
she seemed to be herself in all things, only she never smiled and was
very indifferent to what took place about her. Thus she remained for
many days.

Although this demeanour on Elsa's part was understood and received with
sympathy and more by the rest of the household, Adrian soon began to
find it irksome and even ridiculous. So colossal was this young man's
vanity that he was unable quite to understand how a girl could be so
wrapped up in the memories of a murdered father, that no place was left
in her mind for the tendernesses of a present adorer. After all, this
father, what was he? A middle-aged and, doubtless, quite uninteresting
burgher, who could lay claim to but one distinction, that of great
wealth, most of which had been amassed by his ancestors.

Now a rich man alive has points of interest, but a rich man dead is
only interesting to his heirs. Also, this Brant was one of these
narrow-minded, fanatical, New Religion fellows who were so wearisome to
men of intellect and refinement. True, he, Adrian, was himself of that
community, for circumstances had driven him into the herd, but oh! he
found them a dreary set. Their bald doctrines of individual effort, of
personal striving to win a personal redemption, did not appeal to him;
moreover, they generally ended at the stake. Now about the pomp and
circumstance of the Mother Church there was something attractive. Of
course, as a matter of prejudice he attended its ceremonials from time
to time and found them comfortable and satisfying. Comfortable also
were the dogmas of forgiveness to be obtained by an act of penitential
confession, and the sense of a great supporting force whose whole weight
was at the disposal of the humblest believer.

In short, there was nothing picturesque about the excellent departed
Hendrik, nothing that could justify the young woman in wrapping herself
up in grief for him to the entire exclusion of a person who _was_
picturesque and ready, at the first opportunity, to wrap himself up in
her.

After long brooding, assisted by a close study of the romances of the
period, Adrian convinced himself that in all this there was something
unnatural, that the girl must be under a species of spell which in her
own interest ought to be broken through. But how? That was the question.
Try as he would he could do nothing. Therefore, like others in a
difficulty, he determined to seek the assistance of an expert, namely,
Black Meg, who, among her other occupations, for a certain fee payable
in advance, was ready to give advice as a specialist in affairs of the
heart.

To Black Meg accordingly he went, disguised, secretly and by night, for
he loved mystery, and in truth it was hardly safe that he should visit
her by the light of day. Seated in a shadowed chamber he poured out his
artless tale to the pythoness, of course concealing all names. He might
have spared himself this trouble, as he was an old client of Meg's, a
fact that no disguise could keep from her. Before he opened his lips
she knew perfectly what was the name of his inamorata and indeed all the
circumstances connected with the pair of them.

The wise woman listened in patience, and when he had done, shook her
head, saying that the case was too hard for her. She proposed, however,
to consult a Master more learned than herself, who, by great good
fortune, was at that moment in Leyden, frequenting her house in fact,
and begged that Adrian would return at the same hour on the morrow.

Now, as it chanced, oddly enough Black Meg had been commissioned by the
said Master to bring about a meeting between himself and this very young
man.

Adrian returned accordingly, and was informed that the Master, after
consulting the stars and other sources of divination, had become so
deeply interested in the affair that, for pure love of the thing and
not for any temporal purpose of gain, he was in attendance to advise in
person. Adrian was overjoyed, and prayed that he might be introduced.
Presently a noble-looking form entered the room, wrapped in a
long cloak. Adrian bowed, and the form, after contemplating him
earnestly--very earnestly, if he had known the truth--acknowledged
the salute with dignity. Adrian cleared his throat and began to speak,
whereon the sage stopped him.

"Explanations are needless, young man," he said, in a measured and
melodious voice, "for my studies of the matter have already informed
me of more than you can tell. Let me see; your name is Adrian van
Goorl--no, called Van Goorl; the lady you desire to win is Elsa Brant,
the daughter of Hendrik Brant, a heretic and well-known goldsmith, who
was recently executed at The Hague. She is a girl of much beauty, but
one unnaturally insensible to the influence of love, and who does not
at present recognise your worth. There are, also, unless I am mistaken,
other important circumstances connected with the case.

"This lady is a great heiress, but her fortune is at present missing;
it is, I have reason to believe, hidden in the Haarlemer Meer. She
is surrounded with influences that are inimical to you, all of which,
however, can be overcome if you will place yourself unreservedly in my
hands, for, young man, I accept no half-confidences, nor do I ask for
any fee. When the fortune is recovered and the maiden is your happy
wife, then we will talk of payment for services rendered, and not
before."

"Wonderful, wonderful!" gasped Adrian; "most learned senor, every word
you say is true."

"Yes, friend Adrian, and I have not told you all the truth. For
instance--but, no, this is not the time to speak. The question is, do
you accept my terms?"

"What terms, senor?"

"The old terms, without which no wonder can be worked--faith, absolute
faith."

Adrian hesitated a little. Absolute faith seemed a large present to give
a complete stranger at a first interview.

"I read your thought and I respect it," went on the sage, who, to tell
truth, was afraid he had ventured a little too far. "There is no hurry;
these affairs cannot be concluded in a day."

Adrian admitted that they could not, but intimated that he would be glad
of a little practical and immediate assistance. The sage buried his face
in his hands and thought.

"The first thing to do," he said presently, "is to induce a favourable
disposition of the maiden's mind towards yourself, and this, I think,
can best be brought about--though the method is one which I do not
often use--by means of a love philtre carefully compounded to suit the
circumstances of the case. If you will come here to-morrow at dusk, the
lady of this house--a worthy woman, though rough of speech and no true
adept--will hand it to you."

"It isn't poisonous?" suggested Adrian doubtfully.

"Fool, do I deal in poisons? It will poison the girl's heart in your
favour, that is all."

"And how is it to be administered?" asked Adrian.

"In the water or the wine she drinks, and afterwards you must speak to
her again as soon as possible. Now that is settled," he went on airily,
"so, young friend, good-bye."

"Are you sure that there is no fee?" hesitated Adrian.

"No, indeed," answered the sage, "at any rate until all is accomplished.
Ah!" and he sighed, "did you but know what a delight it is to a weary
and world-worn traveller to help forward the bright ambitions of youth,
to assist the pure and soaring soul to find the mate destined to it by
heaven--ehem!--you wouldn't talk of fees. Besides, I will be frank; from
the moment that I entered this room and saw you, I recognised in you a
kindred nature, one which under my guidance is capable of great things,
of things greater than I care to tell. Ah! what a vision do I see. You,
the husband of the beautiful Elsa and master of her great wealth, and I
at your side guiding you with my wisdom and experience--then what might
not be achieved? Dreams, doubtless dreams, though how often have my
dreams been prophetic! Still, forget them, and at least, young man, we
will be friends," and he stretched out his hand.

"With all my heart," answered Adrian, taking those cool, agile-looking
fingers. "For years I have sought someone on whom I could rely, someone
who would understand me as I feel you do."

"Yes, yes," sighed the sage, "I do indeed understand you."

"To think," he said to himself after the door had closed behind the
delighted and flattered Adrian, "to think that I can be the father
of such a fool as that. Well, it bears out my theories about
cross-breeding, and, after all, in this case a good-looking, gullible
fool will be much more useful to me than a young man of sense. Let me
see; the price of the office is paid and I shall have my appointment
duly sealed as the new Governor of the Gevangenhuis by next week at
furthest, so I may as well begin to collect evidence against my worthy
successor, Dirk van Goorl, his adventurous son Foy, and that red-headed
ruffian, Martin. Once I have them in the Gevangenhuis it will go hard if
I can't squeeze the secret of old Brant's money out of one of the three
of them. The women wouldn't know, they wouldn't have told the women,
besides I don't want to meddle with them, indeed nothing would persuade
me to that"--and he shivered as though at some wretched recollection.
"But there must be evidence; there is such noise about these executions
and questionings that they won't allow any more of them in Leyden
without decent evidence; even Alva and the Blood Council are getting
a bit frightened. Well, who can furnish better testimony than that
jackass, my worthy son, Adrian? Probably, however, he has a conscience
somewhere, so it may be as well not to let him know that when he thinks
himself engaged in conversation he is really in the witness box. Let me
see, we must take the old fellow, Dirk, on the ground of heresy, and
the youngster and the serving man on a charge of murdering the king's
soldiers and assisting the escape of heretics with their goods. Murder
sounds bad, and, especially in the case of a young man, excites less
sympathy than common heresy."

Then he went to the door, calling, "Meg, hostess mine, Meg."

He might have saved himself the trouble, however, since, on opening it
suddenly, that lady fell almost into his arms.

"What!" he said, "listening, oh, fie! and all for nothing. But there,
ladies will be curious and"--this to himself--"I must be more careful.
Lucky I didn't talk aloud."

Then he called her in, and having inspected the chamber narrowly,
proceeded to make certain arrangements.



CHAPTER XVII

BETROTHED

At nightfall on the morrow Adrian returned as appointed, and was
admitted into the same room, where he found Black Meg, who greeted him
openly by name and handed to him a tiny phial containing a fluid clear
as water. This, however, was scarcely to be wondered at, seeing that it
was water and nothing else.

"Will it really work upon her heart?" asked Adrian, eyeing the stuff.

"Ay," answered the hag, "that's a wondrous medicine, and those who drink
it go crazed with love for the giver. It is compounded according to the
Master's own receipt, from very costly tasteless herbs that grow only in
the deserts of Arabia."

Adrian understood, and fumbled in his pocket. Meg stretched out her hand
to receive the honorarium. It was a long, skinny hand, with long, skinny
fingers, but there was this peculiarity about it, that one of these
fingers chanced to be missing. She saw his eyes fixed upon the gap, and
rushed into an explanation.

"I have met with an accident," Meg explained. "In cutting up a pig the
chopper caught this finger and severed it."

"Did you wear a ring on it?" asked Adrian.

"Yes," she replied, with sombre fury.

"How very strange!" ejaculated Adrian.

"Why?"

"Because I have seen a finger, a woman's long finger with a gold ring
on it, that might have come off your hand. I suppose the pork-butcher
picked it up for a keepsake."

"May be, Heer Adrian, but where is it now?"

"Oh! it is, or was, in a bottle of spirits tied by a thread to the
cork."

Meg's evil face contorted itself. "Get me that bottle," she said
hoarsely. "Look you, Heer Adrian, I am doing much for you, do this for
me."

"What do you want it for?"

"To give it Christian burial," she replied sourly. "It is not fitting or
lucky that a person's finger should stand about in a bottle like a caul
or a lizard. Get it, I say get it--I ask no question where--or, young
man, you will have little help in your love affairs from me."

"Do you wish the dagger hilt also?" he asked mischievously.

She looked at him out of the corners of her black eyes. This Adrian knew
too much.

"I want the finger and the ring on it which I lost in chopping up the
pig."

"Perhaps, mother, you would like the pig, too. Are you not making a
mistake? Weren't you trying to cut his throat, and didn't he bite off
the finger?"

"If I want the pig, I'll search his stye. You bring that bottle, or----"

She did not finish her sentence, for the door opened, and through it
came the sage.

"Quarrelling," he said in a tone of reproof. "What about? Let me guess,"
and he passed his hand over his shadowed brow. "Ah! I see, there is a
finger in it, a finger of fate? No, not that," and, moved by a fresh
inspiration, he grasped Meg's hand, and added, "Now I have it. Bring it
back, friend Adrian, bring it back; a dead finger is most unlucky to all
save its owner. As a favour to me."

"Very well," said Adrian.

"My gifts grow," mused the master. "I have a vision of this honest hand
and of a great sword--but, there, it is not worth while, too small a
matter. Leave us, mother. It shall be returned, my word on it. Yes, gold
ring and all. And now, young friend, let us talk. You have the philtre?
Well, I can promise you that it is a good one, it would almost bring
Galatea from her marble. Pygmalion must have known that secret. But tell
me something of your life, your daily thoughts and daily deeds, for when
I give my friendship I love to live in the life of my friends."

Thus encouraged, Adrian told him a great deal, so much, indeed, that the
Senor Ramiro, nodding in the shadow of his hood, began to wonder whether
the spy behind the cupboard door, expert as he was, could possibly make
his pen keep pace with these outpourings. Oh! it was a dreary task,
but he kept to it, and by putting in a sentence here and there artfully
turned the conversation to matters of faith.

"No need to fence with me," he said presently. "I know how you have been
brought up, how through no fault of your own you have wandered out
of the warm bosom of the true Church to sit at the clay feet of the
conventicle. You doubt it? Well, let me look again, let me look. Yes,
only last week you were seated in a whitewashed room overhanging the
market-place. I see it all--an ugly little man with a harsh voice is
preaching, preaching what I think blasphemy. Baskets--baskets? What have
baskets to do with him?"

"I believe he used to make them," interrupted Adrian, taking the bait.

"That may be it, or perhaps he will be buried in one; at any rate he
is strangely mixed up with baskets. Well, there are others with you, a
middle-aged, heavy-faced man, is he not Dirk van Goorl, your stepfather?
And--wait--a young fellow with rather a pleasant face, also a relation.
I see his name, but I can't spell it. F--F--o--i, faith in the French
tongue, odd name for a heretic."

"F-o-y--Foy," interrupted Adrian again.

"Indeed! Strange that I should have mistaken the last letter, but in the
spirit sight and hearing these things chance: then there is a great man
with a red beard."

"No, Master, you're wrong," said Adrian with emphasis; "Martin was not
there; he stopped behind to watch the house."

"Are you sure?" asked the seer doubtfully. "I look and I seem to see
him," and he stared blankly at the wall.

"So you might see him often enough, but not at last week's meeting."

It is needless to follow the conversation further. The seer, by aid of a
ball of crystal that he produced from the folds of his cloak, described
his spirit visions, and the pupil corrected them from his intimate
knowledge of the facts, until the Senor Ramiro and his confederates in
the cupboard had enough evidence, as evidence was understood in those
days, to burn Dirk, Foy, and Martin three times over, and, if it should
suit him, Adrian also. Then for that night they parted.

Next evening Adrian was back again with the finger in the bottle,
which Meg grabbed as a pike snatches at a frog, and further fascinating
conversation ensued. Indeed, Adrian found this well of mystic lore
tempered with shrewd advice upon love affairs and other worldly matters,
and with flattery of his own person and gifts, singularly attractive.

Several times did he return thus, for as it chanced Elsa had been unwell
and kept her room, so that he discovered no opportunity of administering
the magic philtre that was to cause her heart to burn with love for him.

At length, when even the patient Ramiro was almost worn out by the young
gentleman's lengthy visits, the luck changed. Elsa appeared one day
at dinner, and with great adroitness Adrian, quite unseen of anyone,
contrived to empty the phial into her goblet of water, which, as he
rejoiced to see, she drank to the last drop.

But no opportunity such as he sought ensued, for Elsa, overcome,
doubtless, by an unwonted rush of emotion, retired to battle it in her
own chamber. Since it was impossible to follow and propose to her there,
Adrian, possessing his soul in such patience as he could command, sat
in the sitting-room to await her return, for he knew that it was not her
habit to go out until five o'clock. As it happened, however, Elsa
had other arrangements for the afternoon, since she had promised to
accompany Lysbeth upon several visits to the wives of neighbours, and
then to meet her cousin Foy at the factory and walk with him in the
meadows beyond the town.

So while Adrian, lost in dreams, waited in the sitting-room Elsa and
Lysbeth left the house by the side door.

They had paid three of their visits when their path chanced to lead them
past the old town prison which was called the Gevangenhuis. This place
formed one of the gateways of the city, for it was built in the walls
and opened on to the moat, water surrounding it on all sides. In front
of its massive door, that was guarded by two soldiers, a small crowd
had gathered on the drawbridge and in the street beyond, apparently
in expectation of somebody or something. Lysbeth looked at the
three-storied frowning building and shuddered, for it was here that
heretics were put upon their trial, and here, too, many of them were
done to death after the dreadful fashion of the day.

"Hasten," she said to Elsa, as she pushed through the crowd, "for
doubtless some horror passes here."

"Have no fear," answered an elderly and good-natured woman who overheard
her, "we are only waiting to hear the new governor of the prison read
his deed of appointment."

As she spoke the doors were thrown open and a man--he was a well-known
executioner named Baptiste--came out carrying a sword in one hand and a
bunch of keys on a salver in the other. After him followed the governor
gallantly dressed and escorted by a company of soldiers and the
officials of the prison. Drawing a scroll from beneath his cloak he
began to read it rapidly and in an almost inaudible voice.

It was his commission as governor of the prison signed by Alva
himself, and set out in full his powers, which were considerable, his
responsibilities which were small, and other matters, excepting only
the sum of money that he had paid for the office, that, given certain
conditions, was, as a matter of fact, sold to the highest bidder. As
may be guessed, this post of governor of a gaol in one of the large
Netherland cities was lucrative enough to those who did not object to
such a fashion of growing rich. So lucrative was it, indeed, that the
salary supposed to attach to the office was never paid; at least its
occupant was expected to help himself to it out of heretical pockets.

As he finished reading through the paper the new governor looked up,
to see, perhaps, what impression he had produced upon his audience. Now
Elsa saw his face for the first time and gripped Lysbeth's arm.

"It is Ramiro," she whispered, "Ramiro the spy, the man who dogged my
father at The Hague."

As well might she have spoken to a statue. Indeed, of a sudden Lysbeth
seemed to be smitten into stone, for there she stood staring with a
blanched and meaningless face at the face of the man opposite to her.
Well might she stare, for she also knew him. Across the gulf of years,
one-eyed, bearded, withered, scarred as he was by suffering, passion
and evil thoughts, she knew him, for there before her stood one whom she
deemed dead, the wretch whom she had believed to be her husband, Juan de
Montalvo. Some magnetism drew his gaze to her; out of all the faces
of that crowd it was hers that leapt to his eye. He trembled and grew
white; he turned away, and swiftly was gone back into the hell of the
Gevangenhuis. Like a demon he had come out of it to survey the human
