in the bright light of the setting sun of the last day of July, as they
turned their horses in front of the wide gateway of The Blue Pike to ride
into Miltenberg and ask lodgings of the citizens.

The trampling of hoofs, the shouts of command, and the voices of the
gentlemen and their attendants outside attracted many guests to the doors
and windows of the long, whitewashed building.

The strollers, however, kept the place at theirs without difficulty; no
one desired to come near them.

The girl with the bandaged foot had now also turned her face toward the
street.  As her gaze rested on the youngest of the Nuremberg dignitaries,
her pale cheeks flushed, and, as if unconsciously, the exclamation:
"It is he!" fell from her lips.

"Who?"  asked red-haired Gitta, and was quickly answered in a low tone

"I mean Lienhard, Herr Groland."

"The young one," stuttered Cyriax.

Then, raising the shawl, he continued inquisitively:

"Do you know him?  For good or for evil?"

The girl, whose face, spite of its sunken cheeks and the dark rings under
the deep-set blue eyes, still bore distinct traces of former beauty,
started and answered sharply, though not very loudly, for speech was
difficult:

"Good is what you call evil, and evil is what you call good.  My
acquaintance with Lienhard, Herr Groland, is my own affair, and, you may
be sure, will remain mine."  She glanced contemptuously away from the
others out of doors, but Cyriax, spite of his mutilated tongue, retorted
quickly and harshly:

"I always said so.  She'll die a saint yet."  Then grasping Kuni's arm
roughly, he dragged her down to him, and whispered jeeringly:

"Ratz has a full purse and sticks to his offer for the cart.  If you put
on airs long, he'll get it and the donkey, too, and you'll be left here.
What was it about Groland?  You can try how you'll manage on your stump
without us, if we're too bad for you."

"We are not under eternal obligations to you on the child's account,"
added red-haired Gitta in a gentler tone.  "Don't vex my husband, or
he'll keep his word about the cart, and who else will be bothered with a
useless creature like you?"

The girl lowered her eyes and looked at her crippled limb.

How would she get on without the cart, which received her when the pain
grew too sharp and the road was too hard and long?

So she turned to the others again, saying soothingly:

"It all happened in the time before I fell."  Then she looked out of
doors once more, but she did not find what she sought.  The Nuremberg
travellers had ridden through the broad gateway into the large square
courtyard, surrounded by stables on three sides.  When Cyriax and his
wife again called to her, desiring to know what had passed between her
and Groland, she clasped her hands around her knees, fixed her eyes on
the gaystuffs wound around the stump where her foot had been amputated,
and in a low, reluctant tone, continued:

"You want to learn what I have to do with Herr Groland?  It was about six
years ago, in front of St. Sebald's church, in Nuremberg.  A wedding was
to take place.  The bridegroom was one of the Council--Lienhard Groland.
The marriage was to be a very quiet one--the bridegroom's father lay
seriously ill.  Yet there could have been no greater throng at the
Emperor's nuptials.  I stood in the midst of the crowd.  A rosary dropped
from the belt of the fat wife of a master workman--she was decked out
like a peacock--and fell just in front of me.  It was a costly ornament,
pure gold and Bohemian garnets.  I did not let it lie there."

"A miracle!" chuckled Cyriax, but the girl was obliged to conquer a
severe attack of coughing before she could go on with her story.

"The chaplet fairly burned my hand.  I would gladly have given it back,
but the woman was no longer before me.  Perhaps I might have returned it,
but I won't say so positively.  However, there was no time to do it; the
wedding party was coming, and on that account  But what is the use of
talking?  While I was still gazing, the owner discovered her loss.
An officer seized me, and so I was taken to prison and the next day was
brought before the magistrates.  Herr Groland was one of them, and, since
it wasn't certain that I would not have restored the property I found, he
interceded in my behalf.  When the others still wished to punish me, he
besought my release because it was my first offence.  So we met, and when
I admit that I am grateful to him for it, you know all."

"H'm," replied Cyriax, giggling, as  he nudged his wife in the side and
made remarks concerning what he had just heard which induced even red-
haired Gitta to declare that the loss of his tongue was scarcely a
misfortune.

Kuni indignantly turned her back upon the slanderer and gazed out of the
window again.  The Nuremberg Honourables had disappeared, but several
grooms were unbuckling the knapsacks from the horses and carrying them
into the house.  The aristocratic travellers were probably cleansing
themselves from the dust of the road before they entered the taproom.

Kuni thought so, and gazed sometimes into vacancy, sometimes into her own
lap.  Her eyes had a dreamy light, for the incident which she had just
related rose before her mind with perfect clearness.

It seemed as though she were gazing a second time at the wedding
procession which was approaching St. Sebald's, and the couple who led it.

Never had she beheld anything fairer than the bride with the myrtle
wreath on her beautifully formed head, whence a delicate lace veil
floated over her long, thick, golden hair.  She could not help gazing at
her as if spellbound.  When she moved forward, holding her bridegroom's
hand, she appeared to float over the rice and flowers strewn in her path
to the church--it was in February.  As Kuni saw the bride raise her large
blue eyes to her lover's so tenderly and yet so modestly, and the
bridegroom thank her with a long joyous look of love, she wondered what
must be the feelings of a maiden who, so pure, so full of ardent love,
and so fervently beloved in return, was permitted to approach the house
of God, accompanied by a thousand pious wishes, with the first and only
man whom she loved, and to whom she wished to devote herself for her
whole life.  Again, as at that time, a burning thrill ran through her
limbs.  Then a bitter smile hovered around her lips.

She had asked herself whether the heart of one who experienced such joys,
to whom such a fate was allotted, would not burst from sheer joy.  Now
the wish, the hope, and every new resolve for good or ill were alike
over.  At that hour, before the door of St. Sebald's, she had been
capable of all, all, perhaps even the best things, if any one had
cherished her in his heart as Lienhard Groland loved the beautiful woman
at his side.

She could not help remembering the spell with which the sight of those
two had forced her to watch their every movement, to gaze at them, and
them only, as if the world contained nothing else.  How often she had
repeated to herself that in that hour she was bewitched, whether by him
or by her she could not decide.  As the throng surged forward, she had
been crowded against the woman who lost the rosary.  She had not had the
faintest thought of it when the bailiff suddenly snatched her from her
rapturous gazing to stern reality, seizing with a rude grip the hand that
held the jewel.  Then, pursued by the reviling and hissing of the
populace, she had been taken to prison.

Now she again saw herself amid the vile rabble assembled there, again
felt how eagerly she inhaled the air as she was led across the courtyard
of the townhall into the presence of the magistrates.  Oh, if she could
but take such a long, deep breath of God's pure air as she did then!
But that time was past.  Her poor, sunken chest would no longer permit
it.  Then she fancied that she was again standing before the judges, who
were called The Five.

Four magistrates sat with the Pfander--[Chief of police]--at the table
covered with a green cloth, but one, who surpassed all the others both in
stature and in manly beauty, was the selfsame Lienhard Groland, who
yesterday had led to the altar the wonderfully lovely girl who had
bewitched her.  She felt how the blood had mounted into her cheeks when
she again saw him who could know nothing of her except that she was a
jade, who had stolen another person's property.  Yet her glance soon met
his, and he must have been blind had he not read in the radiant lustre of
