he scarce doubted that the proffered appointment would, notwithstanding
his mother's uncertainty, suit the disposition of a youth who had
appeared devoted to woodland sports, and a foe alike to sedentary or
settled occupation of any kind. The Refectioner and Kitchener were so
well pleased with Halbert's prepossessing appearance, that they seemed
to think that the salary, emoluments, and perquisites, the dole, the
grazing, the gown, and the galligaskins, could scarce be better bestowed
than on the active and graceful figure before them.

Sir Piercie Shafton, whether from being more deeply engaged in his own
cogitations, or that the subject was unworthy of his notice, did not
seem to partake of the general feeling of approbation excited by the
young man's presence. He sate with his eyes half shut, and his arms
folded, appearing to be wrapped in contemplations of a nature deeper
than those arising out of the scene before him. But, notwithstanding his
seeming abstraction and absence of mind, there was a flutter of vanity
in Sir Piercie's very handsome countenance, an occasional change of
posture from one striking attitude (or what he conceived to be such)
to another, and an occasional stolen glance at the female part of the
company, to spy how far he succeeded in riveting their attention, which
gave a marked advantage, in comparison, to the less regular and more
harsh features of Halbert Glendinning, with their composed, manly, and
deliberate expression of mental fortitude.

Of the females belonging to the family of Glendearg, the Miller's
daughter alone had her mind sufficiently at leisure to admire, from time
to time, the graceful attitudes of Sir Piercie Shafton; for both Mary
Avenel and Dame Glendinning were waiting in anxiety and apprehension
the answer which Halbert was to return to the Abbot's proposal, and
fearfully anticipating the consequences of his probable refusal.
The conduct of his brother Edward, for a lad constitutionally shy,
respectful, and even timid, was at once affectionate and noble. This
younger son of Dame Elspeth had stood unnoticed in a corner, after
the Abbot, at the request of the Sub-Prior, had honoured him with some
passing notice, and asked him a few common-place questions about his
progress in Donatus, and in the _Promptuarium Parvulorum_, without
waiting for the answers. From his corner he now glided round to his
brother's side, and keeping a little behind him, slid his right hand
into the huntsman's left, and by a gentle pressure, which Halbert
instantly and ardently returned, expressed at once his interest in his
situation, and his resolution to share his fate.

The group was thus arranged, when, after the pause of two or three
minutes, which he employed in slowly sipping his cup of wine, in order
that he might enter on his proposal with due and deliberate dignity, the
Abbot at length expressed himself thus:--

"My son--we your lawful Superior, and the Abbot, under God's favour,
of the community of Saint Mary's, have heard of your manifold good
gifts--a-hem--especially touching wood-craft--and the huntsman-like
fashion in which you strike your game, truly and as a yeoman should, not
abusing Heaven's good benefits by spoiling the flesh, as is too often
seen in careless rangers--a-hem." He made here a pause, but observing
that Glendinning only replied to his compliment by a bow, he
proceeded,--"My son, we commend your modesty; nevertheless, we will
that thou shouldst speak freely to us touching that which we have
premeditated for thine advancement, meaning to confer on thee the office
of bow-bearer and ranger, as well over the chases and forests wherein
our house hath privilege by the gifts of pious kings and nobles, whose
souls now enjoy the fruits of their bounties to the Church as to those
which belong to us in exclusive right of property and perpetuity. Thy
knee, my son--that we may, with our own hand, and without loss of time,
induct thee into office."

"Kneel down," said the Kitchener on the one side; and "Kneel down," said
the Refectioner on the other.

But Halbert Glendinning remained standing.

"Were it to show gratitude and good-will for your reverend lordship's
noble offer, I could not," he said, "kneel low enough, or remain long
enough kneeling. But I may not kneel to take investure of your
noble gift, my Lord Abbot, being a man determined to seek my fortune
otherwise."

"How is that, sir?" said the Abbot, knitting his brows; "do I hear you
speak aright? and do you, a born vassal of the Halidome, at the moment
when I am destining to you such a noble expression of my good-will,
propose exchanging my service for that of any other?"

"My lord," said Halbert Glendinning, "it grieves me to think you hold
me capable of undervaluing your gracious offer, or of exchanging
your service for another. But your noble proffer doth but hasten the
execution of a determination which I have long since formed."

"Ay, my son," said the Abbot, "is it indeed so?--right early have
you learned to form resolutions without consulting those on whom you
naturally depend. But what may it be, this sagacious resolution, if I
may so far pray you?"

"To yield up to my brother and mother," answered Halbert, "mine
interest in the fief of Glendearg, lately possessed by my father, Simon
Glendinning: and having prayed your lordship to be the same kind and
generous master to them, that your predecessors, the venerable Abbots
of Saint Mary's, have been to my fathers in times past; for myself, I am
determined to seek my fortune where I may best find it."

Dame Glendinning here ventured, emboldened by maternal anxiety, to
break silence with an exclamation of "O my son!" Edward clinging to his
brother's side, half spoke, half whispered, a similar ejaculation, of
"Brother! brother!"

The Sub-Prior took up the matter in a tone of grave reprehension, which,
as he conceived, the interest he had always taken in the family at
Glendearg required at his hand.

"Wilful young man," he said, "what folly can urge thee to push back the
hand that is stretched out to aid thee? What visionary aim hast
thou before thee, that can compensate for the decent and sufficient
independence which thou art now rejecting with scorn?"

"Four marks by the year, duly and truly," said the Kitchener.

"Cow's-grass, doublet, and galligaskins," responded the Refectioner.

"Peace, my brethren," said the Sub-Prior; "and may it please your
lordship, venerable father, upon my petition, to allow this headstrong
youth a day for consideration, and it shall be my part so to
indoctrinate him, as to convince him what is due on this occasion to
your lordship, and to his family, and to himself."

"Your kindness, reverend father," said the youth, "craves my dearest
thanks--it is the continuance of a long train of benevolence towards me,
for which I give you my gratitude, for I have nothing else to offer. It
is my mishap, not your fault, that your intentions have been frustrated.
But my present resolution is fixed and unalterable. I cannot accept the
generous offer of the Lord Abbot; my fate calls me elsewhere, to scenes
where I shall end it or mend it."

"By our Lady," said the Abbot, "I think the youth be mad indeed--or that
you, Sir Piercie, judged of him most truly, when you prophesied that he
would prove unfit for the promotion we designed him--it may be you knew
something of this wayward humour before?"

"By the mass, not I," answered Sir Piercie Shafton, with his usual
indifference. "I but judged of him by his birth and breeding; for seldom
doth a good hawk come out of a kite's egg."

"Thou art thyself a kite, and kestrel to boot," replied Halbert
Glendinning, without a moment's hesitation.

"This in our presence, and to a man of worship?" said the Abbot, the
blood rushing to his face.

"Yes, my lord," answered the youth; "even in your presence I return to
this gay man's face, the causeless dishonour--which he has flung on my
name. My brave father, who fell in the cause of his country, demands
that justice at the hands of his son!"

"Unmannered boy!" said the Abbot.

"Nay, my good lord," said the knight, "praying pardon for the
coarse interruption, let me entreat you not to be wroth with this
rustical--Credit me, the north wind shall as soon puff one of your rocks
from its basis, as aught which I hold so slight and inconsiderate as the
churlish speech of an untaught churl, shall move the spleen of Piercie
Shafton."

"Proud as you are, Sir Knight," said Halbert, "in your imagined
superiority, be not too confident that you cannot be moved."

"Faith, by nothing that thou canst urge," said Sir Piercie.

"Knowest thou, then, this token?" said young Glendinning, offering to
him the silver bodkin he had received from the White Lady.

Never was such an instant change, from the most contemptuous serenity,
to the most furious state of passion, as that which Sir Piercie Shafton
exhibited. It was the difference between a cannon lying quiet in its
embrasure, and the same gun when touched by the linstock. He started
up, every limb quivering with rage, and his features so inflamed and
agitated by passion, that he more resembled a demoniac, than a man under
the regulation of reason. He clenched both his fists, and thrusting them
forward, offered them furiously at the face of Glendinning, who was even
himself startled at the frantic state of excitation which his action
had occasioned. The next moment he withdrew them, struck his open palm
against his own forehead, and rushed out of the room in a state of
indescribable agitation. The whole matter had been so sudden, that no
person present had time to interfere.

When Sir Piercie Shafton had left the apartment, there was a moment's
pause of astonishment; and then a general demand that Halbert
Glendinning should instantly explain by what means he had produced such
a violent change in the deportment of the English cavalier.

"I did nought to him," answered Halbert Glendinning, "but what you all
saw--am I to answer for his fantastic freaks of humour?"

"Boy," said the Abbot, in his most authoritative manner, "these
subterfuges shall not avail thee. This is not a man to be driven from
his temperament without some sufficient cause. That cause was given by
thee, and must have been known to thee. I command thee, as thou wilt
save thyself from worse measure, to explain to me by what means thou
hast moved our friend thus--We choose not that our vassals shall drive
our guests mad in our very presence, and we remain ignorant of the means
whereby that purpose is effected."

"So may it please your reverence, I did but show him this token," said
Halbert Glendinning, delivering it at the same time to the Abbot, who
looked at it with much attention, and then, shaking his head, gravely
delivered it to the Sub-Prior, without speaking a word.

Father Eustace looked at the mysterious token with some attention; and
then addressing Halbert in a stern and severe voice, said, "Young man,
if thou wouldst not have us suspect thee of some strange double-dealing
in this matter, let us instantly know whence thou hadst this token, and
how it possesses an influence on Sir Piercie Shafton?"--It would have
been extremely difficult for Halbert, thus hard pressed, to have either
evaded or answered so puzzling a question. To have avowed the truth
might, in those times, have occasioned his being burnt at a stake,
although, in ours, his confession would have only gained for him the
credit of a liar beyond all rational credibility. He was fortunately
relieved by the return of Sir Piercie Shafton himself, whose ear caught,
as he entered, the sound of the Sub-Prior's question.

Without waiting until Halbert Glendinning replied, he came forward,
whispering to him as he passed, "Be secret--thou shalt have the
satisfaction thou hast dared to seek for."

When he returned to his place, there were still marks of discomposure on
his brow; but, becoming apparently collected and calm, he looked around
him, and apologized for the indecorum of which he had been guilty, which
he ascribed to sudden and severe indisposition. All were silent, and
looked on each other with some surprise.

The Lord Abbot gave orders for all to retire from the apartment, save
himself, Sir Piercie Shafton, and the Sub-Prior. "And have an eye," he
added, "on that bold youth, that he escape not; for if he hath practised
by charm, or otherwise, on the health of our worshipful guest, I swear
by the alb and mitre which I wear, that his punishment shall be most
exemplary."

"My lord and venerable father," said Halbert, bowing respectfully, "fear
not but that I will abide my doom. I think you will best learn from the
worshipful knight himself, what is the cause of his distemperature, and
how slight my share in it has been."

"Be assured," said the knight, without looking up, however, while he
spoke, "I will satisfy the Lord Abbot."

With these words the company retired, and with them young Glendinning.
When the Abbot, the Sub-Prior, and the English knight were left alone,
Father Eustace, contrary to his custom, could not help speaking the
first. "Expound unto us, noble sir," he said, "by what mysterious means
the production of this simple toy could so far move your spirit, and
overcome your patience, after you had shown yourself proof to all the
provocation offered by this self-sufficient and singular youth?"

The knight took the silver bodkin from the good father's hand, looked at
it with great composure, and, having examined it all over, returned it
to the Sub-Prior, saying at the same time, "In truth, venerable father,
I cannot but marvel, that the wisdom implied alike in your silver hairs,
and in your eminent rank, should, like a babbling hound, (excuse the
similitude,) open thus loudly on a false scent. I were, indeed, more
slight to be moved than the leaves of the aspen-tree, which wag at the
least breath of heaven, could I be touched by such a trifle as this,
which in no way concerns me more than if the same quantity of silver
were stricken into so many groats. Truth is, that from my youth upward,
I have been subjected to such a malady as you saw me visited with even
now--a cruel and searching pain, which goeth through nerve and bone,
even as a good brand in the hands of a brave soldier sheers through limb
and sinew--but it passes away speedily, as you yourselves may judge."

"Still," said the Sub-Prior, "this will not account for the youth
offering to you this piece of silver, as a token by which you were
to understand something, and, as we must needs conjecture, something
disagreeable."

"Your reverence is to conjecture what you will," said Sir Piercie; "but
I cannot pretend to lay your judgment on the right scent when I see it
at fault. I hope I am not liable to be called upon to account for the
foolish actions of a malapert boy?"

"Assuredly," said the Sub-Prior, "we shall prosecute no inquiry which
is disagreeable to our guest. Nevertheless," said he, looking to his
Superior, "this chance may, in some sort, alter the plan your lordship
had formed for your worshipful guest's residence for a brief term in
this tower, as a place alike of secrecy and of security; both of which,
in the terms which we now stand on with England, are circumstances to be
desired."

"In truth," said the Abbot, "and the doubt is well thought on, were it
as well removed; for I scarce know in the Halidome so fitting a place
of refuge, yet see I not how to recommend it to our worshipful guest,
considering the unrestrained petulance of this headstrong youth."

"Tush! reverend sirs--what would you make of me?" said Sir Piercie
Shafton. "I protest, by mine honour, I would abide in this house were I
to choose. What! I take no exceptions at the youth for showing a flash
of spirit, though the spark may light on mine own head. I honour the
lad for it. I protest I will abide here, and he shall aid me in striking
down a deer. I must needs be friends with him, and he be such a shot:
and we will speedily send down to my lord Abbot a buck of the first
head, killed so artificially as shall satisfy even the reverend
Kitchener."

This was said with such apparent ease and good-humour, that the Abbot
made no farther observation on what had passed, but proceeded to
acquaint his guest with the details of furniture, hangings, provisions,
and so forth, which he proposed to send up to the Tower of Glendearg for
his accommodation. This discourse, seasoned with a cup or two of
wine, served to prolong the time until the reverend Abbot ordered his
cavalcade to prepare for their return to the Monastery.

"As we have," he said, "in the course of this our toilsome journey,
lost our meridian, [Footnote: The hour of repose at noon, which, in the
middle ages, was employed in slumber, and which the monastic rules of
nocturnal vigils rendered necessary.] indulgence shall be given to those
of our attendants who shall, from very weariness, be unable to attend
the duty at prime, [Footnote: _Prime_ was the midnight service of the
monks.] and this by way of misericord or _indulgentia._" [Footnote:
_Misericord,_ according to the learned work of Fosbrooke on British
Monachism, meant not only an indulgence, or exoneration from particular
duties, but also a particular apartment in a convent, where the monks
assembled to enjoy such indulgences or allowances as were granted beyond
the rule.]

Having benevolently intimated a boon to his faithful followers, which he
probably judged would be far from unacceptable, the good Abbot, seeing
all ready for his journey, bestowed his blessing on the assembled
household--gave his hand to be kissed by Dame Glendinning--himself
kissed the cheek of Mary Avenel, and even of the Miller's maiden, when
they approached to render him the same homage--commanded Halbert to rule
his temper, and to be aiding and obedient in all things to the
English Knight--admonished Edward to be _discipulus impiger atque
strenuus_--then took a courteous farewell of Sir Piercie Shafton,
advising him to lie close, for fear of the English borderers, who might
be employed to kidnap him; and having discharged these various offices
of courtesy, moved forth to the courtyard, followed by the whole
establishment. Here, with a heavy sigh, approaching to a groan, the
venerable father heaved himself upon his palfrey, whose dark purple
housings swept the ground; and, greatly comforted that the discretion of
the animal's pace would be no longer disturbed by the gambadoes of Sir
Piercie and his prancing war-horse, he set forth at a sober and steady
trot upon his return to the Monastery.

When the Sub-Prior had mounted to accompany his principal, his eye
sought out Halbert, who, partly hidden by a projection of the outward
wall of the court, stood apart from, and gazing upon the departing
cavalcade, and the group which assembled around them. Unsatisfied with
the explanation he had received concerning the mysterious transaction
of the silver bodkin, yet interesting himself in the youth, of whose
character he had formed a favourable idea, the worthy monk resolved
to take an early opportunity of investigating that matter. In the
meanwhile, he looked upon Halbert with a serious and warning aspect, and
held up his finger to him as he signed farewell. He then joined the rest
of the churchmen, and followed his Superior down the valley.




Chapter the Twentieth.


  I hope you'll give me cause to think you noble.
  And do me right with your sword, sir, as becomes
  One gentleman of honour to another;

  All this is fair, sir--let us make no days on't,
  I'll lead your way.

LOVE'S PILGRIMAGE.

The look and sign of warning which the Sub-Prior gave to Halbert
Glendinning as they parted, went to his heart; for although he had
profited much less than Edward by the good man's instructions, he had
a sincere reverence for his person; and even the short time he had for
deliberation tended to show him he was embarked in a perilous adventure.
The nature of the provocation which he had given to Sir Piercie Shafton
he could not even conjecture; but he saw that it was of a mortal
quality, and he was now to abide the consequences.

That he might not force these consequences forward by any premature
renewal of their quarrel, he resolved to walk apart for an hour, and
consider on what terms he was to meet this haughty foreigner. The time
seemed propitious for his doing so without having the appearance
of wilfully shunning the stranger, as all the members of the little
household were dispersing either to perform such tasks as had been
interrupted by the arrival of the dignitaries, or to put in order what
had been deranged by their visit.

Leaving the tower, therefore, and descending, unobserved as he thought,
the knoll on which it stood, Halbert gained the little piece of level
ground which extended betwixt the descent of the hill, and the first
sweep made by the brook after washing the foot of the eminence on which
the tower was situated, where a few straggling birch and oak-trees
served to secure him from observation. But scarcely had he reached the
spot, when he was surprised to feel a smart tap upon the shoulder, and,
turning around, he perceived he had been closely followed by Sir
Piercie Shafton. When, whether from our state of animal spirits, want
of confidence in the justice of our cause, or any other motive, our own
courage happens to be in a wavering condition, nothing tends so much
altogether to disconcert us, as a great appearance of promptitude on
the part of our antagonist. Halbert Glendinning, both morally and
constitutionally intrepid, was nevertheless somewhat troubled at seeing
the stranger, whose resentment he had provoked, appear at once before
him, and with an aspect which boded hostility. But though his heart
might beat somewhat thicker, he was too high-spirited to exhibit any
external signs of emotion.--"What is your pleasure, Sir Piercie?" he
said to the English knight, enduring without apparent discomposure all
the terrors which his antagonist had summoned into his aspect.

"What is my pleasure!" answered Sir Piercie; "a goodly question
after the part you have acted towards me!--Young man, I know not
what infatuation has led thee to place thyself in direct and insolent
opposition to one who is a guest of thy liege-lord the Abbot, and who,
even from the courtesy due to thy mother's roof, had a right to remain
there without meeting insult. Neither do I ask, or care, by what means
thou hast become possessed of the fatal secret by which thou hast dared
to offer me open shame. But I must now tell thee, that the possession of
it has cost thee thy life."

"Not, I trust, if my hand and sword can defend it," replied Halbert,
boldly.

"True," said the Englishman, "I mean not to deprive thee of thy fair
chance of self-defence. I am only sorry to think, that, young and
country-bred as thou art, it can but little avail thee. But thou must be
well aware, that in this quarrel I shall use no terms of quarter."

"Rely on it, proud man," answered the youth, "that I shall ask none; and
although thou speakest as if I lay already at thy feet, trust me,
that as I am determined never to ask thy mercy, so I am not fearful of
needing it."

"Thou wilt, then," said the knight, "do nothing to avert the certain
fate which thou hast provoked with such wantonness?"

"And how were that to be purchased?" replied Halbert Glendinning, more
with the wish of obtaining some farther insight into the terms on which
he stood with this stranger, than to make him the submission which he
might require.

"Explain to me instantly," said Sir Piercie, "without equivocation or
delay, by what means thou wert enabled to wound my honour so deeply--and
shouldst thou point out to me by so doing an enemy more worthy of my
resentment, I will permit thine own obscure insignificance to draw a
veil over thine insolence."

"This is too high a flight," said Glendinning, fiercely, "for thine own
presumption to soar without being checked. Thou hast come to my father's
house, as well as I can guess, a fugitive and an exile, and thy first
greeting to its inhabitants has been that of contempt and injury. By
what means I have been able to retort that contempt, let thine own
conscience tell thee. Enough for me that I stand on the privilege of
a free Scotchman, and will brook no insult unreturned, and no injury
unrequited."

"It is well, then," said Sir Piercie Shafton; "we will dispute this
matter to-morrow morning with our swords. Let the time be daybreak, and
do thou assign the place. We will go forth as if to strike a deer."

"Content," replied Halbert Glendinning: "I will guide thee to a
spot where an hundred men might fight and fall without any chance of
interruption."

"It is well," answered Sir Piercie Shafton. "Here then we part.--Many
will say, that in thus indulging the right of a gentleman to the son of
a clod-breaking peasant, I derogate from my sphere, even as the blessed
sun would derogate should he condescend to compare and match his golden
beams with the twinkle of a pale, blinking, expiring, gross-fed taper.
But no consideration of rank shall prevent my avenging the insult thou
hast offered me. We bear a smooth face, observe me, Sir Villagio, before
the worshipful inmates of yonder cabin, and to-morrow we try conclusions
with our swords." So saying, he turned away towards the tower.

It may not be unworthy of notice, that in the last speech only, had Sir
Piercie used some of those flowers of rhetoric which characterized the
usual style of his conversation. Apparently, a sense of wounded honour,
and the deep desire of vindicating his injured feelings, had proved too
strong for the fantastic affectation of his acquired habits. Indeed,
such is usually the influence of energy of mind, when called forth and
exerted, that Sir Piercie Shafton had never appeared in the eyes of his
youthful antagonist half so much deserving of esteem and respect as
in this brief dialogue, by which they exchanged mutual defiance. As he
followed him slowly to the tower, he could not help thinking to himself,
that, had the English knight always displayed this superior tone of
bearing and feeling, he would not probably have felt so earnestly
disposed to take offence at his hand. Mortal offence, however, had been
exchanged, and the matter was to be put to mortal arbitrement.

The family met at the evening meal, when Sir Piercie Shafton extended
the benignity of his countenance and the graces of his conversation far
more generally over the party than he had hitherto condescended to do.
The greater part of his attention was, of course, still engrossed by
his divine inimitable Discretion, as he chose to term Mary Avenel; but,
nevertheless there were interjectional flourishes to the Maid of the
Mill, under the title of Comely Damsel, and to the Dame, under that of
Worthy Matron. Nay, lest he should fail to excite their admiration by
the graces of his rhetoric, he generously, and without solicitation,
added those of his voice; and after regretting bitterly the absence of
his viol-de-gamba, he regaled them with a song, "which," said he, "the
inimitable Astrophel, whom mortals call Philip Sidney, composed in the
nonage of his muse, to show the world what they are to expect from
his riper years, and which will one day see the light in that
not-to-be-paralleled perfection of human wit, which he has addressed
to his sister, the matchless Parthenope, whom men call Countess of
Pembroke; a work," he continued, "whereof his friendship hath permitted
me, though unworthy, to be an occasional partaker, and whereof I may
well say, that the deep afflictive tale which awakeneth our sorrows, is
so relieved with brilliant similitudes, dulcet descriptions, pleasant
poems, and engaging interludes, that they seem as the stars of the
firmament, beautifying the dusky robe of night. And though I wot well
how much the lovely and quaint language will suffer by my widowed voice,
widowed in that it is no longer matched by my beloved viol-de-gamba, I
will essay to give you a taste of the ravishing sweetness of the poesy
of the un-to-be-imitated Astrophel."

So saying, he sung without mercy or remorse about five hundred verses,
of which the two first and the four last may suffice for a specimen--

  "What tongue can her perfections tell,
  On whose each part all pens may dwell.

  Of whose high praise arid praiseful bliss,
  Goodness the pen. Heaven paper is;
  The ink immortal fame doth send,
  As I began so I must end."

As Sir Piercie Shafton always sung with his eyes half shut, it was not
until, agreeably to the promise of poetry, he had fairly made an end,
that looking round, he discovered that the greater part of his audience
had, in the meanwhile, yielded to the charms of repose. Mary Avenel,
indeed, from a natural sense of politeness, had contrived to keep awake
through all the perplexities of the divine Astrophel; but Mysie was
transported in dreams back to the dusty atmosphere of her father's mill.
Edward himself, who had given his attention for some time, had at length
fallen fast asleep; and the good dame's nose, could its tones have
been put in regulation, might have supplied the bass of the lamented
viol-de-gamba. Halbert, however, who had no temptation to give way
to the charms of slumber, remained awake with his eyes fixed on the
songster; not that he was better entertained with the words, or more
ravished with the execution, than the rest of the company, but rather
because he admired, or perhaps envied, the composure, which could thus
spend the evening in interminable madrigals, when the next morning was
to be devoted to deadly combat. Yet it struck his natural acuteness
of observation, that the eye of the gallant cavalier did now and
then, furtively as it were, seek a glance of his countenance, as if to
discover how he was taking the exhibition of his antagonist's composure
and serenity of mind.

He shall read nothing in my countenance, thought Halbert, proudly, that
can make him think my indifference less than his own.

And taking from the shelf a bag full of miscellaneous matters collected
for the purpose, he began with great industry to dress hooks, and had
finished half-a-dozen of flies (we are enabled, for the benefit of those
who admire the antiquities of the gentle art of angling, to state that
they were brown hackles) by the time that Sir Piercie had arrived at the
conclusion of his long-winded strophes of the divine Astrophel. So that
he also testified a magnanimous contempt of that which to-morrow should
bring forth.

As it now waxed late, the family of Glendearg separated for the evening;
Sir Piercie first saying to the dame, that "her son Albert--"

"Halbert," said Elspeth, with emphasis, "Halbert, after his goodsire,
Halbert Brydone."

"Well, then, I have prayed your son, Halbert, that we may strive
tomorrow, with the sun's earliness, to wake a stag from his lair, that I
may see whether he be as prompt at that sport as fame bespeaks him."

"Alas! sir," answered Dame Elspeth, "he is but too prompt, an you
talk of promptitude, at any thing that has steel at one end of it, and
mischief at the other. But he is at your honourable disposal, and I
trust you will teach him how obedience is due to our venerable father
and lord, the Abbot, and prevail with him to take the bow-bearer's place
in fee; for, as the two worthy monks said, it will be a great help to a
widow-woman."

"Trust me, good dame," replied Sir Piercie, "it is my purpose so to
indoctrinate him touching his conduct and bearing towards his betters,
that he shall not lightly depart from the reverence due to them.--We
meet, then, beneath the birch-trees in the plain," he said, looking
to Halbert, "so soon as the eye of day hath opened its lids."--Halbert
answered with a sign of acquiescence, and the knight proceeded, "And
now, having wished to my fairest Discretion those pleasant dreams which
wave their pinions around the couch of sleeping beauty, and to this
comely damsel the bounties of Morpheus, and to all others the common
good-night, I will crave you leave to depart to my place of rest, though
I may say with the poet,

  'Ah rest!--no rest but change of place and posture:
  Ah sleep!--no sleep but worn-out Nature's swooning;
  Ah bed!--no bed but cushion fill'd with stones:
  Rest, sleep, nor bed, await not on an exile.'"

With a delicate obeisance he left the room, evading Dame Glendinning,
who hastened to assure him he would find his accommodations for repose
much more agreeable than they had been the night before, there having
been store of warm coverlets, and a soft feather-bed, sent up from the
Abbey. But the good knight probably thought that the grace and effect
of his exit would be diminished, if he were recalled from his heroics to
discuss such sublunary and domestic topics, and therefore hastened away
without waiting to hear her out.

"A pleasant gentleman," said Dame Glendinning; "but I will warrant
him an humorous [Footnote: _Humorous_--full of whims--thus Shakspeare,
"Humorous as winter."--The vulgar word humorsome comes nearest to
the meaning.]--And sings a sweet song, though it is somewhat of the
longest.--Well, I make mine avow he is goodly company--I wonder when he
will go away."

Having thus expressed her respect for her guest, not without intimation
that she was heartily tired of his company, the good dame gave the
signal for the family to disperse, and laid her injunctions on Halbert
to attend Sir Piercie Shafton at daybreak, as he required.

When stretched on his pallet by his brother's side, Halbert had no small
cause to envy the sound sleep which instantly settled on the eyes of
Edward, but refused him any share of its influence. He saw now too well
what the spirit had darkly indicated, that, in granting the boon which
he had asked so unadvisedly, she had contributed more to his harm than
his good. He was now sensible, too late, of the various dangers and
inconveniences with which his dearest friends were threatened, alike by
his discomfiture or his success in the approaching duel. If he fell, he
might say personally, "good-night all." But it was not the less certain
that he should leave a dreadful legacy of distress and embarrassment
