"Impossible!" said the Queen; "the bounty which permits the daughter of
so many kings, and who yet is Queen of the realm, the attendance of
two waiting-women and a boy, is a grace which Mary Stewart can never
sufficiently acknowledge. Why! my train will be equal to that of any
country dame in this your kingdom of Fife, saving but the lack of a
gentleman-usher, and a pair or two of blue-coated serving-men. But I
must not forget, in my selfish joy, the additional trouble and charges
to which this magnificent augmentation of our train will put our kind
hostess, and the whole house of Lochleven. It is this prudent anxiety, I
am aware, which clouds your brows, my worthy lady. But be of good cheer;
the crown of Scotland has many a fair manor, and your affectionate son,
and my no less affectionate brother, will endow the good knight your
husband with the best of them, ere Mary should be dismissed from this
hospitable castle from your ladyship's lack of means to support the
charges."

"The Douglasses of Lochleven, madam," answered the lady, "have known
for ages how to discharge their duty to the State, without looking for
reward, even when the task was both irksome and dangerous."

"Nay! but, my dear Lochleven," said the Queen, "you are over
scrupulous--I pray you accept of a goodly manor; what should support
the Queen of Scotland in this her princely court, saving her own
crown-lands--and who should minister to the wants of a mother, save an
affectionate son like the Earl of Murray, who possesses so wonderfully
both the power and inclination?--Or said you it was the danger of the
task which clouded your smooth and hospitable brow?--No doubt, a page is
a formidable addition to my body-guard of females; and I bethink me it
must have been for that reason that my Lord of Lindesay refused even
now to venture within the reach of a force so formidable, without being
attended by a competent retinue."

The Lady Lochleven started, and looked something surprised; and Mary
suddenly changing her manner from the smooth ironical affectation of
mildness to an accent of austere command, and drawing up at the same
time her fine person, said, with the full majesty of her rank, "Yes!
Lady of Lochleven; I know that Ruthven is already in the castle, and
that Lindesay waits on the bank the return of your barge to bring him
hither along with Sir Robert Melville. For what purpose do these nobles
come--and why am I not in ordinary decency apprised of their arrival?"'

"Their purpose, madam," replied the Lady of Lochleven, "they must
themselves explain--but a formal annunciation were needless, where your
Grace hath attendants who can play the espial so well."

"Alas! poor Fleming," said the Queen, turning to the elder of the female
attendants, "thou wilt be tried, condemned, and gibbeted, for a spy in
the garrison, because thou didst chance to cross the great hall while my
good Lady of Lochleven was parleying at the full pitch of her voice with
her pilot Randal. Put black wool in thy ears, girl, as you value the
wearing of them longer. Remember, in the Castle of Lochleven, ears and
tongues are matters not of use, but for show merely. Our good hostess
can hear, as well as speak, for us all. We excuse your farther
attendance, my lady hostess," she said, once more addressing the object
of her resentment, "and retire to prepare for an interview with our
rebel lords. We will use the ante-chamber of our sleeping apartment as
our hall of audience. You, young man," she proceeded, addressing Roland
Graeme, and at once softening the ironical sharpness of her manner into
good-humoured raillery, "you, who are all our male attendance, from our
Lord High Chamberlain down to our least galopin, follow us to prepare
our court."

She turned, and walked slowly towards the castle. The Lady of Lochleven
folded her arms, and smiled in bitter resentment, as she watched her
retiring steps.

"The whole male attendance!" she muttered, repeating the Queen's last
words, "and well for thee had it been had thy train never been larger;"
then turning to Roland, in whose way she had stood while making this
pause, she made room for him to pass, saying at the same time, "Art thou
already eaves-dropping? follow thy mistress, minion, and, if thou wilt,
tell her what I have now said."

Roland Graeme hastened after his royal mistress and her attendants, who
had just entered a postern-gate communicating betwixt the castle and the
small garden. They ascended a winding-stair as high as the second story,
which was in a great measure occupied by a suite of three rooms, opening
into each other, and assigned as the dwelling of the captive Princess.
The outermost was a small hall or ante-room, within which opened a
large parlour, and from that again the Queen's bedroom. Another small
apartment, which opened into the same parlour, contained the beds of the
gentlewomen in waiting.

Roland Graeme stopped, as became his station, in the outermost of these
apartments, there to await such orders as might be communicated to him.
From the grated window of the room he saw Lindesay, Melville, and their
followers disembark; and observed that they were met at the castle gate
by a third noble, to whom Lindesay exclaimed, in his loud harsh voice,
"My Lord of Ruthven, you have the start of us!"

At this instant, the page's attention was called to a burst of
hysterical sobs from the inner apartment, and to the hurried
ejaculations of the terrified females, which led him almost instantly to
hasten to their assistance. When he entered, he saw that the Queen had
thrown herself into the large chair which stood nearest the door, and
was sobbing for breath in a strong fit of hysterical affection. The
elder female supported her in her arms, while the younger bathed her
face with water and with tears alternately.

"Hasten, young man!" said the elder lady, in alarm, "fly--call in
assistance--she is swooning!"

But the Queen ejaculated in a faint and broken voice, "Stir not, I
charge you!--call no one to witness--I am better--I shall recover
instantly." And, indeed, with an effort which seemed like that of one
struggling for life, she sate up in her chair, and endeavoured to resume
her composure, while her features yet trembled with the violent emotion
of body and mind which she had undergone. "I am ashamed of my weakness,
girls," she said, taking the hands of her attendants; "but it is
over--and I am Mary Stewart once more. The savage tone of that man's
voice--my knowledge of his insolence--the name which he named--the
purpose for which they come--may excuse a moment's weakness, and it
shall be a moment's only." She snatched from her head the curch or cap,
which had been disordered during her hysterical agony, shook down the
thick clustered tresses of dark brown which had been before veiled under
it--and, drawing her slender fingers across the labyrinth which they
formed, she arose from the chair, and stood like the inspired image of a
Grecian prophetess in a mood which partook at once of sorrow and pride,
of smiles and of tears. "We are ill appointed," she said, "to meet
our rebel subjects; but, as far as we may, we will strive to present
ourselves as becomes their Queen. Follow me, my maidens," she said;
"what says thy favourite song, my Fleming?

  'My maids, come to my dressing-bower,
  And deck my nut-brown hair;
  Where'er ye laid a plait before,
  Look ye lay ten times 'mair.'

"Alas!" she added, when she had repeated with a smile these lines of an
old ballad, "violence has already robbed me of the ordinary decorations
of my rank; and the few that nature gave me have been destroyed by
sorrow and by fear." Yet while she spoke thus, she again let her slender
fingers stray through the wilderness of the beautiful tresses which
veiled her kingly neck and swelling bosom, as if, in her agony of mind,
she had not altogether lost the consciousness of her unrivalled charms.
Roland Graeme, on whose youth, inexperience, and ardent sense of what
was dignified and lovely, the demeanour of so fair and high-born a lady
wrought like the charm of a magician, stood rooted to the spot with
surprise and interest, longing to hazard his life in a quarrel so
fair as that which Mary Stewart's must needs be. She had been bred in
France--she was possessed of the most distinguished beauty--she had
reigned a Queen and a Scottish Queen, to whom knowledge of character was
as essential as the use of vital air. In all these capacities, Mary
was, of all women on the earth, most alert at perceiving and using the
advantages which her charms gave her over almost all who came within the
sphere of their influence. She cast on Roland a glance which might have
melted a heart of stone. "My poor boy," she said, with a feeling partly
real, partly politic, "thou art a stranger to us--sent to this doleful
captivity from the society of some tender mother, or sister, or maiden,
with whom you had freedom to tread a gay measure round the Maypole. I
grieve for you; but you are the only male in my limited household--wilt
thou obey my orders?"

"To the death, madam," said Graeme, in a determined tone.

"Then keep the door of mine apartment," said the Queen; "keep it till
they offer actual violence, or till we shall be fitly arrayed to receive
these intrusive visiters."

"I will defend it till they pass over my body," said Roland Graeme; any
hesitation which he had felt concerning the line of conduct he ought to
pursue being completely swept away by the impulse of the moment.

"Not so, my good youth," answered Mary; "not so, I command. If I have
one faithful subject beside me, much need, God wot, I have to care for
his safety. Resist them but till they are put to the shame of using
actual violence, and then give way, I charge you. Remember my commands."
And, with a smile expressive at once of favour and of authority, she
turned from him, and, followed by her attendants, entered the bedroom.

The youngest paused for half a second ere she followed her companion,
and made a signal to Roland Graeme with her hand. He had been already
long aware that this was Catherine Seyton--a circumstance which could
not much surprise a youth of quick intellects, who recollected the sort
of mysterious discourse which had passed betwixt the two matrons at the
deserted nunnery, and on which his meeting with Catherine in this place
seemed to cast so much light. Yet such was the engrossing effect of
Mary's presence, that it surmounted for the moment even the feelings of
a youthful lover; and it was not until Catherine Seyton had disappeared,
that Roland began to consider in what relation they were to stand to
each other. "She held up her hand to me in a commanding manner," he
thought; "perhaps she wanted to confirm my purpose for the execution of
the Queen's commands; for I think she could scarce purpose to scare me
with the sort of discipline which she administered to the groom in the
frieze-jacket, and to poor Adam Woodcock. But we will see to that anon;
meantime, let us do justice to the trust reposed in us by this unhappy
Queen. I think my Lord of Murray will himself own that it is the duty of
a faithful page to defend his lady against intrusion on her privacy."

Accordingly, he stepped to the little vestibule, made fast, with lock
and bar, the door which opened from thence to the large staircase, and
then sat himself down to attend the result. He had not long to wait--a
rude and strong hand first essayed to lift the latch, then pushed and
shook the door with violence, and, when it resisted his attempt to open
it, exclaimed, "Undo the door there, you within!"

"Why, and at whose command," said the page, "am I to undo the door of
the apartments of the Queen of Scotland?"

Another vain attempt, which made hinge and bolt jingle, showed that
the impatient applicant without would willingly have entered altogether
regardless of his challenge; but at length an answer was returned.

"Undo the door, on your peril--the Lord Lindesay comes to speak with the
Lady Mary of Scotland."

"The Lord Lindesay, as a Scottish noble," answered the page, "must await
his Sovereign's leisure."

An earnest altercation ensued amongst those without, in which Roland
distinguished the remarkable harsh voice of Lindesay in reply to
Sir Robert Melville, who appeared to have been using some soothing
language--"No! no! no! I tell thee, no! I will place a petard against
the door rather than be baulked by a profligate woman, and bearded by an
insolent footboy."

"Yet, at least," said Melville, "let me try fair means in the first
instance. Violence to a lady would stain your scutcheon for ever. Or
await till my Lord Ruthven comes."

"I will await no longer," said Lindesay; "it is high time the business
were done, and we on our return to the council. But thou mayest try thy
fair play, as thou callest it, while I cause my train to prepare the
petard. I came hither provided with as good gunpowder as blew up the
Kirk of Field."

"For God's sake, be patient," said Melville; and, approaching the door,
he said, as speaking to those within, "Let the Queen know, that I, her
faithful servant, Robert Melville, do entreat her, for her own sake, and
to prevent worse consequences, that she will undo the door, and admit
Lord Lindesay, who brings a mission from the Council of State."

"I will do your errand to the Queen," said the page, "and report to you
her answer."

He went to the door of the bedchamber, and tapping against it gently, it
was opened by the elderly lady, to whom he communicated his errand, and
returned with directions from the Queen to admit Sir Robert Melville and
Lord Lindesay. Roland Graeme returned to the vestibule, and opened the
door accordingly, into which the Lord Lindesay strode, with the air of
a soldier who has fought his way into a conquered fortress; while
Melville, deeply dejected, followed him more slowly.

"I draw you to witness, and to record," said the page to this last,
"that, save for the especial commands of the Queen, I would have made
good the entrance, with my best strength, and my best blood, against all
Scotland."

"Be silent, young man," said Melville, in a tone of grave rebuke; "add
not brands to fire--this is no time to make a flourish of thy boyish
chivalry."

"She has not appeared even yet," said Lindesay, who had now reached the
midst of the parlour or audience-room; "how call you this trifling?"

"Patience, my lord," replied Sir Robert, "time presses not--and Lord
Ruthven hath not as yet descended."

At this moment the door of the inner apartment opened, and Queen Mary
presented herself, advancing with an air of peculiar grace and majesty,
and seeming totally unruffled, either by the visit, or by the rude
manner in which it had been enforced. Her dress was a robe of black
velvet; a small ruff, open in front, gave a full view of her beautifully
formed chin and neck, but veiled the bosom. On her head she wore a small
cap of lace, and a transparent white veil hung from her shoulders over
the long black robe, in large loose folds, so that it could be drawn at
pleasure over the face and person. She wore a cross of gold around her
neck, and had her rosary of gold and ebony hanging from her girdle. She
was closely followed by her two ladies, who remained standing behind her
during the conference. Even Lord Lindesay, though the rudest noble
of that rude age, was surprised into something like respect by the
unconcerned and majestic mien of her, whom he had expected to find
frantic with impotent passion, or dissolved in useless and vain sorrow,
or overwhelmed with the fears likely in such a situation to assail
fallen royalty.

"We fear we have detained you, my Lord of Lindesay," said the Queen,
while she curtsied with dignity in answer to his reluctant obeisance;
"but a female does not willingly receive her visiters without some
minutes spent at the toilette. Men, my lord, are less dependant on such
ceremonies."

Lord Lindesay, casting his eye down on his own travel-stained and
disordered dress, muttered something of a hasty journey, and the Queen
paid her greeting to Sir Robert Melville with courtesy, and even, as
it seemed, with kindness. There was then a dead pause, during which
Lindesay looked towards the door, as if expecting with impatience the
colleague of their embassy. The Queen alone was entirely unembarrassed,
and, as if to break the silence, she addressed Lord Lindesay, with
a glance at the large and cumbrous sword which he wore, as already
mentioned, hanging from his neck.

"You have there a trusty and a weighty travelling companion, my lord.
I trust you expected to meet with no enemy here, against whom such
a formidable weapon could be necessary? it is, methinks, somewhat a
singular ornament for a court, though I am, as I well need to be, too
much of a Stuart to fear a sword."

"It is not the first time, madam," replied Lindesay, bringing round the
weapon so as to rest its point on the ground, and leaning one hand on
the huge cross-handle, "it is not the first time that this weapon has
intruded itself into the presence of the House of Stewart."

"Possibly, my lord," replied the Queen, "it may have done service to my
ancestors--Your ancestors were men of loyalty"

"Ay, madam," replied he, "service it hath done; but such as kings love
neither to acknowledge nor to reward. It was the service which the knife
renders to the tree when trimming it to the quick, and depriving it of
the superfluous growth of rank and unfruitful suckers, which rob it of
nourishment."

"You talk riddles, my lord," said Mary; "I will hope the explanation
carries nothing insulting with it."

"You shall judge, madam," answered Lindesay. "With this good sword was
Archibald Douglas, Earl of Angus, girded on the memorable day when he
acquired the name of Bell-the-Cat, for dragging from the presence of
your great grandfather, the third James of the race, a crew of minions,
flatterers, and favourites whom he hanged over the bridge of Lauder,
as a warning to such reptiles how they approach a Scottish throne. With
this same weapon, the same inflexible champion of Scottish honour
and nobility slew at one blow Spens of Kilspindie, a courtier of your
grandfather, James the fourth, who had dared to speak lightly of him
in the royal presence. They fought near the brook of Fala; and
Bell-the-Cat, with this blade, sheared through the thigh of his
opponent, and lopped the limb as easily as a shepherd's boy slices a
twig from a sapling."

"My lord," replied the Queen, reddening, "my nerves are too good to
be alarmed even by this terrible history--May I ask how a blade
so illustrious passed from the House of Douglas to that of
Lindesay?--Methinks it should have been preserved as a consecrated
relic, by a family who have held all that they could do against their
king, to be done in favour of their country."

"Nay, madam," said Melville, anxiously interfering, "ask not
that question of Lord Lindesay--And you, my lord, for shame--for
decency--forbear to reply to it."

"It is time that this lady should hear the truth," replied Lindesay.

"And be assured," said the Queen, "that she will be moved to anger by
none that you can tell her, my lord. There are cases in which just scorn
has always the mastery over just anger."

"Then know," said Lindesay, "that upon the field of Carberry-hill, when
that false and infamous traitor and murderer, James, sometime Earl of
Bothwell, and nicknamed Duke of Orkney, offered to do personal battle
with any of the associated nobles who came to drag him to justice, I
accepted his challenge, and was by the noble Earl of Morton gifted
with his good sword that I might therewith fight it out--Ah! so help me
Heaven, had his presumption been one grain more, or his cowardice one
grain less, I should have done such work with this good steel on his
traitorous corpse, that the hounds and carrion-crows should have found
their morsels daintily carved to their use !"

The Queen's courage well-nigh gave way at the mention of Bothwell's
name--a name connected with such a train of guilt, shame, and disaster.
But the prolonged boast of Lindesay gave her time to rally herself, and
to answer with an appearance of cold contempt--"It is easy to slay
an enemy who enters not the lists. But had Mary Stewart inherited her
father's sword as well as his sceptre, the boldest of her rebels should
not upon that day have complained that they had no one to cope withal.
Your lordship will forgive me if I abridge this conference. A brief
description of a bloody fight is long enough to satisfy a lady's
curiosity; and unless my Lord of Lindesay has something more important
to tell us than of the deeds which old Bell-the-Cat achieved, and how he
would himself have emulated them, had time and tide permitted, we will
retire to our private apartment, and you, Fleming, shall finish reading
to us yonder little treatise _Des Rodomontades Espagnolles_."

"Tarry, madam," said Lindesay, his complexion reddening in his turn, "I
know your quick wit too well of old to have sought an interview that
you might sharpen its edge at the expense of my honour. Lord Ruthven and
myself, with Sir Robert Melville as a concurrent, come to your Grace on
the part of the Secret Council, to tender to you what much concerns the
safety of your own life and the welfare of the State."

"The Secret Council?" said the Queen; "by what powers can it subsist or
act, while I, from whom it holds its character, am here detained under
unjust restraint? But it matters not--what concerns the welfare of
Scotland shall be acceptable to Mary Stewart, come from whatever quarter
it will--and for what concerns her own life, she has lived long enough
to be weary of it, even at the age of twenty-five.--Where is your
colleague, my lord?--why tarries he?"

"He comes, madam," said Melville, and Lord Ruthven entered at the
instant, holding in his hand a packet. As the Queen returned his
salutation she became deadly pale, but instantly recovered herself
by dint of strong and sudden resolution, just as the noble, whose
appearance seemed to excite such emotions in her bosom, entered the
apartment in company with George Douglas, the youngest son of the Knight
of Lochleven, who, during the absence of his father and brethren,
acted as Seneschal of the Castle, under the direction of the elder Lady
Lochleven, his father's mother.




Chapter the Twenty-Second.


  I give this heavy weight from off my head,
  And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand;
  With mine own tears I wash away my balm,
  With mine own hand I give away my crown,
  With mine own tongue deny my sacred state,
  With mine own breath release all duteous oaths.
                                   RICHARD II.

Lord Ruthven had the look and bearing which became a soldier and a
statesman, and the martial cast of his form and features procured him
the popular epithet of Greysteil, by which he was distinguished by his
intimates, after the hero of a metrical romance then generally known.
His dress, which was a buff-coat embroidered, had a half-military
character, but exhibited nothing of the sordid negligence which
distinguished that of Lindesay. But the son of an ill-fated sire, and
the father of a yet more unfortunate family, bore in his look that cast
of inauspicious melancholy, by which the physiognomists of that time
pretended to distinguish those who were predestined to a violent and
unhappy death.

The terror which the presence of this nobleman impressed on the Queen's
mind, arose from the active share he had borne in the slaughter of
David Rizzio; his father having presided at the perpetration of that
abominable crime, although so weak from long and wasting illness, that
he could not endure the weight of his armour, having arisen from a
sick-bed to commit a murder in the presence of his Sovereign. On that
occasion his son also had attended and taken an active part. It was
little to be wondered at, that the Queen, considering her condition
when such a deed of horror was acted in her presence, should retain an
instinctive terror for the principal actors in the murder. She returned,
however, with grace the salutation of Lord Ruthven, and extended her
hand to George Douglas, who kneeled, and kissed it with respect; the
first mark of a subject's homage which Roland Graeme had seen any of
them render to the captive Sovereign. She returned his greeting in
silence, and there was a brief pause, during which the steward of the
castle, a man of a sad brow and a severe eye, placed, under George
Douglas's directions, a table and writing materials; and the page,
obedient to his mistress's dumb signal, advanced a large chair to the
side on which the Queen stood, the table thus forming a sort of bar
which divided the Queen and her personal followers from her unwelcome
visitors. The steward then withdrew after a low reverence. When he had
closed the door behind him, the Queen broke silence--"With your favour,
my lords, I will sit--my walks are not indeed extensive enough at
present to fatigue me greatly, yet I find repose something more
necessary than usual."

She sat down accordingly, and, shading her cheek with her beautiful
hand, looked keenly and impressively at each of the nobles in turn.
Mary Fleming applied her kerchief to her eyes, and Catherine Seyton and
Roland Graeme exchanged a glance, which showed that both were too deeply
engrossed with sentiments of interest and commiseration for their royal
mistress, to think of any thing which regarded themselves.

"I wait the purpose of your mission, my lords," said the Queen, after
she had been seated for about a minute without a word-being spoken,--"I
wait your message from those you call the Secret Council.-I trust it
is a petition of pardon, and a desire that I will resume my rightful
throne, without using with due severity my right of punishing those who
have dispossessed me of it."

"Madam," replied Ruthven, "it is painful for us to speak harsh truths to
a Princess who has long ruled us. But we come to offer, not to implore,
pardon. In a word, madam, we have to propose to you on the part of the
Secret Council, that you sign these deeds, which will contribute greatly
to the pacification of the State, the advancement of God's word, and the
welfare of your own future life."

"Am I expected to take these fair words on trust, my lord? or may I hear
the contents of these reconciling papers, ere I am asked to sign them?"

"Unquestionably, madam; it is our purpose and wish, you should read what
you are required to sign," replied Ruthven.

"Required?" replied the Queen, with some emphasis; "but the phrase suits
well the matter-read, my lord."

The Lord Ruthven proceeded to read a formal instrument, running in the
Queen's name, and setting forth that she had been called, at an early
age, to the administration of the crown and realm of Scotland, and had
toiled diligently therein, until she was in body and spirit so wearied
out and disgusted, that she was unable any longer to endure the travail
and pain of State affairs; and that since God had blessed her with a
fair and hopeful son, she was desirous to ensure to him, even while
she yet lived, his succession to the crown, which was his by right of
hereditary descent. "Wherefore," the instrument proceeded, "we, of the
motherly affection we bear to our said son, have renounced and demitted,
and by these our letters of free good-will, renounce and demit, the
Crown, government, and guiding of the realm of Scotland, in favour of
our said son, that he may succeed to us as native Prince thereof, as
much as if we had been removed by disease, and not by our own proper
act. And that this demission of our royal authority may have the more
full and solemn effect, and none pretend ignorance, we give, grant,
and commit, fall and free and plain power to our trusty cousins, Lord
Lindesay of the Byres, and William Lord Ruthven, to appear in our
name before as many of the nobility, clergy, and burgesses, as may be
assembled at Stirling, and there, in our name and behalf, publicly, and
in their presence, to renounce the Crown, guidance, and government of
this our kingdom of Scotland."

The Queen here broke in with an air of extreme surprise. "How is this,
my lords?" she said: "Are my ears turned rebels, that they deceive me
with sounds so extraordinary?--And yet it is no wonder that, having
conversed so long with rebellion, they should now force its language
upon my understanding. Say I am mistaken, my lords--say, for the honour
of yourselves and the Scottish nobility, that my right trusty cousins of
Lindesay and Ruthven, two barons of warlike fame and ancient line, have
not sought the prison-house of their kind mistress for such a purpose as
these words seem to imply. Say, for the sake of honour and loyalty, that
my ears have deceived me."

"No, madam," said Ruthven gravely, "your ears do _not_ deceive you--they
deceived you when they were closed against the preachers of the
evangele, and the honest advice of your faithful subjects; and when
they were ever open to flattery of pickthanks and traitors, foreign
cubiculars and domestic minions. The land may no longer brook the rule
of one who cannot rule herself; wherefore, I pray you to comply with the
last remaining wish of your subjects and counsellors, and spare yourself
and us the farther agitation of matter so painful."

"And is this _all_ my loving subjects require of me, my lord?" said
Mary, in a tone of bitter irony. "Do they really stint themselves to the
easy boon that I should yield up the crown, which is mine by birthright,
to an infant which is scarcely more than a year old--fling down my
sceptre, and take up a distaff--Oh no! it is too little for them to
ask--That other roll of parchment contains something harder to be
complied with, and which may more highly task my readiness to comply
with the petitions of my lieges."

"This parchment," answered Ruthven, in the same tone of inflexible
gravity, and unfolding the instrument as he spoke, "is one by which your
grace constitutes your nearest in blood, and the most honourable and
trustworthy of your subjects, James, Earl of Murray, Regent of the
kingdom during the minority of the young King. He already holds the
appointment from the Secret Council."

The Queen gave a sort of shriek, and, clapping her hands together,
exclaimed, "Comes the arrow out of his quiver?--out of my brother's
bow?--Alas! I looked for his return from France as my sole, at least my
readiest, chance of deliverance.--And yet, when I heard he had assumed
the government, I guessed he would shame to wield it in my name."

"I must pray your answer, madam," said Lord Ruthven, "to the demand of
the Council."

"The demand of the Council!" said the Queen; "say rather the demand of a
set of robbers, impatient to divide the spoil they have seized. To such
a demand, and sent by the mouth of a traitor, whose scalp, but for my
womanish mercy, should long since have stood on the city gates, Mary of
Scotland has no answer."

"I trust, madam," said Lord Ruthven, "my being unacceptable to your
presence will not add to your obduracy of resolution. It may become
you to remember that the death of the minion, Rizzio, cost the house
of Ruthven its head and leader. My father, more worthy than a whole
province of such vile sycophants, died in exile, and broken-hearted."

The Queen clasped her hands on her face, and, resting her arms on the
table, stooped down her head and wept so bitterly, that the tears were
seen to find their way in streams between the white and slender fingers
with which she endeavoured to conceal them.

"My lords," said Sir Robert Melville, "this is too much rigour. Under
your lordship's favour, we came hither, not to revive old griefs, but to
find the mode of avoiding new ones."

"Sir Robert Melville," said Ruthven, "we best know for what purpose we
were delegated hither, and wherefore you were somewhat unnecessarily
sent to attend us."

"Nay, by my hand," said Lord Lindesay, "I know not why we were cumbered
with the good knight, unless he comes in place of the lump of sugar
which pothicars put into their wholesome but bitter medicaments, to
please a froward child--a needless labour, methinks, where men have the
means to make them swallow the physic otherwise."

"Nay, my lords," said Melville, "ye best know your own secret
instructions. I conceive I shall best obey mine in striving to mediate
between her Grace and you."

"Be silent, Sir Robert Melville," said the Queen, arising, and her face
still glowing with agitation as she spoke. "My kerchief, Fleming--I
shame that traitors should have power to move me thus.--Tell me, proud
lords," she added, wiping away the tears as she spoke, "by what earthly
warrant can liege subjects pretend to challenge the rights of an
anointed Sovereign--to throw off the allegiance they have vowed, and to
take away the crown from the head on which Divine warrant hath placed
it?"

"Madam," said Ruthven, "I will deal plainly with you. Your reign, from
the dismal field of Pinkie-cleugh, when you were a babe in the cradle,
till now that ye stand a grown dame before us, hath been such a tragedy
of losses, disasters, civil dissensions, and foreign wars, that the like
is not to be found in our chronicles. The French and English have, with
one consent, made Scotland the battle-field on which to fight out their
own ancient quarrel.--For ourselves every man's hand hath been
against his brother, nor hath a year passed over without rebellion and
slaughter, exile of nobles, and oppressing of the commons. We may endure
it no longer, and therefore, as a prince, to whom God hath refused the
gift of hearkening to wise counsel, and on whose dealings and projects
no blessing hath ever descended, we pray you to give way to other rule
and governance of the land, that a remnant may yet be saved to this
distracted realm."

"My lord," said Mary, "it seems to me that you fling on my unhappy and
devoted head those evils, which, with far more justice, I may impute
to your own turbulent, wild, and untameable dispositions--the frantic
violence with which you, the Magnates of Scotland, enter into feuds
against each other, sticking at no cruelty to gratify your wrath, taking
deep revenge for the slightest offences, and setting at defiance those
wise laws which your ancestors made for stanching of such cruelty,
rebelling against the lawful authority, and bearing yourselves as if
there were no king in the land; or rather as if each were king in his
own premises. And now you throw the blame on me--on me, whose life has
been embittered--whose sleep has been broken--whose happiness has been
wrecked by your dissensions. Have I not myself been obliged to traverse
wilds and mountains, at the head of a few faithful followers, to
maintain peace and put down oppression? Have I not worn harness on my
person, and carried pistols at my saddle; fain to lay aside the softness
of a woman, and the dignity of a Queen, that I might show an example to
my followers?"

"We grant, madam," said Lindesay, "that the affrays occasioned by your
misgovernment, may sometimes have startled you in the midst of a masque
or galliard; or it may be that such may have interrupted the idolatry of
the mass, or the jesuitical counsels of some French ambassador. But the
longest and severest journey which your Grace has taken in my memory,
was from Hawick to Hermitage Castle; and whether it was for the weal of
the state, or for your own honour, rests with your Grace's conscience."

The Queen turned to him with inexpressible sweetness of tone and manner,
and that engaging look which Heaven had assigned her, as if to show
that the choicest arts to win men's affections may be given in vain.
"Lindesay," she said, "you spoke not to me in this stern tone, and with
such scurril taunt, yon fair summer evening, when you and I shot at the
butts against the Earl of Mar and Mary Livingstone, and won of them the
evening's collation, in the privy garden of Saint Andrews. The Master
of Lindesay was then my friend, and vowed to be my soldier. How I have
offended the Lord of Lindesay I know not, unless honours have changed
manners."

Hardhearted as he was, Lindesay seemed struck with this unexpected
appeal, but almost instantly replied, "Madam, it is well known that
your Grace could in those days make fools of whomever approached you.
I pretend not to have been wiser than others. But gayer men and better
courtiers soon jostled aside my rude homage, and I think your Grace
cannot but remember times, when my awkward attempts to take the manners
that pleased you, were the sport of the court-popinjays, the Marys and
