excellent friend at the close of his useful and virtuous life--Alas,
wherefore--the question bursts from me involuntarily--wherefore could
you not have complied with his wishes?--wherefore"--

"Do not ask me," said she, stopping the question which was on his lips;
"we are not the formers of our own destiny. It is painful to talk on
such a subject; but for once, and for ever, let me tell you that I
should have done Mr. Hartley wrong, if, even to secure his assistance to
my father, I had accepted his hand, while my wayward affections did not
accompany the act."

"But wherefore do I see you here, Menie?--Forgive me, Miss Gray, my
tongue as well as my heart turns back to long-forgotten scenes--But why
here?--why with this woman?"

"She is not, indeed, every thing that I expected," answered Menie;
"but I must not be prejudiced by foreign manners, after the step I have
taken--She is, besides, attentive, and generous in her way, and I
shall soon"--she paused a moment, and then added, "be under better
protection."

"That of Richard Middlemas?" said Hartley with a faltering voice.

"I ought not, perhaps, to answer the question," said Menie; "but I am
a bad dissembler, and those whom I trust, I trust entirely. You have
guessed right, Mr. Hartley," she added,--colouring a good deal, "I have
come hither to unite my fate to that of your old comrade."

"It is, then, just as I feared!" exclaimed Hartley.

"And why should Mr. Hartley fear?" said Menie Gray. "I used to think you
too generous--surely the quarrel which occurred long since ought not to
perpetuate suspicion and resentment."

"At least, if the feeling of resentment remained in my own bosom,
it would be the last I should intrude upon you, Miss Gray,"
answered Hartley. "But it is for you, and for you alone, that I am
watchful.--This person--this gentleman whom you mean to intrust with
your happiness--do you know where he is--and in what service?"

"I know both, more distinctly perhaps than Mr. Hartley can do. Mr.
Middlemas has erred greatly, and has been severely punished. But it was
not in the time of his exile and sorrow, that she who has plighted her
faith to him should, with the flattering world, turn her back upon him.
Besides, you have, doubtless, not heard of his hopes of being restored
to his country and his rank?"

"I have," answered Hartley, thrown off his guard; "but I see not how he
can deserve it, otherwise than by becoming a traitor to his new master,
and thus rendering himself even more unworthy of confidence than I hold
him to be at this moment."

"It is well that he hears you not," answered Menie Gray, resenting, with
natural feeling, the imputation on her lover. Then instantly softening
her tone she added, "My voice ought not to aggravate, but to soothe
your quarrel. Mr. Hartley, I plight my word to you that you do Richard
wrong."

She said these words with affected calmness, suppressing all appearance
of that displeasure, of which she was evidently sensible, upon this
depreciation of a beloved object.

Hartley compelled himself to answer in the same strain.

"Miss Gray," he said, "your actions and motives will always be those of
an angel; but let me entreat you to view this most important matter with
the eyes of worldly wisdom and prudence. Have you well weighed the risks
attending the course which you are taking in favour of a man, who,--nay,
I will not again offend you--who may, I hope, deserve your favour?"

"When I wished to see you in this manner, Mr. Hartley, and declined
a communication in public, where we could have had less freedom of
conversation, it was with the view of telling you every thing. Some
pain I thought old recollections might give, but I trusted it would be
momentary; and, as I desire to retain your friendship, it is proper
I should show that I still deserve it. I must then first tell you my
situation after my father's death. In the world's opinion we were
always poor, you know; but in the proper sense I had not known what real
poverty was, until I was placed in dependence upon a distant relation of
my poor father, who made our relationship a reason for casting upon me
all the drudgery of her household, while she would not allow that it
gave me a claim to countenance, kindness, or anything but the relief
of my most pressing wants. In these circumstances I received from
Mr. Middlemas a letter, in which he related his fatal duel, and its
consequences. He had not dared to write to me to share his misery--Now,
when he was in a lucrative situation, under the patronage of a powerful
prince, whose wisdom knew how to prize and protect such Europeans as
entered his service--now, when he had every prospect of rendering our
government such essential service by his interest with Hyder Ali, and
might eventually nourish hopes of being permitted to return and stand
his trial for the death of his commanding officer--now, he pressed me
to come to India, and share his reviving fortunes, by accomplishing the
engagement into which we had long ago entered. A considerable sum
of money accompanied this letter. Mrs. Duffer was, pointed out as
a respectable woman, who would protect me during the passage. Mrs.
Montreville, a lady of rank, having large possessions and high interest
in the Mysore, would receive me on my arrival at Fort St. George, and
conduct me safely to the dominions of Hyder. It was farther recommended,
that, considering the peculiar situation of Mr. Middlemas, his name
should be concealed in the transaction, and that the ostensible cause of
my voyage should be to fill an office in that lady's family--What was
I to do?--My duty to my poor father was ended, and my other friends
considered the proposal as too advantageous to be rejected. The
references given, the sum of money lodged, were considered as putting
all scruples out of the question, and my immediate protectress and
kinswoman was so earnest that I should accept of the offer made me, as
to intimate that she would not encourage me to stand in my own light, by
continuing to give me shelter and food, (she gave me little more,) if I
was foolish enough to refuse compliance."

"Sordid wretch!" said Hartley, "how little did she deserve such a
charge!"

"Let me speak a proud word, Mr. Hartley, and then you will not perhaps
blame my relations so much. All their persuasions, and even their
threats, would have failed in inducing me to take a step, which has an
appearance, at least, to which I found it difficult to reconcile myself.
But I had loved Middlemas--I love him still--why should I deny it?--and
I have not hesitated to trust him. Had it not been for the small
still voice which reminded me of my engagements, I had maintained
more stubbornly the pride of womanhood, and, as you would perhaps have
recommended, I might have expected, at least, that my lover should have
come to Britain in person, and might have had the vanity to think,"
she added, smiling faintly, "that if I were worth having, I was worth
fetching."

"Yet now--even now," answered Hartley, "be just to yourself while you
are generous to your lover.--Nay, do not look angrily, but hear me.
I doubt the propriety of your being under the charge of this unsexed
woman, who can no longer be termed a European. I have interest enough
with females of the highest rank in the settlement--this climate is that
of generosity and hospitality--there is not one of them, who, knowing
your character and history, will not desire to have you in her society,
and under her protection, until your lover shall be able to vindicate
his title to your hand in the face of the world.--I myself will be no
cause of suspicion to him, or of inconvenience to you, Menie. Let me but
have your consent to the arrangement I propose, and the same moment
that sees you under honourable and unsuspected protection, I will
leave Madras, not to return till your destiny is in one way or other
permanently fixed."

"No, Hartley," said Miss Gray. "It may, it must be, friendly in you thus
to advise me; but it would be most base in me to advance my own affairs
at the expense of your prospects. Besides, what would this be but taking
the chance of contingencies, with the view of sharing poor Middlemas's
fortunes, should they prove prosperous, and casting him off, should they
be otherwise? Tell me only, do you, of your own positive knowledge, aver
that you consider this woman as an unworthy and unfit protectress for so
young a person as I am?"

"Of my own knowledge I can say nothing; nay, I must own, that reports
differ even concerning Mrs. Montreville's character. But surely the mere
suspicion"----

"The mere suspicion, Mr. Hartley, can have no weight with me,
considering that I can oppose to it the testimony of the man with whom I
am willing to share my future fortunes. You acknowledge the question
is but doubtful, and should not the assertion of him of whom I think so
highly decide my belief in a doubtful matter? What, indeed, must he be,
should this Madame Montreville be other than he represented her?"

"What must he be, indeed!" thought Hartley internally, but his lips
uttered not the words. He looked down in a deep reverie, and at length
started from it at the words of Miss Gray.

"It is time to remind you, Mr. Hartley, that we must needs part. God
bless and preserve you."

"And you, dearest Menie," exclaimed Hartley as he sunk on one knee,
and pressed to his lips the hand which she held out to him. "God
bless you!--you must deserve blessing. God protect you!--you must need
protection.--Oh, should things prove different from what you hope, send
for me instantly, and if man can aid you, Adam Hartley will!"

He placed in her hand a card containing his address. He then rushed from
the apartment. In the hall he met the lady of the mansion, who made him
a haughty reverence in token of adieu, while a native servant of the
upper class, by whom she was attended, made a low and reverential salam.

Hartley hastened from the Black Town, more satisfied than before
that some deceit was about to be practised towards Menie Gray--more
determined than ever to exert himself for her preservation; yet more
completely perplexed, when he began to consider the doubtful character
of the danger to which she might be exposed, and the scanty means of
protection which she had to oppose to it.




CHAPTER THE TWELFTH.


As Hartley left the apartment in the house of Ram Sing Cottah by one
mode of exit, Miss Gray retired by another, to an apartment destined for
her private use. She, too, had reason for secret and anxious reflection,
since all her love for Middlemas, and her full confidence in his honour,
could not entirely conquer her doubts concerning the character of the
person whom he had chosen for her temporary protectress. And yet she
could not rest these doubts upon any thing distinctly conclusive; it was
rather a dislike of her patroness's general manners, and a disgust at
her masculine notions and expressions, that displeased her, than any
thing else.

Meantime, Madame Montreville, followed by her black domestic, entered
the apartment where Hartley and Menie had just parted. It appeared
from the conversation which follows, that they had from some place
of concealment overheard the dialogue we have narrated in the former
chapter.

"It is good luck, Sadoc," said the lady, "that there is in this world
the great fool."

"And the great villain," answered Sadoc, in good English, but in a most
sullen tone.

"This woman, now," continued the lady, "is what in Frangistan you call
an angel."

"Ay, and I have seen those in Hindostan you may well call devil."

"I am sure that this--how you call him--Hartley, is a meddling devil.
For what has he to do? She will not have any of him. What is his
business who has her? I wish we were well up the Ghauts again, my dear
Sadoc."

"For my part," answered the slave, "I am half determined never to ascend
the Ghauts more. Hark you, Adela, I begin to sicken of the plan we have
laid. This creature's confiding purity--call her angel or woman, as you
will--makes my practices appear too vile, even in my own eyes. I feel
myself unfit to be your companion farther in the daring paths which you
pursue. Let us part, and part friends."

"Amen, coward. But the woman remains with me," answered the Queen of
Sheba. [Footnote: In order to maintain uninjured the tone of passion
throughout this dialogue, it has been judged expedient to discard, in
the Language of the Begum, the _patois_ of Madame Munreville.]

"With thee!" replied the seeming black--"never. No, Adela. She is
under the shadow of the British flag, and she shall experience its
protection."

"Yes--and what protection will it afford to you yourself?" retorted the
Amazon. "What if I should clap my hands, and command a score of my black
servants to bind you like a sheep, and then send word to the Governor
of the Presidency that one Richard Middlemas, who had been guilty
of mutiny, murder, desertion, and serving of the enemy against his
countrymen, is here, at Ram Sing Cottah's house, in the disguise of a
black servant?" Middlemas covered his face with his hands, while Madame
Montreville proceeded to load him with reproaches.--"Yes," she said,
"slave and son of a slave! Since you wear the dress of my household,
you shall obey me as fully as the rest of them, otherwise,--whips,
fetters,--the scaffold, renegade,--the gallows, murderer! Dost thou dare
to reflect on the abyss of misery from which I raised thee, to share
my wealth and my affections? Dost thou not remember that the picture
of this pale, cold, unimpassioned girl was then so indifferent to thee,
that thou didst sacrifice it as a tribute due to the benevolence of
her who relieved thee, to the affection of her who, wretch as thou art,
condescended to love thee?"

"Yes, fell woman," answered Middlemas, "but was it I who encouraged
the young tyrant's outrageous passion for a portrait, or who formed the
abominable plan of placing the original within his power?"

"No--for to do so required brain and wit. But it was thine, flimsy
villain, to execute the device which a bolder genius planned; it was
thine to entice the woman to this foreign shore, under pretence of a
love, which, on thy part, cold-blooded miscreant, never had existed."

"Peace, screech-owl!" answered Middlemas, "nor drive me to such madness
as may lead me to forget thou art a woman."

"A woman, dastard! Is this thy pretext for sparing me?--what, then, art
thou, who tremblest at a woman's looks, a woman's words?--I am a woman,
renegade, but one who wears a dagger, and despises alike thy strength
and thy courage. I am a woman who has looked on more dying men than thou
hast killed deer and antelopes. Thou must traffic for greatness?--thou
hast thrust thyself like a five-years' child, into the rough sports of
men, and wilt only be borne down and crushed for thy pains. Thou wilt be
a double traitor, forsooth--betray thy betrothed to the Prince, in order
to obtain the means of betraying the Prince to the English, and thus
gain thy pardon from thy countrymen. But me thou shalt not betray. I
will not be made the tool of thy ambition--I will not give thee the
aid of my treasures and my soldiers, to be sacrificed at last to this
northern icicle. No, I will watch thee as the fiend watches the wizard.
Show but a symptom of betraying me while we are here, and I denounce
thee to the English, who might pardon the successful villain, but
not him who can only offer prayers for his life, in place of useful
services. Let me see thee flinch when we are beyond the Ghauts, and the
Nawaub shall know thy intrigues with the Nizam and the Mahrattas,
and thy resolution to deliver up Bangalore to the English, when the
imprudence of Tippoo shall have made thee Killedar. Go where thou wilt,
slave, thou shalt find me thy mistress."

"And a fair though an unkind one," said the counterfeit Sadoc, suddenly
changing his tone to an affectation of tenderness. "It is true I pity
this unhappy woman; true I would save her if I could--but most unjust
to suppose I would in any circumstances prefer her to my Nourjehan, my
light of the world, my Mootee Mahul, my pearl of the palace"----

"All false coin and empty compliment," said the Begum. "Let me hear, in
two brief words, that you leave this woman to my disposal."

"But not to be interred alive under your seat, like the Circassian of
whom you were jealous," said Middlemas, shuddering.

"No, fool; her lot shall not be worse than that of being the favourite
of a prince. Hast thou, fugitive and criminal as thou art, a better fate
to offer her?"

"But," replied Middlemas, blushing even through his base disguise at
the consciousness of his abject conduct, "I will have no force on her
inclinations."

"Such truce she shall have as the laws of the Zenana allow," replied the
female tyrant. "A week is long enough for her to determine whether she
will be the willing mistress of a princely and generous lover."

"Ay," said Richard, "and before that week expires"----He stopped short.

"What will happen before the week expires?" said the Begum Montreville.

"No matter--nothing of consequence. I leave the woman's fate with you."

"'Tis well--we march to-night on our return, so soon as the moon rises
Give orders to our retinue."

"To hear is to obey," replied the seeming slave, and left the apartment.

The eyes of the Begum remained fixed on the door through which he had
passed. "Villain--double-dyed villain!" she said, "I see thy drift; thou
wouldst betray Tippoo, in policy alike and in love. But me thou canst
betray.--Ho, there, who waits? Let a trusty messenger be ready to set
off instantly with letters, which I will presently make ready. His
departure must be a secret to every one.--And now shall this pale
phantom soon know her destiny, and learn what it is to have rivalled
Adela Montreville."

While the Amazonian Princess meditated plans of vengeance against her
innocent rival and the guilty lover, the latter plotted as deeply for
his own purposes. He had waited until such brief twilight as India
enjoys rendered his disguise complete, then set out in haste for the
part of Madras inhabited by the Europeans, or, as it is termed, Fort St.
George.

"I will save her yet," he said; "ere Tippoo can seize his prize, we will
raise around his ears a storm which would drive the God of War from the
arms of the Goddess of Beauty. The trap shall close its fangs upon this
Indian tiger, ere he has time to devour the bait which enticed him into
the snare."

While Middlemas cherished these hopes, he approached the Residency. The
sentinel on duty stopped him, as of course, but he was in possession
of the counter-sign, and entered without opposition. He rounded the
building in which the President of the Council resided, an able and
active, but unconscientious man, who, neither in his own affairs, nor in
those of the Company, was supposed to embarrass himself much about the
means which he used to attain his object. A tap at a small postern gate
was answered by a black slave, who admitted Middlemas to that necessary
appurtenance of every government, a back stair, which, in its turn,
conducted him to the office of the Bramin Paupiah, the Dubash, or
steward of the great man, and by whose means chiefly he communicated
with the native courts, and carried on many mysterious intrigues, which
he did not communicate to his brethren at the council-board.

It is perhaps justice to the guilty and unhappy Middlemas to suppose,
that if the agency of a British officer had been employed, he might have
been induced to throw himself on his mercy, might have explained the
whole of his nefarious bargain with Tippoo, and, renouncing his guilty
projects of ambition, might have turned his whole thoughts upon
saving Menie Gray, ere she was transported beyond the reach of British
