
Jack, who was in two minds about fighting or accepting a pardon, and who
indeed did both, saw at last that there was nothing to expect from his
men, and that it was very likely some of them would deliver him up and
get a reward of a thousand marks, which was offered for his apprehension.
So, after they had travelled and quarrelled all the way from Southwark to
Blackheath, and from Blackheath to Rochester, he mounted a good horse and
galloped away into Sussex.  But, there galloped after him, on a better
horse, one Alexander Iden, who came up with him, had a hard fight with
him, and killed him.  Jack's head was set aloft on London Bridge, with
the face looking towards Blackheath, where he had raised his flag; and
Alexander Iden got the thousand marks.

It is supposed by some, that the Duke of York, who had been removed from
a high post abroad through the Queen's influence, and sent out of the
way, to govern Ireland, was at the bottom of this rising of Jack and his
men, because he wanted to trouble the government.  He claimed (though not
yet publicly) to have a better right to the throne than Henry of
Lancaster, as one of the family of the Earl of March, whom Henry the
Fourth had set aside.  Touching this claim, which, being through female
relationship, was not according to the usual descent, it is enough to say
that Henry the Fourth was the free choice of the people and the
Parliament, and that his family had now reigned undisputed for sixty
years.  The memory of Henry the Fifth was so famous, and the English
people loved it so much, that the Duke of York's claim would, perhaps,
never have been thought of (it would have been so hopeless) but for the
unfortunate circumstance of the present King's being by this time quite
an idiot, and the country very ill governed.  These two circumstances
gave the Duke of York a power he could not otherwise have had.

Whether the Duke knew anything of Jack Cade, or not, he came over from
Ireland while Jack's head was on London Bridge; being secretly advised
that the Queen was setting up his enemy, the Duke of Somerset, against
him.  He went to Westminster, at the head of four thousand men, and on
his knees before the King, represented to him the bad state of the
country, and petitioned him to summon a Parliament to consider it.  This
the King promised.  When the Parliament was summoned, the Duke of York
accused the Duke of Somerset, and the Duke of Somerset accused the Duke
of York; and, both in and out of Parliament, the followers of each party
were full of violence and hatred towards the other.  At length the Duke
of York put himself at the head of a large force of his tenants, and, in
arms, demanded the reformation of the Government.  Being shut out of
London, he encamped at Dartford, and the royal army encamped at
Blackheath.  According as either side triumphed, the Duke of York was
arrested, or the Duke of Somerset was arrested.  The trouble ended, for
the moment, in the Duke of York renewing his oath of allegiance, and
going in peace to one of his own castles.

Half a year afterwards the Queen gave birth to a son, who was very ill
received by the people, and not believed to be the son of the King.  It
shows the Duke of York to have been a moderate man, unwilling to involve
England in new troubles, that he did not take advantage of the general
discontent at this time, but really acted for the public good.  He was
made a member of the cabinet, and the King being now so much worse that
he could not be carried about and shown to the people with any decency,
the duke was made Lord Protector of the kingdom, until the King should
recover, or the Prince should come of age.  At the same time the Duke of
Somerset was committed to the Tower.  So, now the Duke of Somerset was
down, and the Duke of York was up.  By the end of the year, however, the
King recovered his memory and some spark of sense; upon which the Queen
used her power--which recovered with him--to get the Protector disgraced,
and her favourite released.  So now the Duke of York was down, and the
Duke of Somerset was up.

These ducal ups and downs gradually separated the whole nation into the
two parties of York and Lancaster, and led to those terrible civil wars
long known as the Wars of the Red and White Roses, because the red rose
was the badge of the House of Lancaster, and the white rose was the badge
of the House of York.

The Duke of York, joined by some other powerful noblemen of the White
Rose party, and leading a small army, met the King with another small
army at St. Alban's, and demanded that the Duke of Somerset should be
given up.  The poor King, being made to say in answer that he would
sooner die, was instantly attacked.  The Duke of Somerset was killed, and
the King himself was wounded in the neck, and took refuge in the house of
a poor tanner.  Whereupon, the Duke of York went to him, led him with
great submission to the Abbey, and said he was very sorry for what had
happened.  Having now the King in his possession, he got a Parliament
summoned and himself once more made Protector, but, only for a few
months; for, on the King getting a little better again, the Queen and her
party got him into their possession, and disgraced the Duke once more.
So, now the Duke of York was down again.

Some of the best men in power, seeing the danger of these constant
changes, tried even then to prevent the Red and the White Rose Wars.  They
brought about a great council in London between the two parties.  The
White Roses assembled in Blackfriars, the Red Roses in Whitefriars; and
some good priests communicated between them, and made the proceedings
known at evening to the King and the judges.  They ended in a peaceful
agreement that there should be no more quarrelling; and there was a great
royal procession to St. Paul's, in which the Queen walked arm-in-arm with
her old enemy, the Duke of York, to show the people how comfortable they
all were.  This state of peace lasted half a year, when a dispute between
the Earl of Warwick (one of the Duke's powerful friends) and some of the
King's servants at Court, led to an attack upon that Earl--who was a
White Rose--and to a sudden breaking out of all old animosities.  So,
here were greater ups and downs than ever.

There were even greater ups and downs than these, soon after.  After
various battles, the Duke of York fled to Ireland, and his son the Earl
of March to Calais, with their friends the Earls of Salisbury and
Warwick; and a Parliament was held declaring them all traitors.  Little
the worse for this, the Earl of Warwick presently came back, landed in
Kent, was joined by the Archbishop of Canterbury and other powerful
noblemen and gentlemen, engaged the King's forces at Northampton,
signally defeated them, and took the King himself prisoner, who was found
in his tent.  Warwick would have been glad, I dare say, to have taken the
Queen and Prince too, but they escaped into Wales and thence into
Scotland.

The King was carried by the victorious force straight to London, and made
to call a new Parliament, which immediately declared that the Duke of
York and those other noblemen were not traitors, but excellent subjects.
Then, back comes the Duke from Ireland at the head of five hundred
horsemen, rides from London to Westminster, and enters the House of
Lords.  There, he laid his hand upon the cloth of gold which covered the
empty throne, as if he had half a mind to sit down in it--but he did not.
On the Archbishop of Canterbury, asking him if he would visit the King,
who was in his palace close by, he replied, 'I know no one in this
country, my lord, who ought not to visit _me_.'  None of the lords
present spoke a single word; so, the duke went out as he had come in,
established himself royally in the King's palace, and, six days
afterwards, sent in to the Lords a formal statement of his claim to the
throne.  The lords went to the King on this momentous subject, and after
a great deal of discussion, in which the judges and the other law
officers were afraid to give an opinion on either side, the question was
compromised.  It was agreed that the present King should retain the crown
for his life, and that it should then pass to the Duke of York and his
heirs.

But, the resolute Queen, determined on asserting her son's right, would
hear of no such thing.  She came from Scotland to the north of England,
where several powerful lords armed in her cause.  The Duke of York, for
his part, set off with some five thousand men, a little time before
Christmas Day, one thousand four hundred and sixty, to give her battle.
He lodged at Sandal Castle, near Wakefield, and the Red Roses defied him
to come out on Wakefield Green, and fight them then and there.  His
generals said, he had best wait until his gallant son, the Earl of March,
came up with his power; but, he was determined to accept the challenge.
He did so, in an evil hour.  He was hotly pressed on all sides, two
thousand of his men lay dead on Wakefield Green, and he himself was taken
prisoner.  They set him down in mock state on an ant-hill, and twisted
grass about his head, and pretended to pay court to him on their knees,
saying, 'O King, without a kingdom, and Prince without a people, we hope
your gracious Majesty is very well and happy!'  They did worse than this;
they cut his head off, and handed it on a pole to the Queen, who laughed
with delight when she saw it (you recollect their walking so religiously
and comfortably to St. Paul's!), and had it fixed, with a paper crown
upon its head, on the walls of York.  The Earl of Salisbury lost his
head, too; and the Duke of York's second son, a handsome boy who was
flying with his tutor over Wakefield Bridge, was stabbed in the heart by
a murderous, lord--Lord Clifford by name--whose father had been killed by
the White Roses in the fight at St. Alban's.  There was awful sacrifice
of life in this battle, for no quarter was given, and the Queen was wild
for revenge.  When men unnaturally fight against their own countrymen,
they are always observed to be more unnaturally cruel and filled with
rage than they are against any other enemy.

But, Lord Clifford had stabbed the second son of the Duke of York--not
the first.  The eldest son, Edward Earl of March, was at Gloucester; and,
vowing vengeance for the death of his father, his brother, and their
faithful friends, he began to march against the Queen.  He had to turn
and fight a great body of Welsh and Irish first, who worried his advance.
These he defeated in a great fight at Mortimer's Cross, near Hereford,
where he beheaded a number of the Red Roses taken in battle, in
retaliation for the beheading of the White Roses at Wakefield.  The Queen
had the next turn of beheading.  Having moved towards London, and falling
in, between St. Alban's and Barnet, with the Earl of Warwick and the Duke
of Norfolk, White Roses both, who were there with an army to oppose her,
and had got the King with them; she defeated them with great loss, and
struck off the heads of two prisoners of note, who were in the King's
tent with him, and to whom the King had promised his protection.  Her
triumph, however, was very short.  She had no treasure, and her army
subsisted by plunder.  This caused them to be hated and dreaded by the
people, and particularly by the London people, who were wealthy.  As soon
as the Londoners heard that Edward, Earl of March, united with the Earl
of Warwick, was advancing towards the city, they refused to send the
Queen supplies, and made a great rejoicing.

The Queen and her men retreated with all speed, and Edward and Warwick
came on, greeted with loud acclamations on every side.  The courage,
beauty, and virtues of young Edward could not be sufficiently praised by
the whole people.  He rode into London like a conqueror, and met with an
enthusiastic welcome.  A few days afterwards, Lord Falconbridge and the
Bishop of Exeter assembled the citizens in St. John's Field, Clerkenwell,
and asked them if they would have Henry of Lancaster for their King?  To
this they all roared, 'No, no, no!' and 'King Edward!  King Edward!'
Then, said those noblemen, would they love and serve young Edward?  To
this they all cried, 'Yes, yes!' and threw up their caps and clapped
their hands, and cheered tremendously.

Therefore, it was declared that by joining the Queen and not protecting
those two prisoners of note, Henry of Lancaster had forfeited the crown;
and Edward of York was proclaimed King.  He made a great speech to the
applauding people at Westminster, and sat down as sovereign of England on
that throne, on the golden covering of which his father--worthy of a
better fate than the bloody axe which cut the thread of so many lives in
England, through so many years--had laid his hand.




CHAPTER XXIII--ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE FOURTH


King Edward the Fourth was not quite twenty-one years of age when he took
that unquiet seat upon the throne of England.  The Lancaster party, the
Red Roses, were then assembling in great numbers near York, and it was
necessary to give them battle instantly.  But, the stout Earl of Warwick
leading for the young King, and the young King himself closely following
him, and the English people crowding round the Royal standard, the White
and the Red Roses met, on a wild March day when the snow was falling
heavily, at Towton; and there such a furious battle raged between them,
that the total loss amounted to forty thousand men--all Englishmen,
fighting, upon English ground, against one another.  The young King
gained the day, took down the heads of his father and brother from the
walls of York, and put up the heads of some of the most famous noblemen
engaged in the battle on the other side.  Then, he went to London and was
crowned with great splendour.

A new Parliament met.  No fewer than one hundred and fifty of the
principal noblemen and gentlemen on the Lancaster side were declared
traitors, and the King--who had very little humanity, though he was
handsome in person and agreeable in manners--resolved to do all he could,
to pluck up the Red Rose root and branch.

Queen Margaret, however, was still active for her young son.  She
obtained help from Scotland and from Normandy, and took several important
English castles.  But, Warwick soon retook them; the Queen lost all her
treasure on board ship in a great storm; and both she and her son
suffered great misfortunes.  Once, in the winter weather, as they were
riding through a forest, they were attacked and plundered by a party of
robbers; and, when they had escaped from these men and were passing alone
and on foot through a thick dark part of the wood, they came, all at
once, upon another robber.  So the Queen, with a stout heart, took the
little Prince by the hand, and going straight up to that robber, said to
him, 'My friend, this is the young son of your lawful King!  I confide
him to your care.'  The robber was surprised, but took the boy in his
arms, and faithfully restored him and his mother to their friends.  In
the end, the Queen's soldiers being beaten and dispersed, she went abroad
again, and kept quiet for the present.

Now, all this time, the deposed King Henry was concealed by a Welsh
knight, who kept him close in his castle.  But, next year, the Lancaster
party recovering their spirits, raised a large body of men, and called
him out of his retirement, to put him at their head.  They were joined by
some powerful noblemen who had sworn fidelity to the new King, but who
were ready, as usual, to break their oaths, whenever they thought there
was anything to be got by it.  One of the worst things in the history of
the war of the Red and White Roses, is the ease with which these
noblemen, who should have set an example of honour to the people, left
either side as they took slight offence, or were disappointed in their
greedy expectations, and joined the other.  Well! Warwick's brother soon
beat the Lancastrians, and the false noblemen, being taken, were beheaded
without a moment's loss of time.  The deposed King had a narrow escape;
three of his servants were taken, and one of them bore his cap of estate,
which was set with pearls and embroidered with two golden crowns.
However, the head to which the cap belonged, got safely into Lancashire,
and lay pretty quietly there (the people in the secret being very true)
for more than a year.  At length, an old monk gave such intelligence as
led to Henry's being taken while he was sitting at dinner in a place
called Waddington Hall.  He was immediately sent to London, and met at
Islington by the Earl of Warwick, by whose directions he was put upon a
horse, with his legs tied under it, and paraded three times round the
pillory.  Then, he was carried off to the Tower, where they treated him
well enough.

The White Rose being so triumphant, the young King abandoned himself
entirely to pleasure, and led a jovial life.  But, thorns were springing
up under his bed of roses, as he soon found out.  For, having been
privately married to ELIZABETH WOODVILLE, a young widow lady, very
beautiful and very captivating; and at last resolving to make his secret
known, and to declare her his Queen; he gave some offence to the Earl of
Warwick, who was usually called the King-Maker, because of his power and
influence, and because of his having lent such great help to placing
Edward on the throne.  This offence was not lessened by the jealousy with
which the Nevil family (the Earl of Warwick's) regarded the promotion of
the Woodville family.  For, the young Queen was so bent on providing for
her relations, that she made her father an earl and a great officer of
state; married her five sisters to young noblemen of the highest rank;
and provided for her younger brother, a young man of twenty, by marrying
him to an immensely rich old duchess of eighty.  The Earl of Warwick took
all this pretty graciously for a man of his proud temper, until the
question arose to whom the King's sister, MARGARET, should be married.
The Earl of Warwick said, 'To one of the French King's sons,' and was
allowed to go over to the French King to make friendly proposals for that
purpose, and to hold all manner of friendly interviews with him.  But,
while he was so engaged, the Woodville party married the young lady to
the Duke of Burgundy!  Upon this he came back in great rage and scorn,
and shut himself up discontented, in his Castle of Middleham.

A reconciliation, though not a very sincere one, was patched up between
the Earl of Warwick and the King, and lasted until the Earl married his
daughter, against the King's wishes, to the Duke of Clarence.  While the
marriage was being celebrated at Calais, the people in the north of
England, where the influence of the Nevil family was strongest, broke out
into rebellion; their complaint was, that England was oppressed and
plundered by the Woodville family, whom they demanded to have removed
from power.  As they were joined by great numbers of people, and as they
openly declared that they were supported by the Earl of Warwick, the King
did not know what to do.  At last, as he wrote to the earl beseeching his
aid, he and his new son-in-law came over to England, and began to arrange
the business by shutting the King up in Middleham Castle in the safe
keeping of the Archbishop of York; so England was not only in the strange
position of having two kings at once, but they were both prisoners at the
same time.

Even as yet, however, the King-Maker was so far true to the King, that he
dispersed a new rising of the Lancastrians, took their leader prisoner,
and brought him to the King, who ordered him to be immediately executed.
He presently allowed the King to return to London, and there innumerable
pledges of forgiveness and friendship were exchanged between them, and
between the Nevils and the Woodvilles; the King's eldest daughter was
promised in marriage to the heir of the Nevil family; and more friendly
oaths were sworn, and more friendly promises made, than this book would
hold.

They lasted about three months.  At the end of that time, the Archbishop
of York made a feast for the King, the Earl of Warwick, and the Duke of
Clarence, at his house, the Moor, in Hertfordshire.  The King was washing
his hands before supper, when some one whispered him that a body of a
hundred men were lying in ambush outside the house.  Whether this were
true or untrue, the King took fright, mounted his horse, and rode through
the dark night to Windsor Castle.  Another reconciliation was patched up
between him and the King-Maker, but it was a short one, and it was the
last.  A new rising took place in Lincolnshire, and the King marched to
repress it.  Having done so, he proclaimed that both the Earl of Warwick
and the Duke of Clarence were traitors, who had secretly assisted it, and
who had been prepared publicly to join it on the following day.  In these
dangerous circumstances they both took ship and sailed away to the French
court.

And here a meeting took place between the Earl of Warwick and his old
enemy, the Dowager Queen Margaret, through whom his father had had his
head struck off, and to whom he had been a bitter foe.  But, now, when he
said that he had done with the ungrateful and perfidious Edward of York,
and that henceforth he devoted himself to the restoration of the House of
Lancaster, either in the person of her husband or of her little son, she
embraced him as if he had ever been her dearest friend.  She did more
than that; she married her son to his second daughter, the Lady Anne.
However agreeable this marriage was to the new friends, it was very
disagreeable to the Duke of Clarence, who perceived that his father-in-
law, the King-Maker, would never make _him_ King, now.  So, being but a
weak-minded young traitor, possessed of very little worth or sense, he
readily listened to an artful court lady sent over for the purpose, and
promised to turn traitor once more, and go over to his brother, King
Edward, when a fitting opportunity should come.

The Earl of Warwick, knowing nothing of this, soon redeemed his promise
to the Dowager Queen Margaret, by invading England and landing at
Plymouth, where he instantly proclaimed King Henry, and summoned all
Englishmen between the ages of sixteen and sixty, to join his banner.
Then, with his army increasing as he marched along, he went northward,
and came so near King Edward, who was in that part of the country, that
Edward had to ride hard for it to the coast of Norfolk, and thence to get
away in such ships as he could find, to Holland.  Thereupon, the
triumphant King-Maker and his false son-in-law, the Duke of Clarence,
went to London, took the old King out of the Tower, and walked him in a
great procession to Saint Paul's Cathedral with the crown upon his head.
This did not improve the temper of the Duke of Clarence, who saw himself
farther off from being King than ever; but he kept his secret, and said
nothing.  The Nevil family were restored to all their honours and
glories, and the Woodvilles and the rest were disgraced.  The King-Maker,
less sanguinary than the King, shed no blood except that of the Earl of
Worcester, who had been so cruel to the people as to have gained the
title of the Butcher.  Him they caught hidden in a tree, and him they
tried and executed.  No other death stained the King-Maker's triumph.

To dispute this triumph, back came King Edward again, next year, landing
at Ravenspur, coming on to York, causing all his men to cry 'Long live
King Henry!' and swearing on the altar, without a blush, that he came to
lay no claim to the crown.  Now was the time for the Duke of Clarence,
who ordered his men to assume the White Rose, and declare for his
brother.  The Marquis of Montague, though the Earl of Warwick's brother,
also declining to fight against King Edward, he went on successfully to
London, where the Archbishop of York let him into the City, and where the
people made great demonstrations in his favour.  For this they had four
reasons.  Firstly, there were great numbers of the King's adherents
hiding in the City and ready to break out; secondly, the King owed them a
great deal of money, which they could never hope to get if he were
unsuccessful; thirdly, there was a young prince to inherit the crown; and
fourthly, the King was gay and handsome, and more popular than a better
man might have been with the City ladies.  After a stay of only two days
with these worthy supporters, the King marched out to Barnet Common, to
give the Earl of Warwick battle.  And now it was to be seen, for the last
time, whether the King or the King-Maker was to carry the day.

While the battle was yet pending, the fainthearted Duke of Clarence began
to repent, and sent over secret messages to his father-in-law, offering
his services in mediation with the King.  But, the Earl of Warwick
disdainfully rejected them, and replied that Clarence was false and
perjured, and that he would settle the quarrel by the sword.  The battle
began at four o'clock in the morning and lasted until ten, and during the
greater part of the time it was fought in a thick mist--absurdly supposed
to be raised by a magician.  The loss of life was very great, for the
hatred was strong on both sides.  The King-Maker was defeated, and the
King triumphed.  Both the Earl of Warwick and his brother were slain, and
their bodies lay in St. Paul's, for some days, as a spectacle to the
people.

Margaret's spirit was not broken even by this great blow.  Within five
days she was in arms again, and raised her standard in Bath, whence she
set off with her army, to try and join Lord Pembroke, who had a force in
Wales.  But, the King, coming up with her outside the town of Tewkesbury,
and ordering his brother, the DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, who was a brave
soldier, to attack her men, she sustained an entire defeat, and was taken
prisoner, together with her son, now only eighteen years of age.  The
conduct of the King to this poor youth was worthy of his cruel character.
He ordered him to be led into his tent.  'And what,' said he, 'brought
_you_ to England?'  'I came to England,' replied the prisoner, with a
spirit which a man of spirit might have admired in a captive, 'to recover
my father's kingdom, which descended to him as his right, and from him
descends to me, as mine.'  The King, drawing off his iron gauntlet,
struck him with it in the face; and the Duke of Clarence and some other
lords, who were there, drew their noble swords, and killed him.

His mother survived him, a prisoner, for five years; after her ransom by
the King of France, she survived for six years more.  Within three weeks
of this murder, Henry died one of those convenient sudden deaths which
were so common in the Tower; in plainer words, he was murdered by the
King's order.

Having no particular excitement on his hands after this great defeat of
the Lancaster party, and being perhaps desirous to get rid of some of his
fat (for he was now getting too corpulent to be handsome), the King
thought of making war on France.  As he wanted more money for this
purpose than the Parliament could give him, though they were usually
ready enough for war, he invented a new way of raising it, by sending for
the principal citizens of London, and telling them, with a grave face,
that he was very much in want of cash, and would take it very kind in
them if they would lend him some.  It being impossible for them safely to
refuse, they complied, and the moneys thus forced from them were
called--no doubt to the great amusement of the King and the Court--as if
they were free gifts, 'Benevolences.'  What with grants from Parliament,
and what with Benevolences, the King raised an army and passed over to
Calais.  As nobody wanted war, however, the French King made proposals of
peace, which were accepted, and a truce was concluded for seven long
years.  The proceedings between the Kings of France and England on this
occasion, were very friendly, very splendid, and very distrustful.  They
finished with a meeting between the two Kings, on a temporary bridge over
the river Somme, where they embraced through two holes in a strong wooden
grating like a lion's cage, and made several bows and fine speeches to
one another.

It was time, now, that the Duke of Clarence should be punished for his
treacheries; and Fate had his punishment in store.  He was, probably, not
trusted by the King--for who could trust him who knew him!--and he had
certainly a powerful opponent in his brother Richard, Duke of Gloucester,
who, being avaricious and ambitious, wanted to marry that widowed
daughter of the Earl of Warwick's who had been espoused to the deceased
young Prince, at Calais.  Clarence, who wanted all the family wealth for
himself, secreted this lady, whom Richard found disguised as a servant in
the City of London, and whom he married; arbitrators appointed by the
King, then divided the property between the brothers.  This led to ill-
will and mistrust between them.  Clarence's wife dying, and he wishing to
make another marriage, which was obnoxious to the King, his ruin was
hurried by that means, too.  At first, the Court struck at his retainers
and dependents, and accused some of them of magic and witchcraft, and
similar nonsense.  Successful against this small game, it then mounted to
the Duke himself, who was impeached by his brother the King, in person,
on a variety of such charges.  He was found guilty, and sentenced to be
publicly executed.  He never was publicly executed, but he met his death
somehow, in the Tower, and, no doubt, through some agency of the King or
his brother Gloucester, or both.  It was supposed at the time that he was
told to choose the manner of his death, and that he chose to be drowned
in a butt of Malmsey wine.  I hope the story may be true, for it would
have been a becoming death for such a miserable creature.

The King survived him some five years.  He died in the forty-second year
of his life, and the twenty-third of his reign.  He had a very good
capacity and some good points, but he was selfish, careless, sensual, and
cruel.  He was a favourite with the people for his showy manners; and the
people were a good example to him in the constancy of their attachment.
He was penitent on his death-bed for his 'benevolences,' and other
extortions, and ordered restitution to be made to the people who had
suffered from them.  He also called about his bed the enriched members of
the Woodville family, and the proud lords whose honours were of older
date, and endeavoured to reconcile them, for the sake of the peaceful
succession of his son and the tranquillity of England.




CHAPTER XXIV--ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE FIFTH


The late King's eldest son, the Prince of Wales, called EDWARD after him,
was only thirteen years of age at his father's death.  He was at Ludlow
Castle with his uncle, the Earl of Rivers.  The prince's brother, the
Duke of York, only eleven years of age, was in London with his mother.
The boldest, most crafty, and most dreaded nobleman in England at that
time was their uncle RICHARD, Duke of Gloucester, and everybody wondered
how the two poor boys would fare with such an uncle for a friend or a
foe.

The Queen, their mother, being exceedingly uneasy about this, was anxious
