Prince.

By the time we had slowly advanced up the grand staircase into the
banqueting-hall, and had made our reverences to the king and queen--ah,
how stately and beautiful they looked together!--the Prince had stepped
in some other way, and stood beside me.

'Well, Meg,' he said, in an undertone--'I beg pardon, Mrs.
Margaret--decked out in all her splendour, a virgin for the sacrifice!'

'What sacrifice, sir?' I asked, startled.

'Eh!' he said. 'You do not know that le futur is arrived!'

'She knows nothing, your Highness,' said Eustace.

'What, oh, what is there to know?' I implored the Prince and my brother
in turn to inform me, for I saw that there was some earnest in the
Prince's jests, and I knew that the queen and my mother were looking out
for a good match for me in France.

'Let me show him to you,' presently whispered the Prince, who had been
called off by his father to receive the civilities of an ambassador.
Then he pointed out a little wizened dried-up old man, who was hobbling
up to kiss Her Majesty's hand, and whose courtly smile seemed to me to
sit most unnaturally on his wrinkled countenance. I nearly screamed. I
was forced to bite my lips to keep back my tears, and I wished myself
child enough to be able to scream and run away, when my mother presently
beckoned me forward. I hardly had strength to curtsey when I was
actually presented to the old man. Nothing but terror prevented my
sinking on the floor, and I heard as through falling waters something
about M. le Marquis de Nidemerle and Mrs. Margaret Ribmont, for so we
were called in England.

By and by I found that I was dancing, I scarcely knew how or with whom,
and I durst not look up the whole time, nor did my partner address a
single word to me, though I knew he was near me; I was only too thankful
that he did not try to address me.

To my joy, when we had made our final reverences, he never came near me
again all the evening. I found myself among some young maidens who were
friends of mine, and in our eager talk together I began to forget what
had passed, or to hope it was only some teasing pastime of the Prince
and Eustace.

When we were seated in the coach on the way to our house my father began
to laugh and marvel which had been the most shy, the gallant or the
lady, telling my mother she need never reproach the English with
bashfulness again after this French specimen.

'How will he and little Meg ever survive to-morrow's meeting!' he said.

Then I saw it was too true, and cried out in despair to beg them to let
me stay at home, and not send me from them; but my mother bade me not be
a silly wench. I had always known that I was to be married in France
and the queen and my half-brother, M. de Solivet, had found an excellent
parti for me. I was not to embarrass matters by any folly, but I must
do her credit, and not make her regret that she had not sent me to a
convent to be educated.

Then I clung to my father. I could hold him tight in the dark, and the
flambeaux only cast in a fitful flickering light. 'Oh, sir,' said I,
'you cannot wish to part with your little Meg!'

'You are your mother's child, Meg,' he said sadly. 'I gave you up to her
to dispose of at her will.'

'And you will thank me one of these days for your secure home,' said my
mother. 'If these rogues continue disaffected, who knows what they may
leave us in England!'

'At least we should be together,' I cried, and I remember how I fondled
my father's hand in the dark, and how he returned it. We should never
have thought of such a thing in the light; he would have been ashamed to
allow such an impertinence, and I to attempt it.

Perhaps it emboldened me to say timidly: 'If he were not so old--'

But my mother declared that she could not believe her ears that a child
of hers should venture on making such objections--so unmaidenly, so
undutiful to a parti selected by the queen and approved by her parents.

As the coach stopped at our own door I perceived that certain strange
noises that I had heard proceeded from Eustace laughing and chuckling to
himself all the way. I must say I thought it very unkind and cruel
when we had always loved each other so well. I would hardly bid him
good-night, but ran up to the room I shared with nurse and Annora,
and wept bitterly through half the night, little comforted by nurse's
assurance that old men were wont to let their wives have their way far
more easily than young ones did.




CHAPTER II. -- A LITTLE MUTUAL AVERSION.



I had cried half the night, and when in the morning little Nan wanted
to hear about my ball, I only answered that I hated the thought of it. I
was going to be married to a hideous old man, and be carried to France,
and should never see any of them again. I made Nan cry too, and we both
came down to breakfast with such mournful faces that my mother chid me
sharply for making myself such a fright.

Then she took me away to the still-room, and set me for an hour to make
orange cakes, while she gave orders for the great dinner that we were
to give that day, I knew only too well for whose sake; and if I had only
known which orange cake was for my betrothed, would not it have been a
bitter one! By and by my mother carried me off to be dressed. She never
trusted the tiring-woman to put the finishing touches with those clumsy
English fingers; and, besides, she bathed my swollen eyelids with
essences, and made me rub my pale cheeks with a scarlet ribbon, speaking
to me so sharply that I should not have dared to shed another tear.

When I was ready, all in white, and she, most stately in blue velvet and
gold, I followed her down the stairs to the grand parlour, where stood
my father, with my brothers and one or two persons in black, who I found
were a notary and his clerk, and there was a table before them with
papers, parchment, a standish, and pens. I believe if it had been a
block, and I had had to lay my head on it, like poor Lady Jane Grey, I
could not have been much more frightened.

There was a sound of wheels, and presently the gentleman usher came
forward, announcing the Most Noble the Marquis de Nidemerle, and the
Lord Viscount of Bellaise. My father and brothers went half-way down the
stairs to meet them, my mother advanced across the room, holding me
in one hand and Annora in the other. We all curtsied low, and as the
gentlemen advanced, bowing low, and almost sweeping the ground with the
plumes in their hats, we each had to offer them a cheek to salute after
the English fashion. The old marquis was talking French so fast that
I could not understand him in the least, but somehow a mist suddenly
seemed to clear away from before me, and I found that I was standing
before that alarming table, not with him, but with something much
younger--not much older, indeed, than Eustace.

I began to hear what the notary was reading out, and behold it
was--'Contract of marriage on the part of Philippe Marie Francois de
Bellaise, Marquis de Nidermerle, and Eustace de Ribaumont, Baron Walwyn
of Walwyn, in Dorset, and Baron de Ribaumont in Picardy, on behoof of
Gaspard Henri Philippe, Viscount de Bellaise, nephew of the Marquis de
Nidemerle, and Margaret Henrietta Maria de Ribaumont, daughter of the
Baron de Ribaumont.'

Then I knew that I had been taken in by the Prince's wicked trick, and
that my husband was to be the young viscount, not the old uncle! I do
not think that this was much comfort to me at the moment, for, all the
same, I was going into a strange country, away from every one I had ever
known.

But I did take courage to look up under my eye-lashes at the form I was
to see with very different eyes. M. de Ballaise was only nineteen, but
although not so tall as my father or brother, he had already that grand
military bearing which is only acquired in the French service, and no
wonder, or he had been three years in the Regiment de Conde, and had
already seen two battles and three sieges in Savoy, and now had only
leave of absence for the winter before rejoining his regiment in the Low
Countries.

Yet he looked as bashful as a maiden. It was true that, as my father
said, his bashfulness was as great as an Englishman's. Indeed, he had
been bred up at his great uncle's chateau in Anjou, under a strict abbe
who had gone with him to the war, and from whom he was only now to be
set free upon his marriage. He had scarcely ever spoken to any lady but
his old aunt--his parents had long been dead--and he had only two or
three times seen his little sister through the grating of her convent.
So, as he afterwards confessed, nothing but his military drill and
training bore him through the affair. He stood upright as a dart, bowed
at the right place, and in due time signed his name to the contract, and
I had to do the same. Then there ensued a great state dinner, where he
and I sat together, but neither of us spoke to the other; and when, as
I was trying to see the viscount under my eyelashes, I caught his eyes
trying to do the same by me, I remember my cheeks flaming all over, and
I think his must have done the same, for my father burst suddenly out
into a laugh without apparent cause, though he tried to check himself
when he saw my mother's vexation.

When all was over, she highly lauded the young gentleman, declaring that
he was an example of the decorum with which such matters were conducted
in France; and when my father observed that he should prefer a little
more fire and animation, she said: 'Truly, my lord, one would think you
were of mere English extraction, that you should prefer the rude habits
of a farmer or milkmaid to the reserve of a true noble and lady of
quality.'

'Well, dame, I promised that you should have it your own way with the
poor lass,' said my father; 'and I see no harm in the lad, but I own I
should like to know more of him, and Meg would not object either. It was
not the way I took thee, Margaret.'

'I shall never make you understand that a widow is altogether a
different thing,' said my mother.

I suppose they never recollected that I could hear every word they
said, but I was full in view of them, and of course I was listening most
anxiously for all I could gather about my new life. If I remember right,
it was an envoy-extraordinary with whom the marquis and his nephew had
come, and their stay was therefore very short, so that we were married
after a very few days in the Queen's Chapel, by her own almoner.

I do not remember much about the wedding, as indeed it was done very
quietly, being intended to be kept altogether a secret; but in some way,
probably through the servants, it became known to the mob in London, and
as we drove home from Whitehall in the great coach with my father and
mother, a huge crowd had assembled, hissing and yelling and crying out
upon Lord Walwyn for giving his daughter to a French Papist.

The wretches! they even proceeded to throw stones. My young bridegroom
saw one of these which would have struck me had he not thrown himself
forward, holding up his hat as a shield. The stone struck him in the
eye, and he dropped forward upon my mother's knee senseless.

The crowd were shocked then, and fell back, but what good did that do to
him? He was carried to his chamber, and a surgeon was sent for, who said
that there was no great injury done, for the eye itself had not been
touched, but that he must be kept perfectly quiet until the last minute,
if he was to be able to travel without danger, when the suite were to
set off in two day's time. They would not let me go near him. Perhaps I
was relieved, for I should not have known what to do; yet I feared that
he would think me unkind and ungrateful, and I would have begged my
mother and Eustace to thank him and make my excuses, but I was too shy,
and I felt it very hard to be blamed for indifference and rudeness.

Indeed, we four young ones kept as much together as we could do in the
house and gardens, and played all our dear old games of shuttlecock, and
pig go to market, and proverbs, and all that you, my children, call very
English sports, because we knew only too well that we should never play
at them altogether again. The more I was blamed for being childish,
the more I was set upon them, till at last my mother said that she was
afraid to let me go, I was so childish and unfeeling; and my father
replied that she should have thought of that before. He and I were both
more English at heart than French, and I am sure now that he perceived
better than I did myself that my clinging to my brothers and sister, and
even my noisy merriment, were not the effect of want of feeling.

As to my bridegroom, I have since known that he was dreadfully afraid of
us, more especially of me, and was thankful that the injury kept him a
prisoner. Nay, he might have come downstairs, if he had been willing, on
the last evening, but he shrank from another presentation to me before
the eyes of all the world, and chose instead to act the invalid, with no
companion save Eustace, with whom he had made friends.

I will not tell you about the partings, and the promises and assurances
that we should meet again. My father had always promised that my mother
should see France once more, and he now declared that they would all
visit me. Alas! we little thought what would be the accomplishment of
that promise.

My father and Eustace rode with us from London to Dover, and all the
time I kept close to them. M. de Bellaise was well enough to ride too.
His uncle, the marquis, went in a great old coach with the ladies,
wives of some of his suite, and I should have been there too, but that
I begged so hard to ride with my father that he yielded, after asking
M. le Vicomte whether he had any objection. M. le Vicomte opened great
eyes, smiled, blushed and bowed, stammering something. I do not think
that he had a quite realised previously that I was his wife, and
belonged to him. My father made him ride with us, and talked to him; and
out in the open air, riding with the wind in our cheeks, and his plume
streaming in the breeze, he grew much less shy, and began to talk about
the wolf-hunts and boar-hunts in the Bocage, and of all the places
that my father and I both knew as well as if we had seen them, from the
grandam's stories.

I listened, but we neither of us sought the other; indeed, I believe it
seemed hard to me that when there was so little time with my father and
Eustace, they should waste it on these hunting stories. Only too soon
we were at Dover, and the last, last farewell and blessing were given. I
looked my last, though I knew it not at that dear face of my father!




CHAPTER III. -- CELADON AND CHLOE



My tears were soon checked by dreadful sea-sickness. We were no sooner
out of Dover than the cruel wind turned round upon us, and we had to go
beating about with all our sails reefed for a whole day and night before
it was safe to put into Calais.

All that time I was in untold misery, and poor nurse Tryphena was worse
than I was, and only now and then was heard groaning out that she was a
dead woman, and begging me to tell some one to throw her over board.

But it was that voyage which gave me my husband. He was not exactly at
his ease, but he kept his feet better than any of the other gentlemen,
and he set himself to supply the place of valet to his uncle, and of
maid to me, going to and fro between our cabins as best he could, for
he fell and rolled whenever he tried to more; sharp shriek or howl, or a
message through the steward, summoned him back to M. le Marquis, who had
utterly forgotten all his politeness and formality towards the ladies.

However, our sufferings were over at last. My husband, who was by
this time bruised from head to foot by his falls, though he made no
complaints, came to say we should in a few moments be in port. He helped
me to dress, for Tryphena thought she was dead, and would not move; and
he dragged me on deck, where the air revived me, and where one by one
the whole party appeared, spectacles of misery.

M. le Marquis did not recover himself till he was on shore, and caused
himself to be assisted to the quay between his nephew and the valet,
leaving me to myself; but the dear viscount returned for me, and after
he had set me ashore, as he saw I was anxious about Tryphena, he went
back and fetched her, as carefully as if she had been a lady, in spite
of the grumblings of his uncle and of her own refractoriness, for she
was horribly frightened, and could not understand a word he said to her.

Nevertheless, as soon as we had all of us come to ourselves, it turned
out that he had gained her heart. Indeed, otherwise I should have had
to send her home, for she pined sadly for some time, and nothing but her
love for me and her enthusiastic loyalty to him kept her up during the
first months.

As to my husband and me, that voyage had made us as fond of one
another's company on one side of the Channel as we had been afraid of it
before on the other, but there was no more riding together for us. I had
to travel in the great coach with M. le Marquis, the three ladies, and
all our women, where I was so dull and weary that I should have felt
ready to die, but for watching for my husband's plume, or now and
then getting a glance and a nod from him as he rode among the other
gentlemen, braving all their laughter at his devotion; for, bashful as
he was, he knew how to hold his own.

I knew that the ladies looked on me as an ugly little rustic foreigner,
full of English mauvaise honte. If they tried to be kind to me, it was
as a mere child; and they went on with their chatter, which I could
hardly follow, for it was about things and people of which I knew
nothing, so that I could not understand their laughter. Or when they
rejoiced in their return from what they called their exile, and
found fault with all they had left in England, my cheeks burned with
indignation.

My happy hours were when we halted for refreshments. My husband handed
me to my place at table and sat beside me; or he would walk with me
about the villages where we rested. The ladies were shocked, and my
husband was censured for letting me 'faire l'Anglaise,' but we were
young and full of spirits, and the being thus thrown on each other had
put an end to his timidity towards me. He did indeed blush up to his
curls, and hold himself as upright as a ramrod, when satire was directed
to us as Celadon and Chloe; but he never took any other notice of it,
nor altered his behaviour in consequence. Indeed, we felt like children
escaping from school when we crept down the stairs in early morning, and
hand-in-hand repaired to the church in time for the very earliest mass
among the peasants, who left their scythes at the door, and the women
with their hottes, or their swaddled babies at their backs. We would
get a cup of milk and piece of barley-bread at some cottage, and wander
among the orchards, fields, or vineyards before Mesdames had begun
their toiles; and when we appeared at the dejeuner, the gentlemen would
compliment me on my rouge au naturel, and the ladies would ironically
envy my English appetite.

Sometimes we rested in large hostels in cities, and then our walk began
with some old cathedral, which could not but be admired, Gothic though
it were, and continued in the market-place, where the piles of fruit,
vegetables, and flowers were a continual wonder and delight to me. My
husband would buy bouquets of pinks and roses for me; but in the coach
the ladies always said they incommoded them by their scent, and obliged
me to throw them away. The first day I could not help shedding a few
tears, for I feared he would think I did not value them; and then I
perceived that they thought the little Englishwoman a child crying for
her flowers. I longed to ask them whether they had ever loved their
husbands; but I knew how my mother would have looked at me, and forbore.

Once or twice we were received in state at some chateau, where our mails
had to be opened that we might sup in full toilet; but this was seldom,
for most of the equals of M. le Marquis lived at Paris. Sometimes our
halt was at an abbey, where we ladies were quartered in a guest-chamber
without; and twice we slept at large old convents, where nobody had
lived since the Huguenot times, except a lay brother put in by M. l'Abbe
to look after the estate and make the house a kind of inn for travelers.
There were fine walled gardens run into wild confusion, and little
neglected and dismantled shrines, and crosses here and there, with long
wreaths of rose and honeysuckle trailing over them, and birds' nests in
curious places. My Viscount laughed with a new pleasure when I showed
him the wren's bright eye peeping out from her nest, and he could not
think how I knew the egg of a hedge-sparrow from that of a red-breast.
Even he had never been allowed to be out of sight of his tutor, and he
knew none of these pleasures so freely enjoyed by my brothers; while as
to his sister Cecile, she had been carried from her nurse to a convent,
and had thence been taken at fourteen to be wedded to the grandson and
heir of the Count d'Aubepine, who kept the young couple under their own
eye at their castle in the Bocage.

My husband had absolutely only seen her twice, and then through the
grating, and the marriage had taken place while he was in Savoy last
autumn. He knew his brother-in-law a little better, having been his
neighbour at Nid de Merle; but he shrugged his shoulders as he spoke of
'le chevalier,' and said he was very young, adored by his grandparents,
and rather headstrong.

As to growing up together in the unity that had always existed between
an absolute surprise to him to find that my dear brother was grieved
at parting with me. He said he had lain and heard our shouts in the
passages with wonder as we played those old games of ours.

'As though you were in a den of roaring wild beasts,' I said; for I
ventured on anything with him by that time, voices, I teased him about
his feelings at having to carry off one of these same savage beasts with
him; and then he told me how surprised he had been when, on the last
evening he spent in his chamber in our house, Eustace had come and
implored him to be good to me, telling him--ah, I can see my dear
brother's boyish way!--all my best qualities, ranging from my always
speaking truth to my being able to teach the little dog to play tricks,
and warning him of what vexed or pained me, even exacting a promise that
he would take care of me when I was away from them all. I believe that
promise was foremost in my husband's mind when he waited on me at sea.
Nay, he said when remembered the tears in my brother's eyes, and saw how
mine arose at the thought, his heart smote him when he remembered that
his sister's marriage had scarcely cost him a thought or care, and that
she was an utter stranger to him; and then we agreed that if ever we had
children, we would bring them up to know and love one another, and
have precious recollections in common. Ah! l'homme propose, mais Dieu
dispose.

It was only on that day that it broke upon me that we were to be
separated immediately after our arrival in Paris. M. de Bellaise was to
go to his regiment, which was at garrison at Nancy, and I was to be
left under the charge of old Madame la Marquise de Nidemerle at Paris. I
heard of it first from the Marquise himself in the coach, as he thanked
one of the ladies who invited me--with him--to her salon in Paris, where
there was to be a great entertainment in the summer. When I replied that
M. de Bellaise would have rejoined his regiment, they began explaining
that I should go into society under Madame de Nidemerle, who would exert
herself for my sake.

I said no more. I knew it was of no use there; but when next I could
speak with my husband--it was under an arbour of vines in the garden of
the inn where we dine--I asked him whether it was true. He opened large
eyes, and said he knew I could not wish to withdraw him from his duty to
his king and country, even if he could do so with honour.

'Ah! no,' I said; 'I never thought of that.' But surely the place of
a wife was with her husband, and I had expected to go with him to his
garrison at Nancy, and there wait when he took the field. He threw
himself at my feet, and pressed my hands with transport at what he
called this unheard-of proof of affection; and then I vexed him by
laughing, for I could not help thinking what my brothers would have
said, could they have seen us thus.
