Woodvilles no grudge) had, in his way to Lincolnshire,--where his
personal aid was necessary to rouse his vassals, infected by the common
sedition,--been attacked and wounded by a body of marauders, and thus
Edward's camp lost one of its greatest leaders. Fierce dispute broke out
in the king's councils; and when the witch Jacquetta's practices against
the earl travelled from the hostile into the royal camp, Raoul de Fulke,
St. John, and others, seized with pious horror, positively declared
they would throw down their arms and retire to their castles, unless
the Woodvilles were dismissed from the camp and the Earl of Warwick was
recalled to England. To the first demand the king was constrained to
yield; with the second he temporized. He marched from Fotheringay to
Newark; but the signs of disaffection, though they could not dismay
him as a soldier, altered his plans as a captain of singular military
acuteness; he fell back on Nottingham, and despatched, with his own
hands, letters to Clarence, the Archbishop of York, and Warwick. To the
last he wrote touchingly.

"We do not believe" (said the letter) "that ye should be of any such
disposition towards us as the rumour here runneth, considering the
trust and affection we bear you,--and cousin, we think ye shall be to us
welcome." [Paston Letters, ccxcviii. (Knight's edition), vol. ii. p.
59. See also Lingard, vol. iii. p. 522 (4to edition), note 43, for the
proper date to be assigned to Edward's letter to Warwick, etc.]

But ere these letters reached their destination, the crown seemed
well-nigh lost. At Edgecote the Earl of Pembroke was defeated and slain,
and five thousand royalists were left on the field. Earl Rivers and his
son, Sir John Woodville, [This Sir John Woodville was the most obnoxious
of the queen's brothers, and infamous for the avarice which had led him
to marry the old Duchess of Norfolk, an act which according to the old
laws of chivalry would have disabled him from entering the lists of
knighthood, for the ancient code disqualified and degraded any knight
who should marry any old woman for her money! Lord Rivers was the more
odious to the people at the time of the insurrection because, in
his capacity of treasurer, he had lately tampered with the coin and
circulation.] who in obedience to the royal order had retired to the
earl's country seat of Grafton, were taken prisoners, and beheaded by
the vengeance of the insurgents. The same lamentable fate befell
the Lord Stafford, on whom Edward relied as one of his most puissant
leaders; and London heard with dismay that the king, with but a handful
of troops, and those lukewarm and disaffected, was begirt on all sides
by hostile and marching thousands.

From Nottingham, however, Edward made good his retreat to a village
called Olney, which chanced at that time to be partially fortified
with a wall and a strong gate. Here the rebels pursued him; and Edward,
hearing that Sir Anthony Woodville, who conceived that the fate of his
father and brother cancelled all motive for longer absence from
the contest, was busy in collecting a force in the neighbourhood of
Coventry, while other assistance might be daily expected from London,
strengthened the fortifications as well as the time would permit, and
awaited the assault of the insurgents.

It was at this crisis, and while throughout all England reigned terror
and commotion, that one day, towards the end of July, a small troop of
horsemen were seen riding rapidly towards the neighbourhood of Olney. As
the village came in view of the cavalcade, with the spire of its church
and its gray stone gateway, so also they beheld, on the pastures that
stretched around wide and far, a moving forest of pikes and plumes.

"Holy Mother!" said one of the foremost riders, "good the knight and
strong man though Edward be, it were sharp work to cut his way from
that hamlet through yonder fields! Brother, we were more welcome, had we
brought more bills and bows at our backs!"

"Archbishop," answered the stately personage thus addressed, "we bring
what alone raises armies and disbands them,--a NAME that a People
honours! From the moment the White Bear is seen on yonder archway side
by side with the king's banner, that army will vanish as smoke before
the wind."

"Heaven grant it, Warwick!" said the Duke of Clarence; "for though
Edward hath used us sorely, it chafes me as Plantagenet and as prince to
see how peasants and varlets can hem round a king."

"Peasants and varlets are pawns in the chessboard, cousin George," said
the prelate; "and knight and bishop find them mighty useful when pushing
forward to an attack. Now knight and bishop appear themselves and take
up the game. Warwick," added the prelate, in a whisper, unheard by
Clarence, "forget not, while appeasing rebellion, that the king is in
your power."

"For shame, George! I think not now of the unkind king; I think only
of the brave boy I dandled on my knee, and whose sword I girded on at
Towton. How his lion heart must chafe, condemned to see a foe whom his
skill as captain tells him it were madness to confront!"

"Ay, Richard Nevile, ay," said the prelate, with a slight sneer, "play
the Paladin, and become the dupe; release the prince, and betray the
people!"

"No! I can be true to both. Tush! brother, your craft is slight to the
plain wisdom of bold honesty. You slacken your steeds, sirs; on! on! see
the march of the rebels! On, for an Edward and a Warwick!" and, spurring
to full speed, the little company arrived at the gates. The loud bugle
of the new comers was answered by the cheerful note of the joyous
warder, while dark, slow, and solemn over the meadows crept on the
mighty crowd of the rebel army.

"We have forestalled the insurgents!" said the earl, throwing himself
from his black steed. "Marmaduke Nevile, advance our banner; heralds,
announce the Duke of Clarence, the Archbishop of York, and the Earl of
Salisbury and Warwick."

Through the anxious town, along the crowded walls and housetops, into
the hall of an old mansion (that then adjoined the church), where the
king, in complete armour, stood at bay, with stubborn and disaffected
officers, rolled the thunder cry, "A Warwick! a Warwick! all saved! a
Warwick!"

Sharply, as he heard the clamour, the king turned upon his startled
council. "Lords and captains!" said he, with that inexpressible majesty
which he could command in his happier hours, "God and our Patron Saint
have sent us at least one man who has the heart to fight fifty times the
odds of yon miscreant rabble, by his king's side, and for the honour of
loyalty and knighthood!"

"And who says, sire," answered Raoul de Fulke, "that we, your lords and
captains, would not risk blood and life for our king and our knighthood
in a just cause? But we will not butcher our countrymen for echoing
our own complaint, and praying your Grace that a grasping and ambitious
family which you have raised to power may no longer degrade your nobles
and oppress your commons. We shall see if the Earl of Warwick blame us
or approve."

"And I answer," said Edward, loftily, "that whether Warwick approve or
blame, come as friend or foe, I will sooner ride alone through yonder
archway, and carve out a soldier's grave amongst the ranks of rebellious
war, than be the puppet of my subjects, and serve their will by
compulsion. Free am I--free ever will I be, while the crown of the
Plantagenet is mine, to raise those whom I love, to defy the threats of
those sworn to obey me. And were I but Earl of March, instead of king
of England, this hall should have swum with the blood of those who
have insulted the friends of my youth, the wife of my bosom. Off,
Hastings!--I need no mediator with my servants. Nor here, nor
anywhere in broad England, have I my equal, and the king forgives or
scorns--construe it as ye will, my lords--what the simple gentleman
would avenge."

It were in vain to describe the sensation that this speech produced.
There is ever something in courage and in will that awes numbers, though
brave themselves. And what with the unquestioned valour of Edward; what
with the effect of his splendid person, towering above all present by
the head, and moving lightly, with each impulse, through the mass of
a mail that few there could have borne unsinking, this assertion
of absolute power in the midst of mutiny--an army marching to the
gates--imposed an unwilling reverence and sullen silence mixed with
anger, that, while it chafed, admired. They who in peace had despised
the voluptuous monarch, feasting in his palace, and reclining on the lap
of harlot-beauty, felt that in war all Mars seemed living in his
person. Then, indeed, he was a king; and had the foe, now darkening the
landscape, been the noblest chivalry of France, not a man there but had
died for a smile from that haughty lip. But the barons were knit heart
in heart with the popular outbreak, and to put down the revolt seemed to
them but to raise the Woodvilles. The silence was still unbroken, save
where the persuasive whisper of Lord Hastings might be faintly heard in
remonstrance with the more powerful or the more stubborn of the chiefs,
when the tread of steps resounded without, and, unarmed, bareheaded, the
only form in Christendom grander and statelier than the king's strode
into the hall.

Edward, as yet unaware what course Warwick would pursue, and half
doubtful whether a revolt that had borrowed his name and was led by his
kinsmen might not originate in his consent, surrounded by those to whom
the earl was especially dear, and aware that if Warwick were against him
all was lost, still relaxed not the dignity of his mien; and leaning on
his large two-handed sword, with such inward resolves as brave kings
and gallant gentlemen form, if the worst should befall, he watched the
majestic strides of his great kinsman, and said, as the earl approached,
and the mutinous captains louted low,--

"Cousin, you are welcome! for truly do I know that when you have aught
whereof to complain, you take not the moment of danger and disaster. And
whatever has chanced to alienate your heart from me, the sound of the
rebel's trumpet chases all difference, and marries your faith to mine."

"Oh, Edward, my king, why did you so misjudge me in the prosperous
hour!" said Warwick, simply, but with affecting earnestness: "since in
the adverse hour you arede me well?"

As he spoke, he bowed his head, and, bending his knee, kissed the hand
held out to him.

Edward's face grew radiant, and, raising the earl, he glanced proudly at
the barons, who stood round, surprised and mute.

"Yes, my lords and sirs, see,--it is not the Earl of Warwick, next to
our royal brethren the nearest subject to the throne, who would desert
me in the day of peril!"

"Nor do we, sire," retorted Raoul de Fulke; "you wrong us before our
mighty comrade if you so misthink us. We will fight for the king, but
not for the queen's kindred; and this alone brings on us your anger."

"The gates shall be opened to ye. Go! Warwick and I are men enough for
the rabble yonder."

The earl's quick eye and profound experience of his time saw at once
the dissension and its causes. Nor, however generous, was he willing
to forego the present occasion for permanently destroying an influence
which he knew hostile to himself and hurtful to the realm. His was not
the generosity of a boy, but of a statesman. Accordingly, as Raoul de
Fulke ceased, he took up the word.

"My liege, we have yet an hour good ere the foe can reach the gates.
Your brother and mine accompany me. See, they enter! Please you, a few
minutes to confer with them; and suffer me, meanwhile, to reason with
these noble captains."

Edward paused; but before the open brow of the earl fled whatever
suspicion might have crossed the king's mind.

"Be it so, cousin; but remember this,--to councillors who can menace me
with desertion at such an hour, I concede nothing."

Turning hastily away, he met Clarence and the prelate midway in the
hall, threw his arm caressingly over his brother's shoulder, and, taking
the archbishop by the hand, walked with them towards the battlements.

"Well, my friends," said Warwick, "and what would you of the king?"

"The dismissal of all the Woodvilles, except the queen; the revocation
of the grants and land accorded to them, to the despoiling the ancient
noble; and, but for your presence, we had demanded your recall."

"And, failing these, what your resolve?"

"To depart, and leave Edward to his fate. These granted, we doubt little
but that the insurgents will disband. These not granted, we but waste
our lives against a multitude whose cause we must approve."

"The cause! But ye know not the real cause," answered Warwick. "I know
it; for the sons of the North are familiar to me, and their rising hath
deeper meaning than ye deem. What! have they not decoyed to their head
my kinsmen, the heirs of Latimer and Fitzhugh, and bold Coniers, whose
steel calque should have circled a wiser brain? Have they not taken my
name as their battle-cry? And do ye think this falsehood veils nothing
but the simple truth of just complaint?"

"Was their rising, then," asked St. John, in evident surprise, "wholly
unauthorized by you?"

"So help me Heaven! if I would resort to arms to redress a wrong, think
not that I myself would be absent from the field! No, my lords, friends,
and captains, time presses; a few words must suffice to explain what as
yet may be dark to you. I have letters from Montagu and others, which
reached me the same day as the king's, and which clear up the purpose
of our misguided countrymen. Ye know well that ever in England, but
especially since the reign of Edward III., strange, wild notions of some
kind of liberty other than that we enjoy have floated loose through the
land. Among the commons, a half-conscious recollection that the nobles
are a different race from themselves feeds a secret rancour and
mislike, which, at any fair occasion for riot, shows itself bitter and
ruthless,--as in the outbreak of Cade and others. And if the harvest
fail, or a tax gall, there are never wanting men to turn the popular
distress to the ends of private ambition or state design. Such a man has
been the true head and front of this commotion."

"Speak you of Robin of Redesdale, now dead?" asked one of the captains.

"He is not dead. [The fate of Robin of Redesdale has been as obscure as
most of the incidents in this most perplexed part of English history.
While some of the chroniclers finish his career according to the report
mentioned in the text, Fabyan not only more charitably prolongs his
life, but rewards him with the king's pardon; and according to the
annals of his ancient and distinguished family (who will pardon, we
trust, a license with one of their ancestry equally allowed by history
and romance), as referred to in Wotton's "English Baronetage" (Art.
"Hilyard"), and which probably rests upon the authority of the life of
Richard III., in Stowe's "Annals," he is represented as still living in
the reign of that king. But the whole account of this famous demagogue
in Wotton is, it must be owned, full of historical mistakes.] Montagu
informs me that the report was false. He was defeated off York, and
retired for some days into the woods; but it is he who has enticed
the sons of Latimer and Fitzhugh into the revolt, and resigned his
own command to the martial cunning of Sir John Coniers. This Robin of
Redesdale is no common man. He hath had a clerkly education, he hath
travelled among the Free Towns of Italy, he hath deep purpose in all he
doth; and among his projects is the destruction of the nobles here, as
it was whilome effected in Florence, the depriving us of all offices and
posts, with other changes, wild to think of and long to name."

"And we would have suffered this man to triumph!" exclaimed De Fulke:
"we have been to blame."

"Under fair pretence he has gathered numbers, and now wields an army. I
have reason to know that, had he succeeded in estranging ye from Edward,
and had the king fallen, dead or alive, into his hands, his object would
have been to restore Henry of Windsor, but on conditions that would have
left king and baron little more than pageants in the state. I knew this
man years ago. I have watched him since; and, strange though it may seem
to you, he hath much in him that I admire as a subject and should fear
were I a king. Brief, thus runs my counsel: For our sake and the realm's
safety, we must see this armed multitude disbanded; that done, we must
see the grievances they with truth complain of fairly redressed. Think
not, my lords, I avenge my own wrongs alone, when I go with you in your
resolve to banish from the king's councils the baleful influence of the
queen's kin. Till that be compassed, no peace for England. As a leprosy,
their avarice crawls over the nobler parts of the state, and devours
while it sullies. Leave this to me; and, though we will redress
ourselves, let us now assist our king!"

With one voice the unruly officers clamoured their assent to all the
earl urged, and expressed their readiness to sally at once from the
gates, and attack the rebels.

"But," observed an old veteran, "what are we amongst so many? Here a
handful--there an army!"

"Fear not, reverend sir," answered Warwick, with an assured smile; "is
not this army in part gathered from my own province of Yorkshire? Is it
not formed of men who have eaten of my bread and drunk of my cup? Let
me see the man who will discharge one arrow at the walls which contain
Richard Nevile of Warwick. Now each to your posts,--I to the king."

Like the pouring of new blood into a decrepit body seemed the arrival,
at that feeble garrison, of the Earl of Warwick. From despair into the
certainty of triumph leaped every heart. Already at the sight of his
banner floating by the side of Edward's, the gunner had repaired to his
bombard, the archer had taken up his bow; the village itself, before
disaffected, poured all its scanty population--women, and age, and
children--to the walls. And when the earl joined the king upon the
ramparts, he found that able general sanguine and elated, and pointing
out to Clarence the natural defences of the place. Meanwhile, the
rebels, no doubt apprised by their scouts of the new aid, had already
halted in their march, and the dark swarm might be seen indistinctly
undulating, as bees ere they settle, amidst the verdure of the plain.

"Well, cousin," said the king, "have ye brought these Hotspurs to their
allegiance?"

"Sire, yes," said Warwick, gravely; "but we have here no force to resist
yon army."

"Bring you not succours?" said the king, astonished. "You must have
passed through London. Have you left no troops upon the road?"

"I had no time, sire; and London is well-nigh palsied with dismay. Had
I waited to collect troops, I might have found a king's head blackening
over those gates."

"Well," returned Edward, carelessly, "few or many, one gentleman is more
worth than a hundred varlets. 'We are eno' for glory,' as Henry said at
Agincourt."

"No, sire; you are too skilful and too wise to believe your boast. These
men we cannot conquer,--we must disperse them."

"By what spell?"

"By their king's word to redress their complaints."

"And banish my queen?"

"Heaven forbid that man should part those whom God has joined," returned
Warwick. "Not my lady, your queen, but my lady's kindred."

"Rivers is dead, and gallant John," said Edward, sadly; "is not that
enough for revenge?"

"It is not revenge that we require, but pledges for the land's safety,"
answered Warwick. "And to be plain, without such a promise these walls
may be your tomb."

Edward walked apart, strongly debating within himself. In his character
were great contrasts: no man was more frank in common, no man more false
when it suited; no man had more levity in wanton love, or more firm
affection for those he once thoroughly took to his heart. He was the
reverse of grateful for service yielded, yet he was warm in protecting
those on whom service was conferred. He was resolved not to give up the
Woodvilles, and after a short self-commune, he equally determined not to
risk his crown and life by persevering in resistance to the demand for
their downfall. Inly obstinate, outwardly yielding, he concealed his
falsehood with his usual soldierly grace.

"Warwick," he said, returning to the earl's side, "you cannot advise
me to what is misbeseeming, and therefore in this strait I resign my
conduct to your hands. I will not unsay to yon mutinous gentlemen what I
have already said; but what you judge it right to promise in my name
to them or to the insurgents, I will not suppose that mime honour will
refuse to concede. But go not hence, O noblest friend that ever stood
by a king's throne!--go not hence till the grasp of your hand assures me
that all past unkindness is gone and buried; yea, and by this hand,
and while its pressure is warm in mine, bear not too hard on thy king's
affection for his lady's kindred."

"Sire," said Warwick, though his generous nature well-nigh melted
into weakness, and it was with an effort that he adhered to his
purpose,--"sire, if dismissed for a while, they shall not be degraded.
And if it be, on consideration, wise to recall from the family
of Woodville your grants of lands and lordships, take from your
Warwick--who, rich in his king's love, hath eno' to spare--take the
double of what you would recall. Oh, be frank with me, be true, be
steadfast, Edward, and dispose of my lands, whenever you would content a
favourite."

"Not to impoverish thee, my Warwick," answered Edward, smiling, "did I
call thee to my aid; for the rest, my revenues as Duke of York are at
least mine to bestow. Go now to the hostile camp,--go as sole minister
and captain-general of this realm; go with all powers and honours a king
can give; and when these districts are at peace, depart to our Welsh
provinces, as chief justiciary of that principality. Pembroke's mournful
death leaves that high post in my gift. It cannot add to your greatness,
but it proves to England your sovereign's trust."

"And while that trust is given," said Warwick, with tears in his
eyes, "may Heaven strengthen my arm in battle, and sharpen my brain in
council! But I play the laggard. The sun wanes westward; it should not
go down while a hostile army menaces the son of Richard of York."

The earl rode rapidly away, reached the broad space where his followers
still stood, dismounted, but beside their steeds,--

"Trumpets advance, pursuivants and heralds go before! Marmaduke, mount!
The rest I need not. We ride to the insurgent camp."




CHAPTER III. THE CAMP OF THE REBELS.

The rebels had halted about a mile from the town, and were already
pitching their tents for the night. It was a tumultuous, clamorous, but
not altogether undisciplined array; for Coniers was a leader of singular
practice in reducing men into the machinery of war, and where his skill
might have failed, the prodigious influence and energy of Robin of
Redesdale ruled the passions and united the discordant elements. This
last was, indeed, in much worthy the respect in which Warwick held his
name. In times more ripe for him, he would have been a mighty demagogue
and a successful regenerator. His birth was known but to few; his
education and imperious temper made him vulgarly supposed of noble
origin; but had he descended from a king's loins, Robert Hilyard had
still been the son of the Saxon people. Warwick overrated, perhaps,
Hilyard's wisdom; for, despite his Italian experience, his ideas were
far from embracing any clear and definite system of democracy. He had
much of the frantic levelism and jacquerie of his age and land, and
could probably not have explained to himself all the changes he desired
to effect; but, coupled with his hatred to the nobles, his deep and
passionate sympathy with the poor, his heated and fanatical chimeras of
a republic, half-political and half-religious, he had, with no uncommon
inconsistency, linked the cause of a dethroned king. For as the
Covenanters linked with the Stuarts against the succeeding and more
tolerant dynasty, never relinquishing their own anti-monarchic theories;
as in our time, the extreme party on the popular side has leagued with
the extreme of the aristocratic, in order to crush the medium policy,
as a common foe,--so the bold leveller united with his zeal for Margaret
the very cause which the House of Lancaster might be supposed the least
to favour. He expected to obtain from a sovereign dependent upon a
popular reaction for restoration, great popular privileges. And as the
Church had deserted the Red Rose for the White, he sought to persuade
many of the Lollards, ever ready to show their discontent, that Margaret
(in revenge on the hierarchy) would extend the protection they had never
found in the previous sway of her husband and Henry V. Possessed of
extraordinary craft, and even cunning in secular intrigues, energetic,
versatile, bold, indefatigable, and, above all, marvellously gifted with
the arts that inflame, stir up, and guide the physical force of masses,
Robert Hilyard had been, indeed, the soul and life of the present
revolt; and his prudent moderation in resigning the nominal command to
those whose military skill and high birth raised a riot into the dignity
of rebellion, had given that consistency and method to the rising which
popular movements never attain without aristocratic aid.

In the principal tent of the encampment the leaders of the insurrection
were assembled.

There was Sir John Coniers, who had married one of the Neviles, the
daughter of Fauconberg, Lord High Admiral, but who had profited little
by this remote connection with Warwick; for, with all his merit, he was
a greedy, grasping man, and he had angered the hot earl in pressing
his claims too imperiously. This renowned knight was a tall, gaunt man,
whose iron frame sixty winters had not bowed. There were the young heirs
of Latimer and Fitzhugh, in gay gilded armour and scarlet mantelines;
and there, in a plain cuirass, trebly welded, and of immense weight, but
the lower limbs left free and unincumbered in thick leathern hose, stood
Robin of Redesdale. Other captains there were, whom different motives
had led to the common confederacy. There might be seen the secret
Lollard, hating either Rose, stern and sour, and acknowledging no leader
but Hilyard, whom he knew as a Lollard's son; there might be seen the
ruined spendthrift, discontented with fortune, and regarding civil war
as the cast of a die,--death for the forfeiture, lordships for the gain;
there, the sturdy Saxon squire, oppressed by the little baron of his
province, and rather hopeful to abase a neighbour than dethrone a king
of whom he knew little, and for whom he cared still less; and there,
chiefly distinguished from the rest by grizzled beard, upturned
mustache, erect mien, and grave, not thoughtful aspect, were the men
of a former period,--the soldiers who had fought against the Maid of
Are,--now without place, station, or hope in peaceful times, already
half robbers by profession, and decoyed to any standard that promised
action, pay, or plunder.

The conclave were in high and warm debate.

"If this be true," said Coniers, who stood at the head of the table,
his helmet, axe, truncheon, and a rough map of the walls of Olney before
him--"if this be true, if our scouts are not deceived, if the Earl
of Warwick is in the village, and if his banner float beside King
Edward's,--I say, bluntly, as soldiers should speak, that I have been
deceived and juggled!"

"And by whom, Sir Knight and cousin?" said the heir of Fitzhugh,
reddening.

"By you, young kinsman, and this hot-mouthed dare-devil, Robin of
Redesdale! Ye assured me, both, that the earl approved the rising; that
he permitted the levying yon troops in his name; that he knew well the
time was come to declare against the Woodvilles, and that no sooner was
an army mustered than he would place himself at its bead; and I say, if
this be not true, you have brought these gray hairs into dishonour!"

"And what, Sir John Coniers," exclaimed Robin, rudely, "what honour had
your gray hairs till the steel cap covered them? What honour, I say,
under lewd Edward and his lusty revellers? You were thrown aside, like a
broken scythe, Sir John Coniers! You were forsaken in your rust! Warwick
himself, your wife's great kinsman, could do nought in your favour! You
stand now, leader of thousands, lord of life and death, master of Edward
and the throne! We have done this for you, and you reproach us!"

"And," began the heir of Fitzhugh, encouraged by the boldness of
Hilyard, "we had all reason to believe my noble uncle, the Earl of
Warwick, approved our emprise. When this brave fellow (pointing to
Robin) came to inform me that, with his own eyes, he had seen the
waxen effigies of my great kinsman, the hellish misdeed of the queen's
witch-dam, I repaired to my Lord Montagu; and though that prudent
courtier refused to declare openly, he let me see that war with the
Woodvilles was not unwelcome to him."

"Yet this same Montagu," observed one of the ringleaders, "when Hilyard
was well-nigh at the gates of York, sallied out and defeated him, sans
ruth, sans ceremony."

"Yes, but he spared my life, and beheaded the dead body of poor Hugh
Withers in my stead: for John Nevile is cunning, and he picks his nuts
from the brennen without lesing his own paw. It was not the hour for him
to join us, so he beat us civilly, and with discretion. But what hath he
done since? He stands aloof while our army swells, while the bull of the
Neviles and the ragged staff of the earl are the ensigns of our war, and
while Edward gnaws out his fierce heart in yon walls of Olney. How say
ye, then, that Warwick, even if now in person with the king, is in heart
against us? Nay, he may have entered Olney but to capture the tyrant."

"If so," said Coniers, "all is as it should be: but if Earl Warwick,
who, though he hath treated me ill, is a stour carle, and to be feared
if not loved, join the king, I break this wand, and ye will seek out
another captain."

"And a captain shall be found!" cried Robin. "Are we so poor in valour,
that when one man leaves us we are headless and undone? What if Warwick
so betray us and himself,--he brings no forces. And never, by God's
blessing, should we separate till we have redressed the wrongs of our
countrymen!"

"Good!" said the Saxon squire, winking, and looking wise,--"not till we
have burned to the ground the Baron of Bullstock's castle!"

"Not," said a Lollard, sternly, "till we have shortened the purple gown
of the churchman; not till abbot and bishop have felt on their backs
the whip wherewith they have scourged the godly believer and the humble
saint."

"Not," added Robin, "till we have assured bread to the poor man, and the
filling of the flesh-pot, and the law to the weak, and the scaffold to
the evil-doer."

"All this is mighty well," said, bluntly, Sir Geoffrey Gates, the leader
of the mercenaries, a skilful soldier, but a predatory and lawless
bravo; "but who is to pay me and my tall fellows?"

At this pertinent question, there was a general hush of displeasure and
disgust.

"For, look you, my masters," continued Sir Geoffrey, "as long as I and
my comrades here believed that the rich earl, who hath half England
for his provant, was at the head or the tail of this matter, we were
contented to wait a while; but devil a groat hath yet gone into my
gipsire; and as for pillage, what is a farm or a homestead? an' it were
a church or a castle there might be pickings."

"There is much plate of silver, and a sack or so of marks and royals,
in the stronghold of the Baron of Bullstock," quoth the Saxon squire,
doggedly hounding on to his revenge.

"You see, my friends," said Coniers, with a smile, and shrugging his
shoulders, "that men cannot gird a kingdom with ropes of sand. Suppose
we conquer and take captive--nay, or slay--King Edward, what then?"

"The Duke of Clarence, male heir to the throne," said the heir of
Latimer, "is Lord Warwick's son-in-law, and therefore akin to you, Sir
John."

"That is true," observed Coniers, musingly.

"Not ill thought of, sir," said Sir Geoffrey Gates; "and my advice is to
proclaim Clarence king and Warwick lord protector. We have some chance
of the angels then."

"Besides," said the heir of Fitzhugh, "our purpose once made clear, it
will be hard either for Warwick or Clarence to go against us,--harder
still for the country not to believe them with us. Bold measures are our
wisest councillors."

"Um!" said the Lollard, "Lord Warwick is a good man, and has never,
though his brother be a bishop, abetted the Church tyrannies. But as for
George of Clarence--"

"As for Clarence," said Hilyard, who saw with dismay and alarm that
the rebellion he designed to turn at the fitting hour to the service of
Lancaster, might now only help to shift from one shoulder to the other
the hated dynasty of York--"as for Clarence, he hath Edward's vices
without his manhood." He paused, and seeing that the crisis had ripened
the hour for declaring himself, his bold temper pushed at once to its
object. "No!" he continued, folding his arms, raising his head, and
comprehending the whole council in his keen and steady gaze,--"no! lords
and gentlemen, since speak I must in this emergency, hear me calmly.
Nothing has prospered in England since we abandoned our lawful king. If
we rid ourselves of Edward, let it not be to sink from a harlot-monger
to a drunkard. In the Tower pines our true lord, already honoured as a
saint. Hear me, I say,--hear me out! On the frontiers an army that keeps
Gloucester at bay hath declared for Henry and Margaret. Let us, after
seizing Olney, march thither at once, and unite forces. Margaret is
already prepared to embark for England. I have friends in London who
will attack the Tower, and deliver Henry. To you, Sir John Coniers, in
the queen's name, I promise an earldom and the garter; to you, the heirs
of Latimer and Fitzhugh, the high posts that beseem your birth; to
all of you, knights and captains, just share and allotment in the
confiscated lands of the Woodvilles and the Yorkists; to you, brethren,"
and addressing the Lollards, his voice softened into a meaning accent
that, compelled to worship in secret, they yet understood, "shelter from
your foes and mild laws; and to you, brave soldiers, that pay which
a king's coffers alone can supply. Wherefore I say, down with all
subject-banners! up with the Red Rose and the Antelope, and long live
Henry the Sixth!"

This address, however subtle in its adaptation to the various passions
of those assembled, however aided by the voice, spirit, and energy of
the speaker, took too much by surprise those present to produce at once
its effect.

The Lollards remembered the fires lighted for their martyrs by the House
of Lancaster; and though blindly confident in Hilyard, were not yet
prepared to respond to his call. The young heir of Fitzhugh, who had, in
truth, but taken arms to avenge the supposed wrongs of Warwick, whom
he idolized, saw no object gained in the rise of Warwick's enemy, Queen
Margaret. The mercenaries called to mind the woful state of Henry's
exchequer in the former time. The Saxon squire muttered to himself, "And
what the devil is to become of the castle of Bullstock?" But Sir Henry
Nevile (Lord Latimer's son), who belonged to that branch of his House
which had espoused the Lancaster cause, and who was in the secret
councils of Hilyard, caught up the cry, and said, "Hilyard doth not
exceed his powers; and he who strikes for the Red Rose shall carve out
his own lordship from the manors of every Yorkist that he slays." Sir
John Coniers hesitated: poor, long neglected, ever enterprising and
ambitious, he was dazzled by the proffered bribe; but age is slow to
act, and he expressed himself with the measured caution of gray hairs.

"A king's name," said he, "is a tower of strength, especially when
marching against a king; but this is a matter for general assent and
grave forethought."

Before any other (for ideas did not rush at once to words in those days)
found his tongue, a mighty uproar was heard without. It did not syllable
itself into distinct sound; it uttered no name; it was such a shout as
numbers alone could raise; and to such a shout would some martial leader
have rejoiced to charge to battle, so full of depth and fervour, and
enthusiasm and good heart, it seemed, leaping from rank to rank, from
breast to breast, from earth to heaven. With one accord the startled
captains made to the entrance of the tent, and there they saw, in the
broad space before them, inclosed by the tents which were grouped in a
wide semicircle,--for the mass of the hardy rebel army slept in the
open air, and the tents were but for leaders,--they saw, we say, in that
broad space, a multitude kneeling, and in the midst, upon his good steed
Saladin, bending graciously down, the martial countenance, the lofty
stature, of the Earl of Warwick. Those among the captains who knew him
not personally recognized him by the popular description,--by the black
war-horse, whose legendary fame had been hymned by every minstrel; by
the sensation his appearance had created; by the armourial insignia of
his heralds, grouped behind him, and whose gorgeous tabards blazed with
his cognizance and quarterings in azure, or, and argent. The sun was
slowly setting, and poured its rays upon the bare head of the mighty
noble, gathering round it in the hazy atmosphere like a halo. The homage
of the crowd to that single form, unarmed, and scarce attended, struck a
death-knell to the hopes of Hilyard,--struck awe into all his comrades!
The presence of that one man seemed to ravish from them, as by magic,
a vast army; power, and state, and command left them suddenly to be
absorbed in HIM! Captains, they were troopless,--the wielder of men's
hearts was amongst them, and from his barb assumed reign, as from his
throne!

"Gads my life!" said Coniers, turning to his comrades, "we have now,
with a truth, the earl amongst us; but unless he come to lead us on to
Olney, I would as lief see the king's provost at my shoulder."

"The crowd separates, he rides this way!" said the heir of Fitzhugh.
"Shall we go forth to meet him?"

"Not so!" exclaimed Hilyard, "we are still the leaders of this army; let
him find us deliberating on the siege of Olney!"

"Right!" said Coniers; "and if there come dispute, let not the rabble
hear it."

The captains re-entered the tent, and in grave silence awaited the
earl's coming; nor was this suspense long. Warwick, leaving the
multitude in the rear, and taking only one of the subaltern officers
in the rebel camp as his guide and usher, arrived at the tent, and was
admitted into the council.

The captains, Hilyard alone excepted, bowed with great reverence as the
earl entered.

"Welcome, puissant sir and illustrious kinsman!" said Coniers, who had
decided on the line to be adopted; "you are come at last to take the
command of the troops raised in your name, and into your hands I resign
this truncheon."

"I accept it, Sir John Coniers," answered Warwick, taking the place of
dignity; "and since you thus constitute me your commander, I proceed at
once to my stern duties. How happens it, knights and gentlemen, that in
my absence ye have dared to make my name the pretext of rebellion? Speak
thou, my sister's son!"

"Cousin and lord," said the heir of Fitzhugh, reddening but not abashed,
"we could not believe but what you would smile on those who have risen
to assert your wrongs and defend your life." And he then briefly related
the tale of the Duchess of Bedford's waxen effigies, and pointed to
Hilyard as the eye-witness.

"And," began Sir Henry Nevile, "you, meanwhile, were banished,
seemingly, from the king's court; the dissensions between you and Edward
sufficiently the land's talk, the king's vices the land's shame!

"Nor did we act without at least revealing our intentions to my uncle
and your brother, the Lord Montagu," added the heir of Fitzhugh.

"Meanwhile," said Robin of Redesdale, "the commons were oppressed, the
people discontented, the Woodvilles plundering, and the king wasting
our substance on concubines and minions. We have had cause eno' for our
rising!" The earl listened to each speaker in stern silence.

"For all this," he said at last, "you have, without my leave or
sanction, levied armed men in my name, and would have made Richard
Nevile seem to Europe a traitor, without the courage to be a rebel! Your
lives are in my power, and those lives are forfeit to the laws."

"If we have incurred your disfavour from our over-zeal for you," said
the son of Lord Fitzhugh, touchingly, "take our lives, for they are of
little worth." And the young nobleman unbuckled his sword, and laid it
on the table.

"But," resumed Warwick, not seeming to heed his nephew's humility,
"I, who have ever loved the people of England, and before king and
parliament have ever pleaded their cause,--I, as captain-general and
first officer of these realms, here declare, that whatever motives of
ambition or interest may have misled men of mark and birth, I believe
that the commons at least never rise in arms without some excuse for
their error. Speak out then, you, their leaders; and, putting aside all
that relates to me as the one man, say what are the grievances of which
the many would complain."

And now there was silence, for the knights and gentlemen knew little
of the complaints of the populace; the Lollards did not dare to expose
their oppressed faith, and the squires and franklins were too uneducated
to detail the grievances they had felt. But then the immense superiority
of the man of the people at once asserted itself; and Hilyard, whose
eye the earl had hitherto shunned, lifted his deep voice. With clear
precision, in indignant but not declamatory eloquence, he painted the
disorders of the time,--the insolent exactions of the hospitals and
abbeys, the lawless violence of each petty baron, the weakness of the
royal authority in restraining oppression, its terrible power in aiding
the oppressor. He accumulated instance on instance of misrule; he showed
the insecurity of property, the adulteration of the coin, the burden
of the imposts; he spoke of wives and maidens violated, of industry
defrauded, of houses forcibly entered, of barns and granaries despoiled,
of the impunity of all offenders, if high-born, of the punishment of all
complaints, if poor and lowly. "Tell us not," he said, "that this is
the necessary evil of the times, the hard condition of mankind. It was
otherwise, Lord Warwick, when Edward first swayed; for you then made
yourself dear to the people by your justice. Still men talk, hereabouts,
of the golden rule of Earl Warwick; but since you have been, though
great in office, powerless in deed, absent in Calais, or idle at
Middleham, England hath been but the plaything of the Woodvilles, and
the king's ears have been stuffed with flattery as with wool. And,"
continued Hilyard, warming with his subject, and, to the surprise of the
Lollards, entering boldly on their master-grievance--"and this is not
all. When Edward ascended the throne, there was, if not justice, at
least repose, for the persecuted believers who hold that God's word
was given to man to read, study, and digest into godly deeds. I speak
plainly. I speak of that faith which your great father Salisbury and
many of the House of York were believed to favour,--that faith which is
called the Lollard, and the oppression of which, more than aught else,
lost to Lancaster the hearts of England. But of late, the Church,
assuming the power it ever grasps the most under the most licentious
kings (for the sinner prince hath ever the tyrant priest!), hath put
in vigour old laws for the wronging man's thought and conscience; [The
Lollards had greatly contributed to seat Edward on the throne; and much
of the subsequent discontent, no doubt, arose from their disappointment,
when, as Sharon Turner well expresses it, "his indolence allied him to
the Church," and he became "hereticorum severissimus hostis."--CROYL.,
p. 564.] and we sit at our doors under the shade, not of the vine-tree,
but the gibbet. For all these things we have drawn the sword; and if
now, you, taking advantage of the love borne to you by the sons of
England, push that sword back into the sheath, you, generous, great,
and princely though you be, well deserve the fate that I foresee and
can foretell. Yes!" cried the speaker, extending his arms, and gazing
fixedly on the proud face of the earl, which was not inexpressive of
emotion--"yes! I see you, having deserted the people, deserted by them
also in your need; I see you, the dupe of an ungrateful king, stripped
of power and honour, an exile and an outlaw; and when you call in vain
upon the people, in whose hearts you now reign, remember, O fallen star,
son of the morning! that in the hour of their might you struck down the
people's right arm, and paralyzed their power. And now, if you will,
let your friends and England's champions glut the scaffolds of your
woman-king!"

He ceased. A murmur went round the conclave; every breast breathed hard,
every eye turned to Warwick. That mighty statesman mastered the effect
which the thrilling voice of the popular pleader produced on him; but
at that moment he had need of all his frank and honourable loyalty to
remind him that he was there but to fulfil a promise and discharge a
trust,--that he was the king's delegate, not the king's judge.

"You have spoken, bold men," said he, "as, in an hour when the rights of
princes are weighed in one scale, the subject's sword in the other, I,
were I king, would wish free men to speak. And now you, Robert Hilyard,
and you, gentlemen, hear me, as envoy to King Edward IV. To all of you
I promise complete amnesty and entire pardon. His highness believes you
misled, not criminal, and your late deeds will not be remembered in your
future services. So much for the leaders. Now for the commons. My liege
the king is pleased to recall me to the high powers I once exercised,
and to increase rather than to lessen them. In his name, I pledge myself
to full and strict inquiry into all the grievances Robin of Redesdale
hath set forth, with a view to speedy and complete redress. Nor is this
all. His highness, laying aside his purpose of war with France, will
have less need of impost on his subjects, and the burdens and taxes will
be reduced. Lastly, his grace, ever anxious to content his people, hath
most benignly empowered me to promise that, whether or not ye rightly
judge the queen's kindred, they will no longer have part or weight
in the king's councils. The Duchess of Bedford, as beseems a lady so
sorrowfully widowed, will retire to her own home; and the Lord Scales
will fulfil a mission to the court of Spain. Thus, then, assenting
to all reasonable demands, promising to heal all true grievances,
proffering you gracious pardon, I discharge my duty to king and to
people. I pray that these unhappy sores may be healed evermore, under
the blessing of God and our patron saint; and in the name of Edward IV.,
Lord Suzerain of England and of France, I break up this truncheon and
disband this army!"

Among those present, this moderate and wise address produced a general
sensation of relief; for the earl's disavowal of the revolt took away
all hope of its success. But the common approbation was not shared by
Hilyard. He sprang upon the table, and, seizing the broken fragments of
the truncheon, which the earl had snapped as a willow twig, exclaimed,
"And thus, in the name of the people, I seize the command that ye
unworthily resign! Oh, yes, what fools were yonder drudges of the hard
hand and the grimed brow and the leathern jerkin, to expect succour from
knight and noble!"

So saying, he bounded from the tent, and rushed towards the multitude at
the distance.

"Ye knights and lords, men of blood and birth, were but the tools of a
manlier and wiser Cade!" said Warwick, calmly. "Follow me."

The earl strode from the tent, sprang upon his steed, and was in the
midst of the troops with his heralds by his side, ere Hilyard had
been enabled to begin the harangue he had intended. Warwick's trumpets
sounded to silence; and the earl himself, in his loud clear voice,
briefly addressed the immense audience. Master, scarcely less than
Hilyard, of the popular kind of eloquence, which--short, plain,
generous, and simple--cuts its way at once through the feelings to the
policy, Warwick briefly but forcibly recapitulated to the commons the
promises he had made to the captains; and as soon as they heard of taxes
removed, the coinage reformed, the corn thrave abolished, the Woodvilles
dismissed, and the earl recalled to power, the rebellion was at an end.
They answered with a joyous shout his order to disperse and retire to
their homes forthwith. But the indomitable Hilyard, ascending a small
eminence, began his counter-agitation. The earl saw his robust form and
waving hand, he saw the crowd sway towards him; and too well acquainted
with mankind to suffer his address, he spurred to the spot, and turning
to Marmaduke, said, in a loud voice, "Marmaduke Nevile, arrest that man
in the king's name!"

Marmaduke sprang from his steed, and laid his hand on Hilyard's
shoulder. Not one of the multitude stirred on behalf of their demagogue.
As before the sun recede the stars, all lesser lights had died in
the blaze of Warwick's beloved name. Hilyard griped his dagger, and
struggled an instant; but when he saw the awe and apathy of the armed
mob, a withering expression of disdain passed over his hardy face.

"Do ye suffer this?" he said. "Do ye suffer me, who have placed swords
in your hands, to go forth in bonds, and to the death?"

"The stout earl wrongs no man," said a single voice, and the populace
echoed the word.

"Sir, then, I care not for life, since liberty is gone. I yield myself
your prisoner."

"A horse for my captive!" said Warwick, laughing; "and hear me promise
you, that he shall go unscathed in goods and in limbs. God wot, when
Warwick and the people meet, no victim should be sacrificed! Hurrah for
King Edward and fair England!"

He waved his plumed cap as he spoke, and within the walls of Olney was
heard the shout that answered.

Slowly the earl and his scanty troop turned the rein; as he receded,
the multitude broke up rapidly, and when the moon rose, that camp was a
solitude. [The dispersion of the rebels at Olney is forcibly narrated by
a few sentences, graphic from their brief simplicity, in the "Pictorial
History of England," Book V, p. 104. "They (Warwick, etc.) repaired in a
very friendly manner to Olney, where they found Edward in a most unhappy
condition; his friends were dead or scattered, flying for their lives,
or hiding themselves in remote places: the insurgents were almost
upon him. A word from Warwick sent the insurgents quietly back to the
North."]
