morning following, family-worship being ended, he retired into his study
until the bell called him away. Upon his return from meeting he returned
again into his study (the place of his labor and prayer) unto his private
devotion; where, having a small repast carried him up for his dinner, he
continued until the tolling of the bell. The public service being over, he
withdrew for a space to his pre-mentioned oratory for his sacred addresses
to God, as in the forenoon, then came down, _repeated the sermon in the
family_, prayed, after supper sang a Psalm, and towards bedtime betaking
himself again to his study he closed the day with prayer. Thus he spent the
Sabbath continually." Just fancy the Cotton children and servants listening
to his long afternoon sermon a second time!

All the New England clergymen were rigid in the prolonged observance of
Sunday. From sunset on Saturday until Sunday night they would not shave,
have rooms swept, nor beds made, have food prepared, nor cooking utensils
and table-ware washed. As soon as their Sabbath began they gathered their
families and servants around them, as did Cotton, and read the Bible and
exhorted and prayed and recited the catechism until nine o'clock, usually
by the light of one small "dip candle" only; on long winter Saturdays it
must have been gloomy and tedious indeed. Small wonder that one minister
wrote back to England that he found it difficult in the new colony to get a
servant who "_enjoyed catechizing and family duties_." Many clergymen
deplored sadly the custom which grew in later years of driving, and even
transacting business, on Saturday night. Mr. Bushnell used to call it
"stealing the time of the Sabbath," and refused to countenance it in any
way.

It was very generally believed in the early days of New England that
special judgments befell those who worked on the eve of the Sabbath.
Winthrop gives the case of a man who, having hired help to repair a
milldam, worked an hour on Saturday after sunset to finish what he had
intended for the day's labor. The next day his little child, being left
alone for some hours, was drowned in an uncovered well in the cellar of his
house. "The father freely, in open congregation, did acknowledge it the
righteous hand of God for his profaning his holy day."

Visitors and travellers from other countries were forced to obey the rigid
laws with regard to Saturday-night observance. Archibald Henderson, the
master of a vessel which entered the port of Boston, complained to the
Council for Foreign Plantations in London that while he was in sober Boston
town, being ignorant of the laws of the land, and having walked half an
hour after sunset on Saturday night, as punishment for this unintentional
and trivial offence, a constable entered his lodgings, seized him by the
hair of his head, and dragged him to prison. Henderson claimed L800 damages
for the detention of his vessel during his prosecution. I have always
suspected that the gay captain may have misbehaved himself in Boston
on that Saturday night in some other way than simply by walking in
the streets, and that the Puritan law-enforcers took advantage of the
Sabbath-day laws in order to prosecute and punish him. We know of
Bradford's complaint of the times; that while sailors brought "a greate
deale" of money from foreign parts to New England to spend, they also
brought evil ways of spending it--"more sine I feare than money."

The Puritans found in Scripture support for this observance of Saturday
night, in these words, "The evening and the morning were the first day,"
and they had many followers in their belief. In New England country towns
to this day, descendants of the Puritans regard Saturday night, though in
a modified way, as almost Sunday, and that evening is never chosen for any
kind of gay gathering or visiting. As late as 1855 the shops in Hartford
were never open for customers upon Saturday night.

Much satire was directed against this Saturday night observance both by
English and by American authors. In the "American Museum" for February,
1787, appeared a poem entitled, "The Connecticut Sabbath." After saying at
some length that God had thought one day in seven sufficient for rest, but
New England Christians had improved his law by setting apart a day and a
half, the poet thus runs on derisively:--

  "And let it be enacted further still
  That all our people strict observe our will;
  Five days and a half shall men, and women, too,
  Attend their bus'ness and their mirth pursue,
  But after that no man without a fine
  Shall walk the streets or at a tavern dine.
  One day and half 'tis requisite to rest
  From toilsome labor and a tempting feast.
  Henceforth let none on peril of their lives
  Attempt a journey or embrace their wives;
  No barber, foreign or domestic bred,
  Shall e'er presume to dress a lady's head;
  No shop shall spare (half the preceding day)
  A yard of riband or an ounce of tea."

And many similar rhymes might be given.

Sunday night, being shut out of the Sabbath hours, became in the eighteenth
century a time of general cheerfulness and often merry-making. This sudden
transition from the religious calm and quiet of the afternoon to the noisy
gayety of the evening was very trying to many of the clergymen, especially
to Jonathan Edwards, who preached often and sadly against "Sabbath evening
dissipations and mirth-making." In some communities singing-schools were
held on Sunday nights, which afforded a comparatively decorous and orderly
manner of spending the close of the day.

Sweet to the Pilgrims and to their descendants was the hush of their calm
Saturday night, and their still, tranquil Sabbath,--sign and token to them,
not only of the weekly rest ordained in the creation, but of the eternal
rest to come. The universal quiet and peace of the community showed the
primitive instinct of a pure, simple devotion, the sincere religion which
knew no compromise in spiritual things, no half-way obedience to God's
Word, but rested absolutely on the Lord's Day--as was commanded. No work,
no play, no idle strolling was known; no sign of human life or motion was
seen except the necessary care of the patient cattle and other dumb beasts,
the orderly and quiet going to and from the meeting, and at the nooning,
a visit to the churchyard to stand by the side of the silent dead. This
absolute obedience to the letter as well as to the spirit of God's Word
was one of the most typical traits of the character of the Puritans, and
appeared to them to be one of the most vital points of their religion.




XVIII.

The Authority of the Church and the Ministers.



Severely were the early colonists punished if they ventured to criticise
or disparage either the ministers or their teachings, or indeed any of the
religious exercises of the church. In Sandwich a man was publicly whipped
for speaking deridingly of God's words and ordinances as taught by the
Sandwich minister. Mistress Oliver was forced to stand in public with a
cleft stick on her tongue for "reproaching the elders." A New Haven man was
severely whipped and fined for declaring that he received no profit from
the minister's sermons. We also know the terrible shock given the Windham
church in 1729 by the "vile and slanderous expressions" of one unregenerate
Windhamite who said, "I had rather hear my dog bark than Mr. Bellamy
preach." He was warned that he would be "shakenoff and givenup," and
terrified at the prospect of so dire a fate he read a confession of his
sorrow and repentance, and promised to "keep a guard over his tongue," and
also to listen to Mr. Bellamy's preaching, which may have been a still more
difficult task. Mr. Edward Tomlins, of Boston, upon retracting his opinion
which he had expressed openly against the singing in the churches, was
discharged without a fine. William Howes and his son were in 1744 fined
fifty shillings "apeece for deriding such as sing in the congregation,
tearming them fooles." The church music was as sacred to the Puritans as
were the prayers, but it must have been a sore trial to many to keep still
about the vile manner and method of singing. In 1631 Phillip Ratcliffe,
for "speaking against the churches," had his ears cut off, was whipped and
banished. We know also the consternation caused in New Haven in 1646 by
Madam Brewster's saying that the custom of carrying contributions to
the Deacons' table was popish--was "like going to the High Alter,"
and "savored of the Mass." She answered her accusers in such a bold,
highhanded, and defiant manner that her heinous offence was considered
worthy of trial in a higher court, whose decision is now lost.

The colonists could not let their affection and zeal for an individual
minister cause them to show any disrespect or indifference to the Puritan
Church in general. When the question of the settlement of the Reverend Mr.
Lenthal in the church of Weymouth, Massachusetts, was under discussion, the
tyranny of the Puritan Church over any who dared oppose or question it was
shown in a marked manner, and may be cited as a typical case. Mr. Lenthal
was suspected of being poisoned with the Anne Hutchinson heresies, and he
also "opposed the way of gathering churches." Hence his ordination over the
church in the new settlement was bitterly opposed by the Boston divines,
though apparently desired by the Weymouth congregation. One Britton, who
was friendly towards Lenthal and who spoke "reproachfully" and slurringly
of a book which defended the course of the Boston churches, was whipped
with eleven stripes, as he had no money to pay the imposed fine. John
Smythe, who "got hands to a blank" (which was either canvassing for
signatures to a proxy vote in favor of Lenthal or obtaining signatures
to an instrument declaring against the design of the churches), for thus
"combining to hinder the orderly gathering" of the Weymouth church at this
time, was fined L2. Edward Sylvester for the same offence was fined and
disfranchised. Ambrose Martin, another friend of Lenthal's, for calling
the church covenant of the Boston divines "a stinking carrion and a human
invention," was fined L10, while Thomas Makepeace, another Weymouth
malcontent, was informed by those in power that "they were weary of him,"
or, in modern slang, that "he made them tired." Parson Lenthal himself,
being sent for by the convention, weakened at once in a way his church
followers must have bitterly despised; he was "quickly convinced of his
error and evil." His conviction was followed with his confession, and in
open court he gave under his hand a laudable retraction, which retraction
he was ordered also to "utter in the assembly at Weymouth, and so no
further censure was passed on him." Thus the chief offender got the
lightest punishment, and thus did the omnipotent Church rule the whole
community.

The names of loquacious, babbling Quakers and Baptists who spoke
disrespectfully of some or all of the ordinances of the Puritan church
might be given, and would swell the list indefinitely; they were fined and
punished without mercy or even toleration.

All profanity or blaspheming against God was severely punished. One very
wicked man in Hartford for his "fillthy and prophane expressions," namely,
that "hee hoped to meet some of the members of the Church in Hell before
long, and he did not question but hee should," was "committed to prison,
there to be kept in safe custody till the sermon, and then to stand the
time thereof in the pillory, and after sermon to be severely whipped." What
a severe punishment for so purely verbal an offence! New England ideas of
profanity were very rigid, and New England men had reason to guard well
their temper and tongue, else that latter member might be bored with a
hot iron; for such was the penalty for profanity. We know what horror Mr.
Tomlins's wicked profanity, "Curse ye woodchuck!" caused in Lynn meeting,
and Mr. Dexter was "putt in ye billboes ffor prophane saying dam ye cowe."
The Newbury doctor was sharply fined also for wickedly cursing. When
drinking at the tavern he raised his glass and said,--

  "I'll pledge my friends, and for my foes
  A plague for their heels, and a poxe for their toes."

He acknowledged his wickedness and foolishness in using the "olde proverb,"
and penitently promised to curse no more.

Sad to tell, Puritan women sometimes lost their temper and their
good-breeding and their godliness. Two wicked Wells women were punished in
1669 "for using profane speeches in their common talk; as in making answer
to several questions their answer is, The Devil a bit." In 1640, in
Springfield, Goody Gregory, being grievously angered, profanely abused an
annoying neighbor, saying, "Before God I coulde breake thy heade!" But she
acknowledged her "great sine and faulte" like a woman, and paid her fine
and sat in the stocks like a man, since she swore like the members of that
profane sex.

Sometimes the sins of the fathers were visited on the children in a most
extraordinary manner. One man, "for abusing N. Parker at the tavern," was
deprived of the privilege of bringing his children to be baptized, and was
thus spiritually punished for a very worldly offence. For some offences,
such as "speaking deridingly of the minister's powers," as was done in
Plymouth, "casting uncharitable reflexions on the minister," as did an
Andover man; and also for absenting one's self from church services; for
"sloathefulness," for "walking prophanely," for spoiling hides when tanning
and refusing explanation thereof; for selling short weight in grain,
for being "given too much to Jearings," for "Slanndering," for being a
"Makebayte," for "ronging naibors," for "being too Proude," for "suspitions
of stealing pinnes," for "pnishouse Squerilouse Odyouse wordes," and for
"lyeing," church-members were not only fined and punished but were deprived
of partaking of the sacrament. In the matter of lying great distinction was
made as to the character and effect of the offence. George Crispe's wife,
who "told a lie, not a pernicious lie, but unadvisedly," was simply
admonished and remonstrated with. Will Randall, who told a "plain lie," was
fined ten shillings. While Ralph Smith, who "lied about seeing a whale,"
was fined twenty shillings and excommunicated.

In some communities, of which Lechford tells us New Haven was one, these
unhouselled Puritans were allowed, if they so desired, to stand outside the
meeting-house door at the time of public worship and catch what few words
of the service they could. This humble waiting for crumbs of God's word was
doubtless regarded as a sign of repentance for past deeds, for it was often
followed by full forgiveness. As excommunicated persons were regarded with
high disfavor and even abhorrence by the entire pious and godly walking
community, this apparently spiritual punishment was more severe in its
temporal effects than at first sight appears. From the Cambridge Platform,
which was drawn up and adopted by the New England Synod in 1648, we learn
that "while the offender remains excommunicated the church is to refrain
from all communion with him in civil things," and the members were
specially "to forbear to eat and drink with him;" so his daily and even his
family life was made wretched. And as it was not necessary to wait for the
action of the church to pronounce excommunication, but the "pastor of a
church might by himself and authoritatively suspend from the Lord's table
a brother _suspected_ of scandal" until there was time for full
examination, we can see what an absolute power the church and even the
minister had over church-members in a New England community.

Nor could the poor excommunicate go to neighboring towns and settlements to
start afresh. No one wished him or would tolerate him. Lancaster, in 1653,
voted not to receive into its plantation "any excommunicat or notoriously
erring agt the Docktrin & Discipline of churches of this Commonwealth."
Other towns passed similar votes. Fortunately, Rhode Island--the island of
"Aquidnay" and the Providence Plantations--opened wide its arms as a place
of refuge for outcast Puritans. Universal freedom and religious toleration
were in Rhode Island the foundations of the State. Josiah Quincy said that
liberty of conscience would have produced anarchy if it had been permitted
in the New England Puritan settlements in the seventeenth century, but the
flourishing Narragansett, Providence, and Newport plantations seem to prove
the absurdity of that statement. Liberty of conscience was there allowed,
as Dr. MacSparran, the first clergyman of the Narragansett Church,
complained in his "America Dissected," "to the extent of no religion at
all." The Gortonians, the Foxians, and Hutchinsonians, the Anabaptists, the
Six Principle Baptists, the Church of England, apparently all the followers
of the eighty-two "pestilent heresies" so sadly enumerated and so bitterly
hated and "cast out to Satan" by the Massachusetts Puritan divines,--all
the excommunicants and exiles found in Rhode Island a home and
friends--other friends than the Devil to whom they had been consigned.

Though the early Puritan ministers had such powerful influence in every
other respect, they were not permitted to perform the marriage-service
nor to raise their voices in prayer or exhortation at a funeral. Sewall
jealously notes when the English burial-service began to be read at
burials, saying, "the office for Burial is a Lying very bad office makes no
difference between the precious and the vile." The office of marriage was
denied the parson, and was generally relegated to the magistrate. In this,
Governor Bradford states, they followed "ye laudable custome of ye Low
Countries." Not rulers and magistrates only were empowered to perform the
marriage ceremony; squires, tavern-keepers, captains, various authorized
persons might wed Puritan lovers; any man of dignity or prominence in the
community could apparently receive authority to perform that office except
the otherwise all-powerful parson.

As years rolled on, though the New Englanders still felt great reverence
and pride for their church and its ordinances, the minister was no longer
the just man made perfect, the oracle of divine will. The church-members
escaped somewhat from ecclesiastical power, and some of them found fault
with and openly disparaged their ministers in a way that would in early
days have caused them to be pilloried, whipped, caged, or fined; and often
the derogatory comments were elicited by the most trivial offences. One
parson was bitterly condemned because he managed to amass eight hundred
dollars by selling the produce of his farm. Another shocking and severely
criticised offence was a game of bowls which one minister played and
enjoyed. Still another minister, in Hanover, Massachusetts, was reproved
for his lack of dignity, which was shown in his wearing stockings "footed
up with another color;" that is, knit stockings in which the feet were
colored differently from the legs. He also was found guilty of having
jumped over the fence instead of decorously and clerically walking through
the gate when going to call on one of his parishioners. Rev. Joseph Metcalf
of the Old Colony was complained of in 1720 for wearing too worldly a wig.
He mildly reproved and shamed the meddlesome women of his church by asking
them to come to him and each cut off a lock of hair from the obnoxious
wig until all the complainers were satisfied that it had been rendered
sufficiently unworldly. Some Newbury church-members, in 1742, asserted that
their minister unclerically wore a colored kerchief instead of a band. This
he indignantly denied, saying that he "had never buried a babe even in most
tempestuous weather," when he rode several miles, but he always wore a
band, and he complained in turn that members of his congregation turned
away from him on the street, and "glowered" at him and "sneered at him."
Still more unseemly demonstrations of dislike were sometimes shown, as in
South Hadley, in 1741, when a committee of disaffected parishioners
pulled the Rev. Mr Rawsom out of the pulpit and marched him out of the
meeting-house because they did not fancy his preaching. But all such
actions were as offensive to the general community then as open expressions
of dissatisfaction and contempt are now.




XIX.

The Ordination of the Minister.



The minister's ordination was, of course, an important social as well as
spiritual event in such a religious community as was a New England colonial
town. It was always celebrated by a great gathering of people from far and
near, including all the ministers from every town for many miles around;
and though a deeply serious service, was also an excuse for much
merriment. In Connecticut, and by tradition also in Massachusetts, an
"ordination-ball" was frequently given. It is popularly supposed that at
this ball the ministers did not dance, nor even appear, nor to it in any
way give their countenance; that it was only a ball given at the time of
the ordination because so many people would then be in the town to take
part in the festivity. That this was not always the case is proved by
a letter of invitation still in existence written by Reverend Timothy
Edwards, who was ordained in Windsor in 1694; it was written to Mr. and
Mrs. Stoughton, asking them to attend the ordination-ball which was to be
given in his, the minister's house. But whether the parsons approved and
attended, or whether they strongly discountenanced it, the ordination-ball
was always a great success. It is recorded that at one in Danvers a young
man danced so vigorously and long on the sanded floor that he entirely wore
out a new pair of shoes. The fashion of giving ordination-balls did not die
out with colonial times. In Federal days it still continued, a specially
gay ball being given in the town of Wolcott at an ordination in 1811.

There was always given an ordination supper,--a plentiful feast, at which
visiting ministers and the new pastor were always present and partook with
true clerical appetite. This ordination feast consisted of all kinds of New
England fare, all the mysterious compounds and concoctions of Indian corn
and "pompions," all sorts of roast meats, "turces" cooked in various ways,
gingerbread and "cacks," and--an inevitable feature at the time of every
gathering of people, from a corn-husking or apple-bee to a funeral--a
liberal amount of cider, punch, and grog was also supplied, which latter
compound beverages were often mixed on the meeting-house green or even in
punch-bowls on the very door-steps of the church. Beer, too, was specially
brewed to honor the feast. Rev. Mr. Thatcher, of Boston, wrote in his diary
on the twentieth of May, 1681, "This daye the Ordination Beare was brewed."
Portable bars were sometimes established at the church-door, and strong
drinks were distributed free of charge to the entire assemblage. As late
as 1825, at the installation of Dr. Leonard Bacon over the First
Congregational Church in New Haven, free drinks were furnished at an
adjacent bar to all who chose to order them, and were "settled for" by the
generous and hospitable society. In considering the extravagant amount of
moneys often recorded as having been paid out for liquor at ordinations,
one must not fail to remember that the seemingly large sums were often
spent in Revolutionary times during the great depreciation of Continental
money. Six hundred and sixty-six dollars were disbursed for the
entertainment of the council at the ordination of Mr. Kilbourn, of
Chesterfield; but the items were really few and the total amount of liquor
was not great,--thirty-eight mugs of flip at twelve dollars per mug; eleven
gills of rum bitters at six dollars per gill, and two mugs of sling at
twenty-four dollars per mug. The church in one town sent the Continental
money in payment for the drinks of the church-council in a wheelbarrow to
the tavern-keeper, and he was not very well paid either.

It gives one a strange sense of the customs and habits of the olden times
to read an "ordination-bill" from a tavern-keeper which is thus endorsed,
"This all Paid for exsept the Minister's Rum." To give some idea of the
expense of "keeping the ministers" at an ordination in Hartford in 1784,
let me give the items of the bill:--

                          L  s. d.
  To keeping Ministers    0  2  4
  2 Mugs tody             0  5 10
  5 Segars                0  3  0
  1 Pint wine             0  0  9
  3 lodgings              0  9  0
  3 bitters               0  0  9
  3 breakfasts            0  3  6
  15 boles Punch          1 10  0
  24 dinners              1 16  0
  11 bottles wine         0  3  6
  5 mugs flip             0  5 10
  3 boles punch           0  6  0
  3 boles tody            0  3  6

One might say with Falstaff, "O monstrous! but one half-pennyworth of bread
to this intolerable deal of sack!" I sadly fear me that at that Hartford
ordination our parson ancestors got grievsously "gilded," to use a choice
"red-lattice phrase."

