
  Yea, I behold, Prometheus! and my fears
  Draw swiftly o'er mine eyes a mist fulfilled of tears,
  When I behold thy frame
  Bound, wasting on the rock, and put to shame
  By adamantine chains!
  The rudder and the rule of Heaven
  Are to strange pilots given:
  Zeus with new laws and strong caprice holds sway,
  Unkings  the ancient Powers, their might constrains,
  And thrusts their pride away!

PROMETHEUS

  Had he but hurled me, far beneath
  The vast and ghostly halls of Death,
  Down to the limitless profound Of Tartarus,
  in fetters bound, Fixed by his unrelenting hand!
  So had no man, nor God on high,
  Exulted o'er mine agony--
  But now, a sport to wind and sky,
  Mocked by my foes, I stand!

CHORUS

  What God can wear such ruthless heart
  As to delight in ill?
  Who in thy sorrow bears not part?
  Zeus, Zeus alone! for he, with wrathful will,
  Clenched and inflexible,
  Bears down Heaven's race--nor end shall be, till hate
  His soul shall satiate,
  Or till, by some device, some other hand
  Shall wrest from him his sternly-clasped command!

PROMETHEUS

  Yet,--though in shackles close and strong
  I lie in wasting torments long,---
  Yet the new tyrant, 'neath whose nod
  Cowers down each blest subservient god,
  One day, far hence, my help shall need,
  The destined stratagem to read,
  Whereby, in some yet distant day,
  Zeus shall be reaved of pride and sway:
  And no persuasion's honied spell
  Shall lure me on, the tale to tell;
  And no stern threat shall make me cower
  And yield the secret to his power,
  Until his purpose be foregone,
  And shackles yield, and he atone
  The deep despite that he hath done!

CHORUS

  O strong in hardihood, thou striv'st amain
  Against the stress of pain!
  But yet too free, too resolute thy tongue
  In challenging thy wrong!
  Ah, shuddering dread doth make my spirit quiver,
  And o'er thy fate sits Fear!
  I see not to what shore of safety ever
  Thy bark can steer--
  In depths unreached the will of Zeus doth dwell,
  Hidden, implacable!

PROMETHEUS

  Ay, stern is Zeus, and Justice stands,
  Wrenched to his purpose, in his hands--
  Yet shall he learn, perforce, to know
  A milder mood, when falls the blow--
  His ruthless wrath he shall lay still,
  And he and I with mutual will
  In concord's bond shall go.

CHORUS

  Unveil, say forth to us the tale entire,
  Under what imputation Zeus laid hands
  On thee, to rack thee thus with shameful pangs?
  Tell us--unless the telling pain thee--all!

PROMETHEUS

  Grievous alike are these things for my tongue,
  Grievous for silence--rueful everyway.
  Know that, when first the gods  began  their strife,
  And heaven was all astir with mutual feud--
  Some willing to fling Cronos from his throne,
  And set, forsooth, their Zeus on high as king,
  And other some in contrariety
  Striving to bar him from heaven's throne for aye--
  Thereon I sought to counsel for the best
  The Titan brood of Ouranos and Earth;
  Yet I prevailed not, for they held in scorn
  My glozing wiles, and, in their hardy pride,
  Deemed that sans effort they could grasp the sway.
  But, for my sake, my mother Themis oft,
  And Earth, one symbol of names manifold,
  Had held me warned, how in futurity
  It stood ordained that not by force or power,
  But by some wile, the victors must prevail.
  In such wise I interpreted; but they
  Deigned not to cast their heed thereon at all.
  Then, of things possible, I deemed it best,
  Joining my mother's wisdom to mine own,
  To range myself with Zeus, two wills in one.
  Thus, by device of mine, the murky depth
  Of Tartarus enfoldeth Cronos old
  And those who strove beside him. Such the aid
  I gave the lord of heaven--my meed for which
  He paid me thus, a penal recompense!
  For 'tis the inward vice of tyranny,
  To deem of friends as being secret foes.
  Now, to your question--hear me clearly show
  On what imputed fault he tortures me.
  Scarce was he seated on his father's throne,
  When he began his doles of privilege
  Among the lesser gods, allotting power
  In trim division; while of mortal men
  Nothing he recked, nor of their misery
  Nay, even willed to blast their race entire
  To nothingness, and breed another brood;
  And none but I was found to cross his will.
  I dared it, I alone; I rescued men
  From crushing ruin and th' abyss of hell--
  Therefore am I constrained in chastisement
  Grievous to bear and piteous to behold,--
  Yea, firm to feel compassion for mankind,
  Myself was held unworthy of the same--
  Ay, beyond pity am I ranged and ruled
  To sufferance--a sight that shames his sway!

CHORUS

  A heart of steel, a mould of stone were he,
  Who could complacently behold thy pains
  I came not here as craving for this sight,
  And, seeing it, I stand heart-wrung with pain.

PROMETHEUS

  Yea truly, kindly eyes must pity me!

CHORUS

  Say, didst thou push transgression further still?

PROMETHEUS

  Ay, man thro' me ceased to foreknow his death.

CHORUS

  What cure couldst thou discover for this curse?

PROMETHEUS

  Blind hopes I sent to nestle in man's heart.

CHORUS

  This was a goodly gift thou gavest them.

PROMETHEUS

  Yet more I gave them, even the boon of fire.

CHORUS

  What? radiant fire, to things ephemeral?

PROMETHEUS

  Yea--many an art too shall they learn thereby!

CHORUS

  Then, upon imputation of such guilt,
  Doth Zeus without surcease torment thee thus?
  Is there no limit to thy course of pain?

PROMETHEUS

  None, till his own will shall decree an end.

CHORUS

  And how shall he decree it? say, what hope?
  Seest thou not thy sin? yet of that sin
  It irks me sore to speak, as thee to hear.
  Nay, no more words hereof; bethink thee now,
  From this ordeal how to find release.

PROMETHEUS

  Easy it is, for one whose foot is set
  Outside the slough of pain, to lesson well
  With admonitions him who lies therein.
  With perfect knowledge did I all I did,
  I willed to sin, and sinned, I own it all--
  I championed men, unto my proper pain.
  Yet scarce I deemed that, in such cruel doom,
  Withering upon this skyey precipice,
  I should inherit lonely mountain crags,
  Here, in a vast tin-neighboured solitude.
  Yet list not to lament my present pains,
  But, stepping from your cars unto the ground,
  Listen, the while I tell the future fates
  Now drawing near, until ye know the whole.
  Grant ye, O grant my prayer, be pitiful
  To one now racked with woe! the doom of pain
  Wanders, but settles, soon or late, on all.

CHORUS

  To willing hearts, and schooled to feel,
  Prometheus, came thy tongue's appeal;
  Therefore we leave, with lightsome tread,
  The flying cars in which we sped--
  We leave the stainless virgin air
  Where winged creatures float and fare,
  And by thy side, on rocky land,
  Thus gently we alight and stand,
  Willing, from end to end, to know
  Thine history of woe.
                       [_The_ CHORUS _alight from their winged cars.
                          Enter_ OCEANUS, _mounted on a griffin_.
OCEANUS

  Thus, over leagues and leagues of space
  I come, Prometheus, to thy place--
  By will alone, not rein, I guide
  The winged thing on which I ride;
  And much, be sure, I mourn thy case--
  Kinship is Pity's bond, I trow;
  And, wert thou not akin, I vow
  None other should have more than thou
  Of my compassion's grace!
  'Tis said, and shall be proved; no skill
  Have I to gloze and feign goodwill!
  Name but some mode of helpfulness,
  And thou wilt in a trice confess
  That I, Oceanus, am best
  Of all thy friends, and trustiest.

PROMETHEUS

  Ho, what a sight of marvel! what, thou too
  Comest to contemplate my pains, and darest--
  (Yet how, I wot not!) leaving far behind
  The circling tide, thy namefellow, and those
  Rock-arched, self-hollowed caverns--thus to come
  Unto this land, whose womb bears iron ore?
  Art come to see my lot, resent with me
  The ills I bear? Well, gaze thy fill! behold
  Me, friend of Zeus, part-author of his power--
  Mark, in what ruthlessness he bows me down!

OCEANUS

  Yea, I behold, Prometheus! and would warn
  Thee, spite of all thy wisdom, for thy weal!
  Learn now thyself to know, and to renew
  A rightful spirit within thee, for, made new
  With pride of place, sits Zeus among the gods!
  Now, if thou choosest to fling forth on him
  Words rough with anger thus and edged with scorn,
  Zeus, though he sit aloof, afar, on high,
  May hear thine utterance, and make thee deem
  His present wrath a mere pretence of pain.
  Banish, poor wretch! the passion of thy soul,
  And seek, instead, acquittance from thy pangs!
  Belike my words seem ancientry to thee--
  Such, natheless, O Prometheus, is the meed
  That doth await the overweening tongue!
  Meek wert thou never, wilt not crouch to pain,
  But, set amid misfortunes, cravest more!
  Now--if thou let thyself be schooled by me--
  Thou must not kick against the goad. Thou knowest,
  A despot rules, harsh, resolute, supreme,
  Whose law is will. Yet shall I go to him,
  With all endeavour to relieve thy plight--
  So thou wilt curb the tempest of thy tongue!
  Surely thou knowest, in thy wisdom deep,
  The saw--_Who vaunts amiss, quick pain is his_.

PROMETHEUS

  O enviable thou, and unaccused--
  Thou who wast art and part in all I dared!
  And now, let be! make this no care of thine,
  For Zeus is past persuasion--urge him not!
  Look to thyself, lest thine emprise thou rue.

OCEANUS

  Thou hast more skill to school thy neighbour's fault
  Than to amend thine own: 'tis proved and plain,
  By fact, not hearsay, that I read this well.
  Yet am I fixed to go--withhold me not--
  Assured I am, assured, that Zeus will grant
  The boon I crave, the loosening of thy bonds.

PROMETHEUS

  In part I praise thee, to the end will praise;
  Goodwill thou lackest not, but yet forbear
  Thy further trouble! If thy heart be fain,
  Bethink thee that thy toil avails me not.
  Nay, rest thee well, aloof from danger's brink!
  I will not ease my woe by base relief
  In knowing others too involved therein.
  Away the thought! for deeply do I rue
  My brother Atlas' doom. Far off he stands
  In sunset land, and on his shoulder bears
  The pillar'd mountain-mass whose base is earth,
  Whose top is heaven, and its ponderous load
  Too great for any grasp. With pity too
  I saw Earth's child, the monstrous thing of war,
  That in Cilicia's hollow places dwelt--
  Typho; I saw his hundred-headed form
  Crushed and constrained; yet once his stride was fierce,
  His jaws gaped horror and their hiss was death,
  And all heaven's host he challenged to the fray,
  While, as one vowed to storm the power of Zeus,
  Forth from his eyes he shot a demon glare.
  It skilled not: the unsleeping bolt of Zeus,
  The downward levin with its rush of flame,
  Smote on him, and made dumb for evermore
  The clamour of his vaunting: to the heart
  Stricken he lay, and all that mould of strength
  Sank thunder-shattered to a smouldering ash;
  And helpless now and laid in ruin huge
  He lieth by the narrow strait of sea,
  Crushed at the root of Etna's mountain-pile.
  High on the pinnacles whereof there sits
  Hephaestus, sweltering at the forge; and thence
  On some hereafter day shall burst and stream
  The lava-floods, that shall with ravening fangs
  Gnaw thy smooth lowlands, fertile Sicily!
  Such ire shall Typho from his living grave
  Send seething up, such jets of fiery surge,
  Hot and unslaked, altho' himself be laid
  In quaking ashes by Zeus' thunderbolt.
  But thou dost know hereof, nor needest me
  To school thy sense: thou knowest safety's road--
  Walk then thereon! I to the dregs will drain,
  Till Zeus relent from wrath, my present woe.

OCEANUS

  Nay, but, Prometheus, know'st thou not the saw--
  _Words can appease the angry soul's disease_?

PROMETHEUS

  Ay--if in season one apply their salve,
  Not scorching wrath's proud flesh with caustic tongue.

OCEANUS

  But in wise thought and venturous essay
  Perceivest thou a danger? prithee tell!

PROMETHEUS

  I see a fool's good nature, useless toil.

OCEANUS

  Let me be sick of that disease;  I know,
  Loyalty, masked as folly, wins the way.

PROMETHEUS

 But of thy blunder I shall bear the blame.

OCEANUS

  Clearly, thy word would send me home again.

PROMETHEUS

  Lest thy lament for me should bring thee hate.

OCEANUS

  Hate from the newly-throned Omnipotence?

PROMETHEUS
