
"I know what you mean, Lady Desmond. People have been accusing us
of--of being rakes. Isn't that it?"

"Yes, Mr. Fitzgerald, that is it. But then I know that I have no
right to speak to you on such a--such a subject."

"Yes, yes; you have every right," said he, warmly; "more right than
any one else."

"Oh, no; Sir Thomas, you know--"

"Well, yes, Sir Thomas. Sir Thomas is very well, and so also is Lady
Fitzgerald; but I do not feel the same interest about them that I
do about you. And they are such humdrum, quiet-going people. As for
Herbert, I'm afraid he'll turn out a prig."

"Well, Mr. Fitzgerald, if you give me the right I shall use it." And
getting up from her chair, and coming to him where he stood, she
looked kindly into his face. It was a bonny, handsome face for a
woman to gaze on, and there was much kindness in hers as she smiled
on him. Nay, there was almost more than kindness, he thought, as he
caught her eye. It was like,--almost like the sweetness of motherly
love. "And I shall scold you," she continued. "People say that for
two or three nights running men have been playing cards at Hap House
till morning."

"Yes, I had some men there for a week. I could not take their candles
away, and put them to bed; could I, Lady Desmond?"

"And there were late suppers, and drinking of toasts, and headaches
in the morning, and breakfast at three o'clock, and gentlemen with
very pale faces when they appeared rather late at the meet--eh, Mr.
Fitzgerald?" And she held up one finger at him, as she upbraided
him with a smile. The smile was so sweet, so unlike her usual look;
that, to tell the truth, was often too sad and careworn for her age.

"Such things do happen, Lady Desmond."

"Ah, yes; they do happen. And with such a one as you, heaven knows
I do not begrudge the pleasure, if it were but now and then,--once
again and then done with. But you are too bright and too good for
such things to continue." And she took his hand and pressed it, as
a mother or a mother's dearest friend might have done. "It would so
grieve me to think that you should be even in danger of shipwreck.

"You will not be angry with me for taking this liberty?" she
continued.

"Angry! how could any man be angry for such kindness?"

"And you will think of what I say. I would not have you unsociable,
or morose, or inhospitable; but--"

"I understand, Lady Desmond; but when young men are together, one
cannot always control them."

"But you will try. Say that you will try because I have asked you."

He promised that he would, and then went his way, proud in his heart
at this solicitude. And how could he not be proud? was she not high
in rank, proud in character, beautiful withal, and the mother of
Clara Desmond? What sweeter friend could a man have; what counsellor
more potent to avert those dangers which now hovered round his head?

And as he rode home he was half in love with the countess. Where is
the young man who has not in his early years been half in love with
some woman older, much older than himself, who has half conquered his
heart by her solicitude for his welfare?--with some woman who has
whispered to him while others were talking, who has told him in such
gentle, loving tones of his boyish follies, whose tenderness and
experience together have educated him and made him manly? Young men
are so proud, proud in their inmost hearts, of such tenderness and
solicitude, as long as it remains secret and wrapt as it were in
a certain mystery. Such liaisons have the interests of intrigue,
without--I was going to say without its dangers. Alas! it may be that
it is not always so.

Owen Fitzgerald as he rode home was half in love with the countess.
Not that his love was of a kind which made him in any way desirous
of marrying her, or of kneeling at her feet and devoting himself to
her for ever; not that it in any way interfered with the other love
which he was beginning to feel for her daughter. But he thought with
pleasure of the tone of her voice, of the pressure of her hand, of
the tenderness which he had found in her eye.

It was after that time, as will be understood, that some goodnatured
friend had told him that he was regarded in the county as the future
husband of Lady Desmond. At first he laughed at this as being--as
he himself said to himself--too good a joke. When the report
first reached him, it seemed to be a joke which he could share so
pleasantly with the countess. For men of three and twenty, though
they are so fond of the society of women older than themselves,
understand so little the hearts and feelings of such women. In his
ideas there was an interval as of another generation between him and
the countess. In her thoughts the interval was probably much less
striking.

But the accusation was made to him again and again till it wounded
him, and he gave up that notion of a mutual joke with his kind friend
at Desmond Court. It did not occur to him that she could ever think
of loving him as her lord and master; but it was brought home to him
that other people thought so.

A year had now passed by since those winter holidays in which Clara
Desmond had been sixteen, and during which she was described by
epithets which will not, I fear, have pleased my readers. Those
epithets were now somewhat less deserved, but still the necessity
of them had not entirely passed away. Her limbs were still thin
and long, and her shoulders pointed; but the growth of beauty had
commenced, and in Owen's eyes she was already very lovely.

At Christmas-time during that winter a ball was given at Castle
Richmond, to celebrate the coming of age of the young heir. It was
not a very gay affair, for the Castle Richmond folk, even in those
days, were not very gay people. Sir Thomas, though only fifty, was
an old man for his age; and Lady Fitzgerald, though known intimately
by the poor all round her, was not known intimately by any but the
poor. Mary and Emmeline Fitzgerald, with whom we shall become better
acquainted as we advance in our story, were nice, good girls, and
handsome withal; but they had not that special gift which enables
some girls to make a party in their own house bright in spite of all
obstacles.

We should have but little to do with this ball, were it not that
Clara Desmond was here first brought out, as the term goes. It was
the first large party to which she had been taken, and it was to her
a matter of much wonder and inquiry with those wondering, speaking
eyes.

And Owen Fitzgerald was there;--as a matter of course, the reader
will say. By no means so. Previous to that ball Owen's sins had been
commented upon at Castle Richmond, and Sir Thomas had expostulated
with him. These expostulations had not been received quite so
graciously as those of the handsome countess, and there had been
anger at Castle Richmond.

Now there was living in the house of Castle Richmond one Miss Letty
Fitzgerald, a maiden sister of the baronet's, older than her brother
by full ten years. In her character there was more of energy, and
also much more of harsh judgment, and of consequent ill-nature, than
in that of her brother. When the letters of invitation were being
sent out by the two girls, she had given a decided opinion that the
reprobate should not be asked. But the reprobate's cousins, with that
partiality for a rake which is so common to young ladies, would not
abide by their aunt's command, and referred the matter both to mamma
and papa. Mamma thought it very hard that their own cousin should be
refused admittance to their house, and very dreadful that his sins
should be considered to be of so deep a dye as to require so severe a
sentence; and then papa, much balancing the matter, gave final orders
that the prodigal cousin should be admitted.

He was admitted, and dangerously he used the privilege. The countess,
who was there, stood up to dance twice, and twice only. She opened
the ball with young Herbert Fitzgerald the heir; and in about an hour
afterwards she danced again with Owen. He did not ask her twice; but
he asked her daughter three or four times, and three or four times he
asked her successfully.

"Clara," whispered the mother to her child, after the last of these
occasions, giving some little pull or twist to her girl's frock as
she did so, "you had better not dance with Owen Fitzgerald again
to-night. People will remark about it."

"Will they?" said Clara, and immediately sat down, checked in her
young happiness.

Not many minutes afterwards, Owen came up to her again. "May we have
another waltz together, I wonder?" he said.

"Not to-night, I think. I am rather tired already." And so she did
not waltz again all the evening, for fear she should offend him.

But the countess, though she had thus interdicted her daughter's
dancing with the master of Hap House, had not done so through any
absolute fear. To her, her girl was still a child; a child without
a woman's thoughts, or any of a woman's charms. And then it was
so natural that Clara should like to dance with almost the only
gentleman who was not absolutely a stranger to her. Lady Desmond had
been actuated rather by a feeling that it would be well that Clara
should begin to know other persons.

By that feeling,--and perhaps unconsciously by another, that it would
be well that Owen Fitzgerald should be relieved from his attendance
on the child, and enabled to give it to the mother. Whether Lady
Desmond had at that time realized any ideas as to her own interest
in this young man, it was at any rate true that she loved to have
him near her. She had refused to dance a second time with Herbert
Fitzgerald; she had refused to stand up with any other person who had
asked her; but with Owen she would either have danced again, or have
kept him by her side, while she explained to him with flattering
frankness that she could not do so lest others should be offended.

And Owen was with her frequently through the evening. She was taken
to and from supper by Sir Thomas, but any other takings that were
incurred were done by him. He led her from one drawing-room to
another; he took her empty coffee-cup; he stood behind her chair,
and talked to her; and he brought her the scarf which she had left
elsewhere; and finally, he put a shawl round her neck while old Sir
Thomas was waiting to hand her to her carriage. Reader, good-natured,
middle-aged reader, remember that she was only thirty-eight, and that
hitherto she had known nothing of the delights of love. By the young,
any such hallucination on her part, at her years, will be regarded as
lunacy, or at least frenzy.

Owen Fitzgerald drove home from that ball in a state of mind that
was hardly satisfactory. In the first place, Miss Letty had made a
direct attack upon his morals, which he had not answered in the most
courteous manner.

"I have heard a great deal of your doings, Master Owen," she said to
him. "A fine house you're keeping."

"Why don't you come and join us, Aunt Letty?" he replied. "It would
be just the thing for you."

"God forbid!" said the old maid, turning up her eyes to heaven.

"Oh, you might do worse, you know. With us you'd only drink and
play cards, and perhaps hear a little strong language now and again.
But what's that to slander, and calumny, and bearing false witness
against one's neighbour?" and so saying he ended that interview--not
in a manner to ingratiate himself with his relative, Miss Letty
Fitzgerald.

After that, in the supper-room, more than one wag of a fellow had
congratulated him on his success with the widow. "She's got some
sort of a jointure, I suppose," said one. "She's very young-looking,
certainly, to be the mother of that girl," declared another. "Upon my
word, she's a handsome woman still," said a third. "And what title
will you get when you marry her, Fitz?" asked a fourth, who was
rather ignorant as to the phases under which the British peerage
develops itself.

Fitzgerald pshawed, and pished, and poohed; and then, breaking away
from them, rode home. He felt that he must at any rate put an end to
this annoyance about the countess, and that he must put an end also
to his state of doubt about the countess's daughter. Clara had been
kind and gracious to him in the first part of the evening; nay,
almost more than gracious. Why had she been so cold when he went up
to her on that last occasion? why had she gathered herself like a
snail into its shell for the rest of the evening?

The young earl had also been at the party, and had exacted a promise
from Owen that he would be over at Desmond Court on the next day. It
had almost been on Owen's lips to tell his friend, not only that he
would be there, but what would be his intention when he got there.
He knew that the lad loved him well; and almost fancied that, earl
as he was, he would favour his friend's suit. But a feeling that
Lord Desmond was only a boy, restrained him. It would not be well to
induce one so young to agree to an arrangement of which in after and
more mature years he would so probably disapprove.

But not the less did Fitzgerald, as he drove home, determine that
on the next day he would know something of his fate: and with this
resolve he endeavoured to comfort himself as he drove up into his own
avenue, and betook himself to his own solitary home.




CHAPTER III.

CLARA DESMOND.


It had been Clara Desmond's first ball, and on the following morning
she had much to occupy her thoughts. In the first place, had she been
pleased or had she not? Had she been most gratified or most pained?

Girls when they ask themselves such questions seldom give themselves
fair answers. She had liked dancing with Owen Fitzgerald; oh, so
much! She had liked dancing with others too, though she had not known
them, and had hardly spoken to them. The mere act of dancing, with
the loud music in the room, and the gay dresses and bright lights
around her, had been delightful. But then it had pained her--she knew
not why, but it had pained her--when her mother told her that people
would make remarks about her. Had she done anything improper on this
her first entry into the world? Was her conduct to be scanned, and
judged, and condemned, while she was flattering herself that no one
had noticed her but him who was speaking to her?

Their breakfast was late, and the countess sat, as was her wont, with
her book beside her tea-cup, speaking a word every now and again to
her son.

"Owen will be over here to-day," said he. "We are going to have a
schooling match down on the Callows." Now in Ireland a schooling
match means the amusement of teaching your horses to jump.

"Will he?" said Lady Desmond, looking up from her book for a moment.
"Mind you bring him in to lunch; I want to speak to him."

"He doesn't care much about lunch, I fancy," said he; "and, maybe, we
shall be half way to Millstreet by that time."

"Never mind, but do as I tell you. You expect everybody to be as wild
and wayward as yourself." And the countess smiled on her son in a
manner which showed that she was proud even of his wildness and his
waywardness.

Clara had felt that she blushed when she heard that Mr. Fitzgerald
was to be there that morning. She felt that her own manner became
constrained, and was afraid that her mother should look at her. Owen
had said nothing to her about love; and she, child as she was, had
thought nothing about love. But she was conscious of something, she
knew not what. He had touched her hand during those dances as it had
never been touched before; he had looked into her eyes, and her eyes
had fallen before his glance; he had pressed her waist, and she had
felt that there was tenderness in the pressure. So she blushed, and
almost trembled, when she heard that he was coming, and was glad in
her heart when she found that there was neither anger nor sunshine in
her mother's face.

Not long after breakfast, the earl went out on his horse, and met
Owen at some gate or back entrance. In his opinion the old house was
stupid, and the women in it were stupid companions in the morning.
His heart for the moment was engaged on the thought of making his
animal take the most impracticable leaps which he could find, and
it did not occur to him at first to give his mother's message to
his companion. As for lunch, they would get a biscuit and glass of
cherry-brandy at Wat M'Carthy's, of Drumban; and as for his mother
having anything to say, that of course went for nothing.

Owen would have been glad to have gone up to the house, but in that
he was frustrated by the earl's sharpness in catching him. His next
hope was to get through the promised lesson in horse-leaping as
quickly as possible, so that he might return to Desmond Court, and
take his chance of meeting Clara. But in this he found the earl very
difficult to manage.

"Oh, Owen, we won't go there," he said, when Fitzgerald proposed a
canter through some meadows down by the river-side. "There are only
a few gripes"--Irish for small ditches--"and I have ridden Fireball
over them a score of times. I want you to come away towards Drumban."

"Drumban! why Drumban's seven miles from here."

"What matter? Besides, it's not six the way I'll take you. I want to
see Wat M'Carthy especially. He has a litter of puppies there, out of
that black bitch of his, and I mean to make him give me one of them."

But on that morning, Owen Fitzgerald would not allow himself to be
taken so far a-field as Drumban, even on a mission so important as
this. The young lord fought the matter stoutly; but it ended by
his being forced to content himself with picking out all the most
dangerous parts of the fences in the river meadows.

"Why, you've hardly tried your own mare at all," said the lad,
reproachfully.

"I'm going to hunt her on Saturday," said Owen; "and she'll have
quite enough to do then."

"Well, you're very slow to-day. You're done up with the dancing, I
think. And what do you mean to do now?"

"I'll go home with you, I think, and pay my respects to the
countess."

"By-the-by, I was to bring you in to lunch. She said she wanted to
see you. By jingo, I forgot all about it! But you've all become very
stupid among you, I know that." And so they rode back to Desmond
Court, entering the demesne by one of the straight, dull, level roads
which led up to the house.

But it did not suit the earl to ride on the road while the grass was
so near him; so they turned off with a curve across what was called
the park, thus prolonging their return by about double the necessary
distance.

As they were cantering on, Owen saw her of whom he was in quest
walking in the road which they had left. His best chance of seeing
her alone had been that of finding her outside the house. He knew
that the countess rarely or never walked with her daughter, and that,
as the governess was gone, Clara was driven to walk by herself.

"Desmond," he said, pulling up his horse, "do you go on and tell your
mother that I will be with her almost immediately."

"Why, where are you off to now?"

"There is your sister, and I must ask her how she is after the ball;"
and so saying he trotted back in the direction of the road.

Lady Clara had seen them; and though she had hardly turned her head,
she had seen also how suddenly Mr. Fitzgerald had stopped his horse,
and turned his course when he perceived her. At the first moment she
had been almost angry with him for riding away from her, and now she
felt almost angry with him because he did not do so.

He slackened his pace as he came near her, and approached her at a
walk. There was very little of the faint heart about Owen Fitzgerald
at any time, or in anything that he attempted. He had now made up
his mind fairly to tell Clara Desmond that he loved her, and to ask
for her love in return. He had resolved to do so, and there was very
little doubt but that he would carry out his resolution. But he had
in nowise made up his mind how he should do it, or what his words
should be. And now that he saw her so near him he wanted a moment to
collect his thoughts.

He took off his hat as he rode up, and asked her whether she was
tired after the ball; and then dismounting, he left his mare to
follow as she pleased.

"Oh, Mr. Fitzgerald, won't she run away?" said Clara, as she gave him
her hand.

"Oh, no; she has been taught better than that. But you don't tell me
how you are. I thought you were tired last night when I saw that you
had altogether given over dancing." And then he walked on beside her,
and the docile mare followed them like a dog.

"No, I was not tired; at least, not exactly," said Clara, blushing
again and again, being conscious that she blushed. "But--but--you
know it was the first ball I was ever at."

"That is just the reason why you should have enjoyed it the more,
instead of sitting down as you did, and being dull and unhappy. For
I know you were unhappy; I could see it."

"Was I?" said Clara, not knowing what else to say.

"Yes; and I'll tell you what. I could see more than that; it was I
that made you unhappy."

"You, Mr. Fitzgerald!"

"Yes, I. You will not deny it, because you are so true. I asked you
to dance with me too often. And because you refused me, you did not
like to dance with any one else. I saw it all. Will you deny that it
was so?"

"Oh, Mr. Fitzgerald!" Poor girl! She did not know what to say; how to
shape her speech into indifference; how to assure him that he made
himself out to be of too much consequence by far; how to make it
plain that she had not danced because there was no one there worth
dancing with. Had she been out for a year or two, instead of being
such a novice, she would have accomplished all this in half a dozen
words. As it was, her tell-tale face confessed it all, and she was
only able to ejaculate, "Oh, Mr. Fitzgerald!"

"When I went there last night," he continued, "I had only one
wish--one hope. That was, to see you pleased and happy. I knew it was
your first ball, and I did so long to see you enjoy it."

"And so I did, till--"

"Till what? Will you not let me ask?"

"Mamma said something to me, and that stopped me from dancing."

"She told you not to dance with me. Was that it?"

How was it possible that she should have had a chance with him;
innocent, young, and ignorant as she was? She did not tell him in
words that so it had been; but she looked into his face with a glance
of doubt and pain that answered his question as plainly as any words
could have done.

"Of course she did; and it was I that destroyed it all. I that should
have been satisfied to stand still and see you happy. How you must
have hated me!"

"Oh, no; indeed I did not. I was not at all angry with you. Indeed,
why should I have been? It was so kind of you, wishing to dance with
me."

"No; it was selfish--selfish in the extreme. Nothing but one thing
could excuse me, and that excuse--"

"I'm sure you don't want any excuse, Mr. Fitzgerald."

"And that excuse, Clara, was this: that I love you with all my heart.
I had not strength to see you there, and not long to have you near
me--not begrudge that you should dance with another. I love you with
all my heart and soul. There, Lady Clara, now you know it all."

The manner in which he made his declaration to her was almost fierce
in its energy. He had stopped in the pathway, and she, unconscious
of what she was doing, almost unconscious of what she was hearing,
had stopped also. The mare, taking advantage of the occasion, was
cropping the grass close to them. And so, for a few seconds, they
stood in silence.

"Am I so bold, Lady Clara," said he, when those few seconds had gone
by--"Am I so bold that I may hope for no answer?" But still she
said nothing. In lieu of speaking she uttered a long sigh; and then
Fitzgerald could hear that she was sobbing.

"Oh, Clara, I love you so fondly, so dearly, so truly!" said he in an
altered voice and with sweet tenderness. "I know my own presumption
in thus speaking. I know and feel bitterly the difference in our
rank."

"I--care--nothing--for rank," said the poor girl, sobbing through her
tears. He was generous, and she at any rate would not be less so. No;
at that moment, with her scanty seventeen years of experience, with
her ignorance of all that the world had in it of grand and great, of
high and rich, she did care nothing for rank. That Owen Fitzgerald
was a gentleman of good lineage, fit to mate with a lady, that
she did know; for her mother, who was a proud woman, delighted to
have him in her presence. Beyond this she cared for none of the
conventionalities of life. Rank! If she waited for rank, where was
she to look for friends who would love her? Earls and countesses,
barons and their baronesses, were scarce there where fate had placed
her, under the shadow of the bleak mountains of Muskerry. Her want,
her undefined want, was that some one should love her. Of all men
and women whom she had hitherto known, this Owen Fitzgerald was the
brightest, the kindest, the gentlest in his manner, the most pleasant
to look on. And now he was there at her feet, swearing that he loved
her;--and then drawing back as it were in dread of her rank. What did
she care for rank?

"Clara, Clara, my Clara! Can you learn to love me?"

She had made her one little effort at speaking when she attempted to
repudiate the pedestal on which he affected to place her; but after
that she could for a while say no more. But she still sobbed, and
still kept her eyes fixed upon the ground.

"Clara, say one word to me. Say that you do not hate me." But just at
that moment she had not one word to say.

"If you will bid me do so, I will leave this country altogether. I
will go away, and I shall not much care whither. I can only stay now
on condition of your loving me. I have thought of this day for the
last year past, and now it has come."

Every word that he now spoke was gospel to her. Is it not always
so,--should it not be so always, when love first speaks to loving
ears? What! he had loved her for that whole twelvemonth that she had
known him; loved her in those days when she had been wont to look up
into his face, wondering why he was so nice, so much nicer than any
one else that came near her! A year was a great deal to her; and had
he loved her through all those days? and after that should she banish
him from her house, turn him away from his home, and drive him forth
unhappy and wretched? Ah, no! She could not be so unkind to him;--she
could not be so unkind to her own heart. But still she sobbed; and
still she said nothing.

In the mean time they had turned, and were now walking back towards
the house, the gentle-natured mare still following at their heels.
They were walking slowly--very slowly back--just creeping along the
path, when they saw Lady Desmond and her son coming to meet them on
the road.

"There is your mother, Clara. Say one word to me before we meet
them."

"Oh, Mr. Fitzgerald; I am so frightened. What will mamma say?"

"Say about what? As yet I do not know what she may have to say. But
before we meet her, may I not hope to know what her daughter will
say? Answer me this, Clara. Can you, will you love me?"

There was still a pause, a moment's pause, and then some sound did
fall from her lips. But yet it was so soft, so gentle, so slight,
that it could hardly be said to reach even a lover's ear. Fitzgerald,
however, made the most of it. Whether it were Yes, or whether it were
No, he took it as being favourable, and Lady Clara Desmond gave him
no sign to show that he was mistaken.

"My own, own, only loved one," he said, embracing her as it were with
his words, since the presence of her approaching mother forbade him
even to take her hand in his, "I am happy now, whatever may occur;
whatever others may say; for I know that you will be true to me. And
remember this--whatever others may say, I also will be true to you.
You will think of that, will you not, love?"

This time she did answer him, almost audibly. "Yes," she said. And
then she devoted herself to a vain endeavour to remove the traces of
her tears before her mother should be close to them.

Fitzgerald at once saw that such endeavour must be vain. At one time
he had thought of turning away, and pretending that they had not seen
the countess. But he knew that Clara would not be able to carry out
any such pretence; and he reflected also that it might be just as
well that Lady Desmond should know the whole at once. That she would
know it, and know it soon, he was quite sure. She could learn it
not only from Clara, but from himself. He could not now be there at
the house without showing that he both loved and knew that he was
beloved. And then why should Lady Desmond not know it? Why should he
think that she would set herself against the match? He had certainly
spoken to Clara of the difference in their rank; but, after all, it
was no uncommon thing for an earl's daughter to marry a commoner.
And in this case the earl's daughter was portionless, and the lover
desired no portion. Owen Fitzgerald at any rate might boast that he
was true and generous in his love.

So he plucked up his courage, and walked on with a smiling face to
meet Lady Desmond and her son; while poor Clara crept beside him with
eyes downcast, and in an agony of terror.

Lady Desmond had not left the house with any apprehension that there
was aught amiss. Her son had told her that Owen had gone off "to do
the civil to Clara;" and as he did not come to the house within some
twenty minutes after this, she had proposed that they would go and
meet him.

"Did you tell him that I wanted him?" said the countess.

"Oh, yes, I did; and he is coming, only he would go away to Clara."

"Then I shall scold him for his want of gallantry," said Lady
Desmond, laughing, as they walked out together from beneath the huge
portal.

But as soon as she was near enough to see the manner of their gait,
as they slowly came on towards her, her woman's tact told her that
something was wrong;--and whispered to her also what might too
probably be the nature of that something. Could it be possible, she
asked herself, that such a man as Owen Fitzgerald should fall in love
with such a girl as her daughter Clara?

"What shall I say to mamma?" whispered Clara to him, as they all drew
near together.

"Tell her everything."

"But, Patrick--"

"I will take him off with me if I can." And then they were all
together, standing in the road.

"I was coming to obey your behests, Lady Desmond," said Fitzgerald,
trying to look and speak as though he were at his ease.

"Coming rather tardily, I think," said her ladyship, not altogether
playfully.

"I told him you wanted him, as we were crossing to the house," said
the earl. "Didn't I, Owen?"

"Is anything the matter with Clara?" said Lady Desmond, looking at
her daughter.

"No, mamma," said Clara; and she instantly began to sob and cry.

"What is it, sir?" And as she asked she turned to Fitzgerald; and her
manner now at least had in it nothing playful.

"Lady Clara is nervous and hysterical. The excitement of the ball has
perhaps been too much for her. I think, Lady Desmond, if you were to
take her in with you it would be well."

Lady Desmond looked up at him; and he then saw, for the first time,
that she could if she pleased look very stern. Hitherto her face had
always worn smiles, had at any rate always been pleasing when he had
seen it. He had never been intimate with her, never intimate enough
to care what her face was like, till that day when he had carried her
son up from the hall door to his room. Then her countenance had been
all anxiety for her darling; and afterwards it had been all sweetness
for her darling's friend. From that day to this present one, Lady
Desmond had ever given him her sweetest smiles.

But Fitzgerald was not a man to be cowed by any woman's looks. He met
hers by a full, front face in return. He did not allow his eye for a
moment to fall before hers. And yet he did not look at her haughtily,
or with defiance, but with an aspect which showed that he was ashamed
of nothing that he had done,--whether he had done anything that he
ought to be ashamed of or no.

"Clara," said the countess, in a voice which fell with awful severity
on the poor girl's ears, "you had better return to the house with
me."

"Yes, mamma."

"And shall I wait on you to-morrow, Lady Desmond?" said Fitzgerald,
in a tone which seemed to the countess to be, in the present state of
affairs, almost impertinent. The man had certainly been misbehaving
himself; and yet there was not about him the slightest symptom of
shame.

"Yes; no," said the countess. "That is, I will write a note to you if
it be necessary. Good morning."

"Good-bye, Lady Desmond," said Owen. And as he took off his hat with
his left hand, he put out his right to shake hands with her, as was
customary with him. Lady Desmond was at first inclined to refuse the
courtesy; but she either thought better of such intention, or else
she had not courage to maintain it; for at parting she did give him
her hand.

"Good-bye, Lady Clara;" and he also shook hands with her, and it need
hardly be said that there was a lover's pressure in the grasp.

"Good-bye," said Clara, through her tears, in the saddest, soberest
tone. He was going away, happy, light hearted, with nothing to
trouble him. But she had to encounter that fearful task of telling
her own crime. She had to depart with her mother;--her mother, who,
though never absolutely unkind, had so rarely been tender with her.
And then her brother--!

"Desmond," said Fitzgerald, "walk as far as the lodge with me like a
good fellow. I have something that I want to say to you."

The mother thought for a moment that she would call her son back; but
then she bethought herself that she also might as well be without
him. So the young earl, showing plainly by his eyes that he knew that
much was the matter, went back with Fitzgerald towards the lodge.

"What is it you have done now?" said the earl. The boy had some sort
of an idea that the offence committed was with reference to his
sister; and his tone was hardly as gracious as was usual with him.

This want of kindliness at the present moment grated on Owen's ears;
but he resolved at once to tell the whole story out, and then leave
it to the earl to take it in dudgeon or in brotherly friendship as he
might please.

"Desmond," said he, "can you not guess what has passed between me and
your sister?"

"I am not good at guessing," he answered, brusquely.

"I have told her that I loved her, and would have her for my wife;
and I have asked her to love me in return."

There was an open manliness about this which almost disarmed the
earl's anger. He had felt a strong attachment to Fitzgerald, and was
very unwilling to give up his friendship; but, nevertheless, he had
an idea that it was presumption on the part of Mr. Fitzgerald of Hap
House to look up to his sister. Between himself and Owen the earl's
coronet never weighed a feather; he could not have abandoned his
boy's heart to the man's fellowship more thoroughly had that man
been an earl as well as himself. But he could not get over the
feeling that Fitzgerald's worldly position was beneath that of
his sister;--that such a marriage on his sister's part would be a
mesalliance. Doubting, therefore, and in some sort dismayed--and in
some sort also angry--he did not at once give any reply.

"Well, Desmond, what have you to say to it? You are the head of her
family, and young as you are, it is right that I should tell you."

"Tell me! of course you ought to tell me. I don't see what youngness
has to do with it. What did she say?"

"Well, she said but little; and a man should never boast that a lady
has favoured him. But she did not reject me." He paused a moment, and
then added, "After all, honesty and truth are the best. I have reason
to think that she loves me."

The poor young lord felt that he had a double duty, and hardly knew
how to perform it. He owed a duty to his sister which was paramount
to all others; but then he owed a duty also to the friend who had
been so kind to him. He did not know how to turn round upon him and
tell him that he was not fit to marry his sister.

"And what do you say to it, Desmond?"
