wheel, condemned to go round and round for hours, is like the same
dog merrily chasing his own tail, and gambolling in all the frolic of
unrestrained freedom. In short, sir, on such occasions, I think I am
bewitched.

_Captain_. Nay, sir, if you plead sorcery, there is no more to be
said--he must needs go whom the devil drives. And this, I suppose, sir,
is the reason why you do not make the theatrical attempt to which you
have been so often urged?

_Author_. It may pass for one good reason for not writing a play, that
I cannot form a plot. But the truth is, that the idea adopted by too
favourable judges, of my having some aptitude for that department of
poetry, has been much founded on those scraps of old plays, which,
being taken from a source inaccessible to collectors, they have hastily
considered the offspring of my mother-wit. Now, the manner in which I
became possessed of these fragments is so extraordinary, that I cannot
help telling it to you.

You must know, that, some twenty years since, I went down to visit an
old friend in Worcestershire, who had served with me in the----Dragoons.

_Captain._ Then you _have_ served, sir?

_Author._ I have--or I have not, which signifies the same thing--Captain
is a good travelling name.--I found my friend's house unexpectedly
crowded with guests, and, as usual, was condemned--the mansion being
an old one--to the _haunted apartment._ I have, as a great modern said,
seen too many ghosts to believe in them, so betook myself seriously
to my repose, lulled by the wind rustling among the lime-trees, the
branches of which chequered the moonlight which fell on the floor
through the diamonded casement, when, behold, a darker shadow interposed
itself, and I beheld visibly on the floor of the apartment--

_Captain._ The White Lady of Avenel, I suppose?--You have told the very
story before.

_Author._ No--I beheld a female form, with mob-cap, bib, and apron,
sleeves tucked up to the elbow, a dredging-box in the one hand, and in
the other a sauce-ladle. I concluded, of course, that it was my friend's
cook-maid walking in her sleep; and as I knew he had a value for Sally,
who could toss a pancake with any girl in the country, I got up
to conduct her safely to the door. But as I approached her, she
said,--"Hold, sir! I am not what you take me for;"--words which seemed
so opposite to the circumstances, that I should not have much minded
them, had it not been for the peculiarly hollow sound in which they were
uttered.--"Know, then," she said, in the same unearthly accents, "that
I am the spirit of Betty Barnes."--"Who hanged herself for love of the
stage-coachman," thought I; "this is a proper spot of work!"--"Of that
unhappy Elizabeth or Betty Barnes, long cook-maid to Mr. Warburton, the
painful collector, but ah! the too careless custodier, of the largest
collection of ancient plays ever known--of most of which the titles only
are left to gladden the Prolegomena of the Variorum Shakspeare. Yes,
stranger, it was these ill-fated hands That consigned to grease and
conflagration the scores of small quartos, which, did they now exist,
would drive the whole Roxburghe Club out of their senses--it was these
unhappy pickers and stealers that singed fat fowls and wiped dirty
trenchers with the lost works of Beaumont and Fletcher, Massinger,
Jonson, Webster--what shall I say?--even of Shakspeare himself!"

Like every dramatic antiquary, my ardent curiosity after some play named
in the Book of the Master of Revels, had often been checked by finding
the object of my research numbered amongst the holocaust of victims
which this unhappy woman had sacrificed to the God of Good Cheer. It is
no wonder then, that, like the Hermit of Parnell,

      "I broke the bands of fear, and madly cried,
       'You careless jade!'--But scarce the words began,
       When Betty brandish'd high her saucing-pan."

"Beware," she said, "you do not, by your ill-timed anger, cut off the
opportunity I yet have to indemnify the world for the errors of my
ignorance. In yonder coal-hole, not used for many a year, repose the few
greasy and blackened fragments of the elder Drama which were not totally
destroyed. Do thou then"--Why, what do you stare at, Captain? By my
soul, it is true; as my friend Major Longbow says, "What should I tell
you a lie for?"

_Captain._ Lie, sir! Nay, Heaven forbid I should apply the word to a
person so veracious. You are only inclined to chase your tail a little
this morning, that's all. Had you not better reserve this legend to form
an introduction to "Three Recovered Dramas," or so?

_Author._ You are quite right--habit's a strange thing, my son. I had
forgot whom I was speaking to. Yes, Plays for the closet, not for the
stage--

_Captain._ Right, and so you are sure to be acted; for the managers,
while thousands of volunteers are desirous of serving them, are
wonderfully partial to pressed men.

_Author._ I am a living witness, having been, like a second Laberius,
made a dramatist whether I would or not. I believe my muse would be
_Terry_-fied into treading the stage, even if I should write a sermon.

_Captain._ Truly, if you did, I am afraid folks might make a farce
of it; and, therefore, should you change your style, I still advise a
volume of dramas like Lord Byron's.

_Author._ No, his lordship is a cut above me--I won't run my horse
against his, if I can help myself. But there is my friend Allan has
written just such a play as I might write myself, in a very sunny day,
and with one of Bramah's extra-patent pens. I cannot make neat work
without such appurtenances.

_Captain._ Do you mean Allan Ramsay?

_Author._ No, nor Barbara Allan either. I mean Allan Cunningham, who
has just published his tragedy of Sir Marmaduke Maxwell, full of
merry-making and murdering, kissing and cutting of throats, and passages
which lead to nothing, and which are very pretty passages for all
that. Not a glimpse of probability is there about the plot, but so much
animation in particular passages, and such a vein of poetry through the
whole, as I dearly wish I could infuse into my Culinary Remains, should
I ever be tempted to publish them. With a popular impress, people would
read and admire the beauties of Allan--as it is, they may perhaps only
note his defects--or, what is worse, not note him at all.--But
never mind them, honest Allan; you are a credit to Caledonia for all
that.--There are some lyrical effusions of his, too, which you would do
well to read, Captain. "It's hame, and it's hame," is equal to Burns.

_Captain._ I will take the hint. The club at Kennaquhair are turned
fastidious since Catalan! visited the Abbey. My "Poortith Cauld" has
been received both poorly and coldly, and "the Banks of Bonnie Doon"
have been positively coughed down--_Tempora mutantur._

_Author._ They cannot stand still, they will change with all of us. What
then?

                 "A man's a man for a' that."

But the hour of parting approaches.

_Captain._ You are determined to proceed then in your own system?
Are you aware that an unworthy motive may be assigned for this rapid
succession of publication? You will be supposed to work merely for the
lucre of gain.

_Author._ Supposing that I did permit the great advantages which must
be derived from success in literature, to join with other motives in
inducing me to come more frequently before the public,--that emolument
is the voluntary tax which the public pays for a certain species of
literary amusement--it is extorted from no one, and paid, I presume,
by those only who can afford it, and who receive gratification in
proportion to the expense. If the capital sum which these volumes have
put into circulation be a very large one, has it contributed to my
indulgences only? or can I not say to hundreds, from honest Duncan the
paper-manufacturer, to the most snivelling of the printer's devils,
"Didst thou not share? Hadst thou not fifteen pence?" I profess I think
our Modern Athens much obliged to me for having established such an
extensive manufacture; and when universal suffrage comes in fashion,
I intend to stand for a seat in the House on the interest of all the
unwashed artificers connected with literature.

_Captain._ This would be called the language of a calico-manufacturer.

_Author._ Cant again, my dear son--there is lime in this sack,
too--nothing but sophistication in this world! I do say it, in spite of
Adam Smith and his followers, that a successful author is a productive
labourer, and that his works constitute as effectual a part of the
public wealth, as that which is created by any other manufacture. If a
new commodity, having an actually intrinsic and commercial value, be
the result of the operation, why are the author's bales of books to be
esteemed a less profitable part of the public stock than the goods of
any other manufacturer? I speak with reference to the diffusion of the
wealth arising to the public, and the degree of industry which even such
a trifling work as the present must stimulate and reward, before the
volumes leave the publisher's shop. Without me it could not exist,
and to this extent I am a benefactor to the country. As for my own
emolument, it is won by my toil, and I account myself answerable to
Heaven only for the mode in which I expend it. The candid may hope it is
not all dedicated to selfish purposes; and, without much pretensions to
merit in him who disburses it, a part may "wander, heaven-directed, to
the poor."

_Captain._ Yet it is generally held base to write from the mere motives
of gain.

_Author._ It would be base to do so exclusively, or even to make it a
principal motive for literary exertion. Nay, I will venture to say,
that no work of imagination, proceeding from the mere consideration of
a certain sum of copy-money, ever did, or ever will, succeed. So the
lawyer who pleads, the soldier who fights, the physician who prescribes,
the clergyman--if such there be--who preaches, without any zeal for his
profession, or without any sense of its dignity, and merely on account
of the fee, pay, or stipend, degrade themselves to the rank of sordid
mechanics. Accordingly, in the case of two of the learned faculties
at least, their services are considered as unappreciable, and are
acknowledged, not by any exact estimate of the services rendered, but by
a _honorarium,_ or voluntary acknowledgment. But let a client or patient
make the experiment of omitting this little ceremony of the honorarium,
which is _cense_ to be a thing entirely out of consideration between
them, and mark how the learned gentleman will look upon his case. Cant
set apart, it is the same thing with literary emolument. No man of
sense, in any rank of life, is, or ought to be, above accepting a just
recompense for his time, and a reasonable share of the capital which
owes its very existence to his exertions. When Czar Peter wrought in the
trenches, he took the pay of a common soldier; and nobles, statesmen,
and divines, the most distinguished of their time, have not scorned to
square accounts with their bookseller.

_Captain. (Sings._)

    "O if it were a mean thing,
       The gentles would not use it;
     And if it were ungodly,
       The clergy would refuse it."

_Author._ You say well. But no man of honour, genius, or spirit, would
make the mere love of gain, the chief, far less the only, purpose of his
labours. For myself, I am not displeased to find the game a winning one;
yet while I pleased the public, I should probably continue it merely for
the pleasure of playing; for I have felt as strongly as most folks that
love of composition, which is perhaps the strongest of all instincts,
driving the author to the pen, the painter to the pallet, often without
either the chance of fame or the prospect of reward. Perhaps I have said
too much of this. I might, perhaps, with as much truth as most people,
exculpate myself from the charge of being either of a greedy or
mercenary disposition; but I am not, therefore, hypocrite enough to
disclaim the ordinary motives, on account of which the whole world
around me is toiling unremittingly, to the sacrifice of ease, comfort,
health, and life. I do not affect the disinterestedness of that
ingenious association of gentlemen mentioned by Goldsmith, who sold
their magazine for sixpence a-piece, merely for their own amusement.

_Captain._ I have but one thing more to hint.--The world say you will
run yourself out.

_Author._ The world say true: and what then? When they dance no longer,
I will no longer pipe; and I shall not want flappers enough to remind me
of the apoplexy.

_Captain._ And what will become of us then, your poor family? We shall
fall into contempt and oblivion.

_Author._ Like many a poor fellow, already overwhelmed with the number
of his family, I cannot help going on to increase it--"'Tis my vocation,
Hal."--Such of you as deserve oblivion--perhaps the whole of you--may be
consigned to it. At any rate, you have been read in your day, which is
more than can be said of some of your contemporaries, of less fortune
and more merit. They cannot say but that you _had_ the crown. It is
always something to have engaged the public attention for seven years.
Had I only written Waverley, I should have long since been, according to
the established phrase, "the ingenious author of a novel much admired
at the time." I believe, on my soul, that the reputation of Waverley
is sustained very much by the praises of those, who may be inclined to
prefer that tale to its successors.

_Captain._ You are willing, then, to barter future reputation for
present popularity?

_Author. Meliora spero._ Horace himself expected not to survive in all
his works--I may hope to live in some of mine;--_non omnis moriar._ It
is some consolation to reflect, that the best authors in all countries
have been the most voluminous; and it has often happened, that those
who have been best received in their own time, have also continued to
be acceptable to posterity. I do not think so ill of the present
generation, as to suppose that its present favour necessarily infers
future condemnation.

_Captain._ Were all to act on such principles, the public would be
inundated.

_Author_ Once more, my dear son, beware of cant. You speak as if the
public were obliged to read books merely because they are printed--your
friends the booksellers would thank you to make the proposition good.
The most serious grievance attending such inundations as you talk of,
is, that they make rags dear. The multiplicity of publications does the
present age no harm, and may greatly advantage that which is to succeed
us.

_Captain._ I do not see how that is to happen.

_Author._ The complaints in the time of Elizabeth and James, of
the alarming fertility of the press, were as loud as they are at
present--yet look at the shore over which the inundation of that age
flowed, and it resembles now the Rich Strand of the Faery Queen--

     ----"Besrrew'd all with rich array,
     Of pearl and precious stones of great assay;
     And all the gravel mix'd with golden ore."

Believe me, that even in the most neglected works of the present age,
the next may discover treasures.

_Captain._ Some books will defy all alchemy.

_Author._ They will be but few in number; since, as for the writers, who
are possessed of no merit at all, unless indeed they publish their
works at their own expense, like Sir Richard Blackmore, their power of
annoying the public will be soon limited by the difficulty of finding
undertaking booksellers.

_Captain._ You are incorrigible. Are there no bounds to your audacity?

_Author._ There are the sacred and eternal boundaries of honour and
virtue. My course is like the enchanted chamber of Britomart--

    "Where as she look'd about, she did behold
     How over that same door was likewise writ,
     _Be Bold--Be Bold,_ and everywhere _Be Bold._
     Whereat she mused, and could not construe it;
     At last she spied at that room's upper end
     Another iron door, on which was writ--
     BE NOT TOO BOLD."

_Captain._ Well, you must take the risk of proceeding on your own
principles.

_Author._ Do you act on yours, and take care you do not stay idling here
till the dinner hour is over.--I will add this work to your patrimony,
_valeat quantum._

Here our dialogue terminated; for a little sooty-faced Apollyon from
the Canongate came to demand the proof-sheet on the part of Mr.
M'Corkindale; and I heard Mr. C. rebuking Mr. F. in another compartment
of the same labyrinth I have described, for suffering any one to
penetrate so far into the _penetralia_ of their temple.

I leave it to you to form your own opinion concerning the import of this
dialogue, and I cannot but believe I shall meet the wishes of our common
parent in prefixing this letter to the work which it concerns.

I am, reverend and dear Sir,

Very sincerely and affectionately

Yours,






THE FORTUNES OF NIGEL

  _Knifegrinder._ Story? Lord bless you! I have none to tell, sir.
                               _Poetry of the Antijacobin._




CHAPTER I


  Now Scot and English are agreed,
  And Saunders hastes to cross the Tweed,
  Where, such the splendours that attend him,
  His very mother scarce had kend him.
  His metamorphosis behold,
  From Glasgow frieze to cloth of gold;
  His back-sword, with the iron hilt,
  To rapier, fairly hatch'd and gilt;
  Was ever seen a gallant braver!
  His very bonnet's grown a beaver.
                  _The Reformation._

The long-continued hostilities which had for centuries separated the
south and the north divisions of the Island of Britain, had been happily
terminated by the succession of the pacific James I. to the English
Crown. But although the united crown of England and Scotland was worn
by the same individual, it required a long lapse of time, and the
succession of more than one generation, ere the inveterate national
prejudices which had so long existed betwixt the sister kingdoms were
removed, and the subjects of either side of the Tweed brought to regard
those upon the opposite bank as friends and as brethren.

These prejudices were, of course, most inveterate during the reign of
King James. The English subjects accused him of partiality to those of
his ancient kingdom; while the Scots, with equal injustice, charged
him with having forgotten the land of his nativity, and with neglecting
those early friends to whose allegiance he had been so much indebted.

The temper of the king, peaceable even to timidity, inclined him
perpetually to interfere as mediator between the contending factions,
whose brawls disturbed the Court. But, notwithstanding all his
precautions, historians have recorded many instances, where the mutual
hatred of two nations, who, after being enemies for a thousand years,
had been so very recently united, broke forth with a fury which menaced
a general convulsion; and, spreading from the highest to the lowest
classes, as it occasioned debates in council and parliament, factions in
the court, and duels among the gentry, was no less productive of riots
and brawls amongst the lower orders.

While these heart-burnings were at the highest, there flourished in the
city of London an ingenious but whimsical and self opinioned mechanic,
much devoted to abstract studies, David Ramsay by name, who, whether
recommended by his great skill in his profession, as the courtiers
alleged, or, as was murmured among the neighbours, by his birthplace, in
the good town of Dalkeith, near Edinburgh, held in James's household the
post of maker of watches and horologes to his Majesty. He scorned
not, however, to keep open shop within Temple Bar, a few yards to the
eastward of Saint Dunstan's Church.

The shop of a London tradesman at that time, as it may be supposed, was
something very different from those we now see in the same locality. The
goods were exposed to sale in cases, only defended from the weather by
a covering of canvass, and the whole resembled the stalls and booths now
erected for the temporary accommodation of dealers at a country fair,
rather than the established emporium of a respectable citizen. But most
of the shopkeepers of note, and David Ramsay amongst others, had their
booth connected with a small apartment which opened backward from it,
and bore the same resemblance to the front shop that Robinson Crusoe's
cavern did to the tent which he erected before it.

To this Master Ramsay was often accustomed to retreat to the labour of
his abstruse calculations; for he aimed at improvements and discoveries
in his own art, and sometimes pushed his researches, like Napier, and
other mathematicians of the period, into abstract science. When thus
engaged, he left the outer posts of his commercial establishment to be
maintained by two stout-bodied and strong-voiced apprentices, who kept
up the cry of, "What d'ye lack? what d'ye lack?" accompanied with the
appropriate recommendations of the articles in which they dealt.

This direct and personal application for custom to those who chanced to
pass by, is now, we believe, limited to Monmouth Street, (if it
still exists even in that repository of ancient garments,) under the
guardianship of the scattered remnant of Israel. But at the time we
are speaking of, it was practised alike by Jew and Gentile, and served,
instead of all our present newspaper puffs and advertisements, to
solicit the attention of the public in general, and of friends in
particular, to the unrivalled excellence of the goods, which they
offered to sale upon such easy terms, that it might fairly appear that
the venders had rather a view to the general service of the public, than
to their own particular advantage.

The verbal proclaimers of the excellence of their commodities, had this
advantage over those who, in the present day, use the public papers for
the same purpose, that they could in many cases adapt their address to
the peculiar appearance and apparent taste of the passengers. [This, as
we have said, was also the case in Monmouth Street in our remembrance.
We have ourselves been reminded of the deficiencies of our femoral
habiliments, and exhorted upon that score to fit ourselves more
beseemingly; but this is a digression.] This direct and personal mode of
invitation to customers became, however, a dangerous temptation to the
young wags who were employed in the task of solicitation during
the absence of the principal person interested in the traffic; and,
confiding in their numbers and civic union, the 'prentices of London
were often seduced into taking liberties with the passengers, and
exercising their wit at the expense of those whom they had no hopes of
converting into customers by their eloquence. If this were resented by
any act of violence, the inmates of each shop were ready to pour forth
in succour; and in the words of an old song which Dr. Johnson was used
to hum,--

    "Up then rose the 'prentices all,
     Living in London, both proper and tall."

Desperate riots often arose on such occasions, especially when the
Templars, or other youths connected with the aristocracy, were insulted,
or conceived themselves to be so. Upon such occasions, bare steel was
frequently opposed to the clubs of the citizens, and death sometimes
ensued on both sides. The tardy and inefficient police of the time
had no other resource than by the Alderman of the ward calling out the
householders, and putting a stop to the strife by overpowering numbers,
as the Capulets and Montagues are separated upon the stage.

At the period when such was the universal custom of the most
respectable, as well as the most inconsiderable, shopkeepers in London,
David Ramsay, on the evening to which we solicit the attention of
the reader, retiring to more abstruse and private labours, left
the administration of his outer shop, or booth, to the aforesaid
sharp-witted, active, able-bodied, and well-voiced apprentices, namely,
Jenkin Vincent and Frank Tunstall.

Vincent had been educated at the excellent foundation of Christ's Church
Hospital, and was bred, therefore, as well as born, a Londoner, with
all the acuteness, address, and audacity which belong peculiarly to
the youth of a metropolis. He was now about twenty years old, short in
stature, but remarkably strong made, eminent for his feats upon holidays
at foot-ball, and other gymnastic exercises; scarce rivalled in
the broad-sword play, though hitherto only exercised in the form of
single-stick. He knew every lane, blind alley, and sequestered court of
the ward, better than his catechism; was alike active in his master's
affairs, and in his own adventures of fun and mischief; and so managed
matters, that the credit he acquired by the former bore him out, or at
least served for his apology, when the latter propensity led him into
scrapes, of which, however, it is but fair to state, that they had
hitherto inferred nothing mean or discreditable. Some aberrations there
were, which David Ramsay, his master, endeavoured to reduce to regular
order when he discovered them, and others which he winked at--supposing
them to answer the purpose of the escapement of a watch, which disposes
of a certain quantity of the extra power of that mechanical impulse
which puts the whole in motion.

The physiognomy of Jin Vin--by which abbreviation he was familiarly
known through the ward--corresponded with the sketch we have given
of his character. His head, upon which his 'prentice's flat cap was
generally flung in a careless and oblique fashion, was closely covered
with thick hair of raven black, which curled naturally and closely, and
would have grown to great length, but for the modest custom enjoined by
his state in life and strictly enforced by his master, which compelled
him to keep it short-cropped,--not unreluctantly, as he looked with
envy on the flowing ringlets, in which the courtiers, and aristocratic
students of the neighbouring Temple, began to indulge themselves, as
marks of superiority and of gentility.

Vincent's eyes were deep set in his head, of a strong vivid black, full
of fire, roguery, and intelligence, and conveying a humorous expression,
even while he was uttering the usual small-talk of his trade, as if
he ridiculed those who were disposed to give any weight to his
commonplaces. He had address enough, however, to add little touches of
his own, which gave a turn of drollery even to this ordinary routine of
the booth; and the alacrity of his manner--his ready and obvious wish
to oblige--his intelligence and civility, when he thought civility
necessary, made him a universal favourite with his master's customers.

His features were far from regular, for his nose was flattish, his mouth
tending to the larger size, and his complexion inclining to be more dark
than was then thought consistent with masculine beauty. But, in despite
of his having always breathed the air of a crowded city, his complexion
had the ruddy and manly expression of redundant health; his turned-up
nose gave an air of spirit and raillery to what he said, and seconded
the laugh of his eyes; and his wide mouth was garnished with a pair of
well-formed and well-coloured lips, which, when he laughed, disclosed a
range of teeth strong and well set, and as white as the very pearl. Such
was the elder apprentice of David Ramsay, Memory's Monitor, watchmaker,
and constructor of horologes, to his Most Sacred Majesty James I.

Jenkin's companion was the younger apprentice, though, perhaps, he might
be the elder of the two in years. At any rate, he was of a much more
staid and composed temper. Francis Tunstall was of that ancient and
proud descent who claimed the style of the "unstained;" because, amid
the various chances of the long and bloody wars of the Roses, they had,
with undeviating faith, followed the House of Lancaster, to which they
had originally attached themselves. The meanest sprig of such a tree
attached importance to the root from which it derived itself; and
Tunstall was supposed to nourish in secret a proportion of that family
pride, which had exhorted tears from his widowed and almost indigent
mother, when she saw herself obliged to consign him to a line of
life inferior, as her prejudices suggested, to the course held by his
progenitors. Yet, with all this aristocratic prejudice, his master found
the well-born youth more docile, regular, and strictly attentive to
his duty, than his far more active and alert comrade. Tunstall also
gratified his master by the particular attention which he seemed
disposed to bestow on the abstract principles of science connected with
the trade which he was bound to study, the limits of which were daily
enlarged with the increase of mathematical science.

Vincent beat his companion beyond the distance-post, in every thing like
the practical adaptation of thorough practice, in the dexterity of
hand necessary to execute the mechanical branches of the art, and
doubled-distanced him in all respecting the commercial affairs of the
shop. Still David Ramsay was wont to say, that if Vincent knew how to do
a thing the better of the two, Tunstall was much better acquainted with
the principles on which it ought to be done; and he sometimes objected
to the latter, that he knew critical excellence too well ever to be
satisfied with practical mediocrity.

The disposition of Tunstall was shy, as well as studious; and, though
perfectly civil and obliging, he never seemed to feel himself in his
place while he went through the duties of the shop. He was tall
and handsome, with fair hair, and well-formed limbs, good features,
well-opened light-blue eyes, a straight Grecian nose, and a countenance
which expressed both good-humour and intelligence, but qualified by a
gravity unsuitable to his years, and which almost amounted to dejection.
He lived on the best of terms with his companion, and readily stood by
him whenever he was engaged in any of the frequent skirmishes, which, as
we have already observed, often disturbed the city of London about this
period. But though Tunstall was allowed to understand quarter-staff (the
weapon of the North country) in a superior degree, and though he was
naturally both strong and active, his interference in such affrays
seemed always matter of necessity; and, as he never voluntarily joined
either their brawls or their sports, he held a far lower place in the
opinion of the youth of the ward than his hearty and active friend Jin
Vin. Nay, had it not been for the interest made for his comrade, by the
intercession of Vincent, Tunstall would have stood some chance of being
altogether excluded from the society of his contemporaries of the same
condition, who called him, in scorn, the Cavaliero Cuddy, and the Gentle
Tunstall.

On the other hand, the lad himself, deprived of the fresh air in which
he had been brought up, and foregoing the exercise to which he had
formerly been accustomed, while the inhabitant of his native mansion,
lost gradually the freshness of his complexion, and, without showing any
formal symptoms of disease, grew more thin and pale as he grew older,
and at length exhibited the appearance of indifferent health, without
any thing of the habits and complaints of an invalid, excepting a
disposition to avoid society, and to spend his leisure time in private
study, rather than mingle in the sports of his companions, or even
resort to the theatres, then the general rendezvous of his class; where,
according to high authority, they fought for half-bitten apples, cracked
nuts, and filled the upper gallery with their clamours.

Such were the two youths who called David Ramsay master; and with both
of whom he used to fret from morning till night, as their peculiarities
interfered with his own, or with the quiet and beneficial course of his
traffic.

Upon the whole, however, the youths were attached to their master, and
he, a good-natured, though an absent and whimsical man, was scarce
less so to them; and when a little warmed with wine at an occasional
junketing, he used to boast, in his northern dialect, of his "twa bonnie
lads, and the looks that the court ladies threw at them, when visiting
his shop in their caroches, when on a frolic into the city." But David
Ramsay never failed, at the same time, to draw up his own tall,
thin, lathy skeleton, extend his lean jaws into an alarming grin, and
indicate, by a nod of his yard-long visage, and a twinkle of his little
grey eye, that there might be more faces in Fleet Street worth looking
at than those of Frank and Jenkin. His old neighbour, Widow Simmons, the
sempstress, who had served, in her day, the very tip-top revellers of
the Temple, with ruffs, cuffs, and bands, distinguished more deeply
the sort of attention paid by the females of quality, who so regularly
visited David Ramsay's shop, to its inmates. "The boy Frank," she
admitted, "used to attract the attention of the young ladies, as having
something gentle and downcast in his looks; but then he could not better
himself, for the poor youth had not a word to throw at a dog. Now Jin
Vin was so full of his jibes and jeers, and so willing, and so ready,
and so serviceable, and so mannerly all the while, with a step that
sprung like a buck's in Epping Forest, and his eye that twinkled as
black as a gipsy's, that no woman who knew the world would make a
comparison betwixt the lads. As for poor neighbour Ramsay himself, the
man," she said, "was a civil neighbour, and a learned man, doubtless,
and might be a rich man if he had common sense to back his learning; and
doubtless, for a Scot, neighbour Ramsay was nothing of a bad man, but
he was so constantly grimed with smoke, gilded with brass filings,
and smeared with lamp-black and oil, that Dame Simmons judged it would
require his whole shopful of watches to induce any feasible woman to
touch the said neighbour Ramsay with any thing save a pair of tongs."

A still higher authority, Dame Ursula, wife to Benjamin Suddlechop, the
barber, was of exactly the same opinion.

Such were, in natural qualities and public estimation, the two youths,
who, in a fine April day, having first rendered their dutiful service
and attendance on the table of their master and his daughter, at their
dinner at one o'clock,--Such, O ye lads of London, was the severe
discipline undergone by your predecessors!--and having regaled
themselves upon the fragments, in company with two female domestics, one
a cook, and maid of all work, the other called Mistress Margaret's maid,
now relieved their master in the duty of the outward shop; and agreeably
to the established custom, were soliciting, by their entreaties and
recommendations of their master's manufacture, the attention and
encouragement of the passengers.

In this species of service it may be easily supposed that Jenkin Vincent
left his more reserved and bashful comrade far in the background. The
latter could only articulate with difficulty, and as an act of duty
which he was rather ashamed of discharging, the established words
of form--"What d'ye lack?--What d'ye lack?--Clocks--watches--barnacles?
--What d'ye lack?--Watches--clocks--barnacles?--What d'ye lack, sir? What
d'ye lack, madam?--Barnacles--watches--clocks?"

But this dull and dry iteration, however varied by diversity of verbal
arrangement, sounded flat when mingled with the rich and recommendatory
oratory of the bold-faced, deep-mouthed, and ready-witted Jenkin
Vincent.--"What d'ye lack, noble sir?--What d'ye lack, beauteous madam?"
he said, in a tone at once bold and soothing, which often was so applied
as both to gratify the persons addressed, and to excite a smile from
other hearers.--"God bless your reverence," to a beneficed clergyman;
"the Greek and Hebrew have harmed your reverence's eyes--Buy a pair of
David Ramsay's barnacles. The King--God bless his Sacred Majesty!--never
reads Hebrew or Greek without them."

"Are you well avised of that?" said a fat parson from the Vale of
Evesham. "Nay, if the Head of the Church wears them,--God bless his
Sacred Majesty!--I will try what they can do for me; for I have not
been able to distinguish one Hebrew letter from another, since--I cannot
remember the time--when I had a bad fever. Choose me a pair of his
most Sacred Majesty's own wearing, my good youth."

"This is a pair, and please your reverence," said Jenkin, producing a
pair of spectacles which he touched with an air of great deference and
respect, "which his most blessed Majesty placed this day three weeks on
his own blessed nose; and would have kept them for his own sacred use,
but that the setting being, as your reverence sees, of the purest jet,
was, as his Sacred Majesty was pleased to say, fitter for a bishop than
for a secular prince."

"His Sacred Majesty the King," said the worthy divine, "was ever a very
Daniel in his judgment. Give me the barnacles, my good youth, and who
can say what nose they may bestride in two years hence?--our reverend
brother of Gloucester waxes in years." He then pulled out his purse,
paid for the spectacles, and left the shop with even a more important
step than that which had paused to enter it.

"For shame," said Tunstall to his companion; "these glasses will never
suit one of his years."

"You are a fool, Frank," said Vincent, in reply; "had the good doctor
wished glasses to read with, he would have tried them before buying.
He does not want to look through them himself, and these will serve
the purpose of being looked at by other folks, as well as the best
magnifiers in the shop.--What d'ye lack?" he cried, resuming his
solicitations. "Mirrors for your toilette, my pretty madam; your
head-gear is something awry--pity, since it is so well fancied." The
woman stopped and bought a mirror.--"What d'ye lack?--a watch, Master
Sergeant--a watch that will go as long as a lawsuit, as steady and true
as your own eloquence?"

"Hold your peace, sir," answered the Knight of the Coif, who was
disturbed by Vin's address whilst in deep consultation with an eminent
attorney; "hold your peace! You are the loudest-tongued varlet betwixt
the Devil's Tavern and Guildhall."

"A watch," reiterated the undaunted Jenkin, "that shall not lose
thirteen minutes in a thirteen years' lawsuit.--He's out of hearing--A
watch with four wheels and a bar-movement--a watch that shall tell you,
Master Poet, how long the patience of the audience will endure your next
piece at the Black Bull." The bard laughed, and fumbled in the pocket of
his slops till he chased into a corner, and fairly caught, a small piece
of coin.

"Here is a tester to cherish thy wit, good boy," he said.

"Gramercy," said Vin; "at the next play of yours I will bring down a
set of roaring boys, that shall make all the critics in the pit, and the
gallants on the stage, civil, or else the curtain shall smoke for it."

"Now, that I call mean," said Tunstall, "to take the poor rhymer's
money, who has so little left behind."

"You are an owl, once again," said Vincent; "if he has nothing left to
buy cheese and radishes, he will only dine a day the sooner with some
patron or some player, for that is his fate five days out of the seven.
