    continent did Cartier become interested in? Why was he specially
    interested in St. Lawrence region?

    2. How did Montreal get its name? Why was the name, Lachine rapids,
    given to the rapids above Montreal on the St. Lawrence river?

    3. Why did Cartier fail in his attempts to plant a French colony in
    North America? How much had he and his friends accomplished for
    France in North America?

    4. Why did Coligny later wish to establish a colony in America?
    Where did his people try to settle? Find the place on the map.
    Give several reasons why they soon got into trouble with
    the Spaniards.

    5. What did the king of Spain send Menendez to Florida to do? What
    things did he accomplish? Why do we specially remember St.
    Augustine? Find it on the map.



    EXERCISES

    1. Examine the map of North America in 1541. What parts
    of North America were known? What parts were unknown? Can you see
    why the explorers would search each bay or inlet or great river?

    2. Find how far into the continent of North America the French
    explored the St. Lawrence river, that is, the distance from
    Newfoundland to Montreal by using the scale of miles on a map in one
    of your geographies.

    _Important Date_: 1565. The founding of St. Augustine.





CHAPTER XX

THE ENGLISH AND THE DUTCH TRIUMPH OVER SPAIN

CRUEL TREATMENT OF THE NETHERLANDERS. Two years after the cruel
  massacre of the Huguenot colony in Florida, Philip II, the King of
  Spain, decided to put an end to the obstinacy of the Netherlanders, and
  sent an army from Spain commanded by the Duke of Alva, who was as
  pitiless as Menendez. Alva began by seizing prominent nobles, and he
  would have arrested the Prince of Orange, but he escaped into Germany. A
  court was set up which condemned many persons to death, including the
  greatest nobles of the land. The people nicknamed it the Council of
  Blood. Alva also turned the merchants against him by compelling them to
  pay the "tenth penny," that is, one tenth of the price of the goods
  every time these were either bought or sold. Alva made himself so
  thoroughly hated that even Philip decided to call him back to Spain.

THE BEGGARS OF THE SEA. Just then something happened which gave
  Coligny and the Huguenots their chance for vengeance. The men who were
  resisting the king's officers in the Netherlands had been nicknamed the
  "Beggars." When they were driven from the cities they took to the sea.
  The "Beggars of the Sea" sometimes found a port of refuge in La
  Rochelle, a Huguenot town on the western coast of France, and sometimes
  they put into friendly English harbors. From these places they would
  sail out and attack Spanish vessels. When Queen Elizabeth in 1572
  ordered a fleet of these "Beggars" to leave, they crossed over to their
  own shores and drove the Spanish garrison out of Brille. This success
  encouraged the Dutch and many of the southern Netherlanders to rise and
  expel the Spanish soldiers from their towns.

THE FRENCH PROMISE AID. As soon as Coligny heard the news he urged
  the French king to send an army into the Netherlands and take vengeance
  not only for the massacre at Fort Caroline, but also for all the wrongs
  that he and his father and his grandfather had ever received at the
  hands of the Spaniards. The French king agreed and wrote a letter to the
  Netherlanders promising aid.

  [Illustration: GASPARD DE COLIGNY After the portrait in the
  Public Library, Geneva]

MASSACRE OF HUGUENOTS IN PARIS. The plan was never carried out.
  While Coligny and many other Huguenots were in Paris, his enemies
  attempted to kill him. When the attempt failed these enemies, including
  the king's mother, persuaded the king that Coligny and the Huguenots
  were plotting against him, and goaded the king into ordering the murder
  of all the Huguenots in Paris and the other cities of France. Thousands
  of Huguenots perished. When the Netherlanders heard of what had befallen
  Coligny and his followers, they were crushed with grief. Coligny had
  missed the chance of vengeance. But the Spanish king was soon to have
  other enemies besides the Huguenots who were ready to help the Dutch.
  These new enemies were the English.

THE ENGLISH DRAWN INTO THE CONFLICT. The religious troubles in
  England had been growing more serious. Two or three plots were made to
  assassinate Elizabeth in order to put on the throne Queen Mary of
  Scotland, who was the next heir. Philip began to encourage these
  plotters, especially after the pope in 1570 had excommunicated Elizabeth
  and forbidden her subjects to obey her as queen. She was sure to be
  dragged into the struggle in the Netherlands sooner or later. We have
  seen that she had once sheltered the "Beggars of the Sea." The murder of
  Coligny and his followers frightened the English and made many of them
  anxious to join in the conflict before their friends on the Continent,
  the French Huguenots and the Dutch Calvinists, were utterly destroyed.

GROWTH OF ENGLISH TRADE. If England should be drawn into war, her
  safety would depend mainly upon her ships. Englishmen had always taken
  to the sea, as was natural for men whose shores were washed by the
  Atlantic, the Channel and the North Sea, but they were slow in building
  fleets of ships either for trade or for war. The trade of the country
  with other peoples in the Middle Ages was carried on mostly by
  foreigners. Yet since the days of Elizabeth's father and grandfather a
  change had taken place. English merchants found their way to all
  markets. They also made new things to sell. Refugees driven by the
  religious troubles from France and the Netherlands brought their skill
  to England and taught the English how to weave fine woolens and silks.

THE NEW ENGLISH NAVY. The English navy was growing. One of the new
  ships, _The Triumph_, carried 450 seamen, 50 gunners, and 200 soldiers.
  Besides harquebuses for the soldiers, there were many kinds of cannon
  with strange names, such as culverins, falconets, sakers, serpentines,
  and rabinets. Four of the cannon were large enough to shoot a
  cannon-ball eight inches in diameter. But it was on the skill and
  courage of her men rather than upon the size of her ships that England
  relied for victory.

  [Illustration: SIR FRANCIS DRAKE After the painting at Buckland
  Abby, England]

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE. One of these men was Francis Drake. He was son
  of a chaplain in the navy and as a boy played in the rigging of the
  great ships-of-war, as other boys play in the streets. In time young
  Drake was apprenticed to the skipper of a small trading vessel. Fortune
  smiled on the lad early in life. His master died, and out of love for
  the apprentice who had served him so well, left him the vessel. Francis
  Drake became thus a shipmaster on his own account, and in time the most
  popular of Queen Elizabeth's sea-captains.

SLAVE-TRADERS. He often went with his cousin, John Hawkins, on
  voyages to Africa. They bought negro slaves from slave-traders along the
  coast, or kidnaped negroes whom they found, and carried them to the
  Spanish planters of the West Indies. Hawkins and Drake were as devout
  and humane as other men of their time. They simply could not see any
  wrong in enslaving the heathen black men in Africa. Besides, they
  enjoyed the wild life of the slave-trader with its dangers and
  rich rewards.

WHY DRAKE HATED THE SPANIARDS. The king of Spain tried to keep the
  trade in slaves for his own merchants, and attempted to prevent the
  trade of the English slavers with the West Indies. Spanish ships-of-war
  ruined one of the voyages from which Hawkins and Drake hoped for large
  profits. The Spaniards won thereby the undying hatred of Drake.

THE DRAGON OF THE SEAS. It was a time, too, when Drake's countrymen
  at home shared his intense hatred of the Spaniard. While England and
  Spain were not at war with one another, English and Spanish traders
  fought whenever they met on the high seas. The English made the Spanish
  settlements in America their special prey. At certain times of the year
  Spanish ships, called government ships, carried to Spain gold and
  silver--the royal share of the products of America. Drake, like many
  another of his countrymen, lay in wait to rob these ships of their
  precious cargoes. He managed to gather a fortune by his cunning and
  courage. More than once he was forced to bury his treasures in the sand
  to lighten his ships that they might sail the faster, and escape his
  pursuers. The Spaniards came to know and to fear Drake as the Dragon
  of the Seas.

  [Illustration: SPANISH TREASURE SHIP]

DRAKE'S VENTURE. Drake once formed the plan to take a fleet into
  the Pacific Ocean in order to plunder the treasure ships where they
  would be less on their guard. A fleet of five ships was made ready.
  Contributions from wealthy merchants and powerful nobles, perhaps a gift
  from Queen Elizabeth herself, gave him the means for unusual luxuries in
  the equipment of his fleet. Skilful musicians and rich furniture were
  taken on board Drake's own ship, the _Pelican_, or the _Golden Hind_ as
  he afterwards christened it. The brilliant little fleet left Plymouth in
  1577. One after another of the ships turned back or was destroyed on the
  long voyage of twelve months across the Atlantic and through the Strait
  of Magellan.

BEYOND THE STRAIT OF MAGELLAN. The _Golden Hind_ alone remained to
  carry out the original project. As it entered the Pacific Ocean a furious
  storm drove the little vessel southward beyond Cape Horn to the regions
  where the oceans meet. No one before had sailed so far south.

THE FIRST PRIZES. Drake regained control of his ship when the storm
  had passed, and sailed northward along the coast, plundering and robbing
  as he went. Once, as a land-party was searching along the shore for
  fresh water, it came upon a Spaniard asleep with thirteen bars of silver
  beside him. His nap was disturbed long enough to take away his burden.
  Further on they met another Spaniard and an Indian boy driving a train
  of Peruvian sheep laden with eight hundred pounds of silver. The
  Englishmen took their place, and merrily drove the sheep to their boats.
  A treasure ship, nicknamed the _Spitfire_, on the way to Panama, was
  captured after a long chase of nearly eight hundred miles. Drake
  obtained from it unknown quantities of gold and silver. With such a rich
  load, his thoughts turned to the homeward voyage.

DRAKE'S VOYAGE AROUND THE WORLD. By this time a host of Spanish
  war-ships were on Drake's track. They expected to capture him on his
  return through the Strait of Magellan. Drake, now confronted with real
  danger, cunningly outwitted his enemies. He and many other Englishmen of
  his day were sure a passage would be found somewhere through North
  America between the Atlantic and the Pacific. Spanish, French, and
  English explorers had all carried on the search for this passage. Drake
  decided to return by such a route, if it were possible. He followed the
  coast of California, and probably passed that of Oregon and Washington
  as far as Vancouver

  [Illustration: MAP OF DRAKE'S VOYAGE]

  When it grew colder and the coast turned to the westward, he gave up the
  search.

  After making some needed repairs in a small harbor a few miles above the
  modern San Francisco, Drake set out boldly across the Pacific to return
  home, as Magellan's men had done before him, by going around the world.
  He touched at the Philippines, visited the Spice Islands, and slowly
  worked his way around the Cape of Good Hope. The _Golden Hind_, long
  since given up as lost, reached England in the fall of 1580, after
  nearly three years' absence. For a second time a ship had sailed around
  the world. Drake was the first Englishman to gain the honor.

DRAKE'S REWARD. Queen Elizabeth liked the story Drake told of
  outwitting and plundering Spaniards. Arrayed in her most gorgeous robes
  she visited his ship, where a banquet had been prepared. While Drake
  knelt at her feet she made him a knight. And so it was that the man whom
  the Spaniards called with good reason the Master Thief of the Seas, the
  English called by a new title, Sir Francis Drake, and praised as the
  greatest sea-captain of the age. His ship, the _Golden Hind_, was
  ordered to be preserved forever.

THE DUTCH STRUGGLE AGAINST SPAIN. A few years after Drake returned
  the English took a deeper interest in the struggle between Philip and
  the Dutch. Although the Dutch had lost hope of help from the French
  Huguenots, they resisted Philip's generals more boldly than ever. The
  Spanish soldiers treated the towns which surrendered so savagely that
  the other towns decided it was better to die fighting than to yield. The
  siege of Leyden became famous because, after food had given out and the
  inhabitants were starving their friends cut the great dikes in order
  that the boats of the "Beggars of the Sea" loaded with provisions might
  be floated up to the very walls of the city. This unexpected flood also
  drove away the Spaniards. Fortunately after the rescue of the city a
  strong wind arose and drove back the waves so that the dikes could again
  be replaced.

  [Illustration: QUEEN ELIZABETH MAKING DRAKE A KNIGHT]

THE DEATH OF WILLIAM OF ORANGE. King Philip had come to the
  conclusion that unless William of Orange were killed the Dutch could not
  be conquered, and so he put a price on Prince William's head, offering a
  large sum of money to any one who should kill him. The first attempts
  failed, but finally in 1584 he was shot.

SIR PHILIP SIDNEY. The murder of William alarmed the English for
  Elizabeth's life, especially as Philip had already aided men who were
  plotting against her. She sent an army into the Netherlands to aid the
  Dutch, although she had not made up her mind to attack Philip directly.
  The army did not give much help to the Dutch, but it is remembered
  because a noble English poet, Sir Philip Sidney, was mortally wounded in
  one of the battles. The story is told that while Sidney was riding back,
  tortured by his wound, he became very thirsty, as wounded men always do,
  and begged for a drink of water. Looking up when it was brought to him
  he saw on the ground a common soldier more sorely wounded than he. He
  immediately sent the water to the soldier saying, "Thy necessity is
  greater than mine."

THE INVINCIBLE ARMADA. The king of Spain now decided that he could
  not subdue the Dutch until he had thoroughly punished the English. He
  even planned to put himself upon the English throne, claiming that he
  was the heir of one of the early kings of England. Months were spent in
  preparing a great fleet, an "Invincible Armada" which was to sail up the
  Channel, take on board the Spanish army in the Netherlands, and cross
  over to England. While these preparations were being made with Philip's
  usual care, Sir Francis Drake swooped down on Cadiz and burnt so much
  shipping and destroyed so many supplies that the voyage had to be
  postponed a year. This Drake called "singeing the king of
  Spain's beard."

THE ARMADA IN THE CHANNEL. It was July, 1588, before the
  "Invincible Armada" appeared off Plymouth in the English Channel. Many
  of the Spanish ships were larger than the English ships, but they were
  so clumsy that the English could outsail them and attack them from any
  direction they chose. Moreover, the Spaniards needed to fight close at
  hand in order that the soldiers armed with ordinary guns might join in
  the fray. The English kept out of range of these guns and used their
  heavy cannon.

  [Illustration: THE SPANISH ARMADA IN THE ENGLISH CHANNEL After
  an engraving by the Society of Antiquarians following a tapestry in the
  House of Lords]

DESTRUCTION OF THE ARMADA. With the English ships clinging to the
  flanks and rear of the Armada, the Spaniards moved heavily up the
  Channel. In the narrower waters between Dover and Calais the English
  attacked more fiercely, and sank several Spanish vessels. Soon the
  others were fleeing into the North Sea, driven by a furious gale. Many
  sought to reach Spain by sailing around Scotland and Ireland, and some
  of these ships were dashed on the rocky shores. Only a third of Philip's
  proud fleet returned to Spain.

EFFECT OF THE DEFEAT OF THE ARMADA ON SPAIN. This was the last
  attempt Philip made to attack the English, because Spain had been
  exhausted in the effort to collect money and supplies for the Invincible
  Armada. The war dragged on for many years, and the English attacked and
  plundered Spanish vessels wherever they found them.

THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE DUTCH. The ruin of the Armada also meant
  that the Dutch would succeed in becoming independent of the Spanish
  king. Seven of the northern provinces had already formed a union and had
  begun to call themselves the United Netherlands. They were growing
  richer while their neighboring provinces on the south, which had decided
  to return to their allegiance to Spain, grew poorer.

FIRST VOYAGE OF THE DUTCH TO THE EAST. Even while the fight was
  going on the Dutch traded in places where Philip had not permitted them
  to trade while he could control them. One of these places was Lisbon,
  the capital of Portugal. Here the Dutch obtained spices which the
  Portuguese brought from the East Indies. But in 1580 Philip seized
  Portugal, and the Dutch could no longer go to Lisbon. This made them
  anxious to find their way to the East. In 1595 the first fleet set out.
  This voyage was unsuccessful, but other fleets followed, until soon the
  Dutch had almost driven the Portuguese, now subjects of the king of
  Spain, from the Spice Islands. Soon also Dutch sailors ventured across
  the Atlantic to the shores of America.


    QUESTIONS

    1. What country in northern Europe did Spain rule? What name was
    given to those who resisted the Spanish officers in the Netherlands?
    Why were they given this name?

    2. What promise did Coligny make to the people of the Netherlands?
    Why was he unable to carry it out? What other people were ready to
    help the Dutch? Can you give one reason at least why the English
    were willing to help the Dutch against Spain?

    3. Why had English trade grown important? Did this help to make a
    navy?

    4. Why did English sailors like Drake specially hate the Spaniards?
    What was Drake's method of making a living? How did he come to go
    around the world in 1577-1580? How long was it since Magellan made
    his voyage?

    5. What did the English think of Drake? What did the Spaniards think
    of him? Why did each people think as it did?

    6. Why did Philip of Spain have William of Orange killed? Why did
    this make the conquest of the Dutch even harder?

    7. Why did Philip, king of Spain, try to conquer England and make
    himself king of that country? How did he try to carry out his plan?
    Why were the English victorious in the great battle with the Armada?
    Where was the battle fought?

    8. How did the defeat of the Armada affect Spain's war in the
    Netherlands? Did all of the Netherlands become independent of Spain?

    9. What trade did the Dutch begin to carry on before their war with
    Spain ended?

    10. What new people became rivals of the Spaniards and French for
    trade and settlements in America?


