should you or yours be ever in the like extremity with my beloved
Wallace (and in these tyrannous times, what brave spirit can answer for
its continued safety?) may the ear which has heard you this night, at
that hour repay my gratitude!"

"Sweet lady," answered Hambledon, "I thank you for your prayer.  God is
indeed the benefactor of a true soldier; and though I serve my king,
and obey my commanders, yet it is only to the Lord of battles that I
look for a sure reward.  And whether he pay me here with victories and
honors, or take my soul through a rent in my breast, to receive my
laurel in paradise, it is all one to Gilbert Hambledon.  But the night
is cold: I must see you safe within your own doors, and then, lady,
farewell!"

Lady Wallace yielded to the impulse of his hand, and with redoubled
haste, as she heard another rustling in the tree above her head.
Hambledon did not notice it; but desiring Halbert to follow, in a few
minutes disappeared with the agitated Marion into the house.

Wallace, whose spirit could ill brook the sight of his domains filled
with hostile troops, and the wife of his bosom brought a prisoner
before their commander, would instantly have braved all dangers, and
have leaped down amongst them; but at the instant he placed his foot on
a lower bough to make a spring, the courteous address of Hambledon to
his wife had made him hesitate.  He listened to the replies of his
Marion with exultation; and when the Englishman ordered his men to
withdraw, and delivered himself so generously respecting the safety of
the man he came to seize, Wallace could hardly prevent a brave
confidence in such virtue from compelling him to come from his
concealment, and thank his noble enemy on the spot.  But in
consideration that such disclosure would put the military duty and the
generous nature of the officer at variance, he desisted, with such an
agitation of spirits that the boughs had again shaken under him, and
reawakened the alarm of his trembling wife.

"Omnipotent virtue!" exclaimed Wallace to himself; "if it were possible
that thy generous spirit could animate the breast of an invading
conqueror, how soon would the vanquished cease to forget their former
freedom, and learn to love their vassalage!  This man's nobleness, how
soon has it quenched the flame of vengeance with which, when I ascended
this tree, I prayed for the extirpation of every follower of Edward!"

"Sir William! my master!" cried a well-known voice, in a suppressed
tone, as if still fearful of being overheard.  It was Halbert's.
"Speak, my dear lord; are you safe?"

"In heart and body!" returned Wallace, sliding from the tree, and
leaping on the ground.  "One only of the arrows touched me; and that
merely striking my bugle, fell back amongst the leaves.  I must now
hasten to the dearest, the noblest of women!"

Halbert begged him to stay till they should hear the retreat from the
English trumpets.  "Till their troops are out of sight," added he, "I
cannot believe you safe."

"Hark!" cried Wallace, "the horses are now descending the craig.  That
must satisfy you, honest Halbert."  With these words he flew across the
grass, and entering the house, met the returning Marion, who had just
bade farewell to Hambledon.  She rushed into his arms, and with the
excess of a disturbed and uncertain joy, fainted on his neck.  Her
gentle spirit had been too powerfully excited by the preceding scenes.
Unaccustomed to tumult of any king, and nursed in the bosom of fondness
till now, no blast had blown on her tender form, no harshness had ever
ruffled the blissful serenity of her mind.  What then was the shock of
this evening's violence!  Her husband pursued as a murderer; herself
exposed to the midnight air, and dragged by the hands of merciless
soldiers to betray the man she loved!  All these scenes were new to
her; and though a kind of preternatural strength had supported her
over, when she fell once more into her husband's extended arms, she
seemed there to have found again her shelter, and the pillow whereon
her harassed soul might repose.

"My life! My best treasure! Preserver of thy Wallace! Look on him!"
exclaimed he; "bless him with a smile from those dear eyes."

His voice, his caresses, soon restored her to sensibility and
recollection.  She wept on his breast, and with love's own eloquence,
thanked Heaven that he had escaped the search and the arrows of his
enemies.

"But my dear lady," interrupted Halbert, "remember my master must not
stay here.  You know the English commander said he must fly far away.
Nay, spies may even now be lurking to betray him."

"You are right," cried she.  "My Wallace, you must depart.  Should the
guard arrive soon, your flight may be prevented.  You must go now--but,
oh! whither?"

"Not far distant, my love.  In going from thee, I leave behind all that
makes my life precious to me; how then can I go far away?  No! there
are recesses among the Cartlane Craigs, I discovered while hunting, and
which I believe have been visited by no mortal foot but my own.  There
I will be, my Marion, before sunrise; and before it sets, thither you
must send Halbert, to tell me how you fare.  Three notes from thine own
sweet strains of Thusa ha measg na reultan mor,** blown by his pipe,
shall be a sign to me that he is there; and I will come forth to hear
tidings of thee."

**Thusa ha measg na reultan mor, etc., are the beginning words of an
old Gaelic ditty, the English of which runs thus: "Thou who art amid
the stars, move to thy bed with music," etc.-(1809.)

"Ah, my Wallace, let me go with thee!"

"What, dearest!" returned he, "to live amidst rocks and streams! to
expose thy tender self, and thine unborn infant, to all the accidents
of such a lodging!"

"But are not you going to so rough, so dangerous a lodging?" asked she.
"O! would not rocks and streams be Heaven's paradise to me, when
blessed by the presence of my husband?  Ah! let me go!"

"Impossible, my lady," cried Halbert, afraid that the melting heart of
his master would consent: "you are safe here; and your flight would awaken
suspicion in the English, that he had not gone far.  Your ease and
safety are dearer to him than his own life; and most likely by his care
to preserve them, he would be traced, and so fall a ready sacrifice to
the enemy."

"It is true, my Marion; I could not preserve you in the places to which
I go."

"But the hardships you will endure!" cried she; "to sleep on the cold
stones, with no covering but the sky, or the dripping vault of some
dreary cave!  I have not courage to abandon you alone to such cruel
rigors."

"Cease, my beloved!" interrupted he, "cease these groundless alarms.
Neither rocks nor storms have any threats to me.  It is only tender
woman's cares that make man's body delicate.  Before I was thine, my
Marion, I have lain whole nights upon the mountain's brow, counting the
wintery stars, as I impatiently awaited the hunter's horn that was to
recall me to the chase in Glenfinlass.  Alike to Wallace is the couch
of down or the bed of heather; so, best-beloved of my heart, grieve not
at hardships which were once my sport, and will now be my safety."

"Then farewell!  May good angels guard thee!"  Her voice failed; she
put his hand to her lips.

"Courage, my Marion," said he; "remember that Wallace lives but in
thee.  Revive, be happy for my sake; and God, who putteth down the
oppressor, will restore me to thine arms."  She spoke not, but rising
from his breast, clasped her hands together, and looked up with an
expression of fervent prayer; then smiling through a shower of tears,
she waved her hand to him to depart, and instantly disappeared into her
own chamber.

Wallace gazed at the closed door, with his soul in his eyes.  To leave
his Marion thus, to quit her who was the best part of his being, who
seemed the very spring of the life now throbbing in his heart, was a
contention with his fond, fond love, almost too powerful for his
resolution.  Here indeed his brave spirit gave way; and he would have
followed her, and perhaps have determined to await his face at her
side, had not Halbert, reading his mind in his countenance, taken him
by the arm, and drawn him toward the portal.

Wallace soon recovered his better reason, and obeying the friendly
impulse of his servant, accompanied him through the garden, to the
quarter which pointed toward the heights that led to the remotest
recesses of the Clyde.  In their way they approached the well where
Lord Mar lay.  Finding that the earl had not been inquired for, Wallace
deemed his stay to be without peril; and intending to inform him of the
necessity which still impelled his own flight, he called to him, but no
voice answered.  He looked down, and seeing him extended on the bottom
without motion, "I fear," said he, "the earl is dead.  As soon as I am
gone, and you can collect the dispersed servants, send one into the
well to bring him forth; and if he be indeed no more, deposit his body
in my oratory, till you can receive his widow's commands respecting his
remains.  The iron box now in the well is of inestimable value; take it
to Lady Wallace and tell her she must guard it, as she has done my
life; but not to look into it, at the peril of what is yet dearer to
her--my honor."

Halbert promised to adhere to his master's orders; and Wallace, girding
on his sword, and taking his hunting-spear (with which the care of his
venerable domestic had provided him), he pressed the faithful hand that
presented it, and again enjoining him to be watchful of the
tranquillity of his lady, and to send him tidings of her in the
evening, to the cave near the Corie Lynn, he climbed the wall, and was
out of sight in an instant.




Chapter III.

Ellerslie.


Halbert returned to the house; and entering the room softly, into which
Marion had withdrawn, beheld her on her knees before a crucifix; she
was praying for the safety of her husband.

"May he, O gracious Lord!" cried she, "soon return to his home.  But if
I am to see him here no more, oh, may it please thee to grant me to
meet him within thy arms in heaven!"

"Hear her, blessed Son of Mary!" ejaculated the old man.  She looked
round, and rising from her knees, demanded of him, in a kind but
anxious voice, whether he had left her lord in security.

"In the way to it, my lady!" answered Halbert.  He repeated all that
Wallace had said at parting, and then tried to prevail on her to go to
rest.  "Sleep cannot visit my eyes this night, my faithful creature,"
replied she; "my spirit will follow Wallace in his mountain flight.  Go
you to your chamber.  After you have had repose, that will be time
enough to revisit the remains of the poor earl, and to bring them with
the box to the house.  I will take a religious charge of both, for the
sake of the dear intruster."

Halbert persuaded his aldy to lie down on the bed, that her limbs at
least might rest after the fatigue of so harassing a night; and she,
little suspecting that he meant to do otherwise than to sleep also,
kindly wished him repose and retired.

Her maids, during the late terror, had dispersed, and were nowhere to
be found; and the men, too, after their stout resistance at the gates,
had all disappeared; some fled others were sent away prisoners to
Lanark, while the good Hambledon was conversing with their lady.
Halbert, therefore, resigned himself to await with patience the rising
of the sun, when he hoped some of the scared domestics would return; if
not, he determined to go to the cotters who lived in the depths of the
glen, and bring some of them to supply the place of the fugitives; and
a few, with stouter hearts, to guard his lady.

Thus musing, he sat on a stone bench in the hall, watching anxiously
the appearance of that orb, whose setting beams he hoped would light
him back with tidings of William Wallace to comfort the lonely heart of
his Marion.  All seemed at peace.  Nothing was hear but the sighing of
the trees as they waved before the western window, which opened toward
the Lanark hills.  The morning was yet gray, and the fresh air blowing
in rather chilly, Halbert rose to close the wooden shutter; at that
moment, his eyes were arrested by a party of armed men in quick march
down the opposite declivity.  In a few minutes more their heavy steps
sounded in his ears, and he saw the platform before the house filled
with English.  Alarmed at the sight, he was retreating across the
apartment, toward his lady's room, when the great hall door was burst
open by a band of soldiers, who rushed forward and seized him.

"Tell me, dotard!" cried their leader, a man of low stature, with gray
locks, but a fierce countenance, "where is the murderer?  Where is Sir
William Wallace?  Speak, or the torture shall force you."

Halbert shuddered, but it was for his defenseless lady, not for
himself.  "My master," said he, "is far from this."

"Where?"

"I know not."

"Thou shalt be made to know, thou hoary-headed villian!" cried the same
violent interrogator.  "Where is the assassin's wife?  I will confront
ye.  Seek her out."

At that word the soldiers parted right and left, and in a moment
afterward three of them appeared, with shouts, bringing in the
trembling Marion.

"Alas! my lady!" cried Halbert, struggling to approach her, as with
terrified apprehension she looked around her; but they held her fast,
and he saw her led up to the merciless wretch who had given the orders
to have her summoned.

"Woman!" cried he, "I am the Governor of Lanark.  You now stand before
the representative of the great King Edward, and on your allegiance to
him, and on the peril of your life, I command you to answer me three
questions.  Where is Sir William Wallace, the murderer of my nephew?
Who is that old Scot, for whom my nephew was slain?  He and his whole
family shall meet my vengeance!  And tell me where is that box of
treasure which your husband stole from Douglas Castle?  Answer me these
questions on your life."

Lady Wallace remained silent.

"Speak, woman," demanded the governor.  "If fear cannot move you, know
that I can reward as well as avenge.  I will endow you richly, if you
declare the truth.  If you persist to refuse, you die."

"Then I die," replied she, scarcely opening her half-closed eyes, as
she leaned, fainting and motionless, against the soldier who held her.

"What?" cried the governor, stifling his rage, in hopes to gain by
persuasion on a spirit he found threats could not intimidate; "can so
gentle a lady reject the favor of England, large grants in this
country, and perhaps a fine English knight for a husband, when you
might have all for the trifling service of giving up a traitor to his
liege lord, and confessing where his robberies lie concealed?  Speak,
fair dame; give me this information, and the lands of the wounded
chieftain whom Wallace brought here, with the hand of the handsome Sir
Gilbert Hambledon, shall be your reward.  Rich, and a beauty in
Edward's court!  Lady, can you now refuse to purchase all, by declaring
the hiding place of the traitor Wallace?"

"It is easier to die!"

"Fool!" cried Heselrigge, driven from his assumed temper by her steady
denial.  "What? is it easier for these dainty limbs to be hacked to
pieces by my soldiers' axes?  Is it easier for that fair bosom to be
trodden underfoot by my horse's hoofs, and for that beauteous head of
thine to decorate my lance?  Is all this easier than to tell me where
to find a murderer and his gold?"

Lady Wallace shuddered; she stretched her hands to heaven.

"Speak once for all!" cried the enraged governor, drawing his sword; "I
am no waxen-hearted Hambledon, to be cajoled by your beauty.  Declare
where Wallace is concealed, or dread my vengeance."

The horrid steel gleamed across the eyes of the unhappy Marion; unable
to sustain herself, she sunk to the ground.

"Kneel not to me for mercy!" cried the fierce wretch; "I grant none,
unless you confess your husband's hiding-place."

A momentary strength darted from the heart of Lady Wallace to her
voice, "I kneel to Heaven alone, and may it ever preserve my Wallace
from the fangs of Edward and his tyrants!"

"Blasphemous wretch!" cried the infuriated Heselrigge; and in that
moment he plunged his sword into her defenseless breast.  Halbert, who
had all this time been held back by the soldiers, could not believe
that the fierce governor would perpetrate the horrid deed he
threatened; but seeing it done, with a giant's strength and a terrible
cry he burst from the hands that held him, and had thrown himself on
the bleeding Marion, before her murderer could strike his second blow.
However, it fell, and pierced through the neck of the faithful servant
before it reached her heart.  She opened her dying eyes, and seeing who
it was that would have shielded her life, just articulated, "Halbert!
my Wallace--to God--" and with that last unfinished sentence her pure
soul took its flight to regions of eternal piece.

The good old man's heart almost burst when he felt that before--heaving
bosom now motionless; and groaning with grief, and fainting with loss
of blood, he lay senseless on her body.

A terrible stillness was now in the hall.  Not a man spoke; all stood
looking on each other, with a stern horror marking each pale
countenance.  Heselrigge, dropping his blood-stained sword on the
ground, perceived by the behavior of his men that he had gone too far,
and fearful of arousing the indignation of awakened humanity, to some
act against himself, he addressed the soldiers in an unusual accent of
condescension: "My friends," said he, "we will now return to Lanark;
to-morrow you may come back, for I reward your services of this night
with the plunder of Ellerslie."

"May a curse light on him who carries a stick from its grounds!"
exclaimed a veteran, from the further end of the hall.  "Amen!"
murmured all the soldiers, with one consent; and falling back, they
disappeared, one by one, out of the great door, leaving Heselrigge
alone with the soldier, who stood leaning on his sword, looking on the
murdered lady.

"Grimsby, why stand you there?" demanded Heselrigge: "follow me."

"Never," returned the soldier.

"What!" exclaimed the governor, momentarily forgetting his panic, "dare
you speak thus to your commander?  March on before me this instant, or
expect to be treated as a rebel."

"I march at your command no more," replied the veteran, eying him
resolutely: "the moment you perpetrated this bloody deed, you became
unworthy the name of man; and I should disgrace my own manhood, were I
ever again to obey the word of such a monster!"

"Villian!" cried the enraged Heselrigge, "you shall die for this!"

"That may be," answered Grimsby, "by the hands of some tyrant like
yourself; but no brave man, not the royal Edward, would do otherwise
than acquit his soldier for refusing obedience to the murderer of an
innocent woman.  It was not so he treated the wives and daughters of
the slaughtered Saracens when I followed his banners over the fields of
Palestine!"

"Thou canting miscreant!" cried Heselrigge, springing on him suddenly,
and aiming his dagger at his breast.  But the soldier arrested the
weapon, and at the same instant closing upon the assassin, with a turn
of his foot threw him to the ground.  Heselrigge, as he lay prostrate,
seeing his dagger in his adversary's hand, with the most dastardly
promises implored for life.

"Monster!" cried the soldier, "I wold not pollute my honest hands with
such unnatural blood.  Neither, though thy hand has been lifted against
my life, would I willingly take thine.  It is not rebellion against my
commander that actuates me, but hatred of the vilest of murderers.  I
go far from you, or your power; but if you forswear your voluntary
oath, and attempt to seek me out for vengeance, remember it is a
soldier of the cross you pursue, and a dire retribution shall be
demanded by Heaven, at a moment you cannot avoid, and with a horror
commensurate with your crimes."

There was a solemnity and determination in the voice and manner of the
soldier that paralyzed the intimidated soul of the governor; he
trembled violently, and repeating the oath of leaving Grimsby
unmolested, at last obtained his permission to return to Lanark.  The
men, in obedience to the conscience-stricken orders of their commander,
had mounted their horses and were now far out of sight.  Heselrigge's
charger was still in the courtyard; he was hurrying toward it, but the
soldier, with a prudent suspicion, called out, "Stop, sir! you must
walk to Lanark.  The cruel are generally false; I cannot trust your
word, should you have the power to break it.  Leave this horse
here: to-morrow you may send for it, I shall then be far away."

Heselrigge saw that remonstrance would be unavailing; and shaking with
impotent rage, he turned into the path which, after five weary miles,
would lead him once more to his citadel.

For the moment the soldier's manly spirit had dared to deliver its
abhorrence of Lady Wallace's murder, he was aware that his life would
no longer be safe within reach of the machinations of Heselrigge; and
determined, alike by detestation of him and regard for his own
preservation, resolved to take shelter in the mountains, till he could
have an opportunity of going beyond sea to join his king's troops in
the Guienne wars.

Full of these thoughts he returned into the hall.  As he approached the
bleeding form on the floor, he perceived it to move; hoping that
perhaps the unhappy lady might not be dead, he drew near; but, alas! as
he bent to examine, he touched her hand and found it quite cold.  The
blood which had streamed from the now exhausted heart, lay congealed
upon her arms and bosom.  Grimsby shuddered.  Again he saw her move;
but it was not with her own life; the recovering senses of her faithful
servant, as his arms clung around the body, had disturbed the remains
of her who would wake no more.

On seeing that existence yet struggled in one of these blameless
victims, Grimsby did his utmost to revive the old man.  He raised him
from the ground, and poured some strong liquor he had in a flask into a
mouth.  Halbert breathed freer; and his kind surgeon, with the
venerable harper's own plaid, bound up the wound in his neck.  Halbert
opened his eyes.  When he fixed them on the rough features and English
helmet of the soldier, he closed them again with a deep groan.

"My honest Scot," said Grimsby, "trust in me.  I am a man like
yourself; and though a Southron, am no enemy to age and helplessness."

The harper took courage at these words; he again looked at the soldier;
but suddenly recollecting what had passed, he turned his eyes toward
the body of his mistress, on which the beams of the now rising sun were
shining.  He started up, and staggering toward her, would have fallen,
had not Grimsby supported him.  "O what a sight is this!" cried he,
wringing his hands.  "My lady! my lovely lady! see how low she lies who
was once the delight of all eyes, the comforter of all hearts."  The
old man's sobs suffocated him.  The veteran turned away his face, a
tear dropped upon his hand.  "Accursed Heselrigge," ejaculated he, "thy
fate must come!"

"If there be a man's heart in all Scotland, it is not far distant!"
cried Halbert.  "My master lives, and will avenge this murder.  You
weep, soldier; and you will not betray what has now escaped me."

"I have fought in Palestine," returned he, "and a soldier of the cross
betrays none who trust him.  Saint Mary preserve your master and
conduct you safely to him.  We must both hasten hence.  Heselrigge will
surely send in pursuit of me.  He is too vile to forgive the truth I
have spoken to him; and should I fall into his power, death is the best
I could expect at his hands.  Let me assist you to put this poor lady's
remains into some decent place; and then, my honest Scot, we must
separate."

Halbert, at these words, threw himself upon the bosom of his mistress,
and wept with loud lamentations over her.  In vain he attempted to
raise her in his feeble arms.  "I have carried thee scores of times in
thy blooming infancy," cried he; "and now must I bear thee to thy
grave?  I had hoped that my eyes would have been closed by this dear
hand."  As he spoke, he pressed her cold hand to his lips with such
convulsive sobs that the soldier, fearing he would expire in the agony
of his sorrow, took him almost motionless from the dead body, and
exhorted him to suppress such self-destroying grief for the sake of his
master.  Halbert gradually revived; and listening to him, cast a
wistful look on the lifeless Marion.

"There sleeps the pride and hope of Ellerslie, the mother with her
child!  O my master, my widowed master," cried he, "what will comfort
thee!"

Fearing the ill consequence of further delay, the soldier again
interrupted his lamentations with arguments for flight; and Halbert
recollecting the oratory in which Wallace had ordered the body of Lord
Mar to be deposited, named it for that of his dear lady.  Grimsby,
immediately wrapping the beauteous corpse in the white garments which
hung about it, raised it in his arms, and was conducted by Halbert to a
little chapel in the heart of a neighboring cliff.

The still weeping old man removed the altar; and Grimsby, laying the
shrouded Marion upon its rocky platform, covered her with the pall,
which he drew from the holy table, and laid the crucifix upon her
bosom.  Halbert, when his beloved mistress was thus hidden from his
sight, threw himself on his knees beside her, and in the vehement
language of grief offered up a prayer for her departed soul.

"Hear me, righteous Judge of heaven and earth!" cried he; "as thou
didst avenge the blood of innocence shed in Bethlehem, so let the gray
hairs of Heselrigge be brought down in blood to the grave for the
murder of this innocent lady!" Halbert kissed the cross, and rising
from his knees, went weeping out of the chapel, followed by the soldier.

Having closed the door, and carefully locked it, absorbed in meditation
on what would be the agonized transports of his master, when he should
tell him these grievous tidings, Halbert proceeded in silence, till he
and his companion in passing the well were startled by a groan.

"Here is some one in extremity!" cried the soldier.

"Is it possible he lives!" exclaimed Halbert, bending down to the edge
of the well with the same inquiry.

"Yes," feebly answered the earl, "I still exist, but am very faint.  If
all be safe above, I pray remove me into the upward air!"  Halbert
replied that it was indeed necessary he should ascend immediately; and
lowering the rope, told him to tie the iron box to it and then himself.
This done, with some difficulty, and the assistance of the wondering
soldier (who now expected to see the husband of the unfortunate Lady
Wallace emerge to the knowledge of his loss), he at last effected the
earl's release.  For a few seconds the fainting nobleman supported
himself on his countryman's shoulder, while the fresh morning breeze
gradually revived his exhausted frame.  The soldier looked at his gray
locks and furrowed brow, and marveled how such proofs of age could
belong to the man whose resistless valor had discomfited the fierce
determination of Arthus Heselrigge and his myrmidons.  However, his
doubts of the veteran before him being other than the brave Wallace,
were soon satisfied by the earl himself, who asked for a draught of the
water which trickled down the opposite hill; and while Halbert went to
bring it, Lord Mar raised his eyes to inquire for Sir William and Lady
Marion.  He started when he saw English armor on the man he would have
accosted, and rising suddenly from the stone on which he sat, demanded,
in a stern voice, "Who art thou?"

"An Englishman," answered the soldier; "one who does not, like the
monster Heselrigge, disgrace the name.  I would assist you, noble
Wallace, to fly this spot.  After that, I shall seek refuge abroad; and
there, on the fields of Guienne, demonstrate my fidelity to my king."

Mar looked at him steadily.  "You mistake; I am not Sir William
Wallace."

At that moment Halbert came up with the water.  The earl drank it,
though now, from the impulse surprise had given to his blood, he did
not require its efficacy; and turning to the venerable bearer, he asked
of him whether his master were safe.

"I trust he is," replied the old man; "but you, my lord, must hasten
hence.  A foul murder has been committed here, since you left it."

"But where is Lady Wallace?" asked the earl; "if there be such danger
we must not leave her to meet it."

"She will never meet danger more!" cried the old man, clasping his
hand; "she is in the bosom of the Virgin; and no second assassin's
steel can reach her there."

"What!" exclaimed the earl, hardly articulate with horror; "is Lady
Wallace murdered?" Halbert answered only by his tears.

"Yes," said the soldier; "and detestation of so unmanly an outrage
provoked me to desert his standard.  But no time must now be lost in
unavailing lamentation.  Heselrigge will return; and if we also would
not be sacrificed to his rage, we must hence immediately."

The earl, struck dumb at this recital, gave the soldier time to recount
the particulars.  When he had finished, Lord Mar saw the necessity for
instant flight, and ordered horses to be brought from the stables.
Though he had fainted in the well, the present shock gave such tension
to his nerves, that he found, in spite of his wound, he could now ride
without difficulty.

Halbert went as commanded, and returned with two horses.  Having
amongst rocks and glens to go, he did not bring one for himself; and
begging the good soldier might attend the earl to Bothwell, he added,
"He will guard you and this box, which Sir William Wallace holds as his
life.  What it contains I know not: and none, he says, may dare to
search into.  But you will take care of it for his sake, till more
peaceful times allow him to reclaim his own!"

"Fatal box!" cried the soldier, regarding it with an abhorrent eye,
"that was the leading cause which brought Heselrigge to Ellerslie."

"How?" inquired the earl.  Grimsby then briefly related, that
immediately after the return to Lanark of the detachment sent to
Ellerslie, under the English garrison in Douglas, and told the governor
that Sir William Wallace had that evening taken a quantity of treasure
from the castle.  His report was, that the English soldiers who stood
near the Scottish knight when he mounted at the castle gate, saw a long
iron coffer under his arm, but not suspecting its having belonged to
Douglas, they thought not of it, till they overheard Sir John Monteith,
as he passed through one of the galleries, muttering something about
gold and a box.  To intercept the robber amongst his native glens, the
soldiers deemed impracticable, and therefore their captain came
immediately to lay the information before the Governor of Lanark.  As
the scabbard found in the affray with young Arthur had betrayed the
victor to have been Sir William Wallace, this intimation of his having
been also the instrument of wrestling from the grasp of Heselrigge
perhaps the most valuable spoil in Douglas exasperated him to the most
vindictive excess.  Inflamed with the double furies of revenge and
avarice, he ordered out a new troop, and placing himself at its head,
took the way to Ellerslie.  One of the servants, whom some of
Hambledon's men had seized for the sake of information, on being
threatened with the torture, confessed to Heselrigge, that not only Sir
William Wallace was in the house when it was attacked, but that the
person whom he had rescued in the streets of Lanark, and who proved to
be a wealthy nobleman, was there also.  This whetted the eagerness of
the governor to reach Ellerslie; and expecting to get a rich booty,
without the most distant idea of the horrors he was going to
perpetrate, a large detachment of men followed him.

"To extort money from you, my lord," continued the soldier, "and to
obtain that fatal coffer, were his main objects; but disappointed in
his darling passion of avarice, he forgot he was a man, and the blood
of innocence glutted his barbarous vengeance."

"Hateful gold!" cried Lord Mar, spurning the box with his foot; "it
cannot be for itself the noble Wallace so greatly prizes it; it must be
a trust."

"I believe it is," returned Halbert, "for he enjoined my lady to
preserve it for the sake of his honor.  Take care of it, then, my lord,
for the same sacred reason."

The Englishman made no objection to accompany the earl; and by a
suggestion of his own, Halbert brought him a Scottish bonnet and cloak
from the house.  While he put them on, the earl observed that the
harper held a drawn and blood-stained sword in his hand, on which he
steadfastly gazed.  "Whence came that forried weapon?" cried Lord Mar.

"It is my lady's blood," replied Halbert, still looking on it.  "I
found it where she lay, in the hall, and I will carry it to my master.
Was not every drop of her blood dear to him? and here are many."  As
the old man spoke he bent his head on the sword, and groaned heavily.

"England shall hear more of this!" cried Mar, as he threw himself
across the horse.  "Give me that fatal box; I will buckle it to my
saddle-bow.  Inadequate will be my utmost care of it, to repay the vast
sorrow its preservation and mine have brought upon the head of my
deliverer."

The Englishman in silence mounted his horse, and Halbert opened a
back-gate that led to the hills which lay between Ellerslie and
Bothwell Castle.  Lord Mar took a golden-trophied bugle from his
breast: "Give this to your master, and tell him that by whatever hands
he sends it, the sight of it shall always command the services of
Donald Mar.  I go to Bothwell, in expectation that he will join me
there.  In making it his home he will render me happy, for my
friendship is now bound to him by bonds which only death can sever."

Halbert took the horn, and promising faithfully to repeat the earl's
message, prayed God to bless him and the honest soldier.  A rocky
promontory soon excluded them from his sight, and in a few minutes more
even the sound of their horses' hoofs was lost on the soft herbage of
the winding dell.

"Now I am alone in this once happy spot.  Not a voice, not a sound.
Oh, Wallace!" cried he, throwing up his venerable arms, "thy house is
left unto thee desolate, and I am to be the fatal messenger."  With the
last words he struck into a deep ravine which led to the remotest
solitudes of the glen, and pursued his way in dreadful silence.  No
human face of Scot or English cheered or scared him as he passed along.
The tumult had so alarmed the poor cottagers, that with one accord
they fled to their kindred on the hills, amid those fastnesses of
nature, to await tidings from the valley, of when all should be still,
and they might return in peace.  Halbert looked to the right and to the
left; no smoke, curling its gray mist from behind the intersecting
rocks, reminded him of the gladsome morning hour, or invited him to
take a moment's rest from his grievous journey.  All was lonely and
comfortless; and sighing bitterly over the wide devastation, he
concealed the fatal sword and the horn under his cloak, and with a
staff which he broke from a withered tree, took his way down the
winding craigs.  Many a pointed flint pierced his aged feet, while
exploring the almost trackless paths, which by their direction he hoped
would lead him at length to the deep caves of Corie Lynn.




Chapter IV.

Corie Lynn.


After having traversed many a weary rood of, to him, before untrodden
ground, the venerable minstrel of the house of Wallace, exhausted by
fatigue, sat down on the declivity of a steep craig.  The burning beams
of the midday sun now beat upon the rocks, but the overshadowing
foliage afforded him shelter, and a few berries from the brambles,
which knit themselves over the path he had yet to explore, with a
draught of water from a friendly burn, offered themselves to revive his
enfeebled limbs.  Insufficient as they appeared, he took them, blessing
Heaven for sending even these, and strengthened by half an hour's rest,
again he grasped his staff to pursue his way.

After breaking a passage, through the entangled shrubs that grew across
the only possible footing in this solitary wilderness, he went along
the side of the expanding stream, which at every turning of the rocks
increased in depth and violence.  The rills from above, and other
mountain brooks, pouring from abrupt falls down the craigs, covered him
with spray, and intercepted his passage.  Finding it impracticable to
proceed through the rushing torrent of a cataract, whose distant
roarings might have intimidated even a younger adventurer, he turned
from its tumbling waters which burst upon his sight, and crept on his
hands and knees up the opposite acclivity, catching by the fern and
other weeds to stay him from falling back into the flood below.
Prodigious craggy heights towered above his head as he ascended; while
the rolling clouds which canopied their summits seemed descending to
wrap him in their "fleecy skirts;" or the projecting rocks bending over
the waters of the glen, left him only a narrow shelf in the cliff,
along which he crept till it brought him to the mouth of a cavern.

He must either enter it or return the way he came, or attempt the
descent of overhanging precipices, which nothing could surmount but the
pinions of their native birds.  Above him was the mountain.  Retread
his footsteps until he had seen his beloved master, he was resolved not
to do--to perish in these glens would be more tolerable to him; for
while he moved forward, hope, even in the arms of death, would cheer
him with the whisper that he was in the path of duty.  He therefore
entered the cavity, and passing on, soon perceived an aperture, through
which emerging on the other side, he found himself again on the margin
of the river.  Having attained a wider bed, it left him a still
narrower causeway to perform the remainder of his journey.

Huge masses of rock, canopied with a thick umbrage of firs, beech, and
weeping-birch, closed over the glen and almost excluded the light of
day.  But more anxious, as he calculated by the increased rapidity of
the stream he must now be approaching the great fall near his master's
concealment, Halbert redoubled his speed.  But an unlooked-for obstacle
baffled his progress.  A growing gloom he had not observed in the sky
excluded valley, having entirely overspread the heavens, at this moment
suddenly discharged itself, amidst peals of thunder, in heavy floods of
rain upon his head.

Fearful of being overwhelmed by the streams, which now on all sides
crossed his path, he kept upon the edge of the river, to be as far as
possible from the influence of their violence.  And thus he proceeded,
slowly and with trepidation, through numerous defiles, and under the
plunge of many a mountain-torrent, till the augmented storm of a world
of waters, dashing from side to side, and boiling up with the noise and
fury of the contending elements above, told him he was indeed not far
from the fall of Corie Lynn.

The spray was spread in so thick a mist over the glen, he knew not how
to advance.  A step further might be on the firm earth, but more
probably illusive, and dash him into the roaring Lynn, where he would
be ingulfed at once in its furious whirlpool.  He paused and looked
around.  The rain had ceased, but the thunder still rolled at a
distance and echoed tremendously from the surrounding rocks.  Halbert
shook his gray locks, streaming with wet, and looked toward the sun,
now gliding with its last rays the vast sheets of falling water.

"This is thine hour, my master!" exclaimed the old man; "and surely I
am too near the Lynn to be far from thee!"

With these words he raised the pipe that hung at his breast, and blew
three strains of the appointed air.  In former days it used to call
from her bower that "fair star of evening," the beauteous Marion, now
departed for ever into her native heaven.  The notes trembled as his
agitated breath breathed them into the instrument; but feeble as they
were, and though the roar of the cataract might have prevented their
reaching a less attentive era than that of Wallace, yet he sprung from
the innermost recess under the fall, and dashing through its rushing
waters, the next instant was at the side of Halbert.

"Faithful creature!" cried he, catching him in his arms, which all the
joy of that moment which ends the anxious wish to learn tidings of what
is dearest in the world, "how fares my Marion?"

"I am weary," cried the heart-stricken old man; "take me within your
sanctuary, and I will tell you all."

Wallace perceived that his time-worn servant was indeed exhausted; and
knowing the toils and hazards of the perilous track he must have passed
over in his way to his fearful solitude, also remembering how, as he
sat in his shelter, he had himself dreaded the effects of the storm
upon so aged a traveler, he no longer wondered at the dispirited tone
of his greeting, and readily accounted for the pale countenance and
tremulous step which at first had excited his alarm.

Giving the old man his hand, he led him with caution to the brink of
the Lynn; and then, folding him in his arms, dashed with him through
the tumbling water into the cavern he had chosen for his asylum.
Halbert sunk against the rocky side, and putting forth his hand to
catch some of the water as it fell, drew a few drops to his parched
lips, and swallowed them.  After this light refreshment, he breathed a
little and turned his eyes upon his anxious master.

"Are you sufficiently recovered, Halbert, to tell me how you left my
dearest Marion."

Halbert dreaded to see the animated light which now cheered him from
the eyes of his master, overclouded with the Cimmerian horrors his
story must unfold; he evaded a direct reply; "I saw your guest in
safety; I saw him and the iron box on their way to Bothwell?"

"What!" inquired Wallace, "were we mistaken? was not the earl dead when
we looked into the well?" Halbert replied in the negative, and was
proceeding with a circumstantial account of his recovery and his
departure when Wallace interrupted him.

"But what of my wife, Halbert? why tell me of others before of her?
She whose safety and remembrance are now my sole comfort!"

"Oh, my dear lord!" cried Halbert, throwing himself on his knees in a
paroxysm of mental agony, "she remembers you where best her prayers can
be heard.  She kneels for her beloved Wallace, before the throne of
God!"

"Halbert!" cried Sir William, in a low and fearful voice, "what would
you say?  My Marion--speak! tell me in one word, she lives!"

"In heaven!"

At this confirmation of a sudden terror, imbibed from the ambiguous
words of Halbert, and which his fond heart would not allow him to
acknowledge to himself.  Wallace covered his face with his hands and
fell with a deep groan against the side of the cavern.  The horrid idea
of premature maternal pains, occasioned by anguish for him; of her
consequent death, involving perhaps that of her infant, struck him to
the soul; a mist seemed passing over his eyes; life was receding; and
gladly did he believe he felt his spirit on the eve of joining hers.

In having declared that the idol of his master's heart no longer
existed for him in this world, Halbert thought he had revealed the
worst, and he went on.  "Her latest breath was sent in prayer for you.
'My Wallace' were the last words her angel spirit uttered as it issued
from her bleeding wounds."

The cry that burst from the heart of Wallace, as he started on his feet
at this horrible disclosure, seemed to pierce through all the recessed
of the glen; and with an instantaneous and dismal return was re-echoed
from rock to rock.  Halbert threw his arms round his master's knees.
The frantic blaze of his eyes struck him with affright.  "Hear me, my
lord; for the sake of your wife, now an angel hovering near you, hear
what I have to say."

Wallace looked around with a wild countenance.  "My Marion near me!
Blessed spirit!  Oh, my murdered wife! my unborn babe!  Who made those
wounds?" cried he, catching Halbert's arm with a tremendous though
unconscious grasp; "tell me who had the heart to aim a blow at that
angel's life?"

"The Governor of Lanark," replied Halbert.

"How? for what?" demanded Wallace, with the terrific glare of madness
shooting from his eyes.  "My wife! my wife! what had she done?"

"He came at the head of a band of ruffians, and seizing my lady,
commanded her on the peril of her life, to declare where you and the
Earl of Mar and the box of treasure were concealed.  My lady persisted
in refusing him information, and in a deadly rage he plunged his sword
into her breast."  Wallace clinched his hands over his face, and
Halbert went on.  "Before he aimed a second blow, I had broken from the
men who held me, and thrown myself on her bosom; but all could not save
her; the villain's sword had penetrated her heart!"

"Great God!" exclaimed Wallace, "dost thou hear this murder?" His hands
were stretched toward heaven; then falling on his knees, with his eyes
fixed.  "Give me power, Almighty Judge!" cried he, "to assert thy
justice!  Let me avenge this angel's blood, and then take me to thy
mercy!"

"My gracious master," cried Halbert, seeing him rise with a stern
composure, "here is the fatal sword; the blood on it is sacred, and I
brought it to you."

Wallace took it in his hand.  He gazed at it, touched it, and kissed it
frantically.  The blade was scarcely yet dry, and the ensanguined hue
came off upon the pressure.  "Marion! Marion!" cried he, "is it thine?
Does not thy blood stain my lip?"  He paused for a moment, leaning his
burning forehead against the fatal blade; then looking up with a
terrific smile.  "Beloved of my soul! never shall this sword leave my
hand till it has drunk the life-blood of thy murderer."

"What is it you intend, my lord?" cried Halbert, viewing with increased
alarm the resolute ferocity which now, blazing from every part of his
countenance, seemed to dilate his figure with more than mortal daring.
"What can you do?  Your single arm-"

"I am not single-God is with me.  I am his avenger.  Now tremble,
tyranny!  I come to hurl thee down!" At the word he sprung from the
cavern's mouth, and had already reached the topmost cliff when the
piteous cries of Halbert penetrated his ear; they recalled him to
recollection, and returning to his servant, he tried to soothe his
fear, and spoke in a composed though determined tone.  "I will lead you
from this solitude to the mountains, where the shepherds of Ellerslie
are tending their flocks.  With them you will find a refuge, till you
have strength to reach Bothwell Castle.  Lord Mar will protect you for
my sake."

Halbert now remembered the bugle, and putting it into the master's
hand, with its accompanying message, asked for some testimony in
return, that the earl might know that he had delivered it safely.
"Even a lock of your precious hair, my beloved master, will be
sufficient."

"Thou shalt have it, severed from my head by this accurse steel,"
answered Wallace, taking off his bonnet, and letting his amber locks
fall in tresses on his shoulders.  Halbert burst into a fresh flood of
tears, for he remembered how often it had been the delight of Marion to
comb these bright tresses and to twist them round he ivory fingers.
Wallace looked up as the old man's sobs became audible, and read his
thoughts:  "It will never be again, Halbert," cried he, and with a firm
grasp of the sword he cut off a large handful of his hair.

"Marion, thy blood hath marked it!" exclaimed he; "and every hair on my
head shall be dyed of the same hue, before this sword is sheathed upon
thy murderers.  Here, Halbert," continued he, knotting it together,
"take this to the Earl of Mar; it is all, most likely, he will ever see
again of William Wallace.  Should I fall, tell him to look on that, and
in my wrongs read the future miseries of Scotland, and remember that
God armoreth the patriot's hand.  Let him set on that conviction and
Scotland may yet be free."

Halbert placed the lock in his bosom, but again repeated his
entreaties, that his master would accompany him to Bothwell Castle.  He
urged the consolation he would meet from the good earl's friendship.

"If he indeed regard me," returned Wallace, "for my sake let him
cherish you.  My consolations must come from a higher hand; I go where
it directs.  If I live, you shall see me again; but twilight
approaches--we must away.  The sun must not rise again upon Heselrigge."
Halbert now followed the rapid steps of Wallace, who, assisting the
feeble limbs of his faithful servant, drew him up the precipitous side
of the Lynn,** and then leaping from rock to rock, awaited with
impatience the slower advances of the poor old harper, as he crept
round a circuit of overhanging cliffs, to join him on the summit of the
craigs.

**The cavern which sheltered Sir William Wallace, near Corie Lynn, is
yet revered by the people.

Together they struck into the most inaccessible defiles of the
mountains, and proceeded, till on discerning smoke whitening with its
ascending curls the black sides of the impending rocks, Wallace saw
himself near the objects of his search.  He sprung on a high cliff
projecting over this mountain-valley, and blowing his bugle with a few
notes of the well-known pibroch of Lanarkshire, was answered by the
reverberations of a thousand echoes.

At the loved sounds which had not dared to visit their ears since the
Scottish standard was lowered to Edward, the hills seemed teeming with
life.  Men rushed from their fastnesses, and women with their babes
eagerly followed to see whence sprung a summons so dear to every
Scottish heart.  Wallace stood on the cliff, like the newly-aroused
genius of his country; his long plaid floated afar, and his glittering
hair streaming on the blast, seemed to mingle with the golden fires
which shot from the heavens.  Wallace raised his eyes--a clash as of the
tumult of contending armies filled the sky, and flames, and flashing
steel, and the horrid red of battle, streamed from the clouds upon the
hills.**

**The late Duke of Gordon exhibited a similar scene to Prince Leopold,
when his royal highness visited Gordon Castle, his "hills reeming with
life."-(1830.)

"Scotsmen!" cried Wallace, waving the fatal sword, which blazed in the
glare of these northern lights like a flaming brand, "behold how the
heavens cry aloud to you!  I come, in the midst of their fires, to call
you to vengeance.  I come in the name of all ye hold dear, of the wives
of you bosoms, and the children in their arms, to tell you the poniard
of England is unsheathed-innocence and age and infancy fall before it.
With this sword, last night, did Heselrigge, the English tyrant of
Lanark, break into my house, and murder my wife!"

The shriek of horror that burst from every mouth, interrupted Wallace.
"Vengeance! vengeance!" was the cry of the men, while tumultuous
lamentations for the "sweet Lady of Ellerslie," filled the air from the
women.

Wallace sprung from the cliff into the midst of his brave countrymen.
"Follow me, then, to strike the mortal blow!"

"Lead on!" cried a vigorous old man. "I drew this stout claymore last in
the battle of Largs.** Life and Alexander was then the word of victory:
now, ye accursed Southrons, ye shall meet the slogan* [* Slogan, (so the
war-word was termed.-(1809.)] of Death and Lady Marion."

**In the battle of Largs, Sir Malcolm Wallace, the father of Wallace,
fell gloriously fighting against the Danes.-(1830.)

"Death and Lady Marion!" was echoed with shouts from mouth to mouth.
Every sword was drawn; and those hardy peasants who owned none, seizing
the instruments of pasturage, armed themselves with wolf-spears,
pickaxes, forks, and scythes.

Sixty resolute men now ranged themselves around their chief.  Wallace,
whose widowed heart turned icy cold at the dreadful slogan of his
Marion's name, more fiercely grasped his sword, and murmured to
himself.  "From this day may Scotland date her liberty, or Wallace
return no more!  My faithful friends," cried he, turning to his men,
and placing his plumed bonnet on his head, "let the spirits of your
fathers inspire you souls; ye go to assert that freedom for which they
died.  Before the moon sets, the tyrant of Lanark must fall in blood."

"Death and Lady Marion!" was the pealing answer that echoed from the
hills.

Wallace again sprung on the cliffs.  His brave peasants followed him;
