river and took possession of the country on both sides of it in the name
of France. In the closing days of the Seventeenth Century a French
expedition landed not far from New Orleans, which was founded in 1718,
with a population of sixty-eight souls. Three years later, the city,
which now contains a population of more than a quarter of a million, was
made the capital of the Territory of Louisiana, and it at once became a
place of considerable importance.

In 1764, it was ceded to Spain, and this resulted in the people taking
possession of New Orleans and resisting the change in government. Five
years later, the new Spanish Governor arrived with ample troops,
suppressed the rebellion, and executed its leaders from the Place
d'Armes. In 1804, the territory of Orleans was established, and in 1814,
a British army, 15,000 strong, advanced on the city after which the
Territory was named. A great deal of confusion followed, but the city
held its own, and the invading army was repulsed.

During the Civil War New Orleans again saw active campaigning. The
occupancy of the city by General Butler, and the stern measures he
adopted to suppress the loyalty even of the women of the town, has
formed the subject of much comment. There are many interesting stories
concerning this epoch in the city's history, which are told with many
variations to every one who sojourns for a while in the great port at
the gate of the greatest river in the world.

To-day, New Orleans is perhaps best known as the second largest cotton
mart in the world, some 2,000,000 bales of the product of the Southern
plantations being received and shipped out every year. More than
30,000,000 pounds of wool and 12,000,000 pounds of hides also pass
through the city every year, to say nothing of immense quantities of
bananas and costly transactions in sugar and lumber.

Although New Orleans is really some little distance from the ocean, the
river at this point is more than half a mile wide, and the great ships
of all nations are seen loading and unloading at its levee.

New Orleans naturally abounds in ancient landmarks and memorials. The
old Spanish Fort is one of the most interesting among these. Warfare of
the most bitter character was seen again and again at this place. The
fortifications were kept up largely to afford protection against raids
from Mexican pirates and hostile Indians, though they were often useful
against more civilized foes. It was at this port that Andrew Jackson
prepared to receive the British invaders. The magnificent use he made of
the fortifications should have given to the old place a lasting standing
and a permanent preservation. Some forty years ago, however, the fort
was purchased and turned into a kind of country resort, and more lately
it has become the home of a recreation club.

Better preserved, and a most interesting connecting link between the
past and the present, is the world-renowned French Market in New
Orleans. A story is told of a great novelist, who traveled several
thousand miles in order to find representatives of all nationalities
grouped together in one narrow space. For a work he had in contemplation
he was anxious to select for his characters men of all nationalities,
whom chance or destiny had thrown together. He spent several days in
Paris, journeyed throughout sunny Italy, got lost in some of the
labyrinths of the unexplored sections of London, and finally crossed the
Atlantic without having found the group of which he was in search. Not
even in the large cities of America could he find his heart's desire,
and it was not until he strayed into the old French Market of New
Orleans that he found that for which he searched. He spent several days,
and even weeks, wandering through the peculiar market, and making
friends with the men of all nationalities who were working in different
parts of it. He found the Creole, full of anecdote, superstition and
pride, even when he was earning an occasional meal by helping to unload
bananas, or to carry away the refuse from the fish stores. The negro, in
every phase of development, civilization and ignorance, could, and
always can, be found within the confines of the market. The amount of
folk-lore stored up in the brains covered by masses of unkempt wool
astounded the novelist, who distributed dollars, in return for
information received, so lavishly, that he began to be looked upon after
a while as a capitalist whose wealth had driven him insane. Then, again,
he met disappointed emigrants from nearly all the European countries,
men, and even women, who had crossed the Atlantic full of great
expectations, but who had found a good many thorns among the looked-for
roses.

The Indian is not often seen now around the French Market, although he
used to be quite a feature of it. Some of the most exceptionally idle
loungers, however, show evidence of Indian blood in their veins, in the
shape of exceptionally high cheek-bones, and abnormally straight and
ungovernable hair.

Almost every known language is spoken here. There is the purest French
and the most atrocious patois. There is polished English, which seems to
indicate high education, and there is the most picturesque dialect
variation that could be desired by the most ardent devotee of the
everlasting dialect story. Spanish is of course spoken by several of the
market traders and workers, while Italian is quite common. At times in
the day, when trade is very busy, the visitor may hear choice expletives
in three or four languages at one time. He may not be able to interpret
the peculiar noises and stern rebukes administered to idle help and
truant boys, but he can generally guess pretty accurately the scope and
object of the little speeches which are scattered around so freely.

If it be asked what special function the market fulfills, the answer is
that it is a kind of inquire-within for everything. Many of the poorer
people do all their trading here. Fruit is a great staple, and on
another page a picture is given of one of the fruit stands of the old
market. The picture is reproduced from a photograph taken on the spot by
an artist of the National Company of St. Louis, publishers of "Our Own
Country," and it shows well the peculiar construction of the market. The
fruit sections are probably the most attractive and the least
objectionable of the entire market, because here cleanliness is
indispensable. In the vegetable section, which is also very large, there
is not always quite so much care displayed or so much cleanliness
enforced, refuse being sometimes allowed to accumulate liberally. Fish
can be obtained in this market for an almost nominal consideration,
being sometimes almost given away. Macaroni and other similar articles
of diet form the staple feature of the Italian store of trade, which is
carried on on the second floor of the market. The legitimate work called
for alone provides excuse for the presence of many thousand people, who
run hither and thither at certain hours of the day as though time were
the essence of the contract, and no delay of any kind could be
tolerated. As soon, however, as the pressing needs of the moment are
satisfied, a period of luxurious idleness follows, and rest seems to be
the chief desideratum of the average habitue or employe. The children,
who are sitting around in large numbers, vie with their elders in
matters of idleness, though they are occasionally aroused to a condition
of pernicious activity by the hope of securing donations or compensation
of some kind from newcomers and guests.

Structurally, the French Market is very well preserved. There are
evidences of antiquity and of the ravages of time and weather on every
side, but for all that the market seems to have as its special mission
the reminding of the people that when our ancestors built, they built
for ages, and not entirely for the immediate present, as is too often
the case nowadays. The market also serves as a link between the present
and the past. It is only of late years that the bazaar, which used to be
so prominent a feature, has fallen into insignificance. Formerly it
retained the importance of the extreme Orient, and afforded infinite
fund for reflection for the antiquarian and the lover of history.

The cemeteries of New Orleans are of exceptional interest, and are
visited every year by thousands of people. Owing to the proximity of
the water mark to the surface of the ground, the dead are not buried as
in other cities, and the vaults are above instead of under ground. They
are well arranged, and the antiquity of the burial grounds, and the
historic memories connected with the tablets, combine to make them of
more than ordinary interest. The local custom of suspending business on
the first day of November of each year for the purpose of decorating
graves in all the cemeteries, is also worthy of more than a passing
notice. Not only do people decorate the last resting places of their
friends and relatives on this specially selected day, but even the
graves of strangers are cared for in a spirit of thankfulness that the
angel of death has not entered the family circle, and made inroads into
bonds of friendship.

A few years ago a young woman died on the cars just as they were
entering the world-renowned Creole city. There was nothing on the body
to aid identification, and a stranger's grave had to be provided. In the
meantime the friends and relatives of the missing girl had been making
every effort to locate her, no idea having occurred to them that she was
going South. A loving brother finally got hold of a clew, which he
followed up so successfully that he at last solved the mystery. He
arrived in New Orleans on November 1st, and when taken out to the grave
that had been provided for the stranger who had died just outside the
gates, he was astounded to find several handsome bouquets of flowers,
with wreaths and crosses, lying upon it. Such a sight could hardly have
been met with in any other city in the world, and too much can hardly be
said in praise of the sentiment which suggests and encourages such
disinterested kindness and thought.

The cemetery which occupies a site close to the great battle-field, is
always specially decorated, and crowds go out in thousands to pay
tribute to honored memories. Close to this spot there is a monument to
celebrate the great battle during which General Pakingham was shot, and
at which General Jackson galloped excitedly up and down the lines, and
almost forced the men on to victory. The monument has not received the
care which it deserves. More than half a century ago work was commenced
on it, and a great deal was accomplished. But after a year or two of
effort the project was abandoned for the time, and it has never been
renewed. In the long interval that has ensued the roof has, in a large
measure, disappeared, as well as several of the steps leading up to the
front. Hundreds of people have cut their names in the stone work, and
the monument, which ought to be preserved in perpetuity, looks so
disreputable that little regret would be caused were the entire fragment
to be swept away by some unusually heavy gust of wind.

More than 1,500 soldiers were buried in the Chalmette Cemetery after the
battle referred to. Since the war it has been well nigh forgotten, but
several duels and affaires d'honneur have been settled on the historic
spot.





CHAPTER XIII.


THE HEATHEN CHINEE IN HIS ELEMENT.

A Trip to Chinatown, San Francisco--A House with a History--Narrow
Alleys and Secret Doors--Opium Smoking and its Effects--The
Highbinders--Celestial Theatricals--Chinese Festivals--The Brighter Side
of a Great City--A Mammoth Hotel and Beautiful Park.


Chinatown, San Francisco, is such a remarkable place, and contrasts so
strangely with the wealth and civilization of the great city on the
Pacific Coast, of which it is a part, that its peculiarities cannot be
ignored in a sketch of the most remarkable features of our native land.
Writers and artists have for years made this blot on San Francisco's
splendor the subject for sarcasm and cartoon, and, indeed, it is
difficult to handle the subject without a considerable amount of
severity. Californians are often blamed for their harshness towards the
Chinese, and the way in which they have clamored from time to time for
more stringent exclusion laws. It takes a trip to Chinatown to make it
clear to the average mortal why this feeling is so general in San
Francisco, and why it extends throughout the entire Pacific Slope.

There are about 25,000 Chinese in and around San Francisco. A small
proportion of these have abandoned the worst features of their race, and
make themselves comparatively useful as domestic servants. In order to
retain their positions they have to assimilate themselves more or less
to the manners and customs of the country, and they are only
objectionable in certain respects. But the one-time dwellers in the
Celestial Empire, who make their homes in Chinatown, have very few
redeeming qualities, and most of them seem to have no tangible excuse
whatever for living.

They adhere to all the vices and uncivilized habits of their
forefathers, and very frequently add to them equally objectionable vices
of so-called civilization. At one time all the streets in Chinatown were
little more than elongated ash pits and garbage receptacles. The public
outcry at length became so vigorous that the strong hand of the law was
brought to bear, and now the principal through streets are kept fairly
clean. The side streets and alleys are, however, still in a deplorable
condition, and no American or European could possibly live many days in
such filth without being stricken with a terrible disease. The
Mongolians, however, seem to thrive under conditions which are fatal to
civilized humanity. They live to quite the average age, and the children
seem to be very healthy, if not conspicuously happy.

Chinatown covers an area of about eight large squares, in the very heart
of San Francisco. Again and again attempts have been made to get rid of
the drawback and nuisance. But the "Melica Man" has allowed himself to
be outwitted by the "Heathen Chinee," who has secured property rights
which cannot be overcome without a measure of confiscation, which would
appear to be scarcely constitutional. The area is probably one of the
most densely populated in the world. The Chinese seem to sleep
everywhere and anywhere, and the houses are overcrowded to an extent
which passes all belief. It is known as an actual fact, that in rooms
twelve feet square as many as twelve human beings sleep and eat, and
even cook what passes with them for food. The houses themselves are so
horrible in their condition, and have been so remodeled from time to
time, to meet Celestial ideas and fall in with notions which are but a
relic of barbarism, that not even a colored man of the most degraded
type can be persuaded to live permanently in a house which has ever been
occupied by an unregenerated denizen of Chinatown.

At the entrance to this peculiar, and, indeed, disreputable quarter,
there is a house with a peculiar history. It was built more than a
quarter of a century ago, by a wealthy banker, who selected the site
because of the admirable view that could be obtained from it of the
leading features of the city. He spared no expense in its erection, and
when it was completed he was able to gaze from the upper windows upon
some of the most beautiful scenery in the world. For a while the banker
lived in the most magnificent style, and earned for himself a reputation
as a prince of entertainers. He spent thousands of dollars on
entertainments, and appeared to have everything that a human being could
desire. His end was a tragic one, and it has never been ascertained for
certain whether he died by his own hand, or by the hand of one of his
alleged friends or avowed foes. The house which was once his great pride
is now occupied by the Chinese Consul.

It is still, by far, the finest house in the Chinese quarter. The moment
it is passed the sight-seeker or slummer finds himself in the midst of a
horrible collection of Oriental filth and squalor. There are a number of
stores which excite his contempt the moment his eyes light upon them.
They are chiefly devoted to the retailing of such food as the occupants
of Chinatown delight in, and over many of them the Chinese national
emblem can be seen flying. Fish are on sale in large numbers, and as
they are kept until sold, regardless of their condition, the effluvia of
some of the fish markets can be very easily imagined. Vegetables also
form a very large proportion of the daily bills of fare, and these add
materially to the malodorous condition of the neighborhood. The streets
are all of them very narrow, and there are also a number of
exceptionally narrow and complicated passages and alleys, which have
been the scenes of crimes innumerable in days gone by.

Some of these alleys are but three or four feet wide, and, owing to
their almost countless turns and angles, they afford an easy means for
the escape of a fugitive who is being hunted by the police, or by one of
those blood-thirsty Chinese societies of which the Highbinders is a
type. One writer who has investigated the matter very thoroughly, tells
us that most of the houses have secret doors leading from one to the
other in such a manner that if a fugitive should determine to make his
escape, he can always do so by means of these secret doors, and the
underground passages to which they lead.

The stores, workshops and other apartments are generally exceedingly
small, and the proverbial economy of the Chinaman is proved by the fact
that every square foot of floor space and ground is put to some
practical use, and one finds cobblers, barbers, fortune-tellers and a
multitude of small tradesmen carrying on a business in a jog, or niche
in the wall, not as large as an ordinary bootblack's stand. Along the
narrow sidewalks are seen many of these curbstone merchants. Some have
their goods displayed in glass show-cases, ranged along the wall, where
are exhibited queer-looking fancy articles of Chinese workmanship, of a
cheap grade, all sorts of inexpensive ornaments for women and children's
wear, curiously fashioned from ivory, bone, beads, glass and brass,
water and opium pipes galore.

The opium pipe is something so unlike any European conception of a pipe
that it is difficult to describe it. It consists of a large bamboo tube
or cylinder, with a bowl about midway between the extremities. The bowl
is sometimes a very small brass plate, and sometimes an earthen
cup-shaped contrivance, with the top closed or decked over, having only
a tiny hole in the center. Into this little aperture the opium, in a
semi-liquid state, after being well melted in a lamp flame, is thrust by
means of a fine wire or needle. The drug is inserted in infinitesimal
quantities. It is said that all the Chinese smoke opium, although all do
not indulge to excess. Some seem to be able to use the drug without its
gaining the mastery over them.

There are more than a hundred opium dens in the Chinese quarters. These
places are used for no other purpose whatever at any time. If it were
the Chinese alone who frequented them, but little would be thought of
it. Hundreds of white people, men, women and the youth of both sexes,
have, however, become victims to this loathsome habit. So completely
enslaved are they, that there is no escape from the tyrant. For all the
poverty and untold misery this has brought upon these unfortunates, the
Chinese are responsible. Vices cluster around Chinese social life, and
nearly every house has its opium-smoking apartment, or rooms where the
lottery or some kind of gambling is carried on.

The residents of Chinatown have a government of their own, with its
social and economic regulations, and its police and penal department,
and they even inflict the death penalty, but in such a secret way that
the outside world seldom hears of these acts of high authority. This
social and commercial policy is controlled by six companies, to one of
which every Chinaman in the country owes allegiance and is tributary.
These companies severally represent different provinces in the Chinese
Empire, and upon every arrival of a steamer from that country, and
before the passengers are landed, the Chinese portion of them are
visited by an official of the six companies, who ascertains what
province each arriving coolie is from. That decides as to which company
he will belong.

Every Chinaman who comes is assured of his return to China, or, if he is
so unfortunate as to die while in exile, that his bones will be sent
home. This very important matter is one of the duties of the six
companies. This comforting assurance, however, is not shared in by the
women, whom, excepting those who are the wives of men of the better
class, are brought over by a vile class of traders, and sold as
