"We should be hanged," answered Lord Claud coolly. "But we shall
not be taken. Make your mind quite clear on that point. Do just as
I tell you, and have no fears. The rest will follow of itself."

Tom had come to have that sort of implicit trust in his companion
which some men have the power to inspire. It makes them dangerous
to foes, because they appear to bear charmed lives; and their
companions trust implicitly in their luck, and know no fear. Tom
felt that if Lord Claud told him to ride through fire or water, he
would do it without hesitation, knowing that the thing was
possible, and believing he would accomplish it.

"Come," said Lord Claud, "take your saddle and bridle and walk
softly. It is time we were off now."

They stole through the silent house, and round to the stable, where
the horses were lying on beds of clean straw. They got up at the
sound of their master's voice, but were so quiet in all their
movements that it seemed as though they knew what was in the air.
In five minutes they were free from the buildings, and the
travellers mounted. The road lay before them in dappled lights and
shadows from the brilliant moon overhead. It was as easy to see the
way as though the sun had been up.

Once clear of the inn, and Lord Claud sprang forward at a steady,
swinging hand gallop, a pace to which the horses settled down as
though well habituated to it.

Then he began to speak to Tom of the project on which they were
bent.

"There is gold on its way from the bank to the coast. It is guarded
by four soldiers. They have been instructed to travel fast to catch
a certain sloop. Today they will have met with many hindrances upon
the way. All that has been arranged for. So they will profit by
this clear moonlight night to prosecute their journey, which will
not lie through what is thought to be dangerous country. Forest
land and wild heath make men very careful, but quiet country roads
where villages are frequent give them confidence. And yet it is
just as easy to fall upon the prey in the latter as in the former
locality. In sooth, I think it is easier. The men in charge rush
back for help, thinking the more easily to track and follow us;"
and then Lord Claud broke into a soft laugh, and began to whistle
cheerily as they galloped forward.

These horses were wonderfully strong and fleet. Tom could not but
remark it as they galloped mile after mile with unwearied energy.
Lord Claud smiled in the moonlight as he replied:

"Oh yes, that is necessary. It is well to prove an alibi, if you
know what that is, good Tom. The honest folks where we come from
will swear that we and our steeds were abed all night over yonder;
but even if that should not be enough, there will be many who will
declare that if we did not leave St. Albans till past ten, we could
never be at the spot I am aiming for and back again before break of
day; and I shall take care to call mine host up betimes, so that
there will be plenty of evidence that I have not been abroad this
night."

Tom had heard often enough of the good understanding existing
between innkeepers and the highway robbers who infested the roads,
and now he began to see the workings of it, and to understand how
easy it made some of these excursions, and how difficult it must
afterwards be to obtain evidence against the freebooters. Lord
Claud's handsome person, his freedom of speech, and his
lavishly-spent gold, made him a favourite everywhere; and now he
seemed about to employ his fascinations of mind and body for other
purposes. Tom was to see how they served him in a different sort of
life.

The rapid pace at which they were travelling hindered conversation.
Tom would not easily have believed it possible to travel so fast by
night, but he trusted himself implicitly to the guidance of his
comrade; and the strong, mettlesome, sure-footed horse he rode
seemed to make nothing either of his solid weight, or of the
distance they had to go.

Presently Lord Claud drew rein. They were passing through a little
copse, where the light was but misty and indistinct, and where the
road made a sudden sharp turn almost at right angles, affording
complete shelter to any person or persons lying in ambush.

"Now, Tom," said Lord Claud, "this is the spot I have chosen. There
is a village not half a mile distant. The road is not a dangerous
or lonely one--this is the only little bit of wood for some
distance, and it is very small. No special precautions will
probably be observed. There are two horses laden with gold, under
the escort of two soldiers each. They had a larger guard to pass
through the wilder forest country, but some of the men were to turn
back when the perilous transit was made. Most likely one horse and
the two troopers will be a little in advance of the other. The
moment the leading horse rounds this corner we shoot down the men.
You need not kill your trooper, Tom--indeed, I never kill unless
there is need--it is enough to disable him. In a moment I shall
have possession of the horse and shall gallop off. But I shall only
possess myself of the treasure, and let the beast go. I have no
wish to be tracked by him. Now, if I am right in what I expect, the
second troopers, hearing the shots and their comrades' cries, will
believe themselves in peril of attack from a much larger gang, and
will instantly fly to save their skins. This is what happens in
five cases out of seven. It is seldom that a couple of men will
stay to face what they believe to be a desperate gang of
highwaymen. If this is so, dash you out upon the second horse.
Seize him, and follow me. I know every inch of the country, and
those fellows know nothing but the roads. They will never catch us,
even if they pursue. If, however, the second pair should prove
fellows of a stouter kidney, and instead of fleeing should show
fight, then leave the second prize and follow hard after me. We
will not risk too much, and one load will suffice for present
necessities, albeit I should like well enough to obtain the two. I
would make our ministers smart for their scurvy treatment of me!"

Tom grasped the situation in a moment, and set his teeth hard,
whilst the light of battle leaped into his eyes. The adventure
suited the reckless self-confidence which his recent life had
quickened. Why should he not in time become a second Lord Claud, a
man half feared, half admired by all London town, petted, made much
of, observed and copied wherever he went? That his calling was
suspected, if not actually known, Tom had abundant reason to know.
But it seemed rather to give a lustre to his reputation than to
cover him with shame. Why should he not attain in time to a like
pinnacle of fame and fortune?

Thus he mused, standing there in the softened moonlight, the fierce
and lawless strain in his nature for the moment in the ascendant,
the influence of his strange comrade dominant in his heart.

There was a sound at last. The horses heard it first and pricked
their ears. Next minute the riders heard it, too. It was the tramp,
tramp of horses' feet upon the road, coming on at a leisurely pace,
together with the jingling of arms and the sound of voices.

Tom's heart beat thick and fast, but his hand did not tremble as he
followed Lord Claud's example and got ready his pistol. Like two
figures carved in stone sat the two liers-in-wait, their
well-trained horses as motionless as themselves.

Crack! crack!

The silence of the night was broken by the ominous sound. A yell of
pain and fury arose. Two horses turned back rearing, and dashed
away, but the third was gripped by a strong hand; and before the
party behind could see a vestige of what was happening, two
riderless horses had galloped past them, throwing them into a panic
of confusion and terror.

Lord Claud had judged right in part. Thrown into confusion, the men
turned as if to flee, thinking themselves fallen amongst a large
band of robbers. Tom made a quick rush round the corner, seized the
second pack horse by the bridle, and dashed off in pursuit of Lord
Claud; but even as he did so he became aware that there were more
than the two troopers in the party, and in a moment the sound of
yells and cries behind him told him that he was pursued.

But he had proved the pace of the horse beneath him, and if he
could but possess himself of the bags upon the pack horse, and let
the slower-paced beast go free, he knew he could distance pursuit.
With a mighty effort he lifted the heavy bags and swung them over
his shoulders; but even at that moment he heard the crack of
firearms in the rear, and his good horse reared up perfectly erect,
and Tom had but time to slip off his back before the creature fell
over backwards, and lay still and dead.

Tom had another pistol, and even as he reached the ground he turned
round and fired full at the foremost pursuer. A cry of pain told
him his shot had found a billet in horse or man. But he could stay
for no more. Already his mask and wig had fallen off. The moonlight
struck full upon his face and the fine proportions of his figure.
He saw that there were half a dozen men spurring onwards in
pursuit; but he was full of that fury which gives to men an almost
superhuman strength.

Leaping upon the back of the pack horse, he spurred the maddened
and terrified animal to the wildest gallop, a gallop which he could
never keep up, but which for the time being distanced all pursuit.
Then when he had winded his own beast, and knew that the pursuing
horses must themselves be pretty well blown, he slipped from its
back and began running like a hare across country in the direction
taken by Lord Claud, knowing that however cleverly he might conceal
himself, he would not be far away, and that he would keep an eye
upon Tom's line of flight, and come up with him as soon as it was
safe to do so.

The sounds of pursuit died away. Tom looked back, and found himself
alone in the fields and copses. His quick turnings and doublings,
and the choice of ground difficult for horses, had served his
purpose well. He was safe, and he had his prize with him. His heart
swelled with pride at the success of his achievement.

In a short while up rode Lord Claud, cool and smiling.

"Well done, Tom; that was gallantly done. But we have lost one of
our good steeds, and you have lost your mask. I trust that none saw
your face?"

"It came off when the horse plunged and reared, and I was cumbered
with the moneybags," answered Tom. "Yet I doubt if any who saw me
would know my face again; the soot upon my forehead at least would
make it hard to be sure of the face. And none were very nigh at
hand."

"Give me the bags, and take you my stirrup, and we will wend our
way back as fast as may be. You can run like a hare, Tom, as I have
seen well. Can you run step for step with a trotting horse for some
few miles?"

"Try me and see," answered Tom, who was not a little proud of his
powers in this respect; and side by side through the misty summer's
night stepped man and horse, both unwearied and full of courage.
Once Lord Claud insisted upon dismounting and letting Tom ride for
a few miles; but for the most part it was Tom who trotted along
step for step with the horse, thinking over the events of the
night, and exulting in the triumph they had achieved.

They reached the inn outside St. Albans just as the dawn was
breaking in the east. Not a creature was stirring as they stabled
the horse and made their way into the house. Nor did they do this
until saddle and bridle and moneybags had been safely locked away
in the body of the carriage, which contained a cavity with a secret
door, the trick of which seemed known only to Lord Claud. Then they
went to their room, removed all traces of travel from their
faces--as Tom had removed them from the horse in the stable just
before--tied up their clothes in small compass, and got into bed
just as the first sound of life began to be heard in the house.

Almost immediately then Lord Claud called loudly for the host, and
bade him bring him instantly a hot posset, as he had had a touch of
ague in the night. There was a good deal of bustling to and fro
then, and servants passed in and out of the room, seeing both
travellers lying peacefully in their beds, as though they had slept
there all night.

Lord Claud wrote a short note at once, and handed it to the host
with a few whispered directions, to which the man replied with a
nod and a wink; and then he took his posset, turned round and slept
a while, and rose at the usual hour as though he had no reason for
desiring longer rest.

This day was spent as the previous one had been, in paying visits
and joining in fashionable amusements. The news that there had been
a robbery on the highway of some gold about to be shipped to
Holland for the troops excited a little commotion in the place, and
once or twice Tom fancied that he saw curious glances levelled at
himself and his companion. Lord Claud talked upon the subject with
his usual airy negligence, but without the faintest hint of
personal interest in the matter. Nor did he even "turn a hair" when
rumour reported that there was a very decided clue as to the
identity of one of the band, who had been recognized by some
travellers on the road, who were going in the same direction as the
troopers, and had assisted them in pursuing one of the robbers. The
man had escaped; but it was asserted that he was known and could be
sworn to at any time.

This was not pleasant hearing for Tom, but he showed a cool enough
front at the time. It was only when alone with Lord Claud that he
asked rather anxiously if he thought it could be true.

"I doubt it," was the reply; "it is a common thing for men to make
the boast, but it seldom proves correct. Was it true that there
were others besides the troopers on the road? I thought I saw more
figures than I looked for, but knew not whether all were soldiers
or not."

"There were others," answered Tom; "but I had no time to see what
manner of men they were. There was much shouting and cursing, and I
heard one man give an exultant laugh when I turned and fired; but
more than that I know not."

Lord Claud looked thoughtful.

"Well, Tom, it boots little to meet danger half way. 'Tis always
best to put on a bold front and set it at defiance. But this
remember, that Nell Gwynne shall be kept in readiness for you by
night and day. And if ever you have reason to seek to save yourself
by flight, the horse is yours; there will be money and a few
necessaries strapped to the saddle. Make your way incontinently to
Captain Jack, who may always be heard of at The Three Ravens; and I
will visit you there, and we will talk over the state of affairs."

Tom nodded, and looked a little relieved in mind; but he felt as
though a cloud hung over his spirit despite his attempts at defying
fate.

Next morning they started off in the carriage once more, and, to
Tom's astonishment, with (apparently) the same two horses. He
looked at his comrade for a moment in mingled surprise and
admiration. Lord Claud gave an odd little smile as he replied:

"It is always well to be provided against accident, good Tom. Half
the clever deeds of this world are rendered null and void because
men forget to look ahead. We shall see the same persons driving
back as we saw driving out. We must have the same steeds too, else
would that dead horse lying in the fields tell a tale we would
rather keep to ourselves."



CHAPTER XIV. THE SWORD OF DAMOCLES.


Back in London, his pockets full of money, fine clothes upon his
back, and fine houses open to him when he went there in company
with Lord Claud, it was small wonder if Tom forgot his fears after
a few days of such a life, and was only rendered uneasy when
whispers reached him from time to time to the effect that the
authorities were hot upon the track of the daring highway robber
who had succeeded in making away with the Queen's gold.

A reward had been offered for the discovery and apprehension of the
miscreants concerned in the affair, and at first Tom had felt half
afraid to show his face in the streets by daylight. But after a few
days had passed by, and nothing had happened to arouse his
anxieties, he had taken heart of grace. Lord Claud's example of
nonchalance gave him coolness and courage; whilst the language and
behaviour of the fine folks with whom he came in contact helped to
dull and deaden any pangs of conscience which the wickedness of the
midnight raid might otherwise have occasioned him.

He saw perfectly well, from the glances of admiration and arch
reproof levelled at Lord Claud by the ladies in the gay company
which he kept, that his patron was suspected in many quarters of
being concerned in this recent robbery. Fine dames would tap him
with their fans, and ask him what he had been doing at St. Albans
on such and such days; and when he replied as to his whereabouts
with that easy grace of bearing which always characterized his
dealings with men and women alike, they would shake their heads,
flirt their fans, and call him by whimsical names incomprehensible
to Tom, but which he knew implied that he was suspected of being
concerned in very wild and lawless deeds.

Yet these suspicions on the part of the ladies raised this handsome
golden-haired Adonis to a higher pinnacle of favour than ever. It
seemed to Tom that so long as a crime was carried out with dash,
and verve, and success, it only brought a man fame and honour. He
shivered sometimes when he thought of his mother and sister, and
what they would think if they suspected that he had been led into
an open act of law breaking and robbery. But he felt a little
flattered in the society of these fine dames, when he saw that they
looked at him with interest and curiosity, and wondered if he had
played the part of lieutenant to their hero in the recent exploit.

He had been growing used to the strange ways of that portion of the
London world in which Lord Claud had his sphere, but even yet it
did seem strange, when he began to think about it, that a man
believed to be a notorious but exceedingly clever criminal, should
be received, courted, flattered, and made much of, as was Lord
Claud, just because of his handsome presence and dashing grace of
bearing, and because he had never been caught.

Tom wondered sometimes how these same faces would look at them,
were they to be carried in irons to Newgate; and he fancied that
under such circumstances they would wear a totally different
aspect.

But for the most part he sought to drown thought and reflection by
plunging into a vortex of gaiety. He was no longer laughed at as a
country bumpkin. He had been quick to pick up the airs of a man
about town. He dressed excellently, having toned down his first
fopperies; and finding that a rich and sober style best suited his
fine proportions, he adopted that, made his mark, and was treated
with respect and courtesy.

He had not learned the jargon of the day, and was a silent man in
company; but that was considered rather a distinguishing trait in
one who could handle the sword and lose his money at the gaming
tables with the aplomb that Tom had acquired. And a fine sum did he
lose, too, during the days that followed upon the escapade; for he
felt a sort of recklessness upon him, and as he had a sense of
being hunted down and tracked, he thought he might make the most of
freedom and wealth so long as they were his.

He was Lord Claud's guest for those days, feeling safer in his
company than elsewhere; and that worthy appeared not to know fear.
Indeed, he had succeeded in covering his tracks so well, that Tom
did not see how anything could be brought home to his door. It made
him think of words he had heard dropped before, to the effect that
to be Lord Claud's confederate was to be also his victim. He
wondered if there had been any truth in these insinuations, and
whether he was trusting in a man who was ready to save himself at
the risk of his friend.

It was difficult to believe this when in the company of his patron.
It was when alone that the doubts would at times assail him, and
therefore he was happier in the company of Lord Claud than in any
other.

He had not been to his old lodgings since his escapade. He felt an
odd sort of reluctance to facing honest Master Cale, and parrying
the questions which might be addressed to him. But he resolved not
to let a second Sunday pass without a visit; and upon the Saturday
he returned thither, dressed in his sober riding suit, and striving
to meet the welcome of his host with an air of unconcerned and
natural gaiety.

"Good Tom, you are welcome indeed!" exclaimed the perruquier
eagerly, taking him by the hand and drawing him within. "I have
been suffering no small anxiety upon your account, my lad. I trust
and hope without any cause."

Tom forced a smile, and hoped it was a natural one, as he asked
gaily:

"And wherefore this fear for me, good mine host?"

"There have been ugly whispers in the air ever since the robbery of
the gold on its way to Holland. Men will talk and wonder, and it
was known to all that Lord Claud had driven forth the day previous
northward from London, and that you were his companion. Men's
tongues have wagged for less than that, Tom, and for less weighty
matters."

The little man was scanning his guest's face somewhat earnestly.
Tom felt a most unwelcome qualm of shame and pain, such as he had
only experienced before when thinking of his mother and sister.

"Why, Master Cale, Lord Claud was but visiting his friends at St.
Albans, far enough away from where they say the robbery took place.
He will have no trouble in proving that he was never two miles from
St. Albans upon that night; and I was with him the whole time,
sharing his room and his company."

"Well, well, well," answered Cale, with a look of some relief, "I
