a bad bargain. Well, well,' said he, 'to-morrow we shall be in Germany.
There the folk are music bitten, and they molest not beggars, unless
they fake to boot, and then they drown us out of hand that moment, curse
'em!' We came to Strasbourg. And I looked down Rhine with longing heart.
The stream how swift! It seemed running to clip Sevenbergen to its soft
bosom. With but a piece of timber and an oar I might drift at my ease to
thee, sleeping yet gliding still. 'Twas a sore temptation. But the fear
of an ill welcome from my folk, and of the neighbours' sneers, and the
hope of coming back to thee victorious, not, as now I must, defeated and
shamed, and thee with me, it did withhold me; and so, with many sighs,
and often turning of the head to look on beloved Rhine, I turned
sorrowful face and heavy heart towards Augsburg."

"Alas, dame, alas! Good master Eli, forgive me! But I ne'er can win over
this part all at one time. It taketh my breath away. Welladay! Why did
he not listen to his heart? Had he not gone through peril enow, sorrow
enow? Well-a-day! well-a-day!"

The letter dropped from her hand, and she drooped like a wounded lily.

Then there was a clatter on the floor, and it was little Kate going on
her crutches, with flushed face, and eyes full of pity, to console her.
"Water, mother," she cried. "I am afeared she shall swoon."

"Nay, nay, fear me not," said Margaret feebly. "I will not be so
troublesome. Thy good-will it maketh me stouter hearted, sweet mistress
Kate. For, if thou carest how I fare, sure Heaven is not against me."

Catherine. "D'ye hear that, my man!"

Eli. "Ay, wife, I hear; and mark to boot."

Little Kate went back to her place, and Margaret read on.

"The Germans are fonder of armorials than the French. So I found work
every day. And whiles I wrought, my master would leave me, and doff his
raiment and don his rags, and other infirmities, and cozen the world,
which he did clepe it 'plucking of the goose:' this done, would meet me
and demand half my earnings; and with restless piercing eye ask me would
I be so base as cheat my poor master by making three parts in lieu of
two, till I threatened to lend him a cuff to boot in requital of his
suspicion; and thenceforth took his due, with feigned confidence in my
good faith, the which his dancing eye belied. Early in Germany we had
a quarrel. I had seen him buy a skull of a jailer's wife, and mighty
zealous a polishing it. Thought I, 'How can he carry yon memento,
and not repent, seeing where ends his way?' Presently I did catch him
selling it to a woman for the head of St. Barnabas, with a tale had
cozened an Ebrew. So I snatched it out of their hands, and trundled it
into the ditch. 'How, thou impious knave,' said I, 'wouldst sell for
a saint the skull of some dead thief, thy brother?' He slunk away. But
shallow she did crawl after the skull, and with apron reverently dust
it for Barnabas, and it Barabbas; and so home with it. Said I, 'Non vult
anser velli, sed populus vult decipi.'"

Catherine. "Oh, the goodly Latin!"

Eli. "What meaneth it?"

Catherine. "Nay, I know not; but 'tis Latin; is not that enow? He was
the flower of the flock."

"Then I to him, 'Take now thy psaltery, and part we here, for art a
walking prison, a walking hell.' But lo! my master fell on his knees,
and begged me for pity's sake not turn him off. 'What would become of
him? He did so love honesty.' 'Thou love honesty?' said I. 'Ay,' said
he, 'not to enact it; the saints forbid. But to look on. 'Tis so fair
a thing to look on. Alas, good Bon Bec,' said he; 'hadst starved
peradventure but for me. Kick not down thy ladder! Call ye that just?
Nay, calm thy choler! Have pity on me! I must have a pal; and how could
I bear one like myself after one so simple as thou? He might cut my
throat for the money that is hid in my belt. 'Tis not much; 'tis not
much. With thee I walk at mine ease; with a sharp I dare not go before
in a narrow way. Alas! forgive me. Now I know where in thy bonnet lurks
the bee, I will ware his sting; I will but pluck the secular goose. 'So
be it,' said I. 'And example was contagious: he should be a true man by
then we reached Nurnberg. 'Twas a long way to Nurnberg.' Seeing him so
humble, I said, 'well, doff rags, and make thyself decent; 'twill
help me forget what thou art.' And he did so; and we sat down to our
nonemete. Presently came by a reverend palmer with hat stuck round with
cockle shells from Holy Land, and great rosary of beads like eggs of
teal, and sandals for shoes. And he leaned a-weary on his long staff,
and offered us a shell apiece. My master would none. But I, to set him
a better example, took one, and for it gave the poor pilgrim two batzen,
and had his blessing. And he was scarce gone, when we heard savage
cries, and came a sorry sight, one leading a wild woman in a chain, all
rags and howling like a wolf. And when they came nigh us, she fell to
tearing her rags to threads. The man sought an alms of us, and told us
his hard case. 'Twas his wife stark raving mad; and he could not work in
the fields, and leave her in his house to fire it, nor cure her could
be without the Saintys' help, and had vowed six pounds of wax to St.
Anthony to heal her, and so was fain beg of charitable folk for the
money. And now she espied us, and flew at me with her long nails, and
I was cold with fear, so devilish showed, her face and rolling eyes and
nails like birdys talons. But he with the chain checked her sudden,
and with his whip did cruelly lash her for it, that I cried, 'Forbear!
forbear! She knoweth not what she doth;' and gave him a batz. And being
gone, said I, 'Master, of those twain I know not which is the more
pitiable.' And he laughed in my face, 'Behold thy justice, Bon Bec,'
said he. 'Thou railest on thy poor, good, within an ace of honest
master, and bestowest alms on a "vopper."' 'Vopper,' said I, 'what is
a vopper?' 'why, a trull that feigns madness. That was one of us, that
sham maniac, and wow but she did it clumsily. I blushed for her and
thee. Also gavest two batzen for a shell from Holy Land, that came
no farther than Normandy. I have culled them myself on that coast by
scores, and sold them to pilgrims true and pilgrims false, to gull flats
like thee withal.' 'What!' said I; 'that reverend man?' 'One of us!'
cried Cul de Jatte; 'one of us! In France we call them "Coquillarts,"
but here "Calmierers." Railest on me for selling a false relic now and
then, and wastest thy earnings on such as sell nought else. I tell thee,
Bon Bec,' said he, 'there is not one true relic on earth's face. The
Saints died a thousand years agone, and their bones mixed with the
dust; but the trade in relics, it is of yesterday; and there are forty
thousand tramps in Europe live by it; selling relics of forty or fifty
bodies; oh, threadbare lie! And of the true Cross enow to build Cologne
Minster. Why, then, may not poor Cul de Jatte turn his penny with the
crowd? Art but a scurvy tyrannical servant to let thy poor master from
his share of the swag with your whoreson pilgrims, palmers and friars,
black, grey, and crutched; for all these are of our brotherhood, and of
our art, only masters they, and we but poor apprentices, in guild.' For
his tongue was an ell and a half.

"'A truce to thy irreverend sophistries,' said I, 'and say what company
is this a coming.' 'Bohemians,' cried he, 'Ay, ay, this shall be the
rest of the band.' With that came along so motley a crew as never your
eyes beheld, dear Margaret. Marched at their head one with a banner on
a steel-pointed lance, and girded with a great long sword, and in velvet
doublet and leathern jerkin, the which stuffs ne'er saw I wedded afore
on mortal flesh, and a gay feather in his lordly cap, and a couple of
dead fowls at his back, the which, an the spark had come by honestly, I
am much mistook. Him followed wives and babes on two lean horses, whose
flanks still rattled like parchment drum, being beaten by kettles and
caldrons. Next an armed man a-riding of a horse, which drew a cart full
of females and children; and in it, sitting backwards, a lusty
lazy knave, lance in hand, with his luxurious feet raised on a holy
water-pail, that lay along, and therein a cat, new kittened, sat glowing
o'er her brood, and sparks for eyes. And the cart-horse cavalier had on
his shoulders a round bundle, and thereon did perch a cock and crowed
with zeal, poor ruffler, proud of his brave feathers as the rest, and
haply with more reason, being his own. And on an ass another wife and
new-born child; and one poor quean a-foot scarce dragged herself along,
so near her time was she, yet held two little ones by the hand, and
helplessly helped them on the road. And the little folk were just a
farce; some rode sticks, with horses' heads, between their legs, which
pranced and caracoled, and soon wearied the riders so sore, they stood
stock still and wept, which cavaliers were presently taken into cart and
cuffed. And one, more grave, lost in a man's hat and feather, walked in
Egyptian darkness, handed by a girl; another had the great saucepan on
his back, and a tremendous three-footed clay-pot sat on his head
and shoulders, swallowing him so as he too went darkling led by his
sweetheart three foot high. When they were gone by, and we had both
laughed lustily, said I, 'Natheless, master, my bowels they yearn for
one of that tawdry band, even for the poor wife so near the downlying,
scarce able to drag herself, yet still, poor soul, helping the weaker on
the way.'

Catherine. "Nay, nay, Margaret. Why, wench, pluck up heart. Certes thou
art no Bohemian."

Kate. "Nay, mother, 'tis not that, I trow, but her father. And, dear
heart, why take notice to put her to the blush?"

Richart. "So I say."

"And he derided me. 'Why, that is a "biltreger,"' said he, 'and you
waste your bowels on a pillow, or so forth.' I told him he lied. 'Time
would show,' said he, 'wait till they camp.' And rising after meat and
meditation, and travelling forward, we found them camped between two
great trees on a common by the wayside; and they had lighted a great
fire, and on it was their caldron; and one of the trees slanting o'er
the fire, a kid hung down by a chain from the tree-fork to the fire,
and in the fork was wedged an urchin turning still the chain to keep the
meat from burning, and a gay spark with a feather in his cap cut up
a sheep; and another had spitted a leg of it on a wooden stake; and a
woman ended chanticleer's pride with wringing of his neck. And under
the other tree four rufflers played at cards and quarrelled, and no word
sans oath; and of these lewd gamblers one had cockles in his hat and was
my reverend pilgrim. And a female, young and comely, and dressed like a
butterfly, sat and mended a heap of dirty rags. And Cul de Jatte said,
'Yon is the "vopper,"' and I looked incredulous and looked again, and it
was so, and at her feet sat he that had so late lashed her; but I ween
he had wist where to strike, or woe betide him; and she did now oppress
him sore, and made him thread her very needle, the which he did with
all humility; so was their comedy turned seamy side without; and Cul de
Jatte told me 'twas still so with 'voppers' and their men in camp; they
would don their bravery though but for an hour, and with their tinsel,
empire, and the man durst not the least gainsay the 'vopper,' or she
would turn him off at these times, as I my master, and take another
tyrant more submissive. And my master chuckled over me. Natheless we
soon espied a wife set with her back against the tree, and her hair
down, and her face white, and by her side a wench held up to her eye a
newborn babe, with words of cheer, and the rough fellow, her husband,
did bring her hot wine in a cup, and bade her take courage. And just
o'er the place she sat, they had pinned from bough to bough of those
neighbouring trees two shawls, and blankets two, together, to keep the
drizzle off her. And so had another poor little rogue come into the
world; and by her own particular folk tended gipsywise, but of the
roasters, and boilers, and voppers, and gamblers, no more noticed, no,
not for a single moment, than sheep which droppeth her lamb in a field,
by travellers upon the way. Then said I, 'What of thy foul suspicions,
master? over-knavery blinds the eye as well as over-simplicity.' And he
laughed and said, 'Triumph, Bon Bec, triumph. The chances were nine in
ten against thee.' Then I did pity her, to be in a crowd at such a
time; but he rebuked me. 'I should pity rather your queens and royal
duchesses, which by law are condemned to groan in a crowd of nobles and
courtiers, and do writhe with shame as, well as sorrow, being come of
decent mothers, whereas these gipsy women have no more shame under their
skins than a wolf ruth, or a hare valour. And, Bon Bec,' quoth he, 'I
espy in thee a lamentable fault. Wastest thy bowels, wilt have none left
for thy poor good master which doeth thy will by night and day.' Then
we came forward; and he talked with the men in some strange Hebrew cant
whereof no word knew I; and the poor knaves bade us welcome and denied
us nought. With them, and all they had, 'twas lightly come and lightly
go; and when we left them, my master said to me 'This is thy first
lesson, but to-night we shall lie at Hansburgh. Come with me to the
"rotboss" there, and I'll show thee all our folk and their lays,
and especially "the lossners," "the dutzers," "the schleppers," "the
gickisses," "the schwanfelders, whom in England we call "shivering
Jemmies," "the suntvegers," "the schwiegers," "the joners," "the
sesseldegers," "the gensscherers," in France "marcandiers or rifodes,"
"the veranerins," "the stabulers," with a few foreigners like ourselves,
such as "pietres," "francmitoux," "polissons" "malingreux," "traters,"
"rufflers," "whipjalks," "dommerars," "glymmerars," "jarkmen,"
"patricos," "swadders," "autem morts," "walking morts" 'Enow,' cried I,
stopping him, 'art as gleesome as the Evil One a counting of his imps.
I'll jot down in my tablet all these caitiffs and their accursed names:
for knowledge is knowledge. But go among them, alive or dead, that will
I not with my good will. Moreover,' said I, 'what need? since I have a
companion in thee who is all the knaves on earth in one?' and thought to
abash him but his face shone with pride, and hand on breast he did bow
low to me. 'If thy wit be scant, good Bon Bec, thy manners are a charm.
I have made a good bargain.' So he to the 'rotboss,' and I to a decent
inn, and sketched the landlord's daughter by candle-light, and started
at morn batzen three the richer, but could not find my master, so
loitered slowly on, and presently met him coming west for me, and
cursing the quiens. Why so? Because he could blind the culls but not
the quiens. At last I prevailed on him to leave cursing and canting,
and tell me his adventure. Said he, 'I sat outside the gate of yon
monastery, full of sores, which I sho'ed the passers-by. Oh, Bon Bec,
beautifuller sores you never saw; and it rained coppers in my hat.
Presently the monks came home from some procession, and the convent dogs
ran out to meet them, curse the quiens!' 'What, did they fall on thee
and bite thee, poor soul?' 'Worse, worse, dear Bon Bec. Had they
bitten me I had earned silver. But the great idiots, being, as I think,
puppies, or little better, fell on me where I sat, downed me, and fell
a licking my sores among them. As thou, false knave, didst swear the
whelps in heaven licked the sores of Lazybones, a beggar of old.' 'Nay,
nay,' said I, 'I said no such thing. But tell me, since they bit thee
not, but sportfully licked thee, what harm?' 'What harm, noodle; why,
the sores came off.' 'How could that be?' 'How could aught else be? and
them just fresh put on. Did I think he was so weak as bite holes in his
flesh with ratsbane? Nay, he was an artist, a painter, like his servant,
and had put on sores made of pig's blood, rye meal, and glue. So when
the folk saw my sores go on tongues of puppies, they laughed, and I
saw cord or sack before me. So up I jumped, and shouted, "A miracle a
miracle! The very dogs of this holy convent be holy, and have cured me.
Good fathers," cried I, "whose day is this?" "St. Isidore's," said one.
"St. Isidore," cried I, in a sort of rapture. "Why, St. Isidore is
my patron saint: so that accounts." And the simple folk swallowed my
miracle as those accursed quiens my wounds. But the monks took me inside
and shut the gate, and put their heads together; but I have a quick ear,
and one did say, "Caret miraculo monasterium," which is Greek patter,
leastways it is no beggar's cant. Finally they bade the lay brethren
give me a hiding, and take me out a back way and put me on the road, and
threatened me did I come back to the town to hand me to the magistrate
and have me drowned for a plain impostor. "Profit now by the Church's
grace," said they, "and mend thy ways." So forward, Bon Bec, for my life
is not sure nigh hand this town.' As we went he worked his shoulders,
'Wow but the brethren laid on. And what means yon piece of monk's cant,
I wonder?' So I told him the words meant 'the monastery is in want of a
miracle,' but the application thereof was dark to me. 'Dark,' cried
he, 'dark as noon. Why, it means they are going to work the miracle,
my miracle, and gather all the grain I sowed. Therefore these blows on
their benefactor's shoulders; therefore is he that wrought their scurry
miracle driven forth with stripes and threats. Oh, cozening knaves!'
Said I, 'Becomes you to complain of guile.' 'Alas, Bon Bec,' said he, 'I
but outwit the simple, but these monks would pluck Lucifer of his
wing feathers.' And went a league bemoaning himself that he was not
convent-bred like his servant 'He would put it to more profit;' and
railing on quiens. 'And as for those monks, there was one Above.'
'Certes,' said I, 'there is one Above. What then?' 'Who will call those
shavelings to compt, one day,' quoth he. 'And all deceitful men' said
I. At one that afternoon I got armories to paint: so my master took the
yellow jaundice and went begging through the town, and with his oily
tongue, and saffron-water face, did fill his hat. Now in all the towns
are certain licensed beggars, and one of these was an old favourite
with the townsfolk: had his station at St. Martin's porch, the greatest
church: a blind man: they called him blind Hans. He saw my master
drawing coppers on the other side the street, and knew him by his tricks
for an impostor, so sent and warned the constables, and I met my master
in the constables' hands, and going to his trial in the town hall. I
followed and many more; and he was none abashed, neither by the pomp
of justice, nor memory of his misdeeds, but demanded his accuser like a
trumpet. And blind Hans's boy came forward, but was sifted narrowly by
my master, and stammered and faltered, and owned he had seen nothing,
but only carried blind Hans's tale to the chief constable. 'This is but
hearsay,' said my master. 'Lo ye now, here standeth Misfortune backbit
by Envy. But stand thou forth, blind Envy, and vent thine own lie.' And
blind Hans behoved to stand forth, sore against his will. Him did my
master so press with questions, and so pinch and torture, asking him
again and again, how, being blind, he could see all that befell, and
some that befell not, across a way; and why, an he could not see, he
came there holding up his perjured hand, and maligning the misfortunate,
that at last he groaned aloud and would utter no word more. And an
alderman said, 'In sooth, Hans, ye are to blame; hast cast more dirt of
suspicion on thyself than on him.' But the burgomaster, a wondrous fat
man, and methinks of his fat some had gotten into his head, checked him,
and said, 'Nay, Hans we know this many years, and be he blind or not,
he hath passed for blind so long, 'tis all one. Back to thy porch, good
Hans, and let the strange varlet leave the town incontinent on pain of
whipping.' Then my master winked to me; but there rose a civic officer
in his gown of state and golden chain, a Dignity with us lightly prized,
and even shunned of some, but in Germany and France much courted, save
by condemned malefactors, to wit the hangman; and says he, 'Ant please
you, first let us see why he weareth his hair so thick and low.' And his
man went and lifted Cul de Jatte's hair, and lo, the upper gristle of
both ears was gone. 'How is this knave? quoth the burgomaster. My
master said carelessly, he minded not precisely: his had been a life of
misfortunes and losses. When a poor soul has lost the use of his leg,
noble sirs, these more trivial woes rest lightly in his memory.' When
he found this would not serve his turn, he named two famous battles,
in each of which he had lost half an ear, a fighting like a true man
against traitors and rebels. But the hangman showed them the two cuts
were made at one time, and by measurement. ''Tis no bungling soldiers'
work, my masters,' said he, ''tis ourn.' Then the burgomaster gave
judgment: 'The present charge is not proven against thee; but, an thou
beest not guilty now, thou hast been at other times, witness thine ears.
Wherefore I send thee to prison for one month, and to give a florin
towards the new hall of the guilds now a building, and to be whipt
out of the town, and pay the hangman's fee for the same.' And all the
aldermen approved, and my master was haled to prison with one look of
anguish. It did strike my bosom. I tried to get speech of him, but the
jailer denied me. But lingering near the jail I heard a whistle, and
there was Cul de Jatte at a narrow window twenty feet from earth. I went
under, and he asked me what made I there? I told him I was loath to go
forward and not bid him farewell. He seemed quite amazed; but soon his
suspicious soul got the better. That was not all mine errand. I told him
not all: the psaltery: 'Well, what of that?' 'Twas not mine, but his; I
would pay him the price of it. 'Then throw me a rix dollar,' said he.
I counted out my coins, and they came to a rix dollar and two batzen.
I threw him up his money in three throws, and when he had got it all
he said, softly, 'Bon Bec.' 'Master,' said I. Then the poor rogue was
greatly moved. 'I thought ye had been mocking me,' said he; 'oh, Bon
Bec, Bon Bec, if I had found the world like thee at starting I had put
my wit to better use, and I had not lain here.' Then he whimpered out,
'I gave not quite a rix dollar for the jingler;' and threw me back that
he had gone to cheat me of; honest for once, and over late; and so, with
many sighs, bade me Godspeed. Thus did my master, after often baffling
men's justice, fall by their injustice; for his lost ears proved not his
guilt only, but of that guilt the bitter punishment: so the account was
even; yet they for his chastisement did chastise him. Natheless he was a
parlous rogue. Yet he holp to make a man of me. Thanks to his good wit
I went forward richer far with my psaltery and brush, than with yon as
good as stolen purse; for that must have run dry in time, like a big
trough, but these a little fountain."

Richart. "How pregnant his reflections be; and but a curly pated lad
when last I saw him. Asking your pardon, mistress. Prithee read on."

"One day I walked alone, and sooth to say, lighthearted, for mine honest
Denys sweetened the air on the way; but poor Cul de Jatte poisoned
it. The next day passing a grand house, out came on prancing steeds
a gentleman in brave attire and two servants; they overtook me. The
gentleman bade me halt. I laughed in my sleeve; for a few batzen were
all my store. He bade me doff my doublet and jerkin. Then I chuckled
no more. 'Bethink you, my lord,' said I, ''tis winter. How may a poor
fellow go bare and live? So he told me I shot mine arrow wide of his
thought, and off with his own gay jerkin, richly furred, and doublet to
match, and held them forth to me. Then a servant let me know it was a
penance. 'His lordship had had the ill luck to slay his cousin in their
cups.' Down to my shoes he changed with me; and set me on his horse like
a popinjay, and fared by my side in my worn weeds, with my psaltery on
his back. And said he, 'Now, good youth, thou art Cousin Detstein; and
I, late count, thy Servant. Play the part well, and help me save my
bloodstained soul! Be haughty and choleric, as any noble; and I will be
as humble as I may.' I said I would do my best to play the noble. But
what should I call him? He bade me call him nought but Servant. That
would mortify him most, he wist. We rode on a long way in silence; for
I was meditating this strange chance, that from a beggar's servant had
made me master to a count, and also cudgelling my brains how best I
might play the master, without being run through the body all at one
time like his cousin. For I mistrusted sore my spark's humility; your
German nobles being, to my knowledge, proud as Lucifer, and choleric
as fire. As for the servants, they did slily grin to one another to see
their master so humbled."

"What is that?"

A lump, as of lead, had just bounced against the door, and the latch was
fumbled with unsuccessfully. Another bounce, and the door swung inwards
with Giles arrayed in cloth of gold sticking to it like a wasp. He
landed on the floor, and was embraced; but on learning what was going
on, trumpeted that he would much liever hear of Gerard than gossip.

Sybrandt pointed to a diminutive chair.

Giles showed his sense of this civility by tearing the said Sybrandt
out of a very big one, and there ensconced himself gorgeous and glowing.
Sybrandt had to wedge himself into the one, which was too small for the
magnificent dwarf's soul, and Margaret resumed. But as this part of the
letter was occupied with notices of places, all which my reader probably
knows, and if not, can find handled at large in a dozen well-known
books, from Munster to Murray, I skip the topography, and hasten to that
part where it occurred to him to throw his letter into a journal. The
personal narrative that intervened may be thus condensed.

He spoke but little at first to his new companions, but listened to pick
up their characters. Neither his noble Servant nor his servants could
read or write; and as he often made entries in his tablets, he impressed
them with some awe. One of his entries was, "Le peu que sont les
hommes." For he found the surly innkeepers licked the very ground
before him now; nor did a soul suspect the hosier's son in the count's
feathers, nor the count in the minstrel's weeds.

This seems to have surprised him; for he enlarged on it with the naivete
and pomposity of youth. At one place, being humbly requested to present
the inn with his armorial bearings, he consented loftily; but painted
them himself, to mine host's wonder, who thought he lowered himself
by handling brush. The true count stood grinning by, and held the
paint-pot, while the sham count painted the shield with three
red herrings rampant under a sort of Maltese cross made with two
ell-measures. At first his plebeian servants were insolent. But this
coming to the notice of his noble one, he forgot what he was doing
penance for, and drew his sword to cut off their ears, heads included.
But Gerard interposed and saved them, and rebuked the count severely.
And finally they all understood one another, and the superior mind
obtained its natural influence. He played the barbarous noble of that
day vilely. For his heart would not let him be either tyrannical or
cold. Here were three human beings. He tried to make them all happier
than he was; held them ravished with stories and songs, and set Herr
Penitent and Co. dancing with his whistle and psaltery. For his own
convenience he made them ride and tie, and thus pushed rapidly through
the country, travelling generally fifteen leagues a day.


DIARY.

"This first day of January I observed a young man of the country to meet
a strange maiden, and kissed his hand, and then held it out to her. She
took it with a smile, and lo! acquaintance made; and babbled like old
friends. Greeting so pretty and delicate I ne'er did see. Yet were they
both of the baser sort. So the next lass I saw a coming, I said to my
servant lord, 'For further penance bow thy pride; go meet yon base-born
girl; kiss thy homicidal hand, and give it her, and hold her in
discourse as best ye may.' And my noble Servant said humbly, 'I shall
obey my lord.' And we drew rein and watched while he went forward,
kissed his hand and held it out to her. Forthwith she took it smiling,
and was most affable with him, and he with her. Presently came up a band
of her companions. So this time I bade him doff his bonnet to them, as
though they were empresses; and he did so. And lo! the lasses drew up as
stiff as hedgestakes, and moved not nor spake."

Denys. "Aie! aie! aie Pardon, the company."

"This surprised me none; for so they did discountenance poor Denys. And
that whole day I wore in experimenting these German lasses; and 'twas
still the same. An ye doff bonnet to them they stiffen into statues;
distance for distance. But accost them with honest freedom, and with
that customary, and though rustical, most gracious proffer, of the
kissed hand, and they withhold neither their hands in turn nor their
acquaintance in an honest way. Seeing which I vexed myself that Denys
was not with us to prattle with them; he is so fond of women." ("Are you
fond of women, Denys?") And the reader opened two great violet eyes upon
him with gentle surprise.

Denys. "Ahem! he says so, she-comrade. By Hannibal's helmet, 'tis their
fault, not mine. They will have such soft voices, and white skins, and
sunny hair, and dark blue eyes, and--"

Margaret. (Reading suddenly.) "Which their affability I put to profit
thus. I asked them how they made shift to grow roses in yule? For know,
dear Margaret, that throughout Germany, the baser sort of lasses wear
for head-dress nought but a 'crantz,' or wreath of roses, encircling
their bare hair, as laurel Caesar's; and though of the worshipful,
scorned, yet is braver, I wist, to your eye and mine which painters be,
though sorry ones, than the gorgeous, uncouth, mechanical head-gear of
the time, and adorns, not hides her hair, that goodly ornament fitted
to her head by craft divine. So the good lasses, being questioned close,
did let me know, the rosebuds are cut in summer and laid then in great
clay-pots, thus ordered:--first bay salt, then a row of buds, and over
that row bay salt sprinkled; then, another row of buds placed crosswise;
for they say it is death to the buds to touch one another; and so on,
buds and salt in layers. Then each pot is covered and soldered tight,
and kept in cool cellar. And on Saturday night the master of the house,
or mistress, if master be none, opens a pot, and doles the rosebuds out
to every female in the house, high or low, withouten grudge; then
solders it up again. And such as of these buds would full-blown roses
make, put them in warm water a little space, or else in the stove, and
then with tiny brush and soft, wetted in Rhenish wine, do coax them till
they ope their folds. And some perfume them with rose-water. For, alack,
their smell it is fled with the summer; and only their fair bodyes lie
withouten soul, in tomb of clay, awaiting resurrection.

"And some with the roses and buds mix nutmegs gilded, but not by my good
will; for gold, brave in itself, cheek by jowl with roses, is but yellow
earth. And it does the eye's heart good to see these fair heads of hair
come, blooming with roses, over snowy roads, and by snow-capt hedges,
setting winter's beauty by the side of summer's glory. For what so
fair as winter's lilies, snow yclept, and what so brave as roses? And
shouldst have had a picture here, but for their superstition. Leaned a
lass in Sunday garb, cross ankled, against her cottage corner, whose
low roof was snow-clad, and with her crantz did seem a summer flower
sprouting from winter's bosom. I drew rein, and out pencil and brush to
limn her for thee. But the simpleton, fearing the evil eye, or glamour,
claps both hands to her face and flies panic-stricken. But indeed, they
are not more superstitious than the Sevenbergen folk, which take thy
father for a magician. Yet softly, sith at this moment I profit by
this darkness of their minds; for, at first, sitting down to write this
diary, I could frame nor thought nor word, so harried and deaved was I
with noise of mechanical persons, and hoarse laughter at dull jests of
one of these particoloured 'fools,' which are so rife in Germany. But
oh, sorry wit, that is driven to the poor resource of pointed ear-caps,
and a green and yellow body. True wit, methinks, is of the mind. We
met in Burgundy an honest wench, though over free for my palate, a
chambermaid, had made havoc of all these zanies, droll by brute force.
Oh, Digressor! Well then, I to be rid of roaring rusticalls, and
mindless jests, put my finger in a glass and drew on the table a great
watery circle; whereat the rusticalls did look askant, like venison at
a cat; and in that circle a smaller circle. The rusticalls held their
peace; and besides these circles cabalistical, I laid down on the table
solemnly yon parchment deed I had out of your house. The rusticalls held
their breath. Then did I look as glum as might be, and muttered
slowly thus 'Videamus--quam diu tu fictus morio--vosque veri
stulti--audebitis--in hac aula morari, strepitantes ita--et olentes: ut
dulcissimae nequeam miser scribere.' They shook like aspens, and stole
away on tiptoe one by one at first, then in a rush and jostling, and
left me alone; and most scared of all was the fool: never earned jester
fairer his ass's ears. So rubbed I their foible, who first rubbed mine;
for of all a traveller's foes I dread those giants twain, Sir Noise, and
eke Sir Stench. The saints and martyrs forgive my peevishness. Thus I
write to thee in balmy peace, and tell thee trivial things scarce worthy
ink, also how I love thee, which there was no need to tell, for well
thou knowest it. And oh, dear Margaret, looking on their roses, which
grew in summer, but blow in winter, I see the picture of our true
affection; born it was in smiles and bliss, but soon adversity beset
us sore with many a bitter blast. Yet our love hath lost no leaf, thank
God, but blossoms full and fair as ever, proof against frowns, and
jibes, and prison, and banishment, as those sweet German flowers a
blooming in winter's snow.

"January 2.--My servant, the count, finding me curious, took me to the
stables of the prince that rules this part. In the first court was a
horse-bath, adorned with twenty-two pillars, graven with the prince's
arms; and also the horse-leech's shop, so furnished as a rich apothecary
might envy. The stable is a fair quadrangle, whereof three sides filled
with horses of all nations. Before each horse's nose was a glazed
window, with a green curtain to be drawn at pleasure, and at his tail a
thick wooden pillar with a brazen shield, whence by turning of a pipe he
is watered, and serves too for a cupboard to keep his comb and rubbing
clothes. Each rack was iron, and each manger shining copper, and each
nag covered with a scarlet mantle, and above him his bridle and saddle
hung, ready to gallop forth in a minute; and not less than two hundred
horses, whereof twelve score of foreign breed. And we returned to our
inn full of admiration, and the two varlets said sorrowfully, 'Why were
we born with two legs?' And one of the grooms that was civil and had of
me trinkgeld, stood now at his cottage-door and asked us in. There we
found his wife and children of all ages, from five to eighteen, and had
but one room to bide and sleep in, a thing pestiferous and most uncivil.
Then I asked my Servant, knew he this prince? Ay, did he, and had often
drunk with him in a marble chamber above the stable, where, for table,
was a curious and artificial rock, and the drinking vessels hang on its
pinnacles, and at the hottest of the engagement a statue of a horseman
in bronze came forth bearing a bowl of liquor, and he that sat nearest
behoved to drain it. ''Tis well,' said I: 'now for thy penance, whisper
thou in yon prince's ear, that God hath given him his people freely, and
not sought a price for them as for horses. And pray him look inside the
huts at his horse-palace door, and bethink himself is it well to house
his horses, and stable his folk.' Said he, ''Twill give sore offence.'
'But,' said I, 'ye must do it discreetly and choose your time.' So he
promised. And riding on we heard plaintive cries. 'Alas,' said I, 'some
sore mischance hath befallen some poor soul: what may it be?' And we
rode up, and lo! it was a wedding feast, and the guests were plying the
business of drinking sad and silent, but ever and anon cried loud and
dolefully, 'Seyte frolich! Be merry.'

"January 3.--Yesterday between Nurnberg and Augsburg we parted company.
I gave my lord, late Servant, back his brave clothes for mine, but his
horse he made me keep, and five gold pieces, and said he was still my
debtor, his penance it had been slight along of me, but profitable. But
his best word was this: 'I see 'tis more noble to be loved than feared.'
And then he did so praise me as I blushed to put on paper; yet, poor
fool, would fain thou couldst hear his words, but from some other pen
than mine. And the servants did heartily grasp my hand, and wish me good
luck. And riding apace, yet could I not reach Augsburg till the
gates were closed; but it mattered little, for this Augsburg it is
an enchanted city. For a small coin one took me a long way round to
a famous postern called der Einlasse. Here stood two guardians, like
statues. To them I gave my name and business. They nodded me leave to
knock; I knocked; and the iron gate opened with a great noise and hollow
rattling of a chain, but no hand seen nor chain; and he who drew the
hidden chain sits a butt's length from the gate; and I rode in, and the
gate closed with a clang after me. I found myself in a great building
with a bridge at my feet. This I rode over and presently came to a
porter's lodge, where one asked me again my name and business, then rang
a bell, and a great portcullis that barred the way began to rise, drawn
by a wheel overhead, and no hand seen. Behind the portcullis was a thick
oaken door studded with steel. It opened without hand, and I rode into a
hall as dark as pitch. Trembling there a while, a door opened and showed
me a smaller hall lighted. I rode into it: a tin goblet came down from
the ceiling by a little chain: I put two batzen into it, and it went
up again. Being gone, another thick door creaked and opened, and I
rid through. It closed on me with a tremendous clang, and behold me in
Augsburg city. I lay at an inn called 'The Three Moors,' over an hundred
years old; and this morning, according to my way of viewing towns to
learn their compass and shape, I mounted the highest tower I could
find, and setting my dial at my foot surveyed the beautiful city: whole
streets of palaces and churches tiled with copper burnished like gold;
and the house fronts gaily painted and all glazed, and the glass so
clean and burnished as 'tis most resplendent and rare; and I, now first
seeing a great city, did crow with delight, and like cock on his ladder,
and at the tower foot was taken into custody for a spy; for whilst I
watched the city the watchman had watched me. The burgomaster received
me courteously and heard my story; then rebuked he the officers. 'Could
ye not question him yourselves, or read in his face? This is to make our
city stink in strangers' report.' Then he told me my curiosity was of a
commendable sort; and seeing I was a craftsman and inquisitive, bade
his clerk take me among the guilds. God bless the city where the very
burgomaster is cut of Soloman's cloth!

"January 5.--Dear Margaret, it is a noble city, and a kind mother to
arts. Here they cut in wood and ivory, that 'tis like spider's work, and
paint on glass, and sing angelical harmonies. Writing of books is quite
gone by; here be six printers. Yet was I offered a bountiful wage to
write fairly a merchant's accounts, one Fugger, a grand and wealthy
trader, and hath store of ships, yet his father was but a poor weaver.
But here in commerce, her very garden, men swell like mushrooms. And he
bought my horse of me, and abated me not a jot, which way of dealing is
not known in Holland. But oh, Margaret, the workmen of all the guilds
are so kind and brotherly to one another, and to me. Here, methinks,
I have found the true German mind, loyal, frank, and kindly, somewhat
choleric withal, but nought revengeful. Each mechanic wears a sword. The
very weavers at the loom sit girded with their weapons, and all Germans
on too slight occasion draw them and fight; but no treachery: challenge
first, then draw, and with the edge only, mostly the face, not with Sir
Point; for if in these combats one thrust at his adversary and hurt him,
'tis called ein schelemstucke, a heinous act, both men and women turn
their backs on him; and even the judges punish thrusts bitterly, but
pass over cuts. Hence in Germany be good store of scarred faces, three
in five at least, and in France scarce more than one in three.

"But in arts mechanical no citizens may compare with these. Fountains
in every street that play to heaven, and in the gardens seeming trees,
which being approached, one standing afar touches a spring, and
every twig shoots water, and souses the guests to their host's much
delectation. Big culverins of war they cast with no more ado than our
folk horse-shoes, and have done this fourscore years. All stuffs they
weave, and linen fine as ours at home, or nearly, which elsewhere
in Europe vainly shall ye seek. Sir Printing Press--sore foe to poor
Gerard, but to other humans beneficial--plieth by night and day, and
casteth goodly words like sower afield; while I, poor fool, can but sow
them as I saw women in France sow rye, dribbling it in the furrow grain
by grain. And of their strange mechanical skill take two examples. For
ending of exemplary rogues they have a figure like a woman, seven feet
high, and called Jung Frau; but lo, a spring is touched, she seizeth the
poor wretch with iron arms, and opening herself, hales him inside
her, and there pierces him through and through with two score lances.
Secondly, in all great houses the spit is turned not by a scrubby boy,
but by smoke. Ay, mayst well admire, and judge me a lying knave. These
cunning Germans do set in the chimney a little windmill, and the smoke
struggling to wend past, turns it, and from the mill a wire runs through
the wall and turns the spit on wheels; beholding which I doffed my
bonnet to the men of Augsburg, for who but these had ere devised to bind
ye so dark and subtle a knave as Sir Smoke, and set him to roast Dame
Pullet?

"This day, January 8, with three craftsmen of the town, I painted a pack
of cards. They were for a senator, in a hurry. I the diamonds. My queen
came forth with eyes like spring violets, hair a golden brown, and
witching smile. My fellow-craftsmen saw her, and put their arms round
my neck and hailed me master. Oh, noble Germans! No jealousy of a
brother-workman: no sour looks at a stranger; and would have me spend
Sunday with them after matins; and the merchant paid me so richly as I
was ashamed to take the guerdon; and I to my inn, and tried to paint
the queen of diamonds for poor Gerard; but no, she would not come like
again. Luck will not be bespoke. Oh, happy rich man that hath got her!
Fie! fie! Happy Gerard that shall have herself one day, and keep house
with her at Augsburg.

"January 8.--With my fellows, and one Veit Stoss, a wood-carver, and
one Hafnagel, of the goldsmiths' guild, and their wives and lasses,
to Hafnagel's cousin, a senator of this free city, and his stupendous
wine-vessel. It is ribbed like a ship, and hath been eighteen months in
hand, and finished but now, and holds a hundred and fifty hogsheads, and
standeth not, but lieth; yet even so ye get not on his back, withouten
ladders two, of thirty steps. And we sat about the miraculous mass, and
drank Rhenish from it, drawn by a little artificial pump, and the lasses
pinned their crantzes to it, and we danced round it, and the senator
danced on its back, but with drinking of so many garausses, lost his
footing and fell off, glass in hand, and broke an arm and a leg in the
midst of us. So scurvily ended our drinking bout for this time.

"January 10.--This day started for Venice with a company of merchants,
and among them him who had desired me for his scrivener; and so we are
now agreed, I to write at night the letters he shall dict, and other
matters, he to feed and lodge me on the road. We be many and armed, and
soldiers with us to boot, so fear not the thieves which men say lie on
the borders of Italy. But an if I find the printing press at Venice, I
trow I shall not go unto Rome, for man may not vie with iron.

"Imprimit una dies quantum non scribitur anno. And, dearest, something
tells me you and I shall end our days at Augsburg, whence going, I shall
leave it all I can--my blessing.

"January 12.--My master affecteth me much, and now maketh me sit with
him in his horse-litter. A grave good man, of all respected, but sad
for loss of a dear daughter, and loveth my psaltery: not giddy-faced
ditties, but holy harmonies such as Cul de Jatte made wry mouths at. So
many men, so many minds. But cooped in horse-litter and at night writing
his letters, my journal halteth.

"January 14.--When not attending on my good merchant, I consort with
such of our company as are Italians, for 'tis to Italy I wend, and I
am ill seen in Italian tongue. A courteous and a subtle people, at meat
delicate feeders and cleanly: love not to put their left hand in the
dish. They say Venice is the garden of Lombardy, Lombardy the garden of
Italy, Italy of the world.

"January 16.-Strong ways and steep, and the mountain girls so girded up,
as from their armpits to their waist is but a handful. Of all the garbs
I yet have seen, the most unlovely.

"January 18.-In the midst of life we are in death. Oh! dear Margaret,
I thought I had lost thee. Here I lie in pain and dole, and shall
write thee that, which read you it in a romance ye should cry, 'Most
improbable!' And so still wondering that I am alive to write it, and
thanking for it God and the saints, this is what befell thy Gerard.
Yestreen I wearied of being shut up in litter, and of the mule's slow
pace, and so went forward; and being, I know not why, strangely full
of spirit and hope, as I have heard befall some men when on trouble's
brink, seemed to tread on air, and soon distanced them all. Presently I
came to two roads, and took the larger; I should have taken the smaller.
After travelling a good half-hour, I found my error, and returned; and
deeming my company had long passed by, pushed bravely on, but I could
not overtake them; and small wonder, as you shall hear. Then I was
anxious, and ran, but bare was the road of those I sought; and night
came down, and the wild beasts a-foot, and I bemoaned my folly; also I
was hungered. The moon rose clear and bright exceedingly, and presently
a little way off the road I saw a tall windmill. 'Come,' said I, 'mayhap
the miller will take ruth on me.' Near the mill was a haystack, and
scattered about were store of little barrels; but lo they were not
flour-barrels, but tar-barrels, one or two, and the rest of spirits,
Brant vein and Schiedam; I knew them momently, having seen the like in
Holland. I knocked at the mill-door, but none answered. I lifted the
latch, and the door opened inwards. I went in, and gladly, for the night
was fine but cold, and a rime on the trees, which were a kind of lofty
sycamores. There was a stove, but black; I lighted it with some of the
hay and wood, for there was a great pile of wood outside, and I know
not how, I went to sleep. Not long had I slept, I trow, when hearing a
noise, I awoke; and there were a dozen men around me, with wild faces,
and long black hair, and black sparkling eyes."

Catherine. "Oh, my poor boy! those black-haired ones do still scare me
to look on."

"I made my excuses in such Italian as I knew, and eking out by
signs. They grinned. 'I had lost my company.' They grinned. 'I was an
hungered.' Still they grinned, and spoke to one another in a tongue I
knew not. At last one gave me a piece of bread and a tin mug of wine,
as I thought, but it was spirits neat. I made a wry face and asked for
water: then these wild men laughed a horrible laugh. I thought to fly,
but looking towards the door it was bolted with two enormous bolts of
iron, and now first, as I ate my bread, I saw it was all guarded too,
and ribbed with iron. My blood curdled within me, and yet I could
not tell thee why; but hadst thou seen the faces, wild, stupid, and
ruthless. I mumbled my bread, not to let them see I feared them; but oh,
it cost me to swallow it and keep it in me. Then it whirled in my brain,
was there no way to escape? Said I, 'They will not let me forth by
the door; these be smugglers or robbers.' So I feigned drowsiness, and
taking out two batzen said, 'Good men, for our Lady's grace let me lie
on a bed and sleep, for I am faint with travel.' They nodded and grinned
their horrible grin, and bade one light a lanthorn and lead me. He took
me up a winding staircase, up, up, and I saw no windows, but the wooden
walls were pierced like a barbican tower, and methinks for the same
purpose, and through these slits I got glimpses of the sky, and thought,
'Shall I e'er see thee again?' He took me to the very top of the mill,
and there was a room with a heap of straw in one corner and many empty
barrels, and by the wall a truckle bed. He pointed to it, and went
downstairs heavily, taking the light, for in this room was a great
window, and the moon came in bright. I looked out to see, and lo, it
was so high that even the mill sails at their highest came not up to my
window by some feet, but turned very slow and stately underneath, for
wind there was scarce a breath; and the trees seemed silver filagree
made by angel craftsmen. My hope of flight was gone.

"But now, those wild faces being out of sight, I smiled at my fears:
what an if they were ill men, would it profit them to hurt me?
Natheless, for caution against surprise, I would put the bed against the
door. I went to move it, but could not. It was free at the head, but at
the foot fast clamped with iron to the floor. So I flung my psaltery on
the bed, but for myself made a layer of straw at the door, so as none
could open on me unawares. And I laid my sword ready to my hand. And
said my prayers for thee and me, and turned to sleep.

"Below they drank and made merry. And hearing this gave me confidence.
Said I, 'Out of sight, out of mind. Another hour and the good Schiedam
will make them forget that I am here.' And so I composed myself to
sleep. And for some time could not for the boisterous mirth below.
At last I dropped off. How long I slept I knew not; but I woke with a
start: the noise had ceased below, and the sudden silence woke me. And
scarce was I awake, when sudden the truckle bed was gone with a loud
clang all but the feet, and the floor yawned, and I heard my psaltery
fall and break to atoms, deep, deep, below the very floor of the mill.
It had fallen into a well. And so had I done, lying where it lay."

Margaret shuddered and put her face in her hands. But speedily resumed.

"I lay stupefied at first. Then horror fell on me, and I rose, but stood
rooted there, shaking from head to foot. At last I found myself looking
down into that fearsome gap, and my very hair did bristle as I peered.
And then, I remember, I turned quite calm, and made up my mind to die
sword in hand. For I saw no man must know this their bloody secret and
live. And I said, 'Poor Margaret!' And I took out of my bosom, where
they lie ever, our marriage lines, and kissed them again and again. And
I pinned them to my shirt again, that they might lie in one grave with
me, if die I must. And I thought, 'All our love and hopes to end thus!'"

Eli. "Whisht all! Their marriage lines? Give her time! But no word. I
can bear no chat. My poor lad!"

During the long pause that ensued Catherine leaned forward and passed
something adroitly from her own lap under her daughter's apron who sat
next her.

"Presently thinking, all in a whirl, of all that ever passed between us,
and taking leave of all those pleasant hours, I called to mind how one
day at Sevenbergen thou taughtest me to make a rope of straw. Mindest
thou? The moment memory brought that happy day back to me, I cried out
very loud: 'Margaret gives me a chance for life even here.' I woke from
my lethargy. I seized on the straw and twisted it eagerly, as thou didst
teach me, but my fingers trembled and delayed the task. Whiles I wrought
I heard a door open below. That was a terrible moment. Even as I twisted
my rope I got to the window and looked down at the great arms of the
mill coming slowly up, then passing, then turning less slowly down, as
it seemed; and I thought, 'They go not as when there is wind: yet, slow
or fast, what man rid ever on such steed as these, and lived. Yet,' said
I, 'better trust to them and God than to ill men.' And I prayed to Him
whom even the wind obeyeth.

"Dear Margaret, I fastened my rope, and let myself gently down, and
fixed my eye on that huge arm of the mill, which then was creeping up
to me, and went to spring on to it. But my heart failed me at the pinch.
And methought it was not near enow. And it passed calm and awful by. I
watched for another; they were three. And after a little while one crept
up slower than the rest methought. And I with my foot thrust myself in
good time somewhat out from the wall, and crying aloud 'Margaret!' did
grip with all my soul the wood-work of the sail, and that moment was
swimming in the air."

Giles. "WELL DONE! WELL DONE!"

"Motion I felt little; but the stars seemed to go round the sky, and then
the grass came up to me nearer and nearer, and when the hoary grass was
quite close I was sent rolling along it as if hurled from a catapult,
and got up breathless, and every point and tie about me broken. I rose,
but fell down again in agony. I had but one leg I could stand on."

Catherine. "Eh! dear! his leg is broke, my boy's leg is broke."

"And e'en as I lay groaning, I heard a sound like thunder. It was the
assassins running up the stairs. The crazy old mill shook under them.
They must have found that I had not fallen into their bloody trap, and
were running to despatch me. Margaret, I felt no fear, for I had now
no hope. I could neither run nor hide; so wild the place, so bright the
moon. I struggled up all agony and revenge, more like some wounded wild
beast than your Gerard. Leaning on my sword hilt I hobbled round; and
swift as lighting, or vengeance, I heaped a great pile of their hay
and wood at the mill door; then drove my dagger into a barrel of their
smuggled spirits, and flung it on; then out with my tinder and lighted
the pile. 'This will bring true men round my dead body,' said I.
'Aha!' I cried, 'think you I'll die alone, cowards, assassins! reckless
fiends!' and at each word on went a barrel pierced. But oh, Margaret!
the fire fed by the spirits surprised me: it shot up and singed my
very hair, it went roaring up the side of the mill, swift as falls
the lightning; and I yelled and laughed in my torture and despair, and
pierced more barrels and the very tar-barrels, and flung them on. The
fire roared like a lion for its prey, and voices answered it inside from
the top of the mill, and the feet came thundering down, and I stood
as near that awful fire as I could, with uplifted sword to slay and
be slain. The bolt was drawn. A tar-barrel caught fire. The door was
opened. What followed? Not the men came out, but the fire rushed in
at them like a living death, and the first I thought to fight with was
blackened and crumpled on the floor like a leaf. One fearsome yell, and
dumb for ever. The feet ran up again, but fewer. I heard them hack with
their swords a little way up at the mill's wooden sides; but they had
no time to hew their way out: the fire and reek were at their heels, and
the smoke burst out at every loophole, and oozed blue in the moonlight
through each crevice. I hobbled back, racked with pain and fury. There
were white faces up at my window. They saw me. They cursed me. I cursed
them back and shook my naked sword: 'Come down the road I came,' I
cried. 'But ye must come one by one, and as ye come, ye die upon this
steel.' Some cursed at that, but others wailed. For I had them all at
deadly vantage. And doubtless, with my smoke-grimed face and fiendish
rage, I looked a demon. And now there was a steady roar inside the mill.
The flame was going up it as furnace up its chimney. The mill caught
fire. Fire glimmered through it. Tongues of flame darted through each
loophole and shot sparks and fiery flakes into the night. One of the
assassins leaped on to the sail, as I had done. In his hurry he missed
his grasp and fell at my feet, and bounded from the hard ground like
a ball, and never spoke, nor moved again. And the rest screamed like
women, and with their despair came back to me both ruth for them and
hope of life for myself. And the fire gnawed through the mill in placen,
and shot forth showers of great flat sparks like flakes of fiery snow;
and the sails caught fire one after another; and I became a man again
and staggered away terror-stricken, leaning on my sword, from the sight
of my revenge, and with great bodily pain crawled back to the road.
And, dear Margaret, the rimy trees were now all like pyramids of
golden filagree, and lace, cobweb fine, in the red firelight. Oh! most
beautiful! And a poor wretch got entangled in the burning sails, and
whirled round screaming, and lost hold at the wrong time, and hurled
like stone from mangonel high into the air; then a dull thump; it was
his carcass striking the earth. The next moment there was a loud crash.
The mill fell in on its destroyer, and a million great sparks flew up,
and the sails fell over the burning wreck, and at that a million more
sparks flew up, and the ground was strewn with burning wood and men. I
prayed God forgive me, and kneeling with my back to that fiery shambles,
I saw lights on the road; a welcome sight. It was a company coming
towards me, and scarce two furlongs off. I hobbled towards them. Ere I
had gone far I heard a swift step behind me. I turned. One had escaped;
how escaped, who can divine? His sword shone in the moonlight. I feared
him. Methought the ghosts of all those dead sat on that glittering
glaive. I put my other foot to the ground, maugre the anguish, and fled
towards the torches, moaning with pain, and shouting for aid. But what
could I do He gained on me. Behooved me turn and fight. Denys had taught
me sword play in sport. I wheeled, our swords clashed. His clothes
they smelled all singed. I cut swiftly upward with supple hand, and his
dangled bleeding at the wrist, and his sword fell; it tinkled on the
ground. I raised my sword to hew him should he stoop for't. He stood
and cursed me. He drew his dagger with his left; I opposed my point and
dared him with my eye to close. A great shout arose behind me from true
men's throats. He started. He spat at me in his rage, then gnashed his
teeth and fled blaspheming. I turned and saw torches close at hand.
Lo, they fell to dancing up and down methought, and the
next-moment-all-was-dark. I had--ah!"

Catherine. "Here, help! water! Stand aloof, you that be men!"

Margaret had fainted away.



CHAPTER LIV

When she recovered, her head was on Catherine's arm, and the honest half
of the family she had invaded like a foe stood round her uttering rough
homely words of encouragement, especially Giles, who roared at her that
she was not to take on like that. "Gerard was alive and well, or he
could not have writ this letter, the biggest mankind had seen as yet,
and," as he thought, "the beautifullest, and most moving, and smallest
writ."

"Ay, good Master Giles," sighed Margaret feebly, "he was alive. But how
know I what hath since befallen him? Oh, why left he Holland to go among
strangers fierce as lions? And why did I not drive him from me sooner
than part him from his own flesh and blood? Forgive me, you that are his
mother!"

And she gently removed Catherine's arm, and made a feeble attempt to
slide off the chair on to her knees, which, after a brief struggle with
superior force, ended in her finding herself on Catherine's bosom. Then
Margaret held out the letter to Eli, and said faintly but sweetly, "I
will trust it from my hand now. In sooth, I am little fit to read any
more-and-and--loth to leave my comfort;" and she wreathed her other arm
round Catherine's neck.

"Read thou, Richart," said Eli: "thine eyes be younger than mine."

Richart took the letter. "Well," said he, "such writing saw I never. A
writeth with a needle's point; and clear to boot. Why is he not in my
counting-house at Amsterdam instead of vagabonding it out yonder!"

"When I came to myself I was seated in the litter, and my good merchant
holding of my hand. I babbled I know not what, and then shuddered awhile
in silence. He put a horn of wine to my lips."

Catherine. "Bless him! bless him!"

Eli. "Whisht!"

"And I told him what had befallen. He would see my leg. It was sprained
sore, and swelled at the ankle; and all my points were broken, as I
could scarce keep up my hose, and I said, 'Sir, I shall be but a burden
to you, I doubt, and can make you no harmony now; my poor psaltery it
is broken;' and I did grieve over my broken music, companion of so many
weary leagues. But he patted me on the cheek, and bade me not fret; also
he did put up my leg on a pillow, and tended me like a kind father.

"January 19.--I sit all day in the litter, for we are pushing forward
with haste, and at night the good, kind merchant sendeth me to bed, and
will not let me work. Strange! whene'er I fall in with men like fiends,
then the next moment God still sendeth me some good man or woman, lest I
should turn away from human kind. Oh, Margaret! how strangely mixed they
be, and how old I am by what I was three months agone. And lo! if good
Master Fugger hath not been and bought me a psaltery."

Catherine. "Eli, my man, an yon merchant comes our way let us buy a
hundred ells of cloth of him, and not higgle."

Eli. "That will I, take your oath on't!"

While Richart prepared to read, Kate looked at her mother, and with a
faint blush drew out the piece of work from under her apron, and sewed
with head depressed a little more than necessary. On this her mother
drew a piece of work out of her pocket, and sewed too, while Richart
read. Both the specimens these sweet surreptitious creatures now first
exposed to observation were babies' caps, and more than half finished,
which told a tale. Horror! they were like little monks' cowls in shape
and delicacy.

"January 20.--Laid up in the litter, and as good as blind, but halting
to bait, Lombardy plains burst on me. Oh, Margaret! a land flowing
with milk and honey; all sloping plains, goodly rivers, jocund meadows,
delectable orchards, and blooming gardens; and though winter, looks
warmer than poor beloved Holland at midsummer, and makes the wanderer's
face to shine, and his heart to leap for joy to see earth so kind and
smiling. Here be vines, cedars, olives, and cattle plenty, but three
goats to a sheep. The draught oxen wear white linen on their necks, and
standing by dark green olive-trees each one is a picture; and the folk,
especially women, wear delicate strawen hats with flowers and leaves
fairly imitated in silk, with silver mixed. This day we crossed a river
prettily in a chained ferry-boat. On either bank was a windlass, and a
single man by turning of it drew our whole company to his shore, whereat
I did admire, being a stranger. Passed over with us some country folk.
And an old woman looking at a young wench, she did hide her face with
her hand, and held her crucifix out like knight his sword in tourney
dreading the evil eye.

"January 25.--Safe at Venice. A place whose strange and passing beauty
is well known to thee by report of our mariners. Dost mind too how Peter
would oft fill our ears withal, we handed beneath the table, and he
still discoursing of this sea-enthroned and peerless city, in shape a
bow, and its great canal and palaces on piles, and its watery ways plied
by scores of gilded boats; and that market-place of nations, orbis,
non urbis, forum, St. Mark, his place? And his statue with the peerless
jewels in his eyes, and the lion at his gate? But I, lying at my window
in pain, may see none of these beauties as yet, but only a street,
fairly paved, which is dull, and houses with oiled paper and linen,
in lieu of glass, which is rude; and the passers-by, their habits and
their gestures, wherein they are superfluous. Therefore, not to miss my
daily comfort of whispering to thee, I will e'en turn mine eyes inward,
and bind my sheaves of wisdom reaped by travel. For I love thee so, that
no treasure pleases me not shared with thee; and what treasure so good
and enduring as knowledge? This then have I, Sir Footsore, learned, that
each nation hath its proper wisdom, and its proper folly; and methinks,
could a great king, or duke, tramp like me, and see with his own eyes,
he might pick the flowers, and eschew the weeds of nations, and go home
and set his own folk on Wisdom's hill. The Germans in the north were
churlish, but frank and honest; in the south, kindly and honest too.
Their general blot is drunkenness, the which they carry even to mislike
and contempt of sober men. They say commonly, 'Kanstu niecht sauffen und
fressen so kanstu kienem hern wol dienen.' In England, the vulgar sort
drink as deep, but the worshipful hold excess in this a reproach, and
drink a health or two for courtesy, not gluttony, and still sugar the
wine. In their cups the Germans use little mirth or discourse, but ply
the business sadly, crying 'Seyte frolich!' The best of their drunken
sport is 'Kurlemurlehuff,' a way of drinking with touching deftly of the
glass, the beard, the table, in due turn, intermixed with whistlings
and snappings of the finger so curiously ordered as 'tis a labour of
Hercules, but to the beholder right pleasant and mirthful. Their topers,
by advice of German leeches, sleep with pebbles in their mouths. For,
as of a boiling pot the lid must be set ajar, so with these fleshy
wine-pots, to vent the heat of their inward parts: spite of which many
die suddenly from drink; but 'tis a matter of religion to slur it, and
gloze it, and charge some innocent disease therewith. Yet 'tis more a
custom than very nature, for their women come among the tipplers, and
do but stand a moment, and as it were, kiss the wine-cup; and are indeed
most temperate in eating and drinking, and of all women, modest and
virtuous, and true spouses and friends to their mates; far before our
Holland lasses, that being maids, put the question to the men, and being
wived, do lord it over them. Why, there is a wife in Tergou, not far
from our door. One came to the house and sought her man. Says she,
'You'll not find him: he asked my leave to go abroad this afternoon, and
I did give it him.'"

Catherine. "'Tis sooth! 'tis sooth! 'Twas Beck Hulse, Jonah's wife. This
comes of a woman wedding a boy."

"In the south where wine is, the gentry drink themselves bare; but not
in the north: for with beer a noble shall sooner burst his body than
melt his lands. They are quarrelsome, but 'tis the liquor, not the mind;
for they are none revengeful. And when they have made a bad bargain
drunk, they stand to it sober. They keep their windows bright; and
judge a man by his clothes. Whatever fruit or grain or herb grows by the
roadside, gather and eat. The owner seeing you shall say, 'Art welcome,
honest man.' But an ye pluck a wayside grape, your very life is in
jeopardy. 'Tis eating of that Heaven gave to be drunken. The French are
much fairer spoken, and not nigh so true-hearted. Sweet words cost them
nought. They call it payer en blanche."

Denys. "Les coquins! ha! ha!"

"Natheless, courtesy is in their hearts, ay, in their very blood. They
say commonly, 'Give yourself the trouble of sitting down.' And such
straws of speech show how blows the wind. Also at a public show, if you
would leave your seat, yet not lose it, tie but your napkin round the
bench, and no French man or woman will sit here; but rather keep the
place for you."

Catherine. "Gramercy! that is manners. France for me!"

Denys rose and placed his hand gracefully to his breastplate.

"Natheless, they say things in sport which are not courteous, but
shocking. 'Le diable t'emporte!' 'Allez au diable!' and so forth. But
