himself I expect we shall have some trouble with him. There has been a
reward of a hundred pounds for his capture for a long time, but so far
without success. One man, whom he suspected rightly or wrongly of
intending to betray him, he killed by fastening the door of his
cottage and then setting the thatch alight; and the man, his wife, and
four children were burned to death."

That evening, just as dinner was over, the sergeant came in and said
that a woman wished to speak to the captain.

"What does she want, sergeant?"

"She won't say what she wants, sir; only that she wishes to speak to
you privately."

"Show her in then, sergeant."

The sergeant brought in the woman and then retired. As soon as the
door closed behind him the woman threw back the shawl which had
hitherto almost covered her face. She was about twenty-five years old,
and strikingly pretty.

"What can I do for you?" Captain O'Connor asked. "The sergeant says
you wish to speak to me on some particular business."

"Yes, sir; sure, and it is very particular business."

"You don't wish to speak to me quite alone, I suppose?" O'Connor
asked, seeing that she hesitated.

"No, your honor; seeing that these gentlemen are all officers there is
no reason in life why they should not hear what I have to say. But,
sure, sir, it's little my life would be worth if it were known outside
these walls that I had been here. My name is Bridget Moore, sir, and I
belong to County Galway. Well, your honor, there was a desperate
villain, they call the Red Captain, there. He was hiding in the hills
for some time near the little farm my husband holds. We did not know
who he was--how should we? but thought he was hiding because the
revenue officers were after him on account of a bit of a still or
something of that kind; but we found out one day, when he had been
taking too much of the cratur and was talking big like, that he was
the Red Captain.

"My Denis was troubled in his mind over it. Av coorse he was not one
to inform, but he had heard so much of the Red Captain and his doings
that he was onaisy at the thought of having him as a neighbor. He
wasn't one to pretind to be frindly when he wasn't, and the captain
noticed it and took offince, and there were mighty high words between
them. One night, your honor, he and his gang came down and broke in
the door, and tould Denis he was a black-hearted informer, Denis said
it was a lie, and they were nigh shooting him, but at last they said
he should have the choice either of joining them or of being shot; and
Denis, being druv to it, and seeing no other way to save his life, was
forced to agree. Then the villains made him kneel down and take a
great oath to be faithful and secret.

"I was away off; for I had caught up the child and run out by the back
door when they came in, but I crept round to a broken window there
was, so that I could hear what was said. When they took him away wid
them and went off, I followed at a distance, for I wasn't sure whether
after all they didn't mean to murther him. But they went up to the hut
where they lived at the edge of the bog, and as they seemed more
friendly like I went back to see after the child, who was left all
alone. The next morning I took it over to a neighbor and asked her to
keep it till I came back. Then I went up to the hut again and found it
was empty.

"A day or two after that I found out from a man who run a still, and
knew the Red Captain well, that he had made up his mind to lave Galway
and come down south, where he had some friends; so I just shut up the
house and walked down here. Now you know, your honor, that I don't
come here for the sake of the reward. Not a penny of it would I touch
if I were dying of hunger, and sooner than be pointed at as an
informer I would throw myself over them big rocks. But they have got
Denis, and either they will make him as bad as themselves--which I
don't think--or they will shoot him; and if they don't shoot him he
will be shot one of these days by the soldiers. What I want you to
promise, your honor, is, that if I point out where you can lay your
hands on the villains, you won't say who tould you, and that you will
tell your soldiers not to shoot Denis.

"You will know him aisy enough, your honor, for he is a dacent-looking
boy; and when the time comes you will find he will do what he can to
help you. I found out who the people were that the Red Captain had
come down to, and I watched and watched their place, till one day I
saw him come there. Then I followed him and found out whereabout they
were hiding. I kept about till, that evening, I had a chance of
spaking to Denis for a minute. He is broken-hearted, your honor, but
he daren't lave them. He said they had sworn if he ever tried to run
away they would hunt him down; and the Red Captain said that he would
send information to the poliss that it was Denis who helped him fire
the hut when those poor cratures were burned, and would say, he had
been in the thick of it all along; and how could he prove the differ?
So he daren't for the life of him move, your honor; and tould me to
keep away and go home, for I could do him no good, and if they caught
me spaking to him they would kill the two of us."

"I promise you willingly," Captain O'Connor said, "I will not say who
pointed out their hiding-place, and if your husband does not join in
the resistance he certainly shall receive no hurt. If he is caught
with them I am afraid that I shall be exceeding my duty in letting him
go; but surely he would have no difficulty in proving that he had only
accompanied them in consequence of their threats."

"That's what he couldn't prove, sir. That's just what they tould him:
if they were caught themselves they knew there was no chance for them,
and they would all swear together that he had been with them all
along; and how could the boy prove that he wasn't?"

"Well, Mrs. Moore, I will try and strain a point," Captain O'Connor
said. "You see, people sometimes escape after they are taken, and I
think we shall be able to manage somehow that Denis shan't appear at
the bar with the others; and if it should turn out that cannot be
managed I will engage to make such representations to the authorities
that your husband shall get off free."

"Very well, sir; then I will tell you where they are to be found. I
can't take you there, your honor, but I can tell you whereabout it is.
There is a footpath turns oft from the road at the end of the village,
and goes straight down to the top of them big rocks that come out of
the sea. Well, sir, a few hundred yards to the right of that there is
a sort of break in the rocks, and there is a track goes down there.
You won't see it onless you look close for it, and it gets lost a
little way down, becase the rocks are all broken about and heaped on
each other. It's down there they go. There's always a man on watch not
far from the top; and there is generally a gossoon from their friends
here somewhere at the edge of the bog behind, who would run forward
and tell the man on watch if he saw any soldiers coming from here. So
you will have to be mighty careful; but they are down there, sure
enough, somewhere.

"Denis tould me there was no chance of their being taken, for they
have got a little boat hid away down among the rocks by the water, and
if the alarm was given they would make off in that. I can't tell you
any more than that, you honor; but I should think that may be enough
to help you to find them."

"I should think so too, Mrs. Moore. And what do you propose doing
yourself?"

"I shall go off, sir, at once. Folk have been wondering at me, and
asking where I came from and what I was doing here, and I want to get
away. If it came to the Red Captain's ears there was a woman about he
might guess it was me, and if he did he would like enough shoot Denis
and make away. I can't see as I can do any good by stopping, and I may
do harm; so I will go over to Dunmanway and stop there till I hear
what your honor has done. If I find Denis has got hurted I shall come
back, if not I shall go home to the farm. Maybe your honor will tell
him I shall be expecting him there."

Captain O'Connor accompanied her outside to see that no one spoke to
her, and when he saw her disappear in the darkness he returned to the
room.

"I think you have had a lucky escape, Conway," he said as he entered.
"The matter is explained now about your being watched and questioned,
and it is very lucky that they did not quite make up their minds you
were a spy; for if they had you may be sure they would have had no
more hesitation in putting an ounce of lead into you, and throwing you
over the cliff, than they would in shooting a sparrow. Well, this is
an important piece of news. The authorities have for a long time been
trying to lay their hands on this scoundrel and his gang, and if we
can catch him it will be a feather in our caps, for he has defied all
their efforts for the last three years. Now, we must arrange the line
of battle, how it is to come off, and when.

"In the first place we must arrange with the coast-guard to have a
well-manned boat somewhere along the coast to cut the scoundrels off
if they try to escape by sea. The attack must be made by daylight,
that is evident, for half the men would break either their legs or
their necks if they tried to get down in the dark. I think it will be
best to place half the company along the top of the cliffs, posting
two or three men at every point where it looks possible that they may
ascend, then with the other half we will go down on this track she
speaks of and search the whole place thoroughly. If they are there we
must find them sooner or later; and find them we will, if the search
takes us a week."

"Who is this Red Captain?"

"I believe his real name is Dan Egan. He was mixed up in some brutal
outrage on an inoffensive farmer, had to leave the county, went to
Dublin, and enlisted. He went out to Spain with his regiment, was
flogged twice for thieving, then he shot an officer who came upon him
when he was ill-treating a Portuguese peasant; he got away at the
time, and it was months before he was heard of again. It was thought
that he had deserted to the French, but I suppose he got down to a
port somewhere in disguise and shipped on board a vessel for England.
The next thing heard of him was that he was back again at his native
place. The police here were of course ignorant as to what had become
of him from the time he disappeared; but the fellow made no secret of
what he had been doing, and boasted of having shot the officer.

"The regiment was communicated with, and by a comparison of the date
of enlistment and the personal description there was no doubt that the
man who had enlisted as Mark Kelly was Dan Egan. Of course every
effort was made to capture him, but in vain. I believe the peasants
would have informed against him, for he was hated for his violence and
overbearing way, but he soon established a sort of terror in the
district. He was joined by three or four of the greatest ruffians in
County Galway, and unless the whole of these had been captured at one
swoop, vengeance would be sure to fall upon whoever had betrayed him.

"He has killed four or five police officers at various times, and I
should say twice as many peasants who have ventured to offend him. He
and his band levied a sort of blackmail in the district, and woe
betide the small farmer who refused to send in a sheep or a bag of
meal once a month. Their cattle were killed and their ricks set on
fire; and so in a short time he had the whole neighborhood under his
thumb. Whenever a party went in pursuit of him he was sure to obtain
early information. Not from love, but from fear; for it was a well
understood thing that any one seeing a body of police and failing to
send instant word would suffer for it.

"Just as we left I heard that a company of foot and a troop of cavalry
were to be sent from Galway to search every hut and hiding-place in
the district, and I suppose that it was this that drove him down here.
He has red hair and beard; and it is this partly, and partly no doubt
the fellow's murderous character, that has gained him the name of the
Red Captain. He is a prize worth taking, and if we can lay hands on
him and his band together we shall have done better work than if we
had unearthed a hundred illicit stills. At any rate we will lose no
time. I will write a letter at once to the revenue officer at the
coast-guard station. I shall mention no names, but say that we hope to
make an important capture to-morrow morning on the cliffs here, and
asking him to send a well-armed boat at daylight, with instructions to
stop and arrest any boat that may put out from the shore. If the
revenue cutter happens to be lying off his station, or within reach of
a messenger, I will tell him to have her off the shore if possible."

Captain O'Connor at once wrote the letter. "Sergeant Morris," he said,
when the non-commissioned officer came in, "I want you to take this
letter yourself to Lieutenant Adcock at the coast-guard station in the
cove three miles along to the east. It is of the highest importance. I
want you to see the officer yourself and obtain an answer from him.
Take a man with you, and carry your side-arms. Don't go along the
cliff, but keep to the road till you come to the lane that leads
direct to the village in the cove. Just tell the landlord to come
here, will you?"

"Landlord," he said, when the host appeared, "I want you to lend a
couple of long greatcoats and two hats or caps of any kind. I am
sending two of my men off on a mission, and I don't want them to be
noticed. It does not matter how old the coats are so that they are
long."

"I will get them your honor. I have one that will do, and will borrow
the other for you in no time."

"You see, sergeant, I don't want your presence in the village to be
noticed. You know how these fellows hang together. The sight of two
soldiers in uniform there would be sure to attract attention. Choose a
man you can rely on to play his part cleverly. I tell you to take your
side-arms, because I happen to know that there are men about who, if
they suspected your mission, would not have the least hesitation in
knocking you on the head. This is no question of finding a still,
sergeant, but of making the capture of one of the most desperate bands
in the country; and it is well worth taking the utmost pains and
precaution to insure everything going well."

"I understand, sir. I will take Pat Hogan with me; he has plenty of
the brogue, and can talk the language too. So if any one should speak
to us as we go along he can do the talking, and no one will suspect
that we are not a couple of countrymen."

"That will do very well, sergeant. It is just seven o'clock now. If
Lieutenant Adcock is in when you get there you ought to be back, well,
before ten. It's about four miles by road. I would borrow a couple of
heavy sticks if I were you. I don't think it at all likely there will
be any occasion to use them, but it is just as well to be prepared.
If, when you get near the village, or on your way back, you come
across any one who questions you inquisitively, and seems to you to be
a suspicious character, I authorize you to make him prisoner and bring
him over with you. Knock him down if he attempt resistance. You may as
well take a pair of handcuffs with you and a short coil of rope. The
object of the rope is, that if you capture any one on your way to the
village you had better handcuff him, gag him, and tie him up securely
to a tree or some other object at a distance from the road, and pick
him up as you come back. I need hardly say that you are not to go into
any house in the village, not to speak to any one beyond what is
absolutely necessary."

"I understand, sir, and you can rely upon me to carry out your
orders."

"You had better fetch Hogan in here, sergeant. Tell him what he has to
do before you bring him in, then we can see the disguises on you both;
and it's better for you to start from an inn, where people are going
in and out, than from one of the houses where you are quartered."

The landlord returned with the disguises almost immediately after the
sergeant had gone out, and in a few minutes the latter came in with
Hogan. The greatcoats were put on, the hats substituted for military
caps, and with the collars of the coats turned up and the addition of
two heavy sticks, the disguise was complete, and the two smart
soldiers would pass anywhere as peasants.

"You had better take your gaiters off, sergeant. You look too neat
about the feet; although that would not be noticed unless you went
into the light. Here is the letter, put it carefully inside your
jacket. There, now, I think you will do."

It was nearly ten when the two soldiers returned. "Here's a letter
sir, from the revenue officer. He quite understands what is wanted,
and will have a boat off the cliffs at daybreak with a well-armed
crew. He does not know where the cutter is at present. She touched
there two days ago, sailing west."

"You met no suspicious characters, sergeant?"

"No, sir. We spoke to no one until we got to the village, beyond
asking a woman which was the turning from the main road. There didn't
seem to be a soul about in the village, and we had to wait about some
time before I could get hold of a boy to tell me which was the revenue
officer's cottage. I left Hogan outside when I went in; but he saw no
one, nor did any one speak to us on our return beyond one or two men
we met passing the time of night, which Hogan answered."

"All the better, sergeant. The great object is secrecy. Now, leave
these things here and put on your caps again. If you go to the bar the
landlord has orders to give you a glass of grog each. Don't say a word
as to where you have been, Hogan, but get back to your quarters. When
you have had your grog, sergeant, look in again before you go."

When the men had gone out Captain O'Connor opened the letter, which
merely confirmed what the sergeant said. When Sergeant Morris returned
Captain O'Connor told him that the company were to parade an hour
before daylight.

"Don't give the order to-night, sergeant; but go round from house to
house yourself in the morning, rouse the men, and tell them to fall in
quietly without beat of drum.

"Everything is going on well, boys," he said when the sergeant had
left, "and I think we have a good chance of laying these scoundrels by
the heels to-morrow. However, we must insure that word is not sent
from the village, when the troops begin to get up. A stir an hour
before the usual time is sure to excite remark, and as it is certain
these fellows will have arranged with some one in the village for
early news of any unusual movement, we must take steps to prevent a
messenger passing. I propose that you two shall be astir half an hour
before the troops; and that you shall, before any one else is moving,
go along the path leading to the cliffs, stop a couple of hundred
yards beyond the village, and arrest any one who may come along."

"Yes, I think that will be a very good plan," Lieutenant Desmond said.
"No one shall pass us, I warrant."

"Don't forget to take your pistols; it is likely enough you may have
to use them before the day is over. These scoundrels know they fight
with ropes round their necks, and are almost sure to resist
desperately. Now we will have one glass more, and then be off to bed.
The day will begin to break about seven, and I will impress upon the
landlord the urgent necessity of calling you both by five."

"I suppose we are to stay where we take up our station till you come
along with the company, O'Connor, whether we take any prisoners or
not?"

"Yes, that will be the best way, Desmond. If you have caught any one I
will send them back with a guard to the village. No, it would not do
for you to move before we come up, for there is no saying what time a
messenger will go along. They may not take the alarm until just as we
are starting, or even until they see which road we are taking. By the
way, you may as well take that pair of handcuffs the sergeant has left
on the table with you, otherwise if you do get a prisoner you would
have to keep your hands on his collar, or he might make a bolt any
moment. There is nothing like being on the safe side.

"You had better take up your post at some place where your figures
will not be seen by any one coming along the road till he is close to
you, or instead of coming straight along he might make a bolt round;
and some of these fellows can run like hares. We must not let the
smallest chance escape us. If we succeed in the affair we shall get no
end of credit, beside the satisfaction of freeing the country of as
desperate a band of ruffians as any that infest it, and that's saying
a good deal. Now, here's success to our work to-morrow." O'Connor
drained his glass and placed it on the table, and then rising and
taking up his sword made his way to his room, his companions at once
following his example.




CHAPTER XII.

THE CAVE AMONG THE ROCKS.


At five o'clock on the following morning Ralph was roused by the
landlord, who brought him a candle; he lost no time in dressing,
buckled on his sword, looked to the priming of the double-barreled
pistols Mr. Penfold had given him, and placed them in his belt. Then
he went downstairs and put the handcuffs into the pocket of his great
coat. He then went to the bar, where the landlord was kindling a fire.

"I want a bottle of whisky, landlord, a loaf of bread, and a big lump
of cheese." As he was waiting for these, Lieutenant Desmond joined
him.

"That's right, Conway, there is nothing like laying in a stock of
creature comforts when you have the chance. Look here, landlord, get
an empty bottle and put half the whisky in, and then fill them both up
with water. Cut that loaf of bread in halves; in that way we can get
it in our pockets. That's right; now do the same with the cheese. You
and I may not be together, Conway, so it's just as well to divide the
commissariat; to say nothing of the convenience of carriage. Now, have
you got the handcuffs? That's right, we will be off at once."

The landlord went to the door with them and looked after them,
somewhat surprised at seeing no soldiers about.

"What can they be up to by themselves at this hour of the morning?" he
said to himself. "Well, they are two nice young fellows anyway, and I
hope that they are not going to get into mischief. Now I will just
make up the fire, and then sit down for an hour's snooze in my
arm-chair. The captain said he was to be called at six. I suppose they
are going out still-hunting somewhere. Well, I wish them luck; for
when the boys can get their whisky for next to nothing they don't care
about coming here, and small blame to them, for I shouldn't myself."

Not a soul was astir in the village as the two young officers passed
along. They turned off at the lane leading to the sea, and after
proceeding a quarter of a mile came to a point where the roadway
ended, the path beyond this being merely a track. Here there was a
gate across the lane, and a wall running right and left.

"We can't find a better spot than this, Conway," Lieutenant Desmond
said. "If we sit down one on each side against the wall, a hundred men
