and his lady." "Another day he returns from attending to the purchase of
western lands to find that Col. Bassett, his wife and children, have
arrived during his absence, 'Billy and Nancy and Mr. Warner Washington
being here also.' The next day the gentlemen go a-hunting together, Mr.
Bryan Fairfax having joined them for the hunt and the dinner that
followed."

Again, we find Mrs. Washington writing, with her usual unique spelling
and sentence structure, to her sister:

     "Mt. Vernon Aug 28 1762.

     "MY DEAR NANCY,--I had the pleasure to receive your kind letter
     of the 25 of July just as I was setting out on a visit to Mr.
     Washington in Westmoreland where I spent a weak very agreabley. I
     carried my little patt with me and left Jackey at home for a
     trial to see how well I could stay without him though we ware
     gone but won fortnight I was quite impatient to get home. If I at
     aney time heard the doggs barke or a noise out, I thought thair
     was a person sent for me....

     "We are daly expect(ing) the kind laydes of Maryland to visit us.
     I must begg you will not lett the fright you had given you
     prevent you comeing to see me again--If I coud leave my children
     in as good Care as you can I would never let Mr. W----n come down
     without me--Please to give my love to Miss Judy and your little
     babys and make my best compliments to Mr. Bassett and Mrs.
     Dawson.

       "I am with sincere regard
                          "dear sister
                   "yours most affectionately
                     "MARTHA WASHINGTON."[163]

Because of the lack of good roads and the apparently great distances,
the mere matter of travelling was far more important in social
activities than is the case in our day of break-neck speed. A
ridiculously small number of miles could be covered in a day; there were
frequent stops for rest and refreshment; and the occupants of the heavy,
rumbling coaches had ample opportunity for observing the scenery and the
peculiarities of the territory traversed. Martha Washington's grandson
has left an account of her journey from Virginia to New York, and
recounts how one team proved balky, delayed the travellers two hours,
and thus upset all their calculations. But the kindness of those they
met easily offset such petty irritations as stubborn horses and slow
coaches. Note these lines from the account:

     "We again set out for Major Snowden's where we arrived at 4
     o'clock in the evening. The gate (was) hung between 2 trees which
     were scarcely wide enough to admit it. We were treated with great
     hospitality and civility by the major and his wife who were plain
     people and made every effort to make our stay as agreeable as
     possible."

     "May 19th. This morning was lowering and looked like rain--we
     were entreated to stay all day but to no effect we had made our
     arrangements & it was impossible.... Majr Snowden accompanied us
     10 or a dozen miles to show a near way and the best road.... We
     proceeded as far as Spurriers ordinary and there refreshed
     ourselves and horses.... Mrs. Washington shifted herself here,
     expecting to be met by numbers of gentlemen out of
     B----re--(Baltimore) in which time we had everything in
     reddiness, the carriage, horses, etc., all at the door in
     waiting."[164]

The story of that journey, now made in a few hours, is filled with
interesting light upon the ways of the day:--the numerous accidents to
coaches and horses, the dangers of crossing rivers on flimsy ferries,
the hospitality of the people, who sent messengers to insist that the
party should stop at the various homes, the strange mingling of the
uncouth, the totally wild, and the highly civilized and cultured.
Probably at no other time in the world's history could so many stages of
man's progress and conquest of nature be seen simultaneously as in
America of the eighteenth century.


_IV. New England Social Life_

Turning to New England, we find of course that under the early Puritan
regime amusements were decidedly under the ban. We have noted under the
discussion of the home the strictness of New England views, and how this
strictness influenced every phase of public and private life. Indeed, at
this time life was largely a preparation for eternity, and the ethical
demands of the day gave man an abnormally tender and sensitive
conscience. When Nathaniel Mather declared in mature years that of all
his manifold sins none so stuck upon him as that, when a boy, he
whittled on the Sabbath day, and did it behind the door--"a great
reproach to God"--he was but illustrating the strange atmosphere of
fear, reverence, and narrowness of his era.

And yet, those earlier settlers of Plymouth and Boston were a kindly,
simple-hearted, good-natured people. It is evident from Judge Sewall's
_Diary_ that everybody in a community knew everybody else, was genuinely
interested in everyone's welfare, and was always ready with a helping
hand in days of affliction and sorrow. All were drawn together by common
dangers and common ties; it was an excellent example of true community
interest and co-operation. This genuine solicitude for others, this
desire to know how other sections were getting along, this natural
curiosity to inquire about other people's health, defences against
common dangers, and advancement in agriculture, trade and manufacturing,
led to a form of inquisitiveness that astonished and angered foreigners.
Late in the eighteenth century even Americans began to notice this
proverbial Yankee trait. Samuel Peters, writing in 1781 in his _General
History of Connecticut_, said: "After a short acquaintance they become
very familiar and inquisitive about news. 'Who are you, whence come you,
where going, what is your business, and what your religion?' They do not
consider these and similar questions as impertinent, and consequently
expect a civil answer. When the stranger has satisfied their curiosity
they will treat him with all the hospitality in their power."

Fisher in his _Men, Women, & Manners in Colonial Times_ declares:
"A ... Virginian who had been much in New England in colonial times used
to relate that as soon as he arrived at an inn he always summoned the
master and mistress, the servants and all the strangers who were about,
made a brief statement of his life and occupation, and having assured
everybody that they could know no more, asked for his supper; and
Franklin, when travelling in New England, was obliged to adopt the same
plan."[165]

Old Judge Sewall, a typical specimen of the better class Puritan,
certainly possessed a kindly curiosity about his neighbors' welfare, and
many are his references to visits to the sick or dying, or to attendance
at funerals. While there were no great balls nor brilliant fetes, as in
the South, his _Diary_ emphatically proves that there were many pleasant
visits and dinner parties and a great deal of the inevitable courting.
Thus, we note the following:

     "Tuesday, January 12. I dine at the Governour's: where Mr. West,
     Governour of Carolina, Capt. Blackwell, his Wife and Daughter,
     Mr. Morgan, his Wife and Daughter Mrs. Brown, Mr. Eliakim
     Hutchinson and Wife.... Mrs. Mercy sat not down, but came in
     after dinner well dressed and saluted the two Daughters. Madm
     Bradstreet and Blackwell sat at the upper end together, Governour
     at the lower end."[166]

     "Dec. 20, 1676 ... Mrs. Usher lyes very sick of an Inflammation
     in the Throat.... Called at her House coming home to tell Mr.
     Fosterling's Receipt, i.e. A Swallows Nest (the inside) stamped
     and applied to the throat outwardly."[167]

     "Satterday, June 5th, 1686. I rode to Newbury, to see my little
     Hull, and to keep out of the way of the Artillery Election, on
     which day eat Strawberries and Cream with Sister Longfellow at
     the Falls."[168]

     "Monday, July 11. I hire Ems's Coach in the Afternoon, wherein
     Mr. Hez. Usher and his wife, and Mrs. Bridget her daughter, my
     Self and wife ride to Roxbury, visit Mr. Dudley, and Mr. Eliot,
     the Father who blesses them. Go and sup together at the Grayhound
     Tavern with boil'd Bacon and rost Fowls. Came home between 10 and
     11 brave Moonshine, were hinder'd an hour or two by Mr. Usher,
     else had been in good season."[169]

     "Thorsday, Oct. 6, 1687 ... On my Unkle's Horse after Diner, I
     carry my wife to see the Farm, where we eat Aples and drank
     Cider. Shew'd her the Meeting-house.... In the Morn Oct. 7th
     Unkle and Goodm. Brown come our way home accompanying of us. Set
     out after nine, and got home before three. Call'd no where by the
     way. Going out, our Horse fell down at once upon the Neck, and
     both fain to scramble off, yet neither receiv'd any
     hurt...."[170]

Nearly a century later Judge Pynchon records a social life similar,
though apparently much more liberal in its views of what might enter
into legitimate entertainment:

     "Saturday, July 7, 1784. Dine at Mr. Wickkham's, with Mrs. Browne
     and her two daughters.... In the afternoon Mrs. Browne and I, the
     Captain, Blaney, and a number of gentlemen and ladies, ride, and
     some walk out, some to Malbon's Garden, some to Redwood's,
     several of us at both; are entertained very agreeably at each
     place; tea, coffee, cakes, syllabub, and English beer, etc.,
     punch and wine. We return at evening; hear a song of Mrs. Shaw's,
     and are highly entertained; the ride, the road, the prospects,
     the gardens, the company, in short, everything was most
     agreeable, most entertaining--was admirable."[171]

     "Thursday, October 25, 1787 ... Mrs. Pynchon, Mrs. Orne, and
     Betsy spend the evening at Mrs. Anderson's; musick and
     dancing."[172]

     "Monday, November 10, 1788 ... Mrs. Gibbs, Curwen, Mrs. Paine,
     and others spend the evening here, also Mr. Gibbs, at
     cards."[173]

     "Friday, April 19 1782. Some rain. A concert at night; musicians
     from Boston, and dancing."[174]

     "June 24, Wednesday, 1778. Went with Mrs. Orne [his daughter] to
     visit Mr. Sewall and lady at Manchester, and returned on
     Thursday."[175]


_V. Funerals as Recreations_

Even toward the close of the eighteenth century, however, lecture days
and fast days were still rather conscientiously observed, and such
occasions were as much a part of New England social activities as were
balls and receptions in Virginia. Judge Pynchon makes frequent note of
such religious meetings; as,--"April 25, Thursday, 1782. Fast Day.
Service at Church, A.M.; none, P.M."[176] "Thursday, July 20, 1780. Fast
Day; clear."[177] Funerals and weddings formed no small part of the
social interests of the day, and indeed the former apparently called for
much more display and formality than was ever the case in the South.
There seems to have been among the Puritans a certain grim pleasure in
attending a burial service, and in the absence of balls, dancing, and
card playing, the importance of the New England funeral in early social
life can scarcely be overestimated. During the time of Sewall the burial
was an occasion for formal invitation cards; gifts of gloves, rings, and
scarfs were expected for those attending; and the air of depression so
common in a twentieth century funeral was certainly not conspicuous. It
may have been because death was so common; for the death rate was
frightfully high in those good old days, and in a community so thinly
populated burials were so extremely frequent that every one from
childhood was accustomed to the sight of crepe and coffin. Man is a
gregarious creature and craves the assembly, and as church meetings,
weddings, executions, and funerals were almost the sole opportunities
for social intercourse, the flocking to the house of the dead was but
normal and natural. Sewall seems to have been in constant attendance at
such gatherings:

     "Midweek, March 23, 1714-5. Mr. Addington buried from the
     Council-Chamber ... 20 of the Council were assisting, it being
     the day for Appointing Officers. All had Scarvs. Bearers Scarvs,
     Rings, Escutcheons...."[178]

     "My Daughter is Inter'd.... Had Gloves and Rings of 2 pwt and
     1/2. Twelve Ministers of the Town had Rings, and two out of
     Town...."[179]

     "Tuesday, 18, Novr. 1712. Mr. Benknap buried. Joseph was invited
     by Gloves, and had a scarf given him there, which is the
     first."[180]

     "Feria sexta, April 8, 1720. Govr. Dudley is buried in his father
     Govr. Dudley's Tomb at Roxbury. Boston and Roxbury Regiments were
     under Arms, and 2 or 3 Troops.... Scarves, Rings, Gloves,
     Escutcheons.... Judge Dudley in a mourning Cloak led the Widow;
     ... Were very many People, spectators out of windows, on Fences
     and Trees, like Pigeons...."[181]

     "July 25th, 1700. Went to the Funeral of Mrs. Sprague, being
     invited by a good pair of Gloves."[182]

This comment is made upon the death of Judge Sewall's father:

     "May 24th.... My Wife provided Mourning upon my Letter by Severs.
     All went in mourning save Joseph, who staid at home because his
     Mother lik'd not his cloaths...."[183]

     "Febr. 1, 1700. Waited on the Lt. Govr. and presented him with a
     Ring in Remembrance of my dear Mother, saying, Please to accept
     in the Name of one of the Company your Honor is preparing to
     go."[184]

     "July 15, 1698.... On death of John Ive.... I was not at his
     Funeral. Had Gloves sent me, but the knowledge of his notoriously
     wicked life made me sick of going ... and so I staid at home, and
     by that means lost a Ring...."[185]

     "Friday, Feb. 10, 1687-8. Between 4 and 5 I went to the Funeral
     of the Lady Andros, having been invited by the Clerk of the South
     Company. Between 7 and 8 Lechus (Lynchs? i.e. links or torches)
     illuminating the cloudy air. The Corps was carried into the Herse
     drawn by Six Horses. The Souldiers making a Guard from the
     Governour's House down the Prison Lane to the South
     Meeting-house, there taken out and carried in at the western
     dore, and set in the Alley before the pulpit, with Six Mourning
     Women by it.... Was a great noise and clamor to keep people out
     of the House, that might not rush in too soon.... On Satterday
     Feb. 11, the mourning cloth of the Pulpit is taken off and given
     to Mr. Willard."[186]

     "Satterday, Nov. 12, 1687. About 5 P.M. Mrs. Elisa Saffen is
     entombed.... Mother not invited."[187]

In the earlier days of the New England colonies the gift of scarfs,
gloves, and rings for such services was almost demanded by social
etiquette; but before Judge Sewall's death the custom was passing. The
following passages from his _Diary_ illustrate the change:

     "Decr. 20, feria sexta.... Had a letter brought me of the Death
     of Sister Shortt.... Not having other Mourning I look'd out a
     pair of Mourning Gloves. An hour or 2 later Mr. Sergeant, sent me
     and Wife Gloves; mine are so little I can't wear them."[188]

     "August 7r 16, 1721. Mrs. Frances Webb is buried, who died of the
     Small Pox. I think this is the first public Funeral without
     Scarves...."[189]

The Puritans were not the only colonists to celebrate death with pomp
and ceremony; but no doubt the custom was far more nearly universal
among them than among the New Yorkers or Southerners. Still, in New
Amsterdam a funeral was by no means a simple or dreary affair; feasting,
exchange of gifts, and display were conspicuous elements at the burial
of the wealthy or aristocratic. The funeral of William Lovelace in 1689
may serve as an illustration:

"The room was draped with mourning and adorned with the escutcheons of
the family. At the head of the body was a pall of death's heads, and
above and about the hearse was a canopy richly embroidered, from the
centre of which hung a garland and an hour-glass. At the foot was a
gilded coat of arms, four feet square, and near by were candles and
fumes which were kept continually burning. At one side was placed a
cupboard containing plate to the value of L200. The funeral procession
was led by the captain of the company to which deceased belonged,
followed by the 'preaching minister,' two others of the clergy, and a
squire bearing the shield. Before the body, which was borne by six
'gentlemen bachelors,' walked two maidens in white silk, wearing gloves
and 'Cyprus scarves,' and behind were six others similarly attired,
bearing the pall.... Until ten o'clock at night wines, sweet-meats, and
biscuits were served to the mourners."[190]


_VI. Trials and Executions_

Whenever normal pleasures are withdrawn from a community that community
will undoubtedly indulge in abnormal ones. We should not be surprised,
therefore, to find that the Puritans had an itching for the details of
the morbid and the sensational. The nature of revelations seldom, if
ever, grew too repulsive for their hearing, and if the case were one of
adultery or incest, it was sure to be well aired. There was a
possibility that if an offender made a thorough-going confession before
the entire congregation or community, he might escape punishment, and on
such occasions it would seem that the congregation sat listening closely
and drinking in all the hideous facts and minutiae. The good fathers in
their diaries and chronicles not only have mentioned the crimes and the
criminals, but have enumerated and described such details as fill a
modern reader with disgust. In fact, Winthrop in his _History of New
England_ has cited examples and circumstances so revolting that it is
impossible to quote them in a modern book intended for the general
public, and yet Winthrop himself seemed to see nothing wrong in offering
cold-bloodedly the exact data. Such indulgence in the morbid or _risque_
was not, however, limited to the New England colonists; it was entirely
too common in other sections; but among the Puritan writers it seemed to
offer an outlet for emotions that could not be dissipated otherwise in
legitimate social activities.

To-day the spectacle or even the very thought of a legal execution is so
horrible to many citizens that the state hedges such occasions about
with the utmost privacy and absence of publicity; but in the seventeenth
century the Puritan seems to have found considerable secret pleasure in
seeing how the victim faced eternity. Condemned criminals were taken to
church on the day of execution, and there the clergyman, dispensing with
the regular order of service, frequently consumed several hours
thundering anathema at the wretch and describing to him his awful crime
and the yawning pit of hell in which even then Satan and his imps were
preparing tortures. If the doomed man was able to face all this without
flinching, the audience went away disappointed, feeling that he was
hard-hearted, stubborn, "predestined to be damned"; but if with loud
lamentation and wails of terror he confessed his sin and his fear of
God's vengeance, his hearers were pleased and edified at the fall of one
more of the devil's agents. Often times a similar scene was enacted at
the gallows, where a host of men, women, and even children crowded close
to see and hear all. Judge Sewall has recorded for us just such an
event:

"Feria Sexta, June 30, 1704.... After Diner, about 3 P.M. I went to see
