"I doubt not that," answered Edward calmly, yet with a look which
Paul did not understand; "but the wide river runs before us, and
the bridge is barred to us. Unless we reduce first this noble city,
we must turn and face the foe and fight him at sore odds."

A look of dismay crossed Paul's face as he heard this piece of
news, and he silently followed the prince at his bidding to the
spot where the leading nobles and generals were gathered together
in warm debate. The news that Edward was just upon them ran like
wildfire through the ranks, and all the most experienced leaders,
including the royal Margaret herself, were of opinion that it would
be better not to run the risk of a battle, but retire rapidly and
stealthily from their present position, and not encounter the onset
of Edward's veteran troops, flushed with victory and thirsting for
blood, until their hardy mountain allies had contrived to join
them.

But there is something revolting to young and ardent spirits in the
thought of flight, and the Duke of Somerset was eager for the fray.
He argued that an easy victory must be theirs if they did but act
boldly and hastened to the attack. To fly were fatal; their troops
would become disheartened and melt away. Their foes would openly
triumph, and all men would be drawn to them. Edward's soldiers,
weary with long marching, would be taken by surprise. It were a
thousand times better to risk the fight than to play the coward at
so critical a juncture.

And these impetuous words carried the younger spirits along with
them. The prince drew his sword, and riding through the ranks,
asked if the soldiers would choose to fight or fly. There could
scarce be more than one reply to such an appeal so made. They drew
their swords and vowed to live or die with him, and the enthusiasm
of the moment was such that all were carried away; and orders were
instantly given for a march upon Tewkesbury, where it was thought
a spot might be found which would give them advantages for the
coming struggle.

The troops had had a long march earlier in the day, but they
traversed the ten miles which lay between them and Tewkesbury with
cheerful alacrity. Paul and the prince rode side by side in the van
of the advancing host, and Edward looked straight before him with
glowing eyes, as if he felt that a crisis of his fate were at hand.

"At last, my good Paul, we are riding forth to try conclusions with
the world, as we have purposed so long to do," he said, with a
strange, flashing smile. "In faith I am glad that the hour of
action is come. Ere another sun is set some blow shall have been
struck which shall set the crown of England upon some one head more
firmly than ever it has been set before. God grant the cause of
right may triumph! But whichever way the conflict goes, I pray that
this distracted land may find peace and rest, and that I may be
either a victor in the strife, or may find a soldier's grave. Paul,
will you give me your promise, trusty comrade, that ere I fall
alive into the hand of the foe, you will bury your knightly sword
in my heart yourself? It were the part of a true brother to save me
from the fate of my patient father. He has borne dethronement and
captivity; but methinks I should pine and die, and I would far
rather--"

He gave Paul an expressive glance; but the young knight answered
gravely and steadfastly:

"My liege, ask me not that beyond my power to grant. We may not
without sin raise our hands against the Lord's anointed, and I may
not do the thing you ask. Death or captivity I will gladly share
with you, or spend every drop of my blood to save you; but more
than this no loyal knight may promise. Forgive me, my liege, if I
offend in this."

But Edward held out his mailed hand with his own bright, sweet
smile, grasping that of Paul, which he held in his own as he spoke.

"You are in the right, Paul, you are in the right. Perchance it
were a coward thought; for should not a prince be ready for any
blow of adverse fortune? But ride you into the battle beside me.
Let us fight side by side, even as we have always hoped to do. I
would that you were in very truth my brother, as in love you have
long been. And if I fall whilst you escape, be it your office to
break the tidings to my mother and my gentle Anne; for methinks,
were it told them suddenly or untenderly, their hearts would break
with the sorrow."

Paul gave this pledge willingly, though it scarce seemed possible
to him that he should live to carry such tidings, seeing he would
die a thousand deaths to save his prince from the foeman's steel.
And then, with grave faces but brave hearts and unclouded brows,
the comrades rode side by side into the town of Tewkesbury, whilst
the army intrenched itself on the summit of a small eminence called
the Home Ground, not half a mile away.

Already the rival army was mustering, and the Yorkist troops
occupied the sloping ground to the south, that went by the name of
the Red Piece. The Lancastrians had the best of the situation, as
they were established amongst trenches and ditches, partly real and
partly artificial; which would render any attack by the enemy
difficult and dangerous.

"I trow it would be hard to drive from this ground these brave men
thus posted," said Edward to Paul, as the two rode round the camp
at the close of the day. "They have only to stand firm and hold
their position, and all will be well. Oh that the night were past,
and that a new day had come! I would I could see the end of this
struggle. I would the veil of the future might be for one moment
lifted."

But the future keeps its secrets well--well for us it is so--and
the youthful and high-spirited young prince saw not the black cloud
hanging already upon him. The soldiers greeted him with cheers and
blessings; the generals bent the knee to him, and vowed to die to
win him back his crown. The light of the setting sun illumined the
field so soon to be red with human blood, and the vesper bell from
the church hard by rang out its peaceful summons.

Edward looked round him, and laid his hand affectionately on Paul's
shoulder.

"This is a fair earth," he said dreamily. "I wonder what the world
beyond will be like, for those who leave this behind, as so many
will do tomorrow."

Paul spoke not a word, but returned the look with one infinitely
loving, and together the two rode back to the town.



Chapter 9: The Tragedy Of Tewkesbury


How the battle of Tewkesbury was lost and won is too well known to
need description in detail here. Whether the Lancastrian army could
have held the field before the Yorkist veterans had they been
skilfully generalled will never now be known; but the fiery and
impetuous Duke of Somerset, whose ill-judged ardour had forced the
battle upon his followers, undoubtedly lost the day for them by his
intemperate and reckless disregard of the dictates of common
prudence. After opening the fight by a discharge of ordnance, he
was mad enough to leave his intrenched position on the Home Ground,
and carry his men into the open for a charge upon the opposing
army. Here they were not only confronted by Edward's compact army,
but were taken in the flank and rear by a company of spearmen who
had been told off to guard against a possible ambush in a little
wood; which, however, the hot-headed Somerset had never thought to
place.

Thrown into confusion, the Lancastrians were routed, and confusion
was rendered worse confounded by another impetuous act on the part
of the fiery young duke. As he and his flying soldiers fell back
upon the town of Tewkesbury, and reached the market place, they
found Lord Wenlock and his men sitting idle and motionless there,
as if there was no work for them to do.

The reason for this extraordinary apathy on the part of one of the
leaders will never now be known. It was the curse of the strife of
the Roses that treachery and a change of sides was always
suspected, and too often with good cause, between men who had been
friends and allies heretofore. The Duke of Somerset at once
concluded that Lord Wenlock had turned traitor to the cause, and
riding furiously up to him as he sat, he dashed out his brains with
his battle-axe, without so much as pausing to ask a single
question.

The followers of both leaders who saw the deed were struck with new
terror. With loud cries of "Treason, treason!" they threw down
their arms and fled they knew not whither, and the retreat became a
confused rout, in which the thought of each man was to save his own
life.

Such, in brief, was the deplorable story of the battle of
Tewkesbury. But we are concerned less with the main course of the
fortunes of the day than with the individual adventures of certain
persons concerned, who, if isolated acts of gallantry and devotion
could have saved the day, would have turned the fortunes of even
the fatal field of Tewkesbury.

The prince was stationed in the main body of the army, under the
care, as was supposed by his anxious mother, of the military Prior
of St. John's Longstruther. And by his side was his faithful
shadow, Paul, whose solemn purpose that day was to keep beside the
prince throughout the course of the battle, and shield him from
harm even at the cost of his own life. Some strange foreboding had
fallen upon Paul, and he scarce expected to see the light of
another day; but this presentiment of coming ill he bravely hid
from his companion, and the two rode into the ranks with smiling
faces, and looked across at the opposing lines of the enemy with a
steadfast and lofty courage. Then the prince turned to his
companion.

"Our first battle, good Paul; for though as a child I saw fighting,
I never took part in it before. I am glad that we ride side by side
this day. Let us show our loyal people, whatever be the fortunes of
the field, that Englishmen can strike hard blows, and that they
never turn their backs upon the foe. If we ride not to victory,
Paul, let us ride to death with a courage that shall not disgrace
the kingly blood that both of us can boast in some measure."

Then they looked to their weapons, and sat very silent, waiting
what would befall.

Perhaps those that take part in a fierce fight know less about the
details than any others. Paul was presently aware that he and the
men about him, the prince still at his side, were charging down the
little eminence upon which they had been posted, straight at the
serried ranks of the Yorkist army, which kept its position, and
awaited their coming with cool intrepidity. Paul had not time to
think or reason, or he would surely have wondered at the rashness
of quitting an advantageous position, and putting themselves to
such disadvantage before the foe. All he knew was that the duke's
company had moved first, and had charged upon the enemy, and that
their military monk had given the word to follow and support their
friends; which was done without a moment's hesitation, whether the
movement were, strategically speaking, right or wrong.

And then, all in a moment as it seemed, the prince and his comrade
found themselves in a fierce melee, in which for a while they could
scarce move hand or foot, jammed in by the press of men and steeds,
but surrounded by friends and comrades, who were eagerly pressing
forward toward the foe. Cries and shouts rent the air, mingled
sometimes with the shriek or groan which told that a well-directed
blow had gone home to its mark. The press became denser, and then
less dense; some riderless horses from the front rank came tearing
back through the crush, forcing their way in a sort of mad terror;
and Edward, snatching his battle-axe from its resting place across
his saddle bow, swung it over his head, and shouted to his
companion:

"Follow me, Paul! yonder lies the foe. I will strike a blow for my
father's liberty and crown this day, whether I live or die."

The way was open now, and Paul saw plainly that they were close to
the ranks of the foe. But there was no drawing back, even had he
wished it; his blood was up now, and not even fear for the possible
peril of the prince could withhold him from the charge. He knew not
whether the person of the prince was known, and whether young
Edward ran any especial danger in thus flinging himself upon the
enemy. But it was no longer his place to think--the moment for
action had arrived; and following Edward's example, he dashed into
the thick of the fray, the impetuosity and fury of his charge
bearing down all before him, and hewing down man and horse as he
clave a passage through the ranks for the prince, who closely
followed.

They were not alone. A gallant little company was following in
their track, and with cries of "An Edward, an Edward, a Prince of
Wales!" smote down the rival warriors with a fury which for the
moment nothing could withstand. There is surely something magnetic
in a war cry or in a patriotic song, for it inspires those who use
it with an ardour and a strength which for the moment seem
invincible.

To Paul and the prince it seemed as if the day were all but won.
Wherever they turned they dealt death and destruction. The wing of
the army upon which they charged was wavering and disorganized; the
infantry recoiled before the fierce charge of the horsemen, and the
opposing cavalry was mostly in another part of the field.

"Victory, victory!" shouted those about Paul and the prince; and to
the enthusiastic and excited lads it seemed as if the day was
already theirs. The name of the Prince of Wales was in all mouths.
It was shouted by each soldier as he fell upon his foe, and the
enemy appeared to recoil before it. Onward and ever onward pressed
the eager little band, until it was entirely separated from the
main body of the army; and so certain were all who took part in
that isolated skirmish that the fortunes of the day were with the
House of Lancaster, that the peril of their position struck none of
the prince's followers till, thinned by the blows of their
adversaries, and weary with the impetuosity of their own charge,
they paused and drew together; whilst the foe, glad of a moment's
breathing space, did not molest them.

There are pauses even on the battlefield when a few words can be
exchanged, and the prince, flushed with the foretaste (as it seemed
to him) of a glorious victory, turned to Paul with kindling eyes.

"War is a glorious game in all truth, Paul. I would not have been
elsewhere for all the world. But you bleed--you are wounded. Tell
me where. I knew not that you were hurt. You must ride back to the
town and be tended there."

"Nay, it is nought; I do not even feel it. I know not who struck
me, nor when. I will bind this scarf about my arm, and all will be
well. And think you not, my liege, that it were well to return to
the lines ourselves? I promised your royal mother and the Lady Anne
that you should not adventure yourself too much today within the
enemy's lines. But all such charge passed from my memory in the
heat of the fight."

"Ay, and my place was here, in the midst of my good soldiers. Oh,
it has been a glorious day! 'Lancaster will remember it ever. And
see, Paul--see how they fly on yonder height! See how the battle
rages and becomes a flight! It is the same everywhere. The Red Rose
triumphs. Proud York is forced to fly. Shall we join them, and lead
again to victory? They are chasing them to the very walls of the
town."

Paul looked in the direction indicated, and a change came over his
face. He had the wonderful long, keen sight which often comes to
those who have grown up in the open air, and have been used from
childhood to the exercise of hunting and hawking. The prince saw
only the flying rout, which he concluded to be the soldiers of
York; but Paul could distinguish more. He could see the colours,
and the badges they wore, and he recognized with a sinking heart
the terrible fact that it was the followers of the Red Rose who
were flying before the mailed warriors of Edward of York.

The change in his countenance did not escape young Edward's keen
eye, and he at once divined the cause, The bright flush faded from
his own face, and his gaze was turned in the same direction again.

Alas! it was but too plain now; for the rout was plainly in the
direction of the town, and it was easy to understand that had it
been the Yorkists who had fled they would have taken an opposite
direction, in order to reach their own lines.

For a moment prince and subject sat spellbound, watching that
terrible sight in deep silence. But then the peril of their own
position, and the deadly danger that menaced the prince if the
situation should be realized by their foes surrounding them here,
flashed across Paul like a vivid and terrible lightning gleam.

He turned and laid his hand upon the shoulder of the prince.

"My liege," he said, "we may not linger here. We must regain our
comrades, and see if we may rally them yet. All may not be lost,
but it were madness to remain here. Let me call our followers
