mansion, built of a dark grey stone, with tall square chimneys, and
windows with heavy mullions. High stone walls, hoary and moss-grown, ran
round the gardens and courts, except on the side of the river, where
there was a terrace overlooking the stream, and forming a pleasant
summer's walk. At the back of the house were a few ancient oaks and
sycamores, and in the gardens were some old clipped yews.

Part of this ancient mansion is still standing, and retains much of its
original character, though subdivided and tenanted by several humble
families. The garden is cut up into paddocks, and the approach environed
by a labyrinth of low stone walls, while miserable sheds and other
buildings are appended to it; the terrace is wholly obliterated; and the
grange and offices are pulled down, but sufficient is still left of the
place to give an idea of its pristine appearance and character. Its
situation is striking and peculiar. In front rises a high hill, forming
the last link of the chain of Pendle, and looking upon Barrowford and
Colne, on the further side of which, and therefore not discernible from
the mansion, stood Malkin Tower. At the period in question the lower
part of this hill was well wooded, and washed by the Pendle Water, which
swept past it through banks picturesque and beautiful, though not so
bold and rocky as those in the neighbourhood of the mill. In the rear of
the house the ground gradually rose for more than a quarter of a mile,
when it obtained a considerable elevation, following the course of the
stream, and looking down the gorge, another hill appeared, so that the
house was completely shut in by mountainous acclivities. In winter,
when the snow lay on the heights, or when the mists hung upon them for
weeks together, or descended in continuous rain, Rough Lee was
sufficiently desolate, and seemed cut off from all communication with
the outer world; but at the season when the party beheld it, though the
approaches were rugged and difficult, and almost inaccessible except to
the horseman or pedestrian, bidding defiance to any vehicle except of
the strongest construction, still the place was not without a certain
charm, mainly, however, derived from its seclusion. The scenery was
stern and sombre, the hills were dark and dreary; but the very wildness
of the place was attractive, and the old house, with its grey walls, its
lofty chimneys, its gardens with their clipped yews, and its
rook-haunted trees, harmonised well with all around it.

As the party drew near the house, the gates were thrown open by an old
porter with two other servants, who besought them to stay and partake of
some refreshment; but Roger Nowell haughtily and peremptorily declined
the invitation, and rode on, and the others, though some of them would
fain have complied, followed him.

Scarcely were they gone, than James Device, who had been in the garden,
issued from the gate and speeded after them.

Passing through a close at the back of the mansion, and tracking a short
narrow lane, edged by stone walls, the party, which had received some
accessions from the cottages of Rough Lee, as well as from the huts on
the hill-side, again approached the river, and proceeded along its
banks.

The new-comers, being all of them tenants of Mrs. Nutter, and acting
apparently under the directions of James Device, who had now joined the
troop, stoutly and loudly maintained that the lady would be found right
in the inquiry, with the exception of one old man named Henry Mitton;
and he shook his head gravely when appealed to by Jem, and could by no
efforts be induced to join him in the clamour.

Notwithstanding this demonstration, Roger Nowell and his legal adviser
were both very sanguine as to the result of the survey being in their
favour, and Master Potts turned to ascertain from Sparshot that the two
plans, which had been rolled up and consigned to his custody, were quite
safe.

Meanwhile, the party having followed the course of Pendle Water through
the glen for about half a mile, during which they kept close to the
brawling current, entered a little thicket, and then striking off on the
left, passed over the foot of a hill, and came to the edge of a wide
moor, where a halt was called by Nowell.

It being now announced that they were on the confines of the disputed
property, preparations were immediately made for the survey; the plans
were taken out of a quiver, in which they had been carefully deposited
by Sparshot, and handed to Potts, who, giving one to Roger Nowell and
the other to Nicholas, and opening his memorandum-book, declared that
all was ready, and the two leaders rode slowly forward, while the rest
of the troop followed, their curiosity being stimulated to the highest
pitch.

Presently Roger Nowell again stopped, and pointed to a woody brake.

"We are now come," he said, "to a wood forming part of my property, and
which from an eruption, caused by a spring, that took place in it many
years ago, is called Burst Clough."

"Exactly, sir--exactly," cried Potts; "Burst Clough--I have it
here--landmarks, five grey stones, lying apart at a distance of one
hundred yards or thereabouts, and giving you, sir, twenty acres of moor
land. Is it not so, Master Nicholas? The marks are such as I have
described, eh?"

"They are, sir," replied the squire; "with this slight difference in the
allotment of the land--namely, that Mistress Nutter claims the twenty
acres, while she assigns you only ten."

"Ten devils!" cried Roger Nowell, furiously. "Twenty acres are mine, and
I will have them."

"To the proof, then," rejoined Nicholas. "The first of the grey stones
is here."

"And the second on the left, in that hollow," said Roger Nowell. "Come
on, my masters, come on."

"Ay, come on!" cried Nicholas; "this perambulation will be rare sport.
Who wins, for a piece of gold, cousin Richard?"

"Nay, I will place no wager on the event," replied the young man.

"Well, as you please," cried the squire; "but I would lay five to one
that Mistress Nutter beats the magistrate."

Meanwhile, the whole troop having set forward, they soon arrived at the
second stone. Grey and moss-grown, it was deeply imbedded in the soil,
and to all appearance had rested undisturbed for many a year.

"You measure from the clough, I presume, sir?" remarked Potts to Nowell.

"To be sure," replied the magistrate; "but how is this?--This stone
seems to me much nearer the clough than it used to be."

"Yeigh, so it dun, mester," observed old Mitton.

"It does not appear to have been disturbed, at all events," said
Nicholas, dismounting and examining it.

"It would seem not," said Nowell--"and yet it certainly is not in its
old place."

"Yo are mistaen, mester," observed Jem Device; "ey knoa th' lond weel,
an this stoan has stood where it does fo' t' last twenty year. Ha'n't
it, neeburs?"

"Yeigh--yeigh," responded several voices.

"Well, let us go on to the next stone," said Potts, looking rather
blank.

Accordingly they went forward, the hinds exchanging significant looks,
and Roger Nowell and Nicholas carefully examining their respective maps.

"These landmarks exactly tally with my plan," said the squire, as they
arrived at the third stone.

"But not with mine," said Nowell; "this stone ought to be two hundred
yards to the right. Some trickery has been practised."

"Impossible!" exclaimed the squire; "these ponderous masses could never
have been moved. Besides, there are several persons here who know every
inch of the ground, and will give you their unbiassed testimony. What
say you, my men? Are these the old boundary stones?"

All answered in the affirmative except old Mitton, who still raised a
dissenting voice.

"They be th' owd boundary marks, sure enough," he said; "boh they are
neaw i' their owd places."

"It is quite clear that the twenty acres belong to Mistress Nutter,"
observed Nicholas, "and that you must content yourself with ten, Master
Nowell. Make an entry to that effect, Master Potts, unless you will have
the ground measured."

"No, it is needless," replied the magistrate, sharply; "let us go on."

During this survey, some of the features of the country appeared changed
to the rustics, but how or in what way they could not precisely tell,
and they were easily induced by James Device to give their testimony in
Mistress Nutter's favour.

A small rivulet was now reached, and another halt being called upon its
sedgy banks, the plans were again consulted.

"What have we here, Master Potts--marks or boundaries?" inquired
Richard, with a smile.

"Both," replied Potts, angrily. "This rivulet, which I take to be Moss
Brook, is a boundary, and that sheepfold and the two posts standing in a
line with it are marks. But hold! how is this?" he cried, regarding the
plan in dismay; "the five acres of waste land should be on the left of
the brook."

"It would doubtless suit Master Nowell better if it were so," said
Nicholas; "but as they chance to be on the right, they belong to
Mistress Nutter. I merely speak from the plan."

"Your plan is naught, sir," cried Nowell, furiously, "By what foul
practice these changes have been wrought I pretend not to say, though I
can give a good guess; but the audacious witch who has thus deluded me
shall bitterly rue it."

"Hold, hold, Master Nowell!" rejoined Nicholas; "I can make great
allowance for your anger, which is natural considering your
disappointment, but I will not permit such unwarrantable insinuations to
be thrown out against Mistress Nutter. You agreed to abide by Sir Ralph
Assheton's award, and you must not complain if it be made against you.
Do you imagine that this stream can have changed its course in a single
night; or that yon sheepfold has been removed to the further side of
it?"

"I do," replied Nowell.

"And so do I," cried Potts; "it has been accomplished by the aid of--"

But feeling himself checked by a glance from the reeve, he stammered
out, "of--of Mother Demdike."

"You declared just now that marks, meres, and boundaries, were
unremovable, Master Potts," said the reeve, with a sneer; "you have
altered your opinion."

The crestfallen attorney was dumb.

"Master Roger Nowell must find some better plea than the imputation of
witchcraft to set aside Mistress Nutter's claim," observed Richard.

"Yeigh, that he mun," cried James Device, and the hinds who supported
him.

The magistrate bit his lips with vexation.

"There is witchcraft in it, I repeat," he said.

"Yeigh, that there be," responded old Mitton.

But the words were scarcely uttered, when he was felled to the ground by
the bludgeon of James Device.

"Ey'd sarve thee i' t' same way, fo' two pins," said Jem, regarding
Potts with a savage look.

"No violence, Jem," cried Nicholas, authoritatively--"you do harm to the
cause you would serve by your outrageous conduct."

"Beg pardon, squoire," replied Jem, "boh ey winna hear lies towd abowt
Mistress Nutter."

"No one shan speak ill on her here," cried the hinds.

"Well, Master Nowell," said Nicholas, "are you willing to concede the
matter at once, or will you pursue the investigation further?"

"I will ascertain the extent of the mischief done to me before I stop,"
rejoined the magistrate, angrily.

"Forward, then," cried Nicholas. "Our course now lies along this
footpath, with a croft on the left, and an old barn on the right. Here
the plans correspond, I believe, Master Potts?"

The attorney yielded a reluctant assent.

"There is next a small spring and trough on the right, and we then come
to a limestone quarry--then by a plantation called Cat Gallows Wood--so
named, because some troublesome mouser has been hanged there, I suppose,
and next by a deep moss-pit, called Swallow Hole. All right, eh, Master
Potts? We shall now enter upon Worston Moor, and come to the hut
occupied by Jem Device, who can, it is presumed, speak positively as to
its situation."

"Very true," cried Potts, as if struck by an idea. "Let the rascal step
forward. I wish to put a few questions to him respecting his tenement.
I think I shall catch him now," he added in a low tone to Nowell.

"Here ey be," cried Jem, stepping up with an insolent and defying look.
"Whot d'ye want wi' me?"

"First of all I would caution you to speak the truth," commenced Potts,
impressively, "as I shall take down your answers in my memorandum book,
and they will be produced against you hereafter."

"If he utters a falsehood I will commit him," said Roger Nowell,
sharply.

"Speak ceevily, an ey win gi' yo a ceevil answer," rejoined Jem, in a
surly tone; "boh ey'm nah to be browbeaten."

"First, then, is your hut in sight?" asked Potts.

"Neaw," replied Jem.

"But you can point out its situation, I suppose?" pursued the attorney.

"Sartinly ey con," replied Jem, without heeding a significant glance
cast at him by the reeve. "It stonds behind yon kloof, ot soide o' t'
moor, wi' a rindle in front."

"Now mind what you say, sirrah," cried Potts. "You are quite sure the
hut is behind the clough; and the rindle, which, being interpreted from
your base vernacular, I believe means a gutter, in front of it?"

The reeve coughed slightly, but failed to attract Jem's attention, who
replied quickly, that he was quite sure of the circumstances.

"Very well," said Potts--"you have all heard the answer. He is quite
sure as to what he states. Now, then, I suppose you can tell whether the
hut looks to the north or the south; whether the door opens to the moor
or to the clough; and whether there is a path leading from it to a spot
called Hook Cliff?"

At this moment Jem caught the eye of the reeve, and the look given him
by the latter completely puzzled him.

"Ey dunna reetly recollect which way it looks," he answered.

"What! you prevaricating rascal, do you pretend to say that you do not
know which way your own dwelling stands," thundered Roger Nowell. "Speak
out, sirrah, or Sparshot shall take you into custody at once."

"Ey'm ready, your worship," replied the beadle.

"Weel, then," said Jem, imperfectly comprehending the signs made to him
by the reeve, "the hut looks nather to t' south naw to t' north, but to
t' west; it feaces t' moor; an there is a path fro' it to Hook Cliff."

As he finished speaking, he saw from the reeve's angry gestures that he
had made a mistake, but it was now too late to recall his words.
However, he determined to make an effort.

"Now ey bethink me, ey'm naw sure that ey'm reet," he said.

"You must be sure, sirrah," said Roger Nowell, bending his awful brows
upon him. "You cannot be mistaken as to your own dwelling. Take down his
description, Master Potts, and proceed with your interrogatories if you
have any more to put to him."

"I wish to ask him whether he has been at home to-day," said Potts.

"Answer, fellow," thundered the magistrate.

Before replying, Jem would fain have consulted the reeve, but the latter
had turned away in displeasure. Not knowing whether a lie would serve
his turn, and fearing he might be contradicted by some of the
bystanders, he said he had not been at home for two days, but had
returned the night before at a late hour from Whalley, and had slept at
Rough Lee.

"Then you cannot tell what changes may have taken place in your dwelling
during your absence?" said Potts.

"Of course not," replied Jem, "boh ey dunna see how ony chawnges con ha'
happent i' so short a time."

"But I do, if you do not, sirrah," said Potts. "Be pleased to give me
your plan, Master Newell. I have a further question to ask him," he
added, after consulting it for a moment.

"Ey win awnser nowt more," replied Jem, gruffly.

"You will answer whatever questions Master Potts may put to you, or you
are taken into custody," said the magistrate, sternly.

Jem would have willingly beaten a retreat; but being surrounded by the
two grooms and Sparshot, who only waited a sign from Nowell to secure
him, or knock him down if he attempted to fly, he gave a surly
intimation that he was ready to speak.

"You are aware that a dyke intersects the heath before us, namely,
Worston Moor?" said Potts.

Jem nodded his head.

"I must request particular attention to your plan as I proceed, Master
Nicholas," pursued the attorney. "I now wish to be informed by you,
James Device, whether that dyke cuts through the middle of the moor, or
traverses the side; and if so, which side? I desire also to be informed
where it commences, and where, it ends?"

Jem scratched his head, and reflected a moment.

"The matter does not require consideration, sirrah," cried Nowell. "I
must have an instant answer."

"So yo shan," replied Jem; "weel, then, th' dyke begins near a little
mound ca'd Turn Heaod, about a hundert yards fro' my dwellin', an runs
across th' easterly soide o't moor till it reaches Knowl Bottom."

"You will swear this?" cried Potts, scarcely able to conceal his
satisfaction.

"Swere it! eigh," replied Jem.

"Eigh, we'n aw swere it," chorused the hinds.

"I'm delighted to hear it," cried Potts, radiant with delight, "for
your description corresponds exactly with Master Nowell's plan, and
differs materially from that of Mistress Nutter, as Squire Nicholas
Assheton will tell you."

"I cannot deny it," replied Nicholas, in some confusion.

"Ey should ha' said 'westerly' i' stead o' 'yeasterly,'" cried Jem, "boh
yo puzzle a mon so wi' your lawyerly questins, that he dusna knoa his
reet hond fro' his laft."

"Yeigh, yeigh, we aw meant to say 'yeasterly,'" added the hinds.

"You have sworn the contrary," cried Nowell. "Secure him," he added to
the grooms and Sparshot, "and do not let him go till we have completed
the survey. We will now see how far the reality corresponds with the
description, and what further devilish tricks have been played with the
property."

Upon this the troop was again put in motion, James Device walking
between the two grooms, with Sparshot behind him.

So wonderfully elated was Master Potts by the successful hit he had just
made, and which, in his opinion, quite counterbalanced his previous
failure, that he could not help communicating his satisfaction to Flint,
and this in such manner, that the fiery little animal, who had been for
some time exceedingly tractable and good-natured, took umbrage at it,
and threatened to dislodge him if he did not desist from his
vagaries--delivering the hint so clearly and unmistakeably that it was
not lost upon his rider, who endeavoured to calm him down. In proportion
as the attorney's spirits rose, those of James Device and his followers
sank, for they felt they were caught in a snare, from which they could
not easily escape.

By this time they had reached the borders of Worston Moor, which had
been hitherto concealed by a piece of rising ground, covered with gorse
and brushwood, and Jem's hut, together with the clough, the rindle, and
the dyke, came distinctly into view. The plans were again produced, and,
on comparing them, it appeared that the various landmarks were precisely
situated as laid down by Mistress Nutter, while their disposition was
entirely at variance with James Device's statement.

Master Potts then rose in his stirrups, and calling for silence,
addressed the assemblage.

"There stands the hut," he said, "and instead of being behind the
clough, it is on one side of it, while the door certainly does _not_
face the moor, neither is the rindle in front of the dwelling or near
it; while the dyke, which is the main and important boundary line
between the properties, runs above two hundred yards further west than
formerly. Now, observe the original position of these marks, meres, and
boundaries--that is, of this hut, this clough, this rindle, and this
dyke--exactly corresponds with the description given of them by the man
Device, who dwells in the place, and who is, therefore, a person most
likely to be accurately acquainted with the country; and yet, though he
has only been absent two days, changes the most surprising have taken
place--changes so surprising, indeed, that he scarcely knows the way to
his own house, and certainly never could find the path which he has
described as leading to Hook Cliff, since it is entirely obliterated.
Observe, further, all these extraordinary and incomprehensible changes
in the appearance of the country, and in the situation of the marks,
meres, and boundaries, are favourable to Mistress Nutter, and give her
the advantage she seeks over my honoured and honourable client. They are
set down in Mistress Nutter's plan, it is true; but when, let me ask,
was that plan prepared? In my opinion it was prepared first, and the
changes in the land made after it by diabolical fraud and contrivance. I
am sorry to have to declare this to you, Master Nicholas, and to you,
Master Richard, but such is my firm conviction."

"And mine, also," added Nowell; "and I here charge Mistress Nutter with
sorcery and witchcraft, and on my return I will immediately issue a
warrant for her arrest. Sparshot, I command you to attach the person of
James Device, for aiding and abetting her in her foul practices."

"I will help you to take charge of him," said the reeve, riding forward.

Probably this was done to give Jem a chance of escape, and if so, it was
successful, for as the reeve pushed among his captors, and thrust
Sparshot aside, the ruffian broke from them; and running with great
swiftness across the moor, plunged into the clough, and disappeared.

Nicholas and Richard instantly gave chase, as did Master Potts, but the
fugitive led them over the treacherous bog in such a manner as to baffle
all pursuit. A second disaster here overtook the unlucky attorney, and
damped him in his hour of triumph. Flint, who had apparently not
forgotten or forgiven the joyous kicks he had recently received from the
attorney's heels, came to a sudden halt by the side of the quagmire,
and, putting down his head, and flinging up his legs, cast him into it.
While Potts was scrambling out, the animal galloped off in the direction
of the clough, and had just reached it when he was seized upon by James
Device, who suddenly started from the covert, and vaulted upon his back.




CHAPTER VIII.--ROUGH LEE.


On returning from their unsuccessful pursuit of James Device, the two
Asshetons found Roger Nowell haranguing the hinds, who, on the flight of
their leader, would have taken to their heels likewise, if they had not
been detained, partly by the energetic efforts of Sparshot and the
grooms, and partly by the exhortations and menaces of the magistrate and
Holden. As it was, two or three contrived to get away, and fled across
the moor, whither the reeve pretended to pursue them; while those left
behind were taken sharply to task by Roger Nowell.

"Listen to me," he cried, "and take good heed to what I say, for it
concerns you nearly. Strange and dreadful things have come under my
observation on my way hither. I have seen a whole village stricken as by
a plague--a poor pedlar deprived of the use of his limbs and put in
peril of his life--and a young maiden, once the pride and ornament of
your own village, snatched from a fond father's care, and borne to an
untimely grave. These things I have seen with my own eyes; and I am
resolved that the perpetrators of these enormities, Mothers Demdike and
Chattox, shall be brought to justice. As to you, the deluded victims of
the impious hags, I can easily understand why you shut your eyes to
their evil doings. Terrified by their threats you submit to their
exactions, and so become their slaves--slaves of the bond-slaves of
Satan. What miserable servitude is this! By so doing you not only
endanger the welfare of your souls, by leaguing with the enemies of
Heaven, and render yourselves unworthy to be classed with a religious
and Christian people, but you place your lives in jeopardy by becoming
accessories to the crimes of those great offenders, and render
yourselves liable to like punishment with them. Seeing, then, the
imminency of the peril in which you stand, you will do well to avoid it
while there is yet time. Nor is this your only risk. Your servitude to
Mistress Nutter is equally perilous. What if she be owner of the land
you till, and the flocks you tend! You owe her no fealty. She has
forfeited all title to your service--and, so far from aiding her, you
ought to regard her as a great criminal, whom you are bound to bring to
justice. I have now incontestable proofs of her dealing in the black
art, and can show that by witchcraft she has altered the face of this
country, with the intent to rob me of my land."

Holden now took up the theme. "The finger of Heaven is pointed against
such robbery," he cried. "'Cursed is he,' saith the scripture, 'that
removeth his neighbour's landmark.' And again, it is written, 'Cursed is
he that smiteth his neighbour secretly.' Both these things hath Mistress
Nutter done, and for both shall she incur divine vengeance."

"Neither shall she escape that of man," added Nowell, severely; "for our
sovereign lord hath enacted that all persons employing or rewarding any
evil spirit, shall be held guilty of felony, and shall suffer death. And
death will be her portion, for such demoniacal agency most assuredly
hath she employed."

The magistrate here paused for a moment to regard his audience, and
reading in their terrified looks that his address had produced the
desired impression, he continued with increased severity--

"These wicked women shall trouble the land no longer. They shall be
arrested and brought to judgment; and if you do not heartily bestir
yourselves in their capture, and undertake to appear in evidence against
them, you shall be held and dealt with as accessories in their crimes."

Upon this, the hinds, who were greatly alarmed, declared with one accord
their willingness to act as the magistrate should direct.

"You do wisely," cried Potts, who by this time had made his way back to
the assemblage, covered from head to foot with ooze, as on his former
misadventure. "Mistress Nutter and the two old hags who hold you in
thrall would lead you to destruction. For understand it is the firm
determination of my respected client, Master Roger Nowell, as well as of
myself, not to relax in our exertions till the whole of these pestilent
witches who trouble the country be swept away, and to spare none who
assist and uphold them."

The hinds stared aghast, for so grim was the appearance of the attorney,
that they almost thought Hobthurst, the lubber-fiend, was addressing
them.

At this moment old Henry Mitton came up. He had partially recovered from
the stunning effects of the blow dealt him by James Device, but his head
was cut open, and his white locks were dabbled in blood. Pushing his way
through the assemblage, he stood before the magistrate.

"If yo want a witness agen that foul murtheress and witch, Alice Nutter,
ca' me, Master Roger Nowell," he said. "Ey con tay my Bible oath that
the whole feace o' this keawntry has been chaunged sin yester neet, by
her hondywark. Ca' me also to speak to her former life--to her intimacy
wi' Mother Demdike an owd Chattox. Ca' me to prove her constant
attendance at devils' sabbaths on Pendle Hill, and elsewhere, wi' other
black and damning offences--an among 'em the murder, by witchcraft, o'
her husband, Ruchot Nutter."

A thrill of horror pervaded the assemblage at this denunciation; and
Master Potts, who was being cleansed from his sable stains by one of the
grooms, cried out--

"This is the very man for us, my excellent client. Your name and abode,
friend?"

"Harry Mitton o' Rough Lee," replied the old man. "Ey ha' dwelt there
seventy year an uppards, an ha' known the feyther and granfeyther o'
Ruchot Nutter, an also Alice Nutter, when hoo war Alice Assheton. Ca'
me, sir, an aw' ye want to knoa ye shan larn."

"We will call you, my good friend," said Potts; "and, if you have
sustained any private wrongs from Mistress Nutter, they shall be amply
redressed."

"Ey ha' endured much ot her honts," rejoined Mitton; "boh ey dunna speak
o' mysel'. It be high time that Owd Scrat should ha' his claws clipt, an
honest folk be allowed to live in peace."

"Very true, my worthy friend--very true," assented Potts.

An immediate return to Whalley was now proposed by Nowell; but Master
Potts was of opinion that, as they were in the neighbourhood of Malkin
Tower, they should proceed thither at once, and effect the arrest of
Mother Demdike, after which Mother Chattox could be sought out and
secured. The presence of these two witches would be most important, he
declared, in the examination of Mistress Nutter. Hue and cry for the
fugitive, James Device, ought also to be made throughout the forest.

Confounded by what they heard, Richard and Nicholas had hitherto taken
no part in the proceedings, but they now seconded Master Potts's
proposition, hoping that the time occupied by the visit to Malkin Tower
would prove serviceable to Mistress Nutter; for they did not doubt that
intelligence would be conveyed to her by some of her agents, of Nowell's
intention to arrest her.

Additional encouragement was given to the plan by the arrival of Richard
Baldwyn, who, at this juncture, rode furiously up to the party.

"Weel, han yo settled your business here, Mester Nowell?" he asked, in
breathless anxiety.

"We have so far settled it, that we have established proofs of
witchcraft against Mistress Nutter," replied Nowell. "Can you speak to
her character, Baldwyn?"

"Yeigh, that ey con," rejoined the miller, "an nowt good. Ey wish to see
aw these mischeevous witches burnt; an that's why ey ha' ridden efter
yo, Mester Nowell. Ey want your help os a magistrate agen Mother
Demdike. Yo ha a constable wi' ye, and so can arrest her at wonst."

"You have come most opportunely, Baldwyn," observed Potts. "We were just
considering whether we should go to Malkin Tower."

"Then decide upon 't," rejoined the miller, "or th' owd hag win escape
ye. Tak her unaweares."

"I don't know that we shall take her unawares, Baldwyn," said Potts;
"but I am decidedly of opinion that we should go thither without delay.
Is Malkin Tower far off?"

"About a mile fro' Rough Lee," replied the miller. "Go back wi' me to t'
mill, where yo con refresh yourselves, an ey'n get together some dozen
o' my friends, an then we'n aw go up to t' Tower together."

"A very good suggestion," said Potts; "and no doubt Master Nowell will
accede to it."

"We have force enough already, it appears to me," observed Nowell.

"I should think so," replied Richard. "Some dozen men, armed, against a
poor defenceless old woman, are surely enough."

"Owd, boh neaw defenceless, Mester Ruchot," rejoined Baldwyn. "Yo canna
go i' too great force on an expedition like this. Malkin Tower is a
varry strong place, os yo'n find."

"Well," said Nowell, "since we are here, I agree with Master Potts, that
it would be better to secure these two offenders, and convey them to
Whalley, where their examination can be taken at the same time with that
of Mistress Nutter. We therefore accept your offer of refreshment,
Baldwyn, as some of our party may stand in need of it, and will at once
proceed to the mill."

"Well resolved, sir," said Potts.

"We'n tae th' owd witch, dead or alive," cried Baldwyn.

"Alive--we must have her alive, good Baldwyn," said Potts. "You must see
her perish at the stake."

"Reet, mon," cried the miller, his eyes blazing with fury; "that's true
vengeance. Ey'n ride whoam an get aw ready fo ye. Yo knoa t' road."

So saying, he struck spurs into his horse and galloped off. Scarcely was
he gone than the reeve, who had kept out of his sight, came forward.

"Since you have resolved upon going to Malkin Tower," he said to Nowell,
"and have a sufficiently numerous party for the purpose, my further
attendance can be dispensed with. I will ride in search of James
Device."

"Do so," replied the magistrate, "and let hue and cry be made after
him."

"It shall be," replied the reeve, "and, if taken, he shall be conveyed
to Whalley."

And he made towards the clough, as if with the intention of putting his
words into execution.

Word was now given to set forward, and Master Potts having been
accommodated with a horse by one of the grooms, who proceeded on foot,
the party began to retrace their course to the mill.

They were soon again by the side of Pendle Water, and erelong reached
Rough Lee. As they rode through the close at the back of the mansion,
Roger Nowell halted for a moment, and observed with a grim smile to
Richard--

"Never more shall Mistress Nutter enter that house. Within a week she
shall be lodged in Lancaster Castle, as a felon of the darkest dye, and
she shall meet a felon's fate. And not only shall she be sent thither,
but all her partners in guilt--Mother Demdike and her accursed brood,
the Devices; old Chattox and her grand-daughter, Nance Redferne: not one
shall escape."

"You do not include Alizon Device in your list?" cried Richard.

"I include all--I will spare none," rejoined Nowell, sternly.

"Then I will move no further with you," said Richard.

"How!" cried Newell, "are you an upholder of these witches? Beware what
you do, young man. Beware how you take part with them. You will bring
suspicion upon yourself, and get entangled in a net from which you will
not easily escape."

"I care not what may happen to me," rejoined Richard; "I will never lend
myself to gross injustice--such as you are about to practise. Since you
announce your intention of including the innocent with the guilty, of
exterminating a whole family for the crimes of one or two of its
members, I have done. You have made dark accusations against Mistress
Nutter, but you have proved nothing. You assert that, by witchcraft, she
has changed the features of your land, but in what way can you make good
the charge? Old Mitton has, indeed, volunteered himself as a witness
against her, and has accused her of most heinous offences; but he has at
the same time shown that he is her enemy, and his testimony will be
regarded with doubt. I will not believe her guilty on mere suspicion,
and I deny that you have aught more to proceed upon."

"I shall not argue the point with you now, sir," replied Nowell;
angrily. "Mistress Nutter will be fairly tried, and if I fail in my
proofs against her, she will be acquitted. But I have little fear of
such a result," he added, with a sinister smile.

"You are confident, sir, because you know there would be every
disposition to find her guilty," replied Richard. "She will not be
fairly tried. All the prejudices of ignorance and superstition,
heightened by the published opinions of the King, will be arrayed
against her. Were she as free from crime, or thought of crime, as the
new-born babe, once charged with the horrible and inexplicable offence
of witchcraft, she would scarce escape. You go determined to destroy
her."

"I will not deny it," said Roger Newell, "and I am satisfied that I
shall render good service to society by freeing it from so vile a
member. So abhorrent is the crime of witchcraft, that were my own son
suspected, I would be the first to deliver him to justice. Like a
noxious and poisonous plant, the offence has taken deep root in this
country, and is spreading its baneful influence around, so that, if it
be not extirpated, it may spring up anew, and cause incalculable
mischief. But it shall now be effectually checked. Of the families I
have mentioned, not one shall escape; and if Mistress Nutter herself had
a daughter, she should be brought to judgment. In such cases, children
must suffer for the sins of the parents."

"You have no regard, then, for their innocence?" said Richard, who felt
as if a weight of calamity was crushing him down.

"Their innocence must be proved at the proper tribunal," rejoined
Nowell. "It is not for me to judge them."

"But you do judge them," cried Richard, sharply. "In making the charge,
you know that you pronounce the sentence of condemnation as well. This
is why the humane man--why the just--would hesitate to bring an
accusation even where he suspected guilt--but where suspicion could not
possibly attach, he would never suffer himself, however urged on by
feelings of animosity, to injure the innocent."

"You ascribe most unworthy motives to me, young sir," rejoined Nowell,
sternly. "I am influenced only by a desire to see justice administered,
and I shall not swerve from my duty, because my humanity may be called
in question by a love-sick boy. I understand why you plead thus warmly
for these infamous persons. You are enthralled by the beauty of the
young witch, Alizon Device. I noted how you were struck by her
yesterday--and I heard what Sir Thomas Metcalfe said on the subject. But
take heed what you do. You may jeopardise both soul and body in the
indulgence of this fatal passion. Witchcraft is exercised in many ways.
Its professors have not only power to maim and to kill, and to do other
active mischief, but to ensnare the affections and endanger the souls of
their victims, by enticing them to unhallowed love. Alizon Device is
comely to view, no doubt, but who shall say whence her beauty is
derived? Hell may have arrayed her in its fatal charms. Sin is
beautiful, but all-destructive. And the time will come when you may
thank me for delivering you from the snares of this seductive siren."
Richard uttered an angry exclamation.

"Not now--I do not expect it--you are too much besotted by her," pursued
Nowell; "but I conjure you to cast off this wicked and senseless
passion, which, unless checked, will lead you to perdition. You have
heard what abominable rites are practised at those unholy meetings
called Devil's Sabbaths, and how can you say that some demon may not be
your rival in Alizon's love?"

"You pass all licence, sir," cried Richard, infuriated past endurance;
"and, if you do not instantly retract the infamous accusation you have
made, neither your age nor your office shall protect you."

"I can fortunately protect myself, young man," replied Nowell, coldly;
"and if aught were wanting to confirm my suspicions that you were under
some evil influence, it would be supplied by your present conduct. You
are bewitched by this girl."

"It is false!" cried Richard.

And he raised his hand against the magistrate, when Nicholas quickly
interposed.

"Nay, cousin Dick," cried the squire, "this must not be. You must take
other means of defending the poor girl, whose innocence I will maintain
as stoutly as yourself. But, since Master Roger Nowell is resolved to
proceed to extremities, I shall likewise take leave to retire."

"Your pardon, sir," rejoined Nowell; "you will not withdraw till I think
fit. Master Richard Assheton, forgetful alike of the respect due to age
and constituted authority, has ventured to raise his hand against me,
for which, if I chose, I could place him in immediate arrest. But I
have no such intention. On the contrary, I am willing to overlook the
insult, attributing it to the frenzy by which he is possessed. But both
he and you, Master Nicholas, are mistaken if you suppose I will permit
you to retire. As a magistrate in the exercise of my office, I call upon
you both to aid me in the capture of the two notorious witches, Mothers
Demdike and Chattox, and not to desist or depart from me till such
capture be effected. You know the penalty of refusal."

"Heavy fine or imprisonment, at the option of the magistrate," remarked
Potts.

"My cousin Nicholas will do as he pleases," observed Richard; "but, for
my part, I will not stir a step further."

"Nor will I," added Nicholas, "unless I have Master Nowell's solemn
pledge that he will take no proceedings against Alizon Device."

"You can give no such assurance, sir," whispered Potts, seeing that the
magistrate wavered in his resolution.

"You must go, then," said Nowell, "and take the consequences of your
refusal to act with me. Your relationship to Mistress Nutter will not
tell in your favour."

"I understand the implied threat," said Nicholas, "and laugh at it.
Richard, lad, I am with you. Let him catch the witches himself, if he
can. I will not budge an inch further with him."

"Farewell, then, gentlemen," replied Roger Nowell; "I am sorry to part
company with you thus, but when next we meet--" and he paused.

"We meet as enemies, I presume" supplied Nicholas.

"We meet no longer as friends," rejoined the magistrate, coldly.

With this he moved forward with the rest of the troop, while the two
Asshetons, after a moment's consultation, passed through a gate and made
their way to the back of the mansion, where they found one or two men on
the look-out, from whom they received intelligence, which induced them
immediately to spring from their horses and hurry into the house.

Arrived at the principal entrance of the mansion, which was formed by
large gates of open iron-work, admitting a view of the garden and front
of the house, Roger Nowell again called a halt, and Master Potts, at his
request, addressed the porter and two other serving-men who were
standing in the garden, in this fashion--

"Pay attention to what I say to you, my men," he cried in a loud and
authoritative voice--"a warrant will this day be issued for the arrest
of Alice Nutter of Rough Lee, in whose service you have hitherto dwelt,
and who is charged with the dreadful crime of witchcraft, and with
invoking, consulting, and covenanting with, entertaining, employing,
feeding, and rewarding evil spirits, contrary to the laws of God and
man, and in express violation of his Majesty's statute. Now take
notice, that if the said Alice Nutter shall at any time hereafter return
to this her former abode, or take refuge within it, you are hereby bound
to deliver her up forthwith to the nearest constable, to be by him
brought before the worshipful Master Roger Nowell of Read, in this
county, so that she may be examined by him on these charges. You hear
what I have said?"

The men exchanged significant glances, but made no reply.

Potts was about to address them, but to his surprise he saw the central
door of the house thrown open, and Mistress Nutter issue from it. She
marched slowly and majestically down the broad gravel walk towards the
gate. The attorney could scarcely believe his eyes, and he exclaimed to
the magistrate with a chuckle--

"Who would have thought of this! We have her safe enough now. Ha! ha!"

But no corresponding smile played upon Nowell's hard lips. His gaze was
fixed inquiringly upon the lady.

