  AEneas Medon and Iaesus slew.
  Medon was spurious offspring of divine                         410
  Oileus Ajax' father, and abode
  In Phylace; for he had slain a Chief
  Brother of Eriopis the espoused
  Of brave Oileus; but Iaesus led
  A phalanx of Athenians, and the son                            415
  Of Sphelus, son of Bucolus was deem'd.
  Pierced by Polydamas Mecisteus fell,
  Polites, in the van of battle, slew
  Echion, and Agenor Clonius;
  But Paris, while Deiochus to flight                            420
  Turn'd with the routed van, pierced him beneath
  His shoulder-blade, and urged the weapon through.
    While them the Trojans spoil'd, meantime the Greeks,
  Entangled in the piles of the deep foss,
  Fled every way, and through necessity                          425
  Repass'd the wall. Then Hector with a voice
  Of loud command bade every Trojan cease
  From spoil, and rush impetuous on the fleet.
  [10]And whom I find far lingering from the ships
  Wherever, there he dies; no funeral fires                      430
  Brother on him, or sister, shall bestow,
  But dogs shall rend him in the sight of Troy.
    So saying, he lash'd the shoulders of his steeds,
  And through the ranks vociferating, call'd
  His Trojans on; they, clamorous as he,                         435
  All lash'd their steeds, and menacing, advanced.
  Before them with his feet Apollo push'd
  The banks into the foss, bridging the gulf
  With pass commodious, both in length and breadth
  A lance's flight, for proof of vigor hurl'd.                   440
  There, phalanx after phalanx, they their host
  Pour'd dense along, while Phoebus in the van
  Display'd the awful aegis, and the wall
  Levell'd with ease divine. As, on the shore
  Some wanton boy with sand builds plaything walls,              445
  Then, sportive spreads them with his feet abroad,
  So thou, shaft-arm'd Apollo! that huge work
  Laborious of the Greeks didst turn with ease
  To ruin, and themselves drovest all to flight.
  They, thus enforced into the fleet, again                      450
  Stood fast, with mutual exhortation each
  His friend encouraging, and all the Gods
  With lifted hands soliciting aloud.
  But, more than all, Gerenian Nestor pray'd
  Fervent, Achaia's guardian, and with arms                      455
  Outstretch'd toward the starry skies, exclaim'd.
    Jove, Father! if in corn-clad Argos, one,
  One Greek hath ever, burning at thy shrine
  Fat thighs of sheep or oxen, ask'd from thee
  A safe return, whom thou hast gracious heard,                  460
  Olympian King! and promised what he sought,
  Now, in remembrance of it, give us help
  In this disastrous day, nor thus permit
  Their Trojan foes to tread the Grecians down!
    So Nestor pray'd, and Jove thunder'd aloud                   465
  Responsive to the old Neleian's prayer.
  But when that voice of AEgis-bearing Jove
  The Trojans heard, more furious on the Greeks
  They sprang, all mindful of the fight. As when
  A turgid billow of some spacious sea,                          470
  While the wind blow that heaves its highest, borne
  Sheer o'er the vessel's side, rolls into her,
  With such loud roar the Trojans pass'd the wall;
  In rush'd the steeds, and at the ships they waged
  Fierce battle hand to hand, from chariots, these,              475
  With spears of double edge, those, from the decks
  Of many a sable bark, with naval poles
  Long, ponderous, shod with steel; for every ship
  Had such, for conflict maritime prepared.
    While yet the battle raged only without                      480
  The wall, and from the ships apart, so long
  Patroclus quiet in the tent and calm
  Sat of Eurypylus, his generous friend
  Consoling with sweet converse, and his wound
  Sprinkling with drugs assuasive of his pains.                  485
  But soon as through the broken rampart borne
  He saw the Trojans, and the clamor heard
  And tumult of the flying Greeks, a voice
  Of loud lament uttering, with open palms
  His thighs he smote, and, sorrowful, exclaim'd.                490
    Eurypylus! although thy need be great,
  No longer may I now sit at thy side,
  Such contest hath arisen; thy servant's voice
  Must soothe thee now, for I will to the tent
  Haste of Achilles, and exhort him forth;                       495
  Who knows? if such the pleasure of the Gods,
  I may prevail; friends rarely plead in vain.
    So saying, he went. Meantime the Greeks endured
  The Trojan onset, firm, yet from the ships
  Repulsed them not, though fewer than themselves,               500
  Nor could the host of Troy, breaking the ranks
  Of Greece, mix either with the camp or fleet;
  But as the line divides the plank aright,
  Stretch'd by some naval architect, whose hand
  Minerva hath accomplish'd in his art,                          505
  So stretch'd on them the cord of battle lay.
  Others at other ships the conflict waged,
  But Hector to the ship advanced direct
  Of glorious Ajax; for one ship they strove;
  Nor Hector, him dislodging thence, could fire                  510
  The fleet, nor Ajax from the fleet repulse
  Hector, conducted thither by the Gods.
  Then, noble Ajax with a spear the breast
  Pierced of Caletor, son of Clytius, arm'd
  With fire to burn his bark; sounding he fell,                  515
  And from his loosen'd grasp down dropp'd the brand.
  But Hector seeing his own kinsman fallen
  Beneath the sable bark, with mighty voice
  Call'd on the hosts of Lycia and of Troy.
    Trojans and Lycians, and close-fighting sons                 520
  Of Dardanus, within this narrow pass
  Stand firm, retreat not, but redeem the son
  Of Clytius, lest the Grecians of his arms
  Despoil him slain in battle at the ships.
    So saying, at Ajax his bright spear he cast                  525
  Him pierced he not, but Lycophron the son
  Of Mastor, a Cytherian, who had left
  Cytheras, fugitive for blood, and dwelt
  With Ajax. Him standing at Ajax' side,
  He pierced above his ear; down from the stern                  530
  Supine he fell, and in the dust expired.
  Then, shuddering, Ajax to his brother spake.
    Alas, my Teucer! we have lost our friend;
  Mastorides is slain, whom we received
  An inmate from Cytherae, and with love                          535
  And reverence even filial, entertain'd;
  By Hector pierced, he dies. Where are thy shafts
  Death-wing'd, and bow, by gift from Phoebus thine?
    He said, whom Teucer hearing, instant ran
  With bow and well-stored quiver to his side,                   540
  Whence soon his arrows sought the Trojan host.
  He struck Pisenor's son Clytus, the friend
  And charioteer of brave Polydamas,
  Offspring of Panthus, toiling with both hands
  To rule his fiery steeds; for more to please                   545
  The Trojans and their Chief, where stormy most
  He saw the battle, thither he had driven.
  But sudden mischief, valiant as he was,
  Found him, and such as none could waft aside,
  For right into his neck the arrow plunged,                     550
  And down he fell; his startled coursers shook
  Their trappings, and the empty chariot rang.
  That sound alarm'd Polydamas; he turn'd,
  And flying to their heads, consign'd them o'er
  To Protiaoen's son, Astynoues,                                   555
  Whom he enjoin'd to keep them in his view;
  Then, turning, mingled with the van again.
  But Teucer still another shaft produced
  Design'd for valiant Hector, whose exploits
  (Had that shaft reach'd him) at the ships of Greece            560
  Had ceased for ever. But the eye of Jove,
  Guardian of Hector's life, slept not; he took
  From Telamonian Teucer that renown,
  And while he stood straining the twisted nerve
  Against the Trojan, snapp'd it. Devious flew                   565
  The steel-charged[11] arrow, and he dropp'd his bow.
  Then shuddering, to his brother thus he spake.
    Ah! it is evident. Some Power divine
  Makes fruitless all our efforts, who hath struck
  My bow out of my hand, and snapt the cord                      570
  With which I strung it new at dawn of day,
  That it might bear the bound of many a shaft.
    To whom the towering son of Telamon.
  Leave then thy bow, and let thine arrows rest,
  Which, envious of the Greeks, some God confounds,              575
  That thou may'st fight with spear and buckler arm'd,
  And animate the rest. Such be our deeds
  That, should they conquer us, our foes may find
  Our ships, at least a prize not lightly won.
    So Ajax spake; then Teucer, in his tent                      580
  The bow replacing, slung his fourfold shield,
  Settled on his illustrious brows his casque
  With hair high-crested, waving, as he moved,
  Terrible from above, took forth a spear
  Tough-grain'd, acuminated sharp with brass,                    585
  And stood, incontinent, at Ajax' side.
  Hector perceived the change, and of the cause
  Conscious, with echoing voice call'd to his host.
    Trojans and Lycians and close-fighting sons
  Of Dardanus, oh now, my friends, be men;                       590
  Now, wheresoever through the fleet dispersed,
  Call into mind the fury of your might!
  For I have seen, myself, Jove rendering vain
  The arrows of their mightiest. Man may know
  With ease the hand of interposing Jove,                        595
  Both whom to glory he ordains, and whom
  He weakens and aids not; so now he leaves
  The Grecians, but propitious smiles on us.
  Therefore stand fast, and whosoever gall'd
  By arrow or by spear, dies--let him die;                       600
  It shall not shame him that he died to serve
  His country,[12] but his children, wife and home,
  With all his heritage, shall be secure,
  Drive but the Grecians from the shores of Troy.
    So saying, he animated each. Meantime,                       605
  Ajax his fellow-warriors thus address'd.
    Shame on you all! Now, Grecians, either die,
  Or save at once your galley and yourselves.
  Hope ye, that should your ships become the prize
  Of warlike Hector, ye shall yet return                         610
  On foot? Or hear ye not the Chief aloud
  Summoning all his host, and publishing
  His own heart's wish to burn your fleet with fire?
  Not to a dance, believe me, but to fight
  He calls them; therefore wiser course for us                   615
  Is none, than that we mingle hands with hands
  In contest obstinate, and force with force.
  Better at once to perish, or at once
  To rescue life, than to consume the time
  Hour after hour in lingering conflict vain                     620
  Here at the ships, with an inferior foe.
    He said, and by his words into all hearts
  Fresh confidence infused. Then Hector smote
  Schedius, a Chief of the Phocensian powers
  And son of Perimedes; Ajax slew,                               625
  Meantime, a Chief of Trojan infantry,
  Laodamas, Antenor's noble son
  While by Polydamas, a leader bold
  Of the Epeans, and Phylides'[13] friend,
  Cyllenian Otus died. Meges that sight                          630
  Viewing indignant on the conqueror sprang,
  But, starting wide, Polydamas escaped,
  Saved by Apollo, and his spear transpierced
  The breast of Craesmus; on his sounding shield
  Prostrate he fell, and Meges stripp'd his arms.                635
  Him so employ'd Dolops assail'd, brave son
  Of Lampus, best of men and bold in fight,
  Offspring of King Laomedon; he stood
  Full near, and through his middle buckler struck
  The son of Phyleus, but his corselet thick                     640
  With plates of scaly brass his life secured.
  That corselet Phyleus on a time brought home
  From Ephyre, where the Selleis winds,
  And it was given him for his life's defence
  In furious battle by the King of men,                          645
  Euphetes. Many a time had it preserved
  Unharm'd the sire, and now it saved the son.
  Then Meges, rising, with his pointed lance
  The bushy crest of Dolops' helmet drove
  Sheer from its base; new-tinged with purple bright             650
  Entire it fell and mingled with the dust.
  While thus they strove, each hoping victory,
  Came martial Menelaus to the aid
  Of Meges; spear in hand apart he stood
  By Dolops unperceived, through his back drove                  655
  And through his breast the spear, and far beyond.
  And down fell Dolops, forehead to the ground.
  At once both flew to strip his radiant arms,
  Then, Hector summoning his kindred, call'd
  Each to his aid, and Melanippus first,                         660
  Illustrious Hicetaon's son, reproved.
  Ere yet the enemies of Troy arrived
  He in Percote fed his wandering beeves;
  But when the Danai with all their fleet
  Came thither, then returning, he outshone                      665
  The noblest Trojans, and at Priam's side
  Dwelling, was honor'd by him as a son.
  Him Hector reprimanding, stern began.
    Are we thus slack? Can Melanippus view
  Unmoved a kinsman slain? Seest not the Greeks                  670
  How busy there with Dolops and his arms?
  Come on. It is no time for distant war,
  But either our Achaian foes must bleed,
  Or Ilium taken, from her topmost height
  Must stoop, and all her citizens be slain.                     675
    So saying he went, whose steps the godlike Chief
  Attended; and the Telamonian, next,
  Huge Ajax, animated thus the Greeks.
    Oh friends, be men! Deep treasure in your hearts
  An honest shame, and, fighting bravely, fear                   680
  Each to incur the censure of the rest.
  Of men so minded more survive than die,
  While dastards forfeit life and glory both.
    So moved he them, themselves already bent
  To chase the Trojans; yet his word they bore                   685
  Faithful in mind, and with a wall of brass
  Fenced firm the fleet, while Jove impell'd the foe.
  Then Menelaus, brave in fight, approach'd
  Antilochus, and thus his courage roused.
    Antilochus! in all the host is none                          690
  Younger, or swifter, or of stronger limb
  Than thou. Make trial, therefore, of thy might,
  Spring forth and prove it on some Chief of Troy.
    He ended and retired, but him his praise
  Effectual animated; from the van                               695
  Starting, he cast a wistful eye around
  And hurl'd his glittering spear; back fell the ranks
  Of Troy appall'd; nor vain his weapon flew,
  But Melanippus pierced heroic son
  Of Hicetaon, coming forth to fight,                            700
  Full in the bosom, and with dreadful sound
  Of all his batter'd armor down he fell.
  Swift flew Antilochus as flies the hound
  Some fawn to seize, which issuing from her lair
  The hunter with his lance hath stricken dead,                  705
  So thee, O Melanippus! to despoil
  Of thy bright arms valiant Antilochus
  Sprang forth, but not unnoticed by the eye
  Of noble Hector, who through all the war
  Ran to encounter him; his dread approach                       710
  Antilochus, although expert in arms,
  Stood not, but as some prowler of the wilds,
  Conscious of injury that he hath done,
  Slaying the watchful herdsman or his dog,
  Escapes, ere yet the peasantry arise,                          715
  So fled the son of Nestor, after whom
  The Trojans clamoring and Hector pour'd
  Darts numberless; but at the front arrived
  Of his own phalanx, there he turn'd and stood.
  Then, eager as voracious lions, rush'd                         720
  The Trojans on the fleet of Greece, the mind
  Of Jove accomplishing who them impell'd
  Continual, calling all their courage forth,
  While, every Grecian heart he tamed, and took
  Their glory from them, strengthening Ilium's host.             725
  For Jove's unalter'd purpose was to give
  Success to Priameian Hector's arms,[14]
  That he might cast into the fleet of Greece
  Devouring flames, and that no part might fail
  Of Thetis' ruthless prayer; that sight alone                   730
  He watch'd to see, one galley in a blaze,
  Ordaining foul repulse, thenceforth, and flight
  To Ilium's host, but glory to the Greeks.
  Such was the cause for which, at first, he moved
  To that assault Hector, himself prepared                       735
  And ardent for the task; nor less he raged
  Than Mars while fighting, or than flames that seize
  Some forest on the mountain-tops; the foam
  Hung at his lips, beneath his awful front
  His keen eyes glisten'd, and his helmet mark'd                 740
  The agitation wild with which he fought.
  For Jove omnipotent, himself, from heaven
  Assisted Hector, and, although alone
  With multitudes he strove, gave him to reach
  The heights of glory, for that now his life                    745
  Waned fast, and, urged by Pallas on,[15] his hour
  To die by Peleus' mighty son approach'd.
  He then, wherever richest arms he saw
  And thickest throng, the warrior-ranks essay'd
  To break, but broke them not, though fierce resolved,          750
  In even square compact so firm they stood.
  As some vast rock beside the hoary Deep
  The stress endures of many a hollow wind,
  And the huge billows tumbling at his base,
  So stood the Danai, nor fled nor fear'd.                       755
  But he, all-fiery bright in arms, the host
  Assail'd on every side, and on the van
  Fell, as a wave by wintry blasts upheaved
  Falls ponderous on the ship; white clings the foam
  Around her, in her sail shrill howls the storm,                760
  And every seaman trembles at the view
  Of thousand deaths from which he scarce escapes,
  Such anguish rent the bosom of the Greeks.
  But he, as leaps a famish'd lion fell
  On beeves that graze some marshy meadow's breadth,             765
  A countless herd, tended by one unskill'd
  To cope with savage beasts in their defence,
  Beside the foremost kine or with the last
  He paces heedless, but the lion, borne
  Impetuous on the midmost, one devours                          770
  And scatters all the rest,[16] so fled the Greeks,
  Terrified from above, before the arm
  Of Hector, and before the frown of Jove.
  All fled, but of them all alone he slew
  The Mycenaean Periphetes, son                                   775
  Of Copreus custom'd messenger of King
  Eurystheus to the might of Hercules.
  From such a sire inglorious had arisen
  A son far worthier, with all virtue graced,
  Swift-footed, valiant, and by none excell'd                    780
  In wisdom of the Mycenaean name;
  Yet all but served to ennoble Hector more.
  For Periphetes, with a backward step
  Retiring, on his buckler's border trod,
  Which swept his heels; so check'd, he fell supine,             785
  And dreadful rang the helmet on his brows.
  Him Hector quick noticing, to his side
  Hasted, and, planting in his breast a spear,
  Slew him before the phalanx of his friends.
  But they, although their fellow-warrior's fate                 790
  They mourn'd, no succor interposed, or could,
  Themselves by noble Hector sore appall'd.
    And now behind the ships (all that updrawn
  Above the shore, stood foremost of the fleet)
  The Greeks retired; in rush'd a flood of foes;                 795
  Then, through necessity, the ships in front
  Abandoning, amid the tents they stood
  Compact, not disarray'd, for shame and fear
  Fast held them, and vociferating each
  Aloud, call'd ceaseless on the rest to stand.                  800
  But earnest more than all, guardian of all,
  Gerenian Nestor in their parents' name
  Implored them, falling at the knees of each.
    Oh friends! be men. Now dearly prize your place
  Each in the estimation of the rest.                            805
  Now call to memory your children, wives,
  Possessions, parents; ye whose parents live,
  And ye whose parents are not, all alike!
  By them as if here present, I entreat
  That ye stand fast--oh be not turn'd to flight!                810
    So saying he roused the courage of the Greeks;
  Then, Pallas chased the cloud fall'n from above
  On every eye; great light the plain illumed
  On all sides, both toward the fleet, and where
  The undiscriminating battle raged.                             815
  Then might be seen Hector and Hector's host
  Distinct, as well the rearmost who the fight
  Shared not, as those who waged it at the ships.
    To stand aloof where other Grecians stood
  No longer now would satisfy the mind                           820
  Of Ajax, but from deck to deck with strides
  Enormous marching, to and fro he swung
  With iron studs emboss'd a battle-pole
  Unwieldy, twenty and two cubits long.
  As one expert to spring from horse to horse,                   825
  From many steeds selecting four, toward
  Some noble city drives them from the plain
  Along the populous road; him many a youth
  And many a maiden eyes, while still secure
  From steed to steed he vaults; they rapid fly;                 830
  So Ajax o'er the decks of numerous ships
  Stalk'd striding large, and sent his voice to heaven.
  Thus, ever clamoring, he bade the Greeks
  Stand both for camp and fleet. Nor could himself
  Hector, contented, now, the battle wage                        835
  Lost in the multitude of Trojans more,
  But as the tawny eagle on full wing
  Assails the feather'd nations, geese or cranes
  Or swans lithe-neck'd grazing the river's verge,
  So Hector at a galley sable-prow'd                             840
  Darted; for, from behind, Jove urged him on
  With mighty hand, and his host after him.
  And now again the battle at the ships
  Grew furious; thou hadst deem'd them of a kind
  By toil untameable, so fierce they strove,                     845
  And, striving, thus they fought. The Grecians judged
  Hope vain, and the whole host's destruction sure;
  But nought expected every Trojan less
  Than to consume the fleet with fire, and leave
  Achaia's heroes lifeless on the field.                         850
  With such persuasions occupied, they fought.
    Then Hector seized the stern of a brave bark
  Well-built, sharp-keel'd, and of the swiftest sail,
  Which had to Troy Protesilaeus brought,
  But bore him never thence. For that same ship                  855
  Contending, Greeks and Trojans hand to hand
  Dealt slaughter mutual. Javelins now no more
  Might serve them, or the arrow-starting bow,
  But close conflicting and of one mind all
  With bill and battle-axe, with ponderous swords,               860
  And with long lances double-edged they fought.
  Many a black-hilted falchion huge of haft
  Fell to the ground, some from the grasp, and some
  From shoulders of embattled warriors hewn,
  And pools of blood soak'd all the sable glebe.                 865
  Hector that ship once grappled by the stern
  Left not, but griping fast her upper edge
  With both hands, to his Trojans call'd aloud.
    Fire! Bring me fire! Stand fast and shout to heaven!
  Jove gives us now a day worth all the past;                    870
  The ships are ours which, in the Gods' despite
  Steer'd hither, such calamities to us
  Have caused, for which our seniors most I blame
  Who me withheld from battle at the fleet
  And check'd the people; but if then the hand                   875
  Of Thunderer Jove our better judgment marr'd,
  Himself now urges and commands us on.
    He ceased; they still more violent assail'd
  The Grecians. Even Ajax could endure,
  Whelm'd under weapons numberless, that storm                   880
  No longer, but expecting death retired
  Down from the decks to an inferior stand,
  Where still he watch'd, and if a Trojan bore
  Fire thither, he repulsed him with his spear,
  Roaring continual to the host of Greece.                       885
    Friends! Grecian heroes! ministers of Mars!
  Be men, my friends! now summon all your might!
  Think we that we have thousands at our backs
  To succor us, or yet some stronger wall
  To guard our warriors from the battle's force?                 890
  Not so. No tower'd city is at hand,
  None that presents us with a safe retreat
  While others occupy our station here,
  But from the shores of Argos far remote
  Our camp is, where the Trojans arm'd complete                  895
  Swarm on the plain, and Ocean shuts us in.
  Our hands must therefore save us, not our heels
    He said, and furious with his spear again
  Press'd them, and whatsoever Trojan came,
  Obsequious to the will of Hector, arm'd                        900
  With fire to burn the fleet, on his spear's point
  Ajax receiving pierced him, till at length
  Twelve in close fight fell by his single arm.




                              THE ILIAD.

                              BOOK XVI.




                   ARGUMENT OF THE SIXTEENTH BOOK.


Achilles, at the suit of Patroclus, grants him his own armor, and
permission to lead the Myrmidons to battle. They, sallying, repulse
the Trojans. Patroclus slays Sarpedon, and Hector, when Apollo had
first stripped off his armor and Euphorbus wounded him, slays
Patroclus.




                              BOOK XVI.


  Such contest for that gallant bark they waged.
  Meantime Patroclus, standing at the side
  Of the illustrious Chief Achilles, wept
  Fast as a crystal fountain from the height
  Of some rude rock pours down its rapid[1] stream.                5
  Divine Achilles with compassion moved
  Mark'd him, and in wing'd accents thus began.[2]
    Who weeps Patroclus like an infant girl
  Who, running at her mother's side, entreats
  To be uplifted in her arms? She grasps                          10
  Her mantle, checks her haste, and looking up
  With tearful eyes, pleads earnest to be borne;
  So fall, Patroclus! thy unceasing tears.
  Bring'st thou to me or to my people aught
  Afflictive? Hast thou mournful tidings learn'd                  15
  Prom Phthia, trusted to thy ear alone?
  Menoetius, son of Actor, as they say,
  Still lives; still lives his Myrmidons among
  Peleus AEacides; whom, were they dead,
  With cause sufficient we should both deplore.                   20
  Or weep'st thou the Achaians at the ships
  Perishing, for their outrage done to me?
  Speak. Name thy trouble. I would learn the cause
    To whom, deep-sorrowing, thou didst reply,
  Patroclus! Oh Achilles, Peleus' son!                            25
  Noblest of all our host! bear with my grief,
  Since such distress hath on the Grecians fallen.
  The bravest of their ships disabled lie,
  Some wounded from afar, some hand to hand.
  Diomede, warlike son of Tydeus, bleeds,                         30
  Gall'd by a shaft; Ulysses, glorious Chief,
  And Agamemnon suffer by the spear,
  And brave Eurypylus an arrow-point
  Bears in his thigh. These all, are now the care
  Of healing hands. Oh thou art pity-proof,                       35
  Achilles! be my bosom ever free
  From anger such as harbor finds in thine,
  Scorning all limits! whom, of men unborn,
  Hereafter wilt thou save, from whom avert
  Disgrace, if not from the Achaians now?                         40
  Ah ruthless! neither Peleus thee begat,
  Nor Thetis bore, but rugged rocks sublime,
  And roaring billows blue gave birth to thee,
  Who bear'st a mind that knows not to relent,
  But, if some prophecy alarm thy fears,                          45
  If from thy Goddess-mother thou have aught
  Received, and with authority of Jove,
  Me send at least, me quickly, and with me
  The Myrmidons. A dawn of cheerful hope
  Shall thence, it may be, on the Greeks arise.                   50
  Grant me thine armor also, that the foe
  Thyself supposing present, may abstain
  From battle, and the weary Greeks enjoy
  Short respite; it is all that war allows.
  We, fresh and vigorous, by our shouts alone                     55
  May easily repulse an army spent
  With labor from the camp, and from the fleet,
    Such suit he made, alas! all unforewarn'd
  That his own death should be the bitter fruit,
  And thus Achilles, sorrowful, replied.                          60
    Patroclus, noble friend! what hast thou spoken?
  Me neither prophesy that I have heard
  Holds in suspense, nor aught that I have learn'd
  From Thetis with authority of Jove!
  Hence springs, and hence alone, my grief of heart;              65
  If one, in nought superior to myself
  Save in his office only, should by force
  Amerce me of my well-earn'd recompense--
  How then? There lies the grief that stings my soul.
  The virgin chosen for me by the sons                            70
  Of Greece, my just reward, by my own spear
  Obtain'd when I Eetion's city took,
  Her, Agamemnon, leader of the host
  From my possession wrung, as I had been
  Some alien wretch, unhonor'd and unknown.                       75
  But let it pass; anger is not a flame
  To feed for ever; I affirm'd, indeed,
  Mine inextinguishable till the shout
  Of battle should invade my proper barks;
  But thou put on my glorious arms, lead forth                    80
  My valiant Myrmidons, since such a cloud,
  So dark, of dire hostility surrounds
  The fleet, and the Achaians, by the waves
  Hemm'd in, are prison'd now in narrow space.
  Because the Trojans meet not in the field                       85
  My dazzling helmet, therefore bolder grown
  All Ilium comes abroad; but had I found
  Kindness at royal Agamemnon's hands,
  Soon had they fled, and with their bodies chok'd
  The streams, from whom ourselves now suffer siege               90
  For in the hands of Diomede his spear
  No longer rages rescuing from death
  The afflicted Danai, nor hear I more
  The voice of Agamemnon issuing harsh
  From his detested throat, but all around                        95
  The burst[3] of homicidal Hector's cries,
  Calling his Trojans on; they loud insult
  The vanquish'd Greeks, and claim the field their own.
  Go therefore, my Patroclus; furious fall
  On these assailants, even now preserve                         100
  From fire the only hope of our return.
  But hear the sum of all; mark well my word;
  So shalt thou glorify me in the eyes
  Of all the Danai, and they shall yield
  Briseis mine, with many a gift beside.                         105
  The Trojans from the fleet expell'd, return.
  Should Juno's awful spouse give thee to win
  Victory, be content; seek not to press
  The Trojans without me, for thou shalt add
  Still more to the disgrace already mine.[4]                    110
  Much less, by martial ardor urged, conduct
  Thy slaughtering legions to the walls of Troy,
  Lest some immortal power on her behalf
  Descend, for much the Archer of the skies
  Loves Ilium. No--the fleet once saved, lead back               115
  Thy band, and leave the battle to themselves.
  For oh, by all the powers of heaven I would
  That not one Trojan might escape of all,
  Nor yet a Grecian, but that we, from death
  Ourselves escaping, might survive to spread                    120
  Troy's sacred bulwarks on the ground, alone.
    Thus they conferr'd. [5]But Ajax overwhelm'd
  Meantime with darts, no longer could endure,
  Quell'd both by Jupiter and by the spears
  Of many a noble Trojan; hideous rang                           125
  His batter'd helmet bright, stroke after stroke
  Sustaining on all sides, and his left arm
  That had so long shifted from side to side
  His restless shield, now fail'd; yet could not all
  Displace him with united force, or move.                       130
  Quick pantings heaved his chest, copious the sweat
  Trickled from all his limbs, nor found he time,
  However short, to breathe again, so close
  Evil on evil heap'd hemm'd him around.
    Olympian Muses! now declare, how first                       135
  The fire was kindled in Achaia's fleet?
    Hector the ashen lance of Ajax smote
  With his broad falchion, at the nether end,
  And lopp'd it sheer. The Telamonian Chief
  His mutilated beam brandish'd in vain,                         140
  And the bright point shrill-sounding-fell remote.
  Then Ajax in his noble mind perceived,
  Shuddering with awe, the interposing power
  Of heaven, and that, propitious to the arms
  Of Troy, the Thunderer had ordain'd to mar                     145
  And frustrate all the counsels of the Greeks.
  He left his stand; they fired the gallant bark;
  Through all her length the conflagration ran
  Incontinent, and wrapp'd her stern in flames.
  Achilles saw them, smote his thighs, and said,                 150
    Patroclus, noble charioteer, arise!
  I see the rapid run of hostile fires
  Already in the fleet--lest all be lost,
  And our return impossible, arm, arm
  This moment; I will call, myself, the band.                    155
    Then put Patroclus on his radiant arms.
  Around his legs his polish'd greaves he clasp'd,
  With argent studs secured; the hauberk rich
  Star-spangled to his breast he bound of swift
  AEacides; he slung his brazen sword                             160
  With silver bright emboss'd, and his broad shield
  Ponderous; on his noble head his casque
  He settled elegant, whose lofty crest
  Waved dreadful o'er his brows, and last he seized
  Well fitted to his gripe two sturdy spears.                    165
  Of all Achilles' arms his spear alone
  He took not; that huge beam, of bulk and length
  Enormous, none, AEacides except,
  In all Achaia's host had power to wield.
  It was that Pelian ash which from the top                      170
  Of Pelion hewn that it might prove the death
  Of heroes, Chiron had to Peleus given.
  He bade Automedon his coursers bind
  Speedily to the yoke, for him he loved
  Next to Achilles most, as worthiest found                      175
  Of trust, what time the battle loudest roar'd.
  Then led Automedon the fiery steeds
  Swift as wing'd tempests to the chariot-yoke,
  Xanthus and Balius. Them the harpy bore
  Podarge, while in meadows green she fed                        180
  On Ocean's side, to Zephyrus the wind.
  To these he added, at their side, a third,
  The noble Pedasus; him Peleus' son,
  Eetion's city taken, thence had brought,
  Though mortal, yet a match for steeds divine.                  185
  Meantime from every tent Achilles call'd
  And arm'd his Myrmidons. As wolves that gorge
  The prey yet panting, terrible in force,
  When on the mountains wild they have devour'd
  An antler'd stag new-slain, with bloody jaws                   190
  Troop all at once to some clear fountain, there
  To lap with slender tongues the brimming wave;
  No fears have they, but at their ease eject
  From full maws flatulent the clotted gore;
  Such seem'd the Myrmidon heroic Chiefs                         195
  Assembling fast around the valiant friend
  Of swift AEacides. Amid them stood
  Warlike Achilles, the well-shielded ranks
  Exhorting, and the steeds, to glorious war.
    The galleys by Achilles dear to Jove                         200
  Commanded, when to Ilium's coast he steer'd,
  Were fifty; fifty rowers sat in each,
  And five, in whom he trusted, o'er the rest
  He captains named, but ruled, himself, supreme.
  One band Menestheus swift in battle led,                       205
  Offspring of Sperchius heaven-descended stream.
  Him Polydora, Peleus' daughter, bore
  To ever-flowing Sperchius, compress'd,
  Although a mortal woman, by a God.
  But his reputed father was the son                             210
  Of Perieres, Borus, who with dower
  Enrich'd, and made her openly his bride.
  Warlike Eudorus led the second band.
  Him Polymela, graceful in the dance,
  And daughter beautiful of Phylas, bore,                        215
  A mother unsuspected of a child.
  Her worshiping the golden-shafted Queen
  Diana, in full choir, with song and dance,
  The valiant Argicide[6] beheld and loved.
  Ascending with her to an upper room,                           220
  All-bounteous Mercury[7] clandestine there
  Embraced her, who a noble son produced
  Eudorus, swift to run, and bold in fight.
  No sooner Ilithya, arbitress
  Of pangs puerperal, had given him birth,                       225
  And he beheld the beaming sun, than her
  Echechleus, Actor's mighty son, enrich'd
  With countless dower, and led her to his home;
  While ancient Phylas, cherishing her boy
  With fond affection, reared him as his own.                    230
  The third brave troop warlike Pisander led,
  Offspring of Maimalus; he far excell'd
  In spear-fight every Myrmidon, the friend
  Of Peleus' dauntless son alone except.
  The hoary Phoenix of equestrian fame                           235
  The fourth band led to battle, and the fifth
  Laerceus' offspring, bold Alcimedon.
  Thus, all his bands beneath their proper Chiefs
  Marshall'd, Achilles gave them strict command--
    Myrmidons! all that vengeance now inflict,                   240
  Which in this fleet ye ceased not to denounce
  Against the Trojans while my wrath endured.
  Me censuring, ye have proclaim'd me oft
  Obdurate. Oh Achilles! ye have said,
  Thee not with milk thy mother but with bile                    245
  Suckled, who hold'st thy people here in camp
  Thus long imprison'd. Unrelenting Chief!
  Even let us hence in our sea-skimming barks
  To Phthia, since thou can'st not be appeased--
  Thus in full council have ye spoken oft.                       250
  Now, therefore, since a day of glorious toil
  At last appears, such as ye have desired,
  There lies the field--go--give your courage proof.
    So them he roused, and they, their leader's voice
  Hearing elate, to closest order drew.                          255
  As when an architect some palace wall
  With shapely stones upbuilds, cementing close
  A barrier against all the winds of heaven,
  So wedged, the helmets and boss'd bucklers stood;
  Shield, helmet, man, press'd helmet, man, and shield,          260
  And every bright-arm'd warrior's bushy crest
  Its fellow swept, so dense was their array.
  In front of all, two Chiefs their station took,
  Patroclus and Automedon; one mind
