did, and may warn old Contarini that his intended daughter-in-law is in
love with a boy belonging to the glass-house. The marriage would be
broken off at once if that happened."

"That is true."

So they talked together, judging Zorzi and Marietta according to their
views of human nature, which they deduced chiefly from their experience
of themselves. From time to time Arisa went and listened at the hole in
the floor, and when she heard the guests beginning to take their leave
she hid Aristarchi in the embrasure of a disused window that was
concealed by a tapestry, and she went into the larger room and lay down
among the cushions by the balcony. When Contarini came, a few minutes
later, she seemed to have fallen asleep like a child, weary of waiting
for him.

So far both she and Aristarchi looked upon Zorzi, who did not know of
their existence, with a friendly eye, but their knowledge of his love
for Marietta was in reality one more danger in his path. If at any
future moment he seemed about to endanger the success of their plans,
the strong Greek would soon find an opportunity of sending him to
another world, as he had sent many another innocent enemy before. They
themselves were safe enough for the present, and it was not likely that
they would commit any indiscretion that might endanger their future
flight. They had long ago determined what to do if Contarini should
accidentally find Aristarchi in the house. Long before his body was
found, they would both be on the high seas; few persons knew of Arisa's
existence, no one connected the Greek merchant captain in any way with
Contarini, and no one guessed the sailing qualities of the unobtrusive
vessel that lay in the Giudecca waiting for a cargo, but ballasted to do
her best, and well stocked with provisions and water. The crew knew
nothing, when other sailors asked when they were to sail; the men could
only say that their captain was the owner of the vessel and was very
hard to please in the matter of a cargo.

In one way or another the two were sure of gaining their end, as soon as
they should have amassed a sufficient fortune to live in luxury
somewhere in the far south.

A change in the situation was brought about by the appearance of Zuan
Venier at the glass-house on the following morning. Indolent, tired of
his existence, sick of what amused and interested his companions, but
generous, true and kind-hearted, he had been sorry to hear that Zorzi
had suffered by an accident, and he felt impelled to go and see whether
the young fellow needed help. Venier did not remember that he had ever
resisted an impulse in his life, though he took the greatest pains to
hide the fact that he ever felt any. He perhaps did not realise that
although he had done many foolish things, and some that a confessor
would not have approved, he had never wished to do anything that was
mean, or unkind, or that might give him an unfair advantage over others.

He fancied Zorzi alone, uncared for, perhaps obliged to work in spite of
his lameness, and it occurred to him that he might help him in some way,
though it was by no means clear what direction his help should take. He
did not know that Beroviero was absent, and he intended to call for the
old glass-maker. It would be easy to say that he was an old friend of
Jacopo Contarini and wished to make the acquaintance of Marietta's
father before the wedding. He would probably have an opportunity of
speaking to Zorzi without showing that he already knew him, and he
trusted to Zorzi's discretion to conceal the fact, for he was a good
judge of men.

It turned out to be much easier to carry out his plan than he had
expected.

"My name is Zuan Venier," he said, in answer to Pasquale's gruff
inquiry.

Pasquale eyed him a moment through the bars, and immediately understood
that he was not a person to be kicked into the canal or received with
other similar amenities. The great name alone would have awed the old
porter to something like civility, but he had seen the visitor's face,
and being quite as good a judge of humanity as Venier himself, he opened
the door at once.

Venier explained that he wished to pay his respects to Messer Angelo
Beroviero, being an old friend of Messer Jacopo Contarini. Learning that
the master was absent on a journey, he asked whether there were any one
within to whom he could deliver a message. He had heard, he said, that
the master had a trusted assistant, a certain Zorzi. Pasquale answered
that Zorzi was in the laboratory, and led the way.

Zorzi was greatly surprised, but as Venier had anticipated, he said
nothing before Pasquale which could show that he had met his visitor
before. Venier made a courteous inclination of the head, and the porter
disappeared immediately.

"I heard that you had been hurt," said Venier, when they were alone. "I
came to see whether I could do anything for you. Can I?"

Zorzi was touched by the kind words, spoken so quietly and sincerely,
for it was only lately that any one except Marietta had shown him a
little consideration. He had not forgotten how his master had taken
leave of him, and the unexpected friendliness of old Pasquale after his
accident had made a difference in his life; but of all men he had ever
met, Venier was the one whom he had instinctively desired for a friend.

"Have you come over from Venice on purpose to see me?" he asked, in
something like wonder.

"Yes," answered Venier with a smile. "Why are you surprised?"

"Because it is so good of you."

"You have solemnly sworn to do as much for me, and for all the
companions of our society," returned Venier, still smiling. "We are to
help each other under all circumstances, as far as we can, you know. You
are standing, and it must tire you, with those crutches. Shall we sit
down? Tell me quite frankly, is there anything I can do for you?"

"Nothing you could ever do could make me more grateful than I am to you
for coming," answered Zorzi sincerely.

Venier took the crutches from his hands and helped him to sit on the
bench.

"You are very kind," Zorzi said.

Venier sat down beside him and asked him all manner of questions about
his accident, and how it had happened. Zorzi had no reason for
concealing the truth from him.

"They all hate me here," he said. "It happened like an accident, but the
man made it happen. I do not think that he intended to maim me for life,
but he meant to hurt me badly, and he did. There was not a man or a boy
in the furnace room who did not understand, for no workman ever yet let
his blow-pipe slip from his hand in swinging a piece. But I do not wish
to make matters worse, and I have said that I believed it was an
accident."

"I should like to come across the man who did it," said Venier, his eyes
growing hard and steely.

"When I tried to hop to the furnace on one leg to save myself from
falling, one of the men cried out that I was a dancer, and laughed. I
hear that the name has stuck to me among the workmen. I am called the
'Ballarin.'"

The ignoble meanness of Zorzi's tormentors roused Venier's generous
blood.

"You will yet be their master," he said. "You will some day have a
furnace of your own, and they will fawn to you. Your nickname will be
better than their names in a few years!"

"I hope so," answered Zorzi.

"I know it," said the other, with an energy that would have surprised
those who only knew the listless young nobleman whom nothing could amuse
or interest.

He did not stay very long, and when he went away he said nothing about
coming again. Zorzi went with him to the door. He had asked the
Dalmatian to tell old Beroviero of his visit. Pasquale, who had never
done such a thing in his life, actually went out upon the footway to the
steps and steadied the gondola by the gunwale while Venier got in.

Giovanni Beroviero saw Venier come out, for it was near noon, and he had
just come back from his own glass-house and was standing in the shadow
of his father's doorway, slowly fanning himself with his large cap
before he went upstairs, for it had been very hot in the sun. He did not
know Zuan Venier by sight, but there was no mistaking the Venetian's
high station, and he was surprised to see that the nobleman was
evidently on good terns with Zorzi.




CHAPTER XIV


Zorzi had not left the glass-house since he had been hurt, but he
foresaw that he might be obliged to leave the laboratory for an hour or
more, now that he was better. He could walk, with one crutch and a
stick, resting a little on the injured foot, and he felt sure that in a
few days he should be able to walk with the stick alone. He had the
certainty that he was lame for life, and now and then, when it was dusk
and he sat under the plane-tree, meditating upon the uncertain future,
he felt a keen pang at the thought that he might never again walk
without limping; for he had been light and agile, and very swift of foot
as a boy.

He fancied that Marietta would pity him, but not as she had pitied him
at first. There would be a little feeling of repulsion for the cripple,
mixed with her compassion for the man. It was true that, as matters were
going now, he might not see her often again, and he was quite sure that
he had no right to think of loving her. Zuan Venier's visit had recalled
very clearly the obligations by which he had solemnly bound himself, and
which he honestly meant to fulfil; and apart from them, when he tried to
reason about his love, he could make it seem absurd enough that he
should dream of winning Marietta for his wife.

But love itself does not argue. At first it is seen far off, like a
beautiful bird of rare plumage, among flowers, on a morning in spring;
it comes nearer, it is timid, it advances, it recedes, it poises on
swiftly beating wings, it soars out of sight, but suddenly it is nearer
than before; it changes shapes, and grows vast and terrible, till its
flight is like the rushing of the whirlwind; then all is calm again, and
in the stillness a sweet voice sings the chant of peace or the
melancholy dirge of an endless regret; it is no longer the dove, nor the
eagle, nor the storm that leaves ruin in its track--it is everything, it
is life, it is the world itself, for ever and time without end, for good
or evil, for such happiness as may pass all understanding, if God will,
and if not, for undying sorrow.

Zorzi had forgotten his small resentment against Marietta, for not
having given him a sign nor sent one word of greeting. He knew only that
he loved her with all his heart and would give every hope he had for the
pressure of her hand in his and the sound of her answering voice; and he
dreaded lest she should pity him, as one pities a hurt creature that one
would rather not touch.

It would not be in the hope of seeing her that he might leave the
laboratory before long. He felt quite sure that Giovanni would make some
further attempt to get possession of the little book that meant fortune
to him who should possess it; and Giovanni evidently knew where it was.
It would he easy for him to send Zorzi on an errand of importance, as
soon as he should be so far recovered as to walk a little. The great
glass-houses had dealings with the banks in Venice and with merchants of
all countries, and Beroviero had more than once sent Zorzi to Venice on
business of moment. Giovanni would come in some morning and declare that
he could trust no one but Zorzi to collect certain sums of money in the
city, and he would take care that the matter should keep him absent
several hours. That would be ample time in which to try the flagstones
with a hammer and to turn over the right one. Zorzi had convinced
himself that it gave a hollow sound when he tapped it and that Giovanni
could find it easily enough.

It was therefore folly to leave the box in its present place any longer,
and he cast about in his mind for some safer spot in which to hide it.
In the meantime, fearing lest Giovanni might think of sending him out at
any moment, he waited till Pasquale had brought him water in the
morning, and then raised the stone, as he had done before, took the box
out of the earth and hid it in the cool end of the annealing oven, while
he replaced the slab. The effort it cost him to move the latter told him
plainly enough that his injury had weakened him almost as an illness
might have done, but he succeeded in getting the stone into its bed at
last. He tapped it with the end of his crutch as he knelt on the floor,
and the sound it gave was even more hollow than before. He smiled as he
thought how easily Giovanni would find the place, and how grievously
disappointed he would be when he realised that it was empty.

It occurred at once to Zorzi that Giovanni's first impression would
naturally be that Zorzi had taken the book himself in order to use it
during the master's absence; and this thought perplexed him for a time,
until he reflected that Giovanni could not accuse him of the deed
without accusing himself of having searched for the box, a proceeding
which his father would never forgive. Zorzi did not intend to tell the
master of his conversation with Giovanni, nor of his suspicions. He
would only say that the hiding-place had not seemed safe enough, because
the stone gave a hollow sound which even the boys would notice if
anything fell upon it.

But for Nella, it would be safest to give the box into Marietta's
keeping, since no one could possibly suspect that it could have found
its way to her room. At the mere thought, his heart beat fast. It would
be a reason for seeing her alone, if he could, and for talking with her.
He planned how he would send her a message by Nella, begging that he
might speak to her on some urgent business of her father's, and she
would come as she had come before; they would talk in the garden, under
the plane-tree, where Pasquale and Nella could see them, and he would
explain what he wanted. Then he would give her the box. He thought of it
with calm delight, as he saw it all in a beautiful vision.

But there was Nella, and there was Pasquale, the former indiscreet, the
latter silent but keen-sighted, and quick-witted in spite of his slow
and surly ways. Every one knew that the book existed somewhere, and the
porter and the serving-woman would guess the truth at once. At present
no one but himself knew positively where the thing was. If he carried
out his plan, three other persons would possess the knowledge. It was
not to be thought of.

He looked about the laboratory. There were the beams and crossbeams, and
the box would probably just fit into one of the shadowy interstices
between two of the latter. But they were twenty feet from the ground, he
had no ladder, and if there had been one at hand he could not have
mounted it yet. His eye fell on the big earthen jar, more than half a
man's height and as big round as a hogshead, half full of broken glass
from the experiments. No one would think of it as a place for hiding
anything, and it would not be emptied till it was quite full, several
months hence. Besides, no one would dare to empty it without Beroviero's
orders, as it contained nothing but fine red glass, which was valuable
and only needed melting to be used at once.

It was not an easy matter to take out half the contents, and he was in
constant danger of interruption. At night it would have been impossible
owing to the presence of the boys. If Pasquale appeared and saw a heap
of broken glass on the floor, he would surely suspect something. Zorzi
calculated that it would take two hours to remove the fragments with the
care necessary to avoid cutting his hands badly, and to put them back
again, for the shape of the jar would not admit of his employing even
one of the small iron shovels used for filling the crucibles.

With considerable difficulty he moved a large chest, that contained
sifted white sand, out of the dark corner in which it stood and placed
it diagonally so as to leave a triangular space behind it. To guard
against the sound of the broken glass being heard from without, he shut
the window, in spite of the heat, and having arranged in the corner one
of the sacks used for bringing the cakes of kelp-ashes from Egypt, he
began to fill it with the broken glass he brought from the jar in a
bucket. When he judged that he had taken out more than half the
contents, he took the iron box from the annealing oven. It was hard to
carry it under the arm by which he walked with a stick, the other hand
being necessary to move the crutch, and as he reached the jar he felt
that it was slipping. He bent forward and it fell with a crash, bedding
itself in the smashed glass. Zorzi drew a long breath of satisfaction,
for the hardest part of the work was done.

He tried to heave up the sack from the corner, but it was far too heavy,
and he was obliged to bring back more than half of what it held by
bucketfuls, before he was able to bring the rest, dragging it after him
across the floor. It was finished at last, he had shaken out the sack
carefully over the jar's mouth, and he had moved the sand-chest back to
its original position. No one would have imagined that the broken glass
had been removed and put back again. The box was safely hidden now.

He was utterly exhausted when he dropped into the big chair, after
washing the dust and blood from his hands--for it had been impossible to
do what he had done without getting a few scratches, though none of them
could have been called a cut. He sat quite still and closed his eyes.
The box was safe now. It was not to be imagined that any one should ever
suspect where it was, and on that point he was well satisfied. His only
possible cause of anxiety now might be that if anything should happen to
him, the master would be in ignorance of what he had done. But he saw no
reason to expect anything so serious and his mind was at rest about a
matter which had much disturbed him ever since Giovanni's visit.

The plan which he had attributed to the latter was not, however, the one
which suggested itself to the younger Beroviero's mind. It would have
been easy to carry out, and was very simple, and for that very reason
Giovanni did not think of it. Besides, in his estimation it would be
better to act in such a way as to get rid of Zorzi for ever, if that
were possible.

On the Saturday night after Zorzi had hidden the box in the jar, the
workmen cleared away the litter in the main furnace rooms and the order
was given to let the fires go out. Zorzi sent word to the night boys who
tended the fire in the laboratory that they were to come as usual. They
appeared punctually, and to his surprise made no objection to working,
though he had expected that they would complain of the heat and allege
that their fathers would not let them go on any longer. On Sunday,
according to the old rule of the house, no work was done, and Zorzi kept
up the fire himself, spending most of the long day in the garden. On
Sunday night the boys came again and went to work without a word, and in
the morning they left the usual supply of chopped billets piled up and
ready for use. Zorzi had rested himself thoroughly and went back to his
experiments on that Monday with fresh energy.

The very first test he took of the glass that had been fusing since
Saturday night was successful beyond his highest expectations. He had
grown reckless after having spoiled the original mixtures by adding the
copper in the hope of getting more of the wonderful red, and carried
away by the love of the art and by the certainty of ultimate success
which every man of genius feels almost from boyhood, he had deliberately
attempted to produce the white glass for which Beroviero was famous. He
followed a theory of his own in doing so, for although he was tolerably
sure of the nature of the ingredients, as was every workman in the
house, neither he nor they knew anything of the proportions in which
Beroviero mixed the substances, and every glass-maker knows by
experience that those proportions constitute by far the most important
element of success.

Zorzi had not poured out the specimen on the table as he had done when
the glass was coloured; on the contrary he had taken some on the
blow-pipe and had begun to work with it at once, for the three great
requisites were transparency, ductility, and lightness. In a few minutes
he had convinced himself that his glass possessed all these qualities in
an even higher degree than the master's own, and that was immeasurably
superior to anything which the latter's own sons or any other
glass-maker could produce. Zorzi had taken very little at first, and he
made of it a thin phial of graceful shape, turned the mouth outward, and
dropped the little vessel into the bed of ashes. He would have set it in
the annealing oven, but he wished to try the weight of it, and he let it
cool. Taking it up when he could touch it safely, it felt in his hand
like a thing of air. On the shelf was another nearly like it in size,
which he had made long ago with Beroviero's glass. There were scales on
the table; he laid one phial in each, and the old one was by far the
heavier. He had to put a number of pennyweights into the scale with his
own before the two were balanced.

His heart almost stood still, and he could not believe his good fortune.
He took the sheet of rough paper on which he had written down the
precise contents of the three crucibles, and he carefully went over the
proportions of the ingredients in the one from which he had just taken
his specimen. He made a strong effort of memory, trying to recall
whether he had been careless and inexact in weighing any of the
materials, but he knew that he had been most precise. He had also noted
the hour at which he had put the mixture into the crucible on Saturday,
and he now glanced at the sand-glass and made another note. But he did
not lay the paper upon the table, where it had been lying for two days,
kept in place by a little glass weight. It had become his most precious
possession; what was written on it meant a fortune as soon as he could
get a furnace to himself; it was his own, and not the master's; it was
wealth, it might even be fame. Beroviero might call him to account for
misusing the furnace, but that was no capital offence after all, and it
was more than paid for by the single crucible of magnificent red glass.
Zorzi was attempting to reproduce that too, for he had the master's
notes of what the pot had contained, and it was almost ready to be
tried; he even had the piece of copper carefully weighed to be equal in
bulk with the ladle that had been melted. If he succeeded there also,
that was a new secret for Beroviero, but the other was for himself.

All that morning he revelled in the delight of working with the new
glass. A marvellous dish with upturned edge and ornamented foot was the
next thing he made, and he placed it at once in the annealing oven. Then
he made a tall drinking glass such as he had never made before, and
then, in contrast, a tiny ampulla, so small that he could almost hide it
in his hand, with its spout, yet decorated with all the perfection of a
larger piece. He worked on, careless of the time, his genius all alive,
the rest a distant dream.

He was putting the finishing touches to a beaker of a new shape when
the door opened, and Giovanni entered the laboratory. Zorzi was seated
on the working stool, the pontil in one hand, the 'porcello' in the
other. He glanced at Giovanni absently and went on, for it was the last
touch and the glass was cooling quickly.

"Still working, in this heat?" asked Giovanni, fanning himself with his
cap as was his custom.

There was a moment's silence. Then a sharp clicking sound and the beaker
fell finished into the soft ashes.

"Yes, I am still at work, as you see," answered Zorzi, not realising
that Giovanni would particularly notice what he was doing.

He rose with some difficulty and got his crutch under one arm. With a
forked stick he took the beaker from the ashes and placed it in the
annealing oven. Giovanni watched him, and when the broad iron door was
open, he saw the other pieces already standing inside on the iron tray.

"Admirable!" cried Giovanni. "You are a great artist, my dear Zorzi!
There is no one like you!"

"I do what I can," answered Zorzi, closing the door quickly, lest the
hot end of the oven should cool at all.

"I should say that you do what no one else can," returned Giovanni. "But
how lame you are! I had expected to find you walking as well as ever by
this time."

"I shall never walk again without limping."

