to sea and so pass the Genoese, who were not likely, in such weather,
to put out to question a sail passing in the distance; but as we made
off from land we saw Pisani's fleet approaching. Then, as Fieschi put
to sea and we saw that the battle was imminent, there was nothing for
us to do but to lie to, and wait for the battle to be over, before we
delivered our stores, having little doubt that Pisani would be
victorious."

"Then had the battle gone the other way," the merchant said, "the
Bonito at the present moment would probably be lying a prize in the
harbour of Genoa!"

"We did not lose sight of the probability of that, signor, but thought
that, if the Genoese should gain a victory, they would be too busy with
their prizes and prisoners, if not too crippled, to pursue us, and we
reckoned that in such weather the Bonito would be able to sail quite as
fast as any of the Genoese."

"And now, tell me about your affairs, Francisco. Where was it you fell
in with the Genoese galley, and by what miracle did you get off?"

"It was in the battle, sir. One of the Venetian galleys had dropped out
of the fight disabled, and its opponent went to the assistance of their
admiral's ship, which was engaged with Pisani. They attempted to board
him on both sides, and, seeing that he was in great peril, and that if
his ship was taken the battle would be as bad as lost, we thought that
you yourself would approve of our going to his assistance. This we did,
and engaged one of their galleys; and, as her crew were occupied with
the admiral, we took them by surprise, and created such a diversion
that he succeeded, with what assistance we could give him, in capturing
both his opponents."

"That was done well indeed," Polani said warmly. "It was a risky
matter, indeed, for you, with sailors unprotected by armour, to enter
into a combat with the iron-clad soldiers of Genoa.

"And so the captain and twenty-seven of the men were killed! You must
have had some brisk fighting!"

"The captain, and many of the men, were shot by the Genoese archers as
we ranged up alongside their vessel. The others were killed in
hand-to-hand fighting."

"And my cousin Matteo, what has become of him?" Polani asked suddenly.
"I trust he is not among the killed!"

"He is unharmed," Francis replied. "He fought gallantly, and the
admiral, the next day, offered to take him on board his own ship, many
of the volunteers serving on board having been killed. Matteo, of
course, accepted the offer."

"He would have done better to have stayed on board my ship for another
two years," Polani said, "and learned his business. He would have made
a far better sailor than he can ever become on board a state galley;
but I never expected him to stick to it. He has no earnestness of
purpose, and is too particular about his dress to care about the rough
life of a real seaman."

"He has plenty of courage, sir, and I have always found him a staunch
friend."

"No doubt he has courage," the merchant said. "He comes of good blood
and could hardly be a coward. I think he is a good-hearted lad, too,
and will, I have no doubt, make a brave commander of a galley; but more
than that Matteo is never likely to become."

"Your daughters are well, I hope?" Francis asked.

"Quite well; but you will not find them at home--they sailed three days
ago, in the Lido, for Corfu. They are going to stay for a time at my
villa there. That affair of last year shook them both, and I thought it
better that they should go away for a change--the hot months here are
trying, and often unhealthy. I will go over myself next week to be with
them."

They were now approaching the Piazzetta, and Polani shouted out, to
various acquaintances he met in passing gondolas, the news that Pisani
had gained a great victory, and had captured the Genoese admiral with
four of his galleys. The gondolas at once changed their course, and
accompanied them, to gather further details of the fight. The news was
shouted to other passing boats, and by the time they reached the steps
of the Piazzetta, a throng was round them.

Those on shore shouted out the news, and it spread rapidly from mouth
to mouth. The shopkeepers left their stores, and the loungers on the
Piazzetta ran up, and it was with difficulty that Polani and Francis
could make their way, through the shouting and excited crowd, to the
entrance of the ducal palace.

Polani at once led Francis to the doge, to whom he gave an account of
the action. Messengers were immediately despatched to some of the
members of the council, for it was to them that the despatches had to
be delivered. As soon as a sufficient number to transact the business
had arrived at the palace, the doge himself led Francis to the council
chamber.

"Is the news that we heard, shouted in the streets as we came thither,
true, your highness?" one of the councillors asked as they entered.
"That our fleet has gained a victory over the Genoese?"

"I am happy to say that it is quite true; but this young gentleman is
the bearer of despatches from the admiral, and these will doubtless
give us all particulars."

"Admiral Pisani has chosen a strange messenger for so important a
despatch," one of the party hostile to the admiral said. "It is usual
to send despatches of this kind by a trusted officer, and I do not
think it respectful, either to the council or the republic, to send
home the news of a victory by a lad like this."

"The admiral apparently chose this young gentleman because, owing to
the death of his captain, he was in command of the ship which Messer
Polani placed at the service of the republic, and which was present at
the fight. The admiral intended, as I hear, to set out at once in
search of the fleet of Doria, and doubtless did not wish to weaken
himself by despatching a state galley with the news. But perhaps he may
explain the matter in his despatches."

Several other councillors had by this time arrived, and the despatches
were opened. The admiral's account of the engagement was brief, for he
was fonder of the sword than the pen. He stated that, having obtained
news that Fieschi's fleet was at anchor under the promontory of Antium,
he sailed thither with nine ships, these being all that were at the
moment fit to take to sea; that Fieschi had sailed out to meet him, and
that an engagement had taken place in the storm, which prevented the
ships from pursuing their usual tactics, and compelled them to fight
with missiles at a distance. The despatch then went on:

"We fought all day, and the upshot of it was, we captured four of their
galleys, the admiral himself, and eight hundred prisoners. Fortunately
it is unnecessary for me to give your seignory the details of the
fighting, as these can be furnished you by Messer Francisco Hammond,
who will hand you these despatches. He was a witness of the action on
the Bonito, which had that morning arrived at Antium with some of the
stores you despatched me. I have selected this young gentleman as the
bearer of these despatches, because it is to him I entirely owe it that
I am not at the present moment a prisoner in Genoa, and to him the
republic owes that we yesterday won a victory.

"I was attacked by Fieschi and by another galley, and, in spite of the
weather, they cast grapnels on to my ship and boarded me. I had already
lost half of my crew by their missiles, and things were going very
badly with us, when the Bonito came up to our assistance, and grappled
with one of the galleys. Her captain was killed, but Messer Hammond--of
whom Polani has so high an opinion that he had appointed him second in
command--led his men to my rescue. They boarded the galley and slew
those who remained on board, and then, crossing on to my ship, fell
upon the rear of the Genoese who were pressing us backwards. His
sailors, undefended as they were by armour, fought like demons with
their axes, and, led by Messer Hammond, cut their way through the enemy
and joined me.

"This reinforcement gave fresh strength and spirit to my men, who had a
minute before thought that all was lost. Together we fell upon the
Genoese, before they could recover from their surprise, beat them back
into their admiral's ship, and following them there forced them to
surrender. Messer Hammond fought by my side, and although but a lad in
years, he showed himself a sturdy man-at-arms, and behaved with a
coolness and bravery beyond praise. I hereby recommend him to your
gracious consideration, for assuredly to him it is due that it is I,
and not Fieschi, who is writing to announce a victory."

A murmur of surprise from the councillors greeted the reading of this
portion of the letter. When it was concluded, the doge was the first to
speak.

"You have indeed deserved well of the republic, Messer Hammond, for we
know that Admiral Pisani is not one to give undue praise, or to
exaggerate in aught.

"This is news to me, signors, as well as to you, for in his narrative
to me of the events of the fight, he passed over his own share in it,
though Messer Polani, who accompanied him, did say that his ship had
taken some part in the fight, and that the captain and twenty-seven men
had been killed.

"Now, young sir, as the admiral has referred us to you for a detailed
narrative of the battle, we will thank you to tell us all you
witnessed, omitting no detail of the occurrences."

Francis accordingly gave a full account of the action, and gave great
praise to his crew for the valour with which they had fought against
the heavy armed Genoese. When he had concluded the doge said:

"We thank you for your narrative, Messer Hammond, as well as for the
great service you have rendered the state. Will you now leave us, as we
have much to debate on regarding this and other matters, and to arrange
for the reinforcements for which, I see by his letter, the admiral
asks.

"Will you ask Messer Polani to remain in attendance for a while, as we
wish to consult with him as to ships and other matters? As to yourself,
we shall ask you to come before us again shortly."

After Francis had left, the council first voted that five ducats should
be given to every man of the crew of the Bonito, and that the widows of
those who had been slain should be provided for, at the expense of the
state. They deferred the question as to the honours which should be
conferred upon Francis, until they had consulted Polani.

State barges were at once sent off to bring in the prisoners from the
ship, and preparations made for their accommodation, for Venice always
treated prisoners taken in war with the greatest kindness, an example
which Genoa was very far from following.

Then Polani was sent for, and the question of stores and ships gone
into. Orders were issued for redoubled activity in the arsenal, and it
was arranged that several ships, belonging to Polani and others, should
be at once purchased for the service of the state.

Then they asked him for his opinion as to the reward which should be
given to Francis. Upon the merchant expressing his ignorance of any
special service his young friend had rendered, the passage from
Pisani's letter relating to him was read out.

"The lad is as modest as he is brave," the merchant said, "for
although, of course, he told me that the ship had taken some part in
the fight, and had done what it could to assist the admiral, in which
service the captain and twenty-seven men had lost their lives, I had no
idea of the real nature of the encounter. I feel very proud of the
service he has rendered the state, for he has rendered me as a private
individual no less important service, and I regard him as my adopted
son, and my future partner in my business. Such being the case,
signors, he needs no gift of money from the state."

"He has not, of course, being still a minor, taken up his papers of
naturalization as a citizen?" the doge said.

"No, your highness, nor is it his intention to do so. I spoke to him on
the subject once, and he said that, although he regarded Venice with
affection, and would at all times do everything in his power for the
state, he could not renounce his birthplace, as an Englishman, by
taking an oath of allegiance to another state, and that probably he
should after a time return to his native country. I pointed out to him
that, although foreigners were given every facility for trade in
Venice, it would be a grievous disadvantage to him in the islands, and
especially with countries such as Egypt, the Turks, and the Eastern
empire, with whom we had treaties; as, unless he were a Venetian, he
would be unable to trade with them.

"He fully saw the force of my argument, but persisted in his
determination. If you ask my opinion, therefore, signors, and you do
not think the honour too great, I would suggest that the highest and
most acceptable honour that could be bestowed upon him, would be that
which you have at various times conferred upon foreign personages of
distinction, namely, to grant him the freedom of Venice, and inscribe
his name upon the list of her citizens, without requiring of him the
renunciation of his own country, or the taking the oath of allegiance."

"The honour is assuredly a great and exceptional one," the doge said,
"but so is the service that he has rendered. He has converted what
would have been a defeat into a victory, and has saved Venice from a
grave peril.

"Will you retire for a few minutes, signor, and we will then announce
to you the result of our deliberations on the matter."



Chapter 12: In Mocenigo's Power.


It was fully an hour before Polani was recalled to the council chamber.
He saw at once, by the flushed and angry faces of some of the council,
that the debate had been a hot one. At this he was not surprised, for
he knew that the friends and connections of Ruggiero Mocenigo would
vehemently oppose the suggestion he had made.

The doge announced the decision.

"The council thank you for your suggestion, Signor Polani, and have
resolved, by a majority, to confer upon Messer Francisco Hammond the
high honour of placing his name upon the list of the citizens of
Venice, without requiring from him the oaths of allegiance to the
state. As such an honour has never before been conferred, save upon
personages of the highest rank, it will be a proof of the gratitude
which Venice feels towards one who has done her such distinguished
service. The decree to that effect will be published tomorrow."

The merchant retired, highly gratified. The honour was a great and
signal one, and the material advantages considerable. The fact that
Francis was a foreigner had been the sole obstacle which had presented
itself to him, in associating him with his business, for it would
prevent Francis from trading personally with any of the countries in
which Venetian citizens enjoyed special advantages.

Francis was immensely gratified, when he heard from the merchant of the
honour to be conferred upon him. It was of all others the reward he
would have selected, had a free choice been given him, but it was so
great and unusual an honour, that he could indeed scarcely credit it
when the merchant told him the result of his interviews with the
council. The difficulty which his being a foreigner would throw in the
way of his career as a merchant in Eastern waters, had been frequently
in his mind, and would, he foresaw, greatly lessen his usefulness, but
that he should be able to obtain naturalization, without renouncing his
allegiance to England, he had never even hoped.

"It is a very high honour, doubtless," Polani said, "but no whit higher
than you deserve. Besides, after all, it costs Venice nothing, and
money is scarce at present. At any rate, I can congratulate myself as
well as you, for I foresaw many difficulties in our way. Although the
ships carrying the Venetian flag could enter the ports of all countries
trading with us, you would personally be liable to arrest, at any time,
on being denounced as not being a native of Venice, which you assuredly
would be by my rivals in trade."

The next day a bulletin was published, giving the substance of Pisani's
despatch, and announcing that, in token of the gratitude of the
republic for the great service he had rendered, Messer Hammond would be
at once granted the freedom of Venice, and his name inserted on the
list of her citizens.

During these two days the delight of Venice at the news of the victory
had been extreme. The houses had been decorated with flags, and the
bells of all the churches had peeled out joyously. Crowds assembled
round the Polani Palace, and insisted upon Francis making his
appearance, when they greeted him with tremendous shouts of applause.
Upon the evening of the second day he said to Polani:

"Have you any ship fit for sea, signor, because if so, I pray you to
send me away, no matter where. I cannot stand this. Since the decree
was published, this morning, I have not had a moment's peace, and it is
too absurd, when I did no more than any sailor on board the ship. If it
went on, I should very soon be heartily sorry I ever interfered on
behalf of the admiral."

The merchant smiled.

"I have half promised to take you with me to the reception at the
Persanis' this evening, and have had a dozen requests of a similar
nature for every night this week and next."

"Then, if you have no ship ready, signor, I will charter a fishing
boat, engage a couple of men, and go off for a fortnight. By the end of
that time something fresh will have happened."

"I can send you off, if you really wish it, Francisco, the first thing
tomorrow morning. I am despatching a small craft with a message to my
agent in Corfu, and with letters for my daughters. They will be
delighted to see you, and indeed, I shall be glad to know that you are
with them, until I can wind up several affairs which I have in hand,
and join them myself. She is fast, and you should be at Corfu in
eight-and-forty hours after sailing."

Francis gladly embraced the offer, and started the next morning. The
vessel was a small one, designed either to sail or row. Her crew
consisted of twenty men, who rowed sixteen sweeps when the wind was
light or unfavourable. She was an open boat, except that she was decked
at each end, a small cabin being formed aft for the captain, and any
passengers there might be on board, while the crew stowed themselves in
the little forecastle.

When the boat was halfway across, a sail was seen approaching, and the
captain recognized her as one of Polani's vessels.

"In that case," Francis said, "we may as well direct our course so as
to pass them within hailing distance. When you approach them, hoist the
Polani flag, and signal to them to lay to."

This was done, and the two craft brought up within thirty yards of each
other. The captain appeared at the side of the vessel, and doffed his
cap when he recognized Francis.

"Have you any news from the East?" the latter asked.

"But little, signor. A few Genoese pirates are among the islands, and
are reported to have made some captures, but I have seen none. There is
nothing new from Constantinople. No fresh attempt has been made by the
emperor to recapture Tenedos."

"Did you touch at Corfu on your way back?"

"I left there yesterday, signor. A strange craft has been reported as
having been seen on the coast. She carries no flag, but from her
appearance she is judged to be a Moor."

"But we are at peace with the Moors," Francis said, "and it is years
since they ventured on any depredations, excepting on their own
waters."

"That is so, signor, and I only tell you what was the report at Corfu.
She appeared to be a swift craft, rowing a great many oars. Her
movements certainly seem mysterious, as she has several times appeared
off the coast. Two vessels which sailed from Cyprus, and were to have
touched at Corfu, had not arrived there when I left, and they say that
several others are overdue. I do not say that has anything to do with
the strange galley, but it is the general opinion in Corfu that it has
something to do with it, and I am the bearer of letters from the
governor to the seignory, praying that two or three war ships may at
once be sent down to the island."

"It looks strange, certainly," Francis said; "but I cannot believe that
any Moorish pirates would be so daring as to come up into Venetian
waters."

"I should not have thought so either, signor; but it may be that,
knowing there is war between Venice and Genoa, and that the state
galleys of the republics, instead of being scattered over the seas, are
now collected in fleets, and thinking only of fighting each other, they
might consider it a good opportunity for picking prizes."

"It is a good opportunity, certainly," Francis said; "but they would
know that Venice would, sooner or later, reckon with them; and would
demand a four-fold indemnity for any losses her merchants may have
suffered.

"However, I will not detain you longer. Will you tell Signor Polani
that you met us, and that we were making good progress, and hoped to
reach Corfu some time tomorrow?"

"This is a curious thing about this galley," the captain of the boat
said to Francis, as the men again dipped their oars into the water, and
the boat once more proceeded on the way.

"It is much more likely to be a Genoese pirate than a Moor," Francis
said. "They may have purposely altered their rig a little, in order to
deceive vessels who may sight them. It is very many years since any
Moorish craft have been bold enough to commit acts of piracy on this
side of Sicily. However, we must hope that we shall not fall in with
her, and if we see anything answering to her description we will give
it a wide berth. Besides, it is hardly likely they would interfere with
so small a craft as ours, for they would be sure we should be carrying
no cargo of any great value."

"Twenty Christian slaves would fetch money among the Moors," the
captain said. "Let us hope we shall see nothing of them; for we should
have no chance of resistance against such a craft, and she would go two
feet to our one."

The next morning Francis was aroused by a hurried summons from the
captain. Half awake, and wondering what could be the cause of the call,
for the boat lay motionless on the water, he hurried out from the
little cabin. Day had just broken, the sky was aglow with ruddy light
in the east.

"Look there, signor!" the captain said, pointing to the south. "The
watch made them out a quarter of an hour since, but, thinking nothing
