It was a beautiful, though perhaps to many of the inmates of Kildrummie
a terrible sight, which from the roof of the turret now presented itself
to their view. The English force lay before them, presenting many a
solid phalanx of steel, many a glancing wood of spears. Nor were these
all; the various engines used in sieges at this time, battering-rams,
and others, whose technical names are unfortunately lost to us, but used
to fling stones of immense weight to an almost incredible distance;
arbalists, and the incomparable archer, who carried as many lives as
arrows in his belt; wagons, heavily laden, with all things necessary
for a close and numerous encampment--all these could be plainly
distinguished in rapid advance towards the castle, marking their path
through the country by the smoke of the hamlets they had burned. Many
and eager voices resounded in various parts of the castle; numbers had
thronged to the tower, with their own eyes to mark the approach of the
enemy, and to report all they had seen to their companions below,
triumphantly or despondingly, according to the temper of their minds.
Sir Nigel Bruce and Sir Christopher Seaton, with others of the superior
officers, stood a little apart, conversing eagerly and animatedly, and
finally separating, with an eager grasp of the hand, to perform the
duties intrusted to each.

"Ha! Christine, and thou, fair maiden," exclaimed Sir Christopher,
gayly, as on turning he encountered his wife and Agnes arm-in-arm. "By
mine honor, this is bravely done; ye will not wait in your tiring-bower
till your knights seek ye, but come for information yourselves. Well,
'tis a goodly company, is't not? as gallant a show as ever mustered, by
my troth. Those English warriors tacitly do us honor, and proclaim our
worth by the numbers of gallant men they bring against us. We shall
return the compliment some day, and pay them similar homage."

His wife smiled at his jest, and even felt reassured, for it was not the
jest of a mind ill at ease, it was the same bluff, soldier spirit she
had always loved.

"And, Nigel, what thinkest thou?"

"Think, dearest?" he said, answering far more the appealing look of
Agnes than her words; "think? that we shall do well, aye, nobly well;
they muster not half the force they led me to expect. The very sight of
them has braced me with new spirit, and put to ignominious flight the
doubts and dreams I told thee had tormented me."

Movement and bustle now pervaded every part of the castle, but all was
conducted with an order and military skill that spoke well for the
officers to whom it was intrusted. The walls were manned; pickaxes and
levers, for the purposes of hurling down stones on the besiegers,
collected and arranged on the walls; arms polished, and so arranged that
the hand might grasp them at a minute's warning, were brought from the
armory to every court and tower; the granaries and storehouses were
visited, and placed under trustworthy guards. A band of picked men,
under an experienced officer, threw themselves into the barbacan,
determined to defend it to the last. Sir Nigel and Sir Christopher
visited every part of the outworks, displaying the most unceasing care,
encouraged the doubting, roused the timid, and cheered and inspired the
boldest with new confidence, new hope; but one feeling appeared to
predominate--liberty and Scotland seemed the watchword of one and all.

Onward, like a mighty river, rolled the English force; nearer and
nearer, till the middle of the second day saw them encamped within a
quarter of a mile from the palisades and outworks raised on either side
of the barbacan. Obtaining easy possession of the river--for Sir Nigel,
aware of the great disparity of numbers, had not even attempted its
defence--they formed three distinct bodies round the walls, the
strongest and noblest setting down before the barbacan, as the principal
point of attack. Numerous as they had appeared in the distance, well
provided with all that could forward their success, it was not till
closer seen all their strength could be discovered; but there was no
change in the hopes and gallant feelings of the Scottish officers and
their men-at-arms, though, could hearts have been read, the timidity,
the doubts, the anxious wishes to make favorable peace with the English
had in some of the original garrison alarmingly increased.

Before, however, any recourse was made to arms, an English herald,
properly supported, demanded and obtained admission within the gates, on
a mission from the Earls of Hereford and Lancaster, to Sir Christopher
Seaton, Sir Nigel Bruce, and others of command. They were summoned to
deliver up the castle and themselves to their liege lord and sovereign,
King Edward; to submit to his mercy, and grace should be shown to them,
and safe conduct granted to all those who, taking refuge within the
walls and adopting a position of defence, proclaimed themselves rebels
and abettors of rebellion; that they should have freedom to return to
their homes uninjured, not only in their persons but in their
belongings; and this should be on the instant the gates were thrown
open, and the banner of England had taken the place of that of Scotland
now floating from their keep.

"Tell thy master, thou smooth-tongued knave," burst angrily from the
lips of Sir Christopher Seaton, as he half rose from his seat and
clenched his mailed hand at the speaker, and then hastily checking
himself, added, in a lower tone, "Answer him, Nigel; thou hast eloquence
at thy command, I have none, save at my sword's point, and my temper is
somewhat too hot to list such words, courteous though they may be."

"Tell your master, sir herald," continued Nigel, rising as his colleague
flung himself back on his seat, and though his voice was sternly calm,
his manner was still courteous, "tell them they may spare themselves the
trouble, and their followers the danger, of all further negotiation. We
are Scottish men and Scottish subjects, and consequently to all the
offers of England we are as if we heard not. Neither rebels nor abettors
of rebels, we neither acknowledge the necessity of submitting ourselves
to a tyrant's mercy, nor desire the advantage of his offered grace.
Return, sir herald; we scorn the conditions proposed. We are here for
Scotland and for Scotland's king, and for them we know both how to live
and how to die."

His words were echoed by all around him, and there was a sharp clang of
steel, as if each man half drew his eager sword, which spoke yet truer
than mere words. Dark brows and features stern were bent upon the herald
as he left their presence, and animated council followed his departure.

No new movement followed the return of the herald. For some days no
decisive operation was observable in the English force; and when they
did attack the outworks, it was as if more to pass the time than with
any serious intent. It was a period of fearful suspense to the besieged.
Their storehouses were scarcely sufficiently provided to hold out for
any great length of time, and they almost imagined that to reduce them
to extremities by famine was the intention of the besiegers. The
greatest danger, if encountered hand to hand in the _melee_, was
welcome, but the very idea of a slow, lingering fate, with the enemy
before them, mocking their misery, was terrible to the bravest. A daring
sally into the very thickest of the enemy's camp, headed by Nigel and
his own immediate followers, carrying all before them, and when by
numbers compelled to retreat, bearing both booty and prisoners with
them, roused the English from their confident supposition that the
besieged would soon be obliged to capitulate, and urged them into
action. The ire of the haughty English blazed up at what seemed such
daring insolence in their petty foe. Decisive measures were resorted to
on the instant, and increased bustle appeared to pervade both besiegers
and besieged.

"Pity thou art already a knight, Nigel!" bluffly exclaimed Seaton,
springing into his saddle by torchlight the following morning, as with a
gallant band he was about dashing over the drawbridge, to second the
defenders of the barbacan and palisades. "How shall we reward thee, my
boy? Thou hast brought the foe to bay. Hark! they are there before me,"
and he spurred on to the very centre of the _melee_.

Sir Nigel was not long after him. The enemy was driven back with fearful
loss. Scaling-ladders were thrown down; the archers on the walls, better
accustomed to their ground, marking their foes by the torches they
carried, but concealed themselves by the darkness, dealt destruction
with as unerring hand as their more famous English brethren. Shouts and
cries rose on either side; the English bore back before the sweeping
stroke of Nigel Bruce as before the scythe of death. For the brief space
of an hour the strife lasted, and still victory was on the side of the
Scots--glorious victory, purchased with scarce the loss of ten men. The
English fled back to their camp, leaving many wounded and dead on the
field, and some prisoners in the hands of the Scots. Ineffectual efforts
were made to harass the Scots, as with a daring coolness seldom
equalled, they repaired the outworks, and planted fresh palisades to
supply those which had fallen in the strife, in the very face of the
English, many of them coolly detaching the arrows which, shot at too
great distance, could not penetrate the thick lining of their buff
coats, and scornfully flinging them back. Several sharp skirmishes took
place that day, both under the walls and at a little distance from them;
but in all the Scots were victorious, and when night fell all was joy
and triumph in the castle; shame, confusion, and fury in the English
camp.

For several days this continued. If at any time the English, by
superiority of numbers, were victorious, they were sure to be taken by
surprise by an impetuous sally from the besieged, and beaten back with
loss, and so sudden and concealed were the movements of Nigel and
Seaton, that though the besiegers lay closer and closer round the
castle, the moment of their setting forth on their daring expeditions
could never be discovered.

"Said I not we should do well, right well, sweet Agnes," exclaimed
Nigel, one night, on his return from an unusually successful sally, "and
are not my words true? Hast thou looked forth on the field to-day, and
seen how gloriously it went? Oh, to resign this castle to my brother's
hands unscathed, even as he intrusted it; to hold it for him, threatened
as it is!"

He smiled gayly as he spoke, for the consciousness of power was upon
him--power to _will_ and _do_, to win and to retain--that most blessed
consciousness, whether it bless a hero's breast or poet's soul, a
maiden's heart or scholar's dream, this checkered world can know.

"I did look forth, my Nigel, for I could not rest; yet ask me not to
tell thee how the battle went," she added, with a faint flush, as she
looked up in his noble face, beaming as it was with every feeling dear
to the heart that loved, "for I traced but the course of one charger,
saw but the waving of one plume."

"And thou didst not fear the besiegers' arrows, my beloved? Didst stand
in the shelter I contrived? Thou must not risk danger, dearest; better
not list the urgings of thy noble spirit than be aught exposed."

"There was no danger, Nigel, at least there seemed none," she said. "I
felt no fear, for I looked on thee."




CHAPTER XVIII.


Had the gallant defenders of Kildrummie Castle been conscious that the
at first dilatory and then uncertain measures of their foes originated
in the fact that the Earls of Hereford and Lancaster were not themselves
yet on the field, and that they had with them a vast addition to their
forces, they would not perhaps have rested so securely on the hopes
which their unexpected success very naturally engendered. Attack on one
side they knew they could resist; their only dread had been that, from
the numbers of the English, the angle towers, each of which covered a
postern, might be attacked at once, and thus discover the real weakness
of their forces. The obstinate struggle for the barbacan, the strongest
point of the castle, had been welcomed with joy by the Scotch, for there
they could overlook every movement of the besiegers. Some wonder it did
cause that such renowned knights as the earls were known to be, should
not endeavor to throw them off their guard by a division of attack; but
this wonder could not take from the triumph of success.

It was from no want of observation the absence of the two earls remained
undiscovered by the besieged. Engaged on a secret expedition, whose
object will be seen in the sequel, they had commanded the message
demanding surrender to be given in their names, their pavilions to be
pitched in sight of the castle as if they were already there, their
banners to wave above them, esquires and pages to be in attendance, and
their war-cries to be shouted, as was the custom when they led on in
person. The numerous knights, clothed in bright armor from head to heel
ever traversing the field, assisted the illusion, and the Scotch never
once suspected the truth.

Imagining a very brief struggle would deliver the castle into their
hands, even if its garrison were mad enough to refuse compliance with
King Edward's terms, the earls had not hurried themselves on their
expedition, and a fortnight after the siege had begun, were reposing
themselves very cavalierly in the stronghold of an Anglo-Scottish baron,
some thirty miles southward of the scene of action.

It was the hour of supper, a rude repast of venison, interspersed with
horn and silver flagons filled with the strong liquors of the day, and
served up in a rude hall, of which the low round arches in the roof, the
massive walls without buttresses, and windows running small outside, but
spreading as to become much larger within, all denoted the Saxon
architecture unsoftened by any of the Norman improvements.

The earls and their host, with some attendant knights, sat as usual
round the dais or raised part of the hall, their table distinguished it
may be by some gold as well as silver vessels, and a greater variety of
liquor, particularly hypocras and claret of the day, the one formed of
wine and honey, the other of wine and spices; by the sinnel and wastel
cakes, but certainly not by the superior refinement of the more solid
food. The huge silver saltcellar alone divided the table of the baron
from that of his dependants, yet the distinction of sitting above and
below the salt was as great as the division between the master and
servant of the present day; the jest, the loud laugh seasoned the
viands placed before them, and the hearty draught from the welcome
flagon. Nor was the baron's own table much quieter; remarks on the state
of the country, speculations as to the hiding-place of King Robert, and
when they should receive tidings of the surrender of Kildrummie, formed
topics of conversation alternately with discussions on the excellence of
the wines, the flavor of the venison, the difference between English and
Scottish cookery, and such like matters, important in the days of our
ancestors as in our own.

"You have ridden long enough to-day, good my lords, to make a hearty
charge on your suppers; a long journey and a tough battle, commend me to
them for helps to the appetite," said the Scottish baron, joyously
inviting them by his own example to eat on and spare not.

"Commend me to the latter, an ye will," answered Hereford, on whose brow
a cloud of something like distaste had spread; "but by mine honor, I
love not the business of the last week. I have brought it to a close,
however, and praise the saints for it."

"Bah! thou art over-squeamish, Hereford. Edward would give us the second
best jewel in his chaplet for the rich prize we have sent him," resumed
Lancaster.

"Reserving the first, of course, for the traitor Bruce himself,"
interposed their host. "Ah! such a captive were in truth worth an
earldom."

"Then, by my troth, the traitor's wife is worth a barony," returned
Lancaster, laughing; "and her fair bevy of attendants, amongst whom are
the wives, daughters, and sisters of many a rebel, thinkest thou not we
shall be high in Edward's favor for them, too? I tell thee we might have
fought many a good fight, and not have done him such good service."

"It may be, it may be," answered Hereford, impatiently, "had it been at
the sword's point, had they been prisoners by force of arms, I would
have joyed too, and felt it was good service; but such rank treachery,
decoyed, entrapped by that foul prince of lies, the Lord of Ross--faugh!
I could have rammed his treachery back into his throat."

"And done the king, perchance, good service too," rejoined Lancaster,
still excessively amused, "for I have no faith in a traitor, however he
may serve us a while; yet thou art not over-wise, good friend, to let
such trifles chafe thee thus. Trust me, Edward will think more of the
captives than the capture."

"There was a time he would not," answered the earl, mournfully; "a time,
when Edward would have held it foul scorn to war with women, and worse
than scorn to obtain their persons by treachery, as now."

"Aye, but he has changed, and we must change too, would we please him,"
said the baron; "such notions might have done in former days, but they
are too high-flown for the present time, my good lord. I marvel they
should have lingered so long with thee."

A frown gathered on Hereford's broad and noble brow, but remembering the
forbearance due to his host, he checked an angry reply. "The king _has_
changed," he said, "darkly and painfully changed; ambition has warped
the noblest, knightliest heart which ever beat for chivalry."

"Hush, ere thou speakest treason, Sir Earl; give me not the pain of
draining another flagon of this sparkling hypocras to gain strength for
thine arrest, good friend," exclaimed Lancaster, laying the flat of his
sword on the earl's shoulder.

Hereford half smiled. "Thou art too happy in thy light-hearted mirth for
me to say aught that would so disturb it," he said; "yet I say, and will
say again, would to heaven, I had been before the gates of Kildrummie,
and left to thee all the honor and glory, an thou wilt, of this
capture."

"Honor and glory, thou bitter piece of satire!" rejoined Lancaster,
holding up a large golden flagon, to hide his face from the earl.
"Unhappy me, were this all the glory I could win. I will wipe away the
stain, if stain there be, at Kildrummie, an it be not surrendered ere we
reach it."

"The stain is with the base traitor Ross, not with thee or me," answered
Hereford; "'tis that I abhor the nature of such expeditions, that I
loathe, aye, loathe communication with such as he, and that--if it can
be--that worse traitor Buchan, that makes me rejoice I have naught
before me now but as fair a field as a siege may be. Would to God, this
devastating and most cruel war were over, I do say! on a fair field it
may be borne, but not to war with women and children, as has been my
fate."

"Aye, by the way, this is not the first fair prize thou hast sent to
Edward; the Countess of Buchan was a rare jewel for our coveting
monarch--somewhat more than possession, there was room for vengeance
there. Bore she her captivity more queenly than the sobbing and weeping
Margaret?"

The question was reiterated by most of the knights around the dais, but
Hereford evidently shrunk from the inquiry.

"Speak not of it, I charge ye," he said. "There is no room for jesting
on grief as hers; majestic and glorious she was, but if the reported
tale be true, her every thought, her every feeling was, as I even then
imagined, swallowed up in one tearless and stern but all-engrossing
anguish."

"The reported tale! meanest thou the fate of her son?" asked one of the
knights.

"If it be true!" resumed another; "believest thou, my lord, there is
aught of hope to prove it false?"

"More likely to be true than false," added Lancaster; "I can believe any
thing of that dark scowling villain Buchan--even the murder of his
child."

"I believe it _not_," answered Hereford; "bad as that man is, hard in
heart as in temper, he has too much policy to act thus, even if he had
no feelings of nature rising to prevent it. No, no; I would wager the
ruby brooch in my helmet that boy lives, and his father will make use of
him to forward his own interests yet."

"But why then forge this tale?" demanded their host; "how may that serve
his purpose?"

"Easily enough, with regard to the vengeance we all know he vowed to
wreak on his unhappy wife. What deeper misery could he inflict upon her
than the belief her boy was murdered? and as for its effect on Edward,
trust a Comyn to make his own way clear."

"But what do with the boy meanwhile?"

"Keep him under lock and key; chained up, may be, as a dog in a kennel,
till he has broken his high spirit, and moulds him to the tool he
wills," answered Hereford, "or at least till his mother is out of his
path."

"Ha! thinkest thou the king will demand such sweeping vengeance? He
surely will not sentence a woman to death."

"Had I thought so, had I only dreamed so," replied Hereford, with almost
startling sternness, "as there is a God above us, I would have risked
the charge of treason and refused to give her up! But no, my lords, no;
changed as Edward is, he would not, he dared not use his power thus. I
meant but imprisonment, when I said out of the boy's path--more he will
not do; but even such I love not. Bold as it was to crown the rebel
Bruce, the deed sprung from a noble heart, and noble deeds should meet
with noble judgment."

A bugle sounded twice or thrice sharply without, and occasioning some
bustle at the lower part of the ball, interrupted for a brief space the
converse of the lords. A few minutes after, the seneschal, attended by
two or three higher servants, returned, marshalling in due form two
young men in the garb of esquires, followed by some fifteen or twenty
men-at-arms.

"Ha! Fitz-Ernest and Hugo; well met, and ye bring us good tidings from
Kildrummie," exclaimed both the English earls at once, as cap in hand
the esquires slowly walked up the hall, and did obeisance to their
masters.

"Yet your steps are somewhat laggard, as they bring us news of victory.
By my troth, were it not utterly impossible, I could deem ye had been
worsted in the strife," continued the impatient Lancaster, while the
cooler and more sagacious Hereford scanned the countenances of the
esquires in silence. "Yet and ye come not to tell of victory, why have
ye come at all?"

"To beseech your lordship's speedy return, to the camp," replied
Fitz-Ernest, after a moment's hesitation, his cheek still flushed from
his master's words. "There is division of purpose and action in the
camp, and an ye not return and head the attack your noble selves, I fear
me there is little hope of victory."

"Peace, fool! is there such skill and wisdom needed? Division in purpose
and action! Quarrelling, methinks, had better be turned against the
enemy than against yourselves. Hugo, do thou speak; in plain terms,
wherefore come ye?"

"In plain terms, then, good my lord, as yet we have had the worst of
it," answered the esquire, bluntly. "The Scotch fight like very devils,
attacking us instead of waiting for our attack, penetrating into the
very centre of our camp, one knows not how or whence, bearing off
prisoners and booty in our very teeth."

"Prisoners--booty--worsted! Thou durst not tell me so!" exclaimed
Lancaster, furiously, as he started up and half drew his sword.

"Peace, peace, I pray thee, good friend, peace," continued Hereford,
laying his hand on Lancaster's shoulder, with a force which compelled
him to resume his seat. "Let us at least hear and understand their
mission. Speak out, Hugo, and briefly--what has befallen?"

In a few straightforward words his esquire gave all the information
which was needed, interrupted only now and then by a brief interrogation
from Hereford, and some impatient starts and muttering from his
colleague. The success of the Scots, described in a former page, had
continued, despite the action of the mangonels and other engines which
the massive walls appeared to hold in defiance. So watchful and skilful
were the besieged, that the greatest havoc had been made amongst the men
employed in working the engines, and not yet had even the palisades and
barbacan been successfully stormed.

"Have they tried any weaker point?" Hereford asked, and the answer was,
that it was on this very matter division had spread amongst the knights,
some insisting on carrying the barbacan as the most important point, and
others advising and declaring their only hope of success lay in a
divided attack on two of the weaker sides at once.

"The fools, the sorry fools!" burst again from Lancaster. "They deserve
to be worsted for their inordinate pride and folly; all wanted to lead,
and none would follow. Give you good e'en, my lord," he added, turning
hastily to his host; "I'll to the courtyard and muster forth my men.
Fitz-Ernest, thou shalt speak on as we go," and drawing his furred
mantle around him, he strode rapidly yet haughtily from the hall.
Hereford only waited to learn all from Hugo, to hold a brief
consultation with some of his attendant knights, and he too, despite the
entreaties of his host to tarry with him at least till morning, left the
banquet to don his armor.

"Silence and speed carry all before them, my good lord," he said,
courteously. "In such a case, though I fear no eventual evil, they must
not be neglected. I would change the mode of attack on these Scotch, ere
they are even aware their foes are reinforced."

"Eventual evil, of a truth, there need not be, my lord," interposed his
esquire, "even should no force of arms prevail. I have heard there are
some within the walls who need but a golden bribe to do the work for
us."

"Peace!" said the nobleman, sternly. "I loathe the very word
betray--spoken or intended. Shame, shame on thee to speak it, and yet
more shame to imagine it needed! Art thou of Norman birth, and deemest a
handful of Scotch like these will bid us raise the siege and tamely
depart?--yet better so than gained by treachery."

Hugo and the Scottish baron alike shrunk back from the reproving look of
Hereford, and both silently followed him to the courtyard. Already it
was a scene of bustling animation: trumpets were sounding and drums
rolling; torches flashing through the darkness on the mailed coats of
the knights and on gleaming weapons; and the heavy tramp of near two
hundred horse, hastily accoutred and led from the stable, mingled with
the hoarse winds of winter, howling tempestuously around. The reserve
