



BOOK EIGHT


ARGUMENT

Mustering of Italians, and embassage to Diomedes (1-18). Tiber in
a dream heartens AEneas and directs him to Evander for succour.
AEneas sacrifices the white sow and her litter to Juno, and reaches
Evander's city Pallanteum--the site of Rome (19-117). AEneas and
Evander meet and feast together. The story of Cacus and the praises
of Hercules are told and sung. Evander shows his city to AEneas
(118-432). Venus asks and obtains from Vulcan divine armour for her
son (433-531). At daybreak Evander promises AEneas further succour.
Their colloquy is interrupted by a sign from heaven (532-630).
Despatches are sent to Ascanius and prayers for aid to the Tuscans.
AEneas, his men and Evander's son Pallas are sent forth by Evander
with prayers for their success (631-720). Venus brings to AEneas the
armour wrought by Vulcan (721-738). Virgil describes the shield, on
which are depicted, not only the trials and triumphs of Rome's early
kings and champions, but the final conflict also at Actium between
East and West and the world-wide empire of Augustus (739-846).


I.  When Turnus from Laurentum's tower afar
    Signalled the strife, and bade the war-horns bray,
    And stirred the mettled steeds, and woke the war,
    Hearts leaped at once; all Latium swore that day
    The oath of battle, burning for the fray.
    Messapus, Ufens, and Mezentius vain,
    Who scorned the Gods, ride foremost. Far away
    They scour the fields; the shepherd and the swain
Rush to the war, and bare of ploughmen lies the plain.

II. To Diomed posts Venulus, to crave
    His aid, and tell how Teucrians hold the land;
    AEneas with his gods hath crossed the wave,
    And claims the throne his vaunted Fates demand.
    How many a tribe hath joined the Dardan's band,
    How spreads his fame through Latium. What the foe
    May purpose next, what conquest he hath planned,
    Should friendly fortune speed the coming blow,
Better than Latium's king AEtolia's lord must know.

III. So Latium fares. AEneas, tost with tides
    Of thought, for well he marked the growing fight,
    This way and that his eager mind divides,
    Reflects, revolves and ponders on his plight.
    As waters in a brazen urn flash bright,
    Smit by the sunbeam or the moon's pale rays,
    And round the chamber flits the trembling light,
    And darts aloft, and on the ceiling plays,
So many a varying mood his anxious mind displays.

IV. 'Twas night; the tired world rested. Far and nigh
    All slept, the cattle and the fowls of air.
    Stretched on a bank, beneath the cold, clear sky,
    Lay good AEneas, fain at length to share
    Late slumber, troubled by the war with care.
    When, 'twixt the poplars, where the fair stream flows,
    With azure mantle, and with sedge-crowned hair,
    The aged Genius of the place uprose,
And, standing by, thus spake, and comforted his woes:

V.  "Blest seed of Heaven! who from the foemen's hand
    Our Troy dost bring, and to an endless date
    Preservest Pergama; whom Latium's land
    Hath looked for, and Laurentum's fields await,
    Here, doubt not, are thy homegods, here hath Fate
    Thy home decreed. Let not war's terrors seem
    To daunt thee. Heaven is weary of its hate;
    Its storms are spent. Distrust not, nor esteem
These words of idle worth, the coinage of a dream.

VI. "Hard by, beneath yon oak-trees, thou shalt see
    A huge, white swine, and, clustering around
    Her teats, are thirty young ones, white as she.
    There shall thy labour with repose be crown'd,
    Thy city set. There Alba's walls renowned,
    When twice ten times hath rolled the circling year,
    Called Alba Longa, shall Ascanius found.
    Sure stands the word; and now attend and hear,
How best through present straits a prosperous course to steer.

VII. "Arcadians here, a race of old renown,
    From Pallas sprung, with king Evander came,
    And on the hill-side built a chosen town,
    Called Pallanteum, from their founder's name.
    Year after year they ply the war's rude game
    With Latins. Go, and win them to thy side,
    Bid them as fellows to thy camp, and frame
    A league. Myself along the banks will guide,
And teach thy labouring oars to mount the opposing tide.

VIII. "Rise, Goddess-born, and, when the stars decline,
    Pray first to Juno, and on bended knee
    Subdue her wrath with supplication. Mine
    Shall be the victor's homage; I am he,
    Heaven's favoured stream, whose brimming waves ye see,
    Borne in full flood these flowery banks between,
    Chafe the fat soil and cleave the fruitful lea,
    Blue Tiber. Here my dwelling shall be seen,
Fairest of lofty towns, the world's majestic queen."

IX. So saying, the Stream-god dived beneath the flood,
    And sought the deep. Slumber at once and night
    Forsook AEneas; he arose, and stood,
    And eastward gazing at the dawning light,
    Scooped up the stream, obedient to the rite,
    And prayed, "O nymphs, Laurentian nymphs, whence spring
    All rivers; father Tiber, blest and bright,
    Receive AEneas as your own, and bring
Peace to his toil-worn heart, and shield the Dardan king.

X.  "What pool soever holds thy source, where'er
    The soil, from whence thou leapest to the day
    In loveliness, these grateful hands shall bear
    Due gifts, these lips shall hallow thee for aye,
    Horned river, whom Hesperian streams obey,
    Whose pity cheers; be with us, I entreat,
    Confirm thy purpose, and thy power display."
    He spake, and chose two biremes from the fleet,
Equipped with oars, and rigged with crews and arms complete.

XI. Lo! now a portent, wondrous to be seen.
    Stretched at full length along the bank, they view
    The fateful swine, conspicuous on the green,
    White, with her litter of the self-same hue.
    Her good AEneas, as an offering due,
    To Juno, mightiest of all powers divine,
    Yea, e'en to thee, dread Juno, caught and slew,
    And lit the altars and outpoured the wine,
And left the dam and brood together at the shrine.

XII. All night the Tiber stayed his swelling flood,
    And with hushed wave, recoiling from the main,
    Calm as some pool or quiet lake, he stood
    And smoothed his waters like a liquid plain,
    That not an oar should either strive or strain.
    Thus on they go; smooth glides the bark of pine,
    Borne with glad shouts; and ever and again
    The woods and waters wonder, as the line
Of painted keels goes by, with arms of glittering shine.

XIII. All night and day outwearying, they steer
    Up the long reaches, through the groves, that lie
    With green trees shadowing the tranquil mere.
    Now flamed the sun in the meridian high,
    When walls afar and citadel they spy,
    And scattered roofs. Where now the power of Rome
    Hath made her stately structures mate the sky,
    Then poor and lowly stood Evander's home.
Thither their prows are turned, and to the town they come.

XIV. That day, Arcadia's monarch, in a grove
    Before the town, a solemn feast had planned
    To Hercules and all the gods above.
    His son, young Pallas, and a youthful band,
    And humble senators around him stand,
    Each offering incense, and the warm, fresh blood
    Still smokes upon the shrines, when, hard at hand,
    They see the tall ships, through the shadowy wood,
Glide up with silent oars along the sacred flood.

XV. Scared by the sudden sight, all quickly rise
    And quit the board. But Pallas, bold of cheer,
    Bids them not break the worship. Forth he flies
    To meet the strangers, as their ships appear,
    His right hand brandishing a glittering spear.
    "Gallants," he hails them from a mound afar,
    "What drove you hither by strange ways to steer?
    Say whither wending? who and what ye are?
Your kin, and where your home? And bring ye peace or war?"

XVI. Then sire AEneas from the stern outheld
    A branch of olive, and bespake him fair:
    "Troy's sons ye see, by Latin pride expelled.
    'Gainst Latin enemies these arms we bear.
    We seek Evander. Go, the news declare:
    Choice Dardan chiefs his friendship come to claim.
    His aid we ask for, and his arms would share."
    He ceased, and wonder and amazement came
On Pallas, struck with awe to hear the mighty name.

XVII. "Whoe'er thou art, hail, stranger," he replied,
    "Step forth, and to my father tell thy quest,
    And take the welcome that true hearts provide."
    Forth as he leaped, the Dardan's hand he pressed,
    And, pressing, held it, and embraced his guest.
    So from the river through the grove they fare,
    And reach the place, where, feasting with the rest,
    They find Evander. Him with speeches fair
AEneas hails, and hastes his errand to declare.

XVIII. "O best of Greeks, whom thus with olive bough
    Hath Fortune willed me to entreat; yet so
    I shunned thee not, albeit Arcadian thou,
    A Danaan leader, in whose veins doth flow
    The blood of Atreus, and my country's foe.
    My conscious worth, our ties of ancestry,
    Thy fame, which rumour through the world doth blow,
    And Heaven's own oracles, by Fate's decree,
My willing steps have led, and link my heart, to thee.

XIX. "Troy's founder, Dardanus, to the Teucrians came,
    Child of Electra, so the Greeks declare.
    Huge Atlas was Electra's sire, the same
    Whose shoulders still the starry skies upbear.
    Your sire is Mercury, whom Maia fair
    On chill Cyllene's summit bore of old;
    And Maia's sire, if aught of truth we hear,
    Was Atlas, he who doth the spheres uphold.
Thus from a single stock the double stems unfold.

XX. "Trusting to this, no embassy I sent,
    No arts employed, thy purpose to explore.
    Myself, my proper person, I present,
    And stand a humble suppliant at thy door.
    Thy foes are ours, the Daunian race, and sore
    They grind us. If they drive us hence, they say,
    Their conquering arms shall stretch from shore to shore.
    Plight we our troth; strong arms are ours to-day,
Stout hearts, and manhood proved in many a hard essay."

XXI. He ceased. Long while Evander marked with joy
    His face and eyes, and scanned through and through,
    Then spake: "O bravest of the sons of Troy!
    What joy to greet thee; thine the voice, the hue,
    The face of great Anchises, whom I knew.
    Well I remember, how, in days forepast,
    Old Priam came to Salamis, to view
    His sister's realms, Hesione's, and passed
To far Arcadia, chilled with many a Northern blast.

XXII. "Scarce o'er my cheeks the callow down had crept,
    With wondering awe I viewed the Trojan train,
    And gazed at Priam. But Anchises stepped
    The tallest. Boyish ardour made me fain
    To greet the hero, and his hand to strain.
    I ventured, and to Pheneus brought my guest.
    A Lycian case of arrows, bridles twain,
    All golden--Pallas holds them,--and a vest
And scarf of broidered gold his parting thanks expressed.

XXIII. "Take then the hand thou seekest; be it thine,
    The plighted pact; and when to-morrow's ray
    Shall chase the shadows, and the dawn shall shine,
    Aid will I give you, and due stores purvey,
    And send you hence rejoicing on your way.
    Meanwhile, since Heaven forbids us to postpone
    These yearly rites, and we are friends, be gay
    And share with us the banquet. Sit ye down,--
Behold, the boards are spread,--and make the feast your own."

XXIV. He spake, and back, at his command, they bring
    The food and wine. The chiefs, in order meet,
    Along the grass he ranges, and their king
    Leads to his throne; of maple was the seat;
    A lion's hide lay bristling at his feet.
    Youths and the altar's minister bring wine,
    And heap the bread, and serve the roasted meat.
    On lustral entrails and the bull's whole chine,
Couched round the Trojan king, the Trojan warriors dine.

XXV. Then, when at last desire of food had ceased,
    Thus spake Evander: "Lo, this solemn show,
    This sacred altar, and this ordered feast,
    No idle witchwork are they. Well we know
    The ancient gods. Saved from a fearful foe,
    Each year the deed we celebrate. See there
    Yon nodding crag; behold the rocks below,
    Tost in huge ruin, and the lonely lair,
Scooped from the mountain's side, how wild the waste and bare!

XXVI. "There yawned the cavern, in the rock's dark womb,
    Wherein the monster Cacus dwelt of yore,
    Half-human. Never sunlight pierced the gloom;
    But day by day the rank earth reeked with gore,
    And human faces, nailed above the door,
    Hung, foul and ghastly. From the loins he came
    Of Vulcan, and his huge mouth evermore
    Spewed forth a torrent of Vulcanian flame;
Proudly he stalked the earth, and shook the world's fair frame.

XXVII. "But time, in answer to our prayers, one day
    Brought aid,--a God to help us in our need.
    Flushed with the death of Geryon, came this way
    Alcides, glorying in the victor's meed,
    And hither drove his mighty bulls to feed.
    These, pasturing in the valley, from his lair
    Fierce Cacus saw, and, scorning in his greed
    To leave undone what crime or craft could dare,
Four beauteous heifers stole, four oxen sleek and fair.

XXVIII. "Then, lest their footprints should the track declare,
    Back by their tails he dragged the captured kine,
    With hoofs reversed, and shut them in his lair,
    And whoso sought the cavern found no sign.
    But when at last Amphitryon's son divine,
    His feasted herds, preparing to remove,
    Called from their pastures, and in long-drawn line,
    With plaintive lowing, the departing drove
Trooped from the echoing hills, and clamours filled the grove,

XXIX. "One of the heifers from the cave again
    Lowed back, in answer to the sound, and broke
    The hopes of Cacus, and his theft was plain.
    Black choler in Alcides' breast awoke.
    Grasping his arms and club of knotted oak,
    Straight to the sky-capt Aventine he hies,
    And scales the steep. Then, not till then, our folk
    Saw Cacus tremble. To the cave he flies,
Wing'd like the wind with fear, and terror in his eyes.

XXX. "Scarce in, the rock he loosened with a blow,
    Slung high in iron by his father's care,
    And with the barrier blocked the door; when lo,
    With heart aflame, great Hercules was there,
    And searched each way for access to his lair,
    Grinding his teeth. Thrice round the mount he threw
    His vengeful eyes, thrice strove from earth to tear
    The stone, and storm the threshold, thrice withdrew,
And in the vale sat down, and nursed his wrath anew.

XXXI. "Sharp-pointed, sheer above the dungeon, stood
    A crag, fit home for evil birds to light.
    This, where it frowned to leftward o'er the flood,
    Alcides shook, and, heaving from the right,
    Tore from its roots, and headlong down the height
    Impelled it. With the impulse and the fall
    Heaven thunders; back the river in affright
    Shrinks to its source. Bank leaps from bank, and all
The mountain, yawning, shows the monster's cave and hall.

XXXII. "Stript of their roof, the dark abodes far back
    Lie open to their inmost; e'en as though
    Earth, rent asunder with convulsive wrack,
    And opening to the centre, gaped to show
    Hell's regions, and the gloomy realms of woe,
    Abhorr'd of gods, and bare to mortals lay
    The vast abyss, while in the gulf below
    The pallid spectres, huddling in dismay,
Looked up with dazzled eyes, at influx of the day.

XXXIII. "Caught in his den, the startled monster strove,
    With uncouth bellowing, to elude the light.
    With darts Alcides plies him from above,
    Huge trunks and millstones seizing for the fight,
    Hard pressed at length, and desperate for flight,
    Black smoke he vomits, wondrous to be told,
    That shrouds the cavern, and obscures the sight,
    And, denser than the night, around his hold
Thick darkness, mixt with fire, and smothering fumes are rolled.

XXXIV. "Scorn filled Alcides, and his wrath outbroke,
    And through the fire, indignant, with a bound
    He dashes, where thickest rolled the cloud of smoke,
    And in black vapours all the cave was drowned.
    Here, vomiting his idle flames, he found
    Huge Cacus in the darkness. Like a thread
    He twists him--chokes him--pins him to the ground,
    The strangled eyeballs starting from his head;
Blood leaves the blackened throat, the giant form lies dead.

XXXV. "Then suddenly, as back the doors are torn,
    The gloomy den stands open, and the prey,
    The stolen oxen, and the spoils forsworn,
    Are bared to heaven, and by the heels straightway
    He drags the grisly carcase to the day.
    All, thronging round, with hungry gaze admire
    The monster. Lost in wonder and dismay
    They mark the eyes, late terrible with ire,
The face, the bristly breast, the jaw's extinguished fire.

XXXVI. "Henceforth they solemnise this day divine,
    Their glad posterity from year to year,
    Potitius first, and the Pinarian line,
    Preserve the praise of Hercules; and here
    This altar named 'the Greatest' did they rear.
    (Greatest 'twill be for ever). Come then, all,
    And give such worth due honour. Wreathe your hair,
    And pass the wine-bowl merrily, and call
Each on our common God, the guardian of us all."

XXXVII. He spake; the God's own poplar, fleckt with white,
    Hung, twining o'er his brows. His right hand bore
    The sacred bowl. All, gladdening, hail the rite,
    And pour libations, and the Gods adore.
    'Twas evening, and the Western star once more
    Sloped towards Olympus. Forth Potitius came,
    Leading the priests, girt roughly, as of yore,
    With skins of beasts, and bearing high the flame.
Fresh, dainty gifts they bring, the second course to frame.

XXXVIII. Next came the Salians, dancing as they sung
    Around the blazing altars. Poplar crowned
    Their brows; a double chorus, old and young,
    Chant forth the glories and the deeds renowned
    Of Hercules; how, potent to confound
    His stepdame's hate, he crushed the serpents twain;
    What towns in war he levelled to the ground,
    Troy and OEchalia; how with infinite pain
Eurystheus' tasks he sped, and Juno's fates were vain:

XXXIX. "Oh thou, unconquered, whose resistless hand
    Smote the twin giants of the cloud-born crew,
    Pholus, Hylaeus; and the Cretan land
    Freed from its monster; and in Nemea slew
    The lion! Styx hath trembled at thy view,
    And Cerberus, when, smeared with gore, he lay
    On bones half-mumbled in his darksome mew.
    Thee not Typhoeus, when in armed array
He towered erect, could daunt, nor grisly shapes dismay.

XL. "Prompt was thy wit, when, powerless to prevail,
    Around thee twined, the beast of Lerna's fen
    Hissed with the legion of its heads. O hail,
    True son of Jove, the praise of mortal men,
    And Heaven's new glory. Hither turn thy ken,
    And cheer thy votaries." So with heart and will
    They chant his praise, nor less the monster's den,
    And Cacus, breathing flames. The loud notes fill
The sacred grove around, and echo to the hill.

XLI. The rites thus ended, to the town they fare.
    In front, the good Evander, old and grey,
    Moves 'twixt AEneas and his youthful heir,
    And oft with various converse, as they stray,
    Beguiles the lightened labour of the way.
    Now this, now that the Trojan chief admires,
    Filled with new pleasure, as his eyes survey
    Each place in turn. Oft, gladly he enquires
The tokens, one by one, and tales of ancient sires.

XLII. Then he, who built the citadel of Rome,
    Spake thus--the good Evander: "Yonder view
    The forest; 'twas the Fauns' and Wood-nymphs' home.
    Their birth from trunks and rugged oaks they drew;
    No arts they had, nor settled life, nor knew
    To yoke the ox, or lay up stores, or spare
    What wealth they gathered; but their wants were few;
    The branches gave them sustenance, whate'er
In toilsome chase they won, composed their scanty fare.

XLIII. "Then first came Saturn from Olympus' height,
    Flying from Jove, his kingdom barred and banned,
    He taught the scattered hillsmen to unite,
    And gave them laws, and bade the name to stand
    Of Latium, he safe latent in the land.
    Then tranquilly the happy seasons rolled
    Year after year, and Peace, with plenteous hand,
    Smiled on his sceptre. 'Twas the Age of Gold,
So well his placid sway the willing folk controlled.

XLIV. "Then waxed the times degenerate, and the stain
    With stealthy growth gave birth to deeds of shame,
    The rage of battle, and the lust of gain.
    Then came Ausonians, then Sicanians came,
    And oft the land of Saturn changed its name.
    Strange tyrants came, and ruled Italia's shore,
    Grim-visaged Thybris, of gigantic frame;
    His name henceforth the river Tiber bore,
And Albula's old name was known, alas! no more.

XLV. "Me, from my country driven forth to roam
    The utmost deep, perforce the Fates' design
    And Fortune's power drove hitherward. This home
    My mother, Nymph Carmentis, warned was mine;
    A god, Apollo, did these shores assign."
    So saying, he shows the altar and the gate
    Long called Carmental, from the Nymph divine,
    First seer who sang, with faithful voice, how great
AEneas' race should rise, and Pallanteum's fate.

XLVI. He shows the grove of Romulus, his famed
    Asylum; then, beneath the rock's cold crest
    Lupercal's cave, from Pan Lycaean named;
    Then, Argiletum's grove, whose shades attest
    The death of Argus, once the monarch's guest;
    Tarpeia's rock, the Capitolian height,
    Now golden--rugged 'twas of old, a nest
    Of tangled brakes, yet hallowed was the site
E'en then, and wood and rock filled the rude hinds with fright.

XLVII. "These wooded steeps," he said, "this sacred grove
    What godhead haunts, we know not; legends say
    Arcadians here have seen the form of Jove,
    And seen his right hand, with resistless sway,
    Shake the dread AEgis, and the clouds array.
    See, yon two cities, once renowned by fame,
    Now ruined walls and crumbling to decay;
    This Janus built, those walls did Saturn frame;
Janiculum was this, that bore Saturnia's name."

XLVIII. So talking, to Evander's lowly seat
    They journeyed. Herds were lowing on the plain,
    Where stand the Forum and Carinae's street.
    "These gates," said he, "did great Alcides deign
    To pass; this palace did the god contain.
    Dare thou to quit thee like the god, nor dread
