that Macwheeble looked very blank at this intimation.

     We'll give them the metal our mountain affords,
     Lillibulero, bullen a la,
     And in place of broad-pieces we'll pay with broadswords,
     Lero, lero, &c.
     With duns and with debts we will soon clear our score,
     Lillibulero, &c.
     For the man that's thus paid will crave payment no more,
     Lero, Lero, &c.
     [These lines, or something like them, occur in an old magazine
     of the period.]

'But come, Bailie, be not cast down; drink your wine with a joyous
heart; the Baron shall return safe and victorious to Tully-Veolan,
and unite Killancureit's lairdship with his own, since the cowardly
half-bred swine will not turn out for the Prince like a gentleman.'

'To be sure, they lie maist ewest,' [i.e. contiguous] said the Bairie,
wiping his eyes, 'and should naturally fa' under the same factory.'

'And I,' proceeded the Chieftain, 'shall take care of myself, too; 'for
you must know, I have to complete a good work here, by bringing Mrs.
Flockhart into the bosom of the Catholic church, or at least half way,
and that is to your Episcopal meeting-house. Oh, Baron! if you heard her
fine counter-tenor admonishing Kate and Matty in the morning, you, who
understand music, would tremble at the idea of hearing her shriek in the
psalmody of Haddo's Hole.'

'Lord forgie you, colonel, how ye rin on! But I hope your honours will
tak tea before ye gang to the palace, and I maun gang and mask it for
you.'

So saying, Mrs. Flockhart left the gentlemen to their own conversation,
which, as might be supposed, turned chiefly upon the approaching events
of the campaign.



CHAPTER XLIII

THE BALL

Ensign Maccombich having gone to the Highland camp upon duty, and Bailie
Macwheeble having retired to digest his dinner and Evan Dhu's intimation
of martial law in some blind change-house, Waverley, with the Baron and
the Chieftain, proceeded to Holyrood House. The two last were in full
tide of spirits, and the Baron rallied in his way our hero upon the
handsome figure which his new dress displayed to advantage. 'If you have
any design upon the heart of a bonny Scotch lassie, I would premonish
you, when you address her, to remember and quote the words of
Virgilius:--

     Nunc insanus amor duri me Martis in armis,
     Tela inter media atque adversos detinet hostes:

whilk verses Robertson of Struan, Chief of the Clan Donnochy (unless
the claims of Lude ought to be preferred PRIMO LOCO), has thus elegantly
rendered;

     For cruel love has gartan'd low my leg,
     And clad my hurdies in a philabeg.

Although, indeed, ye wear the trews, a garment whilk I approve maist of
the twa, as mair ancient and seemly.' 'Or rather,' said Fergus, 'hear my
song:

     She wadna hae a Lowland laird,
     Nor be an English lady;
     But she's away with Duncan Graeme,
     And he's row'd her in his plaidy.'

By this time they reached the palace of Holyrood, and were announced
respectively as they entered the apartments.

It is but too well known how many gentlemen of rank, education, and
fortune, took a concern in the ill-fated and desperate undertaking of
1745. The ladies, also, of Scotland very generally espoused the cause of
the gallant and handsome young Prince, who threw himself upon the mercy
of his countrymen, rather like a hero of romance than a calculating
politician. It is not, therefore, to be wondered that Edward, who
had spent the greater part of his life in the solemn seclusion of
Waverley-Honour, should have been dazzled at the liveliness and elegance
of the scene now exhibited in the long-deserted halls of the Scottish
palace. The accompaniments, indeed, fell short of splendour, being such
as the confusion and hurry of the time admitted; still, however, the
general effect was striking, and, the rank of the company considered,
might well be called brilliant.

It was not long before the lover's eye discovered the object of his
attachment. Flora Mac-Ivor was in the act; of returning to her seat,
near the top of the room, with Rose Bradwardine by her side. Among much
elegance and beauty, they had attracted a great degree of the public
attention, being certainly two of the handsomest women present. The
Prince took much notice of both, particularly of Flora, with whom he
danced; a preference which she probably owed to her foreign education,
and command of the French and Italian languages.

When the bustle attending the conclusion of the dance permitted, Edward,
almost intuitively, followed Fergus to the place where Miss Mac-Ivor was
seated. The sensation of hope, with which he had nursed his affection
in absence of the beloved object, seemed to vanish in her presence, and,
like one striving to recover the particulars of a forgotten dream,
he would have given the world at that moment to have recollected
the grounds on which he had founded expectations which now seemed so
delusive. He accompanied Fergus with downcast eyes, tingling ears,
and the feelings of the criminal, who, while the melancholy cart moves
slowly through the crowds that have assembled to behold his execution,
receives no clear sensation either from the noise which fills his ears,
or the tumult on which he casts his wandering look.

Flora seemed a little--a very little--affected and discomposed at his
approach. 'I bring you an adopted son of Ivor,' said Fergus.

'And I receive him as a second brother,' replied Flora.

There was a slight emphasis on the word, which would have escaped
every ear but one that was feverish with apprehension. It was, however,
distinctly marked, and, combined with her whole tone and manner, plainly
intimated, 'I will never think of Mr. Waverley as a more intimate
connexion.' Edward stopped, bowed, and looked at Fergus, who bit his
lip; a movement of anger, which proved that he also had put a sinister
interpretation on the reception which his sister had given his friend.
'This, then, is an end of my day-dream!' Such was Waverley's first
thought, and it was so exquisitely painful as to banish from his cheek
every drop of blood.

'Good God!' said Rose Bradwardine, 'he is not yet recovered!'

These words, which she uttered with great emotion, were overheard by the
Chevalier himself, who stepped hastily forward, and, taking Waverley by
the hand, inquired kindly after his health, and added, that he wished to
speak with him. By a strong and sudden effort, which the circumstances
rendered indispensable, Waverley recovered himself so far as to follow
the Chevalier in silence to a recess in the apartment.

Here the Prince detained him some time, asking various questions about
the great Tory and Catholic families of England, their connexions,
their influence, and the state of their affections towards the house of
Stuart. To these queries Edward could not at any time have given more
than general answers, and it may be supposed that, in the present state
of his feelings, his responses were indistinct even to confusion. The
Chevalier smiled once or twice at the incongruity of his replies, but
continued the same style of conversation, although he found himself
obliged to occupy the principal share of it, until he perceived that
Waverley had recovered his presence of mind. It is probable that this
long audience was partly meant to further the idea which the Prince
desired should be entertained among his followers, that Waverley was a
character of political influence. But it appeared, from his concluding
expressions, that he had a different and good-natured motive, personal
to our hero, for prolonging the conference. 'I cannot resist the
temptation,' he said, 'of boasting of my own discretion as a lady's
confidant. You see, Mr. Waverley, that I know all, and I assure you I am
deeply interested in the affair. But, my good young friend, you must put
a more severe restraint upon your feelings. There are many here whose
eyes can see as clearly as mine, but the prudence of whose tongues may
not be equally trusted.'

So saying, he turned easily away, and joined a circle of officers at
a few paces' distance, leaving Waverley to meditate upon his parting
expression, which though not intelligible to him in its whole purport,
was sufficiently so in the caution which the last word recommended.
Making, therefore, an effort to show himself worthy of the interest
which his new master had expressed, by instant obedience to his
recommendation, he walked up to the spot where Flora and Miss
Bradwardine were still seated, and having made his compliments to the
latter, he succeeded, even beyond his own expectation, in entering into
conversation upon general topics.

If, my dear reader, thou hast ever happened to take post-horses at--,
or at--(one at least of which blanks, or more probably both, you will
be able to fill up from an inn near your own residence), you must have
observed, and doubtless with sympathetic pain, the reluctant agony with
which the poor jades at first apply their galled necks to the collars
of the harness. But when the irresistible arguments of the postboy have
prevailed upon them to proceed a mile or two, they will become callous
to the first sensation; and being warm at the harness, as the said
postboy may term it, proceed as if their withers were altogether
unwrung. This simile so much corresponds with the state of Waverley's
feelings in the course of this memorable evening, that I prefer it
(especially as being, I trust, wholly original) to any more splendid
illustration with which Byshe's ART OF POETRY might supply me.

Exertion, like virtue, is its own reward; and our hero had, moreover,
other stimulating motives for persevering in a display of affected
composure and indifference to Flora's obvious unkindness. Pride, which
supplies its caustic as a useful, though severe, remedy for the wounds
of affection, came rapidly to his aid. Distinguished by the favour of a
Prince; destined, he had room to hope, to play a conspicuous part in
the revolution which awaited a mighty kingdom; excelling, probably,
in mental acquirements, and equalling, at least, in personal
accomplishments, most of the noble and distinguished persons with whom
he was now ranked; young, wealthy, and high-born--could he, or ought he
to droop beneath the frown of a capricious beauty?

     O nymph, unrelenting and cold as thou art,
     My bosom is proud as thine own.

With the feeling expressed in these beautiful lines (which, however,
were not then written) [They occur in Miss Seward's fine verses,
beginning--To thy rocks, stormy Lannow, adieu.], Waverley determined
upon convincing Flora that he was not to be depressed by a rejection,
in which his vanity whispered that perhaps she did her own prospects as
much injustice as his. And, to aid this change of feeling, there lurked
the secret and unacknowledged hope, that she might learn to prize his
affection more highly when she did not conceive it to be altogether
within her own choice to attract or repulse it. There was a mystic tone
of encouragement, also, in the Chevalier's words, though he feared they
only referred to the wishes of Fergus in favour of a union between
him and his sister. But the whole circumstances of time, place, and
incident, combined at once to awaken his imagination, and to call upon
him for a manly and decisive tone of conduct, leaving to fate to dispose
of the issue. Should he appear to be the only one sad and disheartened
on the eve of battle, how greedily would the tale be commented upon by
the slander which had been already but too busy with his fame? Never,
never, he internally resolved, shall my unprovoked enemies possess such
an advantage over my reputation.

Under the influence of these mixed sensations, and cheered at times by
a smile of intelligence and approbation from the Prince as he passed the
group, Waverley exerted his powers of fancy, animation, and eloquence,
and attracted the general admiration of the company. The conversation
gradually assumed the tone best qualified for the display of his talents
and acquisitions. The gaiety of the evening was exalted in character,
rather than checked, by the approaching dangers of the morrow. All
nerves were strung for the future, and prepared to enjoy the present.
This mood of mind is highly favourable for the exercise of the powers
of imagination, for poetry, and for that eloquence which is allied to
poetry. Waverley, as we have elsewhere observed, possessed at times a
wonderful flow of rhetoric; and, on the present occasion, he touched
more than once the higher notes of feeling, and then again ran off in
a wild voluntary of fanciful mirth. He was supported and excited by
kindred spirits, who felt the same impulse of mood and time; and even
those of more cold and calculating habits were hurried along by the
torrent. Many ladies declined the dance, which still went forward, and,
under various pretences, joined the party to which the 'handsome young
Englishman' seemed to have attached himself. He was presented to
several of the first rank, and his manners, which for the present were
altogether free from the bashful restraint by which, in a moment of less
excitation, they were usually clouded, gave universal delight.

Flora Mac-Ivor appeared to be the only female present who regarded him
with a degree of coldness and reserve; yet even she could not suppress
a sort of wonder at talents which, in the course of their acquaintance,
she had never seen displayed with equal brilliancy and impressive
effect. I do not know whether she might not feel a momentary regret at
having taken so decisive a resolution upon the addresses of a lover, who
seemed fitted so well to fill a high place in the highest stations
of society. Certainly she had hitherto accounted among the incurable
deficiencies of Edward's disposition, the MAUVAISE HONTE, which, as
she had been educated in the first foreign circles, and was little
acquainted with the shyness of English manners, was, in her opinion,
too nearly related to timidity and imbecility of disposition. But if
a passing wish occurred that Waverley could have rendered himself
uniformly thus amiable and attractive, its influence was momentary; for
circumstances had arisen since they met, which rendered, in her eyes,
the resolution she had formed respecting him final and irrevocable.

With opposite feelings, Rose Bradwardine bent her whole soul to listen.
She felt a secret triumph at the public tribute paid to one, whose merit
she had learned to prize too early and too fondly. Without a thought of
jealousy, without a feeling of fear, pain, or doubt, and undisturbed by
a single selfish consideration, she resigned herself to the pleasure of
observing the general murmur of applause. When Waverley spoke, her ear
was exclusively filled with his voice; when others answered, her eye
took its turn of observation, and seemed to watch his reply. Perhaps
the delight which she experienced in the course of that evening, though
transient, and followed by much sorrow, was in its nature the most pure
and disinterested which the human mind is capable of enjoying.

'Baron,' said the Chevalier, 'I would not trust my mistress in the
company of your young friend. He is really, though perhaps somewhat
romantic, one of the most fascinating young men whom I have ever seen.'

'And by my honour, sir,' replied the Baron, 'the lad can sometimes be as
dowff as a sexagenary like myself. If your Royal Highness had seen
him dreaming and dozing about the banks of Tully-Veolan like an
hypochondriac person, or, as Burton's ANATOMIA hath it, a phrenesiac or
lethargic patient, you would wonder where he hath sae suddenly acquired
all this fine sprack festivity and jocularity.'

'Truly,' said Fergus Mac-Ivor, 'I think it can only be the inspiration
of the tartans; for, though Waverley be always a young fellow of
sense and honour, I have hitherto often found him a very absent and
inattentive companion.'

'We are the more obliged to him,' said the Prince, 'for having reserved
for this evening qualities which even such intimate friends had not
discovered.--But come, gentlemen, the night advances, and the business
of to-morrow must be early thought upon. Each take charge of his fair
partner, and honour a small refreshment with your company.'

He led the way to another suite of apartments, and assumed the seat and
canopy at the head of a long range of tables, with an air of dignity
mingled with courtesy, which well became his high birth and lofty
pretensions. An hour had hardly flown away when the musicians played the
signal for parting, so well known in Scotland.' [Which is, or was wont
to be, the old air of 'Good-night, and joy be with you a'!']

'Good-night, then, said the Chevalier, rising; 'Good-night, and joy
be with you!--Good-night, fair ladies, who have so highly honoured a
proscribed and banished Prince.--Good-night, my brave friends;--may the
happiness we have this evening experienced be an omen of our return to
these our paternal halls, speedily and in triumph, and of many and many
future meetings of mirth and pleasure in the palace of Holyrood!'

When the Baron of Bradwardine afterwards mentioned this adieu of the
Chevalier, he never failed to repeat, in a melancholy tone,

     Audiit, et voti Phoebus succedere partem
     Mente dedit; partem volueres dispersit in auras,

'which,' as he added, 'is weel rendered into English metre by my friend
Bangour:

     Ae half the prayer, wi' Phoebus grace did find,
     The t'other half he whistled down the wind.'



CHAPTER XLIV

THE MARCH

The conflicting passions and exhausted feelings of Waverley had resigned
him to late but sound repose. He was dreaming of Glennaquoich, and had
transferred to the halls of Ian nan Chaistel the festal train which so
lately graced those of Holyrood. The pibroch too was distinctly heard;
and this at least was no delusion, for the 'proud step of the chief
piper' of the 'chlain Mac-Ivor' was perambulating the court before the
door of his Chieftain's quarters, and, as Mrs. Flockhart, apparently
no friend to his minstrelsy, was pleased to observe, 'garring the very
stane-and-lime wa's dingle wi' his screeching.' Of course, it soon
became too powerful for Waverley's dream, with which it had at first
rather harmonized.

The sound of Callum's brogues in his apartment (for Mac-Ivor had again
assigned Waverley to his care) was the next note of parting. 'Winna yere
honour bang up? Vich Ian Vohr and ta Prince are awa to the lang green
glen ahint the clachan, tat they ca' the King's Park, and mony ane's on
his ain shanks the day, that will be carried on ither folk's ere night.'
[The main body of the Highland army encamped, or rather bivouacked,
in that part of the King's Park which lies towards the village of
Duddingston.]

Waverley sprang up, and, with Callum's assistance and instructions,
adjusted his tartans in proper costume. Callum told him also, 'tat his
leather DORLACH wi' the lock on her was come frae Doune, and she was awa
again in the wain wi' Vich Inn Vohr's walise,'

By this periphrasis Waverley readily apprehended his portmanteau was
intended. He thought upon the mysterious packet of the maid of the
cavern, which seemed always to escape him when within his very grasp.
But this was no time for indulgence of curiosity; and having declined
Mrs. Flockhart's compliment of a morning, i.e. a matutinal dram, being
probably the only man in the Chevalier's army by whom such a courtesy
would have been rejected, he made his adieus, and departed with Callum.

'Callum,' said he, as they proceeded down a dirty close to gain the
southern skirts of the Canongate, 'what shall I do for a horse?'

'Ta deil ane ye maun think o',' said Callum. 'Vich Ian Vohr's marching
on foot at the head o' his kin (not to say ta Prince, wha does
the like), wi' his target on his shoulder; and ye maun e'en be
neighbour-like.'

'And so I will, Callum--give me my target;--so, there we are fixed. How
does it look?'

'Like the bra' Highlander tat's painted on the board afore the mickle
change-house they ca' Luckie Middlemass's,' answered Callum; meaning,
I must observe, a high compliment, for, in his opinion, Luckie
Middlemass's sign was an exquisite specimen of art. Waverley, however,
not feeling the full force of this polite simile, asked him no further
questions.

Upon extricating themselves from the mean and dirty suburbs of the
metropolis, and emerging into the open air, Waverley felt a renewal both
of health and spirits, and turned his recollection with firmness upon
the events of the preceding evening, and with hope and resolution
towards those of the approaching day.

When he had surmounted a small craggy eminence, called St. Leonard's
Hill, the King's Park, or the hollow between the mountain of Arthur's
Seat, and the rising grounds on which the southern part of Edinburgh
is now built, lay beneath him, and displayed a singular and animating
prospect. It was occupied by the army of the Highlanders, now in the act
of preparing for their march. Waverley had already seen something of the
kind at the hunting-match which he attended with Fergus Mac-Ivor; but
this was on a scale of much greater magnitude, and incomparably deeper
interest. The rocks, which formed the background of the scene, and the
very sky itself, rang with the clang of the bagpipers, summoning
forth, each with his appropriate pibroch, his chieftain and clan. The
mountaineers, rousing themselves from their couch under the canopy of
heaven, with the hum and bustle of a confused and irregular multitude,
like bees alarmed and arming in their hives, seemed to possess all the
pliability of movement fitted to execute military manoeuvres. Their
motions appeared spontaneous and confused, but the result was order and
regularity; so that a general must have praised the conclusion, though a
martinet might have ridiculed the method by which it was attained.

The sort of complicated medley created by the hasty arrangements of the
various clans under their respective banners, for the purpose of getting
into the order of march, was in itself a gay and lively spectacle. They
had no tents to strike, having generally, and by choice, slept upon the
open field, although the autumn was now waning, and the nights began to
be frosty. For a little space, while they were getting into order, there
was exhibited a changing, fluctuating; and confused appearance of
waving tartans and floating plumes, and of banners displaying the proud
gathering word of Clanronald, GANION COHERIGA (Gainsay who dares);
LOCH-SLOY, the watchword of the Mac-Farlanes; FORTH FORTUNE, AND FILL
THE FETTERS, the motto of the Marquis of Tuilibardine; BYDAND, that of
Lord Lewis Gordon; and the appropriate signal words and emblems of many
other chieftains and clans.

At length the mixed and wavering multitude arranged themselves into a
narrow and dusky column of great length, stretching through the whole
extent of the valley. In the front of the column the standard of the
Chevalier was displayed, bearing at red cross upon a white ground,
with the motto TANDEM TRIUMPHANS. The few cavalry being chiefly Lowland
gentry, with their domestic servants and retainers, formed the advanced
guard of the army; and their standards, of which they had rather too
many in respect of their numbers, were seen waving upon the extreme
verge of the horizon. Many horsemen of this body, among whom Waverley
accidentally remarked Balmawhapple, and his lieutenant, Jinker (which
last, however, had been reduced, with several others, by the advice of
the Baron of Bradwardine, to the situation of what he called reformed
officers, or reformadoes), added to the liveliness, though by no means
to the regularity, of the scene, by galloping their horses as fast
forward as the press would permit, to join their proper station in
the van. The fascinations of the Circes of the High Street, and the
potations of strength with which they had been drenched over night, had
probably detained these heroes within the walls of Edinburgh somewhat
later than was consistent with their morning duty. Of such loiterers,
the prudent took the longer and circuitous, but more open route, to
attain their place in the march, by keeping at some distance from the
infantry, and making their way through the enclosures to the right, at
the expense of leaping over or pulling down the dry-stone fences. The
irregular appearance and vanishing of these small parties of horsemen,
as well as the confusion occasioned by those who endeavoured, though
generally without effect, to press to the front through the crowd of
Highlanders, maugre their curses, oaths, and opposition, added to the
picturesque wildness what it took from the military regularity of the
scene.

While Waverley gazed upon this remarkable spectacle, rendered yet more
impressive by the occasional discharge of cannon-shot from the Castle
at the Highland guards as they were withdrawn from its vicinity to
join their main body, Callum, with his usual freedom of interference,
reminded him that Vich Ian Vohr's folk were nearly at the head of the
column of march, which was still distant, and that 'they would gang very
fast after the cannon fired.' Thus admonished, Waverley walked briskly
forward, yet often easting a glance upon the darksome clouds of warriors
who were collected before and beneath him. A nearer view, indeed,
rather diminished the effect impressed on the mind by the more distant
appearance of the army. The leading men of each clan were well armed
with broadsword, target, and fusee, to which all added the dirk, and
most the steel pistol. But these consisted of gentlemen, that is,
relations of the chief, however distant, and who had an immediate title
to his countenance and protection. Finer and hardier men could not
have been selected out of any army in Christendom; while the free and
independent habits which each possessed, and which each was yet so well
taught to subject to the command of his chief, and the peculiar mode of
discipline adopted in Highland warfare, rendered them equally formidable
by their individual courage and high spirit, and from their rational
conviction of the necessity of acting in unison, and of giving their
national mode of attack the fullest opportunity of success.

But, in a lower rank to these, there were found individuals of an
inferior description, the common peasantry of the Highland country,
who, although they did not allow themselves to be so called, and claimed
often, with apparent truth, to be of more ancient descent than the
masters whom they served, bore, nevertheless, the livery of extreme
penury, being indifferently accoutred, and worse armed, half naked,
stinted in growth, and miserable in aspect. Each important clan had some
of those Helots attached to them;--thus, the Mac-Couls, though tracing
their descent from Comhal, the father of Finn or Fingal, were a sort
of Gibeonites, or hereditary servants to the Stewarts of Appin; the
Macbeths, descended from the unhappy monarch of that name, were subjects
to the Morays, and clan Donnochy, or Robertsons of Athole; and many
other examples might be given, were it not for the risk of hurting any
pride of clanship which may yet be left, and thereby drawing a Highland
tempest into the shop of my publisher. Now these same Helots, though
forced into the field by the arbitrary authority of the chieftains under
whom they hewed wood and drew water, were, in general, very sparingly
fed, ill dressed, and worse armed. The latter circumstance was indeed
owing chiefly to the general disarming act, which had been carried into
effect ostensibly through the whole Highlands, although most of the
chieftains contrived to elude-its influence, by retaining the weapons
of their own immediate clansmen, and delivering up those of less value,
which they collected from these inferior satellites. It followed, as a
matter of course, that, as we have already hinted, many of these poor
fellows were brought to the field in a very wretched condition.

From this it happened, that, in bodies, the van of which were admirably
well armed in their own fashion, the rear resembled actual banditti.
Here was a pole-axe, there a sword without a scabbard; here a gun
without a lock, there a scythe set straight upon a pole; and some had
only their dirks, and bludgeons or stakes pulled out of hedges. The
grim, uncombed, and wild appearance of these men, most of whom gazed
with all the admiration of ignorance upon the most ordinary production
of domestic art, created surprise in the Lowlands, but it also created
terror. So little was the condition of the Highlands known at that late
period, that the character and appearance of their population,
while thus sallying forth as military adventurers, conveyed to the
south-country Lowlanders as much surprise as if an invasion of African
Negroes or Esquimaux Indians had issued forth from the northern
mountains of their own native country. It cannot therefore be wondered
if Waverley, who had hitherto judged of the Highlanders generally from
the samples which the policy of Fergus had from time to time exhibited,
should have felt damped and astonished at the daring attempt of a body
not then exceeding four thousand men, and of whom not above half the
number, at the utmost, were armed, to change the fate, and alter the
dynasty, of the British kingdoms.

As he moved along the column, which still remained stationary, an iron
gun, the only piece of artillery possessed by the army which meditated
so important a revolution, was fired as the signal of march. The
Chevalier had expressed a wish to leave this useless piece of ordnance
behind him; but, to his surprise, the Highland chiefs interposed to
solicit that it might accompany their march, pleading the prejudices of
their followers, who, little accustomed to artillery, attached a
degree of absurd importance to this field-piece, and expected it would
contribute essentially to a victory which they could only owe to their
own muskets and broadswords. Two or three French artillerymen were
therefore appointed to the management of this military engine, which
was drawn along by a string of Highland ponies, and was, after all, only
used for the purpose of firing signals. [See Note 25.]

No sooner was its voice heard upon the present occasion, than the whole
line was in motion. A wild cry of joy from the advancing battalions rent
the air, and was then lost in the shrill clangour of the bagpipes, as
the sound of these, in their turn, was partially drowned by the heavy
tread of so many men put at once into motion. The banners glittered
and shook as they moved forward, and the horse hastened to occupy their
station as the advanced guard, and to push on reconnoitring parties
to ascertain and report the motions of the enemy. They vanished from
Waverley's eye as they wheeled round the base of Arthur's seat, under
the remarkable ridge of basaltic rocks which fronts the little lake of
Duddingston.

The infantry followed in the same direction, regulating their pace by
another body which occupied a road more to the southward. It cost Edward
some exertion of activity to attain the place which Fergus's followers
occupied in the line of march.



CHAPTER XLV

AN INCIDENT GIVES RISE TO UNAVAILING REFLECTIONS

When Waverley reached that part of the column which was filled by
the clan of Mac-Ivor, they halted, formed, and received him with a
triumphant flourish upon the bagpipes, and a loud shout of the men, most
of whom knew him personally, and were delighted to see him in the dress
of their country and of their sept. 'You shout,' said a Highlander of
a neighbouring clan to Evan Dhu, 'as if the Chieftain were just come to
your head.'

MAR E BRAN IS E BRATHAIR, If it be not Bran, it is Bran's brother,' was
the proverbial reply of Maccombich. [Bran, the well-known dog of Fingal,
is often the theme of Highland proverb as well as song.]

'Oh, then, it is the handsome Sassenach Duinhe-wassel, that is to be
married to Lady Flora?'

'That may be, or it may not be; and it is neither your matter nor mine,
Gregor.'

Fergus advanced to embrace the volunteer, and afford him a warm and
hearty welcome; but he thought it necessary to apologize for the
diminished numbers of his battalion (which did not exceed three hundred
men), by observing, he had sent a good many out upon parties.

The real fact, however, was, that the defection of Donald Bean Lean had
deprived him of at least thirty hardy fellows, whose services he had
fully reckoned upon, and that many of his occasional adherents had been
recalled by their several chiefs to the standards to which they most
properly owed their allegiance. The rival chief of the great northern
branch also of his own clan, had mustered his people, although he had
not yet declared either for the Government or for the Chevalier, and by
his intrigues had in some degree diminished the force with which
Fergus took the field. To make amends for these disappointments, it was
universally admitted that the followers of Vich Ian Vohr, in point of
appearance, equipment, arms, and dexterity in using them, equalled the
most choice troops which followed the standard of Charles Edward. Old
Ballenkeiroch acted as his major; and, with the other officers who had
known Waverley when at Glennaquoich, gave our hero a cordial reception,
as the sharer of their future dangers and expected honours.

The route pursued by the Highland army, after leaving the village of
Duddingston, was for some time the common post-road betwixt Edinburgh
and Haddington, until they crossed the Esk at Musselburgh, when, instead
of keeping the low grounds towards the sea, they turned more inland, and
occupied the brow of the eminence called Carberry hill, a place already
distinguished in Scottish history as the spot where the lovely Mary
surrendered herself to her insurgent subjects. This direction was
chosen, because the Chevalier had received notice that the army of the
Government, arriving by sea from Aberdeen, had landed at Dunbar, and
quartered the night before to the west of Haddington, with the intention
of falling down towards the sea-side, and approaching Edinburgh by the
lower coast-road. By keeping the height, which overhung that road in
many places, it was hoped the Highlanders might find an opportunity of
attacking them to advantage. The army therefore halted upon the ridge of
Carberry hill, both to refresh the soldiers, and as a central situation,
from which their march could be directed to any point that the motions
of the enemy might render most advisable. While they remained in this
position, a messenger arrived in haste to desire Mac-Ivor to come to the
Prince, adding, that their advanced post had had a skirmish with some of
the enemy's cavalry, and that the Baron of Bradwardine had sent in a few
prisoners.

Waverley walked forward out of the line to satisfy his curiosity, and
soon observed five or six of the troopers, who, covered with dust, had
galloped in to announce that the enemy were in full march westward along
the coast. Passing still a little further on, he was struck with a groan
which issued from a hovel. He approached the spot, and heard a voice, in
the provincial English of his native county, which endeavoured, though
frequently interrupted by pain, to repeat the Lord's Prayer. The voice
of distress always found a ready answer in our hero's bosom. He entered
the hovel, which seemed to be intended for what is called, in the
pastoral counties of Scotland, a smearing-house; and in its obscurity
Edward could only at first discern a sort of red bundle; for those who
had stripped the wounded man of his arms, and part of his clothes, had
left him the dragoon-cloak in which he was enveloped.

'For the love of God,' said the wounded man, as he heard Waverley's
step, 'give me a single drop of water!'

'You shall have it,' answered Waverley, at the same time raising him in
his arms, bearing him to the door of the hut, and giving him some drink
from his flask.

'I should know that voice,' said the man; but, looking on Waverley's
dress with a bewildered look,--'no, this is not the young squire!'

This was the common phrase by which Edward was distinguished on the
estate of Waverley-Honour, and the sound now thrilled to his heart with
the thousand recollections which the well-known accents of his native
country had already contributed to awaken. 'Houghton!' he said, gazing
on the ghastly features which death was fast disfiguring, 'can this be
you?'

'I never thought to hear an English voice again,' said the wounded man;
'they left me to live or die here as I could, when they found I would
say nothing about the strength of the regiment. But, oh, squire! how
could you stay from us so long, and let us be tempted by that fiend of
the pit, Ruffin?--we should have followed you through flood and fire, to
be sure.'

'Ruffin! I assure you, Houghton, you have been vilely imposed upon.'

'I often thought so,' said Houghton, 'though they showed us your very
seal; and so Timms was shot, and I was reduced to the ranks.'

'Do not exhaust your strength in speaking,' said Edward; 'I will get you
