than a quarter of a century, to say nothing of the Prince of Orange,
and King Henry the Great.

Then mark--a most curious thing--the extreme youth of those who were in
this business.  France, subject to the Queen-Mother, of course, was
ruled at the time by boys scarce out of their tutors' hands.  They were
mere lads, hot-blooded, reckless nobles, ready for any wild brawl,
without forethought or prudence.  Of the four Frenchmen who it is
thought took the leading parts, one, the king, was twenty-two;
Monsieur, his brother, was only twenty; the Duke of Guise was
twenty-one.  Only the Marshal de Tavannes was of mature age.  For the
other conspirators, for the Queen-Mother, for her advisers Retz and
Nevers and Birague, they were Italians; and Italy may answer for them
if Florence, Mantua and Milan care to raise the glove.

To return to our journey.  A league from the town we halted at a large
inn, and some of us dismounted.  Horses were brought out to fill the
places of those lost or left behind, and Bure had food served to us.
We were famished and exhausted, and ate it ravenously, as if we could
never have enough.

The Vidame sat his horse apart, served by his page, I stole a glance at
him, and it struck me that even on his iron nature the events of the
night had made some impression.  I read, or thought I read, in his
countenance, signs of emotions not quite in accordance with what I knew
of him--emotions strange and varied. I could almost have sworn that as
he looked at us a flicker of kindliness lit up his stern and cruel
gloom; I could almost have sworn he smiled with a curious sadness.  As
for Louis, riding with a squad who stood in a different part of the
yard, he did not see us; had not yet seen us at all.  His side face,
turned towards me, was pale and sad, his manner preoccupied, his mien
rather sorrowful than downcast.  He was thinking, I judged, as much of
the many brave men who had yesterday been his friends--companions at
board and play-table--as of his own fate.  When we presently, at a
signal from Bure, took to the road again, I asked no permission, but
thrusting my horse forward, rode to his side as he passed through the
gateway.



CHAPTER XI.

A NIGHT OF SORROW.

"Louis!  Louis!"

He turned with a start at the sound of my voice, joy and
bewilderment--and no wonder--in his countenance.  He had not supposed
us to be within a hundred leagues of him.  And lo!  here we were, knee
to knee, hand meeting hand in a long grasp, while his eyes, to which
tears sprang unbidden, dwelt on my face as though they could read in it
the features of his sweetheart. Some one had furnished him with a hat,
and enabled him to put his dress in order, and wash his wound, which
was very slight, and these changes had improved his appearance; so that
the shadow of grief and despondency passing for a moment from him in
the joy of seeing me, he looked once more his former self:  as he had
looked in the old days at Caylus on his return from hawking, or from
some boyish escapade among the hills.  Only, alas!  he wore no sword.

"And now tell me all," he cried, after his first exclamation of wonder
had found vent.  "How on earth do you come here?  Here, of all places,
and by my side?  Is all well at Caylus?  Surely Mademoiselle is not--"

"Mademoiselle is well!  perfectly well!  And thinking of you, I swear!"
I answered passionately.  "For us," I went on, eager for the moment to
escape that subject--how could I talk of it in the daylight and under
strange eyes?--"Marie and Croisette are behind.  We left Caylus eight
days ago.  We reached Paris yesterday evening.  We have not been to
bed!  We have passed, Louis, such a night as I never--"

He stopped me with a gesture.  "Hush!"  he said, raising his hand.
"Don't speak of it, Anne!"  and I saw that the fate of his friends was
still too recent, the horror of his awakening to those dreadful sights
and sounds was still too vivid for him to bear reference to them.  Yet
after riding for a time in silence--though his lips moved--he asked me
again what had brought us up.

"We came to warn you--of him," I answered, pointing to the solitary,
moody figure of the Vidame, who was riding ahead of the party.  "He--he
said that Kit should never marry you, and boasted of what he would do
to you, and frightened her.  So, learning he was going to Paris, we
followed him--to put you on your guard, you know."  And I briefly
sketched our adventures, and the strange circumstances and mistakes
which had delayed us hour after hour, through all that strange night,
until the time had gone by when we could do good.

His eyes glistened and his colour rose as I told the story.  He wrung
my hand warmly, and looked back to smile at Marie and Croisette.  "It
was like you!"  he ejaculated with emotion.  "It was like her cousins!
Brave, brave lads!  The Vicomte will live to be proud of you!  Some day
you will all do great things!  I say it!"

"But oh, Louis!"  I exclaimed sorrowfully, though my heart was bounding
with pride at his words, "if we had only been in time! If we had only
come to you two hours earlier!"

"You would have spoken to little purpose then, I fear," he replied,
shaking his head.  "We were given over as a prey to the enemy.
Warnings?  We had warnings in plenty.  De Rosny warned us, and we
scoffed at him.  The king's eye warned us, and we trusted him.  But--"
and Louis' form dilated and his hand rose as he went on, and I thought
of his cousin's prediction--"it will never be so again in France, Anne!
Never!  No man will after this trust another!  There will be no honour,
no faith, no quarter, and no peace!  And for the Valois who has done
this, the sword will never depart from his house!  I believe it!  I do
believe it!"

How truly he spoke we know now.  For two-and-twenty years after that
twenty-fourth of August, 1572, the sword was scarcely laid aside in
France for a single month.  In the streets of Paris, at Arques, and
Coutras, and Ivry, blood flowed like water that the blood of the St.
Bartholomew might be forgotten--that blood which, by the grace of God,
Navarre saw fall from the dice box on the eve of the massacre.  The
last of the Valois passed to the vaults of St. Denis:  and a greater
king, the first of all Frenchmen, alive or dead, the bravest, gayest,
wisest of the land, succeeded him:  yet even he had to fall by the
knife, in a moment most unhappy for his country, before France,
horror-stricken, put away the treachery and evil from her.

Talking with Louis as we rode, it was not unnatural--nay, it was the
natural result of the situation--that I should avoid one subject.  Yet
that subject was the uppermost in my thoughts. What were the Vidame's
intentions?  What was the meaning of this strange journey?  What was to
be Louis' fate?  I shrank with good reason from asking him these
questions.  There could be so little room for hope, even after that
smile which I had seen Bezers smile, that I dared not dwell upon them.
I should but torture him and myself.

So it was he who first spoke about it.  Not at that time, but after
sunset, when the dusk had fallen upon us, and found us still plodding
southward with tired horses; a link outwardly like other links in the
long chain of riders, toiling onwards.  Then he said suddenly, "Do you
know whither we are going, Anne?"

I started, and found myself struggling with a strange confusion before
I could reply.  "Home," I suggested at random.

"Home?  No.  And yet nearly home.  To Cahors," he answered with an odd
quietude.  "Your home, my boy, I shall never see again, Nor Kit!  Nor
my own Kit!"  It was the first time I had heard him call her by the
fond name we used ourselves.  And the pathos in his tone as of the
past, not the present, as of pure memory--I was very thankful that I
could not in the dusk see his face--shook my self-control.  I wept.
"Nay, my lad," he went on, speaking softly and leaning from his saddle
so that he could lay his hand on my shoulder "we are all men together.
We must be brave.  Tears cannot help us, so we should leave them to
the--women."

I cried more passionately at that.  Indeed his own voice quavered over
the last word.  But in a moment he was talking to me coolly and
quietly.  I had muttered something to the effect that the Vidame would
not dare--it would be too public.

"There is no question of daring in it," he replied.  "And the more
public it is, the better he will like it.  They have dared to take
thousands of lives since yesterday.  There is no one to call him to
account since the king--our king forsooth!--has declared every Huguenot
an outlaw, to be killed wherever he be met with.  No, when Bezers
disarmed me yonder," he pointed as he spoke to his wound, "I looked of
course for instant death.  Anne! I saw blood in his eyes!  But he did
not strike."

"Why not?"  I asked in suspense.

"I can only guess," Louis answered with a sigh.  "He told me that my
life was in his hands, but that he should take it at his own time.
Further that if I would not give my word to go with him without trying
to escape, he would throw me to those howling dogs outside.  I gave my
word.  We are on the road together.  And oh, Anne!  yesterday, only
yesterday, at this time I was riding home with Teligny from the Louvre,
where we had been playing at paume with the king!  And the world--the
world was very fair."

"I saw you, or rather Croisette did," I muttered as his sorrow--not for
himself, but his friends--forced him to stop.  "Yet how, Louis, do you
know that we are going to Cahors?"

"He told me, as we passed through the gates, that he was appointed
Lieutenant-Governor of Quercy to carry out the edict against the
religion.  Do you not see, Anne?"  my companion added bitterly, "to
kill me at once were too small a revenge for him! He must torture
me--or rather he would if he could--by the pains of anticipation.

"Besides, my execution will so finely open his bed of justice. Bah!"
and Pavannes raised his head proudly, "I fear him not!  I fear him not
a jot!"

For a moment he forgot Kit, the loss of his friends, his own doom.  He
snapped his fingers in derision of his foe.

But my heart sank miserably.  The Vidame's rage I remembered had been
directed rather against my cousin than her lover; and now by the light
of his threats I read Bezers' purpose more clearly than Louis could.
His aim was to punish the woman who had played with him.  To do so he
was bringing her lover from Paris that he might execute him--AFTER
GIVING HER NOTICE!  That was it:  after giving her notice, it might be
in her very presence!  He would lure her to Cahors, and then--

I shuddered.  I well might feel that a precipice was opening at my
feet.  There was something in the plan so devilish, yet so accordant
with those stories I had heard of the Wolf, that I felt no doubt of my
insight.  I read his evil mind, and saw in a moment why he had troubled
himself with us.  He hoped to draw Mademoiselle to Cahors by our means.

Of course I said nothing of this to Louis.  I hid my feelings as well
as I could.  But I vowed a great vow that at the eleventh hour we would
baulk the Vidame.  Surely if all else failed we could kill him, and,
though we died ourselves, spare Kit this ordeal.  My tears were dried
up as by a fire.  My heart burned with a great and noble rage:  or so
it seemed to me!

I do not think that there was ever any journey so strange as this one
of ours.  We met with the same incidents which had pleased us on the
road to Paris.  But their novelty was gone.  Gone too were the cosy
chats with old rogues of landlords and good-natured dames.  We were
travelling now in such force that our coming was rather a terror to the
innkeeper than a boon.  How much the Lieutenant-Governor of Quercy,
going down to his province, requisitioned in the king's name; and for
how much he paid, we could only judge from the gloomy looks which
followed us as we rode away each morning.  Such looks were not solely
due I fear to the news from Paris, although for some time we were the
first bearers of the tidings.

Presently, on the third day of our journey I think, couriers from the
Court passed us:  and henceforth forestalled us.  One of these
messengers--who I learned from the talk about me was bound for Cahors
with letters for the Lieutenant-Governor and the Count-Bishop--the
Vidame interviewed and stopped.  How it was managed I do not know, but
I fear the Count-Bishop never got his letters, which I fancy would have
given him some joint authority. Certainly we left the messenger--a
prudent fellow with a care for his skin--in comfortable quarters at
Limoges, whence I do not doubt he presently returned to Paris at his
leisure.

The strangeness of the journey however arose from none of these things,
but from the relations of our party to one another. After the first day
we four rode together, unmolested, so long as we kept near the centre
of the straggling cavalcade.  The Vidame always rode alone, and in
front, brooding with bent head and sombre face over his revenge, as I
supposed.  He would ride in this fashion, speaking to no one and giving
no orders, for a day together.  At times I came near to pitying him.
He had loved Kit in his masterful way, the way of one not wont to be
thwarted, and he had lost her--lost her, whatever might happen.  He
would get nothing after all by his revenge.  Nothing but ashes in the
mouth.  And so I saw in softer moments something inexpressibly
melancholy in that solitary giant-figure pacing always alone.

He seldom spoke to us.  More rarely to Louis.  When he did, the
harshness of his voice and his cruel eyes betrayed the gloomy hatred in
which he held him.  At meals he ate at one end of the table:  we four
at the other, as three of us had done on that first evening in Paris.
And sometimes the covert looks, the grim sneer he shot at his
rival--his prisoner--made me shiver even in the sunshine.  Sometimes,
on the other hand, when I took him unawares, I found an expression on
his face I could not read.

I told Croisette, but warily, my suspicions of his purpose.  He heard
me, less astounded to all appearance than I had expected. Presently I
learned the reason.  He had his own view.  "Do you not think it
possible, Anne?"  he suggested timidly--we were of course alone at the
time--"that he thinks to make Louis resign Mademoiselle?"

"Resign her!"  I exclaimed obtusely.  "How?"

"By giving him a choice--you understand?"

I did understand I saw it in a moment.  I had been dull not to see it
before.  Bezers might put it in this way:  let M. de Pavannes resign
his mistress and live, or die and lose her.

"I see," I answered.  "But Louis would not give her up.  Not to him!"

"He would lose her either way," Croisette answered in a low tone. "That
is not however the worst of it.  Louis is in his power. Suppose he
thinks to make Kit the arbiter, Anne, and puts Louis up to ransom,
setting Kit for the price?  And gives her the option of accepting
himself, and saving Louis' life; or refusing, and leaving Louis to die?"

"St. Croix!"  I exclaimed fiercely.  "He would not be so base!" And yet
was not even this better than the blind vengeance I had myself
attributed to him?

"Perhaps not," Croisette answered, while he gazed onwards through the
twilight.  We were at the time the foremost of the party save the
Vidame; and there was nothing to interrupt our view of his gigantic
figure as he moved on alone before us with bowed shoulders.  "Perhaps
not," Croisette repeated thoughtfully. "Sometimes I think we do not
understand him; and that after all there may be worse people in the
world than Bezers."

I looked hard at the lad, for that was not what I had meant. "Worse?"
I said.  "I do not think so.  Hardly!"

"Yes, worse," he replied, shaking his head.  "Do you remember lying
under the curtain in the box-bed at Mirepoix's?"

"Of course I do!  Do you think I shall ever forget it?"

"And Madame d'O coming in?"

"With the Coadjutor?"  I said with a shudder.  "Yes."

"No, the second time," he answered, "when she came back alone. It was
pretty dark, you remember, and Madame de Pavannes was at the window,
and her sister did not see her?"

"Well, well, I remember," I said impatiently.  I knew from the tone of
his voice that he had something to tell me about Madame d'O, and I was
not anxious to hear it.  I shrank, as a wounded man shrinks from the
cautery, from hearing anything about that woman; herself so beautiful,
yet moving in an atmosphere of suspicion and horror.  Was it shame, or
