drawn the first as far as the plain, and had built a wall at their
sterns. For, broad as it was, the shore was by no means able to contain
their vessels, and the people were crowded. Wherefore they drew them up
in rows one behind the other, and filled the wide mouth of the whole
shore, as much as the promontories enclosed. There then were they
walking together, leaning upon the spear, in order to behold the tumult
and the battle; and the heart in their bosoms was grieved. But aged
Nestor met them, and terrified the souls in the breasts of the Greeks:
whom first king Agamemnon addressing, said:

"O Neleian Nestor, great glory of the Greeks, why, leaving the
man-destroying battle, comest thou hither? Truly I fear lest impetuous
Hector make good his speech, as once he threatened, haranguing among the
Trojans, that he would not return to Ilium from the ships, before that
he had burned the ships with fire, and slain us also: thus indeed he
harangued; and now are all things fulfilling. Ye gods, surely the other
well-greaved Greeks, as well as Achilles, store up wrath against me in
their minds; nor are they willing to fight at the sterns of the ships."

But him the Gerenian knight Nestor then answered: "Assuredly these
things are in active accomplishment, nor could even lofty-thundering
Jove himself contrive them otherwise; for the wall, in which we trusted
that it would be an impregnable defence to the ships and to ourselves,
has now fallen. But they are sustaining an obstinate contest at the
swift ships; nor couldst thou any longer distinguish, though examining
particularly, on which side the Greeks, confounded, are routed; so
promiscuously are they slain, whilst the shout reaches heaven. Let us,
however, deliberate how these things will be, if counsel avail anything;
although I advise not that we enter the battle; for it is by no means
proper that a wounded man should fight."

But him then answered Agamemnon, king of men. "Nestor, since they are
combating at the sterns of the ships, and the constructed rampart avails
not, nor the ditch, at which the Greeks suffered much, and hoped in
their minds that it would be an impregnable defence to the ships and to
themselves, surely it will be agreeable to all-powerful Jove that the
Greeks perish here, inglorious, far away from Argos. For I was conscious
when he willingly gave assistance to the Greeks, and I now know that he
honours those [the Trojans] equally with the happy gods, but hath
fettered our courage and our hands. But come, let us all obey as I shall
advise. Let us draw down the ships, as many as are drawn up first near
the sea, and launch them all into the vast ocean. Let us moor them at
anchor in the deep, till mortal-deceiving[455] night arrive, if even
then the Trojans may abstain from battle, and then we may perhaps draw
down all the vessels; for there is no disgrace in flying from evil, not
even during the night. It is better for a flying man to escape from
evil, than to be taken."

   [Footnote 455: [Greek: 'Abrote] is akin to [Greek: embroton] from
   [Greek: amartano], and therefore = "making mortals go astray," or
   else = [Greek: ambrosin] in ii. 57. See Buttm. Lexil. p. 82. Or
   it may be regarded as the "nox intempesta," _i.e._ "muita nox,
   qua nihil agi tempestivum est," Censorinus de Die Nat. xxiv.]

But him sternly regarding, wise Ulysses then addressed: "Son of Atreus,
what speech hath escaped thy lips? Lost man! thou shouldst command some
worthless army, and not rule over us, to whom Jove hath granted, from
youth even unto old age, to accomplish toilsome wars, until we, each of
us, shall perish. Dost thou then desire thus to leave wide-wayed Troy,
on account of which we have endured so many woes? Be silent, lest some
other of the Greeks hear a speech, which a man ought not to have brought
through his mouth, whoever understands in his mind how to speak prudent
things, who is a sceptre-bearer, and whom so many people obey, as many
as thou dost govern among the Greeks. For now do I reprobate thy
judgment, in what thou hast said; who commandest us, whilst the war and
battle are waged, to draw down the well-benched ships to the sea, in
order that the wishes of the Trojans may be still better fulfilled,
victorious though they be, and dire destruction fall upon us: for the
Greeks will not maintain the fight whilst the ships are being dragged to
the sea, but will look back, and retire from the combat. Then will thy
counsel be injurious, O leader of the people."

But him Agamemnon, the king of men, then answered: "Much, O Ulysses,
hast thou touched me to the soul with thy severe reproof; yet I
commanded not the sons of the Greeks against their will to draw the
well-benched ships down to the sea. But now would that there were one,
either young or old, who would deliver an opinion better than this; it
would be to my joy." [456]

But among them Diomede, valiant in the din of battle, also spoke: "The
man is near, we need not seek far, if indeed ye are willing to be
persuaded; and do not find fault each through wrath, because I am by
birth the youngest amongst you; for I boast that my race is from a noble
sire, Tydeus, whom the heaped-up earth[457] covers at Thebes. For to
Portheus were born three distinguished sons, and they dwelt in Pleuron
and lofty Calydon: Agrius and Melas, but the third was the knight oeneus,
the father of my father, who was conspicuous among them for valour. He
indeed remained there, but my father, as an exile, dwelt at Argos, for
so Jove willed and the other gods. But he married [one] of the
daughters[458] of Adrastus, and he inhabited a mansion opulent in
resources, and corn-bearing fields were his in abundance, and there were
many rows[459] of plants around him. Numerous were his herds, and he
surpassed the Greeks in the use of the spear; but these things ye ought
to know, since it is a truth. Do not, therefore, dispute the opinion
freely delivered, which I give advisedly, deeming that I am base by
birth, and unwarlike. Come, then, let us go to battle, wounded as we
are, from necessity. There, then, let us ourselves approach the combat,
out [of the reach] of weapons, lest any one receive wound upon wound;
and, encouraging others, we will urge them on, who hitherto, gratifying
their souls, have stood apart, nor fought."

   [Footnote 456: For this use of the dative, cf. Plato Phaedon, Sec.
   24. So Tacit. Agric. "Quibus bellum volentibus erat."--Kennedy.
   Cf. AEsch. Prom. s.i., [Greek: asmeno de soi E poikileimon nuz
   apokrypei phaos].]

   [Footnote 457: See my note on Od. ii. p. 21, n. 35, ed. Bohn, and
   an admirable dissertation on these classic barrow-tombs in
   Stephen's notes on Saxo-Grammaticus, pp. 90-92.]

   [Footnote 458: Deipyle. See Scholiast.]

   [Footnote 459: Not "gardens." Schol. Theocrit. i. 48. [Greek:
   Orchaton ten epistichon phyteian ... kai Aristophanes to metaxy
   ton phyton metorchyon ekalesen en tois georgois' kai Esiodos
   archon legeis ten epistichon ton ampelon phuteian]. Cf. Schol. on
   Lycophr. 857; Hesych. t. ii. p. 792.]

Thus he spoke; and to him they all listened readily, and obeyed.
Wherefore they hastened to advance, and the king of men, Agamemnon, led
them.

Nor did the illustrious Earth-shaker keep a negligent look-out, but he
went amongst them like unto an aged man, and he caught the right hand of
Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, and addressing him, spoke winged words:

"Son of Atreus, now perchance the revengeful heart of Achilles rejoices
in his breast, beholding the slaughter and rout of the Greeks; since
there is no feeling in him, not even a little. May he, however, thus
perish, and may a god cover him with disgrace. But with thee the blessed
gods are not yet altogether enraged, but again the leaders and chiefs of
the Trojans will perchance raise the dust upon the wide plain, and thou
wilt behold them flying towards the city from the ships and the tents."

So saying, he shouted aloud, rushing over the plain. As loud as nine or
ten thousand men shout, beginning the contest of Mars, so loud a cry did
king Neptune send forth from his breast; and he cast great resolution
into every heart among the Greeks, to war and to fight incessantly.

But golden-throned Juno, standing, looked down with her eyes from the
summit of Olympus, and immediately recognized her own brother, [who
was] also her brother-in-law, exerting himself through the glorious
battle, and she rejoiced in her mind. She also beheld Jove sitting upon
the highest top of many-rilled Ida, and he was hateful to her soul. Then
the venerable large-eyed Juno next anxiously considered how she could
beguile the mind of aegis-bearing Jove. And now this plan appeared best
to her mind, to proceed to Ida, having well arrayed herself, if
perchance he might desire to lie beside her form[460] in dalliance, so
that she might pour upon his eyelids and vigilant mind careless and
genial sleep. And she proceeded to her chamber, which Vulcan, her dear
son, had made for her, and had fitted the thick doors to the lintels
with a secret bolt;[461] and this no other god could remove. There
entering in, she closed the shining doors. First she washed all
impurities from her lovely person with rich oil, ambrosial,[462] and
anointed herself with rich oil, ambrosial and agreeable,[463] which was
odoriferous to her; and the perfume of which, when shaken in the
brazen-floored[464] mansion of Jove, reached even to earth and to
heaven. With this having anointed her body, and having also combed her
hair, with her hands she arranged her shining locks, beautiful,
ambrosial, [which flowed] from her immortal head. Next she threw around
her an ambrosial robe, which Minerva had wrought[465] for her in
needlework, and had embroidered much varied work upon it, and she
fastened it upon her breast with golden clasps. Then she girded herself
with a zone, adorned with a hundred fringes, and in her well-perforated
ears placed her triple-gemmed, elaborate,[466]earrings, and much grace
shone from [her]. From above she, divine of goddesses, covered herself
with a veil, beautiful, newly wrought, and it was bright as the sun; and
beneath her shining feet she fastened her beautiful sandals. But when
she had arranged all her ornaments around her person, she proceeded
straight from her chamber; and having called Venus apart from the other
gods, addressed her in speech:

   [Footnote 460: Construe [Greek: paradratheein e chroie].]

   [Footnote 461: Respecting the different meanings of [Greek:
   kleis], see Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 462: See Buttm. Lexil. p 81, 3.]

   [Footnote 463: Buttmann, p. 242, regards [Greek: edanos] as
   "perhaps a stronger and higher meaning of [Greek: eos], or
   [Greek: eos], _good_, which may be compared with [Greek:
   outidanos mekedanos]."]

   [Footnote 464: See my note on Od. ii. 2.]

   [Footnote 465: "The proper sense of [Greek: exyse] is, _scraped_
   or _rubbed over_ and its use here is best explained by supposing
   a reference to some process among the ancients whereby a shining
   appearance was given to their vestments, as by _calendering_ or
   _glazing_ with us."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 466: [Greek: Moroenta peri a emoresen o
   technites.--Schol].]

"Wilt thou now be at all obedient to me, dear child, in what I shall
say? Or wilt thou refuse, enraged in thy mind on this account, because I
aid the Greeks whilst thou [aidest] the Trojans?"

But her Venus, the daughter of Jove, then answered: "Juno, venerable
goddess, daughter of mighty Saturn, declare whatsoever thou dost
meditate; for my mind urges me to accomplish it, if indeed I can
accomplish it, and if it be practicable."

But her the venerable Juno, meditating guile, addressed: "Give now to me
that loveliness and desire with which thou dost subdue all, immortals,
and mortal men; for I go to visit the limits of the fertile earth, and
Oceanus, the parent of the gods, and mother Tethys; who, receiving me
from Rhea, nurtured and educated me with care in their abodes, when
far-resounding Jove cast down Saturn beneath the earth and the fruitless
sea. These I go to visit, and I will put an end to eternal
quarrels.[467] For already have they abstained for a length of time from
the couch and embrace of each other, since anger fell upon their mind.
But if, by persuading their hearts by my words, I should lead them back
to the bed, to be united in love, then should I always be called by them
beloved and revered."

   [Footnote 467: These passages were regarded by the ancients as
   referring to the perpetual strife of the elements. Thus Plato,
   in Theaetet. says: [Greek: Omeros eipon, Okeanon te theon genesin, kai
   metera Tethun, panta eireken ekgona poes te kai kineseos]. See
   Sextus Empir. adv. Grammat. i. 13, p. 280, ed. Fabr.; Stobaeus,
   Ecl. i. 11. Grote, vol. i. p. 16, note, observes that, "Oceanus
   and Tethys seem to be presented in the Iliad as the primitive
   father and mother of the gods," although he says that "Uranos and
   Gaea, like Oceanus, Tethys, and Nyx, are with Homer great and
   venerable gods, but neither the one nor the other present the
   character of predecessors of Kronos and Zeus."]

But her laughter-loving Venus in turn addressed: "It is not possible nor
becoming to refuse thy request, for thou reclinest in the arms of
mightiest Jove."

She said, and loosed from her bosom the embroidered, variegated
cestus;[468] where all allurements were enclosed. In it were love, and
desire, converse, seductive speech, which steals away the mind even of
the very prudent. This then she placed in her hands, spoke, and
addressed her:

"Take[469] this, now place in thy bosom this variegated belt, in which
all things are contained; and I think that thou wilt not return with thy
object unaccomplished, whatsoever thou desirest in thy mind."

   [Footnote 468: I have avoided translating "cestus," as it is very
   doubtful what is meant by it. It could not have been an ordinary
   girdle, since it was to be hidden in the bosom (ver. 219), and
   since its power appears to have been secret. See Heyne's note.]

   [Footnote 469: [Greek: Te] is an old imperative from a root
   TA--"formed like [Greek: zen], according to Doric analogy.... In
   all cases it stands either quite absolute, that is, with the
   object understood, or the accusative belongs to a verb
   immediately following."--Buttm. Lexil. pp. 505, sq.]

Thus she spake, and the large-eyed, venerable Juno smiled, and smiling,
then placed it in her bosom. But Venus, the daughter of Jove, departed
to the palace; and Juno, hastening, quitted the summit of Olympus, and,
having passed over Pieria and fertile Emathia, she hastened over the
snowy mountains of equestrian Thrace, most lofty summits, nor did she
touch the ground with her feet. From Athos she descended to the foaming
deep, and came to Lemnos, the city of divine Thoas, where she met Sleep,
the brother of Death; to whose hand she then clung, and spoke, and
addressed him:

"O Sleep,[470] king of all gods and all men,[471] if ever indeed thou
didst listen to my entreaty, now too be persuaded; and I will
acknowledge gratitude to thee all my days. Close immediately in sleep
for me the bright eyes of Jove under his eyelids, after I couch with him
in love; and I will give thee, as gifts, a handsome golden throne, for
ever incorruptible. And my limping son, Vulcan, adorning it, shall make
it, and below thy feet he shall place a footstool, upon which thou
mayest rest thy shining feet while feasting."

   [Footnote 470: Cf. Hesiod, Theog. 214. The dying words of Gorgias
   of Leontium are very elegant: [Greek: Ede me o ypnos archetai
   parakatatithesthai to adelpho].--AElian, Var. Hist. ii. 35.]

   [Footnote 471: So in the Orphic hymn: [Greek: Ypne anax panton
   makaron thneton t' anthropon].]

But her sweet Sleep answering, addressed: "Juno, venerable goddess,
daughter of great Saturn, any other of the everlasting gods could I
easily lull to sleep, and even the flowing of rapid Ocean, who is the
parent of all; but I could not approach Saturnian Jove, nor lull him to
sleep, unless, at least, he himself command me. For once already, at
least, has he terrified me by his threats, on that day when the
magnanimous son of Jove (Hercules) sailed from Ilium, having sacked the
city of the Trojans. Then I lulled the mind of aegis-bearing Jove, being
poured gently around him, whilst thou wast planning evils in thy mind
[against the hero], rousing the blasts of bitter winds over the deep;
and thou didst afterwards carry him away apart from all his friends to
well-inhabited Cos. But he, when awakened, was enraged, hurling about
the gods through his mansion, and me chiefly of all he sought, and would
have cast me down, a lost one, from the aether into the deep, had not
Night, vanquisher of gods and men, preserved me, to whom I came flying.
So he restrained himself, angry as he was; for he dreaded lest he should
do things which were disagreeable to swift[472] Night. And now again
dost thou urge me to perform this another dangerous deed."

But him the venerable large-eyed Juno in turn answered: "O Sleep, why
thinkest thou these things within thy mind? Canst thou suppose that
far-sounding Jove favours the Trojans, as he was enraged on account of
Hercules, his own son? But come, [do this], and I will give thee one of
the younger Graces to wed, and to be called thy spouse, Pasithea,[473]
whom thou fondly desirest day after day."

   [Footnote 472: But see Buttm. Lexil. p. 369. Translate, "quick
   and fearful night."]

   [Footnote 473: The most beautiful of the Graces,--"blandarum
   prima sororum," according to Statius, Theb. ii. 286. Cf. Virg.
   AEn. i. 267, sqq.]

Thus she spoke; but Sleep was delighted, and, answering, addressed her:
"Come now, swear to me by the inviolable water of the Styx, and touch
with one hand the fertile earth, and with the other the marble sea; so
that all the gods beneath, around Saturn, may be witnesses between us,
that thou wilt surely give me one of the younger Graces, Pasithea, whom
I will desire all my days."

Thus he spoke, nor did the white-armed goddess Juno disobey, but she
swore as he desired, and named all gods who dwell under Tartarus, which
are called Titans.[474] When then she had sworn, and performed her oath,
they both proceeded, leaving the city of Lemnos and Imbrus, mantled in
haze, quickly making their way; and they came to Ida of many rills, the
mother of wild beasts, to Lectos, where first they quitted the sea: but
they both advanced over the land, and the summit of the wood was shaken
beneath their feet. There Sleep on his part remained, before the eyes of
Jove should perceive him; ascending a lofty fir, which then growing the
highest upon Ida, sprung up through the air to the clouds. There he sat,
thickly covered with the fir branches, like unto a shrill bird, which,
living in the mountains, the gods call Chalcis, and men Cymindis.

   [Footnote 474: On this oath, see Grote, vol. i. p. 17.]

But Juno proceeded hastily to Gargarus, the summit of lofty Ida, and
cloud-compelling Jove beheld her. But the instant he beheld her, that
instant[475] desire entirely shadowed around his august mind, just as
when they first were united in love, retiring to the bed, without the
knowledge of their dear parents. And he stood before her, and spoke, and
addressed her:

"Wherefore hastening from Olympus, Juno, comest thou hither, but thy
horses and chariot are not near, which thou mayest ascend."

   [Footnote 475: Cf. Theocrit. ii. 82: [Greek: Os idon, os emanen,
   os meu peri Thymos iaphthe]. iii. 42: [Greek: Os idon, os emane].
   Ovid, Epist. xii. 33: "Ut vidi, ut perii, nec notis ignibus
   arsi."]

But him the venerable Juno, meditating guiles, addressed; "I go to visit
the limits of the fertile earth, and Oceanus, the parent of the gods,
and mother Tethys, who nurtured and trained me with care in their
palaces. Them I go to see, and will take away their bitter quarrels. For
already they abstain a long while from the couch and embrace of each
other; since anger has invaded their minds. But my steeds, which will
bear me over dry and wet, stand near the base of Ida with many rills.
Now, however, on thy account have I come hither from Olympus, lest
perchance thou shouldst afterwards be angry with me, were I to depart in
secret to the abode of deep-flowing Oceanus?"

But her cloud-collecting Jove answering, addressed: "Juno, thither thou
canst go even by-and-by, but come [now], let us, reclining, be delighted
with love; for never at any time did the love of a goddess or a woman,
poured around the heart within my breast, so subdue me: neither when I
loved the wife of Ixion, who bore Pirithous, a counsellor equal to the
gods; nor when [I loved] fair-ankled Danae, the daughter of Acrisius,
who bore Perseus, most illustrious of all men; nor when with that of the
celebrated daughter of Phoenix,[476] who bore to me Minos and godlike
Rhadamanthus:[477] nor yet when [I loved] Semele, nor Alcmena in Thebes,
who brought forth my valiant son Hercules: but Semele bore [me] Bacchus,
a joy to mortals: nor when [I loved] Ceres, the fair-haired queen: nor
when glorious Latona nor thyself; as I now love thee, and sweet desire
seizes me."

   [Footnote 476: But Europa is generally considered to be the
   daughter of Agenor. See Grote, vol. i. p. 350.]

   [Footnote 477: On the career of Rhadamanthus, who is "after death
   promoted to an abode of undisturbed bliss in the Elysian plain at
   the extremity of the earth," see Grote, vol. i. p. 300.]

But him venerable Juno, meditating guiles, addressed: "Most shameless
son of Saturn, what word hast thou spoken? If now thou desire to recline
in love upon the summit of Ida, where all places are exposed, how will
it be, if any of the immortal gods should perceive us sleeping, and,
going amongst all the gods, disclose it? I for my part could never
return to thy mansion, arising from the couch; for surely it would be
unbecoming. But if in truth thou desirest it, and it be agreeable to thy
soul, there is a chamber of thine which Vulcan, thy beloved son, formed
for thee, and fitted its secure doors to its lintels. Thither let us
repair, about to recline, since an embrace is indeed thy desire."

But her cloud-collecting Jove, answering, addressed:

"Fear not, O Juno, that any of either gods or men shall behold this.
Such a golden cloud will I spread around, that not even the Sun may see
us through it, although his eye is very keen to behold." [478]

Thus he spake, and the son of Saturn encircled his wife in his arms. And
the divine earth produced[479] fresh herbage under them, the dewy lotus,
and the crocus, and the hyacinth, close and soft, which elevated them
from the earth. Upon this [couch] they reclined, and clothed themselves
above with a beautiful golden cloud; and lucid dew-drops fell from it.

   [Footnote 478: On the god Helios, and his overseeing influence,
   the student should compare Grote, vol. i. p. 466.]

   [Footnote 479: So Milton, describing the couch of our first
   parents, P. L. iv. 700:--

                 ----"underfoot the violet,
           Crocus, and hyacinth with rich inlay,
           Broider'd the ground."]

Thus quietly slumbered the sire upon the summit of Gargarus, subdued by
sleep and love, and held his spouse in his arms. But sweet Sleep
hastened to run to the ships of the Greeks, that he might deliver a
message to Neptune, the shaker of the earth. And, standing near, he
addressed to him winged words:

"Now, Neptune, heartily give aid to the Greeks, and bestow glory upon
them, at least for a little, whilst yet Jove sleeps; since I have
enveloped him in a veil[480] of soft slumber, and Juno hath deceived
[him], that he might sleep in love."

   [Footnote 480: Observe the force of [Greek: perikalypsa].]

So saying, he indeed departed to the illustrious tribes of men; but he
still more impelled [Neptune] to assist the Greeks, and immediately
springing forward far into the van, he exhorted them:

"O Greeks, yet again do we yield the victory to Hector, the son of
Priam, that he may seize the ships and bear away glory? For so indeed he
supposes and boasts, because Achilles remains at the hollow ships,
enraged at heart. However, there would not be a great need of him, if
the rest of us were incited to assist one another. But come? let us all
obey as I shall advise. Let us, clad with shields, as many as are best
and greatest in the army, who are covered as to our heads with
glittering helmets, and hold the longest spears in our hands, advance,
and I will lead the way; nor do I think that Hector, the son of Priam,
will await us, though very eager. Whatsoever man also is obstinate in
the fight, and bears but a small shield upon his shoulder, let him give
it to an inferior man, and let him clothe himself in a larger shield."

Thus he spoke; but they listened to him readily, and obeyed. The kings
themselves, Tydides, Ulysses, and Agamemnon, son of Atreus, marshalled
[the troops], wounded as they were; and, going about among them all,
exchanged their martial arms, the brave [soldier] put on the good
[armour], and the worse they gave to the inferior man. But when they had
girded the splendid brass around their bodies, they began to advance;
and earth-shaking Neptune led them on, grasping in his firm hand a
dreadful tapering sword, like unto a thunderbolt, with which [sword] it
is not possible to engage in destructive battle, for the fear [of it]
restrains men.

On the other side again illustrious Hector drew up the Trojans. Then
truly azure-haired Neptune and illustrious Hector drew forth the
severest struggle of war, the one indeed aiding the Trojans, and the
other the Greeks. But the sea was dashed up to the tents and ships of
the Greeks and they engaged with a mighty shout. Not so loudly does the
billow of the ocean roar against the main land, when driven from the
deep by the rough blast of Boreas; nor so great is the crackling of
blazing fire in the glens of a mountain, when it is raised aloft to
consume the wood; nor so loud howls the wind amidst the high-foliaged
oaks (which, in particular, loudly roars in its wrath), as was the cry
of the Trojans and Greeks shouting dreadfully, when they rushed one upon
the other.

At Ajax illustrious Hector first took aim with his spear, as he was
turned right against him; nor did he miss. [He struck him] where the two
belts were crossed upon his breast, both that of the shield and that of
the silver-studded sword; for these protected the tender skin: but
Hector was enraged because his swift weapon had fled from his hand in
vain, and he retired back into the crowd of his companions, shunning
death. At him then, retiring, mighty Telamonian Ajax [threw] with a
stone, for [stones] in great numbers were rolled about among the feet of
the combatants, props for the fleet barks; lifting up one of these, he
struck him upon the breast, above the orb of the shield, near the neck.
And, throwing, he twirled it like a top, and it (the stone) rolled round
on all sides. As when, beneath a violent stroke from father Jove, an oak
falls uprooted, and a terrible smell of sulphur arises from it; but
confidence no longer possesses the man, whosoever being near beholds it,
because the thunderbolt of mighty Jove is terrible: so rapidly upon the
ground fell the might of Hector in the dust. And he dropped his spear
from his hand, his shield and helmet followed above him, and his armour,
variegated with brass, rang upon him. Then the sons of the Greeks,
loudly shouting, rushed in, hoping to draw him off, and they hurled
numerous javelins; but no one was able either to strike from a distance,
or to smite close at hand, the shepherd of the people, for the bravest
[of the warriors], Polydamas, AEneas, and noble Agenor, Sarpedon, leader
of the Lycians, and illustrious Glaucus, first threw themselves round
him. And no one of the rest neglected him, but they held their
well-orbed shields before him. But his companions, up-raising him in
their hands, bore him out of the conflict, till they reached his fleet
horses, which stood for him in rear of the combat and the war, holding
both the charioteer and the variegated car; which then carried him
towards the city, groaning heavily.[481]

   [Footnote 481: Milton, P.L. vi. 335:--

      "Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run
      By angels many and strong, who interposed
      Defence, while others bore him on their shields
      Back to his chariot, where it stood retired
      From off the files of war; there they him laid,
      Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame."]

But when now they came to the ford of the rapid-flowing current of
eddying Xanthus, whom immortal Jove begat, there they removed him from
his car to the ground, and poured water over him; but he breathed again,
and looked up with his eyes; and, sitting upon his knees, disgorged
black blood. Again he fell back upon the ground, and dark night
overshadowed his eyes; for the blow still subdued his spirits.

But when the Greeks saw Hector going apart, they pressed the more on the
Trojans, and were mindful of contest. Then swift Oilean Ajax before
others, leaping forward with his fir-tree spear, wounded Satnius, son of
Enops, whom a Naiad, the fairest nymph, bore to Enops, when keeping his
flocks by the banks of Satnio. Him the spear-renowned son of Oileus,
drawing near, wounded in the flank; but he fell supine, and round him
the Trojans and Greeks engaged in a valiant battle. But to him
spear-brandishing Polydamas, son of Panthous, came as an avenger, and
smote Prothoenor, son of Areilochus, upon the right shoulder. The tough
spear passed on through his shoulder, but falling in the dust, he
grasped the earth with his hand. And Polydamas boasted mightily over
him, shouting aloud:

"I do not think, indeed, that the weapon hath fled vainly from the
sturdy hand of the magnanimous son of Panthous, but some one of the
Greeks has received it in his body; and I think that he, leaning upon
it, will descend to the mansion of Pluto."

Thus he spoke, but grief arose among the Greeks at his boasting, and
particularly agitated the mind of warlike Ajax, the son of Telamon, for
he had fallen very near him; and he immediately hurled with his shining
spear at him departing. Polydamas himself indeed avoided black fate,
springing off obliquely; but Archilochus, son of Antenor, received [the
blow], for to him the gods had doomed destruction. Him then he struck
upon the last vertebra, in the joining of the head and neck, and he
disjoined both tendons; but the head, the mouth, and the nostrils of him
falling, met the ground much sooner than his legs and knees. Then Ajax
in turn cried out to blameless Polydamas:

"Reflect, O Polydamas, and tell me the truth; is not this man worthy to
be slain in exchange of Prothoenor? He appears not to me indeed a
coward, nor [sprung] from cowards, but [to be] the brother or the son of
horse-breaking Antenor, for he seems most like him as to his race."

Thus he spoke, well knowing [him], but grief possessed the minds of the
Trojans. Then Acamas, stalking round his brother, wounded with his spear
Promachus, the Boeotian; whilst he was dragging him off by the feet. But
over him Acamas greatly boasted, calling out aloud:

"Ye Argive archers,[482] insatiable in threats, assuredly not to us
alone will toil and sorrow accrue, but thus thou also wilt at some time
be slain. Consider how your Promachus sleeps, subdued by my spear, that
a requital for my brother might not be long unpaid. Therefore should a
man wish a brother to be left in his family, as an avenger of his
death."

   [Footnote 482: See note on iv. 242.]

Thus he spoke; but grief arose among the Greeks as he boasted, and he
particularly agitated the mind of warlike Peneleus. Accordingly he
rushed upon Acamas, who awaited not the charge of king Peneleus; but he
wounded Ilioneus, son of Phorbas, rich in flocks, whom Mercury loved
most of all the Trojans, and had presented with possessions; and to whom
his mother bore Ilioneus alone. Him then he wounded below the brow, in
the socket of the eye, and he forced out the pupil: but the spear went
forward through the eye, and through the back of the head; and he sat
down, stretching out both his hands. But Peneleus, drawing his sharp
sword, smote him upon the middle of the neck, and lopped off his head
with its helmet to the ground, and the strong spear still remained in
his eye. But he (Peneleus), holding it up like a poppy, shouted to the
Trojans, and boasting spoke thus:

"Tell for me, ye Trojans, the beloved father and mother of illustrious
Ilioneus, that they may lament him in their halls; for neither shall the
wife of Promachus, the son of Alegenor, present herself with joy to her
dear husband coming [back], when we, sons of the Greeks, return from
Troy with our ships."

Thus he spoke; but pale fear seized upon them all, and each gazed about,
[seeking] where he might escape utter destruction.

Tell me now, ye muses, possessing Olympian dwellings, which of the
Greeks now first bore away gore-stained spoils of men, when the
illustrious Earth-shaker turned the [tide of] battle.

Telamonian Ajax then first wounded Hyrtius, son of Gyrtias, leader of
the undaunted Mysians; and Antilochus spoiled Phalces and Mermerus;
Meriones slew Morys and Hippotion; and Teucer slew Prothous and
Periphoetes. But the son of Atreus next wounded upon the flank Hyperenor,
the shepherd of the people, and the spear, cutting its way, drank his
entrails; and his soul, expelled, fled in haste through the inflicted
wound, and darkness veiled his eyes. But Ajax, the swift son of Oileus,
slew the most; because there was not one equal to him on foot, to follow
the flying men, when Jove had excited flight amongst them.




                          BOOK THE FIFTEENTH.


                               ARGUMENT.

Jove awaking, and finding the Trojans routed, menaces Juno. He then
sends Iris to desire Neptune to relinquish the battle, and Apollo to
restore Hector to health. Armed with the aegis, Apollo puts the Greeks to
flight; who are pursued home to their fleet, while Telamonian Ajax slays
twelve Trojans who were bringing fire to burn it.


But after the fugitives had crossed both the ramparts and the trench,
and many were subdued by the hands of the Greeks, the rest were at
length detained, waiting beside their chariots, pallid with fear, and
terrified. But Jove arose on the summits of Ida, from beside
golden-throned Juno; and starting up, he stood and beheld the Trojans
and Greeks, those indeed in confusion, and the Greeks throwing them into
confusion in the rear; and amongst them king Neptune. Hector he beheld
lying upon the plain, and his companions sat round him:[483] but he was
afflicted with grievous difficulty of respiration, and devoid of his
senses,[484] vomiting blood, for it was not the weakest of the Greeks
who had wounded him. The father of men and gods, seeing, pitied him, and
sternly regarding Juno, severely addressed her:

"O Juno, of evil arts, impracticable, thy stratagem has made noble
Hector cease from battle, and put his troops to flight. Indeed I know
not whether again thou mayest not be the first to reap the fruits of thy
pernicious machinations, and I may chastise thee with stripes. Dost thou
not remember when thou didst swing from on high, and I hung two anvils
from thy feet, and bound a golden chain around thy hands, that could not
be broken? And thou didst hang in the air and clouds, and the gods
commiserated thee throughout lofty Olympus; but standing around, they
were not able to release thee; but whomsoever I caught, seizing, I
hurled from the threshold [of heaven], till he reached the earth, hardly
breathing. Nor even thus did my vehement anger, through grief for divine
Hercules, leave me; whom thou, prevailing upon the storms, with the
