    The hubbub was of swine prison'd within.                         500
    Then call'd the master to his rustic train.
    Bring ye the best, that we may set him forth
    Before my friend from foreign climes arrived,
    With whom ourselves will also feast, who find
    The bright-tusk'd multitude a painful charge,
    While others, at no cost of theirs, consume
    Day after day, the profit of our toils.
      So saying, his wood for fuel he prepared,
    And dragging thither a well-fatted brawn
    Of the fifth year his servants held him fast                     510
    At the hearth-side. Nor failed the master swain
    T' adore the Gods, (for wise and good was he)
    But consecration of the victim, first,
    Himself performing, cast into the fire
    The forehead bristles of the tusky boar,
    Then pray'd to all above, that, safe, at length,
    Ulysses might regain his native home.
    Then lifting an huge shive that lay beside
    The fire, he smote the boar, and dead he fell,
    Next, piercing him, and scorching close his hair,                520
    They carv'd him quickly, and Eumaeus spread
    Thin slices crude taken from ev'ry limb
    O'er all his fat, then other slices cast,
    Sprinkling them first with meal, into the fire.
    The rest they slash'd and scored, and roasted well,
    And placed it, heap'd together, on the board.
    Then rose the good Eumaeus to his task
    Of distribution, for he understood
    The hospitable entertainer's part.
    Sev'n-fold partition of the banquet made,                        530
    He gave, with previous pray'r, to Maia's son[63]
    And to the nymphs one portion of the whole,
    Then served his present guests, honouring first
    Ulysses with the boar's perpetual chine;
    By that distinction just his master's heart
    He gratified, and thus the Hero spake.
      Eumaeus! be thou as belov'd of Jove
    As thou art dear to me, whom, though attired
    So coarsely, thou hast served with such respect!
      To whom, Eumaeus, thou didst thus reply.                        540
    Eat, noble stranger! and refreshment take
    Such as thou may'st; God[64] gives, and God denies
    At his own will, for He is Lord of all.
      He said, and to the everlasting Gods
    The firstlings sacrificed of all, then made
    Libation, and the cup placed in the hands
    Of city-spoiler Laertiades
    Sitting beside his own allotted share.
    Meantime, Mesaulius bread dispensed to all,
    Whom, in the absence of his Lord, himself                        550
    Eumaeus had from Taphian traders bought
    With his own proper goods, at no expence
    Either to old Laertes or the Queen.
    And now, all stretch'd their hands toward the feast
    Reeking before them, and when hunger none
    Felt more or thirst, Mesaulius clear'd the board.
    Then, fed to full satiety, in haste
    Each sought his couch. Black came a moonless night,
    And Jove all night descended fast in show'rs,
    With howlings of the ever wat'ry West.                           560
    Ulysses, at that sound, for trial sake
    Of his good host, if putting off his cloak
    He would accommodate him, or require
    That service for him at some other hand,
    Addressing thus the family, began.
      Hear now, Eumaeus, and ye other swains
    His fellow-lab'rers! I shall somewhat boast,
    By wine befool'd, which forces ev'n the wise
    To carol loud, to titter and to dance,
    And words to utter, oft, better suppress'd.                      570
    But since I have begun, I shall proceed,
    Prating my fill. Ah might those days return
    With all the youth and strength that I enjoy'd,
    When in close ambush, once, at Troy we lay!
    Ulysses, Menelaus, and myself
    Their chosen coadjutor, led the band.
    Approaching to the city's lofty wall
    Through the thick bushes and the reeds that gird
    The bulwarks, down we lay flat in the marsh,
    Under our arms, then Boreas blowing loud,                        580
    A rueful night came on, frosty and charged
    With snow that blanch'd us thick as morning rime,
    And ev'ry shield with ice was crystall'd o'er.
    The rest with cloaks and vests well cover'd, slept
    Beneath their bucklers; I alone my cloak,
    Improvident, had left behind, no thought
    Conceiving of a season so severe;
    Shield and belt, therefore, and nought else had I.
    The night, at last, nigh spent, and all the stars
    Declining in their course, with elbow thrust                     590
    Against Ulysses' side I roused the Chief,
    And thus address'd him ever prompt to hear.
      Laertes' noble son, for wiles renown'd!
    I freeze to death. Help me, or I am lost.
    No cloak have I; some evil daemon, sure,
    Beguil'd me of all prudence, that I came
    Thus sparely clad; I shall, I must expire.
      So I; he, ready as he was in arms
    And counsel both, the remedy at once
    Devised, and thus, low-whisp'ring, answer'd me.                  600
      Hush! lest perchance some other hear--He said,
    And leaning on his elbow, spake aloud.
      My friends! all hear--a monitory dream
    Hath reach'd me, for we lie far from the ships.
    Haste, therefore, one of you, with my request
    To Agamemnon, Atreus' son, our Chief,
    That he would reinforce us from the camp.
      He spake, and at the word, Andraemon's son
    Thoas arose, who, casting off his cloak,
    Ran thence toward the ships, and folded warm                     610
    Within it, there lay I till dawn appear'd.
    Oh for the vigour of such youth again!
    Then, some good peasant here, either for love
    Or for respect, would cloak a man like me,
    Whom, now, thus sordid in attire ye scorn.
      To whom, Eumaeus, thou didst thus reply.
    My ancient guest! I cannot but approve
    Thy narrative, nor hast thou utter'd aught
    Unseemly, or that needs excuse. No want
    Of raiment, therefore, or of aught beside                        620
    Needful to solace penury like thine,
    Shall harm thee here; yet, at the peep of dawn
    Gird thy own tatters to thy loins again;
    For _we_ have no great store of cloaks to boast,
    Or change of vests, but singly one for each.
    But when Ulysses' son shall once arrive,
    He will himself with vest and mantle both
    Cloath thee, and send thee whither most thou would'st.
      So saying, he rose, and nearer made his couch
    To the hearth-side, spreading it thick with skins                630
    Of sheep and goats; then lay the Hero down,
    O'er whom a shaggy mantle large he threw,
    Which oft-times served him with a change, when rough
    The winter's blast and terrible arose.
    So was Ulysses bedded, and the youths
    Slept all beside him; but the master-swain
    Chose not his place of rest so far remote
    From his rude charge, but to the outer court
    With his nocturnal furniture, repair'd,
    Gladd'ning Ulysses' heart that one so true                       640
    In his own absence kept his rural stores.
    Athwart his sturdy shoulders, first, he flung
    His faulchion keen, then wrapp'd him in a cloak
    Thick-woven, winter-proof; he lifted, next,
    The skin of a well-thriven goat, in bulk
    Surpassing others, and his javelin took
    Sharp-pointed, with which dogs he drove and men.
    Thus arm'd, he sought his wonted couch beneath
    A hollow rock where the herd slept, secure
    From the sharp current of the Northern blast.                    650


FOOTNOTES:

[61] +Dios hyphorbos+.--The swineherd's was therefore in those days, and
in that country, an occupation honourable as well as useful. Barnes deems
the epithet +dios+ significant of his noble birth. Vide Clarke in loco.

[62] It may be proper to suggest that Ulysses was lord of part of the
continent opposite to Ithaca--viz.--of the peninsula Nericus or Leuca,
which afterward became an island, and is now called Santa Maura. F.

[63] Mercury.

[64] +Theos+--without a relative, and consequently signifying GOD in the
abstract, is not unfrequently found in Homer, though fearing to give
offence to serious minds unacquainted with the original, I have not
always given it that force in the translation. But here, the sentiment is
such as fixes the sense intended by the author with a precision that
leaves no option. It is observable too, that +dynatai gar apanta+--is an
ascription of power such as the poet never makes to his Jupiter.




BOOK XV

ARGUMENT

Telemachus, admonished by Minerva, takes leave of Menelaus, but ere he
sails, is accosted by Theoclymenos, a prophet of Argos, whom at his
earnest request he takes on board. In the meantime Eumaeus relates to
Ulysses the means by which he came to Ithaca. Telemachus arriving there,
gives orders for the return of his bark to the city, and repairs himself
to Eumaeus.


    Meantime to Lacedaemon's spacious vale
    Minerva went, that she might summon thence
    Ulysses' glorious son to his own home.
    Arrived, she found Telemachus reposed
    And Nestor's son beneath the vestibule
    Of Menelaus, mighty Chief; she saw
    Pisistratus in bands of gentle sleep
    Fast-bound, but not Telemachus; his mind
    No rest enjoy'd, by filial cares disturb'd
    Amid the silent night, when, drawing near                         10
    To his couch side, the Goddess thus began.
      Thou canst no longer prudently remain
    A wand'rer here, Telemachus! thy home
    Abandon'd, and those haughty suitors left
    Within thy walls; fear lest, partition made
    Of thy possessions, they devour the whole,
    And in the end thy voyage bootless prove.
    Delay not; from brave Menelaus ask
    Dismission hence, that thou may'st find at home
    Thy spotless mother, whom her brethren urge                       20
    And her own father even now to wed
    Eurymachus, in gifts and in amount
    Of proffer'd dow'r superior to them all.
    Some treasure, else, shall haply from thy house
    Be taken, such as thou wilt grudge to spare.
    For well thou know'st how woman is disposed;
    Her whole anxiety is to encrease
    His substance whom she weds; no care hath she
    Of her first children, or remembers more
    The buried husband of her virgin choice.                          30
    Returning then, to her of all thy train
    Whom thou shalt most approve, the charge commit
    Of thy concerns domestic, till the Gods
    Themselves shall guide thee to a noble wife.
    Hear also this, and mark it. In the frith
    Samos the rude, and Ithaca between,
    The chief of all her suitors thy return
    In vigilant ambush wait, with strong desire
    To slay thee, ere thou reach thy native shore,
    But shall not, as I judge, till the earth hide                    40
    Many a lewd reveller at thy expence.
    Yet, steer thy galley from those isles afar,
    And voyage make by night; some guardian God
    Shall save thee, and shall send thee prosp'rous gales.
    Then, soon as thou attain'st the nearest shore
    Of Ithaca, dispatching to the town
    Thy bark with all thy people, seek at once
    The swine-herd; for Eumaeus is thy friend.
    There sleep, and send him forth into the town
    With tidings to Penelope, that safe                               50
    Thou art restored from Pylus home again.
      She said, and sought th' Olympian heights sublime.
    Then, with his heel shaking him, he awoke
    The son of Nestor, whom he thus address'd.
      Rise, Nestor's son, Pisistratus! lead forth
    The steeds, and yoke them. We must now depart.
      To whom the son of Nestor thus replied.
    Telemachus! what haste soe'er we feel,
    We can by no means prudently attempt
    To drive by night, and soon it will be dawn.                      60
    Stay, therefore, till the Hero, Atreus' son,
    Spear-practis'd Menelaus shall his gifts
    Place in the chariot, and with kind farewell
    Dismiss thee; for the guest in mem'ry holds
    Through life, the host who treats him as a friend.
      Scarce had he spoken, when the golden dawn
    Appearing, Menelaus, from the side
    Of beauteous Helen ris'n, their bed approach'd,
    Whose coming when Telemachus perceived,
    Cloathing himself hastily in his vest                             70
    Magnificent, and o'er his shoulders broad
    Casting his graceful mantle, at the door
    He met the Hero, whom he thus address'd.
      Atrides, Menelaus, Chief renown'd!
    Dismiss me hence to Ithaca again,
    My native isle, for I desire to go.
      Him answer'd Menelaus famed in arms.
    Telemachus! I will not long delay
    Thy wish'd return. I disapprove alike
    The host whose assiduity extreme                                  80
    Distresses, and whose negligence offends;
    The middle course is best; alike we err,
    Him thrusting forth whose wish is to remain,
    And hind'ring the impatient to depart.
    This only is true kindness--To regale
    The present guest, and speed him when he would.
    Yet stay, till thou shalt see my splendid gifts
    Placed in thy chariot, and till I command
    My women from our present stores to spread
    The table with a plentiful repast.                                90
    For both the honour of the guest demands,
    And his convenience also, that he eat
    Sufficient, ent'ring on a length of road.
    But if through Hellas thou wilt take thy way
    And traverse Argos, I will, then, myself
    Attend thee; thou shalt journey with my steeds
    Beneath thy yoke, and I will be thy guide
    To many a city, whence we shall not go
    Ungratified, but shall in each receive
    Some gift at least, tripod, or charger bright,                   100
    Or golden chalice, or a pair of mules.
      To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied.
    Atrides, Menelaus, Chief renown'd!
    I would at once depart, (for guardian none
    Of my possessions have I left behind)
    Lest, while I seek my father, I be lost
    Myself, or lose what I should grudge to spare.
      Which when the valiant Menelaus heard,
    He bade his spouse and maidens spread the board
    At once with remnants of the last regale.                        110
    Then Eteoneus came, Boetheus' son
    Newly aris'n, for nigh at hand he dwelt,
    Whom Menelaus bade kindle the fire
    By which to dress their food, and he obey'd.
    He next, himself his fragrant chamber sought,
    Not sole, but by his spouse and by his son
    Attended, Megapenthes. There arrived
    Where all his treasures lay, Atrides, first,
    Took forth, himself, a goblet, then consign'd
    To his son's hand an argent beaker bright.                       120
    Meantime, beside her coffers Helen stood
    Where lay her variegated robes, fair works
    Of her own hand. Producing one, in size
    And in magnificence the chief, a star
    For splendour, and the lowest placed of all,
    Loveliest of her sex, she bore it thence.
    Then, all proceeding through the house, they sought
    Telemachus again, whom reaching, thus
    The Hero of the golden locks began.
      May Jove the Thunderer, dread Juno's mate,                     130
    Grant thee, Telemachus! such voyage home
    As thy own heart desires! accept from all
    My stores selected as the richest far
    And noblest gift for finish'd beauty--This.
    I give thee wrought elaborate a cup,
    Itself all silver, bound with lip of gold.
    It is the work of Vulcan, which to me
    The Hero Phaedimus imparted, King
    Of the Sidonians, when, on my return,
    Beneath his roof I lodg'd. I make it thine.                      140
      So saying, the Hero, Atreus' son, the cup
    Placed in his hands, and Megapenthes set
    Before him, next, the argent beaker bright;
    But lovely Helen drawing nigh, the robe
    Presented to him, whom she thus address'd.
      I also give thee, oh my son, a gift,
    Which seeing, thou shalt think on her whose hands
    Wrought it; a present on thy nuptial day
    For thy fair spouse; meantime, repose it safe
    In thy own mother's keeping. Now, farewell!                      150
    Prosp'rous and happy be thy voyage home!
      She ceas'd, and gave it to him, who the gift
    Accepted glad, and in the chariot-chest
    Pisistratus the Hero all disposed,
    Admiring them the while. They, following, next,
    The Hero Menelaus to his hall
    Each on his couch or on his throne reposed.
    A maiden, then, with golden ewer charged
    And silver bowl, pour'd water on their hands,
    And spread the polish'd table, which with food                   160
    Various, selected from her present stores,
    The mistress of the household charge supplied.
    Boetheus' son stood carver, and to each
    His portion gave, while Megapenthes, son
    Of glorious Menelaus, serv'd the cup.
    Then, all with outstretch'd hands the feast assail'd,
    And when nor hunger more nor thirst of wine
    They felt, Telemachus and Nestor's son
    Yoked the swift steeds, and, taking each his seat
    In the resplendent chariot, drove at once                        170
    Right through the sounding portico abroad.
    But Menelaus, Hero amber-hair'd,
    A golden cup bearing with richest wine
    Replete in his right hand, follow'd them forth,
    That not without libation first perform'd
    They might depart; he stood before the steeds,
    And drinking first, thus, courteous, them bespake.
      Health to you both, young friends! and from my lips
    Like greeting bear to Nestor, royal Chief,
    For he was ever as a father kind                                 180
    To me, while the Achaians warr'd at Troy.
      To whom Telemachus discrete replied.
    And doubtless, so we will; at our return
    We will report to him, illustrious Prince!
    Thy ev'ry word. And oh, I would to heav'n
    That reaching Ithaca, I might at home
    Ulysses hail as sure, as I shall hence
    Depart, with all benevolence by thee
    Treated, and rich in many a noble gift.
      While thus he spake, on his right hand appear'd                190
    An eagle; in his talons pounced he bore
    A white-plumed goose domestic, newly ta'en
    From the house-court. Ran females all and males
    Clamorous after him; but he the steeds
    Approaching on the right, sprang into air.
    That sight rejoicing and with hearts reviv'd
    They view'd, and thus Pisistratus his speech
    Amid them all to Menelaus turn'd.
      Now, Menelaus, think, illustrious Chief!
    If us, this omen, or thyself regard.                             200
      While warlike Menelaus musing stood
    What answer fit to frame, Helen meantime,
    His spouse long-stoled preventing him, began.
      Hear me; for I will answer as the Gods
    Teach me, and as I think shall come to pass.
    As he, descending from his place of birth
    The mountains, caught our pamper'd goose away,
    So shall Ulysses, after many woes
    And wand'rings to his home restored, avenge
    His wrongs, or even now is at his home                           210
    For all those suitors sowing seeds of woe.
      To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied.
    Oh grant it Jove, Juno's high-thund'ring mate!
    So will I, there arrived, with vow and pray'r
    Thee worship, as thou wert, thyself, divine.
      He said, and lash'd the coursers; fiery they
    And fleet, sprang through the city to the plain.
    All day the yoke on either side they shook,
    Journeying swift; and now the setting sun
    To gloomy evening had resign'd the roads,                        220
    When they to Pherae came, and in the house
    Of good Diocles slept, their lib'ral host,
    Whose sire Orsilochus from Alpheus sprang.
    But when Aurora, daughter of the Dawn,
    Look'd rosy from the East, yoking their steeds,
    They in the sumptuous chariot sat again.
    Forth through the vestibule they drove, and through
    The sounding portico, when Nestor's son
    Plied brisk the scourge, and willing flew the steeds.
    Thus whirl'd along, soon they approach'd the gates               230
    Of Pylus, when Telemachus, his speech
    Turning to his companion, thus began.
      How, son of Nestor! shall I win from thee
    Not promise only, but performance kind
    Of my request? we are not bound alone
    To friendship by the friendship of our sires,
    But by equality of years, and this
    Our journey shall unite us still the more.
    Bear me not, I intreat thee, noble friend!
    Beyond the ship, but drop me at her side,                        240
    Lest ancient Nestor, though against my will,
    Detain me in his palace through desire
    To feast me, for I dread the least delay.
      He spake; then mused Pisistratus how best
    He might effect the wishes of his friend,
    And thus at length resolved; turning his steeds
    With sudden deviation to the shore
    He sought the bark, and placing in the stern
    Both gold and raiment, the illustrious gifts
    Of Menelaus, thus, in accents wing'd                             250
    With ardour, urged Telemachus away.
      Dispatch, embark, summon thy crew on board,
    Ere my arrival notice give of thine
    To the old King; for vehement I know
    His temper, neither will he let thee hence,
    But, hasting hither, will himself enforce
    Thy longer stay, that thou may'st not depart
    Ungifted; nought will fire his anger more.
      So saying, he to the Pylian city urged
    His steeds bright-maned, and at the palace-gate                  260
    Arrived of Nestor speedily; meantime
    Telemachus exhorted thus his crew.
      My gallant friends! set all your tackle, climb
    The sable bark, for I would now return.
      He spake; they heard him gladly, and at once
    All fill'd the benches. While his voyage he
    Thus expedited, and beside the stern
    To Pallas sacrifice perform'd and pray'd,
    A stranger, born remote, who had escaped
    From Argos, fugitive for blood, a seer                           270
    And of Melampus' progeny, approach'd.
    Melampus, in old time, in Pylus dwelt,
    Mother of flocks, alike for wealth renown'd
    And the magnificence of his abode.
    He, flying from the far-famed Pylian King,
    The mighty Neleus[65], migrated at length
    Into another land, whose wealth, the while,
    Neleus by force possess'd a year complete.
    Meantime, Melampus in the house endured
    Of Phylacus imprisonment and woe,                                280
    And burn'd with wrath for Neleus' daughter sake
    By fell Erynnis kindled in his heart.
    But, 'scaping death, he drove the lowing beeves
    From Phylace to Pylus, well avenged
    His num'rous injuries at Neleus' hands
    Sustain'd, and gave into his brother's arms
    King Neleus' daughter fair, the promis'd bride.
    To Argos steed-renown'd he journey'd next,
    There destin'd to inhabit and to rule
    Multitudes of Achaians. In that land                             290
    He married, built a palace, and became
    Father of two brave sons, Antiphates
    And Mantius; to Antiphates was born
    The brave Oicleus; from Oicleus sprang
    Amphiaraues, demagogue renown'd,
    Whom with all tenderness, and as a friend
    Alike the Thund'rer and Apollo prized;
    Yet reach'd he not the bounds of hoary age.
    But by his mercenary consort's arts[66]
    Persuaded, met his destiny at Thebes.                            300
    He 'gat Alcmaeon and Amphilocus.
    Mantius was also father of two sons,
    Clytus and Polyphides. Clytus pass'd
    From earth to heav'n, and dwells among the Gods,
    Stol'n by Aurora for his beauty's sake.
    But (brave Amphiaraues once deceased)
    Phoebus exalted Polyphides far
    Above all others in the prophet's part.
    He, anger'd by his father, roam'd away
    To Hyperesia, where he dwelt renown'd                            310
    Throughout all lands the oracle of all.
      His son, named Theoclymenus, was he
    Who now approach'd; he found Telemachus
    Libation off'ring in his bark, and pray'r,
    And in wing'd accents ardent him address'd.
      Ah, friend! since sacrificing in this place
    I find thee, by these sacred rites and those
    Whom thou ador'st, and by thy own dear life,
    And by the lives of these thy mariners
    I beg true answer; hide not what I ask.                          320
    Who art thou? whence? where born? and sprung from whom?
      To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied.
    I will inform thee, stranger! and will solve
    Thy questions with much truth. I am by birth
    Ithacan, and Ulysses was my sire.
    But he hath perish'd by a woeful death,
    And I, believing it, with these have plow'd
    The ocean hither, int'rested to learn
    A father's fate long absent from his home.
      Then answer'd godlike Theoclymenus.                            330
    I also am a wand'rer, having slain
    A man of my own tribe; brethren and friends
    Num'rous had he in Argos steed-renown'd,
    And pow'rful are the Achaians dwelling there.
    From them, through terrour of impending death,
    I fly, a banish'd man henceforth for ever.
    Ah save a suppliant fugitive! lest death
    O'ertake me, for I doubt not their pursuit.
      Whom thus Telemachus answer'd discrete.
    I shall not, be assured, since thou desir'st                     340
    To join me, chace thee from my bark away.
    Follow me, therefore, and with us partake,
    In Ithaca, what best the land affords.
      So saying, he at the stranger's hand received
    His spear, which on the deck he lay'd, then climb'd
    Himself the bark, and, seated in the stern,
    At his own side placed Theoclymenus.
    They cast the hawsers loose; then with loud voice
    Telemachus exhorted all to hand
    The tackle, whom the sailors prompt obey'd.                      350
    The tall mast heaving, in its socket deep
    They lodg'd it, and its cordage braced secure,
    Then, straining at the halyards, hoised the sail.
    Fair wind, and blowing fresh through aether pure
    Minerva sent them, that the bark might run
    Her nimblest course through all the briny way.
    Now sank the sun, and dusky ev'ning dimm'd
    The waves, when, driven by propitious Jove,
    His bark stood right for Pherae; thence she stretch'd
    To sacred Elis where the Epeans rule,                            360
    And through the sharp Echinades he next
    Steer'd her, uncertain whether fate ordain'd
    His life or death, surprizal or escape.
      Meantime Ulysses and the swine-herd ate
    Their cottage-mess, and the assistant swains
    Theirs also; and when hunger now and thirst
    Had ceased in all, Ulysses thus began,
    Proving the swine-herd, whether friendly still,
    And anxious for his good, he would intreat
    His stay, or thence hasten him to the town.                      370
      Eumaeus, and all ye his servants, hear!
    It is my purpose, lest I wear thee out,
    Thee and thy friends, to seek at early dawn
    The city, there to beg--But give me first
    Needful instructions, and a trusty guide
    Who may conduct me thither; there my task
    Must be to roam the streets; some hand humane
    Perchance shall give me a small pittance there,
    A little bread, and a few drops to drink.
    Ulysses' palace I shall also seek,                               380
    And to discrete Penelope report
    My tidings; neither shall I fail to mix
    With those imperious suitors, who, themselves
    Full-fed, may spare perhaps some boon to me.
    Me shall they find, in whatsoe'er they wish
    Their ready servitor, for (understand
    And mark me well) the herald of the skies,
    Hermes, from whom all actions of mankind
