willingly consent; and, if I may but win your leave to love you, lady, it
will be with a heart that has yearned to no other woman.'

He spoke low and steadily, looking straight before him, with no visible
emotion, save a little quiver in the last sentence, a slight dilating of
the delicately cut nostril; and then he was silent, until, having
recovered the self-restraint that had been failing him, he prevented the
words she was trying to form by saying, 'Not in haste, lady.  There is
time yet before you to bethink yourself whether you can be free in will
and conscience.  If so, I will bear you through all.'

How invitingly the words fell on the lonely heart, so long left to fight
its own battles!  There came for the first time the full sense of what
life might be, the shielding tenderness, the sure reliance, the pure
affection, such as she saw Henry lavish on the shallow Queen, but which
she could meet and requite in John.  The brutal Boemond, the childish
Malcolm, had aroused no feeling in her but dislike or pity, and to them a
convent was infinitely preferable; but Bedford--the religious, manly,
brave, unselfish Bedford--opened to her the view of all that could
content a high-souled woman's heart, backed, moreover, by the wonder of
having been the first to touch such a spirit.

It would not have been a _mesalliance_.  Her family was one of the
grandest of the Netherlands; the saintly Emperor, Henry of Luxemburg, was
her ancestor; and Bedford's proposal was not a condescension such as to
rouse her sense of dignity.  His rank did not strike her as did his lofty
stainless character; the like of which she had never known to exist in
the world of active life till she saw the brothers of England, who came
more near to the armed saints and holy warriors of Church legend than her
fancy had thought mortal man could do, bred as she had been in the
sensual, violent, and glittering Burgundy of the fifteenth century.  In
truth, as Malcolm had thought the cloister the only refuge from the
harshness and barbarism of Scotland, so Esclairmonde had thought piety
and purity to be found nowhere else; and both had found the Court of
Henry V. an infinitely better world than they had supposed possible; but,
until the present moment, Esclairmonde had never felt the slightest call
to take a permanent place there.  Now however the cloister, even if it
were open to her, presented a gloomy, cheerless life of austerity, in
comparison with human affection and matronly duty.  And most vivid of all
at the moment was the desire to awaken the tender sweetness that slept in
those steady gray eyes, to see the grave, wise visage gleam with smiling
affection, and to rest in having one to take thought for her, and finish
this long term of tossing about and self-defence.  Was not the patience
with which he kept his eyes away from her already a proof of his
consideration and delicate kindness?

But deep in Esclairmonde's soul lay the sense that her dedication was
sacred, and her power over herself gone.  She had always felt a wife's
allegiance due to Him whom she received as her spiritual Spouse; and
though the sense at this moment only brought her disappointment and self-
reproach, her will was loyal.  The bond was cutting into her very flesh,
but she never even thought of breaking it; and all she waited for was the
power of restraining her grateful tears.

In this she was assisted by observing that Bedford's attention had been
attracted towards his brother, who was looking wan and weary, scarcely
tasting what was set before him; and, after fitfully trying to converse
with Marguerite of Burgundy, at last had taken advantage of an endless
harangue from all the Virtues, and had dropped asleep.  The Lady Anne was
seen making a sign to her sister not to disturb him; and Bedford
murmured, with a sigh, 'There is, for once, a discreet woman.'  Then, as
if recalled to a sense of what was passing, he turned on Esclairmonde his
full earnest look, saying, 'You will teach the Queen how _he_ should be
cared for.  You will help me.'

'Sir,' said Esclairmonde, feeling it most difficult not to falter, 'this
is a great grace, but it cannot be.'

'Cannot!' said Bedford, slowly.  'You have taken thought?'

'Sir, it is not the part of a betrothed spouse to take thought.  My vows
were renewed of my own free will and it were sacrilege to try to recall
them for the first real temptation.'

She spoke steadily, but the effort ached through her whole frame,
especially when the last word illumined John Plantagenet's face with
strange sweet light, quenched as his lip trembled, his nostril quivered,
his eye even moistened, as he said, 'It is enough, lady; I will no more
vex one who is vexed enough already; and you will so far trust me as to
regard me as your protector, if you should be in need?'

'Indeed I will,' said Esclairmonde, hardly restraining her tears.

'That is well,' said Bedford.  And he neither looked at her nor spoke to
her again, till, as he led her away in the procession from the hall, he
held her hand fast, and murmured: 'There then it rests, sweet lady
unless, having taken counsel with your own heart, you should change your
decree, and consult some holy priest.  If so, make but a sign of the
hand, and I am yours; for verily you are the only maiden I could ever
have loved.'

She was still in utter confusion, in the chamber where the ladies were
cloaking for their return, when her hands were grasped on either side by
the two Burgundian princesses.

'Sweet runaway, we have caught you at last!  Here, into Anne's chamber.
See you we must!  How is it with you?  Like you the limping Scot better
than Boemond?' laughed the Dauphiness, her company dignity laid aside for
school-girl chatter.

'If you cannot hold out,' said Anne, 'the Scot seems a gentle youth; and,
at least, you are quit of Boemond.'

'Yes,' said Marguerite, 'his last prank was too strong for the Duke:
quartering a dozen men-at-arms on a sulky Cambrai weaver till he paid him
2000 crowns.  Besides, it would be well to get the Scottish king for an
ally.  Do you know what we two are here for, Clairette?  We are both to
be betrothed: one to the handsome captive with the gold locks; the other
to your hawk-nosed neighbour, who seemed to have not a word to say.'

'But,' said Esclairmonde, replying to the easiest part of the disclosure,
'the King of Scots is in love with the Demoiselle of Somerset.'

'What matters that, silly maid?' said Marguerite 'he does not displease
me; and Anne is welcome to that melancholy duke.'

'Oh, Lady Anne!' exclaimed Esclairmonde, 'if such be your lot, it would
be well indeed.'

'What, the surly brother, of whom Catherine tells such tales!' continued
Marguerite.

'Credit them not,' said Esclairmonde.  'He never crosses her but when he
would open her eyes to his brother's failing health.'

'Yes,' interrupted Marguerite; 'my lord brother swears that this king
will not live a year; and if Catherine have no better luck with her child
than poor Michelle, then there will be another good Queen Anne in
England.'

'If so,' said Esclairmonde, looking at her friend with swimming eyes,
'she will have the best of husbands--as good as even she deserves!'

Anne held her hand fast, and would have said many tender words on
Esclairmonde's own troubles; but the other ladies were arrayed, and
Esclairmonde would not for worlds have been left behind in the Hotel de
Bourgogne.

Privacy was not an attainable luxury, and Esclairmonde could not commune
with her throbbing heart, or find peace for her aching head, till night.
This must be a matter unconfided to any, even Alice Montagu.  And while
the maiden lay smiling in her quiet sleep, after having fondly told her
friend that Sir Richard Nevil had really noticed her new silken kirtle,
she knelt on beneath the crucifix, mechanically reciting her prayers,
and, as the beads dropped from her fingers, fighting out the fight with
her own heart.

Her mind was made up; but her sense of the loss, her craving for the
worthy affection which lay within her grasp--these dismayed her.  The
life she had sighed for had become a blank; and she passionately detested
the obligation that held her back from affection, usefulness, joy, and
excellence--not ambition, for the greatest help to her lay in Bedford's
position, his exalted rank, and nearness to the crown.  Indeed, she
really dreaded and loathed worldly pomp so much that the temptation would
have been greater had he not been a prince.

It was this sense of renunciation that came to her aid.  She had at least
a _real_ sacrifice to offer; till now, as she became aware, she had made
none.  She folded her hands, and laid her offering to be hallowed by the
One all-sufficient Sacrifice.  She offered all those capacities for love
that had been newly revealed to her; she offered up the bliss, whose
golden dawn she had seen; she tried to tear out the earthliness of her
heart and affections by the roots, and lay them on the altar, entreating
that, come what might, her spirit might never stray from the Heavenly
Spouse of her betrothal.

Therewith came a sense of His perfect sufficiency--of rest, peace,
support, ineffable love, that kept her kneeling in a calm, almost
ecstatic state, in which common hopes, fears, and affections had melted
away.




CHAPTER XI: THE TWO PROMISES


After all, Alice Montagu was married almost privately, and without any
preparation.  Tidings came that the Duke of Alencon was besieging Cosne,
a city belonging to the Duke of Burgundy, and that instant relief was
needed.  The Duke was urgent with Henry to save the place for him, and
set off at once to collect his brilliant chivalry; while Henry, rousing
at the trumpet-call, declared that nothing ailed him but pageants, sent
orders to all his troops to collect from different quarters, and prepared
to take the command in person; while reports daily came in of the great
muster the Armagnacs were making, as though determined to offer battle.

Salisbury was determined not to abide the chances of the battle without
first giving a protector to his little daughter; and therefore, as
quietly as if she had been merely going to mass, the Lady Alice was
wedded to her Sir Richard Nevil, who treated the affair as the simplest
matter of course, and troubled himself with very slight demonstrations of
affection.  The wedding took place at Senlis, whither the female part of
the Court had accompanied the King, upon the very day of the parting.  No
one was present, except one of Sir Richard's brothers (the whole family
numbered twenty-two), his esquire; and on Alice's side, her father,
Esclairmonde, and a few other ladies.

At the last moment, however, the King himself came up, leaning on
Warwick's arm, looking thin, ill, and flushed, but resolved to do honour
to his faithful Salisbury, at whose request he had permitted the barony
of Montagu to be at once transferred to Nevil, who would thenceforth be
called by that title.

After the ceremony, King Henry kissed the gentle bride, placed a costly
ring upon her finger, and gave his best and warmest wishes to the newly-
married pair.  Little guessed any there present what the sound of Warwick
and Salisbury would be in forty years' time to the babe cradled at
Windsor.

As the King passed Esclairmonde, he paused, and said, in an undertone,
'Dear lady, deem not that I have forgotten your holy purpose; but you
understand that there are some who are jealous of any benefit conferred
on Paris save from themselves, and whose alliance I may not risk.  But if
God be pleased to grant me this battle also, then, with His good
pleasure, I shall not be forced to have such respect to persons; and when
I return, lady, whether the endowment come from your bounty or no, God
helping us, you shall begin the holy work of St. Katharine's bedeswomen
among the poor of Paris.'

But while Henry V., with all his grave sweetness, spoke these words to
Esclairmonde de Luxemburg, this was the farewell of Countess Jaqueline of
Hainault to Malcolm Stewart:

'Look here, my languishing swain; never mind her scorn, but win your
spurs in the battle that is to be, and then make some excuse to get back
again to us before the two Kings, with all their scruples.  Then beshrew
me but she shall be yours!  If Monseigneur de Therouenne and I cannot
manage one proud girl, I am not Countess of Hainault!'

This promise sent him away, planning the enjoyment of conquering
Esclairmonde's long resistance, and teaching her where to find happiness.
Should he punish her, by being stern and tyrannical at first? or should
his kindness teach her to repent?  When he was a knight, he would be in a
condition to assert his authority, he thought; and of knighthood both he
and Ralf Percy felt almost certain, in that wholesale dubbing of knights
that was wont to be the preliminary of a battle.  To be sure, they had
indulged in a good many unlicensed pleasures at Paris--Ralf from sheer
reckless love of sport, Malcolm in his endeavour to forget himself, and
to be manly; but they had escaped detection, and they knew plenty of
young Englishmen, and many more Burgundians and Gascons, who had plunged
far deeper into mischief, and thought it no disgrace, but rather held
that there was some special dispensation for the benefit of warriors.

Malcolm and Ralf were riding with a party of these young men.  King Henry
had consented to make his first day's journey as far as Corbeil in a
litter, since only there he was to meet the larger number of his troops,
whom Bedford and Warwick were assembling.  James was riding close beside
him, with his immediate attendants; and the two youths, not being needed,
had joined their comrades with the advanced guard of the escort.

It was always a fiction maintained by Henry, that he was marching in a
friendly country; plunder was strictly forbidden, and everything was to
be paid for; but unfortunately, the peasantry on his way never realized
this, and the soldiery often took care they should not.  Therefore, when
the advanced guard came to the village that had been marked out for their
halt, instead of finding provisions and forage to be purchased, they met
with only bare walls, and a few stray cats; and while storming and raving
between hunger and disappointment, a report came from somewhere that the
inhabitants had fled, and driven off their cattle to another village some
four miles off, in the woods, on the heights above.  Of course, they must
be taught reason.  It was true that the men-at-arms, who were under the
command of Sir Christopher Kitson and Sir William Trenton, were obliged
to abide where they were, much as Kitson growled at being unable to
procure a draught of wine for Trenton, whom he had been nursing for weeks
under intermitting fever, caught at Meaux; but the young gentlemen were
well pleased to show themselves under no Yorkshireman's orders, and
galloped off _en masse_ to procure refreshment for their horses and
themselves, further stimulated by the report that the Armagnacs had left
a sick man behind them there, who might be a valuable prisoner.

By and by, a woodland path brought the disorderly party, about forty in
number, including their servants and the ruffians who always followed
whenever plunder was to be scented, out upon a pretty French village of
the better class, built round a green shaded with chestnuts, under which,
sure enough, were hay-carts, cows, sheep, and goats, and their owners,
taking refuge in a place thought to be out of the track of the invaders.

Here were the malicious defrauders of the hungry warriors.  Down upon
them flew the angry foragers.  Soon the pretty tranquil scene was ringing
with the oaths of the plundering and the cries of the plundered; the
cattle were being driven off, the houses and farm-yards rifled, blood was
flowing, and what could not be carried off was burning.  The search for
the Armagnac prisoner had, however, relaxed after the first inquiry, and
Malcolm, surprised that this had been forgotten, suddenly bethought him
of the distinction he should secure by sending a valuable prize to
Esclairmonde's feet.  He seized on an old man who had not been able to
fly, and stood trembling and panting in a corner, and demanded where the
sick man was.  The old man pointed to a farm-house, round which clouds of
smoke were rolling, and Malcolm hurried into it, shouting, 'Dog of an
Armagnac, come out!  Yield, ere thou be burnt!'

No answer; and he dashed forward.  In the lower room was a sight that
opened his eyes with horror--no other than the shield of Drummond, with
the three wavy lines; ay, and with it the helmet and suit of armour,
whereof he knew each buckle and brace!

'Patie!  Patrick!  Patrick Drummond!' he wildly shouted, 'are you there?'

No answer; and seeing through the smoke a stair, he rushed up.  There, in
an upper room, on a bed, lay a senseless form, suffocated perhaps by the
smoke, but unmistakably his cousin!  He called to him, seized him, shook
him, dragged him out of bed, all in vain; there was no sign of animation.
The fire was gaining on the house; Malcolm's own breath was failing, and
his frenzied efforts to carry Patrick's almost giant form to the stairs
were quite unavailing.  Wild with horror, he flew shouting down-stairs to
call Halbert, whom he had left with his horse, but neither Halbert nor
horse was in sight, nor indeed any of the party.  Not a man was in sight,
except a few hurrying far out of reach, as if something had alarmed them.
He wrung his hands in anguish, and was about to make another attempt to
drag Patrick down from the already burning house, when suddenly a troop
of horse was among the scene of desolation, and at their head King James
himself.  Malcolm flew to the King, cutting short his angry exclamation
with the cry, 'Help! help! he will burn!  Patrick!  Patie Drummond!
There!'

James had scarce gathered the sense of the words, ere, leaping from his
horse, he bounded up the stairs, through the smoke, amid flakes of
burning thatch falling from the roof, groped in the dense clouds of smoke
for the senseless weight, and holding the shoulders while Malcolm held
the feet, they sped down the stair, and rested not till they had laid him
under a chestnut tree, out of reach of the crash of the house, which fell
in almost instantly.

'Does he live?' gasped Malcolm.

'He will not,' said the King, 'if his nation be known here.  Keep out of
his sight!  He must hear only French!'

Remembering how inexorably Henry hung every Scotch prisoner, Malcolm's
heart sank.  This was why no one had sought the prisoner.  A Scot was not
available for ransom!  Should he be the murderer of his cousin, Lily's
love?

Meantime James hurriedly explained to Kitson that here was the sick man
left by the enemy, summoned Sir Nigel to his side, closed his own visor,
and called for water; then hung over the prisoner, anxious to prevent the
first word from being broad Scotch.  In the free air, some long sobs
showed that Patrick was struggling back to life; and James at once said,
'Rendez vous, Messire;' but he neither answered, nor was there meaning in
his eyes.  And James perceived that he was bandaged as though for broken
ribs, and that his right shoulder was dislocated, and no doubt had been a
second time pulled out when Malcolm had grasped him by the arms.  He
swooned again at the first attempt to lift him, and a hay-cart having
been left in the flight of the marauders, he was laid in it, and covered
with the King's cloak, to be conveyed to Corbeil, where James trusted to
secure his life by personal intercession with Henry.  He groaned heavily
several times, but never opened his eyes or spoke articulately the whole
way; and James and Sir Nigel kept on either side of the cart, ready to
address him in French the first moment, having told the English that he
was a prisoner of quality, who must be carefully conveyed to King James's
tent at Corbeil.  Malcolm was not allowed to approach, lest he should be
recognized; and he rode along in an agony of shame and suspense, with
very different feelings towards Patrick than those with which he had of
late thought of him, or of his own promises.  If Patrick died through
this plundering raid, how should he ever face Lily?

It was nearly night ere they reached Corbeil, where the tents were
pitched outside the little town.  James committed his captive to the
prudent care of old Baird, bidding him send for a French or Burgundian
surgeon, unable to detect the Scottish tongue; and then, taking Malcolm
with him, he crossed the square in the centre of the camp to the royal
pavilion, opposite to which his own was pitched.

It was a sultry night, and Henry had insisted on sleeping in his tent,
declaring himself sick of stone walls; and as they approached his voice
could be heard in brief excited sentences, giving orders, and asking for
the King of Scots.

'Here, Sir,' said James, stopping in where the curtain was looped up, and
showed King Henry half sitting, half lying, on a couch of cushions and
deer-skins, his eyes full of fire, his thin face flushed with deep
colour; Bedford, March, Warwick, and Salisbury in attendance.

'Ho! you are late!' said Henry.  'Did you come up with the caitiff
robbers?'

'They made off as we rode up.  The village was already burnt.'

'Who were they?  I hope you hung them on the spot, as I bade,' continued
Henry, coughing between his sentences, and almost in spite of himself,
putting his hand to his side.

'I was delayed.  There was a life to save: a gentleman who lay sick and
stifled in a burning house.'

'And what was it to you,' cried Henry, angrily, 'if a dozen rebel
