"These are exactly the details I asked for," said the king. "Who and
what are the two men of whom you speak?"

"Two Frenchmen, sire."

"Indeed! I am glad of that."

"And the two ideas," said Mazarin;--"I am more curious about ideas than
about men, for my part."

"Yes," murmured the king.

"The second idea, the devoted, reasonable idea--the least important,
sir--was to go and dig up a million in gold, buried by King Charles I.
at Newcastle, and to purchase with that gold the adherence of Monk."

"Oh, oh!" said Mazarin, reanimated by the word million. "But Newcastle
was at the time occupied by Monk."

"Yes, monsieur le cardinal, and that is why I venture to call the idea
courageous as well as devoted. It was necessary, if Monk refused the
offers of the negotiator, to reinstate King Charles II. in possession of
this million, which was to be torn, as it were, from the loyalty and not
the loyalism of General Monk. This was effected in spite of many
difficulties: the general proved to be loyal, and allowed the money to
be taken away."

"It seems to me," said the timid, thoughtful king, "that Charles II.
could not have known of this million whilst he was in Paris."

"It seems to me," rejoined the cardinal, maliciously, "that his majesty
the king of Great Britain knew perfectly well of this million, but that
he preferred having two millions to having one."

"Sire," said Athos, firmly, "the king of England, whilst in France, was
so poor that he had not even money to take the post; so destitute of
hope that he frequently thought of dying. He was so entirely ignorant of
the existence of the million at Newcastle, that but for a gentleman--one
of your majesty's subjects--the moral depositary of the million, who
revealed the secret to King Charles II., that prince would still be
vegetating in the most cruel forgetfulness."

"Let us pass on to the strange, bold and ingenious idea," interrupted
Mazarin, whose sagacity foresaw a check. "What was that idea?"

"This--M. Monk formed the only obstacle to the re-establishment of the
fallen king. A Frenchman imagined the idea of suppressing this
obstacle."

"Oh! oh! but he is a scoundrel, that Frenchman," said Mazarin; "and the
idea is not so ingenious as to prevent its author being tied up by the
neck at the Place de Greve, by decree of the parliament."

"Your eminence is mistaken," replied Athos, dryly; "I did not say that
the Frenchman in question had resolved to assassinate M. Monk, but only
to suppress him. The words of the French language have a value which the
gentlemen of France know perfectly. Besides, this is an affair of war;
and when men serve kings against their enemies they are not to be
condemned by a parliament--God is their judge. This French gentleman,
then, formed the idea of gaining possession of the person of Monk, and
he executed his plan."

The king became animated at the recital of great actions. The king's
younger brother struck the table with his hand, exclaiming, "Ah! that is
fine!"

"He carried off Monk?" said the king. "Why, Monk was in his camp."

"And the gentleman was alone, sire."

"That is marvelous!" said Philip.

"Marvelous, indeed!" cried the king.

"Good! There are the two little lions unchained," murmured the cardinal.
And with an air of spite, which he did not dissemble: "I am unacquainted
with these details, will you guarantee their authenticity, monsieur?"

"All the more easily, my lord cardinal, from having seen the events."

"You have?"

"Yes, monseigneur."

The king had involuntarily drawn close to the count, the Duc d'Anjou had
turned sharply round, and pressed Athos on the other side.

"What next? monsieur, what next?" cried they both at the same time.

"Sire, M. Monk, being taken by the Frenchman, was brought to King
Charles II., at the Hague. The king gave back his freedom to Monk, and
the grateful general, in return, gave Charles II. the throne of Great
Britain, for which so many valiant men had fought in vain."

Philip clapped his hands with enthusiasm, Louis XIV., more reflective,
turned towards the Comte de la Fere.

"Is this true," said he, "in all its details?"

"Absolutely true, sire."

"That one of my gentlemen knew the secret of the million, and kept it?"

"Yes, sire."

"The name of that gentleman?"

"It was your humble servant," said Athos, simply, and bowing.

A murmur of admiration made the heart of Athos swell with pleasure. He
had reason to be proud, at least. Mazarin, himself, had raised his arms
towards heaven.

"Monsieur," said the king, "I shall seek and find means to reward you."
Athos made a movement. "Oh, not for your honesty, to be paid for that
would humiliate you; but I owe you a reward for having participated in
the restoration of my brother, King Charles II."

"Certainly," said Mazarin.

"It is the triumph of a good cause which fills the whole house of France
with joy," said Anne of Austria.

"I continue," said Louis XIV.: "Is it also true that a single man
penetrated to Monk, in his camp, and carried him off?"

"That man had ten auxiliaries, taken from a very inferior rank."

"And nothing more but them?"

"Nothing more."

"And he is named?"

"Monsieur d'Artagnan, formerly lieutenant of the musketeers of your
majesty."

Anne of Austria colored; Mazarin became yellow with shame; Louis XIV.
was deeply thoughtful, and a drop of moisture fell from his pale brow.
"What men!" murmured he. And, involuntarily, he darted a glance at the
minister which would have terrified him, if Mazarin, at the moment, had
not concealed his head under his pillow.

"Monsieur," said the young Duc d'Anjou, placing his hand, delicate and
white as that of a woman, upon the arm of Athos, "tell that brave man, I
beg you, that Monsieur, brother of the king, will to-morrow drink his
health before five hundred of the best gentlemen of France." And, on
finishing those words, the young man, perceiving that his enthusiasm had
deranged one of his ruffles, set to work to put it to rights with the
greatest care imaginable.

"Let us resume business, sire," interrupted Mazarin, who never was
enthusiastic, and who wore no ruffles.

"Yes, monsieur," replied Louis XIV. "Pursue your communication, monsieur
le comte," added he, turning towards Athos.

Athos immediately began and offered in due form the hand of the Princess
Henrietta Stuart to the young prince, the king's brother. The conference
lasted an hour; after which the doors of the chamber were thrown open to
the courtiers, who resumed their places as if nothing had been kept from
them in the occupations of that evening. Athos then found himself again
with Raoul, and the father and son were able to clasp each other's
hands.




Chapter XLII. In which Mazarin becomes Prodigal.


Whilst Mazarin was endeavoring to recover from the serious alarm he had
just experienced, Athos and Raoul were exchanging a few words in a
corner of the apartment. "Well, here you are at Paris, then, Raoul?"
said the comte.

"Yes, monsieur, since the return of M. le Prince."

"I cannot converse freely with you here, because we are observed; but I
shall return home presently, and shall expect you as soon as your duty
permits."

Raoul bowed, and, at that moment, M. le Prince came up to them. The
prince had that clear and keen look which distinguishes birds of prey of
the noble species; his physiognomy itself presented several distinct
traits of this resemblance. It is known that in the Prince de Conde, the
aquiline nose rose out sharply and incisively from a brow slightly
retreating, rather low than high, and according to the railers of the
court,--a pitiless race without mercy even for genius,--constituted
rather an eagle's beak than a human nose, in the heir of the illustrious
princes of the house of Conde. This penetrating look, this imperious
expression of the whole countenance, generally disturbed those to whom
the prince spoke, more than either majesty or regular beauty could have
done in the conqueror of Rocroi. Besides this, the fire mounted so
suddenly to his projecting eyes, that with the prince every sort of
animation resembled passion. Now, on account of his rank, everybody at
the court respected M. le Prince, and many even, seeing only the man,
carried their respect as far as terror.

Louis de Conde then advanced towards the Comte de la Fere and Raoul,
with the marked intention of being saluted by the one, and of speaking
with the other. No man bowed with more reserved grace than the Comte de
la Fere. He disdained to put into a salutation all the shades which a
courtier ordinarily borrows from the same color--the desire to please.
Athos knew his own personal value, and bowed to the prince like a man,
correcting by something sympathetic and undefinable that which might
have appeared offensive to the pride of the highest rank in the
inflexibility of his attitude. The prince was about to speak to Raoul.
Athos forestalled him. "If M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne," said he, "were
not one of the humble servants of your royal highness, I would beg him
to pronounce my name before you--mon prince."

"I have the honor to address Monsieur le Comte de la Fere," said Conde,
instantly.

"My protector," added Raoul, blushing.

"One of the most honorable men in the kingdom," continued the prince;
"one of the first gentlemen of France, and of whom I have heard so much
that I have frequently desired to number him among my friends."

"An honor of which I should be unworthy," replied Athos, "but for the
respect and admiration I entertain for your royal highness."

"Monsieur de Bragelonne," said the prince, "is a good officer, and it is
plainly seen that he has been to a good school. Ah, monsieur le comte,
in your time, generals had soldiers!"

"That is true, my lord, but nowadays soldiers have generals."

This compliment, which savored so little of flattery, gave a thrill of
joy to the man whom already Europe considered a hero; and who might be
thought to be satiated with praise.

"I regret very much," continued the prince, "that you should have
retired from the service, monsieur le comte; for it is more than
probable that the king will soon have a war with Holland or England, and
opportunities for distinguishing himself would not be wanting for a man
who, like you, knows Great Britain as well as you do France."

"I believe I may say, monseigneur, that I have acted wisely in retiring
from the service," said Athos, smiling. "France and Great Britain will
henceforward live like two sisters, if I can trust my presentiments."

"Your presentiments?"

"Stop, monseigneur, listen to what is being said yonder, at the table of
my lord the cardinal."

"Where they are playing?"

"Yes, my lord."

The cardinal had just raised himself on one elbow, and made a sign to
the king's brother, who went to him.

"My lord," said the cardinal, "pick up, if you please, all those gold
crowns." And he pointed to the enormous pile of yellow and glittering
pieces which the Comte de Guiche had raised by degrees before him by a
surprising run of luck at play.

"For me?" cried the Duc d'Anjou.

"Those fifty thousand crowns; yes, monseigneur, they are yours."

"Do you give them to me?"

"I have been playing on your account, monseigneur," replied the
cardinal, getting weaker and weaker, as if this effort of giving money
had exhausted all his physical and moral faculties.

"Oh, good heavens!" exclaimed Philip, wild with joy, "what a fortunate
day!" And he himself, making a rake of his fingers, drew a part of the
sum into his pockets, which he filled, and still full a third remained
on the table.

"Chevalier," said Philip to his favorite, the Chevalier de Lorraine,
"come hither, chevalier." The favorite quickly obeyed. "Pocket the
rest," said the young prince.

This singular scene was considered by the persons present only as a
touching kind of family fete. The cardinal assumed the airs of a father
with the sons of France, and the two princes had grown up under his
wing. No one then imputed to pride, or even impertinence, as would be
done nowadays, this liberality on the part of the first minister. The
courtiers were satisfied with envying the prince.--The king turned away
his head.

"I never had so much money before," said the young prince, joyously, as
he crossed the chamber with his favorite to go to his carriage. "No,
never! What a weight these crowns are!"

"But why has monsieur le cardinal given away all this money at once?"
asked M. le Prince of the Comte de la Fere. "He must be very ill, the
dear cardinal!"

"Yes, my lord, very ill, without doubt; he looks very ill, as your royal
highness may perceive."

"But surely he will die of it. A hundred and fifty thousand livres! Oh,
it is incredible! But, comte, tell me a reason for it?"

"Patience, monseigneur, I beg of you. Here comes M. le Duc d'Anjou,
talking with the Chevalier de Lorraine; I should not be surprised if
they spared us the trouble of being indiscreet. Listen to them."

In fact the chevalier said to the prince in a low voice, "My lord, it is
not natural for M. Mazarin to give you so much money. Take care! you
will let some of the pieces fall, my lord. What design has the cardinal
upon you to make him so generous?"

"As I said," whispered Athos in the prince's ear; "that, perhaps, is the
best reply to your question."

"Tell me, my lord," repeated the chevalier impatiently, as he was
calculating, by weighing them in his pocket, the quota of the sum which
had fallen to his share by rebound.

"My dear chevalier, a wedding present."

"How a wedding present?"

"Eh! yes, I am going to be married," replied the Duc d'Anjou, without
perceiving, at the moment, he was passing the prince and Athos, who both
bowed respectfully.

The chevalier darted at the young duke a glance so strange, and so
malicious, that the Comte de la Fere quite started on beholding it.

"You! you to be married!" repeated he; "oh! that's impossible. You would
not commit such a folly!"

"Bah! I don't do it myself; I am made to do it," replied the Duc
d'Anjou. "But come, quick! let us get rid of our money." Thereupon he
disappeared with his companion, laughing and talking, whilst all heads
were bowed on his passage.

"Then," whispered the prince to Athos, "that is the secret."

"It was not I who told you so, my lord."

"He is to marry the sister of Charles II.?"

"I believe so."

The prince reflected for a moment, and his eye shot forth one of its not
infrequent flashes. "Humph!" said he slowly, as if speaking to himself;
"our swords are once more to be hung on the wall--for a long time!" and
he sighed.

All that sigh contained of ambition silently stifled, of extinguished
illusions and disappointed hopes, Athos alone divined, for he alone
heard that sigh. Immediately after, the prince took leave and the king
left the apartment. Athos, by a sign made to Bragelonne, renewed the
desire he had expressed at the beginning of the scene. By degrees the
chamber was deserted, and Mazarin was left alone, a prey to suffering
which he could no longer dissemble. "Bernouin! Bernouin!" cried he in a
broken voice.

"What does monseigneur want?"

"Guenaud--let Guenaud be sent for," said his eminence. "I think I'm
dying."

Bernouin, in great terror, rushed into the cabinet to give the order,
and the piqueur, who hastened to fetch the physician, passed the king's
carriage in the Rue Saint Honore.




Chapter XLIII. Guenaud.


The cardinal's order was pressing; Guenaud quickly obeyed it. He found
his patient stretched on his bed, his legs swelled, his face livid, and
his stomach collapsed. Mazarin had a severe attack of gout. He suffered
tortures with the impatience of a man who has not been accustomed to
resistances. On seeing Guenaud: "Ah!" said he; "now I am saved!"

Guenaud was a very learned and circumspect man, who stood in no need of
the critiques of Boileau to obtain a reputation. When facing a disease,
if it were personified in a king, he treated the patient as a Turk
treats a Moor. He did not, therefore, reply to Mazarin as the minister
expected: "Here is the doctor; good-bye disease!" On the contrary, on
examining his patient, with a very serious air:

"Oh! oh!" said he.

"Eh! what! Guenaud! How you look at me!"

"I look as I should on seeing your complaint, my lord; it is a very
dangerous one."

"The gout--oh! yes, the gout."

"With complications, my lord."

Mazarin raised himself upon his elbow, and, questioning by look and
gesture: "What do you mean by that? Am I worse than I believe myself to
be?"

"My lord," said Guenaud, seating himself beside the bed; "your eminence
has worked very hard during your life; your eminence has suffered much."

"But I am not old, I fancy. The late M. de Richelieu was but seventeen
months younger than I am when he died, and died of a mortal disease. I
am young, Guenaud: remember, I am scarcely fifty-two."

"Oh! my lord, you are much more than that. How long did the Fronde
last?"

"For what purpose do you put such a question to me?"

"For a medical calculation, monseigneur."

"Well, some ten years--off and on."

"Very well; be kind enough to reckon every year of the Fronde as three
years--that makes thirty; now twenty and fifty-two makes seventy-two
years. You are seventy-two, my lord; and that is a great age."

Whilst saying this, he felt the pulse of his patient. This pulse was
full of such fatal indications, that the physician continued,
notwithstanding the interruptions of the patient: "Put down the years of
the Fronde at four each, and you have lived eighty-two years."

"Are you speaking seriously, Guenaud?"

"Alas! yes, monseigneur."

"You take a roundabout way, then, to inform me that I am very ill?"

"Ma foi! yes, my lord, and with a man of the mind and courage of your
eminence, it ought not to be necessary to do so."

The cardinal breathed with such difficulty that he inspired pity even in
a pitiless physician. "There are diseases and diseases," resumed
Mazarin. "From some of them people escape."

"That is true, my lord."

"Is it not?" cried Mazarin, almost joyously; "for, in short, what else
would be the use of power, of strength of will? What would the use of
genius be--your genius, Guenaud? What would be the use of science and
art, if the patient, who disposes of all that, cannot be saved from
peril?"

Guenaud was about to open his mouth, but Mazarin continued:

"Remember," said he, "I am the most confiding of your patients; remember
I obey you blindly, and that consequently--"

"I know all that," said Guenaud.

"I shall be cured, then?"

"Monseigneur, there is neither strength of will, nor power, nor genius,
nor science that can resist a disease which God doubtless sends, or
which He cast upon the earth at the creation, with full power to destroy
and kill mankind. When the disease is mortal, and nothing can--"

"Is--my--disease--mortal?" asked Mazarin.

"Yes, my lord."

His eminence sank down for a moment, like an unfortunate wretch who is
crushed by a falling column. But the spirit of Mazarin was a strong one,
or rather his mind was a firm one. "Guenaud," said he, recovering from
his first shock, "you will permit me to appeal from your judgment. I
will call together the most learned men of Europe: I will consult them.
I will live, in short, by the virtue of I care not what remedy."

"My lord must not suppose," said Guenaud, "that I have the presumption
to pronounce alone upon an existence so valuable as yours. I have
already assembled all the good physicians and practitioners of France
and Europe. There were twelve of them."

"And they said--"

"They said that your eminence was suffering from a mortal disease; I
have the consultation signed in my portfolio. If your eminence will
please to see it, you will find the names of all the incurable diseases
we have met with. There is first--"

"No, no!" cried Mazarin, pushing away the paper. "No, no, Guenaud, I
yield! I yield!" And a profound silence, during which the cardinal
resumed his senses and recovered his strength, succeeded to the
agitation of this scene. "There is another thing," murmured Mazarin;
"there are empirics and charlatans. In my country, those whom physicians
abandon run the chance of a quack, who kills them ten times but saves
them a hundred times."

"Has not your eminence observed, that during the last month I have
changed my remedies ten times?"

"Yes. Well?"

"Well, I have spent fifty thousand crowns in purchasing the secrets of
all these fellows: the list is exhausted, and so is my purse. You are
not cured: and, but for my art, you would be dead."

"That ends it!" murmured the cardinal; "that ends it." And he threw a
melancholy look upon the riches which surrounded him. "And must I quit
all that?" sighed he. "I am dying, Guenaud! I am dying!"

"Oh! not yet, my lord," said the physician.

Mazarin seized his hand. "In what time?" asked he, fixing his two large
eyes upon the impassible countenance of the physician.

"My lord, we never tell that."

"To ordinary men, perhaps not;--but to me--to me, whose every minute is
worth a treasure. Tell me, Guenaud, tell me!"

"No, no, my lord."

"I insist upon it, I tell you. Oh! give me a month, and for every one of
those thirty days I will pay you a hundred thousand crowns."

"My lord," replied Guenaud, in a firm voice, "it is God who can give you
days of grace, and not I. God only allows you a fortnight."

The cardinal breathed a painful sigh, and sank back down upon his
pillow, murmuring, "Thank you, Guenaud, thank you!"

The physician was about to depart; the dying man, raising himself up:
"Silence!" said he, with flaming eyes, "silence!"

"My lord, I have known this secret two months; you see that I have kept
it faithfully."

"Go, Guenaud; I will take care of your fortunes; go, and tell Brienne to
send me a clerk called M. Colbert. Go!"




Chapter XLIV. Colbert.


Colbert was not far off. During the whole evening he had remained in one
of the corridors, chatting with Bernouin and Brienne, and commenting,
with the ordinary skill of people of court, upon the news which
developed like air-bubbles upon the water, on the surface of each event.
It is doubtless time to trace, in a few words, one of the most
interesting portraits of the age, and to trace it with as much truth,
perhaps, as contemporary painters have been able to do. Colbert was a
man in whom the historian and the moralist have an equal right.

He was thirteen years older than Louis XIV., his future master. Of
middle height, rather lean than otherwise, he had deep-set eyes, a mean
appearance, his hair was coarse, black and thin, which, say the
biographers of his time, made him take early to the skull-cap. A look of
severity, of harshness even, a sort of stiffness, which, with inferiors,
was pride, with superiors an affectation of superior virtue; a surly
cast of countenance upon all occasions, even when looking at himself in
a glass alone--such is the exterior of his personage. As to the moral
part of his character, the depth of his talent for accounts, and his
ingenuity in making sterility itself productive, were much boasted of.
Colbert had formed the idea of forcing governors of frontier places to
feed the garrisons without pay, with what they drew from contributions.
Such a valuable quality made Mazarin think of replacing Joubert, his
intendant, who had recently died, by M. Colbert, who had such skill in
nibbling down allowances. Colbert by degrees crept into court,
notwithstanding his lowly birth, for he was the son of a man who sold
wine as his father had done, but who afterwards sold cloth, and then
silk stuffs. Colbert, destined for trade, had been clerk in Lyons to a
merchant, whom he had quitted to come to Paris in the office of a
Chatlet procureur named Biterne. It was here he learned the art of
drawing up an account, and the much more valuable one of complicating
it.

This stiffness of manner in Colbert had been of great service to him; it
is so true that Fortune, when she has a caprice, resembles those women
of antiquity, who, when they had a fancy, were disgusted by no physical
or moral defects in either men or things. Colbert, placed with Michel
Letellier, secretary of state in 1648, by his cousin Colbert, Seigneur
de Saint-Penange, who protected him, received one day from the minister
a commission for Cardinal Mazarin. His eminence was then in the
enjoyment of flourishing health, and the bad years of the Fronde had not
yet counted triple and quadruple for him. He was at Sedan, very much
annoyed at a court intrigue in which Anne of Austria seemed inclined to
desert his cause.

Of this intrigue Letellier held the thread. He had just received a
letter from Anne of Austria, a letter very valuable to him, and strongly
compromising Mazarin; but, as he already played the double part which
served him so well, and by which he always managed two enemies so as to
draw advantage from both, either by embroiling them more and more or by
reconciling them, Michel Letellier wished to send Anne of Austria's
letter to Mazarin, in order that he might be acquainted with it, and
consequently pleased with his having so willingly rendered him a
service. To send the letter was an easy matter; to recover it again,
after having communicated it, that was the difficulty. Letellier cast
his eyes around him, and seeing the black and meager clerk with the
scowling brow, scribbling away in his office, he preferred him to the
best gendarme for the execution of this design.

Colbert was commanded to set out for Sedan, with positive orders to
carry the letter to Mazarin, and bring it back to Letellier. He listened
to his orders with scrupulous attention, required the instructions to be
repeated twice, and was particular in learning whether the bringing back
was as necessary as the communicating, and Letellier replied sternly,
"More necessary." Then he set out, traveled like a courier, without any
care for his body, and placed in the hands of Mazarin, first a letter
from Letellier, which announced to the cardinal the sending of the
precious letter, and then that letter itself. Mazarin colored greatly
whilst reading Anne of Austria's letter, gave Colbert a gracious smile
and dismissed him.

"When shall I have the answer, monseigneur?"

"To-morrow."

"To-morrow morning?"

"Yes, monsieur."

The clerk turned upon his heel, after making his very best bow. The next
day he was at his post at seven o'clock. Mazarin made him wait till ten.
He remained patiently in the ante-chamber; his turn having come, he
entered; Mazarin gave him a sealed packet. On the envelope of this
packet were these words:--Monsieur Michel Letellier, etc. Colbert looked
at the packet with much attention; the cardinal put on a pleasant
countenance and pushed him towards the door.

"And the letter of the queen-mother, my lord?" asked Colbert.

"It is in with the rest, in the packet," said Mazarin.

"Oh! very well," replied Colbert; and placing his hat between his knees,
he began to unseal the packet.

Mazarin uttered a cry. "What are you doing?" said he, angrily.

"I am unsealing the packet, my lord."

"You mistrust me, then, master pedant, do you? Did any one ever see such
impertinence?"

"Oh! my lord, do not be angry with me! It is certainly not your
eminence's word I place in doubt, God forbid!"

"What then?"

"It is the carefulness of your chancery, my lord. What is a letter? A
rag. May not a rag be forgotten? And look, my lord, look if I was not
right. Your clerks have forgotten the rag; the letter is not in the
packet."

"You are an insolent fellow, and you have not looked," cried Mazarin,
very angrily; "begone and wait my pleasure." Whilst saying these words,
with perfectly Italian subtlety he snatched the packet from the hands of
Colbert, and re-entered his apartments.

But this anger could not last so long as to be replaced in time by
reason. Mazarin, every morning, on opening his closet door, found the
figure of Colbert like a sentinel behind the bench, and this
disagreeable figure never failed to ask him humbly, but with tenacity,
for the queen-mother's letter. Mazarin could hold out no longer, and was
obliged to give it up. He accompanied this restitution with a most
severe reprimand, during which Colbert contented himself with examining,
feeling, even smelling, as it were, the paper, the characters, and the
signature, neither more nor less than if he had to deal with the
greatest forger in the kingdom. Mazarin behaved still more rudely to
him, but Colbert, still impassible, having obtained a certainty that the
letter was the true one, went off as if he had been deaf. This conduct
obtained for him afterwards the post of Joubert; for Mazarin, instead of
bearing malice, admired him, and was desirous of attaching so much
fidelity to himself.

It may be judged by this single anecdote, what the character of Colbert
was. Events, developing themselves, by degrees allowed all the powers of
his mind to act freely. Colbert was not long in insinuating himself to
the good graces of the cardinal: he became even indispensable to him.
The clerk was acquainted with all his accounts without the cardinal's
ever having spoken to him about them. This secret between them was a
powerful tie, and this was why, when about to appear before the Master
of another world, Mazarin was desirous of taking good counsel in
disposing the wealth he was so unwillingly obliged to leave in this
world. After the visit of Guenaud, he therefore sent for Colbert,
desired him to sit down, and said to him: "Let us converse, Monsieur
Colbert, and seriously, for I am very ill, and I may chance to die."

"Man is mortal," replied Colbert.

"I have always remembered that, M. Colbert, and I have worked with that
end in view. You know that I have amassed a little wealth."

"I know you have, monseigneur."

"At how much do you estimate, as near as you can, the amount of this
wealth, M. Colbert?"

"At forty millions, five hundred and sixty thousand, two hundred livres,
nine cents, eight farthings," replied Colbert.

The cardinal heaved a deep sigh, and looked at Colbert with wonder, but
he allowed a smile to steal across his lips.

"Known money," added Colbert, in reply to that smile.

The cardinal gave quite a start in bed. "What do you mean by that?" said
he.

"I mean," said Colbert, "that besides those forty millions, five hundred
and sixty thousand, two hundred livres, nine cents, eight farthings,
there are thirteen millions that are not known."

"Ouf!" sighed Mazarin, "what a man!"

At this moment, the head of Bernouin appeared through the embrasure of
the door.

"What is it?" asked Mazarin, "and why do you disturb me?"

"The Theatin father, your eminence's director, was sent for this
evening; and he cannot come again to my lord till after to-morrow."

Mazarin looked a Colbert, who rose and took his hat, saying: "I shall
come again, my lord."

Mazarin hesitated. "No, no," said he; "I have as much business to
transact with you as with him. Besides, you are my other confessor--and
what I have to say to one the other may hear. Remain where you are,
Colbert."

"But my lord, if there be no secret of penitence, will the director
consent to my being here?"

"Do not trouble yourself about that; come into the ruelle."

"I can wait outside, monseigneur."

"No, no, it will do you good to hear the confession of a rich man."

Colbert bowed and went into the ruelle.

"Introduce the Theatin father," said Mazarin, closing the curtains.




Chapter XLV. Confession of a Man of Wealth.


The Theatin entered deliberately, without being too much astonished at
the noise and agitation which anxiety for the cardinal's health had
raised in his household. "Come in, my reverend father," said Mazarin,
after a last look at the ruelle, "come in and console me."

"That is my duty, my lord," replied the Theatin.

"Begin by sitting down, and making yourself comfortable, for I am going
to begin with a general confession; you will afterwards give me a good
absolution, and I shall believe myself more tranquil."

"My lord," said the father, "you are not so ill as to make a general
confession urgent--and it will be very fatiguing--take care."

"You suspect, then, that it may be long, father?"

"How can I think it otherwise, when a man has lived so completely as
your eminence has done?"

"Ah! that is true!--yes--the recital may be long."

"The mercy of God is great," snuffled the Theatin.

"Stop," said Mazarin; "there I begin to terrify myself with having
allowed so many things to pass which the Lord might reprove."

"Is that not always so?" said the Theatin naively, removing further from
the lamp his thin pointed face, like that of a mole. "Sinners are so
forgetful beforehand, and scrupulous when it is too late."

"Sinners?" replied Mazarin. "Do you use that word ironically, and to
reproach me with all the genealogies I have allowed to be made on my
account--I--the son of a fisherman, in fact?"

[This is quite untranslatable--it being a play upon the words pecheur
(with a grave over the first e), a sinner, and pecheur (with an accent
circumflex over the first e), a fisherman. It is in very bad
taste.--TRANS.]

"Hum!" said the Theatin.

"That is a first sin, father; for I have allowed myself made to descend
from two old Roman consuls, S. Geganius Macerinus 1st, Macerinus 2d, and
Proculus Macerinus 3d, of whom the Chronicle of Haolander speaks. From
Macerinus to Mazarin the proximity was tempting. Macerinus, a
diminutive, means leanish, poorish, out of case. Oh! reverend father!
Mazarini may now be carried to the augmentative Maigre, thin as Lazarus.
Look!"--and he showed his fleshless arms.

"In your having been born of a family of fishermen I see nothing
injurious to you; for--St. Peter was a fisherman; and if you are a
prince of the church, my lord, he was the supreme head of it. Pass on,
if you please."

"So much the more for my having threatened with the Bastile a certain
Bounet, a priest of Avignon, who wanted to publish a genealogy of the
Casa Mazarini much too marvelous."

"To be probable?" replied the Theatin.

"Oh! if I had acted up to his idea, father, that would have been the
vice of pride--another sin."

"It was an excess of wit, and a person is not to be reproached with such
sorts of abuses. Pass on, pass on!"

"I was all pride. Look you, father, I will endeavor to divide that into
capital sins."

"I like divisions, when well made."

"I am glad of that. You must know that in 1630--alas! that is thirty-one
years ago--"

"You were then twenty-nine years old, monseigneur."

"A hot-headed age. I was then something of a soldier, and I threw myself
at Casal into the arquebusades, to show that I rode on horseback as well
as an officer. It is true, I restored peace between the French and the
Spaniards. That redeems my sin a little."

"I see no sin in being able to ride well on horseback," said the
Theatin; "that is in perfect good taste, and does honor to our gown. As
a Christian, I approve of your having prevented the effusion of blood;
as a monk, I am proud of the bravery a monk has exhibited."

Mazarin bowed his head humbly. "Yes," said he, "but the consequences?"

"What consequences?"

"Eh! that damned sin of pride has roots without end. From the time that
I threw myself in that manner between two armies, that I had smelt
powder and faced lines of soldiers, I have held generals a little in
contempt."

"Ah!" said the father.

"There is the evil; so that I have not found one endurable since that
time."

"The fact is," said the Theatin, "that the generals we have had have not
been remarkable."

"Oh!" cried Mazarin, "there was Monsieur le Prince. I have tormented him
thoroughly!"

"He is not much to be pitied: he has acquired sufficient glory, and
sufficient wealth."

"That may be, for Monsieur le Prince; but M. Beaufort, for example--whom
