and able monarch martyred, because, among other benefits projected for
his people, he was of opinion that it was more for their advantage that
the economic service of the state should be supplied by direct taxation
levied by an individual known to all, than by indirect taxation,
raised by an irresponsible and fluctuating assembly. But thanks
to parliamentary patriotism, the people of England were saved from
ship-money, which money the wealthy paid, and only got in its stead
the customs and excise, which the poor mainly supply. Rightly was
King Charles surnamed the Martyr; for he was the holocaust of direct
taxation. Never yet did man lay down his heroic life for so great a
cause: the cause of the Church and the cause of the Poor.

Even now in the quiet times in which we live, when public robbery is out
of fashion and takes the milder title of a commission of inquiry, and
when there is no treason except voting against a Minister, who, though
he may have changed all the policy which you have been elected to
support, expects your vote and confidence all the same; even in this
age of mean passions and petty risks, it is something to step aside from
Palace Yard and instead of listening to a dull debate, where the facts
are only a repetition of the blue books you have already read, and the
fancy an ingenious appeal to the recrimination of Hansard, to enter the
old abbey and listen to an anthem!

This was a favourite habit of Egremont, and though the mean discipline
and sordid arrangements of the ecclesiastical body to which the
guardianship of the beautiful edifice is intrusted, have certainly done
all that could injure and impair the holy genius of the place, it still
was a habit often full of charm and consolation.

There is not perhaps another metropolitan population in the world that
would tolerate such conduct as is pursued to "that great lubber, the
public" by the Dean and Chapter of Westminster, and submit in silence to
be shut out from the only building in the two cities which is worthy of
the name of a cathedral. But the British public will bear anything; they
are so busy in speculating in railroad shares.

When Egremont had entered on his first visit to the Abbey by the south
transept, and beheld the boards and the spikes with which he seemed
to be environed as if the Abbey were in a state of siege; iron gates
shutting him out from the solemn nave and the shadowy aisles; scarcely
a glimpse to be caught of a single window; while on a dirty form, some
noisy vergers sate like ticket-porters or babbled like tapsters at their
ease,--the visions of abbatial perfection in which he had early and
often indulged among the ruins of Marney rose on his outraged sense,
and he was then about hastily to retire from the scene he had so long
purposed to visit, when suddenly the organ burst forth, a celestial
symphony floated in the lofty roof, and voices of plaintive melody
blended with the swelling sounds. He was fixed to the spot.

Perhaps it was some similar feeling that influenced another individual
on the day after the visit of the deputation to Egremont. The sun,
though in his summer heaven he had still a long course, had passed his
meridian by many hours, the service was performing in the choir, and
a few persons entering by the door into that part of the Abbey Church
which is so well known by the name of Poet's Corner, proceeded through
the unseemly stockade which the chapter have erected, and took their
seats. One only, a female, declined to pass, notwithstanding the
officious admonitions of the vergers that she had better move on, but
approaching the iron grating that shut her out from the body of the
church, looked wistfully down the long dim perspective of the beautiful
southern aisle. And thus motionless she remained in contemplation, or
it might be prayer, while the solemn peals of the organ and the sweet
voices of the choir enjoyed that holy liberty for which she sighed, and
seemed to wander at their will in every sacred recess and consecrated
corner.

The sounds--those mystical and thrilling sounds that at once elevate
the soul and touch the heart--ceased, the chaunting of the service
recommenced; the motionless form moved; and as she moved Egremont came
forth from the choir, and his eye was at once caught by the symmetry of
her shape and the picturesque position which she gracefully occupied;
still gazing through that grate, while the light pouring through the
western window, suffused the body of the church with a soft radiance,
just touching the head of the unknown with a kind of halo. Egremont
approached the transept door with a lingering pace, so that the
stranger, who he observed was preparing to leave the church, might
overtake him. As he reached the door, anxious to assure himself that he
was not mistaken, he turned round and his eye at once caught the face
of Sybil. He started, he trembled; she was not two yards distant, she
evidently recognised him; he held open the swinging postern of the Abbey
that she might pass, which she did and then stopped on the outside, and
said "Mr Franklin!"

It was therefore clear that her father had not thought fit, or had
not yet had an opportunity, to communicate to Sybil the interview of
yesterday. Egremont was still Mr Franklin. This was perplexing. Egremont
would like to have been saved the pain and awkwardness of the avowal,
yet it must be made, though not with unnecessary crudeness. And so
at present he only expressed his delight, the unexpected delight he
experienced at their meeting. And then he walked on by her side.

"Indeed," said Sybil, "I can easily imagine you must have been
surprised at seeing me in this great city. But many things, strange and
unforeseen, have happened to us since you were at Mowedale. You know, of
course you with your pursuits must know, that the People have at length
resolved to summon their own parliament in Westminster. The people of
Mowbray had to send up two delegates to the Convention, and they chose
my father for one of them. For so great is their confidence in him none
other would content them."

"He must have made a great sacrifice in coming?" said Egremont.

"Oh! what are sacrifices in such a cause!" said Sybil. "Yes; he made
great sacrifices," she continued earnestly; "great sacrifices, and I am
proud of them. Our home, which was a happy home, is gone; he has quitted
the Traffords to whom we were knit by many, many ties," and her voice
faltered--"and for whom, I know well he would have perilled his life.
And now we are parted," said Sybil, with a sigh, "perhaps for ever. They
offered to receive me under their roof," she continued, with emotion.
"Had I needed shelter there was another roof which has long awaited me:
but I could not leave my father at such a moment. He appealed to me: and
I am here. All I desire, all I live for, is to soothe and support him
in his great struggle; and I should die content if the People were only
free, and a Gerard had freed them."

Egremont mused: he must disclose all, yet how embarrassing to enter
into such explanations in a public thoroughfare! Should he bid her after
a-while farewell, and then make his confession in writing? Should he at
once accompany her home, and there offer his perplexing explanations? Or
should he acknowledge his interview of yesterday with Gerard, and then
leave the rest to the natural consequences of that acknowledgment when
Sybil met her father! Thus pondering, Egremont and Sybil, quitting the
court of the Abbey, entered Abingdon Street.

"Let me walk home with you," said Egremont, as Sybil seemed to intimate
her intention here to separate.

"My father is not there," said Sybil; "but I will not fail to tell him
that I have met his old companion."

"Would he had been as frank!" thought Egremont. And must he quit her in
this way. Never! "You must indeed let me attend you!" he said aloud.

"It is not far," said Sybil. "We live almost in the Precinct--in an
old house with some kind old people, the brother of one of the nuns of
Mowbray. The nearest way to it is straight along this street, but that
is too bustling for me. I have discovered," she added with a smile, "a
more tranquil path." And guided by her they turned up College Street.

"And how long have you been in London?"

"A fortnight. 'Tis a great prison. How strange it is that, in a vast
city like this, one can scarcely walk alone?"

"You want Harold," said Egremont. "How is that most faithful of
friends?"

"Poor Harold! To part with him too was a pang."

"I fear your hours must be heavy," said Egremont.

"Oh! no," said Sybil, "there is so much at stake; so much to hear
the moment my father returns. I take so much interest too in their
discussions; and sometimes I go to hear him speak. None of them can
compare with him. It seems to me that it would be impossible to resist
our claims if our rulers only heard them from his lips."

Egremont smiled. "Your Convention is in its bloom, or rather its bud,"
he said; "all is fresh and pure now; but a little while and it will find
the fate of all popular assemblies. You will have factions."

"But why?" said Sybil. "They are the real representatives of the people,
and all that the people want is justice; that Labour should be as much
respected by law and society as Property."

While they thus conversed they passed through several clean, still
streets, that had rather the appearance of streets in a very quiet
country town than of abodes in the greatest city in the world, and
in the vicinity of palaces and parliaments. Rarely was a shop to be
remarked among the neat little tenements, many of them built of curious
old brick, and all of them raised without any regard to symmetry or
proportion. Not the sound of a single wheel was heard; sometimes not a
single individual was visible or stirring. Making a circuitous
course through this tranquil and orderly district, they at last found
themselves in an open place in the centre of which rose a church of
vast proportions, and built of hewn stone in that stately, not to say
ponderous, style which Vanburgh introduced. The area round it, which was
sufficiently ample, was formed by buildings, generally of a very mean
character: the long back premises of a carpenter, the straggling yard
of a hackney-man: sometimes a small, narrow isolated private residence,
like a waterspout in which a rat might reside: sometimes a group of
houses of more pretension. In the extreme corner of this area, which
was dignified by the name of Smith's Square, instead of taking a more
appropriate title from the church of St John which it encircled, was a
large old house, that had been masked at the beginning of the century
with a modern front of pale-coloured bricks, but which still stood in
its courtyard surrounded by its iron railings, withdrawn as it were from
the vulgar gaze like an individual who had known higher fortunes, and
blending with his humility something of the reserve which is prompted by
the memory of vanished greatness.

"This is my home," said Sybil. "It is a still place and suits us well."

Near the house was a narrow passage which was a thoroughfare into the
most populous quarter of the neighbourhood. As Egremont was opening the
gate of the courtyard, Gerard ascended the steps of this passage and
approached them.




Book 4 Chapter 7



When Gerard and Morley quitted the Albany after their visit to Egremont,
they separated, and Stephen, whom we will accompany, proceeded in the
direction of the Temple, in the vicinity of which he himself lodged, and
where he was about to visit a brother journalist, who occupied chambers
in that famous inn of court. As he passed under Temple Bar his eye
caught a portly gentleman stepping out of a public cab with a bundle of
papers in his hand, and immediately disappearing through that well-known
archway which Morley was on the point of reaching. The gentleman
indeed was still in sight, descending the way, when Morley entered, who
observed him drop a letter. Morley hailed him, but in vain; and fearing
the stranger might disappear in one of the many inextricable courts, and
so lose his letter, he ran forward, picked up the paper, and then pushed
on to the person who dropped it, calling out so frequently that the
stranger at length began to suspect that he himself might be the object
of the salute, and stopped and looked round. Morley almost mechanically
glanced at the outside of the letter, the seal of which was broken,
and which was however addressed to a name that immediately fixed his
interest. The direction was to "Baptist Hatton, Esq., Inner Temple."

"This letter is I believe addressed to you, Sir," said Morley, looking
very intently upon the person to whom he spoke--a portly man and a
comely; florid, gentleman-like, but with as little of the expression
which Morley in imagination had associated with that Hatton over whom he
once pondered, as can easily be imagined.

"Sir, I am extremely obliged to you," said the strange gentleman; "the
letter belongs to me, though it is not addressed to me. I must have this
moment dropped it. My name, Sir, is Firebrace--Sir Vavasour Firebrace,
and this letter is addressed to a--a--not exactly my lawyer, but
a gentleman--a professional gentleman--whom I am in the habit of
frequently seeing; daily, I may say. He is employed in a great question
in which I am deeply interested. Sir, I am vastly obliged to you, and I
trust that you are satisfied."

"Oh I perfectly, Sir Vavasour;" and Morley bowed; and going in different
directions, they separated.

"Do you happen to know a lawyer by name Hatton in this Inn?" inquired
Morley of his friend the journalist, when, having transacted their
business, the occasion served.

"No lawyer of that name; but the famous Hatton lives here," was the
reply.

"The famous Hatton! And what is he famous for? You forget I am a
provincial."

"He has made more peers of the realm than our gracious Sovereign," said
the journalist. "And since the reform of parliament the only chance of
a tory becoming a peer is the favour of Baptist Hatton; though who he is
no one knows, and what he is no one can describe."

"You speak in conundrums," said Morley; "I wish I could guess them. Try
to adapt yourself to my somewhat simple capacity."

"In a word, then," said his friend, "if you must have a definition,
Hatton may rank under the genus 'antiquary,' though his species is
more difficult to describe. He is a heraldic antiquary; a discoverer,
inventor, framer, arranger of pedigrees; profound in the mysteries
of genealogies; an authority I believe unrivalled in everything that
concerns the constitution and elements of the House of Lords; consulted
by lawyers, though not professing the law; and startling and alarming
the noblest families in the country by claiming the ancient baronies
which they have often assumed without authority, for obscure pretenders,
many of whom he has succeeded in seating in the parliament of his
country."

"And what part of the country did he come from: do you happen to know?"
inquired Morley, evidently much interested, though he attempted to
conceal his emotion.

"He may be a veritable subject of the kingdom of Cockaigne, for aught I
know," replied his friend. "He has been buried in this inn I believe
for years; for very many before I settled here; and for a long time I
apprehend was sufficiently obscure, though doing they say a great deal
in a small way; but the Mallory case made his fortune about ten years
ago. That was a barony by writ of summons which had been claimed a
century before, and failed. Hatton seated his man, and the precedent
enabled three or four more gentlemen under his auspices to follow that
example. They were Roman Catholics, which probably brought him the
Mallory case, for Hatton is of the old church; better than that, they
were all gentlemen of great estate, and there is no doubt their champion
was well rewarded for his successful service. They say he is very rich.
At present all the business of the country connected with descents flows
into his chambers. Not a pedigree in dispute, not a peerage in
abeyance, which is not submitted to his consideration. I don't know him
personally; but you can now form some idea of his character: and if you
want to claim a peerage," the journalist added laughingly, "he is your
man."

A strong impression was on the mind of Morley that this was his man: he
resolved to inquire of Gerard, whom he should see in the evening, as
to the fact of their Hatton being a Catholic, and if so, to call on the
antiquary on the morrow.

In the meantime we must not forget one who is already making that visit.
Sir Vavasour Firebrace is seated in a spacious library that looks upon
the Thames and the gardens of the Temple. Though piles of parchments
and papers cover the numerous tables, and in many parts intrude upon the
Turkey carpet, an air of order, of comfort, and of taste, pervades the
chamber. The hangings of crimson damask silk blend with the antique
furniture of oak; the upper panes of the windows are tinted by the
brilliant pencil of feudal Germany, while the choice volumes that line
the shelves are clothed in bindings which become their rare contents.
The master of this apartment was a man of ordinary height, inclined to
corpulency, and in the wane of middle life, though his unwrinkled cheek,
his undimmed blue eye, and his brown hair, very apparent, though he wore
a cap of black velvet, did not betray his age, or the midnight studies
by which he had in a great degree acquired that learning for which he
was celebrated. The general expression of his countenance was pleasing,
though dashed with a trait of the sinister. He was seated in an easy
chair, before a kidney table at which he was writing. Near at hand was a
long tall oaken desk, on which were several folio volumes open, and some
manuscripts which denoted that he had recently been engaged with them.
At present Mr Hatton, with his pen still in his hand and himself in a
chamber-robe of the same material as his cap, leant back in his chair,
while he listened to his client, Sir Vavasour. Several most beautiful
black and tan spaniels of the breed of King Charles the Second were
reposing near him on velvet cushions, with a haughty luxuriousness which
would have become the beauties of the merry monarch; and a white Persian
cat with blue eyes and a very long tail, with a visage not altogether
unlike that of its master, was resting with great gravity on the
writing-table, and assisting at the conference.

Sir Vavasour had evidently been delivering himself of a long narrative,
to which Mr Hatton had listened with that imperturbable patience which
characterised him, and which was unquestionably one of the elements
of his success. He never gave up anything, and he never interrupted
anybody. And now in a silvery voice he replied to his visitor:

"What you tell me, Sir Vavasour, is what I foresaw, but which, as my
influence could not affect it, I dismissed from my thoughts. You came
to me for a specific object. I accomplished it. I undertook to ascertain
the rights and revive the claims of the baronets of England. That
was what you required me: I fulfilled your wish. Those rights are
ascertained; those claims are revived. A great majority of the Order
have given in their adhesion to the organized movement. The nation is
acquainted with your demands, accustomed to them, and the monarch once
favourably received them. I can do no more; I do not pretend to make
baronets, still less can I confer on those already made the right to
wear stars and coronets, the dark green dress of Equites aurati, or
white hats with white plumes of feathers. These distinctions, even
if their previous usage were established, must flow from the gracious
permission of the Crown, and no one could expect in an age hostile to
personal distinctions, that any ministry would recommend the sovereign
to a step which with vulgar minds would be odious, and by malignant ones
might be rendered ridiculous."

"Ridiculous!" said Sir Vavasour.

"All the world," said Mr Hatton, "do not take upon these questions the
same enlightened view as ourselves, Sir Vavasour. I never could for
a moment believe that the Sovereign would consent to invest such a
numerous body of men with such privileges."

"But you never expressed this opinion," said Sir Vavasour.

"You never asked for my opinion," said Mr Hatton; "and if I had given
it, you and your friends would not have been influenced by it. The point
was one on which you might with reason hold yourselves as competent
judges as I am. All you asked of me was to make out your case, and
I made it out. I will venture to say a better case never left these
chambers; I do not believe there is a person in the kingdom who could
answer it except myself. They have refused the Order their honours, Sir
Vavasour, but it is some consolation that they have never answered their
case."

"I think it only aggravates the oppression," said Sir Vavasour, shaking
his head; "but cannot you advise any new step, Mr Hatton? After so many
years of suspense, after so much anxiety and such a vast expenditure, it
really is too bad that I and Lady Firebrace should be announced at court
in the same style as our fishmonger, if he happens to be a sheriff."

"I can make a Peer," said Mr Hatton, leaning back in his chair and
playing with his seals, "but I do not pretend to make Baronets. I can
place a coronet with four balls on a man's brow; but a coronet with two
balls is an exercise of the prerogative with which I do not presume to
interfere."

"I mention it in the utmost confidence," said Sir Vavasour in a whisper;
"but Lady Firebrace has a sort of promise that in the event of a change
of government, we shall be in the first batch of peers."

Mr Hatton shook his head with a slight smile of contemptuous
incredulity.

"Sir Robert," he said, "will make no peers; take my word for that. The
whigs and I have so deluged the House of Lords, that you may rely upon
it as a secret of state, that if the tories come in, there will be no
peers made. I know the Queen is sensitively alive to the cheapening of
all honours of late years. If the whigs go out to-morrow, mark me, they
will disappoint all their friends. Their underlings have promised so
many, that treachery is inevitable, and if they deceive some they may
as well deceive all. Perhaps they may distribute a coronet or two among
themselves: and I shall this year make three: and those are the only
additions to the peerage which will occur for many years. You may rely
on that. For the tories will make none, and I have some thoughts of
retiring from business."

It is difficult to express the astonishment, the perplexity, the
agitation, that pervaded the countenance of Sir Vavasour while his
companion thus coolly delivered himself. High hopes extinguished and
excited at the same moment; cherished promises vanishing, mysterious
expectations rising up; revelations of astounding state secrets; chief
ministers voluntarily renouncing their highest means of influence, and
an obscure private individual distributing those distinctions which
sovereigns were obliged to hoard, and to obtain which the first men in
the country were ready to injure their estates and to sacrifice their
honour! At length Sir Vavasour said, "You amaze me Mr Hatton. I could
mention to you twenty members of Boodle's, at least, who believe they
will be made peers the moment the tories come in."

"Not a man of them," said Hatton peremptorily. "Tell me one of their
names, and I will tell you whether they will be made peers."

"Well then there is Mr Tubbe Sweete, a county member, and his son in
parliament too--I know he has a promise."

"I repeat to you, Sir Vavasour, the tories will not make a single peer;
the candidates must come to me; and I ask you what can I do for a Tubbe
Sweete, the son of a Jamaica cooper? Are there any old families among
your twenty members of Brookes'?"

"Why I can hardly say," said Sir Vavasour; "there is Sir Charles
Featherly, an old baronet."

"The founder a lord mayor in James the First's reign. That is not the
sort of old family that I mean," said Mr Hatton.

"Well there is Colonel Cockawhoop," said Sir Vavasour. "The Cockawhoops
are a very good family I have always heard."

"Contractors of Queen Anne: partners with Marlborough and Solomon
Medina; a very good family indeed: but I do not make peers out of good
families, Sir Vavasour; old families are the blocks out of which I cut
my Mercurys."

"But what do you call an old family?" said Sir Vavasour.

"Yours," said Mr Hatton, and he threw a full glance on the countenance
on which the light rested.

"We were in the first batch of baronets," said Sir Vavasour.

"Forget the baronets for a while," said Hatton. "Tell me, what was your
family before James the First?"

"They always lived on their lands," said Sir Vavasour. "I have a room
full of papers that would perhaps tell us something about them. Would
you like to see them?"

"By all means: bring them all here. Not that I want them to inform me
of your rights: I am fully acquainted with them. You would like to be a
peer, sir. Well, you are really Lord Vavasour, but there is a difficulty
in establishing your undoubted right from the single writ of summons
difficulty. I will not trouble you with technicalities, Sir Vavasour:
sufficient that the difficulty is great though perhaps not unmanageable.
But we have no need of management. Your claim on the barony of Lovel
is very good: I could recommend your pursuing it, did not another
more inviting still present itself. In a word, if you wish to be Lord
Bardolf, I will undertake to make you so, before, in all probability,
Sir Robert Peel obtains office; and that I should think would gratify
Lady Firebrace."

"Indeed it would," said Sir Vavasour, "for if it had not been for this
sort of a promise of a peerage made--I speak in great confidence Mr
Hatton--made by Mr Taper, my tenants would have voted for the whigs the
other day at the ----shire election, and the conservative candidate would
have been beaten. Lord Masque had almost arranged it, but Lady Firebrace
would have a written promise from a high quarter, and so it fell to the
ground."

"Well we are independent of all these petty arrangements now," said Mr
Hatton.

"It is very wonderful," said Sir Vavasour, rising from his chair and
speaking as it were to himself. "And what do you think our expenses will
be in this claim?" he inquired.

"Bagatelle!" said Mr Hatton. "Why a dozen years ago I have known men
lay out nearly half a million in land and not get two per cent for their
money, in order to obtain a borough influence which might ultimately
obtain them a spick and span coronet; and now you are going to put one
on your head, which will give you precedence over every peer on the
roll, except three (and I made those), and it will not cost you a paltry
twenty or thirty thousand pounds. Why I know men who would give that for
the precedence alone.--Here!" and he rose and took up some papers from
a table: "Here is a case; a man you know, I dare say; an earl, and of a
decent date as earls go: George the First. The first baron was a Dutch
valet of William the Third. Well I am to terminate an abeyance in his
favour through his mother, and give him one of the baronies of the
Herberts. He buys off the other claimant who is already ennobled with
a larger sum than you will expend on your ancient coronet. Nor is that
all. The other claimant is of French descent and name; came over at
the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. Well, besides the hush money,
my client is to defray all the expense of attempting to transform
the descendant of the silkweaver of Lyons into the heir of a Norman
conqueror. So you see, Sir Vavasour, I am not unreasonable. Pah! I would
sooner gain five thousand pounds by restoring you to your rights, than
fifty thousand in establishing any of these pretenders in their base
assumptions. I must work in my craft, Sir Vavasour, but I love the old
English blood, and have it in my veins."

"I am satisfied, Mr Hatton." said Sir Vavasour: "let no time be lost.
All I regret is, that you did not mention all this to me before; and
then we might have saved a great deal of trouble and expence."

"You never consulted me," said Mr Hatton. "You gave me your
instructions, and I obeyed them. I was sorry to see you in that mind,
for to speak frankly, and I am sure now you will not be offended, my
lord, for such is your real dignity, there is no title in the world for
which I have such a contempt as that of a baronet."

Sir Vavasour winced, but the future was full of glory and the present of
excitement; and he wished Mr Hatton good morning, with a promise that he
would himself bring the papers on the morrow.

Mr Hatton was buried for a few moments in a reverie, during which he
played with the tail of the Persian cat.




Book 4 Chapter 8

We left Sybil and Egremont just at the moment that Gerard arrived at the
very threshold which they had themselves reached.

"Ah! my father," exclaimed Sybil, and then with a faint blush of which
she was perhaps unconscious, she added, as if apprehensive Gerard would
not recall his old companion, "you remember Mr Franklin?"

"This gentleman and myself had the pleasure of meeting yesterday,"
said Gerard embarrassed, while Egremont himself changed colour and was
infinitely confused. Sybil felt surprised that her father should
have met Mr Franklin and not have mentioned a circumstance naturally
interesting to her. Egremont was about to speak when the street-door was
opened. And were they to part again, and no explanation? And was Sybil
to be left with her father, who was evidently in no haste, perhaps
had no great tendency, to give that explanation? Every feeling of an
ingenuous spirit urged Egremont personally to terminate this prolonged
misconception.

"You will permit me, I hope," he said, appealing as much to Gerard as to
his daughter, "to enter with you for a few moments."

It was not possible to resist such a request, yet it was conceded on the
part of Gerard with no cordiality. So they entered the large gloomy
hail of the house, and towards the end of a long passage Gerard opened a
door, and they all went into a spacious melancholy room, situate at the
back of the house, and looking upon a small square plot of dank grass,
in the midst of which rose a very weather-stained Cupid, with one arm
broken, and the other raised in the air with a long shell to its mouth.
It seemed that in old days it might have been a fountain. At the end of
the plot the blind side of a house offered a high wall which had once
been painted in fresco. Though much of the coloured plaster had cracked
and peeled away, and all that remained was stained and faded, still some
traces of the original design might yet be detected: festive wreaths,
the colonnades and perspective of a palace.

The wails of the room itself were waincsotted in pannels of dark-stained
wood; the window-curtains were of coarse green worsted, and encrusted
with dust so ancient and irremovable, that it presented almost a
lava-like appearance; the carpet that had once been bright and showy,
was entirely threadbare, and had become grey with age. There were
several heavy mahogany arm-chairs in the room, a Pembroke table, and an
immense unwieldy sideboard, garnished with a few wine-glasses of a deep
blue colour. Over the lofty uncouth mantel was a portrait of the Marquis
of Granby, which might have been a sign, and opposite to him, over the
sideboard, was a large tawdry-coloured print, by Bunbury, of Ranelagh in
its most festive hour. The general appearance of the room however though
dingy, was not squalid: and what with its spaciousness, its extreme
repose, and the associations raised by such few images as it did
suggest, the impression on the mind of the spectator was far from
unpleasing, partaking indeed of that vague melancholy which springs
from the contemplation of the past, and which at all times softens the
spirit.

Gerard walked to the window and looked at the grass-plot; Sybil seating
herself, invited their guest to follow her example; Egremont, not
without agitation, seemed suddenly to make an effort to collect himself,
and then, in a voice not distinguished by its accustomed clearness,
he said, "I explained yesterday to one who I hope I may still call my
friend, why I assumed a name to which I have no right."

Sybil started a little, slightly stared, but did not speak.

"I should be happy if you also would give me credit, in taking that
step, at least for motives of which I need not be ashamed; even," he
added in a hesitating voice, "even if you deemed my conduct indiscreet."

Their eyes met: astonishment was imprinted on the countenance of Sybil,
but she uttered not a word; and her father, whose back was turned to
them, did not move.

"I was told," continued Egremont, "that an impassable gulf divided the
Rich from the Poor; I was told that the Privileged and the People
formed Two Nations, governed by different laws, influenced by different
manners, with no thoughts or sympathies in common; with an innate
inability of mutual comprehension. I believed that if this were indeed
the case, the ruin of our common country was at hand; I would have
endeavoured, feebly perchance, but not without zeal, to resist such a
catastrophe; I possessed a station which entailed on me some portion of
its responsibility: to obtain that knowledge which could alone qualify
