neither, when that accident happened, would he have left the ship until
she had been stove to pieces, especially when the tide was making;
wherefore, by this time, I do suppose, he has been tried by a
court-martial, and executed for his cowardice and misconduct."

I could not help smiling at the description of my uncle's ladder, by
which he proposed to climb to the attention of the board of admiralty;
and, though I knew the world too well to confide in such dependence
myself, I would not discourage him with doubts, but asked if he had no
friend in London, who would advance a small sum of money to enable him
to appear as he ought, and make a small present to the under secretary,
who might possibly dispatch his business the sooner on that account. He
scratched his head, and after some recollection, replied, "Why, yes, I
believe Daniel Whipcord, the ship-chandler in Wapping, would not
refuse me such a small matter. I know I can have what credit I want for
lodging, liquor, and clothes; but as to money, I won't be positive.
Had honest Block been living, I should not have been at loss." I was
heartily sorry to find a worthy man so destitute of friends, when he had
such need of them, and looked upon my own situation as less miserable
than his, because I was better acquainted with the selfishness and
roguery of mankind, consequently less liable to disappointment and
imposition.






CHAPTER XLII

He takes his passage in a cutter for Deal--we are accosted by a Priest,
who proves to be a Scotchman--his profession on friendship--he
is affronted by the Lieutenant, who afterwards appeases him by
submission--my uncle embarks--I am introduced by a Priest to a Capuchin,
in whose company I set out for Paris--the character of my fellow
traveller--on adventure on the road--I am shocked at his behaviour

When our repast was ended, we walked down to the harbour, where we
found a cutter that was to sail for Deal in the evening, and Mr. Bowling
agreed for his passage. In the meantime, we sauntered about the town
to satisfy our curiosity, our conversation turning on the subject of my
designs, which were not as yet fixed: neither can it be supposed that my
mind was at ease, when I found myself reduced almost to extreme poverty,
in the midst of foreigners, among whom I had not one acquaintance to
advise or befriend me. My uncle was sensible of my forlorn condition,
and pressed me to accompany him to England, where he did not doubt of
finding some sort of provision for me; but besides the other reasons I
had for avoiding that kingdom, I looked upon it, at this time, as the
worst country in the universe for a poor honest man to live in; and
therefore determined to remain in France, at all events.

I was confirmed in this resolution by a reverend priest, who, passing by
at this time, and overhearing us speak English, accosted us in the same
language, telling us he was our countryman, and wishing it might be in
his power to do us any service. We thanked this grave person for his
courteous offer, and invited him to drink a glass with us, which he did
not think proper to refuse, and we went altogether into a tavern of
his recommending. After having drunk to our healths in a bumper of good
Burgundy, he began to inquire into our situation, particularly the
place of our nativity, which we no sooner named than he started up, and,
wringing our hands with great fervour, shed a flood of tears, crying,
"I come from the same part of the country! perhaps you are my own
relations." I was on my guard against his caresses, which I suspected
very much, when I remembered the adventure of the money-dropper; but,
without any appearance of diffidence, observed, that, as he was born
in that part of the country, he must certainly know our families, which
(howsoever mean our present appearance might be) were none of the most
obscure or inconsiderable. Then I discovered our names, to which I
found he was no stranger; he had known my grandfather personally; and,
notwithstanding an absence of fifty years from Scotland, recounted so
many particulars of the families in the neighbourhood, that my scruples
were entirely removed, and I thought myself happy in his acquaintance.
In the course of our conversation, I disclosed my condition without
reserve, and displayed my talents to such advantage, that the old father
looked upon me with admiration, and assured me, that, if I stayed in
France, and listened to reason, I could not fail of making my fortune,
to which he would contribute all in his power.

My uncle began to be jealous of the Priest's insinuation, and very
abruptly declared, that if ever I should renounce my religion, he would
break off all connection and correspondence with me; for it was his
opinion, that no honest man would swerve from his principles in which he
was bred, whether Turkish, Protestant, or Roman. The father, affronted
at this declaration, with great vehemence began a long discourse,
setting forth the danger of obstinacy, and shutting one's eyes
against the light. He said, that ignorance would be no plea towards
justification, when we had opportunities of being better informed;
and, that, if the minds of people had not been open to conviction, the
Christian religion could not have been propagated in the world, and we
should now be in a state of Pagan darkness and barbarity: he endeavoured
to prove, by some texts of Scripture and many quotations from the
Fathers, that the Pope was the successor of St. Peter, and vicar of
Jesus Christ; that the church of Rome was the true, holy, catholic
church; and that the Protestant faith was an impious heresy and damnable
schism, by which many millions of souls would suffer everlasting
perdition. When he had finished his sermon, which I thought he
pronounced with more zeal than discretion, he addressed himself to
my uncle, desired to know his objections to what had been said. The
lieutenant, whose attention had been wholly engrossed by his own
affairs, took the pipe out of his mouth, and replied, "As for me,
friend, d'ye see, I have no objection to what you say; it may be either
truth or false, for what I know; I meddle with nobody's affairs but my
own; the gunner to his linstock, and the steersman to the helm, as the
saying is. I trust to no creed but the compass, and do unto every man
as I would be done by; so that I defy the Pope, the Devil, and the
Pretender; and hope to be saved as well as another." This association
of persons gave great offence to the friar, who protested, in a mighty
passion, that if Mr. Bowling had not been his countryman, he would have
caused him to be imprisoned for his insolence; I ventured to disapprove
of my uncle's rashness, and appeased the old gentleman, by assuring him
there was no offence intended by my kinsman, who, by this time sensible
of his error, shook the injured party by the hand, and asked pardon for
the freedom he had taken. Matters being amicably compromised, he invited
us to come and see him in the afternoon at the convent to which he
belonged, and took his leave for the present; when my uncle recommended
it strongly to me to persevere in the religion of my forefathers,
whatever advantages might propose to myself by a change, which could not
fail of disgracing myself, and dishonouring my family. I assured him no
consideration would induce me to forfeit his friendship and good opinion
on that score; at which assurance he discovered great satisfaction, and
put me in mind of dinner, which we immediately bespoke, and when it was
ready, ate together.

I imagined my acquaintance with the Scottish priest if properly managed,
might turn out to my advantage, and therefore resolved to cultivate
it as much as I could. With this view we visited him at his convent,
according to his invitation, where he treated us with wine and
sweetmeats, and showed us everything that was remarkable in the
monastery. Having been thus entertained, we took our leave, though not
before I had promised to see him next day, and the time fixed for my
uncle's embarking being come, I accompanied him to the harbour, and saw
him on board. We parted not without tears, after we had embraced and
wished one another all manner of prosperity: and he entreated me to
write to him often, directing to Lieutenant Bowling, at the sign of the
Union Flag, near the Hermitage, London.

I returned to the house in which we had met, where I passed the night
in a very solitary manner, reflecting on the severity of my fate, and
endeavouring to project some likely scheme of life for the future; but
my invention failed me; I saw nothing but insurmountable difficulties in
my way, and was ready to despair at the miserable prospect! That I might
not, however, neglect any probable reason, I got up in the morning, and
went directly to the father, whose advice and assistance I implored. He
received me very kindly, and gave me to understand, that there was one
way of life in which a person of my talents could not fail of making a
great figure. I guessed his meaning, and told him, once for all, I was
fully determined against any alteration in point of religion; therefore
if his proposal regarded the church, he might save himself the trouble
of explaining it. He shook his head and sighed, saying, "Ah! son, son,
what a glorious prospect is here spoiled by your stubborn prejudice!
Suffer yourself to be persuaded by reason, and consult your temporal
welfare, as well as the concerns of your eternal soul. I can, by my
interest procure your admission as a noviciate to this convent, where I
will superintend and direct you with a truly paternal affection." Then
he launched out into the praises of a monastic life, which no noise
disturbs, no cares molest, and no danger invades--where the heart
is weaned from carnal attachments, the grosser appetite subdued and
chastised, and the soul wafted to divine regions of philosophy and
truth, on the wing of studious contemplation. But his eloquence was lost
upon me, whom two considerations enabled to withstand his temptation;
namely, my promise to my uncle, and my aversion to an ecclesiastical
life; for as to the difference of religion, I looked upon it as a thing
of too small moment to come in competition with a man's fortune. Finding
me immovable on this head, he told me, he was more sorry than offended
at my noncompliance, and still ready to employ his good offices in
my behalf. "The same erroneous maxims," said he, "that obstruct your
promotion in the church, will infallibly prevent your advancement in the
army; but, if you can brook the condition of a servant, I am acquainted
with some people of rank at Versailles, to whom I can give you letters
of recommendation, that you may be entertained by some one of them in
quality of maitre d'hotel; and I do not doubt that your qualifications
will soon entitle you to a better provision." I embraced his offer with
great eagerness, and he appointed me to come back in the afternoon,
when he would not only give me letters, but likewise introduce me to
a capuchin of his acquaintance, who intended to set out for Paris next
morning in whose company I might travel, without being at the expense
of one livre during the whole journey. This piece of good news gave me
infinite pleasure; I acknowledged my obligation to the benevolent father
in the most grateful expressions; and he performed his promise to a
tittle, in delivering the letters, and making me acquainted with the
capuchin, with whom I departed next morning by break of day.

It was not long before I discovered my fellow traveller to be a merry
facetious fellow, who, notwithstanding his profession and appearance of
mortification, loved good eating and drinking better than his rosary,
and paid more adoration to a pretty girl than to the Virgin Mary, or St.
Genevieve. He was a thick brawny young man, with red eyebrows, a hook
nose, a face covered with freckles; and his name was Frere Balthazar.
His order did not permit him to wear linen, so that, having little
occasion to undress himself, he was none of the cleanliest animals in
the world; and his constitution was naturally so strongly scented that
I always thought it convenient to keep to the windward of him in our
march. As he was perfectly well known on the road, we fared sumptuously
without any cost, and the fatigue of our journey was much alleviated by
the good humour of my companion, who sang an infinite number of catches
on the subjects of love and wine. We took up our lodging the first night
at a peasant's house not far from Abbeville, where we were entertained
with an excellent ragout, cooked by our landlord's daughters, one
of whom was very handsome. After having eaten heartily and drank a
sufficient quantity of small wine, we were conducted to a barn, where we
found a couple of carpets spread upon clean straw for our reception.
We had not lain in this situation above half-an-hour, when we heard
somebody knock softly at the door, upon which Balthazar got up, and
let in our host's two daughters, who wanted to have some private
conversation with him in the dark. When they had whispered together some
time, the capuchin came to me, and asked if I was insensible to love,
and so hard-hearted as to refuse a share of my bed to a pretty maid who
had a tendre for me? I must own to my shame, that I suffered myself to
be overcome by my passion, and with great eagerness seized the occasion,
when I understood that the amiable Nanette was to be my bedfellow. In
vain did my reason suggest the respect that I owed to my dear mistress
Narcissa; the idea of that lovely charmer rather increased than allayed
the ferment of my spirits; and the young paysanne had no reason to
complain of my remembrance. Early in the morning, the kind creatures
left us to our repose, which lasted till eight o'clock when we got up,
and were treated at breakfast with chocolate and l'eau-de-vie by our
paramours, of whom we took a tender leave, after my companion had
confessed and given them absolution.

While we proceeded on our journey, the conversation turned upon the
night's adventure, being introduced by the capuchin, who asked me how I
liked my lodging; I declared my satisfaction, and talked in rapture of
the agreeable Nanette, at which he shook his head, and smiling said, she
was a morceau pour la bonne bouche. "I never valued myself," continued
he, "upon anything so much as the conquest of Nanette; and, vanity
apart, I have been pretty fortunate in my amours." This information
shocked me not a little, as I was well convinced of his intimacy with
her sister; and though I did not care to tax him with downright
incest, I professed my astonishment at his last night's choice, when, I
supposed, the other was at his devotion. To this hint he answered that,
besides his natural complaisance to the sex, he had another reason to
distribute his favours equally between them, namely, to preserve peace
in the family, which could not otherwise be maintained; that, moreover,
Nanette had conceived an affection for me, and he loved her too well
to balk her inclination; more especially, when he had an opportunity of
obliging his friend at the same time. I thanked him for this instance
of his friendship, though I was extremely disgusted at his want of
delicacy, and cursed the occasion that threw me in his way. Libertine as
I was, I could not bear to see a man behave so wide of the character he
assumed. I looked upon him as a person of very little worth or honesty,
and should even have kept a wary eye upon my pocket, if I had thought he
could have had any temptation to steal. But I could not conceive the use
of money to a capuchin, who is obliged, by the rules of his order, to
appear like a beggar, and enjoy all other necessaries of life gratis;
besides, my fellow traveller seemed to be of a complexion too careless
and sanguine to give me any apprehension on that score; so that I
proceeded with great confidence, in expectation of being soon at my
journey's end.






CHAPTER XLIII

We lodge at a House near Amiens, where I am robbed by the Capuchin, who
escapes while I am asleep--I go to Noyons in search of him, but
without Success--make my Condition known to several People, but find
no Relief--grow desperate--find a Company of Soldiers--Enlist in the
Regiment of Picardy--we are ordered into Germany--I find the Fatigues of
the March almost intolerable--Quarrel with my Comrade in a dispute about
Politics--he challenges me to the Field--wounds and disarms me

The third night of our pilgrimage we passed at a house near Amiens,
where being unknown, we supped upon indifferent fare and sour wine, and
were fain to be in a garret upon an old mattress, which, I believe had
been in the possession of ten thousand myriads of fleas time out of
mind. We did not invade their territory with impunity; in less than
a minute we were attacked by stings innumerable, in spite of which,
however, I fell fast asleep, being excessively fatigued with our day's
march, and did not wake till nine next morning, when, seeing myself
alone, I started up in a terrible fright, and, examining my pockets,
found my presaging fear too true! My companion had made free with my
cash, and left me to seek my way to Paris by myself! I ran down stairs
immediately; and, with a look full of grief and amazement, inquired for
the mendicant, who, they gave me to understand, had set out four hours
before, after having told them I was a little indisposed, and desired I
might not be disturbed, but be informed when I should wake, that he had
taken the road to Noyons, where he would wait for my coming, at the Coq
d'Or. I spoke not a word, but with a heavy heart directed my course to
that place, at which I arrived in the afternoon, fainting with weariness
and hunger; but learned to my utter confusion, that no such person had
been there! It was happy for me that I had a good deal of resentment
in my constitution, which animated me on such occasions against the
villainy of mankind, and enabled me to bear misfortunes, otherwise
intolerable. Boiling with indignation, I discovered to the host my
deplorable condition, and inveighed with great bitterness against the
treachery of Balthazar; at which he shrugged up his shoulders, and
with a peculiar grimace on his countenance, said, he was sorry for my
misfortune, but there was no remedy like patience. At that instant some
guests arrived, to whom he hastened to offer his service, leaving me
mortified at his indifference, and fully persuaded that an innkeeper is
the same sordid animal all the world over.

While I stood in the porch forlorn and undetermined, venting
ejaculations of curses against the thief who had robbed me, and the old
priest who recommended him to my friendship, a young gentleman richly
dressed, attended by a valet de chambre and two servants in livery,
arrived at the inn. I thought I perceived a great deal of sweetness and
good-nature in his countenance; therefore he had no sooner alighted than
I accosted him, and, in a few words, explained my situation: he listened
with great politeness, and, when I made an end of my story, said, "Well,
monsieur, what would you have me to do?" I was effectually abashed
at this interrogation, which, I believe, no man of common sense or
generosity could make, and made no other compliment than a low bow:
he returned the compliment still lower, and tripped into an apartment,
while the landlord let me know that my standing there to interrupt
company gave offence, and might do him infinite prejudice. He had no
occasion to repeat his insinuation; I moved from the place immediately,
and was so much transported with grief, anger, and disdain, that a
torrent of blood gushed from my nostrils. In this ecstacy, I quitted
Noyons, and betook myself to the fields, where I wandered about like one
distracted, till my spirits were quite exhausted, and I was obliged to
throw myself down at the root of a tree, to rest my wearied limbs. Here
my rage forsook me: I began to feel the importunate cravings of nature,
and relapsed into silent sorrow and melancholy reflection. I revolved
all the crimes I had been guilty of and found them too few and venial,
that I could not comprehend the justice of that Providence, which, after
having exposed me to so much wretchedness and danger, left me a prey
to famine at last in a foreign country, where I had not one friend or
acquaintance to close my eyes, and do the last offices of humanity to my
miserable carcass. A thousand times I wished myself a bear, that I might
retreat to woods and deserts, far from the inhospitable haunts of man,
where I could live by my own talents, independent of treacherous friends
and supercilious scorn.

As I lay in this manner, groaning over my hapless fate, I heard the
sound of a violin, and raising my head, perceived a company of men and
women dancing on the grass at some distance from me. I looked upon this
to be a favourable season for distress to attract compassion, when every
selfish thought is banished, and the heart dilated with mirth and social
joy; wherefore I got up, and approached those happy people, whom I soon
discovered to be a party of soldiers, with their wives and children,
unbending and diverting themselves at this rate, after the fatigue of
a march. I had never before seen such a parcel of scarecrows together,
neither could I reconcile their meagre and gaunt looks, their squalid
and ragged attire, and every other external symptom of extreme woe, with
this appearance of festivity. I saluted them, however, and was received
with great politeness; after which they formed a ring, and danced around
me. This jollity had a wonderful effect upon my spirits. I was infected
with their gaiety, and in spite of my dismal situation, forgot my cares,
and joined in their extravagance. When we had recreated ourselves a good
while at this diversion, the ladies spread their manteaus on the ground,
upon which they emptied their knapsacks of some onions, coarse bread,
and a few flasks of poor wine: being invited to a share of the banquet,
I sat down with the rest, and, in the whole course of my life, never
made a more comfortable meal. When our repast was ended, we got up
again to dance, and, now that I found myself refreshed I behaved to the
admiration of everybody; I was loaded with a thousand compliments and
professions of friendship: the men commended my person and agility, and
the women were loud in the praise of my bonne grace; the sergeant in
particular expressed so much regard for me, and described the pleasures
of a soldier's life to me with so much art, that I began to listen to
his proposal of enlisting me in the service; and the more I considered
my own condition, the more I was convinced of the necessity I was under
to come to a speedy determination.

Having, therefore, maturely weighed the circumstances pro and con I
signified my consent, and was admitted into the regiment of Picardy,
said to be the oldest corps in Europe. The company to which this
commander belonged was quartered at a village not far off, whither we
marched next day, and I was presented to my captain, who seemed very
well pleased with my appearance, gave me a crown to drink, and ordered
me to be accommodated with clothes, arms, and accoutrements. Then I sold
my livery suit, purchased linen, and, as I was at great pains to learn
the exercise, in a very short time became a complete soldier.

It was not long before we received orders to join several more
regiments, and march with all expedition into Germany, in order to
reinforce Mareschal Duc de Noailles, who was then encamped with his army
on the side of the river Mayne, to watch the motions of the English,
Hanoverians, Austrians, and Hessians, under the command of the Earl of
Stair. We began our march accordingly, and then I became acquainted with
that part of a soldier's life to which I had been hitherto a stranger.
It is impossible to describe the hunger and thirst I sustained, and the
fatigue I underwent in a march of so many hundred miles; during which, I
was so much chafed with the heat and motion of my limbs, that in a very
short time the inside of my thighs and legs were deprived of skin, and I
proceeded in the utmost torture. This misfortune I owed to the plumpness
of my constitution, which I cursed, and envied the withered condition
of my comrades, whose bodies could not spare juice enough to supply a
common issue, and were indeed proof against all manner of friction. The
continual pain I felt made me fretful, and my peevishness was increased
by the mortification of my pride in seeing those miserable wretches,
whom a hard gale of wind would have scattered through the air like
chaff, bear those toils with alacrity under which I was ready to sink.

One day, while we enjoyed a halt, and the soldiers with their wives had
gone out to dance, according to custom, my comrade stayed at home
with me on pretence of friendship, and insulted me with his pity and
consolation! He told me that, though I was young and tender at present,
I should soon be seasoned to the service; and he did not doubt but I
should have the honour to contribute in some measure to the glory of
the king. "Have courage, therefore, my child," said he, "and pray to the
good God, that you may be as happy as I am, who have had the honour of
serving Louis the Great, and of receiving many wounds, in helping to
establish his glory." When I looked upon the contemptible object that
pronounced these words, I was amazed at the infatuation that possessed
him; and could not help expressing my astonishment at the absurdity of
a rational who thinks himself highly honoured, in being permitted to
encounter abject poverty, oppression, famine, disease, mutilation, and
evident death merely to gratify the vicious ambition of a prince, by
whom his sufferings were disregarded, and his name utterly unknown. I
observed that, if his situation were the consequence of compulsion, I
would praise his patience and fortitude in bearing his lot: if he had
taken up arms in defence of his injured country, he was to be applauded
for his patriotism: or if he had fled to this way of life as a refuge
from a greater evil, he was justifiable in his own conscience (though
I could have no notion of misery more extreme than he suffered); but
to put his condition on the footing of conducing to the glory of his
prince, was no more than professing himself a desperate slave, who
voluntarily underwent the utmost wretchedness and peril, and
committed the most flagrant crimes, to soothe the barbarous pride of a
fellow-creature, his superior in nothing but the power he derived
from the submission of such wretches as him. The soldier was very much
affronted at the liberty I took with his king, which, he said, nothing
but my ignorance could excuse: he affirmed that the characters of
princes were sacred, and ought not to be profaned by the censure
of their subjects, who were bound by their allegiance to obey their
commands, of what nature soever, without scruple or repining; and
advised me to correct the rebellious principles I had imbibed among the
English, who, for their insolence to their kings, were notorious all
over the world, even to a proverb.

In vindication of my countrymen, I repeated all the arguments commonly
used to prove that every man has a natural right to liberty; that
allegiance and protection are reciprocal; that, when the mutual tie is
broken by the tyranny of the king, he is accountable to the people for
his breach of contract, and subject to the penalties of the law; and
that those insurrections of the English, which are branded with the
name of rebellion by the slaves of arbitrary power, were no other than
glorious efforts to rescue that independence which was their birthright,
from the ravenous claws of usurping ambition. The Frenchman, provoked at
the little deference I paid to the kingly name, lost all patience, and
reproached me in such a manner that my temper forsook me, I clenched my
fist, with an intention to give him a hearty box on the ear. Perceiving
my design, he started back and demanded a parley; upon which I checked
my indignation, and he gave me to understand that a Frenchman never
forgave a blow; therefore, if I were not weary of my life, I would do
well to spare him that mortification, and do him the honour of measuring
his sword with mine, like a gentleman. I took his advice and followed
him to a field hard by, where indeed I was ashamed at the pitiful figure
of my antagonist, who was a poor little shivering creature, decrepit
with age, and blind of one eye. But I soon found the folly of judging
from appearances; being at the second pass wounded in the sword hand,
and immediately disarmed with such a jerk, that I thought the joint
was dislocated. I was no less confounded than enraged at this event,
especially as my adversary did not bear his success with all the
moderation that might have been expected; for he insisted upon my asking
pardon for affronting his king and him. This proposal I would by no
means comply with, but told him, it was a mean condescension, which no
gentleman in his circumstances ought to propose, nor any in my situation
ought to perform; and that, if he persisted in his ungenerous demand,
I would in my turn claim satisfaction with my musket, when we should be
more upon a par than with the sword, of which he seemed so much master.






CHAPTER XLIV

In order to be revenged, I learn the Science of Defence--we join
Mareschal Duc de Noailles, are engaged with the Allies of Dettingen, and
put to flight--the behaviour of the French soldiers on that occasion--I
industriously seek another combat with the old Gascon, and vanquish him
in my turn--our regiment is put into Winter Quarters at Rheims, where
I find my friend Strap--our Recognition--he supplies me with Money, and
procures my Discharge--we take a trip to Paris; from whence, by the way
of Flanders, we set out for London; where we safely arrive

He was disconcerted at this declaration, to which he made no reply, but
repaired to the dancers, among whom he recounted his victory with many
exaggerations and gasconades; while I, taking up my sword, went to my
quarters, and examined my wound, which I found was of no consequence.
The same day an Irish drummer, having heard of my misfortune, visited
me, and after having condoled me on the chance of war, gave me to
understand, that he was master of the sword, and would in a very short
time instruct me so thoroughly in that noble science, that I should be
able to chastise the old Gascon for his insolent boasting at my expense.
This friendly office he proffered on pretence of the regard he had for
his countrymen; but I afterwards learned the true motive was no other
than a jealousy he entertained of a correspondence between the Frenchman
and his wife, which he did not think proper to resent in person. Be this
as it will, I accepted his offer and practised his lessons with such
application, that I soon believed myself a match for my conqueror.
In the meantime we continued our march, and arrived at the Camp
of Mareschal Noailles the night before the battle at Dettingen:
notwithstanding the fatigue we had undergone, our regiment was one of
those that were ordered next day to cross the river, under the command
of the Duc de Grammont, to take possession of a narrow defile, through
which the allies must of necessity have passed at a great disadvantage,
or remain where they were, and perish for want of provision, if they
would not condescend to surrender at discretion. How they suffered
themselves to be pent up in this manner it is not my province to relate;
I shall only observe that, when we had taken possession of our ground, I
heard an old officer in conversation with another express a surprise at
the conduct of Lord Stair, who had the reputation of a good general. But
it seems, at this time, that nobleman was overruled, and only acted in
an inferior character; so that no part of the blame could be imputed
to him, who declared his disapprobation of the step, in consequence of
which the whole army was in the utmost danger; but Providence or destiny
acted miracles in their behalf, by disposing the Duc de Grammont to quit
his advantageous post, pass the defile, and attack the English, who were
drawn up in order of battle on the plain, and who handled us so roughly
that, after having lost a great number of men, we turned our backs
without ceremony, and fled with such precipitation that many hundreds
perished in the river through pure fear and confusion: for the enemy
were so generous that they did not pursue us one inch of ground; and,
if our consternation would have permitted, we might have retreated with
great order and deliberation. But, notwithstanding the royal clemency
of the king of Great Britain, who headed the allies in person, and, no
doubt, put a stop to the carnage, our loss amounted to five thousand
men, among whom were many officers of distinction. Our miscarriage
opened a passage for the foe to Haynau, whither they immediately
marched, leaving their sick and wounded to the care of the French, who
next day took possession of the field of battle, buried the dead, and
treated the living with humanity.

This circumstance was a great consolation to us, who thence took
occasion to claim the victory; and the genius of the French nation never
appeared more conspicuous than now, in the rhodomontades they uttered
on the subject of their generosity and courage. Every man (by his own
account) performed feats that eclipsed all the heroes of antiquity.
One compared himself to a lion retiring at leisure from his cowardly
pursuers, who keep at a wary distance, and gall him with their darts.
Another likened himself to a bear that retreats with his face to the
enemy, who dare not assail him; and the third assumed the character of a
desperate stag, that turns upon the hounds and keeps them at bay. There
was not a private soldier engaged who had not by the prowess of his
single arm demolished a whole platoon, or put a squadron of horse to
flight; and, among others, the meagre Gascon extolled his exploits above
those of Hercules or Charlemagne. As I still retained my resentment for
the disgrace I suffered in my last rencontre with him, and, now that I
the thought myself qualified, longed for an opportunity to retrieve my
honour, I magnified the valour of the English with all the hyperboles I
could imagine, and described the pusillanimity of the French in the same
style, comparing them to hares flying before greyhounds, or mice pursued
by cats; and passed an ironical compliment on the speed he exerted
in his flight, which, considering his age and infirmities I said was
surprising. He was stung to the quick by this sarcasm, and, with an air
of threatening disdain, bade me know myself better, and remember the
correction I had already received from him for my insolence; for he
might not always be in the humour of sparing a wretch who abused his
goodness. To this inuendo I made no reply but by a kick on the breech,
which overturned him in an instant. He started up with wonderful
agility, and, drawing his sword, attacked me with great fury. Several
people interposed, but, when he informed them of its being an affair of
honour, they retired, and left us to decide the battle by ourselves.
I sustained his onset with little damage, having only received a small
scratch on my right shoulder, and, seeing his breath and vigour almost
exhausted, assaulted him in my turn, closed with him, and wrested his
sword out of his hand in the struggle. Having thus acquired the victory,
I desired him to beg his life; to which demand he made no answer, but
shrugged up his shoulders to his ears, expanded his hands, elevated
the skin on his forehead and eyebrows, and depressed the corners of his
mouth in such a manner, that I could scarce refrain from laughing aloud
at his grotesque appearance. That I might, however, mortify his vanity,
which triumphed without bounds over my misfortune, I thrust his sword up
to the hilt in something (it was not a tansy), that lay smoking on the
plain, and joined the rest of the soldiers with an air of tranquillity
and indifference.

There was nothing more of moment attempted by either of the armies
during the remaining part of the campaign, which being ended, the
English marched back to the Netherlands; part of our army was detached
to French Flanders, and our regiment ordered into winter quarters in
Champagne. It was the fate of the grenadier company, to which I now
belonged, to lie at Rheims, where I found myself in the utmost want
of everything, my pay, which amounted to five sols a day, far from
supplying me with necessaries, being scarce sufficient to procure a
wretched subsistence to keep soul and body together; so that I was,
by hunger and hard duty, brought down to the meagre condition of my
fellow-soldiers, and my linen reduced from three tolerable shirts to
two pair of sleeves and necks, the bodies having been long ago converted
into spatterdaches; and after all, I was better provided than any
private man in the regiment. In this urgency of my affairs, I wrote to
my uncle in England, though my hopes from that quarter were not at all
