mean liberty and a recovered throne, and who could wonder at the joy
that even the faintest gleam of light afforded to one whose captivity
had lasted longer than Cicely's young life?--and then once more there
was an alternation of feeling at the last moment, when Cicely, dressed
in her best, came to receive instructions.

"I ken not, I ken not," said Mary, speaking the Scottish tongue, to
which she recurred in her moments of deepest feeling, "I ought not to
let it go.  I ought to tell the noble Prince to have naught to do with
a being like me.  'Tis not only the jettatura wherewith the Queen
Mother used to reproach me.  Men need but bear me good will, and misery
overtakes them.  Death is the best that befalls them!  The gentle
husband of my girlhood--then the frantic Chastelar, my poor, poor good
Davie, Darnley, Bothwell, Geordie Douglas, young Willie, and again
Norfolk, and the noble and knightly Don John!  One spark of love and
devotion to the wretched Mary, and all is over with them! Give me back
that paper, child, and warn Babington against ever dreaming of aid to a
wretch like me.  I will perish alone!  It is enough!  I will drag down
no more generous spirits in the whirlpool around me."

"Madam! madam!" exclaimed De Preaux the almoner, who was standing,
"this is not like your noble self.  Have you endured so much to be
fainthearted when the end is near, and you are made a smooth and
polished instrument, welded in the fire, for the triumph of the Church
over her enemies?"

"Ah, Father!" said the Queen, "how should not my heart fail me when I
think of the many high spirits who have fallen for my sake?  Ay, and
when I look out on yonder peaceful vales and happy homesteads, and
think of them ravaged by those furious Spaniards and Italians, whom my
brother of Anjou himself called very fiends!"

"Fiends are the tools of Divine wrath," returned Preaux.  "Look at the
profaned sanctuaries and outraged convents on which these proud English
have waxen fat, and say whether a heavy retribution be not due to them."

"Ah, father!  I may be weak, but I never loved persecution.  King
Francis and I were dragged to behold the executions at Amboise.  That
was enough for us.  His gentle spirit never recovered it, and I--I see
their contorted visages and forms still in my restless nights; and if
the Spanish dogs should deal with England as with Haarlem or Antwerp,
and all through me!--Oh! I should be happier dying within these walls!"

"Nay, madam, as Queen you would have the reins in your own hand: you
could exercise what wholesome severity or well-tempered leniency you
chose," urged the almoner; "it were ill requiting the favour of the
saints who have opened this door to you at last to turn aside now in
terror at the phantasy that long weariness of spirit hath conjured up
before you."

So Mary rallied herself, and in five minutes more was as eager in
giving her directions to Cicely and to the Curlls as though her heart
had not recently failed her.

Cis was to go forth with her chaperons, not by any means enjoying the
message to Babington, and yet unable to help being very glad to escape
for ever so short a time from the dull prison apartments. There might
be no great faith in her powers of diplomacy, but as it was probable
that Babington would have more opportunity of conversing with her than
with the Curlls, she was charged to attend heedfully to whatever he
might say.

Sir Ralf's son-in-law, Mr. Somer, was sent to escort the trio to the
hall at the hour of noon; and there, pacing the ample chamber, while
the board at the upper end was being laid, were Sir Ralf Sadler and his
guest Mr. Babington.  Antony was dressed in green velvet slashed with
primrose satin, setting off his good mien to the greatest advantage,
and he came up with suppressed but rapturous eagerness, bowing low to
Mrs. Curll and the secretary, but falling on his knee to kiss the hand
of the dark-browed girl.  Her recent courtly training made her much
less rustically awkward than she would have been a few months before,
but she was extremely stiff, and held her head as though her ruff were
buckram, as she began her lesson.  "Sir, I am greatly beholden to you
for this token, but if it be not sent with the knowledge and consent of
my honoured father and mother I may not accept of it."

"Alas! that you will say so, fair mistress," said Antony, but he was
probably prepared for this rejection, for he did not seem utterly
overwhelmed by it.

"The young lady exercises a wise discretion," said Sir Ralf Sadler to
Mrs. Curll. "If I had known that mine old friend Mr. Talbot of
Bridgefield was unfavourable to the suit, I would not have harboured
the young spark, but when he brought my Lady Countess's commendation, I
thought all was well."

Barbara Curll had her cue, namely, to occupy Sir Ralf so as to leave
the young people to themselves, so she drew him off to tell him in
confidence a long and not particularly veracious story of the
objections of the Talbots to Antony Babington; whilst her husband
engaged the attention of Mr. Somer, and there was a space in which, as
Antony took back the watch, he was able to inquire "Was the egg-shell
opened?"

"Ay," said Cis, blushing furiously and against her will, "the egg was
sucked and replenished."

"Take consolation," said Antony, and as some one came near them, "Duty
and discretion shall, I trust, both be satisfied when I next sun myself
in the light of those lovely eyes."  Then, as the coast became more
clear, "You are about shortly to move.  Chartley is preparing for you."

"So we are told."

"There are others preparing," said Antony, bending over her, holding
her hand, and apparently making love to her with all his might. "Tell
me, lady, who hath charge of the Queen's buttery?  Is it faithful old
Halbert as at Sheffield?"

"It is," replied Cis.

"Then let him look well at the bottom of each barrel of beer supplied
for the use of her household.  There is an honest man, a brewer, at
Burton, whom Paulett will employ, who will provide that letters be sent
to and fro.  Gifford and Langston, who are both of these parts, know
him well."  Cis started at the name.  "Do you trust Langston then?" she
asked.

"Wholly!  Why, he is the keenest and ablest of all.  Have you not seen
him and had speech with him in many strange shapes?  He can change his
voice, and whine like any beggar wife."

"Yea," said Cis, "but the Queen and Sir Andrew doubted a little if he
meant not threats last time we met."

"All put on--excellent dissembling to beguile the keepers.  He told me
all," said Antony, "and how he had to scare thee and change tone
suddenly.  Why, he it is who laid this same egg, and will receive it.
There is a sworn band, as you know already, who will let her know our
plans, and be at her commands through that means.  Then, when we have
done service approaching to be worthy of her, then it may be that I
shall have earned at least a look or sign."

"Alas! sir," said Cicely, "how can I give you false hopes?"  For her
honest heart burnt to tell the poor fellow that she would in case of
his success be farther removed from him than ever.

"What would be false now shall be true then.  I will wring love from
thee by my deeds for her whom we both alike love, and then wilt thou be
mine own, my true Bride!"

By this time other guests had arrived, and the dinner was ready.
Babington was, in deference to the Countess, allowed to sit next to his
lady-love.  She found he had been at Sheffield, and had visited
Bridgefield, vainly endeavouring to obtain sanction to his addresses
from her adopted parents.  He saw how her eyes brightened and heard how
her voice quivered with eagerness to hear of what still seemed home to
her, and he was pleased to feel himself gratifying her by telling her
how Mrs. Talbot looked, and how Brown Dumpling had been turned out in
the Park, and Mr. Talbot had taken a new horse, which Ned had insisted
on calling "Fulvius," from its colour, for Ned was such a scholar that
he was to be sent to study at Cambridge.  Then he would have wandered
off to little Lady Arbell's being put under Master Sniggius's tuition,
but Cicely would bring him back to Bridgefield, and to Ned's brothers.

No, the boasted expedition to Spain had not begun yet.  Sir Francis
Drake was lingering about Plymouth, digging a ditch, it was said, to
bring water from Dartmoor.  He would never get license to attack King
Philip on his own shores.  The Queen knew better than to give it.
Humfrey and Diccon would get no better sport than robbing a ship or two
on the way to the Netherlands.  Antony, for his part, could not see
that piracy on the high seas was fit work for a gentleman.

"A gentleman loves to serve his queen and country in all places," said
Cicely.

"Ah!" said Antony, with a long breath, as though making a discovery,
"sits the wind in that quarter?"

"Antony," exclaimed she, in her eagerness calling him by the familiar
name of childhood, "you are in error.  I declare most solemnly that it
is quite another matter that stands in your way."

"And you will not tell me wherefore you are thus cruel?"

"I cannot, sir.  You will understand in time that what you call cruelty
is true kindness."

This was the gist of the interview.  All the rest only repeated it in
one form or another; and when Cis returned, it was with a saddened
heart, for she could not but perceive that Antony was well-nigh crazed,
not so much with love of her, as with the contemplation of the wrongs
of the Church and the Queen, whom he regarded with equally passionate
devotion, and with burning zeal and indignation to avenge their
sufferings, and restore them to their pristine glory.  He did, indeed,
love her, as he professed to have done from infancy, but as if she were
to be his own personal portion of the reward.  Indeed there was
magnanimity enough in the youth almost to lose the individual hope in
the dazzle of the great victory for which he was willing to devote his
own life and happiness in the true spirit of a crusader.  Cicely did
not fully or consciously realise all this, but she had such a glimpse
of it as to give her a guilty feeling in concealing from him the whole
truth, which would have shown how fallacious were the hopes that her
mother did not scruple, for her own purposes, to encourage.  Poor
Cicely! she had not had royal training enough to look on all subjects
as simply pawns on the monarch's chess-board; and she was so evidently
unhappy over Babington's courtship, and so little disposed to enjoy her
first feminine triumph, that the Queen declared that Nature had
designed her for the convent she had so narrowly missed; and, valuable
as was the intelligence she had brought, she was never trusted with the
contents of the correspondence.  On the removal of Mary to Chartley the
barrel with the false bottom came into use, but the secretaries Nau and
Curll alone knew in full what was there conveyed.  Little more was said
to Cicely of Babington.

However, it was a relief when, before the end of this summer, Cicely
heard of his marriage to a young lady selected by the Earl.  She hoped
it would make him forget his dangerous inclination to herself; but yet
there was a little lurking vanity which believed that it had been
rather a marriage for property's than for love's sake.




CHAPTER XXIV.

A LIONESS AT BAY.


It was in the middle of the summer of 1586 that Humfrey and his young
brother Richard, in broad grass hats and long feathers, found
themselves again in London, Diccon looking considerably taller and
leaner than when he went away.  For when, after many months' delay, the
naval expedition had taken place, he had been laid low with fever
during the attack on Florida by Sir Francis Drake's little fleet; and
the return to England had been only just in time to save his life.
Though Humfrey had set forth merely as a lieutenant, he had returned in
command of a vessel, and stood in high repute for good discipline,
readiness of resource, and personal exploits.  His ship had, however,
suffered so severely as to be scarcely seaworthy when the fleet arrived
in Plymouth harbour; and Sir Francis, finding it necessary to put her
into dock and dismiss her crew, had chosen the young Captain Talbot to
ride to London with his despatches to her Majesty.

The commission might well delight the brothers, who were burning to
hear of home, and to know how it fared with Cicely, having been
absolutely without intelligence ever since they had sailed from
Plymouth in January, since which they had plundered the Spaniard both
at home and in the West Indies, but had had no letters.

They rode post into London, taking their last change of horses at
Kensington, on a fine June evening, when the sun was mounting high upon
the steeple of St. Paul's, and speeding through the fields in hopes of
being able to reach the Strand in time for supper at Lord Shrewsbury's
mansion, which, even in the absence of my Lord, was always a harbour
for all of the name of Talbot.  Nor, indeed, was it safe to be out
after dark, for the neighbourhood of the city was full of roisterers of
all sorts, if not of highwaymen and cutpurses, who might come in
numbers too large even for the two young gentlemen and the two
servants, who remained out of the four volunteers from Bridgefield.

They were just passing Westminster where the Abbey, Hall, and St.
Stephen's Chapel, and their precincts, stood up in their venerable but
unstained beauty among the fields and fine trees, and some of the
Westminster boys, flat-capped, gowned, and yellow-stockinged, ran out
with the cry that always flattered Diccon, not to say Humfrey, though
he tried to be superior to it, "Mariners! mariners from the Western
Main!  Hurrah for gallant Drake!  Down with the Don!"  For the tokens
of the sea, in the form of clothes and weapons, were well known and
highly esteemed.

Two or three gentlemen who were walking along the road turned and
looked up, and the young sailors recognised in a moment a home face.
There was an exclamation on either side of "Antony Babington!" and
"Humfrey Talbot!" and a ready clasp of the hand in right of old
companionship.

"Welcome home!" exclaimed Antony.  "Is all well with you?"

"Royally well," returned Humfrey.  "Know'st thou aught of our father
and mother?"

"All was well with them when last I heard," said Antony.

"And Cis--my sister I mean?" said Diccon, putting, in his
unconsciousness, the very question Humfrey was burning to ask.

"She is still with the Queen of Scots, at Chartley," replied Babington.

"Chartley, where is that?  It is a new place for her captivity."

"'Tis a house of my Lord of Essex, not far from Lichfield," returned
Antony.  "They sent her thither this spring, after they had well-nigh
slain her with the damp and wretched lodgings they provided at Tutbury."

"Who?  Not our Cis?" asked Diccon.

"Nay," said Antony, "it hurt not her vigorous youth--but I meant the
long-suffering princess."

"Hath Sir Ralf Sadler still the charge of her?" inquired Humfrey.

"No, indeed.  He was too gentle a jailer for the Council.  They have
given her Sir Amias Paulett, a mere Puritan and Leicestrian, who is as
hard as the nether millstone, and well-nigh as dull," said Babington,
with a little significant chuckle, which perhaps alarmed one of his
companions, a small slight man with a slight halt, clad in black like a
lawyer.  "Mr. Babington," he said, "pardon me for interrupting you, but
we shall make Mr. Gage tarry supper for us."

"Nay, Mr. Langston," said Babington, who was in high spirits, "these
are kinsmen of your own, sons of Mr. Richard Talbot of Bridgefield, to
whom you have often told me you were akin."

Mr. Langston was thus compelled to come forward, shake hands with the
young travellers, welcome them home, and desire to be commended to
their worthy parents; and Babington, in the exuberance of his welcome,
named his other two companions--Mr. Tichborne, a fine, handsome,
graceful, and somewhat melancholy young man; Captain Fortescue, a
bearded moustached bravo, in the height of the fashion, a long plume in
his Spanish hat, and his short gray cloak glittering with silver lace.
Humfrey returned their salute, but was as glad as they evidently were
when they got Babington away with them, and left the brothers to pursue
their way, after inviting them to come and see him at his lodgings as
early as possible.

"It is before supper," said Diccon, sagely, "or I should say Master
Antony had been acquainted with some good canary."

"More likely he is uplifted with some fancy of his own.  It may be only
with the meeting of me after our encounter," said Humfrey.  "He is a
brave fellow and kindly, but never did craft so want ballast as does
that pate of his!"

"Humfrey," said his brother, riding nearer to him, "did he not call
that fellow in black, Langston?"

"Ay, Cuthbert Langston.  I have heard of him.  No good comrade for his
weak brain."

"Humfrey, it is so, though father would not credit me.  I knew his halt
and his eye--just like the venomous little snake that was the death, of
poor Foster.  He is the same with the witch woman Tibbott, ay, and with
her with the beads and bracelets, who beset Cis and me at Buxton."

Young Diccon had proved himself on the voyage to have an unerring eye
for recognition, and his brother gave a low whistle.  "I fear me then
Master Antony may be running himself into trouble."

"See, they turn in mounting the steps to the upper fence of yonder
house with the deep carved balcony.  Another has joined them!  I like
not his looks.  He is like one of those hardened cavaliers from the
Netherlands."

"Ay! who seem to have left pity and conscience behind them there," said
Humfrey, looking anxiously up at the fine old gabled house with its
projecting timbered front, and doubting inwardly whether it would be
wise to act on his old playfellow's invitation, yet with an almost sick
longing to know on what terms the youth stood with Cicely.

In another quarter of an hour they were at the gateway of Shrewsbury
House, where the porter proved to be one of the Sheffield retainers,
and admitted them joyfully.  My Lord Earl was in Yorkshire, he said,
but my Lord and Lady Talbot were at home, and would be fain to see
them, and there too was Master William Cavendish.

They were handed on into the courtyard, where servants ran to take
their horses, and as the news ran that Master Richard's sons had
arrived from the Indies, Will Cavendish came running down the hall
steps to embrace them in his glee, while Lord Talbot came to the door
of the hall to welcome them.  These great London houses, which had not
quite lost their names of hostels or inns, did really serve as free
lodgings to all members of the family who might visit town, and above
all such travellers as these, bringing news of grand national
achievements.

Very soon after Gilbert's accession to the heirship, quarrels had begun
between his wife and her mother the Countess.

Lord Talbot had much of his father's stately grace, and his wife was a
finished lady.  They heartily welcomed the two lads who had grown from
boys to men.  My lady smilingly excused the riding-gear, and as soon as
the dust of travel had been removed they were seated at the board, and
called on to tell of the gallant deeds in which they had taken part,
whilst they heard in exchange of Lord Leicester's doings in the
Netherlands, and the splendid exploits of the Stanleys at Zutphen.

Lord Talbot promised to take Humfrey to Richmond the next day, to be
presented to her Majesty, so soon as he should be equipped, so as not
to lose his character of mariner, but still not to affront her
sensibilities by aught of uncourtly or unstudied in his apparel.

They confirmed what Babington had said of the Queen of Scots' changes
of residence and of keepers.  As to Cicely, they had been lately so
little at Sheffield that they had almost forgotten her, but they
thought that if she were still at Chartley, there could be no objection
to her brothers having an interview with her on their way home, if they
chose to go out of their road for it.

Humfrey mentioned his meeting with Babington in Westminster, and Lord
Talbot made some inquiries as to his companions, adding that there were
strange stories and suspicions afloat, and that he feared that the
young man was disaffected and was consorting with Popish recusants.
Diccon's tongue was on the alert with his observation, but at a sign
from his brother, who did not wish to get Babington into trouble, he
was silent.  Cavendish, however, laughed and said he was for ever in
Mr. Secretary's house, and even had a room there.

Very early the next morning the body servant of his Lordship was in
attendance with a barber and the fashionable tailor of the Court, and
in good time Humfrey and Diccon were arrayed in such garments as were
judged to suit the Queen's taste, and to become the character of young
mariners from the West.  Humfrey had a dainty jewel of shell-work from
the spoils of Carthagena, entrusted to him by Drake to present to the
Queen as a foretaste of what was to come.  Lady Talbot greatly admired
its novelty and beauty, and thought the Queen would be enchanted with
it, giving him a pretty little perfumed box to present it in.

Lord Talbot, well pleased to introduce his spirited young cousins, took
them in his boat to Richmond, which they reached just as the evening
coolness came on.  They were told that her Majesty was walking in the
Park, and thither, so soon as the ruffs had been adjusted and the fresh
Spanish gloves drawn on, they resorted.

The Queen walked freely there without guards--without even swords being
worn by the gentlemen in attendance--loving as she did to display her
confidence in her people.  No precautions were taken, but they were
allowed to gather together on the greensward to watch her, as among the
beautiful shady trees she paced along.

The eyes of the two youths were eagerly directed towards her, as they
followed Lord Talbot.  Was she not indeed the cynosure of all the
realm?  Did she not hold the heart of every loyal Englishman by an
invisible rein?  Was not her favour their dream and their reward? She
was a little in advance of her suite.  Her hair, of that light sandy
tint which is slow to whiten, was built up in curls under a rich stiff
coif, covered with silver lace, and lifted high at the temples.  From
this a light gauze veil hung round her shoulders and over her splendid
standing ruff, which stood up like the erected neck ornaments of some
birds, opening in front, and showing the lesser ruff or frill
encircling her throat, and terminating a lace tucker within her low-cut
boddice.  Rich necklaces, the jewel of the Garter, and a whole
constellation of brilliants, decorated her bosom, and the boddice of
her blue satin dress and its sleeves were laced with seed pearls.  The
waist, a very slender one, was encircled with a gold cord and heavy
tassels, the farthingale spread out its magnificent proportions, and a
richly embroidered white satin petticoat showed itself in front, but
did not conceal the active, well-shaped feet. There was something
extraordinarily majestic in her whole bearing, especially the poise of
her head, which made the spectator never perceive how small her stature
actually was.  Her face and complexion, too, were of the cast on which
time is slow to make an impression, being always pale and fair, with
keen and delicately-cut features; so that her admirers had quite as
much reason to be dazzled as when she was half her present age; nay,
perhaps more, for the habit of command had added to the regality which
really was her principal beauty.  Sir Christopher Hatton, with a
handsome but very small face at the top of a very tall and portly
frame, dressed in the extreme of foppery, came behind her, and then a
bevy of ladies and gentlemen.

As the Talbots approached, she was moving slowly on, unusually erect
even for her, and her face composed to severe majesty, like that of a
judge, the tawny eyes with a strange gleam in them fixed on some one in
the throng on the grass near at hand.  Lord Talbot advanced with a bow
so low that he swept the ground with his plume, and while the two
youths followed his example, Diccon's quick eye noted that she glanced
for one rapid second at their weapons, then continued her steady gaze,
never withdrawing it even to receive Lord Talbot's salutation as he
knelt before her, though she said, "We greet you well, my good lord.
Are not we well guarded, not having one man with a sword near me?"

"Here are three good swords, madam," returned he, "mine own, and those
of my two young kinsmen, whom I venture to present to your Majesty, as
they bear greetings from your trusty servant, Sir Francis Drake."

While he spoke there had been a by-play unperceived by him, or by the
somewhat slow and tardy Hatton.  A touch from Diccon had made Humfrey
follow the direction of the Queen's eye, and they saw it was fixed on a
figure in a loose cloak strangely resembling that which they had seen
on the stair of the house Babington had entered.  They also saw a
certain quailing and cowering of the form, and a scowl on the shaggy
red eyebrows, and Irish features, and Humfrey at once edged himself so
as to come between the fellow and the Queen, though he was ready to
expect a pistol shot in his back, but better thus, was his thought,
than that it should strike her,--and both laid their hands on their
swords.

"How now!" said Hatton, "young men, you are over prompt.  Her Majesty
needs no swords.  You are out of rank.  Fall in and do your obeisance."

Something in the Queen's relaxed gaze told Humfrey that the peril was
over, and that he might kneel as Talbot named him, explaining his
lineage as Elizabeth always wished to have done.  A sort of tremor
passed over her, but she instantly recalled her attention.  "From
Drake!" she said, in her clear, somewhat shrill voice.  "So, young
gentleman, you have been with the pirate who outruns our orders, and
fills our brother of Spain with malice such that he would have our life
by fair or foul means."

"That shall he never do while your Grace has English watch-dogs to
guard you," returned Talbot.

"The Talbot is a trusty hound by water or by land," said Elizabeth,
surveying the goodly proportion of the elder brother.  "Whelps of a
good litter, though yonder lad be somewhat long and lean.  Well, and
how fares Sir Francis?  Let him make his will, for the Spaniards one
day will have his blood."

"I have letters and a token from him for your Grace," said Humfrey.

"Come then in," said the Queen.  "We will see it in the bower, and hear
what thou wouldst say."

A bower, or small summer-house, stood at the end of the path, and here
she took her way, seating herself on a kind of rustic throne evidently
intended for her, and there receiving from Humfrey the letter and the
gift, and asking some questions about the voyage; but she seemed
preoccupied and anxious, and did not show the enthusiastic approbation
of her sailors' exploits which the young men expected. After glancing
over it, she bade them carry the letter to Mr. Secretary Walsingham the
next day; nor did she bid the party remain to supper; but as soon as
half a dozen of her gentlemen pensioners, who had been summoned by her
orders, came up, she rose to return to the palace.




CHAPTER XXV.

PAUL'S WALK.


Will Cavendish, who was in training for a statesman, and acted as a
secretary to Sir Francis Walsingham, advised that the letters should be
carried to him at once that same evening, as he would be in attendance
on the Queen the next morning, and she would inquire for them.

The great man's house was not far off, and he walked thither with
Humfrey, who told him what he had seen, and asked whether it ought not
at once to be reported to Walsingham.

Will whistled.  "They are driving it very close," he said.  "Humfrey;
old comrade, thy brains were always more of the order fit to face a
tough breeze than to meddle with Court plots.  Credit me, there is
cause for what amazed thee.  The Queen and her Council know what they
are about.  Risk a little, and put an end to all the plottings for
ever!  That's the word."

"Risk even the Queen's life?"

Will Cavendish looked sapient, and replied, "We of the Council Board
know many a thing that looks passing strange."

Mr. Secretary Walsingham's town house was, like Lord Talbot's, built
round a court, across which Cavendish led the way, with the assured air
of one used to the service, and at home there.  The hall was thronged
with people waiting, but Cavendish passed it, opened a little wicket,
and admitted his friends into a small anteroom, where he bade them
remain, while he announced them to Sir Francis.

He disappeared, shutting a door behind him, and after a moment's
interval another person, with a brown cloak round him, came hastily and
stealthily across to the door.  He had let down the cloak which muffled
his chin, not expecting the presence of any one, and there was a
moment's start as he was conscious of the young men standing there.  He
passed through the door instantly, but not before Humfrey had had time
to recognise in him no other than Cuthbert Langston, almost the last
person he would have looked for at Sir Francis Walsingham's.  Directly
afterwards Cavendish returned.

"Sir Francis could not see Captain Talbot, and prayed him to excuse
him, and send in the letter."

"It can't be helped," said Cavendish, with his youthful airs of
patronage.  "He would gladly have spoken with you when I told him of
you, but that Maude is just come on business that may not tarry.  So
you must e'en entrust your packet to me."

"Maude," repeated Humfrey, "Was that man's name Maude?  I should have
dared be sworn that he was my father's kinsman, Cuthbert Langston."

"Very like," said Will, "I would dare be sworn to nothing concerning
him, but that he is one of the greatest and most useful villains
unhung."

So saying, Will Cavendish disappeared with the letters.  He probably
had had a caution administered to him, for when he returned he was
evidently swelling with the consciousness of a State secret, which he
would not on any account betray, yet of the existence of which he
desired to make his old comrade aware.

Humfrey asked whether he had told Mr. Secretary of the man in Richmond
Park.

"Never fear! he knows it," returned the budding statesman.  "Why, look
you, a man like Sir Francis has ten thousand means of intelligence that
a simple mariner like you would never guess at.  I thought it strange
myself when I came first into business of State, but he hath eyes and
ears everywhere, like the Queen's gown in her picture.  Men of the
Privy Council, you see, must despise none, for the lewdest and meanest
rogues oft prove those who can do the best service, just as the
bandy-legged cur will turn the spit, or unearth the fox when your
gallant hound can do nought but bay outside."

"Is this Maude, or Langston, such a cur?"

Cavendish gave his head a shake that expressed unutterable things,
saying: "Your kinsman, said you?  I trust not on the Talbot side of the
house?"

"No.  On his mother's side.  I wondered the more to see him here as he
got that halt in the Rising of the North, and on the wrong side, and
hath ever been reckoned a concealed Papist."

"Ay, ay.  Dost not see, mine honest Humfrey, that's the very point that
fits him for our purpose?"

"You mean that he is a double traitor and informer."

"We do not use such hard words in the Privy Council Board as you do on
deck, my good friend," said Cavendish.  "We have our secret
intelligencers, you see, all in the Queen's service.  Foul and dirty
work, but you can't dig out a fox without soiling of fingers, and if
there be those that take kindly to the work, why, e'en let them do it."

"Then there is a plot?"

