
"Thank you, monsieur le baron; the musketeers and the Swiss guards we
know we can absolutely rely upon, and I shall be glad to be able to
inform the queen that she can place implicit faith in your regiment.
I need not impress upon you the necessity for our conversation being
regarded by you as absolutely confidential."

Hector, thinking the matter over, had no great difficulty in the end in
arriving at the truth, namely, that his own loyalty was a very secondary
object of interest to the minister, and that his real motive in thus
apparently opening his mind to him had been, not to gather his own
sentiments, but to endeavour to ascertain those of Turenne. From the
talk among his officers he had already learned that the general opinion
was, that although the queen had always entertained a most favourable
opinion of Turenne, and had herself nominated him as marshal and
commander of the forces on the Rhine, Mazarin had assented to the
arrangement because he feared that the army of Italy would probably
follow its commander should the latter take up the quarrel of his
brother, while, on the Rhine with but a few regiments, to all of whom
he was a stranger, under his command, he would be practically powerless,
whatever his sentiments might be with regard to Bouillon.

In the middle of August Hector received an order from Mazarin to take
part with his regiment in a review which the queen intended to hold
at Versailles two days later. At this review the musketeers, the Swiss
guards, the Scottish regiment, and two regiments of the line besides his
own, the queen, the young king, Mazarin, and most of the members of the
court were present. The Poitou regiment acquitted itself admirably,
and its marching, and the steadiness with which it went through its
manoeuvres, were in such strong contrast to that of the other two
infantry regiments, which had both been formed for some years, as to
excite the surprise and admiration of the spectators. After it was over
a mounted officer rode up to Hector and told him that the queen wished
to speak to him. Riding up, he dismounted, and advanced to the queen's
pavilion.

"Monsieur Campbell," the queen said graciously, "I wish to express to
you how well satisfied we are with the efficiency of your regiment, and
the admirable way in which it has gone through its manoeuvres. Never
have I seen these better performed; and this is the more surprising
as it has been but four months raised, and but three months under your
personal command. The cardinal has informed me that he learns that this
is due entirely to your personal exertions, and the care that you have
bestowed upon it. I wish that all my officers showed the same zeal
and diligence. In order to mark my gratification at the conduct of
the regiment, I have requested monsieur le cardinal to order that
two companies of your regiment shall be quartered at the barracks now
occupied by the Scottish regiment, which is to march east tomorrow."

Hector bowed deeply; and, immensely gratified at the praise that his
regiment had received, returned to his place at its head, and marched
back to St. Denis. On their arrival there he informed his men of the
gracious words the queen had been pleased to say about the regiment, and
the great honour bestowed upon them by the quartering of two companies
in Paris. The men broke into loud cheering as he concluded.

Hector then called the officers together. "Gentlemen," he said, "I
have to thank you for the admirable way in which you have seconded my
efforts, and by the aid of which the regiment has just gained the high
commendation of Her Majesty, within so very short a time after it has
been raised. I have been thinking the matter over as I rode back, and I
have decided that where all did so well, it would be invidious to give
to any the sole honour of being thus quartered near the Louvre and
furnishing guards, and to yourselves the pleasure of being in Paris.
Therefore, gentlemen, I shall send, in the first place, the first and
tenth companies. At the end of two weeks the ninth company will take the
place of the tenth; a fortnight later, the second will take the place of
the first, and so in order, so that each company will in turn have its
share in this honourable service."

There was a general murmur of satisfaction. The next morning a formal
order was received that two companies of the Poitou regiment should
march into Paris, and occupy a portion of the barracks which the Scotch
regiment had just vacated.

Hector called up the two companies he had selected.

"Now, men," he said, "you see the advantage that you have gained by
discipline and good conduct. I have no doubt that before granting us the
honour of forming a part of the garrison of Paris, the minister has made
inquiries respecting the conduct of the regiment here, and has doubtless
heard that it has been eminently satisfactory, and that the authorities
and inhabitants have no complaint, of drunkenness or misconduct, against
us. Of misconduct there have been no cases, of drunkenness very few,
and, indeed, for the past month there has not been a single case among
you. I trust that you will remember that while in Paris the credit of
the regiment is in your hands, and that no single case of drunkenness or
brawling in the streets will take place. I feel confident that this
will be so, and I need hardly say that should there be an exception, the
punishment will be vastly more severe than any that has previously been
awarded, and I am sure that any offender will find, in the contempt
with which he will be regarded by his comrades, a still more severe
punishment than any that I can inflict."

That evening Captain de Thiou and the other officers of the two
companies that were to march into Paris the next day dined with Hector;
and after dinner de Thiou rose and said: "Colonel, I have been requested
to express to you, on behalf of the whole of the officers of the
regiment, our deep gratitude for the honours that our regiment has
obtained. These you were good enough yesterday to ascribe partly to us;
but we feel that they are wholly due to yourself. Although some of us
were at first a little inclined to think that the changes made by you
in our work were unnecessary, all now recognize fully how great has been
the benefit, not only to the regiment, but to ourselves. Duties which
were at first considered irksome are now regarded as pleasant. We feel
that, as you said would be the case, we have acquired the respect of
the men, and that it is upon us that they rely, and not upon their
sergeants.

"Our own time passes more pleasantly from being fully occupied, and from
consciousness that we are doing our duty. As to the regiment in general,
the benefit has been enormous. The men seem pleased with the interest
shown in them, as much as with the comfort that they now enjoy, and they
in turn endeavour to satisfy us, both by their attention to drill, by
their bearing and manner, and by their avoidance of giving any cause for
complaint. All this, monsieur, has been your work, and I am sure that we
are all conscious of the difference of the display we made in the park,
and that which we should have shown had it not been for the reforms
which have been introduced by you. We all trust that the day may not be
far distant when we shall be able to prove on the field of battle the
same efficiency that has won us credit upon the parade ground."

"I thank you heartily, Captain de Thiou, for what you have been good
enough to say on your own behalf and that of the officers of the
regiment. I can only say that I have endeavoured to act up to the
teaching of Monsieur de Turenne, and I felt sure that although my
methods might at first seem irksome to some of you, their value would
gradually become appreciated. I am scarcely less pleased at the decrease
in drunkenness, and at the general improvement in the men, than by the
increase of discipline and efficiency."

"Do you mean to come to Paris, colonel?" De Thiou asked presently.

"No; I shall remain here. I shall ride in every day, but my presence
will be more necessary with the regiment than with only two companies.
You as senior officer will be responsible for the general order of the
detachment."

Hector rode in the next day with his men, and after seeing them
comfortably lodged in barracks, returned to St. Denis. A week later
reports reached St. Denis of a strange scene at the court. The haughty
and insolent Duchess of Monthazon, who belonged to the party of the
Importants, had the impertinence to insult the queen grossly in the
gardens of the Tuileries. She had at once been disgraced and ordered
to retire to Rochfield, and the Duke of Beaufort and his friends were
furious at this exercise of Mazarin's authority. The next day Hector
received a message asking him to call at the Hotel de Cleves, the
cardinal's residence. On his presenting himself, he was at once shown
into Mazarin's private apartments.

"Monsieur de Villar," Mazarin said, "I am sorely in need of friends.
You have heard of what has happened, and from the threats that he
has publicly uttered against myself I am convinced that Beaufort will
hesitate at nothing to bring about my ruin. I hear that you are still
with your regiment at St. Denis. I shall be glad if for a time you will
take up your abode at Paris, and will hold yourself in readiness to be
of service to me if there should be occasion. Beaufort is capable of
even attempting my life; he is very unscrupulous, and will hesitate at
nothing. I shall be glad if you will take up your lodging within a short
distance of this, so that I can communicate with you instantly."

"Certainly, your excellency; I will keep half a company always under
arms, so that at the shortest notice they will be in readiness to act
as you may direct. But surely, your excellency, you have the queen's
musketeers close at hand?"

"The queen's musketeers are a body of gallant soldiers, but they
will take their orders only from the queen. They were strongly
anti-cardinalist in the late reign, and I do not suppose that they are
better affected towards myself than they were towards Richelieu. If they
heard that my hotel was attacked they would not move a foot until they
received orders from the queen to do so."

"At any rate, you shall have no reason to complain of delay on our part,
your excellency, and I can assure you of my devotion."

Hector at once went to an auberge but a few hundred yards from the
cardinal's residence. He thought it better to put up there than to take
lodgings, as he could then have his four mounted men with him; and,
riding to St. Denis, he returned the same night with them.

"A horse is always to be saddled," he said to them when they had
dismounted and his orderlies had come up to his room, "and one of you
by turns will always remain here armed and ready to mount without an
instant's delay. The others will put aside their scarves; and one of
you will always be at the cabaret nearest to the Hotel de Vendome, the
residence of the Duke of Beaufort, who is a son of the Duc de Vendome.
At times two of you can be there so as to drink and play cards together,
as the appearance of one sitting too long might attract attention. Your
object is to find out from the conversation of the duke's guards and
servants whether they have any idea that anything unusual is going to
take place. I have reason to believe that there is a plot against the
cardinal, and I am much concerned in defeating it."

When the four Scotch soldiers had retired, Hector said to Paolo:

"Now, Paolo, I place more reliance upon your finding out anything
that is afloat than upon the soldiers. It is not likely that any plans
Beaufort may form will be communicated to his people until the moment
for action, and indeed it is probable that he will rely solely upon his
personal friends. Now I want you to disguise yourself in any way you may
think best, and watch Beaufort's hotel; see who comes in and out, and if
a messenger goes out follow him, see the houses he calls at, and mark
if those who dwell there repair at once to the Hotel de Vendome. If you
perceive that this is the case let me know at once. See if you can get
hold of half a dozen street gamins, and employ them to watch the houses
of all these gentlemen, and especially that of Monsieur Id, captain of
Beaufort's guards, and of the two Messieurs de Campion and the Count de
Beaupuis, who are, I know, among the duke's most intimate friends. There
are scores of these street boys who for a few sous a day would gladly
undertake the work."

"I will do that, master. You can take my word that by tomorrow at noon
the lodging of these four gentlemen will be strictly watched. This is a
business after my own heart."

"In the first place, Paolo, take a note from me to the Hotel de Cleves
and wait for an answer."

The note was a short one. It merely gave the name of the auberge at
which he had taken up his quarters, and added:

If your eminence will be good enough to send me every morning a list of
any visits that you may intend to pay, or any journey that you may make
during the day, it would enable me to regulate my movements accordingly
in order to be always here and ready to carry out any orders that you
may send me from your hotel.

The cardinal's reply was even more brief:

It is well thought of. I shall go nowhere but to the Louvre tomorrow,
and shall probably be there the greater part of the day. Unless you hear
from me to the contrary, you need only remain in between twelve and one.

The next morning Paolo appeared dressed in ragged clothes.

"What is that bundle of papers that you have got?"

"They are lampoons on the cardinal. Nothing so natural as that I should
try and sell them in front of the Hotel de Vendome."

"Nothing could be better, Paolo."

"I have already picked up a dozen gamins, master, sharp little beggars,
who jumped at the idea of being set to watch people. Between them
everyone who goes in or comes out from the hotel will be followed, and
they will, in the first place, find out his name and bring it to me,
after that they will follow him wherever he goes, and from time to time
let me know what he is doing."

Several days passed. The four gentlemen specially named, together
with several others, were frequently at the hotel. There was in this,
however, nothing suspicious, as Hector easily learned that they were
all vassals or close friends of the house of Vendome. On the third day,
however, he heard that at least a dozen of these gentlemen met in twos
or threes at various cabarets near the Duke of Beaufort's, and spent
the greater portion of their time there. Hector at once procured dresses
suitable for gentlemen of the middle class for the troopers, and gave
them instructions to spend the greater portion of their time at the
cabarets at which these gentlemen stopped. Their reports were that they
talked of indifferent subjects, but that they were evidently waiting for
someone, as they invariably turned a glance at the door whenever a fresh
comer entered.

The next day Hector received a note from the cardinal:

I am just starting with the Duke of Orleans for Maisons, where I shall
dine with him.

Two hours later the three troopers who had been out returned almost at
the same minute with the news that the persons they were watching had
all got up suddenly and gone out after a messenger wearing the Beaufort
cognizance had come in and spoken to them. And a few minutes later Paolo
arrived and said that the Duke of Beaufort had gone with the Count of
Beaupuis to the convent of the Capuchins, and that several horses had
been taken there.

Hector thought the matter over. "Certainly," he said to himself, "as the
cardinal's note is dated at nine o'clock, he is now some distance on his
way. As soon as the duke received notice of his having gone, he notified
his friends. It can only be on his way home that they will venture to
attack him; but even if they have that intention they will scarcely do
so if the Duke of Orleans returns with him, unless, indeed, the duke is
himself in the plot, and as none of Paolo's scouts have brought news
of any communications between Beaufort and Orleans, it is hardly likely
that it is so.

"Paolo, do you go down and watch the convent of the Capuchins. If the
Duke of Beaufort remains there with his friend--and he may doubtless be
joined by others--let me know if he rides away. If he does so the attack
may take place anywhere along the road; if he remains, he will doubtless
attack the cardinal as his carriage passes. Should there be more than
one entrance to the convent, put boys to watch them, and bring you news
should the party sally out. I shall be at the barracks. It is there that
you must bring or send me word."

The troopers were ordered to put on their military clothes and saddle
their horses, and a quarter of an hour later Hector rode to the
barracks, followed by them.

"De Thiou," he said, "I want you and the other five officers to have
your horses ready at a moment's notice. I have some sort of idea that
there is a plot on foot against the cardinal, and I want to take a hand
in the matter. I fancy that with you and my five troopers we shall be
strong enough to disconcert the plotters."

Two hours later he received a message from Paolo, saying that the Duke
of Beaufort and three other gentlemen were still at the convent, but
that most of the others had gone to the residence of Henri de Campion in
the Rue St. Honore.

"They mean to attack him just at the end of the journey," Hector said
to himself, "and close to the Hotel de Vendome. Now it only depends
upon whether the Duke of Orleans stays at Maisons or returns with the
cardinal."

He ordered the officers and troopers to mount, and with them took his
post on the road by which the cardinal would return. In half an hour
they saw his carriage approaching. They then moved forward. As the
carriage passed them Hector saluted, and saw to his satisfaction that
the Duke of Orleans was with the cardinal. After the carriage had gone
fifty yards Hector turned, and with his party followed the carriage at
that distance. When within a quarter of a mile of the Rue St. Honore a
horseman came along. He met the carriage, and immediately it passed him
turned and galloped back along the road. Hector felt no doubt that he
was placed there to warn the conspirators to be in readiness if the
Duke of Orleans was not in the carriage, and that there would now be no
attempt. However, he closed up to within thirty yards. As they entered
the Rue St. Honore all was quiet there, and nothing happened until the
cardinal alighted at the Hotel de Cleves. As he did so he looked round,
and beckoned to Hector to follow him.



CHAPTER XIII: THE BATTLES OF FREIBURG


The cardinal did not address Hector until he had entered his private
room, when he turned and said sharply, "What means this, colonel? When
I saw you and your officers on the road I felt sure that you were not
there for nothing, and still more sure when on alighting I found you so
closely following me."

"I was convinced, cardinal, that there was a plot against your life, and
I believe that it was only because the Duke of Orleans returned with you
that it was not carried into effect."

"And possibly because they saw your troop behind the carriage. Now tell
me your reason for supposing that I was in danger."

Hector related the various steps that he had taken.

"Your spies worked better for you than mine did for me," the cardinal
said. "That a dozen or so of Beaufort's friends were for some reason
or other spending their time at the Angel Inn and other cabarets I was
aware, but I have had no word of their proceedings today. You have been
better served, doubtless, because your plans were better laid. I hardly
think that they would have attacked me when Orleans was with me, but
there is no saying; for if Beaufort has daring and insolence enough to
attempt to slay the queen's minister within a quarter of a mile of the
Louvre, he would not trouble greatly whether princes of the blood were
in the carriage or not, especially if he had some reason for believing
that Orleans would not regard the deed with very great disapproval.

"However, whatever his intentions might be, it is clear that the
appearance of your party of twelve armed men decided the question. We
may regard it as certain that the news that I had such an escort was
carried to them by the man who galloped on ahead. I thank you, sir, I
thank you very heartily, not only for my sake, but for that of France. I
will ask you to go across to the Louvre; I will take half a dozen armed
servants with me, but there is little fear that the attempt will be
renewed today. They must be too much disconcerted by the failure of
their plot to make fresh arrangements so speedily. I shall go first
to the Louvre and inform her majesty of what has taken place. You will
remain here for half an hour, and will then leave by the gate at the
back of the house and make a circuit, and enter the palace by the river
gate. The musketeers on guard will stop you, but I will give you a
pass." And he wrote a few lines on paper. "The queen's confidential
servant, Laporte, will be at the door to meet you, and will have
instructions to escort you by corridors where you will be unobserved,
and so to her majesty's private closet. Were you to accompany me,
Beaufort would soon hear of it, and would be shrewd enough to perceive
that your meeting with me was by no means a matter of chance."

Hector followed out his instructions, and on presenting himself at the
palace was at once taken up to the queen's closet. Laporte went in, and
returning immediately requested him to enter. The queen was walking up
and down the room, her face flushed with indignation.

"Her majesty would fain hear from your own lips, monsieur le baron, the
statement that you have made to me."

The queen sat down and listened intently while Hector repeated the
story.

"There can be no doubt about it, cardinal; this keeping of a number of
armed men within call for days, the summons to them to gather in the Rue
St. Honore, while he himself with others took up his post at the convent
of the Capuchins hard by, the moment his spies had discovered that you
had left for Maisons, could but have been for one purpose. But they
shall learn that although a woman, Anne of Austria, Queen of France, is
not to be deprived of her minister and faithful friend without striking
back in return. Monsieur de Villar, you have rendered me a great
service. Is there any boon that you would ask of me? it is granted
beforehand."

"I thank your majesty most humbly," Hector said. "Already I have
received honours far beyond anything I deserve. I had the honour when
thanking your majesty, to hope some day to be able to give proof that
they were not unworthily bestowed, and still hope to do so."

"You have already shown yourself worthy," the queen said, "by the manner
in which you have in so short a time rendered the regiment to which we
appointed you so efficient. However, if there is at present no boon that
we can bestow, then remember that the Queen of France holds herself
your debtor, and that you have my royal word that any boon that you may
hereafter ask for, that is in my power to grant, will be given you.
Take this as a pledge of my promise." And she took off a gold chain
exquisitely worked, and gave it him. He received it kneeling. "Now, sir,
we will keep you here no longer. I have much to say to his excellency. I
trust that you will present yourself at the levee this evening."

"One thing more, colonel," Mazarin added; "I doubt not that some of
Beaufort's people will endeavour to find out how it was that you came to
be behind my carriage. If they do so you might carelessly mention that
you and your officers had ridden out in a party at St. Germain, and that
on your way back you chanced to fall in with my carriage."

At the barracks Hector called the officers together. "Gentlemen," he
said, "I have no doubt that your little ride today has somewhat puzzled
you. I am not at liberty to tell you the reason why I requested you
to ride with me; but it is very probable that you may be asked the
question, and I beg you all to remember that we have been on a little
party of pleasure to St. Germain, and having dined there were on our way
back when we overtook the carriage of the cardinal; and seeing that
he had the Duke of Orleans with him, we reined back and followed him,
deeming that it would not appear respectful were we to gallop past the
