Philip, not catching the last word, and wondering what kind of man that
might be, made answer, 'I am his brother, Madame.'

'_Eh! Monsieur son frere_. Had _Madame sa mere_ a son so old?'

'I am Philip Thistlewood, her husband's son, at your service, Madame,'
said Philip, colouring up to the ears; 'I came with him for he is too
weak to be alone.'

'Great confidence must be reposed in you, sir,' she said, with a not
unflattering surprise. 'But whence are you come? I little looked to see
Monsieur here.'

'We came from Anjou, Madame. We went to La Sablerie,' and he broke off.

'I understand. Ah! let us say no more! It rends the heart;' and again
she wiped away tear. 'And now---'

'We are coming to the Ambassador's to obtain'--he stopped, for
Berenger gave him a touch of peremptory warning, but the lady saved his
embarrassment by exclaiming that she could not let her dear cousin go to
the Ambassador's when he was among his own kindred. Perhaps Monsieur did
not know her; she must present herself as Madame de Selinville, _nee_ de
Ribaumont, a poor cousin of _ce cher Baron_, 'and even a little to you,
_M. le frere_, if you will own me,' and she held out a hand, which he
ought to have kissed, but not knowing how, he only shook it. She further
explained that her brother was at Cracow with Monsieur, now King of
Poland, but that her father lived with her at her hotel, and would be
enchanted to see his dear cousin, only that he, like herself, would be
desolated at the effects of that most miserable of errors. She had
been returning from her Advent retreat at a convent, where she had
been praying for the soul of the late M. de Selinville, when a true
Providence had made her remark the colours of her family. And now,
nothing would serve her, but that this dear Baron should be carried at
once to their hotel, which was much nearer than that of the Ambassador,
and where every comfort should await him. She clasped her hands in
earnest entreaty, and Philip, greatly touched by her kindness and
perceiving that every jolt of the splendid by springless vehicle caused
Berenger's head a shoot of anguish, was almost acceding to her offer,
when he was checked by one of the most imperative of those silent
negatives. Hitherto, Master Thistlewood had been rather proud of his bad
French, and as long as he could be understood, considered trampling on
genders, tenses, and moods as a manful assertion of Englishry, but he
would just now have given a great deal for the command of any language
but a horseboy's, to use to this beautiful gracious personage. '_Merci,
Madame, nous ne fallons pas, nous avons passe notre parole d'aller droit
a l'Ambassadeur's et pas ou else_,' did not sound very right to his
ears; he coloured up to the roots of his hair, and knew that if Berry
had had a smile left in him, poor fellow, he would have smiled now. But
this most charming and polite of ladies never betrayed it, if it were
ever such bad French; she only bowed her head, and said something very
pretty--if only he could make it out--of being the slave of one's word,
and went on persuading. Nor did it make the conversation easier, that
she inquired after Berenger, and mourned over his injuries as if he were
unconscious, while Philip knew, nay, was reminded every instant, that
he was aware of all that was passing, most anxious that as little as
possible should be said, and determined against being taken to her
hotel. So unreasonable a prejudice did this seem to Philip, that had it
not been for Humfrey's words, he would have doubted whether, in spite of
all his bleeding, his brother's brain were not wandering.

However, what with Humfrey without, and Berenger within, the turn to
the Ambassador's hotel was duly taken, and in process of time a hearty
greeting passed between Humfrey and the porter; and by the time the
carriage drew up, half the household were assembled on the steps,
including Sir Francis himself, who had already heard more than
a fortnight back from Lord Walwyn, and had become uneasy at the
non-arrival of his two young guests. On Smithers's appearance, all had
been made ready; and as Berenger, with feeble, tardy movements, made
courteous gestures of thanks to the lady, and alighted form the coach,
he was absolutely received into the dignified arms of the Ambassador.
'Welcome, my poor lad, I am glad to see you here again, though in such
different guise. Your chamber is ready for you, and I have sent my
secretary to see if Maitre Par be at home, so we will, with God's help,
have you better at ease anon.'

Even Philip's fascination by Madame de Selinville could not hold out
against the comfort of hearing English voices all round him, and of
seeing his brother's anxious brow expand, and his hand and eyes return
no constrained thanks. Civilities were exchanged on both sides; the
Ambassador thanked the lady for the assistance she had rendered to his
young friend and guest; she answered with a shade of stiffness, that she
left her kinsman in good hands, and said she should send to inquire
that evening, and her father would call on the morrow; then, as Lady
Walsingham did not ask her in, the black and white coach drove away.

The lady threw herself back in one corner, covered her face, and spoke
no word. Her coach pursued its way through the streets, and turned at
length into another great courtyard, surrounded with buildings, where
she alighted, and stepped across a wide but dirty hall, where ranks
of servants stoop up and bowed as she passed; then she ascended a
wide carved staircase, opened a small private door, and entered a tiny
wainscoted room hardly large enough for her farthingale to turn round
in. 'You, Veronique, come in--only you,' she said, at the door; and a
waiting-woman, who had been in the carriage, obeyed, no longer clad in
the Angevin costume, but in the richer and less characteristic dress of
the ordinary Parisian _femme de chambre_.

'Undo my mantle in haste!' gasped Madame de Selinville. 'O
Veronique--you saw--what destruction!'

'Ah! if my sweet young lady only known how frightful he had become, she
had never sacrificed herself,' sighed Veronique.

'Frightful! What, with the grave blue eyes that seem like the steady
avenging judgment of St. Michael in his triumph in the picture at the
Louvre?' murmured Madame de Selinville; then she added quickly, 'Yes,
yes, it is well. She and you, Veronique, may see him frightful and
welcome. There are other eyes--make haste, girl. There--another
handerchief. Follow me not.'

And Madame de Selinville moved out of the room, past the great state
bedroom and the _salle_ beyond, to another chamber where more servants
waited and rose at her entrance.

'Is any one with my father?'

'No, Madame;' and a page knocking, opened the door and announced,
'Madame la Comtesse.'

The Chevalier, in easy _deshabille_, with a flask of good wine, iced
water, and delicate cakes and _confitures_ before him, a witty and
licentious epigrammatic poem close under his hand, sat lazily enjoying
the luxuries that it had been his daughter's satisfaction to procure for
him ever since her marriage. He sprang up to meet her with a grace
and deference that showed how different a person was the Comtesse de
Selinville from Diane de Ribaumont.

'Ah! _ma belle_, my sweet,' as there was a mutual kissing of hands,
'thou art returned. Had I known thine hour, I had gone down for thy
first embrace. But thou lookest fair, my child; the convent has made
thee lovelier than ever.'

'Father, who think you is here? It is he--the Baron.'

'The Baron? Eh, father!' she cried impetuously. 'Who could it be but
one?'

'My child, you are mistaken! That young hot-head can never be thrusting
himself here again.'

'But he is, father; I brought him into Paris in my coach! I left him at
the Ambassador's.'

'Thou shouldest have brought him here. There will be ten thousand fresh
imbroglios.'

'I could not; he is as immovable as ever, though unable to speak! Oh,
father, he is very ill, he suffers terribly. Oh, Narcisse! Ah! may I
never see him again!'

'But what brings him blundering her again?' exclaimed the Chevalier.
'Speak intelligibly, child! I thought we had guarded against that! He
knows nothing of the survivance.'

'I cannot tell much. He could not open his mouth, and his half-brother,
a big dull English boy, stammered out a few words of shocking French
against his will. But I believe they had heard of _la pauvre petite_ at
La Sablerie, came over for her, and finding the ruin my brother makes
wherever he goes, are returning seeking intelligence and succour for
HIM.'

'That may be,' said the Chevalier, thoughtfully. 'It is well thy brother
is in Poland. I would not see him suffer any more; and we may get him
back to England ere my son learns that he is here.'

'Father, there is a better way! Give him my hand.'

'_Eh quoi_, child; if thou art tired of devotion, there are a thousand
better marriages.'

'No, father, none so good for this family. See, I bring him all--all
that I was sold for. As the price of that, he resigns for ever all his
claims to the ancestral castle--to La Leurre, and above all, that claim
to Nid de Merle as Eustacie's widower, which, should he ever discover
the original contract, will lead to endless warfare.'

'His marriage with Eustacie was annulled. Yet--yet there might be
doubts. There was the protest; and who knows whether they formally
renewed their vows when so much went wrong at Montpipeau. Child, it is
a horrible perplexity. I often could wish we had had no warning, and
the poor things had made off together. We could have cried shame till we
forced out a provision for thy brother; and my poor little Eustacie---'
He had tears in his eyes as he broke off.

Diane made an impatient gesture. 'She would have died of tedium in
England, or broken forth so as to have a true scandal. That is all over,
father, now; weigh my proposal! Nothing else will save my brother from
all that his cruel hand merits! You will win infinite credit at court.
The King loved him more than you thought safe.'

'The King has not a year to live, child, and he has personally offended
the King of Poland. Besides, this youth is heretic.'

'Only by education. Have I not heard you say that he had by an
abjuration. And as to Monsieur's enmity, if it be not forgotten, the
glory of bringing about a conversion would end that at once.'

'Then, daughter, thou shouldst not have let him bury himself among the
English.'

'It was unavoidable, father, and perhaps if he were here he would live
in an untamable state of distrust, whereas we may now win him gradually.
You will go and see him to-morrow, my dear father.'

'I must have time to think of this thy sudden device.'

'Nay, he is in no condition to hear of it at present. I did but speak
now, that you might not regard it as sudden when the fit moment comes.
It is the fixed purpose of my mind. I am no girl now, and I could act
for myself if I would; but as it is for your interest and that of my
brother thus to dispose of me, it is better that you should act for me.'

'Child, headstrong child, thou wilt make no scandal,' said the
Chevalier, looking up at his daughter's handsome head drawn up proudly
with determination.

'Certainly not, sir, if you will act for me.' And Diane sailed away in
her sweeping folds of black brocade.

In a few moments more she was kneeling with hands locked together before
a much-gilded little waxem figure of St. Eustacie with his cross-bearing
stag by his side, which stood in a curtained recess in the alcove where
her stately bed was placed.

'Monseigneur St. Eustache, ten wax candles everyday to your shrine at
Bellaise, so he recovers; ten more if he listen favourably and loves me.
Nay, all--all the Selinville jewels to make you a shrine. All--all, so
he will only let me love him;' and then, while taking up the beads, and
pronouncing the repeated devotions attached to each, her mind darted
back to the day when, as young children, she had played unfairly,
defrauded Landry Osbert, and denied it; how Berenger, though himself
uninjured, had refused to speak to her all that day--how she had hated
him then--how she had thought she had hated him throughout their brief
intercourse in the previous year; how she had played into her brother's
hands; and when she thought to triumph over the man who had scorned her,
found her soul all blank desolation, and light gone out from the earth!
Reckless and weary, she had let herself be united to M. de Selinville,
and in her bridal honours and amusements had tried to crowd out the
sense of dreariness and lose herself in excitement. Then came the
illness and death of her husband, and almost at the same time the
knowledge of Berenger's existence. She sought excitement again that
feverish form of devotion then in vogue at Paris, and which resulted in
the League. She had hitherto stunned herself as it were with penances,
processions, and sermons, for which the host of religious orders then
at Paris had given ample scope; and she was constantly devising new
extravagances. Even at this moment she wore sackcloth beneath her
brocade, and her rosary was of death's heads. She was living on the
outward husk of the Roman Church not penetrating into its living power,
and the phase of religion which fostered Henry III. and the League
offered her no more.

All, all had melted away beneath the sad but steadfast glance of those
two eyes, the only feature still unchanged in the marred, wrecked
countenance. That honest, quiet refusal, that look which came from a
higher atmosphere, had filled her heart with passionate beatings and
aspirations once more, and more consciously than ever. Womanly feeling
for suffering, and a deep longing to compensate to him, and earn his
love, nay wrest it from him by the benefits she would heap upon him,
were all at work; but the primary sense was the longing to rest on the
only perfect truth she had ever known in man, and thus with passionate
ardour she poured forth her entreaties to St. Eustache, a married saint,
who had known love, and could feel for her, and could surely not object
to the affection to which she completely gave way for one whose hand was
now as free as her own.

But St. Eustache was not Diane's only hope. That evening she sent
Veronique to Rene of Milan, the court-perfumer, but also called by the
malicious, _l'empoisonneur de le Reine_, to obtain from him the most
infallible charm and love potion in his whole repertory.




CHAPTER XXVI. THE CHEVALIER'S EXPIATION



                  Next, Sirs, did he marry?
And whom, Sirs, did he marry? One like himself, Though doubtless graced
with many virtues, young, And erring, and in nothing more astray Than in
this marriage.--TAYLOR, EDWIN THE FAIR.


Nothing could be kinder than the Ambassador's family, and Philip found
himself at once at home there, at least in his brother's room, which
was all the world to him. fortunately, Ambroise Pare, the most skillful
surgeon of his day, had stolen a day from his attendance of King
Charles, at St. Germain, to visit his Paris patients, and, though
unwilling to add to the list of cases, when he heard from Walsingham's
secretary who the suffer was, and when injured, he came at once to
afford his aid.

He found, however, that there was little scope for present treatment,
he could only set his chief assistant to watch the patient and to inform
him when the crisis should be nearer; but remarking the uneasy, anxious
expression in Berenger's eyes, he desired to know whether any care
on his mind might be interfering with his recovery. A Huguenot, and
perfectly trustworthy, he was one who Walsingham knew might safely hear
the whole, and after hearing all, he at once returned to his patient,
and leaning over him, said, 'Vex not yourself, sir; your illness is
probably serving you better than health could do.'

Sir Francis thought this quite probable, since Charles was so unwell
and so beset with his mother's creatures that no open audience could
be obtained from him, and Pare, who always had access to him, might act
when no one else could reach him. Meantime the Ambassador rejoiced to
hear of the instinctive caution that had made Berenger silence Philip on
the object of the journey to Paris, since if the hostile family guessed
at the residence of the poor infant, they would have full opportunity
for obliterating all the scanty traces of her. Poor persecuted little
thing! the uncertain hope of her existence seemed really the only thread
that still bound Berenger to life. He had spent eighteen months in
hope deferred, and constant bodily pain; and when the frightful
disappointment met him at La Sablerie, it was not wonder that his heart
and hope seemed buried in the black scorched ruins where all he cared
for had perished. He was scarcely nineteen, but the life before him
seemed full of nothing but one ghastly recollection, and, as he said in
the short sad little letter which he wrote to his grandfather from his
bed, he only desired to live long enough to save Eustacie's child from
being a nameless orphan maintained for charity in a convent, and to see
her safe in Aunt Cecily's care; and then he should be content to have
done with this world for ever.

The thought that no one except himself could save the child, seemed to
give him the resolution to battle for life that often bears the
patient through illness, though now he as suffering more severely and
consciously than ever he had done before; and Lady Walsingham often gave
up hopes of him. He was tenderly cared for by her and her women; but
Philip was the most constant nurse, and his unfailing assiduity and
readiness amazed the household, who had begun by thinking him ungainly,
loutish, and fit for nothing but country sports.

The Chevalier de Ribaumont came daily to inquire; and the first time
he was admitted actually burst into tears at the sight of the swollen
disfigured face, and the long mark on the arm which lay half-uncovered.
Presents of delicacies, ointments, and cooling drinks were frequently
sent from him and from the Countess de Selinville; but Lady Walsingham
distrusted these, and kept her guest strictly to the regimen appointed
by Pare. Now and then, billets would likewise come. The first brought a
vivid crimson into Berenger's face, and both it and all its successors
he instantly tore into the smallest fragments, without letting any one
see them.

On the day of the Carnival, the young men of the household had asked
Master Thistlewood to come out with them and see the procession of the
_Boeuf Gras_; but before it could take place, reports were flying about
that put the city in commotion, caused the Ambassador to forbid all
going out, and made Philip expect another Huguenot massacre. The Duke
of Alencon and the King of Navarre had been detected, it was said, in a
conspiracy for overthrowing the power of the Queen-mother, bringing in
the Huguenots, and securing the crown to Alencon on the King's death.
Down-stairs, the Ambassador and his secretaries sat anxiously striving
to sift the various contradictory reports; up-stairs, Philip and
Lady Walsingham were anxiously watching Berenger in what seemed the
long-expected crisis, and Philip was feeling as if all the French court
were welcome to murder one another so that they would only let Ambroise
Pare come to his brother's relief. And it was impossible even to send!

At last, however, when Ash-Wednesday was half over, there was a quiet
movement, and a small pale man in black was at the bedside, without
Philip's having ever seen his entrance. He looked at his exhausted
patient, and said, 'It is well; I could not have done you any good
before.'

And when he had set Berenger more at ease, he told how great had been
the confusion at St. Germain when the plot had become known to the
Queen-mother. The poor King had been wakened at two o'clock in the
morning, and carried to his litter, when Pare and his old nurse had
tended him. He only said, 'Can they not let me die in peace?' and his
weakness had been so great on arriving, that the surgeon could hardly
have left him for M. de Ribaumont, save by his own desire. 'Yes, sir,'
added Pare, seeing Berenger attending to him, 'we must have you well
quickly; his Majesty knows all about you, and is anxious to see you.'

In spite of these good wishes, the recovery was very slow; for, as the
surgeon had suspected, the want of skill in those who had had the charge
of Berenger at the first had been the cause of much of his protracted
suffering. Pare, the inventor of trephining, was, perhaps, the only
man in Europe who could have dealt with the fracture in the back of
the head, and he likewise extracted the remaining splinters of the jaw,
though at the cost of much severe handling and almost intolerable pain:
but by Easter, Berenger found the good surgeon's encouragement verified,
and himself on the way to a far more effectual cure than he had hitherto
thought possible. Sleep had come back to him, he experienced the luxury
of being free from all pain, he could eat without difficulty; and Pare,
always an enemy to wine, assured him that half the severe headaches
for which he had been almost bled to death, were the consequence of
his living on bread soaked in sack instead of solid food; and he was
forbidden henceforth to inflame his brain with anything stronger than
sherbet. His speech, too, was much improved; he still could not utter
all the consonants perfectly, and could not speak distinctly without
articulating very slowly, but all the discomfort and pain were gone; and
though still very weak, he told Philip that now all his course seemed
clear towards his child, instead of being like a dull, distraught dream.
His plan was to write to have a vessel sent from Weymouth, to lie off
the coast till his signal should be seen from la Motte-Achard, and then
to take in the whole party and the little yearling daughter, whom
he declared he should trust to no one but himself. Lady Walsingham
remonstrated a little at the wonderful plans hatched by the two lads
together, and yet she was too glad to see a beginning of brightening
on his face to make many objections. It was only too sand to think how
likely he was again to be disappointed.

He was dressed, but had not left his room, and was lying on cushions
in the ample window overlooking the garden, while Frances and Elizabeth
Walsingham in charge of their mother tried to amuse him by their
childish airs and sports, when a message was brought that M. le
Chevalier de Ribaumont prayed to be admitted to see him privily.

'What bodes that?' he languidly said.

'Mischief, no doubt,' said Philip Walsingham. 'Send him word that you
are seriously employed.'

'Nay, that could scarce be, when he must have heard the children's
voices,' said Lady Walsingham. 'Come away, little ones.'

The ladies took the hint and vanished, but Philip remained till the
Chevalier had entered, more resplendent than ever, in a brown velvet
suit slashed with green satin, and sparkling with gold lace-a contrast
to the deep mourning habit in which Berenger was dressed. After
inquiries for his health, the Chevalier looked at Philip, and expressed
his desire of speaking with his cousin alone.

'If it be of business,' said Berenger, much on his guard, 'my head is
still weak, and I would wish to have the presence of the Ambassador or
one of his secretaries.'

'This is not so much a matte of business as of family,' said the
Chevalier, still looking so uneasily at Philip that Berenger felt
constrained to advise him to join the young ladies in the garden; but
instead of doing this, the boy paced the corridors like a restless
dog waiting for his master, and no sooner heard the old gentleman
bow himself out than he hurried back again, to find Berenger heated,
panting, agitated as by a sharp encounter.

'Brother, what is it--what has the old rogue done to you?'

'Nothing,' said Berenger, tardily and wearily; and for some minutes he
did not attempt to speak, while Philip devoured his curiosity as best he
might. At last he said, 'He was always beyond me. What think you? Now he
wants me to turn French courtier and marry his daughter.'

'His daughter!' exclaimed Philip, 'that beautiful lady I saw in the
coach?'

A nod of assent.

'I only wish it were I.'

'Philip,' half angrily, 'how can you be such a fool?'

'Of course, I know it can't be,' said Philip sheepishly, but a little
offended. 'But she's the fairest woman my eyes ever beheld.'

'And the falsest.'

'My father says all women are false; only they can't help it, and don't
mean it.'

'Only some do mean it,' said Berenger, dryly.

'Brother!' cried Philip, fiercely, as if ready to break a lance, 'what
right have you to accuse that kindly, lovely dame of falsehood?'

'It skills not going through all,' said Berenger, wearily. 'I know her
of old. She began by passing herself off on me as my wife.'

'And you were not transported?'

'I am not such a gull as you.'

'How very beautiful your wife must have been!' said Philip, with gruff
amazement overpowering his consideration.

'Much you know about it,' returned Berenger, turning his face away.

There was a long silence, first broken by Philip, asking more
cautiously, 'And what did you say to him?'

'I said whatever could show it was most impossible. Even I said the
brother's handwriting was too plain on my face for me to offer myself
to the sister. But it seems all that is to be passed over as an unlucky
mistake. I wish I could guess what the old fellow is aiming at.'

'I am sure the lady looked at you as if she loved you.'

'Simpleton! She looked to see how she could beguile me. Love! They do
nothing for love here, you foolish boy, save _par amour_. If she loved
me, her father was the last person she would have sent me. No, no;
'tis a new stratagem, if I could only seen my way into it. Perhaps Sir
Francis will when he can spend an hour on me.'

Though full of occupation, Sir Francis never failed daily to look
in upon his convalescent guest, and when he heard of the Chevalier's
interview, he took care that Berenger should have full time to consult
him; and, of course, he inquired a good deal more into the particulars
of the proposal than Philip had done. When he learnt that the Chevalier
had offered all the very considerable riches and lands that Diane
enjoyed in right of her late husband as an equivalent for Berenger's
resignation of all claims upon the Nid-de-Merle property, he noted it
on his tables, and desired to know what these claims might be. 'I cannot
tell,' said Berenger. 'You may remember, sir, the parchments with our
contract of marriage had been taken away from Chateau Leurre, and I have
never seen them.'

'Then,' said the Ambassador, 'you may hold it as certain that those
parchments give you some advantage which he hears, since he is willing
to purchase it at so heavy a price. Otherwise he himself would be the
natural heir of those lands.'

'After my child,' said Berenger, hastily.

'Were you on your guard against mentioning your trust in your child's
life?' said Sir Francis.

The long scar turned deeper purple than ever. 'Only so far as that I
said there still be rights I had no power to resign,' said Berenger.
'And then he began to prove to me---what I had no mind to hear' (and his
voice trembled) '---all that I know but too well.'

'Hum! you must not be left alone again to cope with him,' said
Walsingham. 'Did he make any question of the validity of your marriage?'

'No, sir, it was never touched on. I would not let him take her name
into his lips.'

Walsingham considered for some minutes, and then said, 'It is clear,
then, that he believes that the marriage can be sufficiently established
to enable you to disturb him in his possession of some part, at least,
of the Angevin inheritance, or he would not endeavour to purchase your
renunciation of it by the hand of a daughter so richly endowed.'

'I would willingly renounce it if that were all! I never sought it; only
I cannot give up her child's rights.'

'And that you almost declared,' proceeded Walsingham; 'so that the
Chevalier has by his negotiation gathered from you that you have not
given up hope that the infant lives. Do your men know where you believe
she is?'

'My Englishmen know it, of course,' said Berenger; 'but there is no fear
of them. The Chevalier speaks no English, and they scarcely any French;
and, besides, I believe they deem him equally my butcher with his son.
The other fellow I only picked up after I was on my way to Paris, and I
doubt his knowing my purpose.'

'The Chevalier must have had speech with him, though,' said Philip; 'for
it was he who brought word that the old rogue wished to speak with you.'

'It would be well to be quit yourself of the fellow ere leaving Paris,'
said Walsingham.

'Then, sir,' said Berenger, with an anxious voice, 'do you indeed think
I have betrayed aught that can peril the poor little one?'

Sir Francis smiled. 'We do not set lads of your age to cope with old
foxes,' he answered; 'and it seems to me that you used far discretion
in the encounter. The mere belief that the child lives does not show him
where she may be. In effect, it would seem likely to most that the
babe would be nursed in some cottage, and thus not be in the city of La
Sablerie at all. He might, mayhap, thus be put on a false scent.'

'Oh no,' exclaimed Berenger, startled; 'that might bring the death of
some other person's child on my soul.'

'That shall be guarded against,' said Sir Francis. 'In the meantime,
my fair youth, keep your matters as silent as may be---do not admit
the Chevalier again in my absence; and, as to this man Guibert, I will
confer with my steward whether he knows too much, and whether it be
safer to keep of dismiss him!'

'If only I could see the King, and leave Paris,' sighed Berenger.

And Walsingham, though unwilling to grieve the poor youth further,
bethought himself that this was the most difficult and hopeless matter
of all. As young Ribaumont grew better, the King grew worse; he himself
only saw Charles on rare occasions, surrounded by a host of watchful
eyes and ears, and every time he marked the progress of disease; and
though such a hint could be given by an Ambassador, he thought that by
far the best chance of recovery of the child lay in the confusion that
might probably follow the death of Charles IX. in the absence of his
next heir.

Berenger reckoned on the influence of Elisabeth of Austria, who had been
the real worker in his union with Eutacie; but he was told that it was
vain to expect assistance from her. In the first year of her marriage,
she had fondly hoped to enjoy her husband's confidence, and take her
natural place in his court; but she was of no mould to struggle with
Catherine de Medicis, and after a time had totally desisted. Even at the
time of the St. Bartholomew, she had endeavoured to uplift her voice
on the side of mercy, and had actually saved the lives of the King of
Navarre and Prince of Conde; and her father, the good Maximilian II.,
had written in the strongest terms to Charles IX. expressing his horror
of the massacre. Six weeks later, the first hour after the birth of her
first and only child, she had interceded with her husband for the lives
of two Huguenots who had been taken alive, and failing then either
through his want of will or want of power, she had collapsed and yielded
up the endeavour. She ceased to listen to petitions from those who had
hoped for her assistance, as if to save both them and herself useless
pain, and seemed to lapse into a sort of apathy to all public interests.
She hardly spoke, mechanically fulfilled her few offices in the court,
and seemed to have turned her entire hope and trust into prayer for her
husband. Her German confessor had been sent home, and a Jesuit given her
in his stead, but she had made no resistance; she seemed to the outer
world a dull, weary stranger, obstinate in leading a conventual life;
but those who knew her best--and of these few was the Huguenot surgeon
Pare--knew that her heart had been broken two guilty lives, or to make
her husband free himself from his bondage to bloody counsels. To pray
for him was all that remained to her--and unwearied had been
those prayers. Since his health had declined, she had been equally
indefatigable in attending on him, and did not seem to have a single
interest beyond his sick chamber.

As to the King of Navarre, for whose help Berenger had hoped, he had
been all these months in the dishonouable thraldom of Catherine de
Medicis, and was more powerless than ever at this juncture, having been
implicated in Alencon's plot, and imprisoned at Vincennes.

And thus, the more Berenger heard of the state of things, the less
hopeful did his cause appear, till he could almost have believed his
best chance lay in Philip's plan of persuading the Huguenots to storm
the convent.




CHAPTER XXVII. THE DYING KING



      Die in terror of thy guiltiness,
  Dream on, dream on of bloody deeds and death, Fainting, despair,
  despairing yield thy breath
                                     KING RICHARD III.


A few days later, when Berenger had sent out Philip, under the keeping
of the secretaries, to see the Queen-mother represent Royalty in one
of the grand processions of Rogation-tide, the gentle knock came to his
door that always announced the arrival of his good surgeon.

'You look stronger, M. le Baron; have you yet left your room?'

