giant figure of the freedman passed through the door, which had remained
open.

"You here, Pyrrhus?" cried the wounded man kindly.

"Yes, master, it is I," replied the stalwart fellow, twirling his sailor
hat still faster. "Listening isn't exactly my trade, and I don't usually
enter your presence uninvited; but I couldn't help hearing what came
through the door, and the croaking of the old raven drew me in."

"I wish you had heard more cheerful things," replied Dion; "but the
brown-skinned bird of ill omen usually sings pleasant songs, and they
all come from a faithful heart. But when my silent Pyrrhus opens his
mouth so far, something important must surely follow, and you can speak
freely in her presence."

The sailor cleared his throat, gripped his coarse felt hat in his sinewy
hands, and said, in such a tremulous, embarrassed tone that his heavy
chin quivered and his voice sometimes faltered: "If the woman is to be
trusted, you must leave here, master, and seek some safe hiding-place. I
came to offer one. On my way I heard your name. It was said that you
had wounded the Queen's son, and it might cost you your life. Then I
thought: 'No, no, not that, so long as Pyrrhus lives, who taught his
young master Dion to use the oars and to set his first sail--Pyrrhus
and his family.' Why repeat what we both know well enough? From my first
boat and the land on our island to the liberty you bestowed upon us, we
owe everything to your father and to you, and a blessing has rested upon
your gift and our labour, and what is mine is yours. No more words are
needed. You know our cliff beyond the Alveus Steganus, north of the
great harbour--the Isle of Serpents. It is quickly gained by any one who
knows the course through the water, but is as inaccessible to others as
the moon and stars. People are afraid of the mere name, though we rid
the island of the vermin long ago. My boys Dionysus, Dionichus, and
Dionikus--they all have 'Dion' in their name--are waiting in the fish
market, and when it grows dusk--" Here the wounded man interrupted the
speaker by holding out his hand and thanking him warmly for his fidelity
and kindness, though he refused the well-meant invitation. He admitted
that he knew no safer hiding-place than the cliff surrounded by
fluttering sea-gulls, where Pyrrhus lived with his family and earned
abundant support by fishing and serving as pilot. But anxiety concerning
his future wife prevented his leaving the city.

The freedman however gave him no rest. He represented how quickly the
harbour could be reached from his island, that fish were brought thence
from it daily, and he would therefore always have news of what was
passing. His sons were like him, and never used any unnecessary words;
talking did not suit them. The women of the household rarely left the
island. So long as it sheltered their beloved guest, they should not set
foot away from it. If occasion should require, the master could be in
Alexandria again quickly enough to put anything right.

This suggestion pleased the architect, who joined in the conversation
to urge the freedman's request. But Dion, for Barine's sake, obstinately
refused, until Anukis, who had long been anxious to go in pursuit of
Archibius, thought it time to give her opinion.

"Go with the man, my lord!" she cried. "I know what I know. I will
tell our Barine of your faithful resolution; but how can she show her
gratitude for it if you are a dead man?"

This question and the information which followed it turned the scale;
and, as soon as Dion had consented to accompany the freedman, the Nubian
prepared to continue her errands, but the wounded man detained her
to give many messages for Barine, and then she was stopped by the
architect, who thought he had found in her the right assistant for
numerous plans he had in his mind.

He had returned early that morning from Heroonpolis, where, with other
members of his profession, he had inspected the newly constructed
waterway. The result of the first investigation had been unfavourable to
the verge of discouragement; and, in behalf of the others, he had gone
to the Queen to persuade her to give up the enterprise which, though so
full of promise, was impracticable in the short time at their disposal.

He had travelled all night, and was received as soon as Cleopatra rose
from her couch. He had driven from the Lochias in the carriage placed at
his disposal because he had business at the arsenal and various points
where building was going on, in order to inspect the wall erected for
Antony on the Choma, and the Temple of Isis at the Corner of the Muses,
to which Cleopatra desired to add a new building. But scarcely had he
quitted the Bruchium when he was detained by the crowd assailing the
house of Didymus with beams and rams, and at the same time keeping off
the Ephebi who had attacked them.

He had forced his way through the raging mob to aid the old couple and
their granddaughter. The slave Phryx had been busily preparing the boats
which lay moored in the harbour of the seawashed estate, but Gorgias had
found it difficult to persuade the grey-haired philosopher to go with
him and his family to the shore. He was ready to face the enraged
rioters and--though it should cost his life--cry out that they were
shamefully deceived and were staining themselves with a disgraceful
crime. Not until the architect represented that it was unworthy of a
Didymus to expose to bestial violence a life on which helpless women and
the whole world--to whom his writings were guide-posts to the realms of
truth--possessed a claim, could he be induced to yield. Nevertheless,
the sage and his relatives almost fell into the hands of the furious
rabble, for Didymus would not depart until he had saved this, that,
and the other precious book, till the number reached twenty or thirty.
Besides, his old deaf wife, who usually submitted quietly when her
defective hearing prevented her comprehension of many things, insisted
upon knowing what was occurring. She ordered everybody who came near her
to explain what had happened, thus detaining her granddaughter Helena,
who was trying to save the most valuable articles in the dwelling. So
the departure was delayed, and only the brave defence of young Philotas,
Didymus's assistant, and some of the Ephebi, who joined him, enabled
them to escape unharmed.

The Scythian guards, which at last put a stop to the frantic rage of
the deluded populace, arrived too late to prevent the destruction of the
house, but they saved Philotas and the other youths from the fists
and stones of the rabble. When the boats had gone farther out into
the harbour the question of finding a home for the philosopher and his
family was discussed. Berenike's house was also threatened, and the
rules of the museum prevented the reception of women. Five servants had
accompanied the family, and none of Didymus's learned friends had room
for so many guests. When the old man and Helena began to enumerate the
lodgings of which they could think, Gorgias interposed with an entreaty
that they would come to his house.

He had inherited the dwelling from his father. It was very large and
spacious, almost empty, and they could reach it speedily, as it stood
on the seashore, north of the Forum. The fugitives would be entirely at
liberty there, since he had work on hand which would permit him to spend
no time under his own roof except at night. He soon overcame the trivial
objections made by the philosopher and, fifteen minutes after they had
left the Corner of the Muses, he was permitted to open the door of
his house to his guests, and he did so with genuine pleasure. The old
housekeeper and the grey-haired steward, who had been in his father's
service, looked surprised, but worked zealously after Gorgias had
confided the visitors to their charge. The pressure of business forbade
his fulfilling the duties of host in his own person.

Didymus and his family had reason to be grateful; and when the old sage
found in the large library which the architect placed at his disposal
many excellent books and among them some of his own, he ceased his
restless pacing to and fro and forced himself to settle down. Then he
remembered that, by the advice of a friend, he had placed his property
in the keeping of a reliable banker and, though life still seemed dark
grey, it no longer looked as black as before.

Gorgias briefly related all this to the Nubian, and Dion added that she
would find Archibius with his Roman friend at the house of Berenike's
brother, the philosopher Arius. Like himself, the latter was suffering
from an injury inflicted by a reckless trick of Antyllus. Barine's
mother was there also, so Anukis could inform them of the fate of
Didymus and his brother, and tell them that he, Dion, intended to leave
her house and the city an hour after sunset.

"But," interrupted Gorgias, "no one, not even your hostess Berenike and
her brother, must know your destination.--You look as if you could keep
a secret, woman."

"Though she owes her nickname Aisopion to her nimble tongue," replied
Dion.

"But this tongue is like the little silver fish with scarlet spots in
the palace garden," said Anukis. "They dart to and fro nimbly enough;
but as soon as danger threatens they keep as quiet in the water as
though they were nailed fast. And--by mighty Isis!--we have no lack of
peril in these trying times. Would you like to see the lady Berenike and
the others before your departure?"

"Berenike, yes; but the sons of Arius--they are fine fellows--would be
wise to keep aloof from this house to-day."

"Yes indeed!" the architect chimed in. "It will be prudent for their
father, too, to seek some hiding-place. He is too closely connected with
Octavianus. It may indeed happen that the Queen will desire to make use
of him. In that case he may be able to aid Barine, who is his sister's
child. Timagenes, too, who comes from Rome as a mediator, may have some
influence."

"The same thoughts entered my poor brain also," said Anukis. "I am now
going to show the gentlemen the danger which threatens her, and if I
succeed--Yet what could a serving-woman of my appearance accomplish?
Still--my house is nearer to the brink of the stream than the dwelling
of most others, and if I fling in a loaf, perhaps the current will bear
it to the majestic sea."

"Wise Aisopion!" cried Dion; but the worthy maid-servant shrugged her
crooked shoulders, saying: "We needn't be free-born to find pleasure in
what is right; and if being wise means using one's brains to think, with
the intention of promoting right and justice, you can always call me so.
Then you will start after sundown?"

With these words she was about to leave the room, but the architect,
who had watched her every movement, had formed a plan and begged her to
follow him.

When they reached the next room he asked for a faithful account of
Barine and the dangers threatening her. After consulting her as if
she were an equal, he held out his hand in farewell, saying: "If it is
possible to bring her to the Temple of Isis unseen, these clouds may
scatter. I shall be in the sanctuary of the goddess from the first hour
after sunset. I have some measurements to take there. When you say you
know that the immortals will have pity on the innocent woman whom they
have led to the verge of the abyss, perhaps you may be right. It seems
as if matters here were combining in a way which would be apt to rob the
story-teller of his listener's faith."

After Aisopion had gone, Gorgias returned to Dion's room and asked the
freedman to be ready with his boat at a place on the shore which he
carefully described.

The friends were again alone. Gorgias had his hands full of work, but
he could not help expressing his surprise at the calm bearing which
Dion maintained. "You behave as if you were going to an oyster supper
at Kanopus," he said, shaking his head as though perplexed by some
incomprehensible problem.

"What else would you have me do?" asked the Macedonian. "The vivid
imagination of you artists shows you the future according to your own
varying moods. If you hope, you transform a pleasant garden into the
Elysian fields; if you fear anything you behold in a burning roof the
conflagration of a world. We, from whose cradle the Muse was absent, who
use only sober reason to provide for the welfare of the household and
the state, as well as for our own, see facts as they are and treat them
like figures in a sum. I know that Barine is in danger. That might drive
me frantic; but beyond her I see Archibius and Charmian spreading their
protecting wings over her head; I perceive the fear of my faction,
including the museum, of the council of which I am a member, of my
clients and the conditions of the times, which precludes arousing
the wrath of the citizens. The product which results from the correct
addition of all these known quantities--"

"Will be correct," interrupted his friend, "so long as the most
incalculable of all factors, passion, does not blend with them--the
passion of a woman--and the Queen belongs to the sex which is certainly
more powerful in that domain."

"Granted! But as soon as Mark Antony returns it will be proved that her
jealousy was needless."

"We will hope so. It is only the misled, deceived, abused Cleopatra whom
I fear; for she herself is matchless in divine goodness. The charm by
which she ensnares hearts is indescribable, and the iron power of her
intellect! I tell you, Dion--"

"Friend, friend," was the laughing interruption. "How high your wishes
soar! For three years I have kept an account of the conflagrations in
your heart. I believe we had reached seventeen; but this last one is
equal to two."

"Folly!" cried Gorgias in an irritated tone: "May not a man admire
what is magnificent, wonderful, unique? She is all these things! Just
now--how long ago is it?--she appeared before me in a radiance of
beauty--"

"Which should have made you shade both eyes. Yet you have been speaking
so warmly of your young guest, her loving caution, her gentle calmness
in the midst of peril--"

"Do you suppose I wish to recall a single syllable?" the architect
indignantly broke in. "Helena has no peer among the maidens of
Alexandria--but the other--Cleopatra--is elevated in her divine majesty
above all ordinary mortals. You might spare me and yourself that
scornful curl of the lip. Had she gazed into your face with those
tearful, sorrowful eyes, as she did into mine, and spoken of her misery,
you would have gone through fire and water, hand in hand with me, for
her sake. I am not a man who is easily moved, and since my father's
death the only tears I have seen have been shed by others; but when she
talked of the mausoleum I was to build for her because Fate, she knew
not how soon, might force her to seek refuge in the arms of death, my
calmness vanished. Then, when she cumbered me among the friends on whom
she could rely and held out her hand--a matchless hand--oh! laugh if you
choose--I felt I know not how, and kneeling at her feet I kissed it;
it was wet with my tears. I am not ashamed of this emotion, and my lips
seem consecrated since they touched the little white hand which spoke a
language of its own and stands before my eyes wherever I gaze."

Pushing back his thick locks from his brow as he spoke, he shook his
head as though dissatisfied with himself and, in an altered tone,
hurriedly continued: "But this is a time ill-suited for such ebullitions
of feeling. I mentioned the mausoleum, whose erection the Queen desires.
She will see the first hasty sketch to-morrow. It is already before
my mind's eye. She wished to have it adjoin the Temple of Isis, her
goddess--I proposed the great sanctuary in the Rhakotis quarter, but she
objected--she wished to have it close to the palace at Lochias. She had
thought of the temple at the Corner of the Muses, but the house occupied
by Didymus stood in the way of a larger structure. If this were removed
it would be possible to carry the street through the old man's garden,
perhaps even to the sea-shore, and we should have had space for a
gigantic edifice and still left room for a fine garden. But we had
learned how the philosopher loved his family estate. The Queen is
unwilling to use violence towards the old man. She is just, and perhaps
other reasons, of which I am ignorant, influence her. So I promised to
look for another site, though I saw how much she desired to have her
tomb connected with the sanctuary of her favourite goddess Then--I have
already told the clever brown witch--then the immortals, Divinity,
Fate, or whatever we call the power which guides the world and our
lives according to eternal laws and its own mysterious, omnipotent will,
permitted a rascally deed, from which I think may come deliverance for
you and a source of pleasure to the Queen in these days of trial."

"Man, man! Where will this new passion lead you? The horses are stamping
impatiently outside; duty summons the most faithful of men, and he
stands like a prophet, indulging in mysterious sayings!"

"Whose meaning and purport, spite of your calm calculations of existing
circumstances, will soon seem no less wonderful to you than to me, whose
unruly artist nature, according to your opinion, is playing me a trick,"
retorted the architect. "Now listen to this explanation: Didymus's house
will be occupied at once by my workmen, but I shall examine the lower
rooms of the Temple of Isis. I have with me a document requiring
obedience to my orders. Cleopatra herself laid the plans before me, even
the secret portion showing the course of the subterranean chambers. It
will cast some light upon my mysterious sayings if I bear you away
from the enemy through one of the secret corridors. They were right in
concealing from you by how slender a thread, spite of the power of your
example in mathematics, the sword hangs above your head. Now that I see
a possibility of removing it, I can show it to you. Tomorrow you would
have fallen, without hope of rescue, into the hands of cruel foes and
been shamefully abandoned by your own weak uncle, had not the most
implacable of all your enemies permitted himself the infamous pleasure
of laying hands on an old man's house, and the Queen, in consequence
of an agitating message, had the idea suggested of building her own
mausoleum. The corridor"--here he lowered his voice--"of which I spoke
leads to the sea at a spot close beside Didymus's garden, and through
it I will guide you, and, if possible, Barine also, to the shore. This
could be accomplished in the usual way only by the greatest risk. If
we use the passage we can reach a dark place on the strand unseen, and
unless some special misfortune pursues us our flight will be unnoticed.
The litters and your tottering gait would betray everything if we were
to enter the boat anywhere else in the great harbour."

"And we, sensible folk, refuse to believe in miracles!" cried Dion,
holding out his wan hand to the architect. "How shall I thank you, you
dear, clever, most loyal of friends to your male friends, though your
heart is so faithless to fair ones? Add that malicious speech to the
former ones, for which I now crave your pardon. What you intend to
accomplish for Barine and me gives you a right to do and say to me
whatever ill you choose all the rest of my life. Anxiety for her would
surely have bound me to this house and the city when the time came to
make the escape, for without her my life would now be valueless. But
when I think that she might follow me to Pyrrhus's cliff--"

"Don't flatter yourself with this hope," pleaded Gorgias. "Serious
obstacles may interpose. I am to have another talk with the Nubian
later. With no offence to others, I believe her advice will be the best.
She knows how matters stand with the lofty, and yet herself belongs to
the lowly. Besides, through Charmian the way to the Queen lies open, and
nothing which happens at court escapes her notice. She showed me that we
must consider Barine's delivery to Alexas a piece of good fortune. How
easily jealousy might have led to a fatal crime one whose wish promptly
becomes action, unless she curbs the undue zeal of her living tools!
Those on whom Fate inflicts so many blows rarely are in haste to
spare others. Would the anxieties which weigh upon her like mountains
interpose between the Queen and the jealous rancour which is too petty
for her great soul?"

"What is great or petty to the heart of a loving woman?" asked Dion. "In
any case you will do what you can to remove Barine from the power of the
enraged princess--I know."

Gorgias pressed his friend's hand closely, then, yielding to a sudden
impulse, kissed him on the forehead and hurried to the door.

On the threshold a faint moan from the wounded man stopped him. Would he
be strong enough to follow the long passage leading to the sea?

Dion protested that he confidently expected to do so, but his deeply
flushed face betrayed that the fever which had once been conquered had
returned.

Gorgias's eyes sought the floor in deep thought. Many sick persons were
borne to the temple in the hope of cure; so Dion's appearance would
cause no special surprise. On the other hand, to have strangers carry
him through the passage seemed perilous. He himself was strong, but even
the strongest person would have found it impossible to support the
heavy burden of a grown man to the sea, for the gallery was low and
of considerable length. Still, if necessary, he would try. With the
comforting exclamation, "If your strength does not suffice, another way
will be found," he took his leave, gave Barine's maid and the wounded
man's body-slave the necessary directions, commanded the door-keeper to
admit no one save the physician, and stepped into the open air.

A little band of Ephebi were pacing to and fro before the house. Others
had flung themselves down in an open space surrounded by shrubbery
in the Paneum garden, and were drinking the choice wine which Dion's
cellarer, by his orders, had brought and was pouring out for the crowd.

It was an animated scene, for the clients of the sufferer, who, after
expressing their sympathy, had been dismissed by the porter, and
bedizened girls had joined the youths. There was no lack of jests and
laughter, and when some pretty young mother or female slave passed by
leading children, with whom the garden was a favourite playground, many
a merry word was exchanged.

Gorgias waved his hands gaily to the youths, pleased with the
cheerfulness with which the brave fellows transformed duty into a
festival, and many raised their wine-cups, shouting a joyous "Io" and
"Evoe," to drink the health of the famous artist who not long ago had
been one of themselves.

The others were led by a slender youth, the student Philotas, from
Amphissa, Didymus's assistant, whom the architect, a few days before,
had helped to liberate from the demons of wine. Even while Gorgias was
beckoning to him from the two-wheeled chariot, the thought entered his
mind that yonder handsome youth, who had so deeply wronged Barine and
Dion, would be the very person to help carry his friend through the
low-roofed passage to the sea. If Philotas was the person Gorgias
believed him to be, he would deem it a special favour to make amends for
his crime to those whom he had injured, and he was not mistaken; for,
after the youth had taken a solemn oath not to betray the secret to
any one, the architect asked him to aid in Dion's rescue. Philotas,
overflowing with joyful gratitude, protested his willingness to do so,
and promised to wait at the appointed spot in the Temple of Isis at the
time mentioned.




CHAPTER XIV.

While Gorgias was examining the subterranean chambers in the Temple
of Isis, Charmian returned to Lochias earlier than she herself had
expected. She had met her brother, whom she did not find at Kanopus,
at Berenike's, and after greeting Dion on his couch of pain, she told
Archibius of her anxiety. She confided to him alone that the Queen had
committed Barine's fate to Alexas, for the news might easily have led
the mother of the endangered woman to some desperate venture; but even
Archibius's composure, so difficult to disturb, was not proof against
it. He would have sought the Queen's presence at once--if necessary,
forced his way to it; but the historian Timagenes, who had just come
from Rome, was expecting him, and he had not returned to his birthplace
as a private citizen, but commissioned by Octavianus to act as mediator
in putting an end to the struggle which had really been decided in his
favour at the battle of Actium. The choice of this mediator was a happy
one; for he had taught Cleopatra in her childhood, and was the self-same
quick-witted man who had so often roused her to argument. His share in a
popular insurrection against the Roman rule had led to his being carried
as a slave to the Tiber. There he soon purchased his freedom, and
attained such distinction that Octavianus entrusted this important
mission to the man who was so well known in Alexandria. Archibius was to
meet him at the house of Arius, who was still suffering from the
wounds inflicted by the chariot-wheels of Antyllus, and Berenike had
accompanied Timagenes to her brother.

Charmian did not venture to go there; a visit to Octavianus's former
teacher would have been misinterpreted, and it was repugnant to her own
delicacy of feeling to hold intercourse at this time with the foe and
conqueror of her royal mistress. She therefore let her brother drive
with Berenike to the injured man's; but before his departure Archibius
had promised, if the worst came, to dare everything to open the eyes of
the Queen, who had forbidden her, Charmian, to speak in behalf of Barine
and thwart the plans of Alexas.

From the Paneum garden she was carried to the Kanopic Way and the Jewish
quarter, where she had many important purchases to make for Cleopatra.
It was long after noon when the litter was again borne to Lochias.

On the way she had severely felt her own powerlessness. Without having
accomplished anything herself, she was forced to wait for the success
of others; and she had scarcely crossed the threshold of the palace ere
fresh cares were added to those which already burdened her soul.

She understood how to read the faces of courtiers, and the door-keeper's
had taught her that since her departure something momentous had
occurred. She disliked to question the slaves and lower officials,
so she refrained, though the interior of the palace was crowded with
guards, officials of every grade, attendants, and slaves. Many who saw
her gazed at her with the timidity inspired by those over whom some
disaster is im pending. Others, whose relations were more intimate,
pressed forward to enjoy the mournful satisfaction of being the first
messengers of evil tidings. But she passed swiftly on, keeping them
back with grave words and gestures, until, before the door of the great
anteroom thronged with Greek and Egyptian petitioners, she met Zeno, the
Keeper of the Seal. Charmian stopped him and inquired what had happened.

"Since when?" asked the old courtier. "Every moment has brought some
fresh tidings and all are mournful. What terrible times, Charmian, what
disasters!"

"No messenger had arrived when I left the Lochias," replied Charmian.
"Now it seems as though the old monster of a palace, accustomed to so
many horrors, is holding its breath in dread. Tell me the main thing, at
least, before I meet the Queen."

"The main thing? Pestilence or famine--which shall we call the worse?"

"Quick, Zeno! I am expected."

"I, too, am in haste, and really there is nothing to relate over which
the tongue would care to dwell. Candidus arrived first. Came himself
straight from Actium. The fellow is bold enough."

"Is the army defeated also?"

"Defeated, dispersed, deserted to the foe--King Herod with his legions
in the van."

Charmian covered her face with her hands and groaned aloud, but Zeno
continued:
