without waiting till the end of the meal, to visit the little invalid.

It was with genuine anxiety that he mounted the stairs. His heart was
heavy over many things, and as he went towards the child's room he said
to himself with a melancholy smile, that he, who had contemned many a
distinguished man and many a courted fair one at Constantinople because
they had fallen short of his lofty standard, had here no one but this
child who would be sure to understand him. Some minutes elapsed before
his knock was answered with the request to 'come in,' and he heard a
hasty bustle within. He found Mary lying, as the physician had ordered,
on a couch by the window, which was wide open and well-shaded; her couch
was surrounded by flowering plants and, on a little table in front of
her, were two large nosegays, one fading, the other quite fresh and
particularly beautiful.

How sadly the child had changed in these few days. The soft round cheeks
had disappeared, and the pretty little face had sunk into nothingness by
comparison with the wonderful, large eyes, which had gained in size and
brilliancy. Yesterday she had been free from fever and very pale, but
to-day her cheeks were crimson, and a twitching of her lips and of her
right shoulder, which had come on since the scene at the grandfather's
deathbed, was so incessant that Orion sat down by her side in some
alarm.

"Has your grandmother been to see you?" was his first question, but the
answer was a mournful shake of her head.

The blossoming plants were his own gift and so was the fading nosegay;
the other, fresher one had not come from him, so he enquired who was the
giver, and was not a little astonished to see his favorite's confusion
and agitation at the question. There must be something special connected
with the posey, that was very evident, and the young man, who did not
wish to excite her sensitive nerves unnecessarily, but could not recall
his words, was wishing he had never spoken them, when the discovery of
a feather fan cut the knot of his difficulty; he took it up, exclaiming:
"Hey--what have we here?"

A deeper flush dyed Mary's cheek, and raising her large eyes imploringly
to his face, she laid a finger on her lips. He nodded, as understanding
her, and said in a low voice:

"Katharina has been here? Susannah's gardener ties up flowers like that.
The fan--when I knocked--she is here still perhaps?"

He had guessed rightly; Mary pointed dumbly to the door of the adjoining
room.

"But, in Heaven's name, child," Orion went on, in an undertone, "what
does she want here?"

"She came by stealth, in the boat," whispered the child. "She sent
Anubis from the treasurer's office to ask me if she might not come, she
could not do without me any longer, and she never did me any harm and so
I said yes--and then, when I knew it was your knock, whisk--off she went
into the bedroom."

"And if your grandmother were to come across her?"

"Then--well, then I do not know what would become of me! But oh! Orion,
if you only knew how--how...." Two big tears rolled down her cheeks
and Orion understood her; he stroked her hair lovingly and said in a
whisper, glancing now and again at the door of the next room.

"But I came up on purpose to tell you something more about Paula. She
sends you her love, and she invites you to go to her and stay with her,
always. But you must keep it quite a secret and tell no one, not even
Eudoxia and Katharina; for I do not know myself how we can contrive to
get your grandmother's consent. At any rate we must set to work very
prudently and cautiously, do you understand? I have only taken you into
our confidence that you may look forward to it and have something to be
glad of at night, when you are such a silly little thing as to keep
your eyes open like the hares, instead of sleeping like a good child. If
things go well, you may be with Paula to-morrow perhaps--think of that!
I had quite given up all hope of managing it at all; but now, just
now--is it not odd--just within these two minutes I suddenly said to
myself: 'It will come all right!'--So it must be done somehow."

A flood of tears streamed down Mary's burning cheeks but, freely as they
flowed, she did not sob and her bosom did not heave. Nor did she speak,
but such pure and fervent gratitude and joy shone from her glistening
eyes that Orion felt his own grow moist. He was glad to find some way
of concealing his emotion when Mary seized his hand and, pressing a long
kiss on it, wetted it with her tears.

"See!" he exclaimed. "All wet! as if I had just taken it out of the
fountain."

But he said no more, for the bedroom door was suddenly thrown open and
Eudoxia's high, thin voice was heard saying:

"But why make any fuss? Mary will be enchanted! Here, Child, here is
your long-lost friend! Such a surprise!" And the water-wagtail, pushed
forward by no gentle hand, appeared within the doorway. Eudoxia was as
radiant as though she had achieved some heroic deed; but she drew back
a little when she found that Orion was still in the room. The divided
couple stood face to face. What was done could not be undone; but,
though he greeted her with only a calm bow, and she fluttered her fan
with abrupt little jerks to conceal her embarrassment, nothing took
place which could surprise the bystander; indeed, Katharina's pretty
features assumed a defiant expression when he enquired how the little
white dog was, and she coldly replied that she had had him chained up in
the poultry-yard, for that the patriarch, who was their guest, could not
endure dogs.

"He honors a good many men with the same sentiments," replied Orion, but
Katharina retorted, readily enough.

"When they deserve it."

The dialogue went on in this key for some few minutes; but the young man
was not in the humor either to take the young girl's pert stings or
to repay her in the same coin; he rose to go but, before he could take
leave, Katharina, observing from the window how low the sun was, cried:
"Mercy on me! how late it is--I must be off; I must not be absent at
supper time. My boat is lying close to yours in the fishing-cove. I only
hope the gate of the treasurer's house is still open."

Orion, too, looked at the sun and then remarked: "To-day is Sanutius."

"I know," said Katharina. "That is why Anubis was free at noon."

"And for the same reason," added Orion, "there is not a soul at work now
in the office."

This was awkward. Not for worlds would she have been seen in the house;
and knowing, as she did from her games with Mary, every nook and corner
of it, she began to consider her position. Her delicate features assumed
a sinister expression quite new to Orion, which both displeased him and
roused his anxiety--not for himself but for Mary, who could certainly
get no good from such a companion as this. These visits must not be
repeated very often; he would not allude to the subject in the child's
presence, but Katharina should at once have a hint. She could not
get out of the place without his assistance; so he intruded on her
meditations to inform her that he had the key of the office about him.
Then he went to see if the hall were empty, and led her at once to the
treasurer's office through the various passages which connected it with
the main buildings. The office at this hour was as lonely as the grave,
and when Orion found himself standing with her, close to the door which
opened on the road to the harbor, and had already raised the key to
unlock it, he paused and for the first time broke the silence they had
both preserved during their unpleasant walk, saying:

"What brought you to see Mary, Katharina? Tell me honestly." Her heart,
which had been beating high since she had found herself alone with him
in the silent and deserted house, began to throb wildly; a great terror,
she knew not of what, came over her.

"She had come to the house for several reasons, but one had outweighed
all the rest: Mary must be told that her young uncle and Paula were
betrothed; for she knew by experience that the child could keep nothing
of importance from her grandmother, and that Neforis had no love for
Paula was an open secret. As yet she certainly could know nothing of
her son's formal suit, but if once she were informed of it she would
do everything in her power--of this Katharina had not a doubt--to keep
Orion and Paula apart. So the girl had told Mary that it was already
reported that they were a betrothed and happy pair, and that she herself
had watched them making love in her neighbor's garden. To her great
annoyance, however, Mary took this all very coolly and without any
special excitement.

"So, when Orion enquired of his companion what had brought her to the
governor's house, she could only reply that she longed so desperately to
see little Mary.

"Of course," said Orion. "But I must beg of you not to yield again to
your affectionate impulse. Your mother makes a public display of her
grudge against mine, and her ill-feeling will only be increased if she
is told that we are encouraging you to disregard her wishes. Perhaps you
may, ere long, have opportunities of seeing Mary more frequently; but,
if that should be the case, I must especially request you not to talk
of things that may agitate her. You have seen for yourself how excitable
she is and how fragile she looks. Her little heart, her too precocious
brain and feelings must have rest, must not be stirred and goaded by
fresh incitements such as you are in a position to apply. The patriarch
is my enemy, the enemy of our house, and you--I do not say it to offend
you--you overheard what he was saying last night, and probably gathered
much important information, some of which may concern me and my family."

Katharina stood looking at her companion, as pale as death. He knew that
she had played the listener, and when, and where! The shock it gave her,
and the almost unendurable pang of feeling herself lowered in his eyes,
quite dazed her. She felt bewildered, offended, menaced; however, she
retained enough presence of mind to reply in a moment to her antagonist:

"Do not be alarmed! I will come no more. I should not have come at all,
if I could have foreseen..."

"That you would meet me?"

"Perhaps.--But do not flatter yourself too much on that account!--As
to my listening.... Well, yes; I was standing at the window. Inside the
room I could only half hear, and who does not want to hear what great
men have to say to each other? And, excepting your father, I have met
none such in Memphis since Memnon left the city. We women have inherited
some curiosity from our mother Eve; but we rarely indulge it so far
as to hunt for a necklace in our neighbor's trunk! I have no luck as a
criminal, my dear Orion. Twice have I deserved the name. Thanks to the
generous and liberal use you made of my inexperience I sinned--sinned
so deeply that it has ruined my whole life; and now, again, in a more
venial way; but I was caught out, you see, in both cases."

"Your taunts are merited," said Orion sadly. "And yet, Child, we may
both thank Providence, which did not leave us to wander long on the
wrong road. Once already I have besought your forgiveness, and I do so
now again. That does not satisfy you I see--and I can hardly blame you.
Perhaps you will be better pleased, when I assure you once more that no
sin was ever more bitterly or cruelly punished than mine has been."

"Indeed!" said Katharina with a drawl; then, with a flutter of her fan,
she went on airily: "And yet you look anything rather than crushed;
and have even succeeded in winning 'the other'--Paula, if I am not
mistaken."

"That will do!" said Orion decisively, and he raised the key to
the lock. Katharina, however, placed herself in his way, raised a
threatening finger, and exclaimed:

"So I should think!--Now I am certain. However, you are right with your
insolent 'That will do!' I do not care a rush for your love affairs;
still, there is one thing I should like to know, which concerns myself
alone; how could you see over our garden hedge? Anubis is scarcely a
head shorter than you are...."

"And you made him try?" interrupted Orion, who could not forbear
smiling, perceiving that his honestly meant gravity was thrown away on
Katharina. "Notwithstanding such a praiseworthy experiment, I may beg
you to note for future cases that what is true of him is not true of
every one, and that, besides foot-passengers, a tall man sometimes
mounts a tall horse?"

"It was you, then, who rode by last night?"

"And who could not resist glancing up at your window."

At these words she drew back in surprise, and her eyes lighted up, but
only for an instant; then, clenching the feathers of her fan in both
hands, she sharply asked:

"Is that in mockery?"

"Certainly not," said Orion coolly; "for though you have reason enough
to be angry with me...."

"I, at any rate, have, so far given you none," she petulantly broke
in. "No, I have not. It is I, and I alone, who have been insulted and
ill-used; you must confess that you owe me some amends, and that I have
a right to ask them."

"Do so," replied he. "I am yours to command." She looked him straight in
the face.

"First of all," she began, "have you told any one else that I was..."

"That you were listening? No--not a living soul."

"And will you promise never to betray me?"

"Willingly. Now, what is the 'secondly' to this 'first of all?'"

But there was no immediate answer; the water-wagtail evidently found it
difficult. However, she presently said, with downcast eyes:

"I want.... You will think me a greater fool than I am... nevertheless,
yes, I will ask you, though it will involve me in fresh humiliation.--I
want to know the truth; and if there is anything you hold sacred, before
I ask, you must swear by what is holiest to answer me, not as if I were
a silly girl, but as if I were the Supreme judge at the last day.--Do
you hear?"

"This is very solemn," said Orion. "And you must allow me to observe
that there are some questions which do not concern us alone, and if
yours is such...."

"No, no," replied Katharina, "what I mean concerns you and me alone."

"Then I see no reason for refusing," he said. "Still, I may ask you a
favor in return. It seems to me no less important than it did to you, to
know what a great man like the patriarch finds to talk about, and since
I place myself at your commands...."

"I thought," said the girl with a smile, "that your first object would
be to discharge some small portion of your debt to me; however, I expect
no excessive magnanimity, and the little I heard is soon told. It cannot
matter much to you either--so I will agree to your wishes, and you, in
return, must promise...."

"To speak the whole truth."

"As truly as you hope for forgiveness of your sins?"

"As truly as that."

"That is well."

"And what is it that you want to know?"

At this she shook her head, exclaiming uneasily:

"Nay, nay, not yet. It cannot be done so lightly. First let me speak;
and then open the door, and if I want to fly let me go without saying
or asking me another word.--Give me that chair; I must sit down." And
in fact she seemed to need it; for some minutes she had looked very
pale and exhausted, and her hands trembled as she drew her handkerchief
across her face.

When she was seated she began her story; and while her words flowed on
quickly but without expression, as though she spoke mechanically, Orion
listened with eager interest, for what she had to tell struck him as
highly significant and important.

He had been watched by the patriarch's orders. By midnight Benjamin
had already been informed of Orion's visit to Fostat, and to the Arab
general. Nothing, however, had been said about it beyond a fear lest he
had gone thither with a view to abjuring the faith of his fathers and
going over to the Infidels. Far more important were the facts
Orion gathered as to the prelate's negotiations with the Khaliff's
representative. Amru had urged a reduction of the number of convents and
of the monks and nuns who lived on the bequests and gifts of the pious,
busied in all kinds of handiwork according to the rule of Pachomius, and
enabled, by the fact of their living at free quarters, to produce almost
all the necessaries of life, from the mats on the floors to the shoes
worn by the citizens, at a much lower price than the independent
artisans, whether in town or country. The great majority of these poor
creatures were already ruined by such competition, and Amru, seeing the
Arab leather-workers, weavers, ropemakers, and the rest, threatened with
the same fate, had determined to set himself firmly to restrict all this
monastic work. The patriarch had resisted stoutly and held out long,
but at last he had been forced to sacrifice almost half the convents for
monks and nuns.

But nothing had been conceded without an equivalent; for Benjamin was
well aware of the immense difficulties which he, as chief of the Church,
could put in the way of the new government of the country. So it was
left to him to designate which convents should be suppressed, and he
had, of course, begun by laying hands on the few remaining Melchite
retreats, among them the Convent of St. Cecilia, next to the house of
Rufinus. This establishment was now to be closed within three days and
to become the property of the Jacobite Church; but it was to be done
quite quietly, for there was no small fear that now, when the delayed
rising of the river was causing a fever of anxiety in all minds, the
impoverished populace of the town might rise in defence of the wealthy
sisterhood to whom they were beholden for much benevolence and kind
care.

Opposition from the town-senate was also to be looked for, since the
deceased Mukaukas had pronounced this measure unjust and detrimental
to the common welfare. The evicted orthodox nuns were to be taken into
various Jacobite convents as lay sisters similar cases had already
been known; but the abbess, whose superior intellect, high rank, and
far-reaching influence might, if she were left free to act, easily rouse
the prelates of the East to oppose Benjamin, was to be conveyed to a
remote convent in Ethiopia, whence no flight or return was possible.

Katharina's report took but few minutes, and she gave it with apparent
indifference; what could the suppression of an orthodox cloister, and
the dispersion of its heretic sisterhood, matter to her, or to Orion,
whose brothers had fallen victims to Melchite fanaticism? Orion did not
betray his deep interest in all he heard, and when at length Katharina
rose and pointed feebly to the door, all she said, as though she were
vexed at having wasted so much time, was: "That, on the whole, is all."

"All?" asked Orion unlocking the door.

"Certainly, all," she repeated uneasily. "What I meant to ask--whether
I ever know it or not--it does not matter.--It would be better
perhaps-yes, that is all.--Let me go."

But he did not obey her.

"Ask," he said kindly. "I will answer you gladly."

"Gladly?" she retorted, with an incredulous shrug. "In point of fact
you ought to feel uncomfortable whenever you see me; but things do not
always turn out as they ought, in Memphis or in the world; for what do
you men care what becomes of a poor girl like me? Do not imagine that
I mean to reproach you; God forbid! I do not even owe you a grudge. If
anyone can live such a thing down I can. Do not you think so? Everything
is admirably arranged for me; I cannot fail to do well. I am very rich,
and not ugly, and I shall have a hundred suitors yet. Oh, I am a most
enviable creature! I have had one lover already, and the next will be
more faithful, at any rate, and not throw me over so ruthlessly as the
first.--Do not you think so?"

"I hope so," said Oriole gravely. "Bitter as the cup is that you offer
me to drink..."

"Well?"

"I can only repeat that I must even drink it, since the fault was mine.
Nothing would so truly gladden me as to be able to atone in some degree
for my sin against you."

"Oh dear no!" she scornfully threw in. "Our hopes shall not be fixed so
high as that! All is at an end between us, and if you ever were anything
to me, you are nothing to me now--absolutely nothing. One hour in the
past we had in common; it was short indeed, but to me--would you believe
it?--a very great matter. It aged the young creature, whom you, but
yesterday, still regarded as a mere child--that much I know--with
amazing rapidity; aye, and made a worse woman of her than you can
fancy."

"That indeed would grieve me to the bottom of my soul," replied Orion.
"There is, I know, no excuse for my conduct. Still, as you yourself
know, our mothers' wish in the first instance..."

"Destined us for each other, you would say. Quite true!--And it was
all to please Dame Neforis that you put your arms round me, under the
acacias, and called me your own, your all, your darling, your rose-bud?
Was that--and this is exactly what I want to ask you, what I insist
on knowing--was that all a lie--or did you, at any rate, in that brief
moment, under the trees, love me with all your heart--love me as now you
love--I cannot name her--that other?--The truth, Orion, the whole truth,
on your oath!"

She had raised her voice and her eyes glowed with the excitement of
passion; and now, when she ceased speaking, their sparkling, glistening
enquiry plainly and unreservedly confessed that her heart still was his,
that she counted on his high-mindedness and expected him to say "yes."
Her round arm lay closely pressed to her bosom, as though to keep its
wild heaving within bounds. Her delicate face had lost its pallor and
seemed bathed in a glow, now tender and now crimson. Her little mouth,
which but now had uttered such bitter words, was parted in a smile as
if ready to bestow a sweet reward for the consoling, saving answer,
for which her whole being yearned, and her eager eyes, shining through
tears, did not cease to entreat him so pathetically, so passionately!
How bewitching an image of helpless, love-sick, beseeching youth and
grace.

"As you love that other,--on your oath."--The words still rang in the
young man's ear. All that was soft in his soul urged him to make good
the evil he had brought upon this fair, hapless young creature; but
those very words gave him strength to remain steadfast; and though
he felt himself appealed to for comfort and compassion, he could only
stretch out imploring hands, as though praying for help, and say:

"Ah Katharina, and you are as lovely, as charming now, as you were then;
but--much as you attracted me, the great love that fills a life can come
but once.... Forget what happened afterwards.... Put your question in
another form, alter it a little, and ask me again--or let me assure
you."

But he had no time to say more; for, before he could atop her, she had
slipped past him and flown away like some swift wild thing into the road
and down to the fishing cove.




CHAPTER IV.

Orion stood alone gazing sadly after her. Was this his father's
curse--that all who loved him must reap pain and grief in return?

He shivered; still, his youthful energy and powers of resistance
were strong enough to give him speedy mastery over these torturing
reflections. What opportunities lay before him of proving his prowess!
Even while Katharina was telling her story, the brave and strenuous
youth had set himself the problem of rescuing the cloistered sisters.
The greater the danger its solution might involve him in, the more
impossible it seemed at first sight, the more gladly, in his present
mood, would he undertake it. He stepped out into the road and closed the
door behind him with a feeling of combative energy.

It was growing dusk. Philippus must now be with Mary and, with the
leech's aid, he was resolved to get the child away from his mother's
house. Not till he felt that she was safe with Paula in Rufinus' house,
could he be free to attempt the enterprise which floated before his
eyes. On the stairs he shouted to a slave:

"My chariot with the Persian trotting horse!" and a few minutes after
he entered the little girl's room at the same time with a slave girl who
carried in a lamp. Neither Mary nor the physician observed him at first,
and he heard her say to Philippus, who sat holding her wrist between his
fingers.

"What is the matter with you this evening? Good heavens, how pale and
melancholy you look!" The lamplight fell full on his face. "Look here, I
have just made such a smart little man out of wax..."

She hoped to amuse the friend who was always so kind to her with this
comical work of art; but, as she leaned forward to reach it, she caught
sight of her uncle and exclaimed: "Philippus comes here to cure me, but
he looks as if he wanted a draught himself. Take care, or you will have
to drink that bitter brown stuff you sent yesterday; then you will
know for once how nasty it can be." Though the child's exclamation was
well-meant, neither of the men took any notice of it. They stood face
to face in utter silence and with only a formal greeting; for Orion,
without Mary's remark, had been struck by the change that had come over
the physician since yesterday. Ignoring Orion's presence, he asked the
child a few brief questions, begged Eudoxia to persevere in the same
course of treatment, and then hastily bid a general farewell to all
present; Orion, however, did not respond, but said, with an affectionate
glance at the little patient: "One word with you presently."

This made Philippus turn to look at Mary and, as the eyes of the rivals
met, they knew that on one subject at any rate they thought and felt
alike. The leech already knew how tenderly the young man had taken to
Mary, and he followed him into the room which Orion now occupied, and
which, as Philippus was aware, had formerly been Paula's.

"In the cause of duty," he said to himself again and again, to keep
himself calm and enable him to gather at least the general sense of
what the handsome young fellow opposite to him was saying in his rich,
pleasant voice, and urging as a request with more warmth than the
leech had given him credit for. Philippus, of course, had heard of the
grandmother's lamentable revulsion of feeling against her grandchild,
and he thought Orion's wish to remove the little girl fully justified.
But, on learning that she was to be placed under Paula's care, he seemed
startled, and gazed at the floor in such sullen gloom that the other
easily guessed what was going on in his mind. In fact, the physician
suspected that the child was to serve merely as an excuse for the more
frequent meetings of the lovers. Unable to bury this apprehension in his
own breast he started to his feet, and was about to put it into words,
when Orion took the words out of his mouth, saying modestly but frankly,
with downcast eyes:

"I speak only for the child's--for Mary's sake. By my father's soul...."

But Philippus shook his head dismally, went up to his rival, and
murmured dully:

"For the sake of that child I am capable of doing or enduring a great
deal. She could not be better cared for than with Rufinus and Paula;
but if I could suppose," and he raised his voice, while his eyes took a
sinister and threatening expression, "if I could suppose that her sacred
and suffering innocence were merely an excuse...."

"No, no," said Orion urgently. "Again, on my sacred word, I assure you
that I have no aim in view but the child's safety; and, as we have said
so much, I will not stick at a word more or less! Rufinus' house is open
to you day and night, and I, if all turns out as I expect, shall ere
long be far from hence--from Memphis--from Paula. There is mischief
brewing--I dare say no more--an act of treachery; and I will try to
prevent it at the risk of my life. You, every one, shall no longer
have a right to think me capable of things which are as repulsive to
my nature as to yours. You and I, if I mistake not, strive for the same
prize, and so far are rivals; but why should the child therefor suffer?
Forget it in her presence, and that forgetting will, as you well know,
enhance your merit in her--her eyes."

"My merit?" retorted the other scornfully. "Merit is not in the balance;
nothing but the gifts of blind Fortune--a nose, a chin, an eye, anything
in short--a crime as much as a deed of heroism--that happens to make a
deep impression on the wax of a girl's soft heart. But curse me," and he
shouted the words at Orion as if he were beside himself, "if I know how
we came to talk of such things! Has my folly gone running through the
streets, bare-bosomed, to display itself to the world at large? How do
you know what my feelings are? She, perhaps, has laughed with you at her
ridiculous lover?--Well, no matter. You know already, or will know by
to-morrow, which of us has won the cock-fight. You have only to look at
me! What woman ever broke her heart for such a Thersites-face. Good-luck
to the winner, and the other one--well, since it must be so, farewell
till to-morrow."

He hastily made his way towards the door; Orion, however, detained him,
imploring him to set aside his ill-feeling--at any rate for the present;
assured him that Paula had not betrayed what his feelings were; that,
on the contrary, he himself, seeing him with her so late on the previous
night, had been consumed by jealousy, and entreated him to vent his
wrath on him in abusive words, if that could ease his heart, only, by
all that was good, not to withdraw his succor from that poor, innocent
child.

The physician's humane heart was not proof against his prayer; and
when at length he prepared to depart, in the joyful and yet painful
conviction that his happier rival had become more worthy of the prize,
he had agreed that he would impress on Neforis, whose mind he suspected
to be slightly affected, that the air of the governor's residence did
not suit Mary, and that she should place her in the care of a physician
outside the town.

As soon as Philippus had quitted the house, Orion went to see Rufinus,
who, on his briefly assuring him that he had come on grave and important
business, begged him to accompany him to his private room. The young
man, however, detained him till he had made all clear with the women as
to the reception of little Mary.

"By degrees all the inhabitants of the residence will be transplanted
into our garden!" exclaimed Rufinus. "Well, I have no objection; and
you, old woman, what do you say to it?"

"I have none certainly," replied his wife. "Besides, neither you nor I
have to decide in this case: the child is to be Paula's guest."

"I only wish she were here already," said Paula, "for who can say
whether your mother, Orion--the air here is perilously Melchite."

"Leave Philippus and me to settle that.--You should have seen how
pleased Mary was."

Then, drawing Paula aside, he hastily added:

"Have I not hoped too much? Is your heart mine? Come what may, can I
count on you--on your love--?"

"Yes, Yes!" The words rushed up from the very bottom of her heart, and
Orion, with a sigh of relief, followed the old man, glad and comforted.

The study was lighted up, and there, without mentioning Katharina, he
told Rufinus of the patriarch's scheme for dispersing the nuns of St.
Cecilia. What could he care for these Melchite sisters? But, since that
consoling hour in the church, he felt as though it were his duty to
stand forth for all that was right, and to do battle against everything
that was base. Besides, he knew how warmly and steadfastly his father
had taken the part of this very convent against the patriarch. Finally,
he had heard how strongly his beloved was attached to this retreat and
its superior, so he prepared himself gleefully to come forth a new man
of deeds, and show his prowess.

The old man listened with growing surprise and horror, and when Orion
had finished his story he rose, helplessly wringing his hands. Orion
spoke to him encouragingly, and told him that he had come, not merely
to give the terrible news, but to hold council with him as to how
the innocent victims might be rescued. At this the grey-headed
philanthropist and wanderer pricked up his ears; and as an old war
horse, though harnessed to the plough, when he hears the trumpet sound
lifts his head and arches his neck as proudly and nobly as of yore
under his glittering trappings, so Rufinus drew himself up, his old
eyes sparkled, and he exclaimed with all the enthusiasm and eagerness of
youth:

"Very good, very good; I am with you; not merely as an adviser; no,
no. Head, and hand, and foot, from crown to heel! And as for you, young
man--as for you! I always saw the stuff that was in you in spite--in
spite.--But, as surely as man is the standard of all things, those
who reach the stronghold of virtue by a winding road are often better
citizens than those who are born in it.--It is growing late, but
evensong will not yet have begun and I shall still be able to see the
abbess. Have you any plan to propose?"

"Yes; the day after to-morrow at this hour...."

"And why not to-morrow?" interrupted the ardent old man.

"Because I have preparations to make which cannot be done in twelve
hours of daylight."

"Good! Good!"

"The day after to-morrow at dusk, a large barge--not one of ours--will
be lying by the bank at the foot of the convent garden. I will escort
the sisters as far as Doomiat on the Lake. I will send on a mounted
messenger to-night, and I will charter a ship for the fugitives by the
help of my cousin Columella, the greatest ship-owner of that town. That
will take them over seas wherever the abbess may command."

"Capital, splendid!" cried Rufinus enthusiastically. He took up his
hat and stick, and the radiant expression of his face changed to a very
grave one. He went up to the young man with solemn dignity, looked at
him with fatherly kindliness, and said:

"I know what woes befell your house through those of our confession,
the fellow-believers of these whom you propose to protect with so much
prudence and courage; and that, young man, is noble, nay, is truly
great. I find in you--you who were described to me as a man of the world
and not over-precise--for the first time that which I have sought in
vain for many years and in many lands, among the pious and virtuous: the
spirit of willing self-sacrifice to save an enemy of a different creed
from pressing peril.--But you are young, Orion, and I am old. You
triumph in the action only, I foresee the consequences. Do you know what
lies before you, if it should be discovered that you have covered the
escape of the prey whom the patriarch already sees in his net? Have you
considered that Benjamin, the most implacable and most powerful hater
among the Jacobites, will pursue you as his mortal foe with all the
fearful means at his command?"

"I have considered it," replied Orion.

Rufinus laid his left hand on the young man's shoulder, and his right
hand on his head, saying, "Then take with you, to begin with, an old
man's--a father's blessing."

"Yes, a father's," repeated Orion softly. A happy thrill ran through his
body and soul, and he fell on the old man's neck deeply moved.

For a minute they stood clasped in each other's arms; then Rufinus freed
himself, and set out to seek the abbess. Orion returned to the women,
whose curiosity had been roused to a high pitch by seeing Rufinus
disappear through the gate leading to the convent-garden. Dame Joanna
could not sit still for excitement, and Pulcheria answered at random
when Orion and Paula, who had an infinity of things to say or whisper to
each other, now and then tried to draw her into the conversation.
Once she sighed deeply, and when her friend asked her: "What ails you,
Child?" she answered anxiously:

"Something serious must be going forward, I feel it. If only Philippus
were here!"

"But we are all safe and well, thank God!" observed Orion, and she
quickly replied:

"Yes indeed, the Lord be praised!" But she thought to herself:

"You think he is of no use but to heal the sick; but it is only when he
is here that everything goes right and happens for the best!"

Still, all felt that there was something unusual and ominous in the
air, and when the old man presently returned his face confirmed their
suspicions. He laid aside his hat and staff in speechless gravity; then
he put his arm affectionately round his wife and said:

"You will need all your courage and self-command once more, as you have
often done before, good wife; I have taken upon myself a serious duty."

Joanna had turned very pale, and while she clung to her husband and
begged him to speak and not to torture her with suspense, her frail
figure was trembling, and bitter tears ran down her cheeks. She could
guess that her husband was once more going away from her and their
child, in the service and for the benefit of others, and she knew full
well that she could not prevent it. If she could, she never would have
had the heart to interfere: for she always understood him, and felt with
him that something to take him out of the narrow circle of home-life was
indispensable to his happiness.

He read her thoughts, and they gave him pain; but he was not to be
diverted from his purpose. The man who would try to heal every suffering
brute was accustomed to see those whom he loved best grieve on his
account. Marriage, he would say, ought not to hinder a man in following
his soul's vocation; and he was fond of using this high-sounding name to
justify himself in his own and his wife's eyes, in doing things to which
he was prompted only by restlessness and unsatisfied energy. Without
this he would, no doubt, have done his best for the imperilled
sisterhood, but it added to his enjoyment of the grand and dangerous
rescue.

The wretched fate of the hapless nuns, and the thought of losing them
as near neighbors, grieved the women deeply, and the men saw many tears
flow; at the same time they had the satisfaction of finding them all
three firmly and equally determined to venture all, and to bid these
whom they loved venture all, to hinder the success of a deed which
filled them with horror and disgust.

Joanna spoke not a word of demur when Rufinus said that he intended to
accompany the fugitives; and when, with beaming looks, he went on
to praise Orion's foresight and keen decisiveness, Paula flew to him
proudly and gladly, holding out both her hands. As for the young man, he
felt as though wings were growing from his shoulders, and this fateful
evening was one of the happiest of his life.

The superior had agreed to his scheme, and in some details had improved
upon it. Two lay sisters and one nun should remain behind. The two
former were to attend to the sick in the infirmary, to ring the bell and
chant the services as usual, that the escape of the rest might not be
suspected; and Joanna, Paula, and Pulcheria, were to assist them.

When, at a late hour, Orion was about to leave, Rufinus asked whether,
under these circumstances, it would be well to bring Mary to his
house; he himself doubted it. Joanna was of his opinion; Paula, on the
contrary, said that she believed it would be better to let the child run
the risk of a remote danger--hardly to be called danger, than to leave
her to pine away body and soul in her old home. Pulcheria supported her,
but the two girls were forced to yield to the decision of the elders.




CHAPTER V.
