chase? let the favoured one look after his own affairs--being a lawyer,
you may well tell yourself, that it is not your interest to move the
question."

And he hesitated and then sat down, and as there is wickedness even in
hesitating about a wicked act, Rem easily drifted from the negative to
the positive of the crime contemplated.

"I had better keep it," he mused, "and see what will come of the
keeping. All things are fair in love and war"--a stupid and slanderous
assertion, as far as love is concerned, for love that is noble and
true, will not justify anything which Christian ethics do not justify.

He suffered in this decision, suffered in his own way quite as much as
Hyde did. Cornelia had been his dream from his youth up, and Hyde had
been his aversion from the moment he first saw him. The words were not
to seek with which he expressed himself, and they were such words as do
not bear repeating. But of all revelations, the revelation of grief is
the plainest. He saw clearly in that hour that Cornelia had never loved
him, that his hopes had always been vain, and he experienced all the
bitterness of being slighted and humbled for an enemy.

After a little while he remembered that Hyde might possibly do the
thing which he had resolved not to do. Involuntarily he did Hyde this
justice, and he said to himself, "if there is anything in the letter
intended for me, which determines its ownership, Hyde will bring it. He
will understand that I have the answer to his proposal, and demand it
from me--and whether I shall feel in a mood to give it to him, will
depend on the manner in which the demand is made. If he is in one of
his lordly ways he will get no satisfaction from me. I am not apt to
give myself, nor anything I have, away; in fact it will be best not to
see him--if he holds a letter of mine he may keep it. I know its tenor
and I am not eager to know the very words in which my lady says 'No.'
HO! HO! HO!" he laughed, "I will go to the Swamp; my scented rival in
his perfumed clothing, will hardly wish the smell of the tanning pits
to come between him and his gentility."

The thought of Hyde's probable visit and this way of escaping it made
him laugh again; but it was a laughter that had that something terrible
in it which makes the laughter of the insane and drunken and cruel,
worse than the bitterest lamentation. He felt a sudden haste to escape
himself, and seizing his hat walked rapidly to his father's office.
Peter looked up as he entered, and the question in his eyes hardly
needed the simple interrogatary--

"Well then?"

"It is 'No.' I shall go to Boston early in the morning. I wish to go
over the business with Blume and Otis, and to possess myself of all
particulars."

"I have just heard that General Hyde came back this morning. He is now
the Right Honourable the Earl of Hyde, and his son is, as you know,
Lord George Hyde. Has this made a difference?"

"It has not. Let us count up what is owing to us. After all there is a
certain good in gold."

"That is the truth. I am an old man and I have seen what altitudes the
want of gold can abase, and what impossible things it makes possible.
In any adversity gold can find friends."

"I shall count every half-penny after Blume and Otis."

"Be not too strict--too far east is west. You may lose all by demanding
all."

Then the two men spent several hours in going over their accounts, and
during this time no one called on Rem and he received no message. When
he returned home he found affairs just as he had left them. "So far
good," he thought, "I will let sleeping dogs lie. Why should I set them
baying about my affairs? I will not do it"--and with this determination
in his heart he fell asleep.

But Rem's sleep was the sleep of pure matter; his soul never knew the
expansion and enlightenment and discipline of the oracles that speak in
darkness. The winged dreams had no message or comfort for him, and he
took no counsel from his pillow. His sleep was the sleep of tired flesh
and blood, and heavy as lead. But the waking from such sleep--if there
is trouble to meet--is like being awakened with a blow. He leaped to
his feet, and the thought of his loss and the shame of it, and the
horror of the dishonourable thing he had done, assailed him with a
brutal force and swiftness. He was stunned by the suddenness and the
inexorable character of his trouble. And he told himself it was "best
to run away from what he could not fight." He had no fear of Hyde's
interference so early in the morning, and once in Boston all attacks
would lose much of their hostile virulence, by the mere influence of
distance. He knew these were cowardly thoughts, but when a man knows he
is in the wrong, he does not challenge his thoughts, he excuses them.
And as soon as he was well on the road to Boston, he even began to
assume that Hyde, full of the glory of his new position, would
doubtless be well disposed to let all old affairs drop quietly "and if
so," he mused, "Cornelia will not be so dainty, and I may get 'Yes'
where I got 'No.'"

He was of course arguing from altogether wrong premises, for Hyde at
that hour was unconscious of his new dignity, and if he had been aware
of it, would have been indifferent to its small honour. He had spent a
miserable night, and a sense of almost intolerable desertion and injury
awoke with him. His soul had been in desolate places, wandering in
immense woods, vaguely apprehended as stretches of time before this
life. He had called the lost Cornelia through all their loneliness, and
answers faint as the faintest echo, had come back to that sense of
spiritual hearing attuned in other worlds than this. But sad as such
experience was, the sole effort had strengthened him. He was indeed in
better case mentally than physically.

"I must get into the fresh air," he said. "I am faint and weak. I must
have movement. I must see my mother. I will tell her everything." Then
he went to his mirror, and looked with a grim smile at its reflection.
"I have the face of a lover kicked out of doors," he continued
scornfully. He took but small pains with his toilet, and calling for
some breakfast sat down to eat it. Then for the first time in his life,
he was conscious of that soul sickness which turns from all physical
comfort; and of that singular obstruction in the throat which is the
heart's sob, and which would not suffer him to swallow.

"I am most wretched," he said mournfully; "and no trouble comes alone.
Of all the days in all the years, why should Madame Jacobus have to
take herself out of town yesterday? It is almost incredible, and she
could, and would have helped me. She would have sent for Cornelia. I
might have pleaded my cause face to face with her." Then angrily--
"Faith! can I yet care for a girl so cruel and so false? I am not to be
pitied if I do. I will go to my dear mother. Mother-love is always
sure, and always young. Whatever befalls, it keeps constant truth. I
will go to my mother."

He rode rapidly through the city and spoke to no one, but when he
reached his Grandfather Van Heemskirk's house, he saw him leaning over
the half-door smoking his pipe. He drew rein then, and the old
gentleman came to his side:

"Why art thou here?" he asked. "Is thy father, or Lady Annie sick?"

"I know nothing new. There was no letter yesterday."

"Yesterday! Surely thou must know that they are now at home? Yesterday,
very early in the morning, they landed."

"My father at home!"

"That is the truth. Where wert thou, not to know this?"

"I came to town yesterday morning. I had a great trouble. I was sick
and kept my room."

"And sick thou art now, I can see that," said Madame Van Heemskirk
coming forward--"What is the matter with thee, my Joris?"

"Cornelia has refused me. I know not how it is, that no woman will love
me. Am I so very disagreeable?"

"Thou art as handsome and as charming as can be; and it is not Cornelia
that has said 'no' to thee, it is her father. Now he will be sorry, for
thy uncle is dead and thy father is Earl Hyde, and thou thyself art a
lord."

"I care not for such things. I am a poor lord, if Cornelia be not my
lady." "I wonder they sent not after thee!"

"They would be expecting me every hour. If there had been a letter I
should have gone directly back with it, but it was beyond all
surmising, that my father should return. Grandfather, will you see
Doctor Moran for me? You can speak a word that will prevail."

"I will not, my Joris. If thy father were not here, that would be
different. He is the right man to move in the matter. Ever thou art in
too much of a hurry. Think now of thy life as a book of uncut leaves,
and do not turn a page till thou hast read it to the very last word."

"_I_ will see Cornelia for thee," said Madame Van Heernskirk. "_I_ will
ask the girl what she means. Very often she passes here, sometimes she
comes in. I will say to her--why did thou throw my grandson's love away
like an old shoe? Art thou not ashamed to be so light of love, for I
know well thou said to my Joris, thou loved him. And she will tell me
the truth. Yes, indeed, if into my house she comes, out of it she goes
not, until I have the why, and the wherefore."

"Do not be unkind to her, grandmother--perhaps it is not her fault--if
she had only said a few sorrowful words--Let me show you her letter."

"No," said Van Heernskirk. "One thing at a time, Joris. Now it is the
time to go and welcome thy father and thy cousin--too long has been the
delay already."

"Then good-bye! Grandmother, you will speak or me?" And she smiled and
nodded, and stood on her tiptoe while Joris stooped and kissed
her--"Fret not thyself at all. I will see Cornelia and speak for thee."
And then he kissed her again and rode away.

Very near the great entrance gates of Hyde Manor he met his father and
mother walking. Madame, the Right Honourable the Countess of Hyde, was
pointing out the many improvements she had made; and the Earl looked
pleased and happy. George threw himself off his horse with a loving
impetuosity, and his mother questioned him about his manner of spending
the previous day. "How could thou help knowing thy father had landed?"
she asked. "Was not the whole city talking of the circumstance?"

"I was not in the city, mother. I went to the post office and from
there to Madame Jacobus. She was just leaving for Charleston, and I
went with her to the boat."

"What an incredible thing! Madame Jacobus leaving New York! For what?
For why?"

"She has gone to nurse her sister-in-law, who is dying. That is of all
things the most likely--for she has a great heart."

"You say that--I know not."

"It is the truth itself. Afterwards I had my lunch and then came on a
fever and a distracting headache, and I was compelled to keep my room;
and so heard nothing at all until my grandfather told me the good news
this morning."

"Madame Kippon was on the dock and saw thy father and cousin land. The
news would be a hot coal in her mouth till she told it, and I am amazed
she did not call at thy lodging. Now go forward; when thy father and I
have been round the land, we will come to thee. Thy cousin Annie is
here."

"That confounds me. I could hardly believe it true."

"She is frail, and her physicians thought the sea voyage might give her
the vitality she needs. It was at least a chance, and she was
determined to take it. Then thy father put all his own desires behind
him, and came with her. We will talk more in a little while. I see thy
dress is untidy, and I dare say thou art hungry. Go, eat and dress, by
that time we shall be home."

But though his mother gave him a final charge "to make haste," he went
slowly. The thought of Cornelia had returned to his memory with a
sweet, strong insistence that carried all before it. He wondered what
she was doing--how she was dressed--what she was thinking--what she was
feeling---He wondered if she was suffering--if she thought he was
suffering--if she was sorry for him--He made himself as wretched as
possible, and then some voice of comfort anteceding all reasoning, told
him to be of good cheer; for if Cornelia had ever loved him, she must
love him still; and if she had only been amusing herself with his
devotion, then what folly to break his heart for a girl who had no
heart worth talking about.

Poor Cornelia! She was at that moment the most unhappy woman in New
York. She had excused the "ten words" he might have written yesterday.
She had found in the unexpected return of his father and cousin reason
sufficient for his neglect; but it was now past ten o'clock of another
day, and there was yet no word from him. Perhaps then he was coming.
She sat at her tambour frame listening till all her senses and emotions
seemed to have fled to her ear. And the ear has memory, it watches for
an accustomed sound, it will not suffer us to forget the voice, the
step of those we love. Many footsteps passed, but none stopped at the
gate; none came up the garden path, and no one lifted the knocker. The
house itself was painfully still; there was no sound but the faint
noise made by Mrs. Moran as she put down her Dobbin or her scissors.
The tension became distressing. She longed for her father--for a
caller--for any one to break this unbearable pause in life.

Yet she could not give up hope. A score of excuses came into her mind;
she was sure he would come in the afternoon. He MUST come. She read and
reread his letter. She dressed herself with delightful care and sat
down to watch for him. He came not. He sent no word, no token, and as
hour after hour slipped away, she was compelled to drop her needle.

"Mother," she said, "I am not well. I must go upstairs." She had been
holding despair at bay so many hours she could bear it no longer. For
she was so young, and this was the first time she had been yoke-fellow
with sorrow. She was amazed at her own suffering. It seemed so
impossible. It had come upon her so swiftly, so suddenly, and as yet
she was not able to seek any comfort or sympathy from God or man. For
to do so, was to admit the impossibility of things yet turning out
right; and this conclusion she would not admit; she was angry at a word
or a look that suggested such a termination.

The next morning she called Balthazar to her and closely questioned
him. It had struck her in the night, that the slave might have lost the
letter, and be afraid to confess the accident. But Balthazar's manner
and frank speech was beyond suspicion. He told her exactly what
clothing Lieutenant Hyde was wearing, how he looked, what words he
said, and then with a little hesitation took a silver crown piece from
his pocket and added "he gave it to me. When he took the letter in his
hand he looked down at it and laughed like he was very happy; and he
gave me the money for bringing it to him; that is the truth, sure, Miss
Cornelia."

She could not doubt it. There was then nothing to be done but wait in
patience for the explanation she was certain would yet come. But on
with what leaden motion the hours went by! For a few days she made a
pretence of her usual employments, but at the end of a week her
embroidery frame stood uncovered, her books were unopened her music
silent, and she declared herself unable to take her customary walk. Her
mother watched her with unspeakable sympathy, but Cornelia's grief was
dumb; it made no audible moan, and preserved an attitude which repelled
all discussion. As yet she would not acknowledge a doubt of her lover's
faith; his conduct was certainly a mystery, but she told her heart with
a passionate iteration that it would positively be cleared up.

Now and then the Doctor, or a visitor, made a remark which might have
broken this implicit trust, and probably did facilitate that end; for
it was evident from them, that Hyde was in health, and that he was
taking his share in the usual routine of daily life:--thus, one day
Mrs. Wiley while making a call said--

"I met the new Countess and the Lady Annie Hyde, and I can tell you the
new Countess is very much of a Countess. As for the Lady Annie," she
added, "she was wrapped to her nose in furs, and you could see nothing
of her but two large black eyes, that even at a distance made you feel
sad and uncomfortable. However Lord George Hyde appeared to be very
much her servant."
