double-dyed in grain, and bing off to Bridewell, with every brass basin
betwixt the Bar and Paul's beating before you, as if the devil were
banging them with his beef-hook."

Dame Ursley coloured like scarlet, seized upon the half-emptied flask of
cordial, and seemed, by her first gesture, about to hurl it at the head
of her adversary; but suddenly, and as if by a strong internal effort,
she checked her outrageous resentment, and, putting the bottle to its
more legitimate use, filled, with wonderful composure, the two glasses,
and, taking up one of them, said, with a smile, which better became her
comely and jovial countenance than the fury by which it was animated the
moment before--

"Here is to thee, Jin Vin, my lad, in all loving kindness, whatever
spite thou bearest to me, that have always been a mother to thee."

Jenkin's English good-nature could not resist this forcible appeal; he
took up the other glass, and lovingly pledged the dame in her cup of
reconciliation, and proceeded to make a kind of grumbling apology for
his own violence--

"For you know," he said, "it was you persuaded me to get these fine
things, and go to that godless ordinary, and ruffle it with the best,
and bring you home all the news; and you said, I, that was the cock
of the ward, would soon be the cock of the ordinary, and would win
ten times as much at gleek and primero, as I used to do at put and
beggar-my-neighbour--and turn up doublets with the dice, as busily as I
was wont to trowl down the ninepins in the skittle-ground--and then you
said I should bring you such news out of the ordinary as should make
us all, when used as you knew how to use it--and now you see what is to
come of it all!"

"'Tis all true thou sayest, lad," said the dame; "but thou must have
patience. Rome was not built in a day--you cannot become used to your
court-suit in a month's time, any more than when you changed your long
coat for a doublet and hose; and in gaming you must expect to lose as
well as gain--'tis the sitting gamester sweeps the board."

"The board has swept me, I know," replied Jin Vin, "and that pretty
clean out.--I would that were the worst; but I owe for all this finery,
and settling-day is coming on, and my master will find my accompt worse
than it should be by a score of pieces. My old father will be called in
to make them good; and I--may save the hangman a labour and do the job
myself, or go the Virginia voyage."

"Do not speak so loud, my dear boy," said Dame Ursley; "but tell me why
you borrow not from a friend to make up your arrear. You could lend him
as much when his settling-day came round."

"No, no--I have had enough of that work," said Vincent. "Tunstall would
lend me the money, poor fellow, an he had it; but his gentle, beggarly
kindred, plunder him of all, and keep him as bare as a birch at
Christmas. No--my fortune may be spelt in four letters, and these read,
RUIN."

"Now hush, you simple craven," said the dame; "did you never hear, that
when the need is highest the help is nighest? We may find aid for you
yet, and sooner than you are aware of. I am sure I would never have
advised you to such a course, but only you had set heart and eye on
pretty Mistress Marget, and less would not serve you--and what could
I do but advise you to cast your city-slough, and try your luck where
folks find fortune?"

"Ay, ay--I remember your counsel well," said Jenkin; "I was to be
introduced to her by you when I was perfect in my gallantries, and as
rich as the king; and then she was to be surprised to find I was poor
Jin Vin, that used to watch, from matin to curfew, for one glance of
her eye; and now, instead of that, she has set her soul on this Scottish
sparrow-hawk of a lord that won my last tester, and be cursed to him;
and so I am bankrupt in love, fortune, and character, before I am out of
my time, and all along of you, Mother Midnight."

"Do not call me out of my own name, my dear boy, Jin Vin," answered
Ursula, in a tone betwixt rage and coaxing,--"do not; because I am no
saint, but a poor sinful woman, with no more patience than she needs,
to carry her through a thousand crosses. And if I have done you wrong by
evil counsel, I must mend it and put you right by good advice. And for
the score of pieces that must be made up at settling-day, why, here is,
in a good green purse, as much as will make that matter good; and
we will get old Crosspatch, the tailor, to take a long day for your
clothes; and--"

"Mother, are you serious?" said Jin Vin, unable to trust either his eyes
or his ears.

"In troth am I," said the dame; "and will you call me Mother Midnight
now, Jin Vin?"

"Mother Midnight!" exclaimed Jenkin, hugging the dame in his transport,
and bestowing on her still comely cheek a hearty and not unacceptable
smack, that sounded like the report of a pistol,--"Mother Midday,
rather, that has risen to light me out of my troubles--a mother more
dear than she who bore me; for she, poor soul, only brought me into a
world of sin and sorrow, and your timely aid has helped me out of the
one and the other." And the good-natured fellow threw himself back in
his chair, and fairly drew his hand across his eyes.

"You would not have me be made to ride the Skimmington then," said the
dame; "or parade me in a cart, with all the brass basins of the ward
beating the march to Bridewell before me?"

"I would sooner be carted to Tyburn myself," replied the penitent.

"Why, then, sit up like a man, and wipe thine eyes; and, if thou art
pleased with what I have done, I will show thee how thou mayst requite
me in the highest degree."

"How?" said Jenkin Vincent, sitting straight up in his chair.--"You
would have me, then, do you some service for this friendship of yours?"

"Ay, marry would I," said Dame Ursley; "for you are to know, that though
I am right glad to stead you with it, this gold is not mine, but was
placed in my hands in order to find a trusty agent, for a certain
purpose; and so--But what's the matter with you?--are you fool enough to
be angry because you cannot get a purse of gold for nothing? I would
I knew where such were to come by. I never could find them lying in my
road, I promise you."

"No, no, dame," said poor Jenkin, "it is not for that; for, look you,
I would rather work these ten bones to the knuckles, and live by my
labour; but--" (and here he paused.)

"But what, man?" said Dame Ursley. "You are willing to work for what you
want; and yet, when I offer you gold for the winning, you look on me as
the devil looks over Lincoln."

"It is ill talking of the devil, mother," said Jenkin. "I had him even
now in my head--for, look you, I am at that pass, when they say he
will appear to wretched ruined creatures, and proffer them gold for the
fee-simple of their salvation. But I have been trying these two days to
bring my mind strongly up to the thought, that I will rather sit down
in shame, and sin, and sorrow, as I am like to do, than hold on in ill
courses to get rid of my present straits; and so take care, Dame Ursula,
how you tempt me to break such a good resolution."

"I tempt you to nothing, young man," answered Ursula; "and, as I
perceive you are too wilful to be wise, I will e'en put my purse in my
pocket, and look out for some one that will work my turn with better
will, and more thankfulness. And you may go your own course,--break
your indenture, ruin your father, lose your character, and bid pretty
Mistress Margaret farewell, for ever and a day."

"Stay, stay," said Jenkin "the woman is in as great a hurry as a brown
baker when his oven is overheated. First, let me hear that which you
have to propose to me."

"Why, after all, it is but to get a gentleman of rank and fortune, who
is in trouble, carried in secret down the river, as far as the Isle of
Dogs, or somewhere thereabout, where he may lie concealed until he can
escape aboard. I know thou knowest every place by the river's side as
well as the devil knows an usurer, or the beggar knows his dish."

"A plague of your similes, dame," replied the apprentice; "for the devil
gave me that knowledge, and beggary may be the end on't.--But what has
this gentleman done, that he should need to be under hiding? No Papist,
I hope--no Catesby and Piercy business--no Gunpowder Plot?"

"Fy, fy!--what do you take me for?" said Dame Ursula. "I am as good a
churchwoman as the parson's wife, save that necessary business will not
allow me to go there oftener than on Christmas-day, heaven help me!--No,
no--this is no Popish matter. The gentleman hath but struck another in
the Park--"

"Ha! what?" said Vincent, interrupting her with a start.

"Ay, ay, I see you guess whom I mean. It is even he we have spoken of so
often--just Lord Glenvarloch, and no one else."

Vincent sprung from his seat, and traversed the room with rapid and
disorderly steps.

"There, there it is now--you are always ice or gunpowder. You sit in the
great leathern armchair, as quiet as a rocket hangs upon the frame in a
rejoicing-night till the match be fired, and then, whizz! you are in the
third heaven, beyond the reach of the human voice, eye, or brain.--When
you have wearied yourself with padding to and fro across the room, will
you tell me your determination, for time presses? Will you aid me in
this matter, or not?"

"No--no--no--a thousand times no," replied Jenkin. "Have you not
confessed to me, that Margaret loves him?"

"Ay," answered the dame, "that she thinks she does; but that will not
last long."

"And have I not told you but this instant," replied Jenkin, "that it was
this same Glenvarloch that rooked me, at the ordinary, of every penny I
had, and made a knave of me to boot, by gaining more than was my own?--O
that cursed gold, which Shortyard, the mercer, paid me that morning on
accompt, for mending the clock of Saint Stephen's! If I had not, by ill
chance, had that about me, I could but have beggared my purse, without
blemishing my honesty; and, after I had been rooked of all the rest
amongst them, I must needs risk the last five pieces with that shark
among the minnows!"

"Granted," said Dame Ursula. "All this I know; and I own, that as Lord
Glenvarloch was the last you played with, you have a right to charge
your ruin on his head. Moreover, I admit, as already said, that Margaret
has made him your rival. Yet surely, now he is in danger to lose his
hand, it is not a time to remember all this?"

"By my faith, but it is, though," said the young citizen. "Lose his
hand, indeed? They may take his head, for what I care. Head and hand
have made me a miserable wretch!"

"Now, were it not better, my prince of flat-caps," said Dame Ursula,
"that matters were squared between you; and that, through means of the
same Scottish lord, who has, as you say, deprived you of your money and
your mistress, you should in a short time recover both?"

"And how can your wisdom come to that conclusion, dame?" said the
apprentice. "My money, indeed, I can conceive--that is, if I comply with
your proposal; but--my pretty Marget!--how serving this lord, whom
she has set her nonsensical head upon, can do me good with her, is far
beyond my conception."

"That is because, in simple phrase," said Dame Ursula, "thou knowest no
more of a woman's heart than doth a Norfolk gosling. Look you, man.
Were I to report to Mistress Margaret that the young lord has miscarried
through thy lack of courtesy in refusing to help him, why, then, thou
wert odious to her for ever. She will loathe thee as she will loathe the
very cook who is to strike off Glenvarloch's hand with his cleaver--and
then she will be yet more fixed in her affections towards this lord.
London will hear of nothing but him--speak of nothing but him--think
of nothing but him, for three weeks at least, and all that outcry will
serve to keep him uppermost in her mind; for nothing pleases a girl so
much as to bear relation to any one who is the talk of the whole world
around her. Then, if he suffer this sentence of the law, it is a chance
if she ever forgets him. I saw that handsome, proper young gentleman
Babington, suffer in the Queen's time myself, and though I was then but
a girl, he was in my head for a year after he was hanged. But, above
all, pardoned or punished, Glenvarloch will probably remain in London,
and his presence will keep up the silly girl's nonsensical fancy about
him. Whereas, if he escapes--"

"Ay, show me how that is to avail me?" said Jenkin. "If he escapes,"
said the dame, resuming her argument, "he must resign the Court for
years, if not for life; and you know the old saying, 'out of sight, and
out of mind.'"

"True--most true," said Jenkin; "spoken like an oracle, most wise
Ursula."

"Ay, ay, I knew you would hear reason at last," said the wily dame; "and
then, when this same lord is off and away for once and for ever, who, I
pray you, is to be pretty pet's confidential person, and who is to fill
up the void in her affections?--why, who but thou, thou pearl of
'prentices! And then you will have overcome your own inclinations to
comply with hers, and every woman is sensible of that--and you will have
run some risk, too, in carrying her desires into effect--and what is it
that woman likes better than bravery, and devotion to her will? Then you
have her secret, and she must treat you with favour and observance, and
repose confidence in you, and hold private intercourse with you, till
she weeps with one eye for the absent lover whom she is never to see
again, and blinks with the other blithely upon him who is in presence;
and then if you know not how to improve the relation in which you stand
with her, you are not the brisk lively lad that all the world takes you
for--Said I well?"

"You have spoken like an empress, most mighty Ursula," said Jenkin
Vincent; "and your will shall be obeyed."

"You know Alsatia well?" continued his tutoress.

"Well enough, well enough," replied he with a nod; "I have heard the
dice rattle there in my day, before I must set up for gentleman, and go
among the gallants at the Shavaleer Bojo's, as they call him,--the worse
rookery of the two, though the feathers are the gayest."

"And they will have a respect for thee yonder, I warrant?"

"Ay, ay," replied Vin, "when I am got into my fustian doublet again,
with my bit of a trunnion under my arm, I can walk Alsatia at midnight
as I could do that there Fleet Street in midday--they will not one of
them swagger with the prince of 'prentices, and the king of clubs--they
know I could bring every tall boy in the ward down upon them."

"And you know all the watermen, and so forth?"

"Can converse with every sculler in his own language, from Richmond to
Gravesend, and know all the water-cocks, from John Taylor the Poet to
little Grigg the Grinner, who never pulls but he shows all his teeth
from ear to ear, as if he were grimacing through a horse-collar."

"And you can take any dress or character upon you well, such as a
waterman's, a butcher's, a foot-soldier's," continued Ursula, "or the
like?"

"Not such a mummer as I am within the walls, and thou knowest that
well enough, dame," replied the apprentice. "I can touch the players
themselves, at the Ball and at the Fortune, for presenting any thing
except a gentleman. Take but this d--d skin of frippery off me, which
I think the devil stuck me into, and you shall put me into nothing else
that I will not become as if I were born to it."

"Well, we will talk of your transmutation by and by," said the dame,
"and find you clothes withal, and money besides; for it will take a good
deal to carry the thing handsomely through."

"But where is that money to come from, dame?" said Jenkin; "there is a
question I would fain have answered before I touch it."

"Why, what a fool art thou to ask such a question! Suppose I am content
to advance it to please young madam, what is the harm then?"

"I will suppose no such thing," said Jenkin, hastily; "I know that you,
dame, have no gold to spare, and maybe would not spare it if you had--so
that cock will not crow. It must be from Margaret herself."

"Well, thou suspicious animal, and what if it were?" said Ursula.

"Only this," replied Jenkin, "that I will presently to her, and learn if
she has come fairly by so much ready money; for sooner than connive at
her getting it by any indirection, I would hang myself at once. It is
enough what I have done myself, no need to engage poor Margaret in such
villainy--I'll to her, and tell her of the danger--I will, by heaven!"

"You are mad to think of it," said Dame Suddlechop, considerably
alarmed--"hear me but a moment. I know not precisely from whom she got
the money; but sure I am that she obtained it at her godfather's."

"Why, Master George Heriot is not returned from France," said Jenkin.

"No," replied Ursula, "but Dame Judith is at home--and the strange lady,
whom they call Master Heriot's ghost--she never goes abroad."

"It is very true, Dame Suddlechop," said Jenkin; "and I believe you have
guessed right--they say that lady has coin at will; and if Marget can
get a handful of fairy-gold, why, she is free to throw it away at will."

"Ah, Jin Vin," said the dame, reducing her voice almost to a whisper,
"we should not want gold at will neither, could we but read the riddle
of that lady!"

"They may read it that list," said Jenkin, "I'll never pry into what
concerns me not--Master George Heriot is a worthy and brave citizen, and
an honour to London, and has a right to manage his own household as he
likes best.--There was once a talk of rabbling him the fifth of November
before the last, because they said he kept a nunnery in his house, like
old Lady Foljambe; but Master George is well loved among the 'prentices,
and we got so many brisk boys of us together as should have rabbled the
rabble, had they had but the heart to rise."

"Well, let that pass," said Ursula; "and now, tell me how you will
manage to be absent from shop a day or two, for you must think that this
matter will not be ended sooner."

"Why, as to that, I can say nothing," said Jenkin, "I have always served
duly and truly; I have no heart to play truant, and cheat my master of
his time as well as his money."

"Nay, but the point is to get back his money for him," said Ursula,
"which he is not likely to see on other conditions. Could you not ask
leave to go down to your uncle in Essex for two or three days? He may be
ill, you know."

"Why, if I must, I must," said Jenkin, with a heavy sigh; "but I will
not be lightly caught treading these dark and crooked paths again."

"Hush thee, then," said the dame, "and get leave for this very evening;
and come back hither, and I will introduce you to another implement,
who must be employed in the matter.--Stay, stay!--the lad is mazed--you
would not go into your master's shop in that guise, surely? Your trunk
is in the matted chamber, with your 'prentice things--go and put them on
as fast as you can."

"I think I am bewitched," said Jenkin, giving a glance towards his
dress, "or that these fool's trappings have made as great an ass of
me as of many I have seen wear them; but let line once be rid of the
harness, and if you catch me putting it on again, I will give you leave
to sell me to a gipsy, to carry pots, pans, and beggar's bantlings, all
the rest of my life." So saying, he retired to change his apparel.




CHAPTER XXII


  Chance will not do the work--Chance sends the breeze;
  But if the pilot slumber at the helm,
  The very wind that wafts us towards the port
  May dash us on the shelves.--The steersman's part is vigilance,
  Blow it or rough or smooth.
                               _Old Play_.

We left Nigel, whose fortunes we are bound to trace by the engagement
contracted in our title-page, sad and solitary in the mansion of
Trapbois the usurer, having just received a letter instead of a visit
from his friend the Templar, stating reasons why he could not at
that time come to see him in Alsatia. So that it appeared that his
intercourse with the better and more respectable class of society, was,
for the present, entirely cut off. This was a melancholy, and, to a
proud mind like that of Nigel, a degrading reflection.

He went to the window of his apartment, and found the street enveloped
in one of those thick, dingy, yellow-coloured fogs, which often invest
the lower part of London and Westminster. Amid the darkness, dense and
palpable, were seen to wander like phantoms a reveller or two, whom the
morning had surprised where the evening left them; and who now, with
tottering steps, and by an instinct which intoxication could not wholly
overcome, were groping the way to their own homes, to convert day into
night, for the purpose of sleeping off the debauch which had turned
night into day. Although it was broad day in the other parts of the
city, it was scarce dawn yet in Alsatia; and none of the sounds of
industry or occupation were there heard, which had long before aroused
the slumberers in any other quarter. The prospect was too tiresome and
disagreeable to detain Lord Glenvarloch at his station, so, turning from
the window, he examined with more interest the furniture and appearance
of the apartment which he tenanted.

Much of it had been in its time rich and curious--there was a huge
four-post bed, with as much carved oak about it as would have made the
head of a man-of-war, and tapestry hangings ample enough to have
been her sails. There was a huge mirror with a massy frame of gilt
brass-work, which was of Venetian manufacture, and must have been worth
a considerable sum before it received the tremendous crack, which,
traversing it from one corner to the other, bore the same proportion to
the surface that the Nile bears to the map of Egypt. The chairs were
of different forms and shapes, some had been carved, some gilded, some
covered with damasked leather, some with embroidered work, but all were
damaged and worm-eaten. There was a picture of Susanna and the Elders
over the chimney-piece, which might have been accounted a choice piece,
had not the rats made free with the chaste fair one's nose, and with the
beard of one of her reverend admirers.

In a word, all that Lord Glenvarloch saw, seemed to have been articles
carried off by appraisement or distress, or bought as pennyworths at
some obscure broker's, and huddled together in the apartment, as in a
sale-room, without regard to taste or congruity.

The place appeared to Nigel to resemble the houses near the sea-coast,
which are too often furnished with the spoils of wrecked vessels, as
this was probably fitted up with the relics of ruined profligates.--"My
own skiff is among the breakers," thought Lord Glenvarloch, "though my
wreck will add little to the profits of the spoiler."

He was chiefly interested in the state of the grate, a huge assemblage
of rusted iron bars which stood in the chimney, unequally supported
by three brazen feet, moulded into the form of lion's claws, while the
fourth, which had been bent by an accident, seemed proudly uplifted
as if to paw the ground; or as if the whole article had nourished the
ambitious purpose of pacing forth into the middle of the apartment, and
had one foot ready raised for the journey. A smile passed over Nigel's
face as this fantastic idea presented itself to his fancy.--"I must
stop its march, however," he thought; "for this morning is chill and raw
enough to demand some fire."

He called accordingly from the top of a large staircase, with a heavy
oaken balustrade, which gave access to his own and other apartments, for
the house was old and of considerable size; but, receiving no answer to
his repeated summons, he was compelled to go in search of some one who
might accommodate him with what he wanted.

Nigel had, according to the fashion of the old world in Scotland,
received an education which might, in most particulars, be termed
simple, hardy, and unostentatious; but he had, nevertheless, been
accustomed to much personal deference, and to the constant attendance
and ministry of one or more domestics. This was the universal custom in
Scotland, where wages were next to nothing, and where, indeed, a man of
title or influence might have as many attendants as he pleased, for
the mere expense of food, clothes, and countenance. Nigel was therefore
mortified and displeased when he found himself without notice or
attendance; and the more dissatisfied, because he was at the same time
angry with himself for suffering such a trifle to trouble him at all,
amongst matters of more deep concernment. "There must surely be some
servants in so large a house as this," said he, as he wandered over the
place, through which he was conducted by a passage which branched
off from the gallery. As he went on, he tried the entrance to several
apartments, some of which he found were locked and others unfurnished,
all apparently unoccupied; so that at length he returned to the
staircase, and resolved to make his way down to the lower part of the
house, where he supposed he must at least find the old gentleman, and
his ill-favoured daughter. With this purpose he first made his entrance
into a little low, dark parlour, containing a well-worn leathern
easy-chair, before which stood a pair of slippers, while on the left
side rested a crutch-handled staff; an oaken table stood before it, and
supported a huge desk clamped with iron, and a massive pewter inkstand.
Around the apartment were shelves, cabinets, and other places convenient
for depositing papers. A sword, musketoon, and a pair of pistols, hung
over the chimney, in ostentatious display, as if to intimate that the
proprietor would be prompt in the defence of his premises.

"This must be the usurer's den," thought Nigel; and he was about to
call aloud, when the old man, awakened even by the slightest noise,
for avarice seldom sleeps sound, soon was heard from the inner room,
speaking in a voice of irritability, rendered more tremulous by his
morning cough.

"Ugh, ugh, ugh--who is there? I say--ugh, ugh--who is there? Why,
Martha!--ugh! ugh--Martha Trapbois--here be thieves in the house, and
they will not speak to me--why, Martha!--thieves, thieves--ugh, ugh,
ugh!"

Nigel endeavoured to explain, but the idea of thieves had taken
possession of the old man's pineal gland, and he kept coughing and
screaming, and screaming and coughing, until the gracious Martha entered
the apartment; and, having first outscreamed her father, in order
to convince him that there was no danger, and to assure him that the
intruder was their new lodger, and having as often heard her sire
ejaculate--"Hold him fast--ugh, ugh--hold him fast till I come," she at
length succeeded in silencing his fears and his clamour, and then
coldly and dryly asked Lord Glenvarloch what he wanted in her father's
apartment.

Her lodger had, in the meantime, leisure to contemplate her appearance,
which did not by any means improve the idea he had formed of it by
candlelight on the preceding evening. She was dressed in what was called
a Queen Mary's ruff and farthingale; not the falling ruff with which the
unfortunate Mary of Scotland is usually painted, but that which, with
more than Spanish stiffness, surrounded the throat, and set off
the morose head, of her fierce namesake, of Smithfield memory. This
antiquated dress assorted well with the faded complexion, grey eyes,
thin lips, and austere visage of the antiquated maiden, which was,
moreover, enhanced by a black hood, worn as her head-gear, carefully
disposed so as to prevent any of her hair from escaping to view,
probably because the simplicity of the period knew no art of disguising
the colour with which time had begun to grizzle her tresses. Her figure
was tall, thin, and flat, with skinny arms and hands, and feet of the
larger size, cased in huge high-heeled shoes, which added height to
a stature already ungainly. Apparently some art had been used by
the tailor, to conceal a slight defect of shape, occasioned by
the accidental elevation of one shoulder above the other; but the
praiseworthy efforts of the ingenious mechanic, had only succeeded in
calling the attention of the observer to his benevolent purpose, without
demonstrating that he had been able to achieve it.

Such was Mrs. Martha Trapbois, whose dry "What were you seeking here,
sir?" fell again, and with reiterated sharpness, on the ear of Nigel,
as he gazed upon her presence, and compared it internally to one of the
faded and grim figures in the old tapestry which adorned his bedstead.
It was, however, necessary to reply, and he answered, that he came in
search of the servants, as he desired to have a fire kindled in his
apartment on account of the rawness of the morning.

"The woman who does our char-work," answered Mistress Martha, "comes at
eight o'clock-if you want fire sooner, there are fagots and a bucket of
sea-coal in the stone-closet at the head of the stair--and there is a
flint and steel on the upper shelf--you can light fire for yourself if
you will."

"No--no--no, Martha," ejaculated her father, who, having donned his
rustic tunic, with his hose all ungirt, and his feet slip-shod, hastily
came out of the inner apartment, with his mind probably full of robbers,
for he had a naked rapier in his hand, which still looked formidable,
though rust had somewhat marred its shine.--What he had heard at
entrance about lighting a fire, had changed, however, the current of his
ideas. "No--no--no," he cried, and each negative was more emphatic than
its predecessor-"The gentleman shall not have the trouble to put on a
fire--ugh--ugh. I'll put it on myself, for a con-si-de-ra-ti-on."

This last word was a favourite expression with the old gentleman, which
he pronounced in a peculiar manner, gasping it out syllable by syllable,
and laying a strong emphasis upon the last. It was, indeed, a sort
of protecting clause, by which he guarded himself against all
inconveniences attendant on the rash habit of offering service or
civility of any kind, the which, when hastily snapped at by those to
whom they are uttered, give the profferer sometimes room to repent his
promptitude.

"For shame, father," said Martha, "that must not be. Master Grahame will
kindle his own fire, or wait till the char-woman comes to do it for him,
just as likes him best."

"No, child--no, child. Child Martha, no," reiterated the old miser--"no
char-woman shall ever touch a grate in my house; they put--ugh, ugh--the
faggot uppermost, and so the coal kindles not, and the flame goes up
the chimney, and wood and heat are both thrown away. Now, I will lay
it properly for the gentleman, for a consideration, so that it shall
last--ugh, ugh--last the whole day." Here his vehemence increased his
cough so violently, that Nigel could only, from a scattered word here
and there, comprehend that it was a recommendation to his daughter
to remove the poker and tongs from the stranger's fireside, with an
assurance, that, when necessary, his landlord would be in attendance to
adjust it himself, "for a consideration."

Martha paid as little attention to the old man's injunctions as a
predominant dame gives to those of a henpecked husband. She only
repeated, in a deeper and more emphatic tone of censure,--"For shame,
father--for shame!" then, turning to her guest, said, with her usual
ungraciousness of manner--"Master Grahame--it is best to be plain with
you at first. My father is an old, a very old man, and his wits, as you
may see, are somewhat weakened--though I would not advise you to make
a bargain with him, else you may find them too sharp for your own. For
myself, I am a lone woman, and, to say truth, care little to see or
converse with any one. If you can be satisfied with house-room, shelter,
and safety, it will be your own fault if you have them not, and they
are not always to be found in this unhappy quarter. But, if you seek
deferential observance and attendance, I tell you at once you will not
find them here."

"I am not wont either to thrust myself upon acquaintance, madam, or
to give trouble," said the guest; "nevertheless, I shall need the
assistance of a domestic to assist me to dress--Perhaps you can
recommend me to such?"

"Yes, to twenty," answered Mistress Martha, "who will pick your purse
while they tie your points, and cut your throat while they smooth your
pillow."

"I will be his servant, myself," said the old man, whose intellect,
for a moment distanced, had again, in some measure, got up with
the conversation. "I will brush his cloak--ugh, ugh--and tie his
points--ugh, ugh--and clean his shoes--ugh--and run on his errands with
speed and safety--ugh, ugh, ugh, ugh--for a consideration."

"Good-morrow to you, sir," said Martha, to Nigel, in a tone of direct
and positive dismissal. "It cannot be agreeable to a daughter that
a stranger should hear her father speak thus. If you be really a
gentleman, you will retire to your own apartment."

"I will not delay a moment," said Nigel, respectfully, for he was
sensible that circumstances palliated the woman's rudeness. "I would but
ask you, if seriously there can be danger in procuring the assistance of
a serving-man in this place?"

"Young gentleman," said Martha, "you must know little of Whitefriars to
ask the question. We live alone in this house, and seldom has a stranger
entered it; nor should you, to be plain, had my will been consulted.
Look at the door--see if that of a castle can be better secured; the
windows of the first floor are grated on the outside, and within, look
to these shutters."

She pulled one of them aside, and showed a ponderous apparatus of bolts
and chains for securing the window-shutters, while her father, pressing
to her side, seized her gown with a trembling hand, and said, in a low
whisper, "Show not the trick of locking and undoing them. Show him not
the trick on't, Martha--ugh, ugh--on _no_ consideration." Martha went
on, without paying him any attention.

"And yet, young gentleman, we have been more than once like to find all
these defences too weak to protect our lives; such an evil effect on the
wicked generation around us hath been made by the unhappy report of my
poor father's wealth."

"Say nothing of that, housewife," said the miser, his irritability
increased by the very supposition of his being wealthy--"Say nothing
of that, or I will beat thee, housewife--beat thee with my staff, for
fetching and carrying lies that will procure our throats to be cut
at last--ugh, ugh.--I am but a poor man," he continued, turning to
Nigel--"a very poor man, that am willing to do any honest turn upon
earth, for a modest consideration."

"I therefore warn you of the life you must lead, young gentleman," said
Martha; "the poor woman who does the char-work will assist you so far as
in her power, but the wise man is his own best servant and assistant."

"It is a lesson you have taught me, madam, and I thank you for it--I
will assuredly study it at leisure."

"You will do well," said Martha; "and as you seem thankful for advice,
I, though I am no professed counsellor of others, will give you more.
Make no intimacy with any one in Whitefriars--borrow no money, on any
score, especially from my father, for, dotard as he seems, he will make
an ass of you. Last, and best of all, stay here not an instant longer
than you can help it. Farewell, sir."

"A gnarled tree may bear good fruit, and a harsh nature may give good
counsel," thought the Lord of Glenvarloch, as he retreated to his own
apartment, where the same reflection occurred to him again and again,
while, unable as yet to reconcile himself to the thoughts of becoming
his own fire-maker, he walked up and down his bedroom, to warm himself
by exercise.

At length his meditations arranged themselves in the following
soliloquy--by which expression I beg leave to observe once for all, that
I do not mean that Nigel literally said aloud with his bodily organs,
the words which follow in inverted commas, (while pacing the room by
himself,) but that I myself choose to present to my dearest reader the
picture of my hero's mind, his reflections and resolutions, in the form
of a speech, rather than in that of a narrative. In other words, I have
put his thoughts into language; and this I conceive to be the purpose of
the soliloquy upon the stage as well as in the closet, being at once the
most natural, and perhaps the only way of communicating to the spectator
what is supposed to be passing in the bosom of the scenic personage.
There are no such soliloquies in nature, it is true, but unless they
were received as a conventional medium of communication betwixt the poet
and the audience, we should reduce dramatic authors to the recipe of
Master Puff, who makes Lord Burleigh intimate a long train of political
reasoning to the audience, by one comprehensive shake of his noddle. In
narrative, no doubt, the writer has the alternative of telling that his
personages thought so and so, inferred thus and thus, and arrived at
such and such a conclusion; but the soliloquy is a more concise and
spirited mode of communicating the same information; and therefore thus
communed, or thus might have communed, the Lord of Glenvarloch with his
own mind.

"She is right, and has taught me a lesson I will profit by. I have been,
through my whole life, one who leant upon others for that assistance,
which it is more truly noble to derive from my own exertions. I am
ashamed of feeling the paltry inconvenience which long habit had led me
to annex to the want of a servant's assistance--I am ashamed of that;
but far, far more am I ashamed to have suffered the same habit of
throwing my own burden on others, to render me, since I came to this
city, a mere victim of those events, which I have never even
attempted to influence--a thing never acting, but perpetually acted
upon--protected by one friend, deceived by another; but in the advantage
which I received from the one, and the evil I have sustained from the
other, as passive and helpless as a boat that drifts without oar or
rudder at the mercy of the winds and waves. I became a courtier, because
Heriot so advised it--a gamester, because Dalgarno so contrived it--an
Alsatian, because Lowestoffe so willed it. Whatever of good or bad has
befallen me, has arisen out of the agency of others, not from my own. My
father's son must no longer hold this facile and puerile course. Live
or die, sink or swim, Nigel Olifaunt, from this moment, shall owe his
safety, success, and honour, to his own exertions, or shall fall with
the credit of having at least exerted his own free agency. I will write
it down in my tablets, in her very words,--'The wise man is his own best
assistant.'"

He had just put his tablets in his pocket when the old charwoman, who,
to add to her efficiency, was sadly crippled by rheumatism, hobbled into
the room, to try if she could gain a small gratification by waiting on
the stranger. She readily undertook to get Lord Glenvarloch's breakfast,
and as there was an eating-house at the next door, she succeeded in a
