become deeper and sharper. Some perpetual indignation seemed smouldering
in the knitted brow and protruding upper lip. He sat there silent and
motionless for some half hour, his chin resting on his hands, and
they again upon the butt of his axe, apparently in deep thought, and
listening with a silent sneer to the clinking of glasses and dishes
within.

Philammon felt too much respect, both for his age and his stately
sadness, to break the silence. At last some louder burst of merriment
than usual aroused him.

'What do you call that?' said he, speaking in Greek.

'Folly and vanity.'

'And what does she there--the Alruna--the prophet-woman, call it?'

'Whom do you mean?'

'Why, the Greek woman whom we went to hear talk this morning.'

'Folly and vanity.'

'Why can't she cure that Roman hairdresser there of it, then?'

Philammon was silent--'Why not, indeed!'

'Do you think she could cure any one of it?'

'Of what?'

'Of getting drunk, and wasting their strength and their fame, and their
hard-won treasures upon eating and drinking, and fine clothes, and bad
women.'

'She is most pure herself, and she preaches purity to all who hear her.'

'Curse preaching. I have preached for these four months.'

'Perhaps she may have some more winning arguments--perhaps--'

'I know. Such a beautiful bit of flesh and blood as she is might get a
hearing, when a grizzled old head-splitter like me was called a dotard.
Eh? Well. It's natural.'

A long silence.

'She is a grand woman. I never saw such a one, and I have seen many.
There was a prophetess once, lived in an island in the Weser-stream--and
when a man saw her, even before she spoke a word, one longed to crawl
to her feet on all fours, and say, "There, tread on me; I am not fit for
you to wipe your feet upon." And many a warrior did it.... Perhaps I may
have done it myself, before now .... And this one is strangely like her.
She would make a prince's wife, now.'

Philammon started. What new feeling was it, which made him indignant at
the notion?

'Beauty? What's body without soul? What's beauty without wisdom? What's
beauty without chastity? Best! fool! wallowing in the mire which every
hog has fouled!'

'Like a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman who is
without discretion.'

'Who said that?'

'Solomon, the king of Israel.'

'I never heard of him. But he was a right Sagaman, whoever said it. And
she is a pure maiden, that other one?'

'Spotless as the'--blessed Virgin, Philammon was going to say--but
checked himself. There were sad recollections about the words.

Wulf sat silent for a few minutes, while Philammon's thoughts reverted
at once to the new purpose for which alone life seemed worth having....
To find his sister! That one thought had in a few hours changed and
matured the boy into the man. Hitherto he had been only the leaf before
the wind, the puppet of every new impression; but now circumstance,
which had been leading him along in such soft fetters for many a month,
was become his deadly foe; and all his energy and cunning, all his
little knowledge of man and of society, rose up sturdily and shrewdly
to fight in this new cause. Wulf was now no longer a phenomenon to be
wondered at, but an instrument to be used. The broken hints which he had
just given of discontent with Pelagia's presence inspired the boy with
sudden hope, and cautiously he began to hint at the existence of persons
who would be glad to remove her. Wulf caught at the notion, and replied
to it with searching questions, till Philammon, finding plain speaking
the better part of cunning, told him openly the whole events of the
morning, and the mystery which Arsenius had half revealed, and then
shuddered with mingled joy and horror, as Wulf, after ruminating over
the matter for a weary five minutes, made answer--

'And what if Pelagia herself were your sister?'

Philammon was bursting forth in some passionate answer, when the old man
stopped him and went on slowly, looking him through and through--

'Because, when a penniless young monk claims kin with a woman who is
drinking out of the wine-cups of the Caesars, and filling a place for
a share of which kings' daughters have been thankful--and will be again
before long--why then, though an old man may be too good-natured to call
it all a lie at first sight, he can't help supposing that the young monk
has an eye to his own personal profit, eh?'

'My profit?' cried poor Philammon, starting up. 'Good God! what object
on earth can I have, but to rescue her from this infamy to purity and
holiness?'

He had touched the wrong chord.

'Infamy? you accursed Egyptian slave!' cried the prince, starting up in
his turn, red with passion, and clutching at the whip which hung
over his head. 'Infamy? As if she, and you too, ought not to consider
yourselves blest in her being allowed to wash the feet of an Amal!'

'Oh' forgive me!' said Philammon, terrified at the fruits of his own
clumsiness. 'But you forget--you forget, she is not married to him!'

'Married to him? A freedwoman? No; thank Freya! he has not fallen as
low as that, at least: and never shall, if I kill the witch with my own
hands. A freedwoman!'

Poor Philammon! And he had been told but that morning that he was a
slave. He hid his face in his hands, and burst into an agony of tears.

'Come, come,' said the testy warrior, softened at once. 'Woman's tears
don't matter, but somehow I never could bear to make a man cry. When you
are cool, and have learnt common courtesy, we'll talk more about this.
So! Hush; enough is enough. Here comes the supper, and I am as hungry as
Loke.'

And he commenced devouring like his namesake' 'the gray beast of the
wood,' and forcing, in his rough hospitable way, Philammon to devour
also much against his will and stomach.

'There. I feel happier now!' quoth Wulf, at last. 'There is nothing
to be done in this accursed place but to eat. I get no fighting, no
hunting. I hate women as they hate me. I don't know anything indeed,
that I don't hate, except eating and singing. And now, what with those
girls' vile unmanly harps and flutes, no one cares to listen to a true
rattling warsong. There they are at it now, with their caterwauling,
squealing all together like a set of starlings on a foggy morning! We'll
have a song too, to drown the noise.' And he burst out with a wild rich
melody, acting, in uncouth gestures and a suppressed tone of voice, the
scene which the words described--

An elk looked out of the pine forest He snuffed up east, he snuffed down
west, Stealthy and still.

His mane and his horns were heavy with snow; I laid my arrow across my
bow, Stealthy and still.

And then quickening his voice, as his whole face blazed up into fierce
excitement--

The bow it rattled' the arrow flew, It smote his blade-bones through and
through, Hurrah!

I sprang at his throat like a wolf of the wood, And I warmed my hands in
the smoking blood, Hurrah!

And with a shout that echoed and rang from wall to wall, and pealed
away above the roofs, he leapt to his feet with a gesture and look of
savage frenzy which made Philammon recoil. But the passion was gone in
an instant, and Wulf sat down again chuckling to himself--

'There--that is something like a warrior's song. That makes the old
blood spin along again! But this debauching furnace of a climate! no man
can keep his muscle, or his courage, or his money, or anything else in
it. May the gods curse the day when first I saw it!'

Philammon said nothing, but sat utterly aghast at an outbreak so unlike
Wulf's usual caustic reserve and stately self-restraint, and shuddering
at the thought that it might be an instance of that daemoniac
possession to which these barbarians were supposed by Christians and by
Neo-Platonists to be peculiarly subject. But the horror was not yet at
its height; for in another minute the doors of the women's court flew
open, and, attracted by Wulf's shout, out poured the whole Bacchanalian
crew, with Orestes, crowned with flowers, and led by the Amal and
Pelagia, reeling in the midst, wine-cup in hand.

'There is my philosopher, my preserver, my patron saint!' hiccupped he.
'Bring him to my arms, that I may encircle his lovely neck with pearls
of India, and barbaric gold!'

'For God's sake let me escape!' whispered he to Wulf, as the rout rushed
upon him. Wulf opened the door in an instant, and he dashed through it.
As he wen, the old man held out his hand--

'Come and see me again, boy!--Me only. The old warrior will not hurt
you!'

There was a kindly tone in the voice, a kindly light in the eye, which
made Philammon promise to obey. He glanced one look back through the
gateway as he fled, and just saw a wild whirl of Goths and girls,
spinning madly round the court in the world-old Teutonic waltz; while,
high above their heads, in the uplifted arms of the mighty Amal, was
tossing the beautiful figure of Pelagia, tearing the garland from her
floating hair to pelt the dancers with its roses. And that might be his
sister! He hid his face and fled, and the gate shut out the revellers
from his eyes; and it is high time that it should shut them out from
ours also.

Some four hours more had passed. The revellers were sleeping off their
wine, and the moon shining bright and cold across the court, when Wulf
came out, carrying a heavy jar of wine, followed by Smid, a goblet in
each hand.

'Here, comrade, out into the middle, to catch a breath of night-air. Are
all the fools asleep?'

'Every mother's son of them. Ah! this is refreshing after that room.
What a pity it is that all men are not born with heads like ours!'

'Very sad indeed,' said Wulf, filling his goblet.

'What a quantity of pleasure they lose in this life! There they are,
snoring like hogs. Now, you and I are good to finish this jar, at
least.'

'And another after it, if our talk is not over by that time.'

'Why, are you going to hold a council of war?'

'That is as you take it. Now, look here, Smid. Whomsoever I cannot
trust, I suppose I may trust you, eh?'

'Well!' quoth Smid surlily, putting down his goblet, 'that is a strange
question to ask of a man who has marched, and hungered, and plundered,
and conquered, and been well beaten by your side for five-and-twenty
years, through all lands between the Wesel and Alexandria!'

'I am growing old, I suppose, and so I suspect every one. But hearken
to me, for between wine and ill-temper out it must come. You saw that
Alruna-woman?'

'Of course.'

'Well?'

'Well?'

'Why, did not you think she would make a wife for any man?'

'Well?'

'And why not for our Amal?'

'That's his concern as well as hers, and hers as well as ours.'

'She? Ought she not to think herself only too much honoured by marrying
a son of Odin? Is she going to be more dainty than Placidia?'

'What was good enough for an emperor's daughter must be good enough for
her.'

'Good enough? And Adolf only a Balt, while Amalric is a full-blooded
Amal--Odin's son by both sides?'

'I don't know whether she would understand that.'

'Then we would make her. Why not carry her off, and marry her to the
Amal whether she chose or not? She would be well content enough with him
in a week, I will warrant.'

'But there is Pelagia in the way.'

'Put her out of the way, then.'

'Impossible.'

'It was this morning; a week hence it may not be. I heard a promise made
to-night which will do it, if there be the spirit of a Goth left in the
poor besotted lad whom we know of.'

'Oh, he is all right at heart; never fear him. But what was the
promise?'

'I will not tell till it is claimed. I will not be the man to shame
my own nation and the blood of the gods. But if that drunken Prefect
recollects it--why let him recollect it. And what is more, the monk-boy
who was here to-night--'

'Ah, what a well-grown lad that is wasted!'

'More than suspects--and if his story is true, I more than suspect
too--that Pelagia is his sister.'

'His sister! But what of that?'

'He wants, of course, to carry her off and make a nun of her.'

'You would not let him do such a thing to the poor child?'

'If folks get in my way, Smid, they must go down. So much the worse for
them: but old Wulf was never turned back yet by man or beast, and he
will not be now.'

'After all, it will serve the hussy right. But Amalric?'

'Out of sight, out of mind.'

'But they say the Prefect means to marry the girl.'

'He? That scented ape? She would not be such a wretch.'

'But he does intend; and she intends too. It is the talk of the whole
town. We should have to put him out of the way first.'

'Why not? Easy enough' and a good riddance for Alexandria. Yet if we
made away with him we should be forced to take the city too; and I doubt
whether we have hands enough for that.'

'The guards might join us. I will go down to the barracks and try them,
if you choose' to-morrow. I am a boon-companion with a good many of them
already. But after all, Prince Wulf--of course you are always right; we
all know that--but what's the use of marrying this Hypatia to the Amal?'

'Use?' said Wulf, smiting down his goblet on the pavement. 'Use? you
purblind old hamster-rat, who think of nothing but filling your own
cheek-pouches!--to give him a wife worthy of a hero, as he is, in spite
of all--a wife who will make him sober instead of drunk, wise instead
of a fool, daring instead of a sluggard--a wife who can command the rich
people for us, and give us a hold here, which if once we get, let us see
who will break it! Why, with those two ruling in Alexandria, we might be
masters of Africa in three months. We'd send to Spain for the Wendels,
to move on Carthage; we'd send up the Adriatic for the Longbeards to
land in Pentapolis; we'd sweep the whole coast without losing a man' now
it is drained of troops by that fool Heraclian's Roman expedition; make
the Wendels and Longbeards shake hands here in Alexandria; draw lots for
their shares of the coast' and then--'

'And then what?'

'Why, when we had settled Africa, I would call out a crew of picked
heroes, and sail away south for Asgard--I'd try that Red Sea this
time--and see Odin face to face, or die searching for him.'

'Oh!' groaned Smid. 'And I suppose you would expect me to come too,
instead of letting me stop halfway, and settle there among the dragons
and elephants. Well, well, wise men are like moorlands--ride as far as
you will on the sound ground, you are sure to come upon a soft place at
last. However, I will go down to the guards to-morrow, if my head don't
ache.'

'And I will see the boy about Pelagia. Drink to our plot!'

And the two old iron-heads drank on, till the stars paled out and the
eastward shadows of the cloister vanished in the blaze of dawn.



CHAPTER XIX: JEWS AGAINST CHRISTIANS


THE little porter, after having carried Arsenius's message to Miriam,
had run back in search of Philammon and his foster-father; and not
finding them, had spent the evening in such frantic rushings to and fro,
as produced great doubts of his sanity among the people of the quarter.
At last hunger sent him home to supper; at which meal he tried to find
vent for his excited feelings in his favourite employment of beating his
wife. Whereon Miriam's two Syrian slave-girls, attracted by her screams,
came to the rescue, threw a pail of water over him, and turned him out
of doors. He, nothing discomfited, likened himself smilingly to Socrates
conquered by Xantippe; and, philosophically yielding to circumstances,
hopped about like a tame magpie for a couple of hours at the entrance of
the alley, pouring forth a stream of light raillery on the passers-by,
which several times endangered his personal safety; till at last
Philammon, hurrying breathlessly home, rushed into his arms.

'Hush! Hither with me! Your star still prospers. She calls for you.'

'Who?'

'Miriam herself. Be secret as the grave. You she will see and speak
with. The message of Arsenius she rejected in language which it is
unnecessary for philosophic lips to repeat. Come; but give her good
words-as are fit to an enchantress who can stay the stars in their
courses, and command the spirits of the third heaven.'

Philammon hurried home with Eudaimon. Little cared he now for Hypatia's
warning against Miriam.... Was he not in search of a sister?

'So' you wretch, you are back again!' cried one of the girls, as they
knocked at the outer door of Miriam's apartments. 'What do you mean by
bringing young men here at this time of night?'

'Better go down, and beg pardon of that poor wife of yours. She has
been weeping and praying for you to her crucifix all the evening, you
ungrateful little ape!'

'Female superstitions--but I forgive her. Peace, barbarian women!
I bring this youthful philosopher hither by your mistress's own
appointment.'

'He must wait, then, in the ante-room. There is a gentleman with my
mistress at present.'

So Philammon waited in a dark, dingy ante-room, luxuriously furnished
with faded tapestry, and divans which lined the walls; and fretted and
fidgeted, while the two girls watched him over their embroidery out of
the corners of their eyes, and agreed that he was a very stupid person
for showing no inclination to return their languishing glances.

In the meanwhile, Miriam, within, was listening, with a smile of grim
delight, to a swarthy and weather-beaten young Jew.

'I knew, mother in Israel, that all depended on my pace; and night
and day I rode from Ostia toward Tarentum: but the messenger of the
uncircumcised was better mounted than I; I therefore bribed a certain
slave to lame his horse, and passed him by a whole stage on the second
day. Nevertheless, by night the Philistine had caught me up again, the
evil angels helping him; and my soul was mad within me.'

'And what then, Jonadab Bar-Zebudah?'

'I bethought me of Ehud, and of Joab also, when he was pursued by
Asahel, and considered much of the lawfulness of the deed, not being
a man of blood. Nevertheless, we were together in the darkness, and I
smote him.'

Miriam clapped her hands.

'Then putting on his clothes, and taking his letters and credentials,
as was but reasonable, I passed myself off for the messenger of the
emperor, and so rode the rest of that journey at the expense of the
heathen; and I hereby return you the balance saved.'

'Never mind the balance. Keep it, thou worthy son of Jacob. What next?'

'When I came to Tarentum, I sailed in the galley which I had chartered
from certain sea-robbers. Valiant men they were, nevertheless, and kept
true faith with me. For when we had come halfway, rowing with all our
might, behold another galley coming in our wake and about to pass us by,
which I knew for an Alexandrian, as did the captain also, who assured me
that she had come from hence to Brundusium with letters from Orestes.'

'Well?'

'It seemed to me both base to be passed, and more base to waste all the
expense wherewith you and our elders had charged themselves; so I took
counsel with the man of blood, offering him over and above our bargain,
two hundred gold pieces of my own, which please to pay to my account
with Rabbi Ezekiel, who lives by the watergate in Pelusium. Then the
pirates, taking counsel, agreed to run down the enemy; for our galley
was a sharp-beaked Liburnian, while theirs was only a messenger
trireme.'

'And you did it?'

'Else had I not been here. They were delivered into our hands, so that
we struck them full in mid-length, and they sank like Pharaoh and his
host.'

'So perish all the enemies of the nation!' cried Miriam. 'And now it is
impossible, you say, for fresh news to arrive for these ten days?'

'Impossible, the captain assured me, owing to the rising of the wind,
and the signs of southerly storm.'

'Here, take this letter for the Chief Rabbi, and the blessing of a
mother in Israel. Thou Last played the man for thy people; and thou
shalt go to the grave full of years and honours, with men-servants and
maid-servants, gold and silver, children and children's children, with
thy foot on the necks of heathens, and the blessing of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, to eat of the goose which is fattening in the desert, and
the Leviathan which lieth in the great sea, to be meat for all true
Israelites at the last day.'

And the Jew turned and went out, perhaps, in his simple fanaticism, the
happiest man in Egypt at that moment.

He passed out through the ante-chamber, leering at the slave-girls, and
scowling at Philammon; and the youth was ushered into the presence of
Miriam.

She sat, coiled up like a snake on a divan writing busily in a tablet
upon her knees while on the cushions beside her glittered splendid
jewels, which she had been fingering over as a child might its toys.
She did not look up for a few minutes; and Philammon could not help, in
spite of his impatience, looking round the little room and contrasting
its dirty splendour, and heavy odour of wine, and food, and perfumes,
with the sunny grace and cleanliness of Greek houses. Against the
wall stood presses and chests fretted with fantastic Oriental carving;
illuminated rolls of parchment lay in heaps in a corner; a lamp of
strange form hung from the ceiling, and shed a dim and lurid light
upon an object which chilled the youth's blood for a moment--a bracket
against the wall, on which, in a plate of gold, engraven with mystic
signs, stood the mummy of an infant's head; one of those teraphim, from
which, as Philammon knew, the sorcerers of the East professed to evoke
oracular responses.

At last she looked up, and spoke in a shrill, harsh voice. 'Well, my
fair boy, and what do you want with the poor old proscribed Jewess? Have
you coveted yet any of the pretty things which she has had the wit to
make her slave-demons save from the Christian robbers?'

Philammon's tale was soon told. The old woman listened, watching him
intently with her burning eye; and then answered slowly--

'Well, and what if you are a slave?'

'Am I one, then? Am I?'

'Of course you are. Arsenius spoke truth. I saw him buy you at Ravenna,
just fifteen years ago. I bought your sister at the same time. She is
two-and-twenty now. You were four years younger than her, I should say.'

'Oh heavens! and you know my sister still! Is she Pelagia?'

'You were a pretty boy,' went on the hag, apparently not hearing him.
'If I had thought you were going to grow up as beautiful and as
clever as you are, I would have bought you myself. The Goths were
just marching, and Arsenius gave only eighteen gold pieces for you--or
twenty--I am growing old, and forget everything, I think. But there
would have been the expense of your education, and your sister cost me
in training--oh what sums? Not that she was not worth the money--no, no,
the darling!'

'And you know where she is? Oh tell me--in the name of mercy tell me!'

'Why, then?'

'Why, then? Have you not the heart of a human being in you? Is she not
my sister?'

'Well? You have done very well for fifteen years without your
sister--why can you not do as well now? You don't recollect her--you
don't love her.'

'Not love her? I would die for her--die for you if you will but help me
to see her!'

'You would, would you? And if I brought you to her, what then! What if
she were Pelagia herself, what then? She is happy enough now, and rich
enough. Could you make her happier or richer?'

'Can you ask? I must--I will--reclaim her from the infamy in which I am
sure she lives.'

'Ah ha, sir monk! I expected as much. I know, none knows better, what
those fine words mean. The burnt child dreads the fire; but the burnt
old woman quenches it, you will find. Now listen. I do not say that you
shall not see her--I do not say that Pelagia herself is not the woman
whom you seek--but--you are in my power. Don't frown and pout. I can
deliver you as a slave to Arsenius when I choose. One word from me to
Orestes, and you are in fetters as a fugitive.'

'I will escape!' cried he fiercely.

'Escape me?'--She laughed, pointing to the teraph--'Me, who, if you fled
beyond Kaf, or dived to the depths of the ocean, could make these dead
lips confess where you were, and command demons to bear you back to me
upon their wings! Escape me! Better to obey me, and see your sister.'

Philammon shuddered, and submitted. The spell of the woman's eye, the
terror of her words, which he half believed, and the agony of longing,
conquered him, and he gasped out--

'I will obey you--only--only--'

'Only you are not quite a man yet, but half a monk still, eh? I must
know that before I help you, my pretty boy. Are you a monk still, or a
man?'

'What do you mean?'

'Ah, ha, ha!' laughed she shrilly. 'And these Christian dogs don't know
what a man means? Are you a monk, then? leaving the man alone, as above
your understanding.'

'I?--I am a student of philosophy.'

'But no man?'

'I am a man, I suppose.'

'I don't; if you had been, you would have been making love like a man to
that heathen woman many a month ago.'

'I--to her?'

'Yes, I-to her!'Said Miriam, coarsely imitating his tone of shocked
humility. 'I, the poor penniless boy-scholar, to her, the great, rich,
wise, worshipped she-philosopher, who holds the sacred keys of the inner
shrine of the east wind--and just because I am a man, and the handsomest
man in Alexandria, and she a woman, and the vainest woman in Alexandria;
and therefore I am stronger than she, and can twist her round my finger,
and bring her to her knees at my feet when I like, as soon I open my
eyes, and discover that I am a man. Eh, boy! Did she ever teach you that
among her mathematics and metaphysics, and gods and goddesses?'

Philammon stood blushing scarlet. The sweet poison had entered, and
every vein glowed with it for the first time in his life. Miriam saw her
advantage.

'There, there--don't be frightened at your new lesson. After all, I
liked you from the first moment I saw you, and asked the teraph about
you, and I got an answer--such an answer! You shall know it some day. At
all events, it set the poor old soft-hearted Jewess on throwing away her
money. Did you ever guess from whom your monthly gold piece came?'

Philammon started, and Miriam burst into loud, shrill laughter.

'From Hypatia, I'll warrant! From the fair Greek woman, of course--vain
child that you are--never thinking of the poor old Jewess.'

'And did you? did you?' gasped Philammon.

'Have I to thank you, then, for that strange generosity?'

'Not to thank me, but to obey me; for mind, I can prove your debt to me,
every obol, and claim it if I choose. But don't fear; I won't be hard on
you, just because you are in my power. I hate every one who is not so.
As soon as I have a hold on them, I begin to love them. Old folks, like
children, are fond of their own playthings.'

'And I am yours, then?' said Philammon fiercely.

'You are indeed, my beautiful boy,' answered she, looking up with so
insinuating a smile that he could not be angry. 'After all, I know how
to toss my balls gently--and for these forty years I have only lived
