however, until not more than ten paces off; and then that traitor, Luke
Settle, rose up behind our bush.

"Set her here, boys," said he, "and tie her pretty ankles."

"Well met, Captain!" said the fellow with the lantern--Reuben
Gedges--stepping forward; "Give us your hand!"

He was holding out his own, when I sprang up, set the pistol close
to his chest, and fired. His scream mingled with the roar of it, and
dropping the lantern, he threw up his hands and tumbled in a heap. At
the same moment, out went the light, and the other rascals, dropping
Delia, turn'd to run, crying, "Sold--sold!"

But behind them came now a shout from Billy, and a crashing blow that
almost severed Black Dick's arm at the shoulder: and at the same instant
I was on Master Toy's collar, and had him down in the dust. Kneeling on
his chest, with my sword point at his throat, I had leisure to glance at
Billy, who in the dark, seem'd to be sitting on the head of his disabled
victim. And then I felt a touch on my shoulder, and a dear face peer'd
into mine.

"Is it Jack--my sweet Jack?"

"To be sure," said I: "and if you but reach out your hand, I will kiss
it, for all that I'm busy with this rogue."

"Nay, Jack, I'll kiss thee on the cheek--so! Dear lad, I am so
frighten'd, and yet could laugh for joy!"

But now I caught the sound of galloping on the road above, and shouts,
and then more galloping; and down came a troop of horsemen that were
like to have ridden over us, had I not shouted lustily.

"Who, in the fiend's name is here?" shouted the foremost, pulling in his
horse with a scramble.

"Honest men and rebels together," I answered; "but light the lantern
that you will find handy by, and you shall know one from t'other."

By the time 'twas found and lit, there was a dozen of Col. John Digby's
dragoons about us: and before the two villains were bound, comes a half
dozen more, leading in Captain Settle, that had taken to his heels at
the first blow and climb'd the hill, all tied as he was about the hands,
and was caught in his endeavor to clamber on Molly's back. So he and
Black Dick and Jeremy Toy were strapp'd up: but Reuben Gedges we left
on the road for a corpse. Yet he did not die (though shot through the
lung), but recovered--heaven knows how: and I myself had the pleasure to
see him hanged at Tyburn, in the second year of his late Majesty's most
blessed Restoration, for stopping the Bishop of Salisbury's coach, in
Maidenhead Thicket, and robbing the Bishop himself, with much added
contumely.

But as we were ready to start, and I was holding Delia steady on Molly's
back, up comes Billy and bawls in my ear---

"There's a second horse, if wanted, that I spied tether'd under a hedge
younder"--and he pointed to the field where we had first found Captain
Settle--"in color a sad black, an' harness'd like as if he came from a
cart."

I look'd at the Captain, who in the light of the lantern blink'd again.
"Thou bloody villain!" muttered I, for now I read the tragedy of the
wagon beside the road, and knew how Master Settle had provided a horse
for his own escape.

But hereupon the word was given, and we started up the hill, I walking
by Delia's stirrup and listening to her talk as if we had never been
parted--yet with a tenderer joy, having by loss of it learn'd to
appraise my happiness aright.




CHAPTER XVIII.

JOAN DOES ME HER LAST SERVICE.


We came, a little before midnight, to Sir Bevill's famous great house
of Stow, near Kilkhampton: that to-night was brightly lit and full of
captains and troopers feasting, as well they needed to, after the great
victory. And here, though loth to do so, I left Delia to the care of
Lady Grace Grenville, Sir Bevill's fond beautiful wife, and of all
gentlewomen I have ever seen the pink and paragon, as well for her loyal
heart as the graces of her mind: who, before the half of our tale was
out, kissed Delia on both cheeks, and led her away. "To you too, sir,
I would counsel bed," said she, "after you have eaten and drunk, and
especially given God thanks for this day's work."

Sir Bevill I did not see, but striding down into the hall, picked my
way among the drinking and drunken; the servants hurrying with dishes of
roast and baked and great tankards of beer; the swords and pikes flung
down under the forms and settles, and sticking out to trip a man up; and
at length found a groom who led me to a loft over one of the barns: and
here, above a mattress of hay, I slept the first time for many months
between fresh linen that smell'd of lavender, and in thinking how
pleasant 'twas, dropped sound asleep.

Sure there is no better, sweeter couch than this of linen spread over
hay. Early in the morning, I woke with wits clear as water, and not an
ache or ounce of weariness in my bones: and after washing at the pump
below, went in search of breakfast and Sir Bevill. The one I found,
ready laid, in the hall; the other seated in his writing-room, studying
in a map; and with apology for my haste, handed him Master Tingcomb's
confession and told my story.

When 'twas over, Sir Bevill sat pondering, and after a while said, very
frankly----

"As a magistrate I can give this warrant; and 'twould be a pleasure, for
well, as a boy, do I remember Deakin Killigrew. Young sir----" he
rose up, and taking a turn across the room, came and laid a hand on my
shoulder, "I have seen his daughter. Is it too late to warn you against
loving her?"

"Why yes," I answer'd blushing: "I think it is."

"She seems both sweet and quaint. God forbid I should say a word against
one that has so taken me! But in these times a man should stand alone:
to make a friend is to run the chance of a soft heart: to marry a wife
makes the chance sure----"

He broke off, and went on again with a change of tone----

"For many reasons I would blithely issue this warrant. But how am I to
spare men to carry it out? At any moment we may be assail'd."

"If that be your concern, sir," answer'd I, "give me the warrant. I have
a good friend here, a seafaring man, whose vessel lies at this moment
in Looe Haven, with a crew on board that will lay Master Tingcomb by the
heels in a trice. Within three days we'll have him clapp'd in Launceston
Jail, and there at the next Assize you shall sit on the Grand Jury and
hear his case, by which time, I hope, the King's law shall run on easier
wheels in Cornwall. The prisoners we have already I leave you to deal
withal: only, against my will, I must claim some mercy for that rogue,
Settle."

To this Sir Bevill consented; and, to be short, the three knaves were
next morning pack'd off to Launceston: but in time, no evidence being
brought against them, regained their freedom, which they used to come
to the gallows, each in his own way. Their doings no longer concern this
history, and so I gladly leave them.

To return, then, to my proper tale, 'twas not ten minutes before I
had the warrant in my pocket. And by eleven o'clock (word having been
carried to Delia, and our plans laid before Billy Pottery, who on the
spot engaged himself to help us) our horses were brought round to the
gate, and my mistress appear'd, all ready for the journey. For tho'
assured that the work needed not her presence, and that she had best
wait at Stow till Master Tingcomb was smok'd out of his nest, she would
have none of it, but was set on riding with me to see justice done on
this fellow, of whose villainy I had told her much the night before. And
glad I was of her choice, as I saw her standing on the entrance steps,
fresh as a rose, and in a fit habit once more: for Lady Grace had lent
not only her own bay horse, but also a riding dress and hat of grey
velvet to equip her: and stood in the porch to wish us _Godspeed!_ while
Sir Bevill help'd Delia to the saddle.

So, with Billy tramping behind us, away we rode up the combe, where
Kilkhampton tower stood against the sky; and turning to wave hands at
the top, found our host and hostess still by the gate, watching us, with
hands rais'd to shield their eyes from the sun.

The whole petty tale of this day's ride I shall not dwell upon. Indeed,
I scarcely noted the miles as they pass'd. For all the way we were
chattering, Delia telling me how Captain Settle and his gang had hurried
her (tho' without indignity) across Dartmoor to Ashburton, thence to
Lynton in North Devon, and so along the coast of Somerset to Bristol;
how they there produced a paper, at sight of which Sir Nathaniel
Fiennes, the new Governor, kept her under lock and key. And thus she
remained four months, at the end of which time they convey'd her on
board a sloop, call'd the _Fortitude_, and bound for the Virginias,
with the result that has been told. To all of which I listened greedily,
stealing from time to time a look at her shape, that on horseback was
graceful as a willow, and into her eyes that, under the flapping grey
brim, were gay and fancy-free as ever.

"And did you," asked I, "never at heart chide me for leaving you so!"

"Why no. I never took thee for a conjurer, Jack."

"But, at least, you thought of me," I urged.

"Oh, dear--oh, dear!" She pull'd rein and look'd at me: "I remember now
that last night I kiss'd thee. Forget it, Jack: last night, so glad was
I to be sav'd, I could have kiss'd a cobbler. Indeed, Jack," she went
on seriously, "I would that some maid had got hold of thee, in all these
months, to cure thy silly notions!"

At Launceston, Billy Pottery took leave of us: and now went, due south,
toward Looe, with a light purse and lighter heart, undertaking that
his ship should lie off Gleys, with her crew ready for action, within
eight-and-forty hours. Delia and I rode faster now toward the southwest:
and having by this time recover'd my temper, I was recounting my flight
along this very road, when I heard a sound that brought my heart into my
mouth.

'Twas the blast of a bugle, and came from behind the hill in front
of us. And at the same moment I understood. It must be Sir George
Chudleigh's cavalry returning, on news of their comrades' defeat, and we
were riding straight toward them, as into a trap.

Now what could have made me forgetful of this danger I cannot explain,
unless it be that our thorough victory over the rebels had given me the
notion that the country behind us was clear of foes. And Sir Bevill
must have had a notion we were going straight to Looe with Billy. At
any rate, there was no time to be lost: for my presence was a danger to
Delia as well. I cast a glance about me. There was no place to hide.

"Quick!" I cried; "follow me, and ride for dear life!"

And striking spur into Molly I turn'd sharp off the road and gallop'd
across the moor to the left, with Delia close after me.

We had gone about two hundred yards only when I heard a shout, and
glancing over my right shoulder, saw a green banner waving on the crest
of the road, and gathered about it the vanguard of the troop--some score
of dragoons: and these, having caught sight of us, were pausing a moment
to watch.

The shout presently was followed by another; to which I made no answer,
but held on my way, with the nose of Delia's horse now level with my
stirrup: for I guess'd that my dress had already betrayed us. And this
was the case; for at the next glance I saw five or six dragoons detach
themselves from the main body, and gallop in a direction at an acute
angle to ours. On they came, yelling to us to halt, and scattering over
the moor to intercept us.

Not choosing, however, to be driven eastward, I kept a straight course
and trusted to our horses' fleetness to carry us by them, out of reach
of their shot. In the pause of their first surprise we had stolen two
hundred yards more. I counted and found eight men thus in pursuit of
us: and to my joy heard the bugle blown again, and saw the rest of the
troop, now gathering fast above, move steadily along the road without
intention to follow. Doubtless the news of the Cornish success made them
thus wary of their good order.

[Illustration: two arrows]

Still, eight men were enough to run from; and now the nearest let fly
with his piece--more to frighten us, belike, than with any other view,
for we were far out of range. But it grew clear that if we held on our
direction they must cut us off: as you may see by these two arrows, the
long thin one standing for our own course, the thicker and shorter for
that of the dragoons.

Only now with good hope I saw a hill rising not half a mile in front,
and somewhat to the right of our course: and thought I "if we can gain
the hollow to the left of it, and put the hill between us, they must
ride over it or round--in either case losing much time." So, pointing
this out to Delia, who rode on my left (to leave my pistol arm free and
at the same time be screen'd by me from shot of the dragoons) I drove my
spurs deep and called to Molly to make her best pace.

The enemy divin'd our purpose: and in a minute 'twas a desperate race
for the entrance to the hollow. But our horses were the faster, and we
the lighter riders; so that we won, with thirty yards to spare, from the
foremost:--not without damage, however; for finding himself baulked,
he sent a bullet at us which cut neatly through my off rein, so that my
bridle was henceforward useless and I could guide Molly with knee and
voice alone. Delia's bay had shied at the sound of it, and likely enough
saved my mistress' life by this; for the bullet must have pass'd within
a foot before her.

Down the hollow we raced with three dragoons at our heels, the rest
going round the hill. But they did little good by so doing, for after
the hollow came a broad, dismal sheet of water (by name Dozmare Pool,
I have since heard) about a mile round and bank'd with black peat.
Galloping along the left shore of this, we cut them off by near half a
mile. But the three behind followed doggedly, though dropping back with
every stride.

Beyond the pool came a green valley; and a stream flowing down it, which
we jump'd easily. Glancing at Delia as she landed on the further side, I
noted that her cheeks were glowing, and her eyes brimful of mirth.

"Say, Jack," she cried; "is not this better than love of women?"

"In Heaven's name," I called out, "take care!"

But 'twas too late. The green valley here melted into a treacherous bog,
in the which her bay was already plunging over his fetlocks, and every
moment sinking deeper.

"Throw me the rein!" I shouted, and catching the bridle close by the
bit, lean'd over and tried to drag the horse forward. By this, Molly
also was over hoofs in liquid mud. For a minute and more we heav'd and
splashed: and all the while the dragoons, seeing our fix, were shouting
and drawing nearer and nearer. But just as a brace of bullets splashed
into the slough at our feet, we stagger'd to the harder slope, and were
gaining on them again. So for twenty minutes along the spurs of the
hills, we held on, the enemy falling back and hidden, every now and
again, in the hollows--but always following: at the end of which time,
Delia call'd from just behind me--

"Jack--here's a to-do: the bay is going lame!"

There was no doubt of it. I suppose he must have wrung his off hind leg
in fighting through the quag. Any way, ten minutes more would see the
end of his gallop. But at this moment we had won to the top of a
stiff ascent: and now, looking down at our feet, I had the joyfullest
surprise.

'Twas the moor of Temple spread below like a map, the low sun striking
on the ruin'd huts to the left of us, on the roof of Joan's cottage, on
the scar of the high road, and the sides of the tall tor above it.

"In ten minutes," said I, "we may be safe."

So down into the plain we hurried: and I thought for the first time of
the loyal girl waiting in the cottage yonder; of my former ride into
Temple; and (with angry shame) of the light heart with which I left it.
To what had the summoning drums and trumpets led me? Where was the new
life, then so carelessly prevented? But two days had gone, and here was
I running to Joan for help, as a child to his mother.

Past the peat-ricks we struggled, the sheep-cotes, the straggling
fences--all so familiar; cross'd the stream and rode into the yard.

"Jump down," I whisper'd: "we have time, and no more." Glancing back, I
saw a couple of dragoons already coming over the heights. They had spied
us.

Dismounting I ran to the cottage door and flung it open. A stream of
light, flung back against the sun, blazed into my eyes.

I rubbed them and halted for a moment stock-still.

For Joan stood in front of me, dress'd in the very clothes I had worn
on the day we first met--buff-coat, breeches, heavy boots, and all. Her
back was toward me, and at the shoulder, where the coat had been cut
away from my wound, I saw the rents all darn'd and patch'd with pack
thread. In her hand was the mirror I had given her.

At the sound of my step on the threshold she turn'd with a short cry--a
cry the like of which I have never heard, so full was it of choking joy.
The glass dropp'd to the floor and was shatter'd. In a second her
arms were about me, and so she hung on my neck, sobbing and laughing
together.

"'Twas true--'twas true! Dear, dear Jack--dear Jack to come to me: hold
me tighter, tighter--for my very heart is bursting!"

And behind me a shadow fell on the doorway: and there stood Delia
regarding us.

"Good lad--all yesterday I swore to be strong and wait for years, if
need be. Fie on womankind, to be so weak! All day I sat an' sat, an' did
never a mite o' work--never set hand to a tool: an' by sunset I gave in
an' went, cursing mysel', over the moor to Warleggan, to Alsie Pascoe,
the wise woman--an' she taught me a charm--an' bless her, bless her,
Jack, for't hath brought thee!"

"Joan," said I, hot with shame, taking her arms gently from my neck:
"listen: I come because I am chased. Once more the dragooners are after
me--not five minutes away. You must lend me a horse, and at once."

"Nay," said a voice in the doorway, "the horse, if lent, is for _me!_"

Joan turn'd, and the two women stood looking at each other;--the one
with dark wonder, the other with cold disdainfulness--and I between them
scarce lifting my eyes. Each was beautiful after her kind, as day and
night: and though their looks cross'd for a full minute like drawn
blades, neither had the mastery. Joan was the first to speak.

"Jack, is thy mare in the yard?"

I nodded.

"Give me thy pistols and thy cloak." She stepp'd to the window hole at
the end of the kitchen, and look'd out. "Plenty o' time," she said; and
pointed to the ladder leading to the loft above--"Climb up there, the
both, and pull the ladder after. Is't _thou_, they want--or _she?_"
pointing to Delia.

"Me chiefly they would catch, no doubt--being a man," I answer'd.

"Aye--bein' a man: the world's full o' folly. Then Jack do thou look
after _her_, an' I'll look after _thee_. If the rebels leave thee in
peace, make for the Jews' Kitchen and there abide me."

She flung my cloak about her, took my pistols and went out at the door.
As she did so, the sun sank and a dull shadow swept over the moor.
"Joan!" I cried, for now I guess'd her purpose and was following to
hinder her: but she had caught Molly's bridle and was already astride of
her. "Get back!" she call'd softly; and then, "I make a better lad
than wench, Jack,"--leap'd the mare through a gap in the wall, and in a
moment was breasting the hill and galloping for the high road.

In less than a minute, as it seem'd, I heard a pounding of hoofs, and
had barely time to follow Delia up the ladder and pull it after me, when
two of the dragoons rode skurrying by the house, and pass'd on yelling.
Their cries were hardly faint in the distance before there came another
three.

"'A's a lost man, now, for sure," said one: "Be dang'd if 'a's not took
the road back to Lan'son!"

"How 'bout the gal?" ask'd another voice. "Here's her horse i' the
yard."

"Drat the gal! Sam, go thou an' tackle her: reckon thou'rt warriors enow
for one 'ooman."

The two hasten'd on: and presently I heard the one they call'd "Sam"
dismounting in the yard. Now there was a window hole in the loft,
facing, not on the yard, but toward the country behind; and running
to it I saw that no more were following--the other three having, as I
suppose, early given up the chase. Softly pulling out a loose stone or
two, I widen'd this hole till I could thrust the ladder out of it. To my
joy it just reach'd the ground. I bade Delia squeeze herself through and
climb down.

But before she was halfway down I heard a wild screech in the kitchen
below, and the voice of Sam shrieking---

"Help--help! Lord ha' mercy 'pon me--'tis a black cat--'tis a witch! The
gal's no gal, but a witch!"

Laughing softly, I was descending the ladder when the fellow came round
the corner screaming--with Jan Tergagle clawing at his back and spitting
murderously. Delia had just time to slip aside, before he ran into
the ladder and brought me flying on top of him. And there he lay and
bellow'd till I tied him, and gagg'd his noise with a big stone in his
mouth and his own scarf tied round it.

"Come!" I whisper'd: for Joan and her pursuers were out of sight.
Catching up her long skirt, Delia follow'd me, and up the tor we panted
together, nor rested till we were safe in the Jews' Kitchen.

"What think you of this for a hiding place?" ask'd I, with a laugh.

But Delia did not laugh. Instead, she faced me with blazing eyes,
check'd herself and answer'd, cold as ice---

"Sir, you have done me a many favors. How I have trusted you in return
it were best for you to remember, and for me to forget."

       *       *       *       *       *

The dark drew on; the western star grew distinct and hung flashing over
