to his mother and family,--an anticipation which by no means tended to
render the front of death, in itself a grisly object, more agreeable to
his imagination. The vengeance of the Abbot, his conscience told him,
was sure to descend on his mother and brother, or could only be averted
by the generosity of the victor--And Mary Avenel--he should have shown
himself, if he succumbed in the present combat, as inefficient in
protecting her, as he had been unnecessarily active in bringing disaster
on her, and on the house in which she had been protected from infancy.
And to this view of the case were to be added all those imbittered and
anxious feelings with which the bravest men, even in a better or less
doubtful quarrel, regard the issue of a dubious conflict, the first time
when it has been their fate to engage in an affair of that nature.

But however disconsolate the prospect seemed in the event of his being
conquered, Halbert could expect from victory little more than the safety
of his own life, and the gratification of his wounded pride. To his
friends--to his mother and brother--especially to Mary Avenel--the
consequences of his triumph would be more certain destruction than the
contingency of his defeat and death. If the English knight survived, he
might in courtesy extend his protection to them; but if he fell, nothing
was likely to screen them from the vindictive measures which the Abbot
and convent would surely adopt against the violation of the peace of
the Halidome, and the slaughter of a protected guest by one of their
own vassals, within whose house they had lodged him for shelter. These
thoughts, in which neither view of the case augured aught short of ruin
to his family, and that ruin entirely brought on by his own rashness,
were thorns in Halbert Glendinning's pillow, and deprived his soul of
peace and his eyes of slumber.

There appeared no middle course, saving one which was marked by
degradation, and which, even if he stooped to it, was by no means free
of danger. He might indeed confess to the English knight the strange
circumstances which led to his presenting him with that token which the
White Lady (in her displeasure as it now seemed) had given him, that
he might offer it to Sir Piercie Shafton. But to this avowal his pride
could not stoop, and reason, who is wonderfully ready to be of counsel
with pride on such occasions, offered many arguments to show it would be
useless as well as mean so far to degrade himself. "If I tell a tale so
wonderful," thought he, "shall I not either be stigmatized as a liar,
or punished as a wizard?--Were Sir Piercie Shafton generous, noble, and
benevolent, as the champions of whom we hear in romance, I might indeed
gain his ear, and, without demeaning myself, escape from the
situation in which I am placed. But as he is, or at least seems to be,
self-conceited, arrogant, vain, and presumptuous--I should but humble
myself in vain--and I will not humble myself!" he said, starting out
of bed, grasping his broadsword, and brandishing it in the light of
the moon, which streamed through the deep niche that served them as a
window; when, to his extreme surprise and terror, an airy form stood in
the moonlight, but intercepted not the reflection on the floor. Dimly as
it was expressed, the sound of the voice soon made him sensible he saw
the White Lady.

At no time had her presence seemed so terrific to him; for when he had
invoked her, it was with the expectation of the apparition, and the
determination to abide the issue. But now she had come uncalled, and her
presence impressed him with a sense of approaching misfortune, and with
the hideous apprehension that he had associated himself with a demon,
over whose motions he had no control, and of whose powers and quality he
had no certain knowledge. He remained, therefore, in mere terror, gazing
on the apparition, which chanted or recited in cadence the following
lines--

  "He whose heart for vengeance sued,
  Must not shrink from shedding blood
  The knot that thou hast tied with word,
  Thou must loose by edge of sword."

"Avaunt thee, false Spirit!" said Halbert Glendinning; "I have bought
thy advice too dearly already--Begone in the name of God!"

The Spirit laughed; and the cold unnatural sound of her laughter had
something in it more fearful than the usually melancholy tones of her
voice. She then replied,--

  "You have summon'd me once--you have summoned me twice,
  And without e'er a summons I come to you thrice;
  Unask'd for, unsued for, you came to my glen;
  Unsued and unask'd I am with you again."

Halbert Glendinning gave way for a moment to terror, and called on his
brother, "Edward! waken, waken, for Our Lady's sake!"

Edward awaked accordingly, and asked what he wanted.

"Look out," said Halbert, "look up! seest thou no one in the room?"

"No, upon my good word," said Edward, looking out.

"What! seest thou nothing in the moonshine upon the floor there?"

"No, nothing," answered Edward, "save thyself resting on thy naked
sword. I tell thee, Halbert, thou shouldst trust more to thy spiritual
arms, and less to those of steel and iron. For this many a night hast
thou started and moaned, and cried out of fighting, and of spectres, and
of goblins--thy sleep hath not refreshed thee--thy waking hath been a
dream.--Credit me, dear Halbert, say the _Pater_ and _Credo_, resign
thyself to the protection of God, and thou wilt sleep sound and wake in
comfort."

"It may be," said Halbert slowly, and having his eye still bent on the
female form which to him seemed distinctly visible,--"it may be. But
tell me, dear Edward, seest thou no one on the chamber floor but me?"

"No one," answered Edward, raising himself on his elbow; "dear brother,
lay aside thy weapon, say thy prayers, and lay thee down to rest."

While he thus spoke, the Spirit smiled at Halbert as if in scorn; her
wan cheek faded in the wan moonlight even before the smile had passed
away, and Halbert himself no longer beheld the vision to which he had so
anxiously solicited his brother's attention. "May God preserve my wits!"
he said, as, laying aside his weapon, he again threw himself on his bed.

"Amen! my dearest brother," answered Edward; "but we must not provoke
that Heaven in our wantonness which we invoke in our misery.--Be not
angry with me, my dear brother--I know not why you have totally of late
estranged yourself from me--It is true, I am neither so athletic in
body, nor so alert in courage, as you have been from your infancy; yet,
till lately, you have not absolutely cast off my society--Believe me, I
have wept in secret, though I forbore to intrude myself on your privacy.
The time has been--when you held me not so cheap; and--when, if I could
not follow the game so closely, or mark it so truly as you, I could
fill up our intervals of pastime with pleasant tales of the olden times,
which I had read or heard, and which excited even your attention as
we sate and ate our provision by some pleasant spring--but now I have,
though I know not why, lost thy regard and affection.--Nay, toss not
thy arms about thee thus wildly," said the younger brother; "from thy
strange dreams, I fear some touch of fever hath affected thy blood--let
me draw closer around thee thy mantle."

"Forbear," said Halbert--"your care is needless--your complaints are
without reason--your fears on my account are in vain."

"Nay, but hear me, brother," said Edward. "Your speech in sleep, and now
even your waking dreams, are of beings which belong not to this world,
or to our race--Our good Father Eustace says, that howbeit we may not
do well to receive all idle tales of goblins and spectres, yet there is
warrant from holy Scripture to believe, that the fiends haunt waste and
solitary places; and that those who frequent such wildernesses alone,
are the prey, or the sport, of these wandering demons. And therefore,
I pray thee, brother, let me go with you when you go next up the glen,
where, as you well know, there be places of evil reputation--Thou
carest not for my escort; but, Halbert, such dangers are more safely
encountered by the wise in judgment, than by the bold in bosom; and
though I have small cause to boast of my own wisdom, yet I have that
which ariseth from the written knowledge of elder times."

There was a moment during this discourse, when Halbert had well-nigh
come to the resolution of disburdening his own breast, by intrusting
Edward with all that weighed upon it. But when his brother reminded him
that this was the morning of a high holiday, and that, setting aside all
other business or pleasure, he ought to go to the Monastery and
shrive himself before Father Eustace, who would that day occupy the
confessional, pride stepped in and confirmed his wavering resolution.
"I will not avow," he thought, "a tale so extraordinary, that I may be
considered as an impostor or something worse--I will not fly from this
Englishman, whose arm and sword may be no better than my own. My fathers
have faced his betters, were he as much distinguished in battle as he is
by his quaint discourse."

Pride, which has been said to save man, and woman too, from falling,
has yet a stronger influence on the mind when it embraces the cause of
passion, and seldom fails to render it victorious over conscience and
reason. Halbert, once determined, though not to the better course, at
length slept soundly, and was only awakened by the dawn of day.

       *       *       *       *       *       *



Chapter the Twenty-First.


  Indifferent, but indifferent--pshaw, he doth it not
  Like one who is his craft's master--ne'er the less
  I have seen a clown confer a bloody coxcomb
  On one who was a master of defence.
                                      OLD PLAY.

With the first gray peep of dawn, Halbert Glendinning arose and hastened
to dress himself, girded on his weapon, and took a cross-bow in his
hand, as if his usual sport had been his sole object. He groped his way
down the dark and winding staircase, and undid, with as little noise
as possible, the fastenings of the inner door, and of the exterior iron
grate. At length he stood free in the court-yard, and looking up to the
tower, saw a signal made with a handkerchief from the window. Nothing
doubting that it was his antagonist, he paused, expecting him. But it
was Mary Avenel, who glided like a spirit from under the low and rugged
portal.

Halbert was much surprised, and felt, he knew not why, like one caught
in the act of a meditated trespass. The presence of Mary Avenel had till
that moment never given him pain. She spoke, too, in a tone where sorrow
seemed to mingle with reproach, while she asked him with emphasis, "What
he was about to do?"

He showed his cross-bow, and was about to express the pretext he had
meditated, when Mary interrupted him.

"Not so, Halbert--that evasion were unworthy of one whose word has
hitherto been truth. You meditate not the destruction of the deer--your
hand and your heart are aimed at other game--you seek to do battle with
this stranger."

"And wherefore should I quarrel with our guest?" answered Halbert,
blushing deeply.

"There are, indeed, many reasons why you should not," replied
the maiden, "nor is there one of avail wherefore you should--yet
nevertheless, such a quarrel you are now searching after."

"Why should you suppose so, Mary?" said Halbert, endeavouring to hide
his conscious purpose--"he is my mother's guest--he is protected by
the Abbot and the community, who are our masters--he is of high degree
also,--and wherefore should you think that I can, or dare, resent a
hasty word, which he has perchance thrown out against me more from the
wantonness of his wit, than the purpose of his heart?"

"Alas!" answered the maiden, "the very asking that question puts your
resolution beyond a doubt. Since your childhood you were ever daring,
seeking danger rather than avoiding it--delighting in whatever had the
air of adventure and of courage: and it is not from fear that you will
now blench from your purpose--Oh, let it then be from pity!--from pity,
Halbert, to your aged mother, whom your death or victory will alike
deprive of the comfort and stay of her age."

"She has my brother Edward," said Halbert, turning suddenly from her.

"She has indeed," said Mary Avenel, "the calm, the noble-minded, the
considerate Edward, who has thy courage, Halbert, without thy fiery
rashness,--thy generous spirit, with more of reason to guide it. He
would not have heard his mother, would not have heard his adopted
sister, beseech him in vain not to ruin himself, and tear up their
future hopes of happiness and protection."

Halbert's heart swelled as he replied to this reproach. "Well--what
avails it speaking?--you have him that is better than me--wiser,
more considerate--braver, for aught I know--you are provided with a
protector, and need care no more for me."

Again he turned to depart, but Mary Avenel laid her hand on his arm so
gently that he scarce felt her hold, yet felt that it was impossible
for him to strike it off. There he stood, one foot advanced to leave the
court-yard, but so little determined on departure, that he resembled a
traveller arrested by the spell of a magician, and unable either to quit
the attitude of motion, or to proceed on his course.

Mary Avenel availed herself of his state of suspense. "Hear me," she
said, "hear me, Halbert!--I am an orphan, and even Heaven hears the
orphan--I have been the companion of your infancy, and if _you_ will not
hear me for an instant, from whom may Mary Avenel claim so poor a boon?"

"I hear you," said Halbert Glendinning, "but be brief, dear Mary--you
mistake the nature of my business--it is but a morning of summer sport
which we propose."

"Say not thus," said the maiden, interrupting him, "say not thus to
me--others thou mayst deceive, but me thou canst not--There has been
that in me from the earliest youth, which fraud flies from, and which
imposture cannot deceive. For what fate has given me such a power I know
not; but bred an ignorant maiden, in this sequestered valley, mine eyes
can too often see what man would most willingly hide--I can judge of the
dark purpose, though it is hid under the smiling brow, and a glance of
the eye says more to me than oaths and protestations do to others."

"Then," said Halbert, "if thou canst so read the human heart,--say,
dear Mary--what dost thou see in mine?--tell me that--say that what thou
seest--what thou readest in this bosom, does not offend thee--say but
_that_, and thou shalt be the guide of my actions, and mould me now and
henceforward to honour or to dishonour at thy own free will!"

Mary Avenel became first red, and then deadly pale, as Halbert
Glendinning spoke. But when, turning round at the close of his address,
he took her hand, she gently withdrew it, and replied, "I cannot read
the heart, Halbert, and I would not of my will know aught of yours, save
what beseems us both--I only can judge of signs, words, and actions of
little outward import, more truly than those around me, as my eyes, thou
knowest, have seen objects not presented to those of others."

"Let them gaze then on one whom they shall never see more," said
Halbert, once more turning from her, and rushing out of the court-yard
without again looking back.

Mary Avenel gave a faint scream, and clasped both her hands firmly on
her forehead and eyes. She had been a minute in this attitude, when
she was thus greeted by a voice from behind: "Generously done, my most
clement Discretion, to hide those brilliant eyes from the far inferior
beams which even now begin to gild the eastern horizon--Certes,
peril there were that Phoebus, outshone in splendour, might in very
shamefacedness turn back his ear, and rather leave the world in
darkness, than incur the disgrace of such an encounter--Credit me,
lovely Discretion--"

But as Sir Piercie Shafton (the reader will readily set down these
flowers of eloquence to the proper owner) attempted to take Mary
Avenel's hand, in order to proceed in his speech, she shook him abruptly
off, and regarding him with an eye which evinced terror and agitation,
rushed past him into the tower.

The knight stood looking after her with a countenance in which contempt
was strongly mingled with mortification. "By my knighthood!" he
ejaculated, "I have thrown away upon this rude rustic Phidel? a speech,
which the proudest beauty at the court of Felicia (so let me call the
Elysium from which I am banished!) might have termed the very matins of
Cupid. Hard and inexorable was the fate that sent thee thither, Piercie
Shafton, to waste thy wit upon country wenches, and thy valour upon
hob-nailed clowns! But that insult--that affront--had it been offered
to me by the lowest plebeian, he must have died for it by my hand, in
respect the enormity of the offence doth countervail the inequality of
him by whom it is given. I trust I shall find this clownish roisterer
not less willing to deal in blows than in taunts."

While he held this conversation with himself, Sir Piercie Shafton was
hastening to the little tuft of birch-trees which had been assigned
as the place of meeting. He greeted his antagonist with a courtly
salutation, followed by this commentary: "I pray you to observe, that
I doff my hat to you, though so much my inferior in rank, without
derogation on my part, inasmuch as my having so far honoured you in
receiving and admitting your defiance, doth, in the judgment of the best
martialists, in some sort and for the time, raise you to a level with
me--an honour which you may and ought to account cheaply purchased, even
with the loss of your life, if such should chance to be the issue of
this duello."

"For which condescension," said Halbert, "I have to thank the token
which I presented to you."

The knight changed colour, and grinded his teeth with rage--"Draw your
weapon!" said he to Glendinning.

"Not in this spot," answered the youth; "we should be liable to
interruption--Follow me, and I will bring you to a place where we shall
encounter no such risk."

He proceeded to walk up the glen, resolving that their place of combat
should be in the entrance of the Corri-nan-shian; both because the spot,
lying under the reputation of being haunted, was very little frequented,
and also because he regarded it as a place which to him might be termed
fated, and which he therefore resolved should witness his death
or victory. They walked up the glen for some time in silence, like
honourable enemies who did not wish to contend with words, and who had
nothing friendly to exchange with each other. Silence, however, was
always an irksome state with Sir Piercie and, moreover, his anger was
usually a hasty and short-lived passion. As, therefore, he went forth,
in his own idea, in all love and honour towards his antagonist, he saw
not any cause for submitting longer to the painful restraint of positive
silence. He began by complimenting Halbert on the alert activity with
which he surmounted the obstacles and impediments of the way.

"Trust me," said he, "worthy rustic, we have not a lighter or a firmer
step in our courtlike revels, and if duly set forth by a silk hose, and
trained unto that stately exercise, your leg would make an indifferent
good show in a pavin or a galliard. And I doubt nothing," he added,
"that you have availed yourself of some opportunity to improve yourself
in the art of fence, which is more akin than dancing to our present
purpose?"

"I know nothing more of fencing," said Halbert, "than hath been taught
me by an old shepherd of ours, called Martin, and at whiles a lesson
from Christie of the Clinthill--for the rest, I must trust to good
sword, strong arm, and sound heart."

"Marry and I am glad of it, young Audacity, (I will call you my
Audacity, and you will call me your Condescension, while we are on these
terms of unnatural equality,) I am glad of your ignorance with all my
heart. For we martialists proportion the punishments which we inflict
upon our opposites, to the length and hazard of the efforts wherewith
they oppose themselves to us. And I see not why you, being but a tyro,
may not be held sufficiently punished for your outrecuidance, and
orgillous presumption, by the loss of an ear, an eye, or even a finger,
accompanied by some flesh-wound of depth and severity, suited to your
error--whereas, had you been able to stand more effectually on
your defence, I see not how less than your life could have atoned
sufficiently for your presumption."

"Now, by God and Our Lady," said Halbert, unable any longer to restrain
himself, "thou art thyself over-presumptuous, who speakest thus daringly
of the issue of a combat which is not yet even begun--Are you a god,
that you already dispose of my life and limbs? or are you a judge in
the justice-air, telling at your ease and without risk, how the head and
quarters of a condemned criminal are to be disposed of?"

"Not so, O thou,--whom I have well permitted to call thyself my
Audacity. I, thy Condescension, am neither a god to judge the issue of
the combat before it is fought, nor a judge to dispose at my ease and
in safety of the limbs and head of a condemned criminal; but I am an
indifferent good master of fence, being the first pupil of the first
master of the first school of fence that our royal England affords, the
said master being no other than the truly noble, and all-unutterably
skilful Vincentio Saviola, from whom I learned the firm step, quick eye,
and nimble hand--of which qualities thou, O my most rustical Audacity,
art full like to reap the fruits so soon as we shall find a piece of
ground fitting for such experiments."

They had now reached the gorge of the ravine, where Halbert had at
first intended to stop; but when he observed the narrowness of the level
ground, he began to consider that it was only by superior agility that
he could expect to make up his deficiency in the science, as it was
called, of defence. He found no spot which afforded sufficient room to
traverse for this purpose, until he gained the well-known fountain, by
whose margin, and in front of the huge rock from which it sprung, was
an amphitheatre of level turf, of small space indeed, compared with the
great height of the cliffs with which it was surrounded on every point
save that from which the rivulet issued forth, yet large enough for
their present purpose.

When they had reached this spot of ground, fitted well by its gloom
and sequestered situation to be a scene of mortal strife, both were
surprised to observe that a grave was dug close by the foot of the rock
with great neatness and regularity, the green turf being laid down
upon the one side, and the earth thrown out in a heap upon the other. A
mattock and shovel lay by the verge of the grave.

Sir Piercie Shafton bent his eye with unusual seriousness upon Halbert
Glendinning, as he asked him sternly, "Does this bode treason, young
man? And have you purpose to set upon me here as in an emboscata or
place of vantage?"

"Not on my part, by Heaven!" answered the youth: "I told no one of our
purpose, nor would I for the throne of Scotland take odds against a
single arm."

"I believe thou wouldst not, mine Audacity," said the knight,
resuming the affected manner which was become a second nature to him;
"nevertheless this fosse is curiously well shaped, and might be
the masterpiece of Nature's last bed-maker, I would say the
sexton--Wherefore, let us be thankful to chance or some unknown friend,
who hath thus provided for one of us the decencies of sepulture, and let
us proceed to determine which shall have the advantage of enjoying this
place of undisturbed slumber."

So saying, he stripped off his doublet and cloak, which he folded
up with great care, and deposited upon a large stone, while Halbert
Glendinning, not without some emotion, followed his example. Their
vicinity to the favourite haunt of the White Lady led him to form
conjectures concerning the incident of the grave--"It must have been her
work!" he thought: "the Spirit foresaw and has provided for the fatal
event of the combat--I must return from this place a homicide, or I must
remain here for ever!"

The bridge seemed now broken down behind him, and the chance of coming
off honourably without killing or being killed, (the hope of which issue
has cheered the sinking heart of many a duellist,) seemed now altogether
to be removed. Yet the very desperation of his situation gave him, on
an instant's reflection, both firmness and courage, and presented to him
one sole alternative, conquest, namely, or death.

"As we are here," said Sir Piercie Shafton, "unaccompanied by any
patrons or seconds, it were well you should pass your hands over my
sides, as I shall over yours; not that I suspect you to use any quaint
device of privy armour, but in order to comply with the ancient and
laudable custom practised on all such occasions."

While complying with his antagonist's humour, Halbert Glendinning went
through this ceremony, Sir Piercie Shafton did not fail to solicit his
attention to the quality and fineness of his wrought and embroidered
shirt--"In this very shirt," said he, "O mine Audacity!--I say in
this very garment, in which I am now to combat a Scottish rustic
like thyself, it was my envied lot to lead the winning party at that
wonderous match at ballon, made betwixt the divine Astrophel, (our
matchless Sidney,) and the right honourable my very good lord of Oxford.
All the beauties of Felicia (by which name I distinguish our beloved
England) stood in the gallery, waving their kerchiefs at each turn of
the game, and cheering the winners by their plaudits. After which noble
sport we were refreshed by a suitable banquet, whereat it pleased the
noble Urania (being the unmatched Countess of Pembroke) to accommodate
me with her fan for the cooling my somewhat too much inflamed visage, to
requite which courtesy, I said, casting my features into a smiling,
yet melancholy fashion, O divinest Urania! receive again that too fatal
gift, which not like the Zephyr cooleth, but like the hot breath of the
Sirocco, heateth yet more that which is already inflamed. Whereupon,
looking upon me somewhat scornfully, yet not so but what the experienced
courtier might perceive a certain cast of approbative affection----"

Here the knight was interrupted by Halbert, who had waited with
courteous patience for some little time, till he found, that far from
drawing to a close, Sir Piercie seemed rather inclined to wax prolix in
his reminiscences.

"Sir Knight," said the youth, "if this matter be not very much to the
purpose, we will, if you object not, proceed to that which we have in
hand. You should have abidden in England had you desired to waste time
in words, for here we spend it in blows."

"I crave your pardon, most rusticated Audacity," answered Sir Piercie;
"truly I become oblivious of every thing beside, when the recollections
of the divine court of Felicia press upon my wakened memory, even as
a saint is dazzled when he bethinks him of the beatific vision. Ah,
felicitous Feliciana! delicate nurse of the fair, chosen abode of the
wise, the birth-place and cradle of nobility, the temple of courtesy,
the fane of sprightly chivalry--Ah, heavenly court, or rather courtly
heaven! cheered with dances, lulled asleep with harmony, wakened
with sprightly sports and tourneys, decored with silks and tissues,
glittering with diamonds and jewels, standing on end with double-piled
velvets, satins, and satinettas!"

"The token, Sir Knight, the token!" exclaimed Halbert Glendinning, who,
impatient of Sir Piercie's interminable oratory, reminded him of the
ground of their quarrel, as the best way to compel him to the purpose of
their meeting.

And he judged right; for Sir Piercie Shafton no sooner heard him speak,
than he exclaimed, "Thy death-hour has struck--betake thee to thy
sword--Via!"

Both swords were unsheathed, and the combatants commenced their
engagement. Halbert became immediately aware, that, as he had expected,
he was far inferior to his adversary in the use of his weapon. Sir
Piercie Shafton had taken no more than his own share of real merit, when
he termed himself an absolutely good fencer; and Glendinning soon found
that he should have great difficulty in escaping with life and honour
from such a master of the sword. The English knight was master of all
the mystery of the _stoccata, imbrocata, punto-reverso, incartata_, and
so forth, which the Italian masters of defence had lately introduced
into general practice. But Glendinning, on his part, was no novice in
the principles of the art, according to the old Scottish fashion, and
possessed the first of all qualities, a steady and collected mind. At
first, being desirous to try the skill, and become acquainted with the
play of his enemy, he stood on his defence, keeping his foot, hand, eye,
and body, in perfect unison, and holding his sword short, and with the
point towards his antagonist's face, so that Sir Piercie, in order
to assail him, was obliged to make actual passes, and could not avail
himself of his skill in making feints; while, on the other hand, Halbert
was prompt to parry these attacks, either by shifting his ground or with
the sword. The consequence was, that after two or three sharp attempts
on the part of Sir Piercie, which were evaded or disconcerted by the
address of his opponent, he began to assume the defensive in his turn,
fearful of giving some advantage by being repeatedly the assailant. But
Halbert was too cautious to press on a swordsman whose dexterity had
already more than once placed him within a hair's breadth of death,
which he had only escaped by uncommon watchfulness and agility.

When each had made a feint or two, there was a pause in the conflict,
both as if by one assent dropping their swords' point, and looking on
each other for a moment without speaking. At length Halbert Glendinning,
who felt perhaps more uneasy on account of his family than he had done
before he had displayed his own courage, and proved the strength of his
antagonist, could not help saying, "Is the subject of our quarrel, Sir
Knight, so mortal, that one of our two bodies must needs fill up that
grave? or may we with honour, having proved ourselves against each
other, sheathe our swords and depart friends?"

"Valiant and most rustical Audacity," said the Southron knight, "to no
man on earth could you have put a question on the code of honour, who
was more capable of rendering you a reason. Let us pause for the space
of one venue, until I give you my opinion on this dependence, [Footnote:
_Dependence_--A phrase among the brethren of the sword for an existing
quarrel.] for certain it is, that brave men should not run upon their
fate like brute and furious wild beasts, but should slay each other
deliberately, decently, and with reason. Therefore, if we coolly examine
the state of our dependence, we may the better apprehend whether
the sisters three have doomed one of us to expiate the same with his
blood--Dost thou understand me?"

"I have heard Father Eustace," said Halbert, after a moment's
recollection, "speak of the three furies, with their thread and their
shears."

"Enough--enough,"--interrupted Sir Piercie Shafton, crimsoning with a
new fit of rage, "the thread of thy life is spun!"

And with these words he attacked with the utmost ferocity the Scottish
youth, who had but just time to throw himself into a posture of defence.
But the rash fury of the assailant, as frequently happens, disappointed
its own purpose; for, as he made a desperate thrust, Halbert Glendinning
avoided it, and ere the knight could recover his weapon, requited him
(to use his own language) with a resolute stoccata, which passed through
his body, and Sir Piercie Shafton fell to the ground.

        *       *       *      *       *



Chapter the Twenty-Second.


  Yes, life hath left him--every busy thought,
  Each fiery passion, every strong affection,
  All sense of outward ill and inward sorrow,
  Are fled at once from the pale trunk before me;
  And I have given that which spoke and moved,
  Thought, acted, suffer'd as a living man,
  To be a ghastly form of bloody clay,
  Soon the foul food for reptiles.
                                        OLD PLAY.

I believe few successful duellists (if the word successful can be
applied to a superiority so fatal) have beheld their dead antagonist
stretched on the earth at their feet, without wishing they could redeem
with their own blood that which it has been their fate to spill. Least
of all could such indifference be the lot of so young a man as Halbert
Glendinning, who, unused to the sight of human blood, was not only
struck with sorrow, but with terror, when he beheld Sir Piercie Shafton
lie stretched on the green-sward before him, vomiting gore as if
impelled by the strokes of a pump. He threw his bloody sword on the
ground, and hastened to kneel and support him, vainly striving, at the
same time, to stanch his wound, which seemed rather to bleed inwardly
than externally.

The unfortunate knight spoke at intervals, when the syncope would permit
him, and his words, so far as intelligible, partook of his affected and
conceited, yet not ungenerous character.

"Most rustical youth," he said, "thy fortune hath prevailed over
knightly skill--and Audacity hath overcome Condescension, even as the
kite hath sometimes hawked at and struck down the falcon-gentle.--Fly
and save thyself!--Take my purse--it is in the nether pocket of my
carnation-coloured hose--and is worth a clown's acceptance. See that
my mails, with my vestments, be sent to the Monastery of Saint
Mary's"--(here his voice grew weak, and his mind and recollection
seemed to waver)--"I bestow the cut velvet jerkin, with close breeches
conforming--for--oh!--the good of my soul."

"Be of good comfort, sir," said Halbert, half distracted with his agony
of pity and remorse. "I trust you shall yet do well--Oh for a leech!"

"Were there twenty physicians, O most generous Audacity, and that were
a grave spectacle--I might not survive, my life is ebbing
fast.--Commend me to the rustical nymph whom I called my Discretion--O
Claridiana!--true empress of this bleeding heart--which now bleedeth in
