favour that his life has been spared, and he has been placed in
the school of Scopus;" and the languid young Romans, looking at
Beric's height and proportions, no longer wondered at the trouble
that the Roman legions had had in overcoming the resistance of
a mere handful of barbarians. Beric on his part was by no means
surprised at the appearance of these young courtiers. He had seen
many of the same type at Camalodunum, and had heard Caius lament
the effeminacy of the rising generation; but he knew that these
scented young nobles could, if necessary, buckle on armour and
fight as valiantly as the roughest soldier; though why they should
choose to waste their lives at present in idleness, when there was
so much work to be done in every corner of the vast empire, was
altogether beyond his comprehension.

"Why is there a crowd gathered round that large building?" he asked
Pollio.

"That is one of the public granaries. Corn is brought here in vast
quantities from Sardinia and Sicily, from Spain and Africa, and
since Nero came to the throne it is distributed gratis to all who
choose to apply for it. No wonder Nero is popular among the people;
he feeds them and gives them shows--they want nothing more. It
is nothing to them, the cruelties he exercises upon the rich."

"But it must encourage the people in lazy habits," Beric said.

Pollio shrugged his shoulders. "They think because they are citizens
of the capital of the world they have a right to live in idleness,
and that others should work for them. At any rate it keeps them in
a good temper. There have been great tumults in Rome in past times,
but by drawing the tribute in corn and distributing it freely here
Nero keeps them in a high state of contentment."

"You don't like Nero, Pollio?"

"I hate him," Pollio said. "He is a tyrant--greedy, cruel, and
licentious. He had his own mother murdered because she opposed
his plans, and some of our best and noblest citizens have been put
to death, either because Nero was jealous of their popularity, or
because he desired to grasp their possessions. It is horrible that
Rome, which has conquered the world, should lie prostrate at the
feet of a creature like this. It was because my father feared that
some spy among the slaves might report what I said about Nero that
caused him to send me out to Suetonius, who is a connection of our
family, and he will ere long obtain for me some other employment
away from the capital. I shall be glad to be gone, the atmosphere
here seems to stifle one. Nero's spies are everywhere, and a man
is afraid of speaking his thoughts even in his own house. I like to
take life easily, but I would rather be battling with your people
in the swamps than living in idleness in Rome."

"I thought you were glad to return, Pollio?"

"I thought I should be, Beric, but I suppose the active life in
Britain has spoilt me. I used to scent my hair and lounge in the
baths, and frequent the shows, and lead just such a life as the
young men we have spoken to this afternoon, and I was contented
with it. I wonder at myself now, but I cannot take up the old life
where I left it. I have been back for twenty-four hours, and I am
restless already and am longing to be doing something."

"I should think," Beric said with a smile, "that you might well
put up with Rome for a few weeks. It seems to me that it will take
years to know all its wonders. There are the great libraries, too,
filled with the manuscripts, and as you understand Greek you could
study the writings of the sages and philosophers."

"I would rather row in the galleys," Pollio said. "I don't mind an
hour or two now and then with the historians, but the philosophers
are too deep for my shallow brain. Would you like to look into a
library now?"

Beric assented eagerly, and they entered one of these buildings.
It consisted of a great hall with innumerable couches and benches
for readers. Round the walls were pigeonholes, in which the
manuscripts were deposited, and numerous attendants moved to and
fro among the readers, supplying them with such manuscripts as they
desired, and taking away those they had done with. Leaving the hall
they passed through a series of large apartments, in which hundreds
of men were at work copying manuscripts.

"These are scribes," Pollio said. "Very many of them are slaves whom
the owners allow to work here, sharing with them their earnings;
others are freedmen who have either purchased their liberty from
their savings, or have been manumitted by their owners. You see
many of the most popular writings, such as those of Caesar, Tacitus,
Livy, or the poets Horace, Virgil, and Ovid, are constantly in
demand, and scores of copies must be kept on hand. Then again many
of the Greek authors are greatly in request. The manuscripts wear
out and must be replaced, so that at the various libraries there
are some thousands of scribes always kept employed. You see among
the scribes men of many nationalities. Those men, for instance,
are Egyptians. You see the rolls they are copying, they are made of
papyrus, which is got, as I have heard my uncle say, from the leaf
of a sort of water plant. Some of them are copying these writings
on to vellum for the use of those who understand the Egyptian
language, others are translating them into Latin. Those men are
Persians, and those at the tables near them are Jews. They are
making translations of their sacred books, which are much read at
present, partly owing to the fact that the people are troublesome,
and probably an army will have to be sent against them, partly
because of the Christian sect, whose doctrines are founded upon the
Jewish sacred books, and are supported, as they claim, by various
prognostications of their augurs, or, as they call them, prophets.
The books, therefore, are of interest to the learned, and it may
be that some who come here to read them are secretly disciples of
the sect."

"Can I come here and read?" Beric asked eagerly.

"Certainly you can, these libraries are open to all. So are the
baths, at least the greater portion of them; everything is free
here. But it is nearly time for us now to be going home."

Beric availed himself at once of the advantages offered by the
public libraries. It was only thus that men of moderate means could
in those days obtain access to books, for the cost of manuscripts
was considerable, and libraries were only to be found in the houses
of the wealthy. His taste for reading was a matter of astonishment
among the gladiators, and was the subject of a good deal of jesting.
This, however, was for the most part of a good natured kind, but
upon the part of one named Lupus it was sneering and offensive.

This man, who was a professional gladiator, that is one of those
who had taken to it as a trade, was a Roman of unusual stature and
strength. He had been a worker in iron, and from making arms took
to their use. He had won many victories in the arena, and was
considered the champion of the school of Scopus, the only man who
approached him in the number of victories being Porus, the Scythian,
whose strong point, however, lay in his activity and his dexterity
in throwing the net rather than in strength. Lupus had, from the
first day of the Britons' arrival at the ludus, viewed them with
aversion, his hostility to Beric being especially marked, and he
particularly objected to the slight deference shown to him by his
companions, in spite of the protests of Beric himself, who in vain
pointed out to them that he was now no longer their chief, and that
they were in all respects comrades and equals.

Lupus had carefully abstained from any remarks that would bring him
into collision with the other Britons. Mortified as he was that his
strength and stature, of which he was very proud, had been thrown
into the shade by that of the newcomers, he felt that in a quarrel
their rough strength might render them more than his match.
Beric, however, he considered as but a youth, and though doubtless
powerful, deemed that his muscles would be no match for his own
seasoned strength. As yet he had not seen Beric tried with any
arms, and thought that the young barbarian could know nothing of the
management of weapons. At first his annoyance only took the form of
addressing him with an affected deference as "my lord Beric;" but
the discovery that, while he himself was unable to read or write,
the young Briton was fond of study, and spent his spare time in the
public libraries, afforded him opportunities for constant sneers.

These Beric took in good part, but Boduoc, who had now picked
up enough Latin to understand the gist of his remarks, one day
intervened, and seizing Lupus by the shoulder dashed him to the
ground. The Roman sprang to his feet, caught up a knife from the
table, and rushed at Boduoc. Scopus, however, who was present, with
an angry growl sprang upon him, seizing him by the throat with so
vigorous a grasp that his face became purple, his eyes stared, and
he in vain gasped for breath. Then he flung him down into a corner
of the room with such force that he lay half stunned.

"You dog," he exclaimed, "how dare you take a knife? I will
have no quarrels here, as you know; and if you again venture on a
disturbance I will bid your comrades tie you up, and will flay the
skin off your back with the lash. The Briton was perfectly right.
Why can't you leave his friend alone? I have marked your ill natured
jests before, and am glad that he punished you."

Lupus rose slowly to his feet with an angry glare in his eyes. He
knew, however, that Scopus had in his time been unrivalled in the
arena, and that, moreover, the rest, who had been offended by his
airs of superiority, would side with the lanista against him.

"I said nothing to the Briton," he said; "it was the boy I addressed.
If it was an offence, why did he not take it up? Is he a coward
that others have to fight his battles? If he is offended, why does
he not challenge me to fight, as is customary in all the ludi?"

"Because he is as yet but a pupil, and will not be fit to enter the
arena for three or four years," Scopus said. "A fight can only be
between trained gladiators. You don't suppose that a fresh joined
youth is going to fight with one who has won a score of times in
the arena?"

"Excuse me, Scopus," Beric said quietly, "I am perfectly ready to
fight with this braggadocio, and challenge him to a contest; a few
hard knocks will do neither of us any harm, therefore let us go
into the school and have it out. It is much better so than to have
perpetual quarrelling."

Scopus would have objected, but the gladiators broke into shouts
of "A fight! a fight!" and, as it was according to the rules of
all the ludi that quarrels should be fought out with wooden swords
without interference by the lanistae, he simply shrugged his
shoulders.

"Well, as he has challenged you, Lupus, I have nothing to say to
it;" and the whole of those present at once adjourned to the school.

The combatants were armed with bucklers and with swords of the
same weight to those ordinarily used, but with square edges with
the corners rounded off, so that though they would give a heavy
blow they would not cut.

Lupus, confident in his skill, and furious at the humiliation he
had just suffered, at once sprang upon Beric, but the latter as
nimbly leaped back, catching the blow on his buckler, and at the same
time bringing his own with such force and weight upon the Roman's
left shoulder that it brought him for a moment on his knee. A
shout of astonishment and applause burst from the lookers on. Lupus
would have instantly renewed the fight, but Beric stepped back and
lowered his sword.

"Your left arm is disabled," he said. "You had best wait till you
can use your buckler again; it would not be a fair match now."

Furious as he was, Lupus felt the truth of what his opponent said,
and though the burst of applause at Beric's magnanimity angered
him even more than before, he drew back a step or two. At the order
of Scopus two of the others came forward with some oil, with which
for some minutes they kneaded his shoulder.

"I am ready again," he said at last, and the gladiators drew back,
and the opponents faced each other. Lupus had learned that Beric
was not, as he had supposed, entirely untaught; but although he
attributed the blow he had received solely to his own rashness, he
renewed the conflict with the same care and prudence he would have
shown had he been fighting with edged weapons in the arena. He soon
found, however, that he had met with an opponent differing widely
from those he had hitherto fought. Beric had had excellent teachers
among the veteran legionaries at Camalodunum, and to skill in the
sword he added a prodigious activity. Instead of fighting in the
ordinary Roman method, standing firm, with the body bent forward and
the buckler stretched out at the level of the shoulder in front of
him, he stood lightly poised on his feet, ready to spring forward
or back, and with his shield across his body.

In vain Lupus tried to get to close quarters. His cramped attitude
prevented rapid movement, and he could not get even within striking
distance of his opponent save when the latter sprang in to deliver
a blow. These, however, fell vainly, for Lupus was fighting now
calmly and warily, and with sword or shield guarded every blow aimed
at him. Beric soon felt that he should but exhaust himself did he
continue to attack in this fashion, and presently desisted, and
standing his ground awaited the attack of Lupus. The blows fell fast
and heavy now. Then Beric purposely lowered his buckler a moment;
Lupus instantly struck, springing a pace forward. Beric sharply
threw up his left arm, striking up the hand of Lupus as it fell,
and at the same moment brought his weapon with tremendous force
down upon the head of his antagonist, who fell as if killed.

"Habet, habet!" shouted the gladiators, alike exultant and astonished
at the defeat of the bully of the school.

"By the gods, Beric," Scopus said, "you have given him a lesson.
I talked abut four years' training, but even now I would send you
into the arena without fear. Why, there are but one or two gladiators
who are considered the superior of Lupus with the sword, and he
had from the first no chance with you."

"It was simply because he did not understand my way of fighting,"
Beric said quietly. "No, Scopus, I will have the four years' training
before I fight. I have chanced to overcome Lupus this time, but I am
not going to match myself against men until I have my full strength."

Scopus laughed. "That looks as if there was strength enough in your
arm, Beric," he said pointing to the prostrate figure. "However,
I know from what you have said that you wish to put off your entry
into the arena as long as possible, and doubtless practice and
teaching will render you a far better swordsman than you are now.
Take him away," he said to the others, pointing to Lupus. "Dash
cold water over him till he comes round, and then bandage his head.
I doubt if his skull be not broken. One of you had better go for a
leech to examine him; and mind, let not a word be breathed outside
the school as to this contest. We will keep it silent until it is
time for Beric to enter the arena, and then we shall be dull indeed
if we do not lay bets enough on him to keep us in wine for a year.
There is no fear of Lupus himself saying a word about it. You may
be sure that, roughly shaken as his conceit may be, he will hold his
tongue as to the fact that he has found his master in what he was
pleased to call a boy. Mind, if I ever hear a word spoken outside
the school on the subject, I will make it my business to find out
who spread the report, and it will be very bad for the man who did
it when I bring it home to him."

It was upwards of a week before Lupus was able to enter the gymnasium
again. Beric had particularly requested the others to make no
allusion to his discomfiture, but from that time the superiority
of Lupus was gone, and Beric's position in the school was fully
established.



CHAPTER XIII: A CHRISTIAN


While Beric thus spent his time between his exercises and the schools
and one or other of the libraries, varied occasionally by paying a
visit with Pollio, Boduoc and his companions were not ill contented
with their life. Most of them had, during the long journey through
Gaul, picked up a few words of Latin from their guards, and as it
was the language of the gymnasium, and was the only medium by which
the men of the various nationalities could communicate with each
other, they now rapidly increased their knowledge of it, Beric strongly
urging them to become acquainted with it as soon as possible, as
it might be most useful and important to them. None of the others
besides Boduoc were, Scopus thought, ever likely to be a credit
to him in the more serious contests in the ring, but all showed an
aptitude for wrestling and boxing, and the lanista was well content
with this, as the games in the arena frequently commenced with
these comparatively harmless sports, and in many of the provincial
cities wrestlers and boxers were in great request.

Beric was much pleased when he heard from the master that he
intended to confine his teaching to these two exercises only with
regard to his companions; for although men were sometimes seriously
hurt by blows given by the masses of leather and lead, which, wound
round the fist, were used to give weight to the blows, a final
termination to the contests was rare. In the exercises the men
practised with many wrappings of wadding and cotton wound round the
caestus, answering the purpose of the modern boxing glove. Beric
himself was very partial to the exercise, and as it strengthened
the muscles, and gave quickness and activity to the limbs, Scopus
encouraged him in it.

"I do not see the use of the caestus," Beric said one day. "One
could hit and guard much more quickly without it. It is good, no
doubt, for exercise, as it strengthens the muscles, but surely for
fighting it would be better to lay it aside. What is the advantage
of it? With the bare fist one can knock an opponent down, and with
a very few blows strike him senseless. What more can you want than
that?"

"Yes, for men like you Britons that would do, for a straight blow
from any one of you would well nigh break in the bones of the face
of an ordinary man, and, as you say, you could strike much more
quickly without the weight on your hands, but with smaller men a
contest might last for hours without the caestus, and the spectators
would get tired of it; but I will try the experiment some day, and
put up one of the Britons against Asthor the Gaul, hands against
the caestus, and see what comes of it. At present he is more skilful
than any of your people, but they are getting on fast, and when
one of them is fairly his match in point of skill I will try it. If
the Briton wins, I will, when they first go into the arena, match
them against the champions of the other schools with bare hands
against armed ones, and they will get great credit if they win
under those conditions. Both at that and at wrestling you Britons
are likely to carry all before you. I should like to train you all
only for that."

"I wish you would," Beric said earnestly.

"There is less honour in winning at wrestling and boxing than in
the other contests," Scopus said.

"For that I care nothing whatever, Scopus; besides, you would
get more credit from my winning in those games than from my being
killed in the others. Strength and height count for much in them,
while against an active retiarius strength goes for very little."

"But you are active as well as strong, Beric, and so is Boduoc.
Moreover, when Caesar sent you to me to be prepared for the ring,
he meant that you should take part in the principal contests, and
he would be furious if, on some great occasion, when he expected
to see you stand up against a famous champion, it turned out that
you were only a wrestler."

"I am ready and willing to learn all the exercises, Scopus--I
should like to excel in them all--but you might put me up as a
wrestler and boxer; then if Nero insisted on my betaking myself to
other weapons, I could do so without discredit to you. But my opinion
is that every man should do what he can do best. Were we to fight
with clubs, I think that we need have no fear of any antagonists;
but our strength is for the most part thrown away at sword play,
at which any active man with but half our strength is our match.
You have told me that Nero often looks in at your school, and
doubtless he will do so when he comes back from Greece. You could
then tell him that you had found that all the Britons were likely
to excel rather in wrestling and boxing, where their strength and
height came into play, than in the other exercises, and that you
therefore were instructing them chiefly in them."

"I will see what I can do," Scopus said. "I like you Britons, you
are good tempered, and give me no trouble. I will tell you what I
will do, I will send to Greece for the best instructor in wrestling
I can get hold of, they are better at that than we are, and wrestling
has always ranked very high in their sports. Most of you already
are nearly a match for Decius; but you are all worth taking pains
about, for there are rich prizes to be won in the provincial arenas,
as well as at Rome; and in Greece, where they do not care for the
serious contests, there is high honour paid to the winners in the
wrestling games."

As time went on Beric had little leisure to spend in libraries, for
the exercises increased in severity, and as, instead of confining
himself, as most of the others did, to one particular branch, he
worked at them all, the day was almost entirely given up to exercises
of one kind or another. His muscles, and those of his companions,
had increased vastly under the training they received. All had
been accustomed to active exercise, but under their steady training
every ounce of superfluous flesh disappeared, their limbs became
more firmly knit, and the muscles showed out through the clear skin
in massive ridges.

"We should astonish them at home, Beric," Boduoc said one day.
"It is strange that people like the Romans, who compared to us are
weakly by nature, should have so studied the art of training men
in exercises requiring strength. I used to wonder that the Roman
soldiers could wield such heavy spears and swords. Now I quite
understand it. We were just as nature made us, they are men built
up by art. Why, when we began, my arms used to ache in a short time
with those heavy clubs, now I feel them no more than if they were
willow wands."

Pollio had remained but two months in Rome, and had then gone out
with a newly appointed general to Syria. Beric had missed his light
hearted friend much, but he was not sorry to give up the visits with
him to the houses of his friends. He felt that in these houses he
was regarded as a sort of show, and that the captured British chief,
who was acquainted with the Latin tongue and with Roman manners,
was regarded with something of the same curiosity and interest as
a tamed tiger might be. Besides, however much gladiators might be
the fashion in Rome, he felt a degradation in the calling, although
he quite appreciated the advantage that the training would be to
him should he ever return to Britain. He was pleased to learn from
Pollio, on the day before he started, that he had heard that his
uncle would ere long return to Rome.

"I believe," he said, "that it is entirely my aunt's doing. You
know how she hates what she calls her exile, and I hear that she
has been quietly using all her family influence to obtain his recall
and his appointment as a magistrate here. I learn she is likely to
succeed, and that my uncle will be one of these fine days astounded
at receiving the news that he is appointed a magistrate here.
I don't suppose he will ever learn my aunt's share in the matter,
and will regard what others would take as a piece of supreme good
luck as a cruel blow of fortune. However, if he did discover it,
my aunt would maintain stoutly that she did it for the sake of
the girls, whom she did not wish to see married to some provincial
officer, and condemned, as she had been, to perpetual exile; and
as she would have the support of all her relations, and even of
my father, who is also convinced that it is the greatest of all
earthly happiness for a Roman to reside at Rome, my uncle for once
will have to give in. Aemilia, too, will be glad to return to Rome,
though I know that Ennia is of a different opinion. I believe, from
what she let drop one day, that she has a leaning towards the new
sect, of which she has heard from the old slave who was her nurse. It
will be a great misfortune if she has, for it would cause terrible
trouble at home, and if any fresh persecution breaks out, she might
be involved. I am sure my aunt has no suspicion of it, for if she
had the slave would be flogged to death or thrown to the fishes,
and Ennia's life would be made a burden to her till she consented
to abandon the absurd ideas she had taken up."

But if Norbanus had returned with his family to Rome, Beric had
heard nothing of it. Had Pollio been at Rome he would at once have
taken him to see them on their return, but now that he had gone
there was no one from whom he would hear of their movements, and
Norbanus himself would be so much occupied with his new duties,
and with the society with which Lesbia would fill the house, that
he would have no time to inquire about the British captive he had
received as his guest at Massilia.

One evening, when the rest of the gladiators were engaged in a hot
discussion as to the merits of some of those who were to appear
at the games given in celebration of the funeral obsequies of a
wealthy senator, Beric asked Boduoc to accompany him for a walk.

"One gets sick of all that talk about fighting," he said as they
went out. "How men can sit indoors in a hot room heavy with the
smoke of the lamps, when they can go out on such a lovely night as
this, I cannot understand. We do not have such nights as this at
home, Boduoc."

"No," Boduoc assented reluctantly, for it was seldom that he would
allow anything Roman to be superior to what he was accustomed to
in Britain; "the nights are certainly fine here, and so they need
be when it is so hot all day that one can scarcely breathe outside
the house. It seems to me that the heat takes all the strength out
of my limbs."

Beric laughed. "It did not seem so, Boduoc, when today you threw
Borthon, who is as heavy and well nigh as strong as yourself, full
five yards through the air. Let us turn out from these busy streets
and get among the hills--not those on which the palaces stand,
but away from houses and people."

"What a night it would be for wolf hunting!" Boduoc said suddenly,
when they had walked along for some distance in silence.

"Yes, that was fine sport, Boduoc; and when we slew we knew we were
ridding the land of fierce beasts."

"Well, many of the gladiators are not much better, Beric. There
is Porus, who may be likened to a panther; there is Chresimus, who
is like a savage bull; Gripus, who, when not at work, is for ever
trying to stir up strife. Truly, I used to think, Beric, that I
could not slay a man unless he was an enemy, but I scarce feel that
now. The captives in war are like ourselves, and I would not, if
