we do. No good running inside the shoals. And with this wind, she has
the foot of us."

"Bear straight for her, and let her board us," Charron answered,
pleasantly. "Down with all French hands into the forepart of the hold,
and stow the spare foresail over them. Show our last bills of lading,
and ask them to trade. You know all about Cheeseman; double his prices.
If we make any cash, we'll divide it. Say we are out of our course,
through supplying a cruiser that wanted our goods for nothing. I shall
keep out of sight on account of my twang, as you politely call it. The
rest I may safely leave to your invention. But if you can get any ready
rhino, Sam Polwhele is not the man to neglect it."

"Bully for you!" cried the Yankee, looking at him with more admiration
than he expected ever to entertain for a Frenchman. "There's five ton
of cheeses that have been seven voyages, and a hundred firkins of Irish
butter, and five-and-thirty cases of Russian tongues, as old as old
Nick, and ne'er a sign of weevil! Lor' no, never a tail of weevil!
Skipper, you deserve to go to heaven out of West Street. But how about
him, down yonder?"

"Captain Carne? Leave him to me to arrange. I shall be ready, if they
intrude. Announce that you have a sick gentleman on board, a passenger
afflicted with a foreign illness, and having a foreign physician. Mon
Dieu! It is good. Every Englishman believes that anything foreign
will kill him with a vault. Arrange you the trading, and I will be the
doctor--a German; I can do the German."

"And I can do the trading," the American replied, without any rash
self-confidence; "any fool can sell good stuff; but it requireth a good
man to sell bad goods."

The gun-brig bore down on them at a great pace, feeling happy certitude
that she had got a prize--not a very big one, but still worth catching.
She saw that the frigate had fired a shot, and believed that it was done
to call her own attention to a matter below that of the frigate. On
she came, heeling to the lively wind, very beautiful in the moonlight,
tossing the dark sea in white showers, and with all her taut canvas
arched and gleaming, hovered with the shades of one another.

"Heave to, or we sink you!" cried a mighty voice through a speaking
trumpet, as she luffed a little, bringing her port broadside to bear;
and the schooner, which had hoisted British colours, obeyed the command
immediately. In a very few seconds a boat was manned, and dancing on
the hillocks of the sea; and soon, with some danger and much care, the
visitors stood upon the London Trader's deck, and Sam Polwhele came to
meet them.

"We have no wish to put you to any trouble," said the officer in
command, very quietly, "if you can show that you are what you profess to
be. You sail under British colours; and the name on your stern is London
Trader. We will soon dismiss you, if you prove that. But appearances are
strongly against you. What has brought you here? And why did you run
the risk of being fired at, instead of submitting to his Majesty's ship
Minerva?"

"Because she haven't got any ready money, skipper, and we don't like
three months' bills," said the tall Bostonian, looking loftily at the
British officer. "Such things is nothing but piracy, and we had better
be shot at than lose such goods as we carry fresh shipped, and in prime
condition. Come and see them, all with Cheeseman's brand, the celebrated
Cheeseman of Springhaven--name guarantees the quality. But one thing,
mind you--no use to hanker after them unless you come provided with the
ready."

"We don't want your goods; we want you," answered Scudamore, now first
luff of the brig of war Delia, and staring a little with his mild blue
eyes at this man's effrontery. "That is to say, our duty is to know all
about you. Produce your papers. Prove where you cleared from last, and
what you are doing here, some thirty miles south of your course, if you
are a genuine British trader."

"Papers all in order, sir. First-chop wafers, as they puts on now, to
save sealing-wax. Charter-party, and all the rest. Last bills of lading
from Gravesend, but you mustn't judge our goods by that. Bulk of them
from St. Mary Axe, where Cheeseman hath freighted from these thirty
years. If ever you have been at Springhaven, Captain, you'd jump at
anything with Cheeseman's brand. But have you brought that little bag of
guineas with you?"

"Once more, we want none of your goods. You might praise them as much
as you liked, if time permitted. Show me to the cabin, and produce your
papers. After that we shall see what is in the hold."

"Supercargo very ill in best cabin. Plague, or black fever, the German
doctor says. None of our hands will go near him but myself. But you
won't be like that, will you?"

Less for his own sake than his mother's--who had none but him to help
her--Scudamore dreaded especially that class of disease which is now
called "zymotic." His father, an eminent physician, had observed and
had written a short work to establish that certain families and types
of constitution lie almost at the mercy of such contagion, and find no
mercy from it. And among those families was his own. "Fly, my boy, fly,"
he had often said to Blyth, "if you ever come near such subjects."

"Captain, I will fetch them," continued Mr. Polwhele, looking grave at
his hesitation. "By good rights they ought to be smoked, I dare say,
though I don't hold much with such stuff myself. And the doctor keeps
doing a heap of herbs hot. You can see him, if you just come down these
few steps. Perhaps you wouldn't mind looking into the hold, to find
something to suit your judgment--quality combined with low figures
there--while I go into the infected den, as the cleverest of my chaps
calls it. Why, it makes me laugh! I've been in and out, with this
stand-up coat on, fifty times, and you can't smell a flue of it, though
wonderful strong down there."

Scudamore shuddered, and drew back a little, and then stole a glance
round the corner. He saw a thick smoke, and a figure prostrate, and
another tied up in a long white robe, waving a pan of burning stuff in
one hand and a bottle in the other, and plainly conjuring Polwhele to
keep off. Then the latter returned, quite complacently.

"Can't find all of them," he said, presenting a pile of papers big
enough to taint Sahara. "That doctor goes on as bad as opening a coffin.
Says he understands it, and I don't. The old figure-head! What does he
know about it?"

"Much more than you do, perhaps," replied Blyth, standing up for the
profession, as he was bound to do. "Perhaps we had better look at these
on deck, if you will bring up your lantern."

"But, Captain, you will have a look at our hold, and make us a bid--we
need not take it, any more than you need to double it--for as prime a
lot of cheese, and sides of bacon--"

"If your papers are correct, it will not be my duty to meddle with your
cargo. But what are you doing the wrong side of our fleet?"

"Why, that was a bad job. There's no fair trade now, no sort of dealing
on the square nohow. We run all this risk of being caught by Crappos on
purpose to supply British ship Gorgeous, soweastern station; and blow me
tight if I couldn't swear she had been supplied chock-full by a Crappo!
Only took ten cheeses and fifteen sides of bacon, though she never
knew nought of our black fever case! But, Captain, sit down here, and
overhaul our flimsies. Not like rags, you know; don't hold plague much."

The young lieutenant compelled himself to discharge his duty of
inspection behind a combing, where the wind was broken; but even so he
took good care to keep on the weather side of the documents; and the
dates perhaps flew away to leeward. "They seem all right," he said, "but
one thing will save any further trouble to both of us. You belong to
Springhaven. I know most people there. Have you any Springhaven hands on
board?"

"I should think so. Send Tugwell aft; pass the word for Dan Tugwell.
Captain, there's a family of that name there--settled as long as we have
been at Mevagissey. Ah, that sort of thing is a credit to the place, and
the people too, in my opinion."

Dan Tugwell came slowly, and with a heavy step, looking quite unlike the
spruce young fisherman whom Scudamore had noticed as first and smartest
in the rescue of the stranded Blonde. But he could not doubt that this
was Dan, the Dan of happier times and thoughts; in whom, without using
his mind about it, he had felt some likeness to himself. It was not in
his power to glance sharply, because his eyes were kindly open to all
the little incidents of mankind, but he managed to let Dan know that
duty compelled him to be particular. Dan Tugwell touched the slouched
hat upon his head, and stood waiting to know what he was wanted for.

"Daniel," said Scudamore, who could not speak condescendingly to any
one, even from the official point of view, because he felt that every
honest man was his equal, "are you here of your own accord, as one of
the crew of this schooner?"

Dan Tugwell had a hazy sense of being put upon an untrue balance. Not
by this kind gentleman's words, but through his own proceedings. In his
honest mind he longed to say: "I fear I have been bamboozled. I
have cast my lot in with these fellows through passion, and in hasty
ignorance. How I should like to go with you, and fight the French,
instead of getting mixed up with a lot of things I can't make out!"

But his equally honest heart said to him: "You have been well treated.
You are well paid. You shipped of your own accord. You have no right to
peach, even if you had anything to peach of; and all you have seen is
some queer trading. None but a sneak would turn against his shipmates
and his ship, when overhauled by the Royal Navy."

Betwixt the two voices, Dan said nothing, but looked at the lieutenant
with that gaze which the receiver takes to mean doubt of his meaning,
while the doubt more often is--what to do with it.

"Are you here of your own accord? Do you belong to this schooner of your
own accord? Are you one of this crew, of your own free-will?"

Scudamore rang the changes on his simple question, as he had often been
obliged to do in the Grammar-school at Stonnington, with the slow-witted
boys, who could not, or would not, know the top from the bottom of a
sign-post. "Do you eat with your eyes?" he had asked them sometimes; and
they had put their thumbs into their mouths to enquire.

"S'pose I am," said Dan at last, assuming stupidity, to cover
hesitation; "yes, sir, I come aboard of my own free-will."

"Very well. Then I am glad to find you comfortable. I shall see your
father next week, perhaps. Shall I give him any message for you?"

"No, sir! For God's sake, don't let him know a word about where you
have seen me. I came away all of a heap, and I don't want one of them to
bother about me."

"As you wish, Dan. I shall not say a word about you, until you return
with your earnings. But if you found the fishing business dull, surely
you might have come to us, Dan. Any volunteers here for His Majesty's
service?" Scudamore raised his voice, with the usual question. "Good
pay, good victuals, fine promotion, and prize-money, with the glory of
fighting for their native country, and provision for life if disabled!"

Not a man came forward, though one man longed to do so; but his sense
of honour, whether true or false, forbade him. Dan Tugwell went heavily
back to his work, trying to be certain that it was his duty. But sad
doubts arose as he watched the brave boat, lifting over the waves in the
moonlight, with loyal arms tugging towards a loyal British ship; and he
felt that he had thrown away his last chance.



CHAPTER XL

SHELFING THE QUESTION


There is a time of day (as everybody must have noticed who is kind
enough to attend to things) not to be told by the clock, nor measured to
a nicety by the position of the sun, even when he has the manners to say
where he is--a time of day dependent on a multiplicity of things unknown
to us (who have made our own brains, by perceiving that we had none,
and working away till we got them), yet palpable to all those less
self-exalted beings, who, or which, are of infinitely nobler origin than
we, and have shown it, by humility. At this time of day every decent
and good animal feels an unthought-of and untraced desire to shift its
position, to come out and see its fellows, to learn what is happening
in the humble grateful world--out of which man has hoisted himself long
ago, and is therefore a spectre to them--to breathe a little sample of
the turn the world is taking, and sue their share of pleasure in the
quiet earth and air.

This time is more observable because it follows a period of the opposite
tendency, a period of heaviness, and rest, and silence, when no bird
sings and no quadruped plays, for about half an hour of the afternoon.
Then suddenly, without any alteration of the light, or weather, or even
temperature, or anything else that we know of, a change of mood flashes
into every living creature, a spirit of life, and activity, and stir,
and desire to use their own voice and hear their neighbour's. The usual
beginning is to come out first into a place that cannot knock their
heads, and there to run a little way, and after that to hop, and take
a peep for any people around, and espying none--or only one of the very
few admitted to be friends--speedily to dismiss all misgivings, take a
very little bit of food, if handy (more as a duty to one's family than
oneself, for the all-important supper-time is not come yet), and then,
if gifted by the Lord with wings--for what bird can stoop at such a
moment to believe that his own grandfather made them?--up to the topmost
spray that feathers in the breeze, and pour upon the grateful air the
voice of free thanksgiving. But an if the blade behind the heart is
still unplumed for flying, and only gentle flax or fur blows out on the
wind, instead of beating it, does the owner of four legs sit and sulk,
like a man defrauded of his merits? He answers the question with a skip
and jump; ere a man can look twice at him he has cut a caper, frolicked
an intricate dance upon the grass, and brightened his eyes for another
round of joy.

At any time of year almost, the time of day commands these deeds, unless
the weather is outrageous; but never more undeniably than in the month
of April. The growth of the year is well established, and its manner
beginning to be schooled by then; childish petulance may still survive,
and the tears of penitence be frequent; yet upon the whole there is--or
used to be--a sense of responsibility forming, and an elemental inkling
of true duty towards the earth. Even man (the least observant of the
powers that walk the ground, going for the signs of weather to the cows,
or crows, or pigs, swallows, spiders, gnats, and leeches, or the final
assertion of his own corns) sometimes is moved a little, and enlarged
by influence of life beyond his own, and tickled by a pen above his
thoughts, and touched for one second by the hand that made him. Then he
sees a brother man who owes him a shilling, and his soul is swallowed up
in the resolve to get it.

But well in the sky-like period of youth, when the wind sits lightly,
and the clouds go by in puffs, these little jumps of inspiration take
the most respectable young man sometimes off his legs, and the young
maid likewise--if she continues in these fine days to possess such
continuation. Blyth Scudamore had been appointed now, partly through
his own good deserts, and wholly through good influence--for Lord St.
Vincent was an ancient friend of the excellent Admiral Darling--to the
command of the Blonde, refitted, thoroughly overhauled at Portsmouth,
and pronounced by the dock-yard people to be the fastest and soundest
corvette afloat, and in every way a credit to the British navy. "The man
that floated her shall float in her," said the Earl, when somebody, who
wanted the appointment, suggested that the young man was too young. "He
has seen sharp service, and done sharp work. It is waste of time to talk
of it; the job is done." "Job is the word for it," thought the other,
but wisely reserved that great truth for his wife. However, it was not
at all a bad job for England. And Scudamore had now seen four years of
active service, counting the former years of volunteering, and was more
than twenty-five years old.

None of these things exalted him at all in his own opinion, or, at
any rate, not very much. Because he had always regarded himself with
a proper amount of self-respect, as modest men are almost sure to do,
desiring less to know what the world thinks of them than to try to think
rightly of it for themselves. His opinion of it seemed to be that it was
very good just now, very kind, and fair, and gentle, and a thing for the
heart of man to enter into.

For Dolly Darling was close beside him, sitting on a very pretty bench,
made of twisted oak, and turned up at the back and both ends, so that
a gentleman could not get very far away from a lady without frightening
her. Not only in this way was the spot well adapted for tender feelings,
but itself truly ready to suggest them, with nature and the time of year
to help. There was no stream issuing here, to puzzle and perpetually
divert the human mind (whose origin clearly was spring-water poured into
the frame of the jelly-fish), neither was there any big rock, like an
obstinate barrier rising; but gentle slopes of daisied pasture led the
eye complacently, sleek cows sniffed the herbage here and there, and
brushed it with the underlip to fetch up the blades for supper-time, and
placable trees, forgetting all the rudeness of the winter winds, began
to disclose to the fond deceiving breeze, with many a glimpse to
attract a glance, all the cream of their summer intentions. And in full
enjoyment of all these doings, the poet of the whole stood singing--the
simple-minded thrush, proclaiming that the world was good and kind, but
himself perhaps the kindest, and his nest, beyond doubt, the best of it.

"How lovely everything is to-day!" Blyth Scudamore spoke slowly, and
gazing shyly at the loveliest thing of all, in his opinion--the face of
Dolly Darling. "No wonder that your brother is a poet!"

"But he never writes about this sort of thing," said Dolly, smiling
pleasantly. "His poems are all about liberty, and the rights of men,
and the wrongs of war. And if he ever mentions cows or sheep, it is
generally to say what a shame it is to kill them."

"But surely it is much worse to kill men. And who is to be blamed for
that, Miss Darling? The Power that wants to overrun all the rest, or the
Country that only defends itself? I hope he has not converted you to
the worship of the new Emperor; for the army and all the great cities of
France have begged him to condescend to be that; and the King of Prussia
will add his entreaties, according to what we have heard."

"I think anything of him!" cried Dolly, as if her opinion would settle
the point. "After all his horrible murders--worst of all of that very
handsome and brave young man shot with a lantern, and buried in a ditch!
I was told that he had to hold the lantern above his poor head, and his
hand never shook! It makes me cry every time I think of it. Only let
Frank come back, and he won't find me admire his book so very much! They
did the same sort of thing when I was a little girl, and could scarcely
sleep at night on account of it. And then they seemed to get a little
better, for a time, and fought with their enemies, instead of one
another, and made everybody wild about liberty, and citizens, and the
noble march of intellect, and the dignity of mankind, and the rights
of labour--when they wouldn't work a stroke themselves--and the black
superstition of believing anything, except what they chose to make a
fuss about themselves. And thousands of people, even in this country,
who have been brought up so much better, were foolish enough to think
it very grand indeed, especially the poets, and the ones that are too
young. But they ought to begin to get wiser now; even Frank will find it
hard to make another poem on them."

"How glad I am to hear you speak like that! I had no idea--at least I
did not understand--"

"That I had so much common-sense?" enquired Dolly, with a glance of
subtle yet humble reproach. "Oh yes, I have a great deal sometimes, I
can assure you. But I suppose one never does get credit for anything,
without claiming it."

"I am sure that you deserve credit for everything that can possibly
be imagined," Scudamore answered, scarcely knowing, with all his own
common-sense to help him, that he was talking nonsense. "Every time I
see you I find something I had never found before to--to wonder at--if
you can understand--and to admire, and to think about, and to--to be
astonished at."

Dolly knew as well as he did the word he longed to use, but feared.
She liked this state of mind in him, and she liked him too for all his
kindness, and his humble worship; and she could not help admiring him
for his bravery and simplicity. But she did not know the value yet of a
steadfast and unselfish heart, and her own was not quite of that order.
So many gallant officers were now to be seen at her father's house, half
a cubit taller than poor Blyth, and a hundred cubits higher in rank, and
wealth, and knowledge of the world, and the power of making their wives
great ladies. Moreover, she liked a dark man, and Scudamore was fair and
fresh as a rose called Hebe's Cup in June. Another thing against him was
that she knew how much her father liked him; and though she loved her
father well, she was not bound to follow his leadings. And yet she did
not wish to lose this useful and pleasant admirer.

"I am not at all ambitious," she replied, without a moment's hesitation,
for the above reflections had long been dealt with, "but how I wish I
could do something to deserve even half that you say of me! But I
fear that you find the air getting rather cold. The weather is so
changeable."

"Are you sure that you are not ambitious?" Scudamore was too deeply
plunged to get out of it now upon her last hint; and to-morrow he must
be far away. "You have every right to be ambitious, if such a word can
be used of you, who are yourself the height of so many ambitions. It was
the only fault I could imagine you to have, and it seems too bad that
you should have none at all."

"You don't know anything about it," said Dolly, with a lovely expression
in her face of candour, penitence, and pleasantry combined; "I am not
only full of faults, but entirely made up of them. I am told of them too
often not to know."

"By miserably jealous and false people." It was impossible to look at
her and not think that. "By people who cannot have a single atom of
perception, or judgment, or even proper feeling. I should like to
hear one of them, if you would even condescend to mention it. Tell
me one--only one--if you can think of it. I am not at all a judge of
character, but--but I have often had to study it a good deal among the
boys."

This made Miss Dolly laugh, and drop her eyes, and smoothe her dress, as
if to be sure that his penetration had not been brought to bear on her.
And the gentle Scuddy blushed at his clumsiness, and hoped that she
would understand the difference.

"You do say such things!" She also was blushing beautifully as she
spoke, and took a long time before she looked at him again. "Things that
nobody else ever says. And that is one reason why I like you so."

"Oh, do you like me--do you like me in earnest? I can hardly dare to
dream even for one moment--"

"I am not going to talk about that any more. I like Mr. Twemlow, I like
Captain Stubbard, I like old Tugwell--though I should have liked him
better if he had not been so abominably cruel to his son. Now I am sure
it is time to go and get ready for dinner."

"Ah, when shall I dine with you again? Perhaps never," said the young
man, endeavouring to look very miserable and to inspire sadness. "But
I ought to be very happy, on the whole, to think of all the pleasures I
have enjoyed, and how much better I have got on than I had any right in
the world to hope for."

"Yes, to be the Commander of a beautiful ship, little more than a year
from the date of your commission. Captain Stubbard is in such a rage
about it!"

"I don't mean about that--though that of course is rare luck--I mean a
much more important thing; I mean about getting on well with you. The
first time I saw you in that fine old school, you did not even want to
shake hands with me, and you thought what a queer kind of animal I was;
and then the first time or two I dined at the Hall, nothing but fine
hospitality stopped you from laughing at my want of practice. But
gradually, through your own kind nature, and my humble endeavours to be
of use, I began to get on with you better and better; and now you are
beginning almost to like me."

"Not almost, but altogether," she answered, with quite an affectionate
glance. "I can tell you there are very few, outside of my own family,
that I like half so well as I like you. But how can it matter to you so
much?"

She looked at him so that he was afraid to speak, for fear of spoiling
everything; and being a very good-natured girl, and pleased with his
deep admiration, she sighed--just enough to make him think that he might
hope.

"We are all so sorry to lose you." she said; "and no one will miss you
so much as I shall, because we have had such pleasant times together.
But if we can carry out our little plot, we shall hear of you very
often, and I dare say not very unfavourably. Faith and I have been
putting our heads together, and for our own benefit, and that of all the
house, if we can get you to second it. My father jumped at the idea,
and said how stupid we were not to think of it before. You know how very
little he can be at home this summer, and he says he has to sacrifice
his children to his country. So we suggested that he should invite Lady
Scudamore to spend the summer with us, if she can be persuaded to leave
home so long. We will do our very utmost to make her comfortable, and
she will be a tower of strength to us; for you know sometimes it is very
awkward to have only two young ladies. But we dare not do anything until
we asked you. Do you think she would take compassion upon us? A word
from you perhaps would decide her; and Faith would write a letter for
you to send."

Scudamore reddened with delight, and took her hand. "How can I thank
you? I had better not try," he answered, with some very tender play
of thumb and fore-finger, and a strong impulse to bring lips too into
action. "You are almost as clever as you are good; you will know what
I mean without my telling you. My mother will be only too glad to come.
She knows what you are, she has heard so much from me. And the reality
will put to shame all my descriptions."

"Tell me what you told her I was like. The truth, now, and not a word
of afterthought or flattery. I am always so irritated by any sort of
flattery."

"Then you must let me hold your hands, to subdue your irritation; for
you are sure to think that it was flattery--you are so entirely ignorant
of yourself, because you never think of it. I told my dear mother that
you were the best, and sweetest, and wisest, and loveliest, and most
perfect, and exquisite, and innocent, and unselfish of all the human
beings she had ever seen, or heard, or read of. And I said it was quite
impossible for any one after one look at you to think of himself any
more in this world."

"Well done!" exclaimed Dolly, showing no irritation, unless a gleam of
pearls inside an arch of coral showed it. "It is as well to do things
thoroughly, while one is about it. I can understand now how you get on
so fast. But, alas, your dear mother will only laugh at all that. Ladies
are so different from gentlemen. Perhaps that is why gentlemen never
understand them. And I would always a great deal rather be judged by a
gentleman than a lady. Ladies pick such a lot of holes in one another,
whereas gentlemen are too large-minded. And I am very glad upon the
whole that you are not a lady, though you are much more gentle than
they make believe to be. Oh dear! We must run; or the ladies will never
forgive us for keeping them starving all this time."



CHAPTER XLI

LISTENERS HEAR NO GOOD


"Not that there is anything to make one so very uneasy," said Mr.
Twemlow, "only that one has a right to know the meaning of what we are
expected to put up with. Nothing is clear, except that we have not one
man in the Government who knows his own mind, or at any rate dares to
pronounce it. Addington is an old woman, and the rest--oh, when shall
we have Pitt back again? People talk of it, and long for it; but the
Country is so slow. We put up with everything, instead of demanding that
the right thing shall be done at once. Here is Boney, a fellow raised up
by Satan as the scourge of this island for its manifold sins; and now he
is to be the Emperor forsooth--not of France, but of Europe, continental
Europe. We have only one man fit to cope with him at all, and the voice
of the nation has been shouting for him; but who pays any attention
to it? This state of things is childish--simply childish; or perhaps I
ought to say babyish. Why, even the children on the sea-shore know, when
they make their little sand walls against the tide, how soon they must
be swept away. But the difference is this, that they don't live inside
them, and they haven't got all that belongs to them inside them. Nobody
must suppose for a moment that a clergyman's family would fail to know
where to look for help and strength and support against all visitations;
but, in common with the laity, we ask for Billy Pitt."

"And in another fortnight you will have him," replied Captain Stubbard,
who was dining there that day. "Allow me to tell you a little thing that
happened to my very own self only yesterday. You know that I am one of
the last people in the world to be accused of any--what's the proper
word for it? Mrs. Stubbard, you know what I mean--Jemima, why the deuce
don't you tell them?"

"Captain Stubbard always has more meaning than he can well put into
words," said his wife; "his mind is too strong for any dictionary.
Hallucination is the word he means."

"Exactly!" cried the Captain. "That expresses the whole of what I wanted
to say, but went aside of it. I am one of the last men in the world to
become the victim of any--there, I've lost it again! But never mind. You
understand now; or if you don't, Mrs. Stubbard will repeat it. What I
mean is that I see all things square, and straight, and with their own
corners to them. Well, I know London pretty well; not, of course, as
I know Portsmouth. Still, nobody need come along with me to go from
Charing Cross to St. Paul's Church-yard; and pretty tight I keep all my
hatches battened down, and a sharp pair of eyes in the crow's-nest--for
to have them in the foretop won't do there. It was strictly on duty that
I went up--the duty of getting a fresh stock of powder, for guns are not
much good without it; and I had written three times, without answer or
powder. But it seems that my letters were going the rounds, and would
turn up somewhere, when our guns were stormed, without a bit of stuff to
make answer."

"Ah, that's the way they do everything now!" interrupted Mr. Twemlow. "I
thought you had been very quiet lately; but I did not know what a good
reason you had. We might all have been shot, and you could not have
fired a salute, to inform the neighbourhood!"

"Well, never mind," replied the Captain, calmly; "I am not complaining,
for I never do so. Young men might; but not old hands, whose duty it is
to keep their situation in life. Well, you must understand that the air
of London always makes me hungry. There are so many thousands of people
there that you can't name a time when there is nobody eating, and this
makes a man from the country long to help them. Anyhow, I smelled roast
mutton at a place where a little side street comes up into the Strand;
and although it was scarcely half past twelve, it reminded me of Mrs.
Stubbard. So I called a halt, and stood to think upon a grating, and the
scent became flavoured with baked potatoes. This is always more than I
can resist, after all the heavy trials of a chequered life. So I pushed
the door open, and saw a lot of little cabins, right and left of a fore
and aft gangway, all rigged up alike for victualling. Jemima, I told you
all about it. You describe it to the Rector and Mrs. Twemlow."

"Don't let us trouble Mrs. Stubbard," said the host; "I know the sort of
thing exactly, though I don't go to that sort of place myself."

"No, of course you don't. And I was a little scared at first, for
there was sawdust enough to soak up every drop of my blood, if they had
pistolled me. Mrs. Twemlow, I beg you not to be alarmed. My wife has
such nerves that I often forget that all ladies are not like her. Now
don't contradict me, Mrs. Stubbard. Well, sir, I went to the end of this
cockpit--if you like to call it so--and got into the starboard berth,
and shouted for a ration of what I had smelled outside. And although
it was far from being equal to its smell--as the character is of
everything--you might have thought it uncommon good, if you had never
tasted Mrs. Stubbard's cooking, after she had been to the butcher
herself. Very well. I don't care for kickshaws, even if I could afford
them, which has never yet been my destiny. So I called for another
ration of hot sheep--beg your pardon, ladies, what I mean is mutton--and
half a dozen more of baked potatoes; and they reminded me of being at
home so much that I called for a pint of best pine-apple rum and a
brace of lemons, to know where I was--to remind me that I wasn't where I
couldn't get them."

"Oh, Adam!" cried Mrs. Stubbard, "what will you say next? Not on
weekdays, of course, but nearly every Sunday--and the samples of his
powder in his pocket, Mr. Twemlow!"

"Jemima, you are spoiling my story altogether. Well, you must
understand that this room was low, scarcely higher than the cabin of a
fore-and-after, with no skylights to it, or wind-sail, or port-hole that
would open. And so, with the summer coming on, as it is now--though a
precious long time about it--and the smell of the meat, and the thoughts
of the grog, and the feeling of being at home again, what did I do but
fall as fast asleep as the captain of the watch in a heavy gale of wind!
My back was to the light, so far as there was any, and to make sure of
the top of my head, I fetched down my hat--the soft-edged one, the same
as you see me wear on fine Sundays.

"Well, I may have gone on in that way for an hour, not snoring, as Mrs.
Stubbard calls it, but breathing to myself a little in my sleep, when I
seemed to hear somebody calling me, not properly, but as people do in
a dream--'Stoobar--Stoobar--Stoobar,' was the sound in my ears, like my
conscience hauling me over the coals in bad English. This made me wake
up, for I always have it out with that part of me when it mutinies; but
I did not move more than to feel for my glass. And then I perceived that
it was nothing more or less than a pair of Frenchmen talking about me
in the berth next to mine, within the length of a marlin-spike from my
blessed surviving ear.

"Some wiseacre says that listeners never hear good of themselves, and
upon my word he was right enough this time, so far as I made out. The
French language is beyond me, so far as speaking goes, for I never can
lay hold of the word I want; but I can make out most of what those queer
people say, from being a prisoner among them once, and twice in command
of a prize crew over them. And the sound of my own name pricked me up to
listen sharply with my one good ear. You must bear in mind, Rector,
that I could not see them, and durst not get up to peep over the
quarter-rail, for fear of scaring them. But I was wearing a short
hanger, like a middy's dirk--the one I always carry in the battery."

"I made Adam promise, before he went to London," Mrs. Stubbard explained
to Mrs. Twemlow, "that he would never walk the streets without steel or
firearms. Portsmouth is a very wicked place indeed, but a garden of Eden
compared with London."

"Well, sir," continued Captain Stubbard, "the first thing I heard those
