
Such--for our nature is ever grander in the individual than the
mass--such is the power of man above mankind!




CHAPTER IV. THE NORMAN EARL AND THE SAXON DEMAGOGUE CONFER.

On leaving the camp, Warwick rode in advance of his train, and his
countenance was serious and full of thought. At length, as a turn in the
road hid the little band from the view of the rebels, the earl motioned
to Marmaduke to advance with his prisoner. The young Nevile then fell
back, and Robin and Warwick rode breast to breast out of hearing of the
rest.

"Master Hilyard, I am well content that my brother, when you fell into
his hands, spared your life out of gratitude for the favour you once
showed to mine."

"Your noble brother, my lord," answered Robin, dryly, "is, perhaps, not
aware of the service I once rendered you. Methinks he spared me rather,
because, without me, an enterprise which has shaken the Woodvilles from
their roots around the throne, and given back England to the Neviles,
had been nipped in the bud!--Your brother is a deep thinker!"

"I grieve to hear thee speak thus of the Lord Montagu. I know that he
hath wilier devices than become, in my eyes, a well-born knight and a
sincere man; but he loves his king, and his ends are juster than his
means. Master Hilyard, enough of the past evil. Some months after the
field of Hexham, I chanced to fall, when alone, amongst a band of roving
and fierce Lancastrian outlaws. Thou, their leader, recognizing the
crest on my helm, and mindful of some slight indulgence once shown to
thy strange notions of republican liberty, didst save me from the swords
of thy followers: from that time I have sought in vain to mend thy
fortunes. Thou hast rejected all mine offers, and I know well that thou
hast lent thy service to the fatal cause of Lancaster. Many a time
I might have given thee to the law; but gratitude for thy aid in the
needful strait, and to speak sooth, my disdain of all individual efforts
to restore a fallen House, made me turn my eyes from transgressions
which, once made known to the king, had placed thee beyond pardon. I
see now that thou art a man of head and arm to bring great danger upon
nations; and though this time Warwick bids thee escape and live, if once
more thou offend, know me only as the king's minister. The debt between
us is now cancelled. Yonder lies the path that conducts to the forest.
Farewell. Yet stay!--poverty may have led thee into treason?"

"Poverty," interrupted Hilyard,--"poverty, Lord Warwick, leads men to
sympathize with the poor, and therefore I have done with riches." He
paused, and his breast heaved. "Yet," he added sadly, "now that I have
seen the cowardice and ingratitude of men, my calling seems over, and my
spirit crushed."

"Alas!" said Warwick, "whether man be rich or poor, ingratitude is the
vice of men; and you, who have felt it from the mob, menace me with it
from the king. But each must carve out his own way through this earth,
without over care for applause or blame; and the tomb is the sole judge
of mortal memory."

Robin looked hard at the earl's face, which was dark and gloomy, as he
thus spoke, and approaching nearer, he said, "Lord Warwick, I take
from you liberty and life the more willingly, because a voice I cannot
mistake tells me, and hath long told, that, sooner or later, time will
bind us to each other. Unlike other nobles, you have owed your power not
so much to lordship, land, and birth, and a king's smile, as to the love
you have nobly won; you alone, true knight and princely Christian,--you
alone, in war, have spared the humble; you alone, stalwart and
resistless champion, have directed your lance against your equals, and
your order hath gone forth to the fierce of heart, 'Never smite the
commons!' In peace, you alone have stood up in your haughty parliament
for just law or for gentle mercy; your castle hath had a board for the
hungry and a shelter for the houseless; your pride, which hath bearded
kings and humbled upstarts, hath never had a taunt for the lowly; and
therefore I--son of the people--in the people's name, bless you living,
and sigh to ask whether a people's gratitude will mourn you dead!
Beware Edward's false smile, beware Clarence's fickle faith, beware
Gloucester's inscrutable wile! Mark, the sun sets!--and while we speak,
yon dark cloud gathers over your plumed head."

He pointed to the heavens as he ceased, and a low roll of gathering
thunder seemed to answer his ominous warning. Without tarrying for the
earl's answer, Hilyard shook the reins of his steed, and disappeared in
the winding of the lane through which he took his way.




CHAPTER V. WHAT FAITH EDWARD IV. PURPOSETH TO KEEP WITH EARL AND PEOPLE.

Edward received his triumphant envoy with open arms and profuse
expressions of gratitude. He exerted himself to the utmost in the
banquet that crowned the day, not only to conciliate the illustrious new
comers, but to remove from the minds of Raoul de Fulke and his officers
all memory of their past disaffection. No gift is rarer or more
successful in the intrigues of life than that which Edward eminently
possessed,--namely, the hypocrisy of frankness. Dissimulation is often
humble, often polished, often grave, sleek, smooth, decorous; but it
is rarely gay and jovial, a hearty laughter, a merry, cordial, boon
companion. Such, however, was the felicitous craft of Edward IV.; and,
indeed, his spirits were naturally so high, his good humour so flowing,
that this joyous hypocrisy cost him no effort. Elated at the dispersion
of his foes, at the prospect of his return to his ordinary life of
pleasure, there was something so kindly and so winning in his mirth,
that he subjugated entirely the fiery temper of Raoul de Fulke and the
steadier suspicions of the more thoughtful St. John. Clarence, wholly
reconciled to Edward, gazed on him with eyes swimming with affection,
and soon drank himself into uproarious joviality. The archbishop, more
reserved, still animated the society by the dry and epigrammatic wit not
uncommon to his learned and subtle mind. But Warwick in vain endeavoured
to shake off an uneasy, ominous gloom. He was not satisfied with
Edward's avoidance of discussion upon the grave matters involved in the
earl's promise to the insurgents, and his masculine spirit regarded with
some disdain, and more suspicion, a levity that he considered ill-suited
to the emergence.

The banquet was over, and Edward, having dismissed his other attendants,
was in his chamber with Lord Hastings, whose office always admitted him
to the wardrobe of the king.

Edward's smile had now left his lip; he paced the room with a hasty
stride, and then suddenly opening the casement, pointed to the landscape
without, which lay calm and suffused in moonlight.

"Hastings," said he, abruptly, "a few hours since and the earth grew
spears! Behold the landscape now!"

"So vanish all the king's enemies!"

"Ay, man, ay,--if at the king's word, or before the king's battle-axe;
but at a subject's command--No, I am not a king while another scatters
armies in my realm at his bare will. 'Fore Heaven, this shall not last!"

Hastings regarded the countenance of Edward, changed from affable beauty
into terrible fierceness, with reflections suggested by his profound and
mournful wisdom. "How little a man's virtues profit him in the eyes of
men!" thought he. "The subject saves the crown, and the crown's wearer
never pardons the presumption!"

"You do not speak, sir!" exclaimed Edward, irritated and impatient. "Why
gaze you thus on me?"

"Beau sire," returned the favourite, calmly, "I was seeking to discover
if your pride spoke, or your nobler nature."

"Tush!" said the king, petulantly, "the noblest part of a king's nature
is his pride as king!" Again he strode the chamber, and again halted.
"But the earl hath fallen into his own snare,--he hath promised in my
name what I will not perform. Let the people learn that their idol hath
deceived them. He asks me to dismiss from the court the queen's mother
and kindred!"

Hastings, who in this went thoroughly with the earl and the popular
feeling, and whose only enemies in England were the Woodvilles, replied
simply,--

"These are cheap terms, sire, for a king's life and the crown of
England."

Edward started, and his eyes flashed that cold, cruel fire, which makes
eyes of a light colouring so far more expressive of terrible passions
than the quicker and warmer heat of dark orbs. "Think you so, sir? By
God's blood, he who proffered them shall repent it in every vein of his
body! Hark ye, William Hastings de Hastings, I know you to be a deep
and ambitious man; but better for you had you covered that learned
brain under the cowl of a mendicant friar than lent one thought to the
counsels of the Earl of Warwick."

Hastings, who felt even to fondness the affection which Edward generally
inspired in those about his person, and who, far from sympathizing,
except in hate of the Woodvilles, with the earl, saw that beneath
that mighty tree no new plants could push into their fullest foliage,
reddened with anger at this imperious menace.

"My liege," said he, with becoming dignity and spirit, "if you can thus
address your most tried confidant and your lealest friend, your most
dangerous enemy is yourself."

"Stay, man," said the king, softening. "I was over warm, but the wild
beast within me is chafed. Would Gloucester were here!"

"I can tell you what would be the counsels of that wise young prince,
for I know his mind," answered Hastings.

"Ay, he and you love each other well. Speak out."

"Prince Richard is a great reader of Italian lere. He saith that those
small States are treasuries of all experience. From that lere Prince
Richard would say to you, 'Where a subject is so great as to be feared,
and too much beloved to be destroyed, the king must remember how Tarpeia
was crushed."

"I remember naught of Tarpeia, and I detest parables."

"Tarpeia, sire (it is a story of old Rome), was crushed under the
weight of presents. Oh, my liege," continued Hastings, warming with that
interest which an able man feels in his own superior art, "were I king
for a year, by the end of it Warwick should be the most unpopular (and
therefore the weakest) lord in England!"

"And how, O wise in thine own conceit?"

"Beau sire," resumed Hastings, not heeding the rebuke--and strangely
enough he proceeded to point out, as the means of destroying the earl's
influence, the very method that the archbishop had detailed to Montagu
as that which would make the influence irresistible and permanent--"Beau
sire," resumed Hastings, "Lord Warwick is beloved by the people, because
they consider him maltreated; he is esteemed by the people, because they
consider him above all bribe; he is venerated by the people, because
they believe that in all their complaints and struggles he is
independent (he alone) of the king. Instead of love, I would raise envy;
for instead of cold countenance I would heap him with grace. Instead of
esteem and veneration I would raise suspicion; for I would so knit him
to your House, that he could not stir hand or foot against you; I would
make his heirs your brothers. The Duke of Clarence hath married one
daughter,--wed the other to Lord Richard. Betroth your young princess to
Montagu's son, the representative of all the Neviles. The earl's immense
possessions must thus ultimately pass to your own kindred. The earl
himself will be no longer a power apart from the throne, but a part of
it. The barons will chafe against one who half ceases to be of their
order, and yet monopolizes their dignities; the people will no longer
see in the earl their champion, but a king's favourite and deputy.
Neither barons nor people will flock to his banner."

"All this is well and wise," said Edward, musing; "but meanwhile my
queen's blood? Am I to reign in a solitude?--for look you, Hastings,
you know well that, uxorious as fools have deemed me, I had purpose
and design in the elevation of new families; I wished to raise a fresh
nobility to counteract the pride of the old, and only upon new nobles
can a new dynasty rely."

"My Lord, I will not anger you again; but still, for a while, the
queen's relations will do well to retire."

"Good night, Hastings," interrupted Edward, abruptly, "my pillow in this
shall be my counsellor."

Whatever the purpose solitude and reflection might ripen in the king's
mind, he was saved from immediate decision by news, the next morning, of
fresh outbreaks. The commons had risen in Lincolnshire and the county
of Warwick; and Anthony Woodville wrote word that, if the king would
but show himself among the forces he had raised near Coventry, all
the gentry around would rise against the rebellious rabble. Seizing
advantage of these tidings, borne to him by his own couriers, and
eager to escape from the uncertain soldiery quartered at Olney, Edward,
without waiting to consult even with the earl, sprang to horse, and his
trumpets were the first signal of departure that he deigned to any one.

This want of ceremony displeased the pride of Warwick; but he made
no complaint, and took his place by the king's side, when Edward said
shortly,--

"Dear cousin, this is a time that needs all our energies. I ride towards
Coventry, to give head and heart to the raw recruits I shall find there;
but I pray you and the archbishop to use all means, in this immediate
district, to raise fresh troops; for at your name armed men spring up
from pasture and glebe, dyke and hedge. Join what troops you can collect
in three days with mine at Coventry, and, ere the sickle is in the
harvest, England shall be at peace. God speed you! Ho! there, gentlemen,
away!--a franc etrier!"

Without pausing for reply,--for he wished to avoid all questioning,
lest Warwick might discover that it was to a Woodville that he was
bound,--the king put spurs to his horse, and, while his men were yet
hurrying to and fro, rode on almost alone, and was a good mile out
of the town before the force led by St. John and Raoul de Fulke, and
followed by Hastings, who held no command, overtook him.

"I misthink the king," said Warwick, gloomily; "but my word is pledged
to the people, and it shall be kept."

"A man's word is best kept when his arm is the strongest," said the
sententious archbishop; "yesterday, you dispersed an army; to-day, raise
one!"

Warwick answered not, but, after a moment's thought, beckoned to
Marmaduke.

"Kinsman," said he, "spur on, with ten of my little company, to join
the king. Report to me if any of the Woodvilles be in his camp near
Coventry."

"Whither shall I send the report?"

"To my castle of Warwick."

Marmaduke bowed his head, and, accustomed to the brevity of the earl's
speech, proceeded to the task enjoined him. Warwick next summoned his
second squire.

"My lady and her children," said he, "are on their way to Middleham.
This paper will instruct you of their progress. Join them with all the
rest of my troop, except my heralds and trumpeters; and say that I shall
meet them ere long at Middleham."

"It is a strange way to raise an army," said the archbishop, dryly, "to
begin by getting rid of all the force one possesses!"

"Brother," answered the earl, "I would fain show my son-in-law, who may
be the father of a line of kings, that a general may be helpless at the
head of thousands, but that a man may stand alone who has the love of a
nation."

"May Clarence profit by the lesson! Where is he all this while?"

"Abed," said the stout earl, with a slight accent of disdain; and then,
in a softer voice, he added, "youth is ever luxurious. Better the slow
man than the false one."

Leaving Warwick to discharge the duty enjoined him, we follow the
dissimulating king.




CHAPTER VI. WHAT BEFALLS KING EDWARD ON HIS ESCAPE FROM OLNEY.

As soon as Edward was out of sight of the spire of Olney, he slackened
his speed, and beckoned Hastings to his side.

"Dear Will," said the king, "I have thought over thy counsel, and will
find the occasion to make experiment thereof. But, methinks, thou wilt
agree with me that concessions come best from a king who has an army of
his own. 'Fore Heaven, in the camp of a Warwick I have less power than a
lieutenant! Now mark me. I go to head some recruits raised in haste near
Coventry. The scene of contest must be in the northern counties. Wilt
thou, for love of me, ride night and day, thorough brake, thorough
briar, to Gloucester on the Borders? Bid him march, if the Scot will let
him, back to York; and if he cannot himself quit the Borders, let
him send what men can be spared under thy banner. Failing this, raise
through Yorkshire all the men-at-arms thou canst collect. But, above
all, see Montagu. Him and his army secure at all hazards. If he demur,
tell him his son shall marry his king's daughter, and wear the coronal
of a duke. Ha, ha! a large bait for so large a fish! I see this is no
casual outbreak, but a general convulsion of the realm; and the Earl
of Warwick must not be the only man to smile or to frown back the angry
elements."

"In this, beau sire," answered Hastings, "you speak as a king and
a warrior should, and I will do my best to assert your royal
motto,--'Modus et ordo.' If I can but promise that your Highness has for
a while dismissed the Woodville lords, rely upon it that ere two months
I will place under your truncheon an army worthy of the liege lord of
hardy England."

"Go, dear Hastings, I trust all to thee!" answered the king. The
nobleman kissed his sovereign's extended hand, closed his visor, and,
motioning to his body-squire to follow him, disappeared down a green
lane, avoiding such broader thoroughfares as might bring him in contact
with the officers left at Olney.

In a small village near Coventry Sir Anthony Woodville had collected
about two thousand men, chiefly composed of the tenants and vassals of
the new nobility, who regarded the brilliant Anthony as their head.
The leaders were gallant and ambitious gentlemen, as they who arrive at
fortunes above their birth mostly are; but their vassals were little
to be trusted. For in that day clanship was still strong, and these
followers had been bred in allegiance to Lancastrian lords, whose
confiscated estates were granted to the Yorkist favourites. The shout
that welcomed the arrival of the king was therefore feeble and lukewarm;
and, disconcerted by so chilling a reception, he dismounted, in less
elevated spirits than those in which he had left Olney, at the pavilion
of his brother-in-law.

The mourning-dress of Anthony, his countenance saddened by the barbarous
execution of his father and brother, did not tend to cheer the king.

But Woodville's account of the queen's grief and horror at the
afflictions of her House, and of Jacquetta's indignation at the foul
language which the report of her practices put into the popular mouth,
served to endear to the king's mind the family that he considered
unduly persecuted. Even in the coldest breasts affection is fanned by
opposition, and the more the queen's kindred were assailed, the more
obstinately Edward clung to them. By suiting his humour, by winking at
his gallantries, by a submissive sweetness of temper, which soothed his
own hasty moods, and contrasted with the rough pride of Warwick and the
peevish fickleness of Clarence, Elizabeth had completely wound
herself into the king's heart. And the charming graces, the elegant
accomplishments, of Anthony Woodville were too harmonious with the
character of Edward, who in all--except truth and honour--was the
perfect model of the gay gentilhomme of the time, not to have become
almost a necessary companionship. Indolent natures may be easily ruled,
but they grow stubborn when their comforts and habits are interfered
with. And the whole current of Edward's merry, easy life seemed to him
to lose flow and sparkle if the faces he loved best were banished, or
even clouded.

He was yet conversing with Woodville, and yet assuring him that, however
he might temporize, he would never abandon the interests of his queen's
kindred, when a gentleman entered aghast, to report that the Lords St.
John and de Fulke, on hearing that Sir Anthony Woodville was in command
of the forces, had, without even dismounting, left the camp, and carried
with them their retainers, amounting to more than half of the little
troop that rode from Olney.

"Let them go," said Edward, frowning; "a day shall dawn upon their
headless trunks!"

"Oh, my king," said Anthony, now Earl of Rivers,--who, by far the least
selfish of his House, was struck with remorse at the penalty Edward paid
for his love marriage,--"now that your Highness can relieve me of my
command, let me retire from the camp. I would fain go a pilgrim to the
shrine of Compostella to pray for my father's sins and my sovereign's
weal."

"Let us first see what forces arrive from London," answered the king.
"Richard ere long will be on the march from the frontiers, and whatever
Warwick resolves, Montagu, whose heart I hold in my hand, will bring his
army to my side. Let us wait."

But the next day brought no reinforcements, nor the next; and the king
retired betimes to his tent, in much irritation and perplexity; when
at the dead of the night he was startled from slumber by the tramp of
horses, the sound of horns, the challenge of the sentinels, and, as he
sprang from his couch, and hurried on his armour in alarm, the Earl of
Warwick abruptly entered. The earl's face was stern, but calm and
sad; and Edward's brave heart beat loud as he gazed on his formidable
subject.

"King Edward," said Warwick, slowly and mournfully, "you have deceived
me! I promised to the commons the banishment of the Woodvilles, and to a
Woodville you have flown."

"Your promise was given to rebels, with whom no faith can be held; and I
passed from a den of mutiny to the camp of a loyal soldier."

"We will not now waste words, king," answered Warwick. "Please you to
mount and ride northward. The Scotch have gained great advantages on
the marches. The Duke of Gloucester is driven backwards. All the
Lancastrians in the North have risen. Margaret of Anjou is on the coast
of Normandy, [at this time Margaret was at Harfleur--Will. Wyre] ready
to set sail at the first decisive victory of her adherents."

"I am with you," answered Edward; "and I rejoice to think that at last
I may meet a foe. Hitherto it seems as if I had been chased by shadows.
Now may I hope to grasp the form and substance of danger and of battle."

"A steed prepared for your Grace awaits you."

"Whither ride we first?"

"To my castle of Warwick, hard by. At noon to-morrow all will be ready
for our northward march."

Edward, by this time having armed himself, strode from the tent into the
open air. The scene was striking: the moon was extremely bright and the
sky serene, but around the tent stood a troop of torch-bearers, and the
red glare shone luridly upon the steel of the serried horsemen and the
banners of the earl, in which the grim white bear was wrought upon an
ebon ground, quartered with the dun bull, and crested in gold with the
eagle of the Monthermers. Far as the king's eye could reach, he saw but
the spears of Warwick; while a confused hum in his own encampment told
that the troops Anthony Woodville had collected were not yet marshalled
into order. Edward drew back.

"And the Lord Anthony of Scales and Rivers?" said he, hesitatingly.

"Choose, king, between the Lord Anthony of Scales and Rivers and Richard
Nevile!" answered Warwick, in a stern whisper.

Edward paused, and at that moment Anthony himself emerged from his tent
(which adjoined the king's) in company with the Archbishop of York, who
had rode thither in Warwick's train.

"My liege," said that gallant knight, putting his knee to the ground, "I
have heard from the archbishop the new perils that await your Highness,
and I grieve sorely that, in this strait, your councillors deem it meet
to forbid me the glory of fighting or falling by your side! I know too
well the unhappy odium attached to my House and name in the northern
parts, to dispute the policy which ordains my absence from your armies.
Till these feuds are over, I crave your royal leave to quit England, and
perform my pilgrimage to the sainted shrine of Compostella."

A burning flush passed over the king's face as he raised his
brother-in-law, and clasped him to his bosom.

"Go or stay, as you will, Anthony!" said he; "but let these proud men
know that neither time nor absence can tear you from your king's heart.
But envy must have its hour Lord Warwick, I attend you; but it seems
rather as your prisoner than your liege."

Warwick made no answer: the king mounted, and waved his hand to Anthony.
The torches tossed to and fro, the horns sounded, and in a silence moody
and resentful on either part Edward and his terrible subject rode on to
the towers of Warwick.

The next day the king beheld with astonishment the immense force that,
in a time so brief, the earl had collected round his standard.

From his casement, which commanded that lovely slope on which so many
a tourist now gazes with an eye that seeks to call back the stormy and
chivalric past, Edward beheld the earl on his renowned black charger,
reviewing the thousands that, file on file and rank on rank, lifted pike
and lance in the cloudless sun.

"After all," muttered the king, "I can never make a new noble a great
baron! And if in peace a great baron overshadows the throne, in time
of war a great baron is a throne's bulwark! Gramercy, I had been mad
to cast away such an army,--an army fit for a king to lead! They serve
Warwick now; but Warwick is less skilful in the martial art than I, and
soldiers, like hounds, love best the most dexterous huntsman!"




CHAPTER VII. HOW KING EDWARD ARRIVES AT THE CASTLE OF MIDDLEHAM.

On the ramparts of feudal Middleham, in the same place where Anne had
confessed to Isabel the romance of her childish love, again the sisters
stood, awaiting the coming of their father and the king. They had only,
with their mother, reached Middleham two days before, and the preceding
night an advanced guard had arrived at the castle to announce the
approach of the earl with his royal comrade and visitor. From the
heights, already they beheld the long array winding in glorious order
towards the mighty pile.

"Look!" exclaimed Isabel, "look! already methinks I see the white steed
of Clarence. Yes! it is he! it is my George, my husband! The banner
borne before shows his device."

"Ah, happy Isabel!" said Anne, sighing; "what rapture to await the
coming of him one loves!"

"My sweet Anne," returned Isabel, passing her arm tenderly round her
sister's slender waist, "when thou hast conquered the vain folly of thy
childhood, thou wilt find a Clarence of thine own. And yet," added the
young duchess, smiling, "it must be the opposite of a Clarence to be to
thy heart what a Clarence is to mine. I love George's gay humour,--thou
lovest a melancholy brow. I love that charming weakness which supples to
my woman will,--thou lovest a proud nature that may command thine own.
I do not respect George less, because I know my mind stronger than his
own; but thou (like my gentle mother) wouldst have thy mate lord and
chief in all things, and live from his life as the shadow from the sun.
But where left you our mother?"

"In the oratory, at prayer."

"She has been sad of late."

"The dark times darken her; and she ever fears the king's falseness or
caprice will stir the earl up to some rash emprise. My father's letter,
brought last night to her, contains something that made her couch
sleepless."

"Ha!" exclaimed the duchess, eagerly, "my mother confides in thee more
than me. Saw you the letter?"

"No."

"Edward will make himself unfit to reign," said Isabel, abruptly. "The
barons will call on him to resign; and then--and then, Anne--sister
Anne,--Warwick's daughters cannot be born to be simple subjects!"

"Isabel, God temper your ambition! Oh, curb it, crush it down! Abuse
not your influence with Clarence. Let not the brother aspire to the
brother's crown."

"Sister, a king's diadem covers all the sins schemed in the head that
wins it!"

As the duchess spoke, her eyes flashed and her form dilated. Her beauty
seemed almost terrible.

The gentle Anne gazed and shuddered; but ere she found words to rebuke,
the lovely shape of the countess-mother was seen moving slowly towards
them. She was dressed in her robes of state to receive her kingly guest;
the vest fitting high to the throat, where it joined the ermine tippet,
and thickly sown with jewels; the sleeves tight, with the second or over
sleeves, that, loose and large, hung pendent and sweeping even to the
ground; and the gown, velvet of cramousin, trimmed with ermine,--made a
costume not less graceful than magnificent, and which, where compressed,
set off the exquisite symmetry of a form still youthful, and where
flowing added majesty to a beauty naturally rather soft and feminine
than proud and stately. As she approached her children, she looked
rather like their sister than their mother, as if Time, at least, shrunk
from visiting harshly one for whom such sorrows were reserved.

The face of the countess was so sad in its aspect of calm and sweet
resignation that even the proud Isabel was touched; and kissing her
mother's hand, she asked if any ill tidings preceded her father's
coming.

"Alas, my Isabel, the times themselves are bad tidings! Your youth
scarcely remembers the days when brother fought against brother, and
the son's sword rose against the father's breast. But I, recalling them,
tremble to hear the faintest murmur that threatens a civil war." She
paused, and forcing a smile to her lips, added, "Our woman fears must
not, however, sadden our lords with an unwelcome countenance; for men
returning to their hearths have a right to a wife's smile; and so,
Isabel, thou and I, wives both, must forget the morrow in to-day. Hark!
the trumpets sound near and nearer! let us to the hall."

Before, however, they had reached the castle, a shrill blast rang at the
outer gate. The portcullis was raised; the young Duke of Clarence, with
a bridegroom's impatience, spurred alone through the gloomy arch, and
Isabel, catching sight of his countenance lifted towards the ramparts,
uttered a cry, and waved her hand. Clarence beard and saw, leaped from
his steed, and had clasped Isabel to his breast, almost before Anne or
the countess had recognized the new comer.

Isabel, however, always stately, recovered in an instant from the joy
she felt at her lord's return, and gently escaping his embrace, she
glanced with a blush towards the battlements crowded with retainers;
Clarence caught and interpreted the look.

"Well, belle mere," he said, turning to the countess, "and if yon
faithful followers do witness with what glee a fair bride inspires
a returning bridegroom, is there cause for shame in this cheek of
damascene?"

"Is the king still with my father?" asked Isabel, hastily, and
interrupting the countess's reply.

"Surely, yes; and hard at hand. And pardon me that I forgot, dear lady,
to say that my royal brother has announced his intention of addressing
the principal officers of the army in Middleham Hall. This news gave me
fair excuse for hastening to you and Isabel."

"All is prepared for his highness," said the countess, "save our own
homage. We must quicken our steps; come, Anne." The countess took the
arm of the younger sister, while the duchess made a sign to Clarence. He
lingered behind, and Isabel, drawing him aside, asked,

"Is my father reconciled to Edward?"

"No,--nor Edward to him."

"Good! The king has no soldiers of his own amidst yon armed train?"

"Save a few of Anthony Woodville's recruits, none. Raoul de Fulke and
St. John have retired to their towers in sullen dudgeon. But have you no
softer questions for my return, bella mia?"

"Pardon me, many--my king."

"King!"

"What other name should the successor of Edward IV. bear?"

"Isabel," said Clarence, in great emotion, "what is it you would tempt
me to? Edward IV. spares the life of Henry VI., and shall Edward IV.'s
brother conspire against his own?"

"Saints forefend!" exclaimed Isabel; "can you so wrong my honest
meaning? O George! can you conceive that your wife--Warwick's
daughter--harbours the thought of murder? No! surely the career before
you seems plain and spotless! Can Edward reign? Deserted by the barons,
and wearing away even my father's long-credulous love; odious! except
in luxurious and unwarlike London, to all the commons--how reign? What
other choice left? none,--save Henry of Lancaster or George of York."

"Were it so!" said the weak duke; and yet be added falteringly, "believe
me, Warwick meditates no such changes in my favour."

"Time is a rapid ripener," answered Isabel; "but hark! they are lowering
the drawbridge for our guests."




CHAPTER VIII. THE ANCIENTS RIGHTLY GAVE TO THE GODDESS OF ELOQUENCE A
CROWN.

The lady of Warwick stood at the threshold of the porch, which, in the
inner side of the broad quadrangle, admitted to the apartments used by
the family; and, heading the mighty train that, line after line, emerged
through the grim jaws of the arch, came the earl on his black destrier,
and the young king.

Even where she stood, the anxious chatelaine beheld the moody and gloomy
air with which Edward glanced around the strong walls of the fortress,
and up to the battlements that bristled with the pikes and sallets of
armed men, who looked on the pomp below, in the silence of military
discipline.

"Oh, Anne!" she whispered to her youngest daughter, who stood beside
her, "what are women worth in the strife of men? Would that our smiles
could heal the wounds which a taunt can make in a proud man's heart!"

Anne, affected and interested by her mother's words, and with a secret
curiosity to gaze upon the man who ruled on the throne of the prince
she loved, came nearer and more in front; and suddenly, as he turned his
head, the king's regard rested upon her intent eyes and blooming face.

"Who is that fair donzell, cousin of Warwick?" he asked.

"My daughter, sire."

"Ah, your youngest!--I have not seen her since she was a child."

Edward reined in his charger, and the earl threw himself from his selle,
and held the king's stirrup to dismount. But he did so with a haughty
and unsmiling visage. "I would be the first, sire," said he, with a
slight emphasis, and as if excusing to himself his condescension, "to
welcome to Middleham the son of Duke Richard."

"And your suzerain, my lord earl," added Edward, with no less proud
a meaning, and leaning his hand lightly on Warwick's shoulder, he
dismounted slowly. "Rise, lady," he said, raising the countess, who
knelt at the porch, "and you too, fair demoiselle. Pardieu, we envy the
knee that hath knelt to you." So saying, with royal graciousness, he
took the countess's hand, and they entered the hall as the musicians, in
the gallery raised above, rolled forth their stormy welcome.

The archbishop, who had followed close to Warwick and the king,
whispered now to his brother,

"Why would Edward address the captains?"

"I know not."

"He hath made himself familiar with many in the march."

"Familiarity with a steel casque better becomes a king than waisall with
a greasy flat-cap."

"You do not fear lest he seduce from the White Bear its retainers?"

"As well fear that he can call the stars from their courses around the
sun."

While these words were interchanged, the countess conducted the king to
a throne-chair raised upon the dais, by the side of which were placed
two seats of state, and, from the dais, at the same time, advanced the
Duke and Duchess of Clarence. The king prevented their kneeling, and
kissed Isabel slightly and gravely on the forehead. "Thus, noble lady,
I greet the entrance of the Duchess of Clarence into the royalty of
England."

Without pausing for reply, he passed on and seated himself on the
throne, while Isabel and her husband took possession of the state chairs
on either hand. At a gesture of the king's the countess and Anne placed
themselves on seats less raised, but still upon the dais. But now
as Edward sat, the hall grew gradually full of lords and knights who
commanded in Warwick's train, while the earl and the archbishop stood
mute in the centre, the one armed cap-a-pie, leaning on his sword, the
other with his arms folded in his long robes.

The king's eye, clear, steady, and majestic, roved round that martial
audience, worthy to be a monarch's war-council, and not one of whom
marched under a monarch's banner! Their silence, their discipline, the
splendour of their arms, the greater splendour of their noble names,
contrasted painfully with the little mutinous camp of Olney, and the
surly, untried recruits of Anthony Woodville. But Edward, whose step,
whose form, whose aspect, proclaimed the man conscious of his rights to
be lord of all, betrayed not to those around him the kingly pride, the
lofty grief, that swelled within his heart. Still seated, he raised his
left hand to command silence; with the right he replaced his plumed cap
upon his brow.

"Lords and gentlemen," he said (arrogating to himself at once, as a
thing of course, that gorgeous following), "we have craved leave of our
host to address to you some words,--words which it pleases a king to
utter, and which may not be harsh to the ears of a loyal subject. Nor
will we, at this great current of unsteady fortune, make excuse, noble
ladies, to you, that we speak of war to knighthood, which is ever the
sworn defender of the daughter and the wife,--the daughters and the wife
of our cousin Warwick have too much of hero-blood in their blue veins to
grow pale at the sight of heroes. Comrades in arms! thus far towards our
foe upon the frontier we have marched, without a sword drawn or an arrow
launched from an archer's bow. We believe that a blessing settles on the
head of a true king, and that the trumpet of a good angel goes before
his path, announcing the victory which awaits him. Here, in the hall of
the Earl of Warwick, our captain-general, we thank you for your cheerful
countenance and your loyal service; and here, as befits a king, we
promise to you those honours a king alone worthily can bestow." He
paused, and his keen eye glanced from chief to chief as he resumed: "We
are informed that certain misguided and traitor lords have joined
the Rose of Lancaster. Whoever so doth is attainted, life and line,
evermore! His lands and dignities are forfeit to enrich and to ennoble
the men who strike for me. Heaven grant I may have foes eno' to reward
all my friends! To every baron who owns Edward IV. king (ay, and not
king in name, king in banquet and in bower, but leader and captain in
the war), I trust to give a new barony, to every knight a new knight's
fee, to every yeoman a hyde of land, to every soldier a year's pay. What
more I can do, let it be free for any one to suggest,--for my domains of
York are broad, and my heart is larger still!"

A murmur of applause and reverence went round. Vowed, as those warriors
were, to the earl, they felt that A MONARCH was amongst them.

"What say you, then? We are ripe for glory. Three days will we halt at
Middleham, guest to our noble subject."

"Three days, sire!" repeated Warwick, in a voice of surprise.

"Yes; and this, fair cousin, and ye, lords and gentlemen, is my reason
for the delay. I have despatched Sir William, Lord de Hastings, to
the Duke of Gloucester, with command to join us here (the archbishop
started, but instantly resumed his earnest, placid aspect); to the Lord
Montagu, Earl of Northumberland, to muster all the vassals of our shire
of York. As three streams that dash into the ocean, shall our triple
army meet and rush to the war. Not even, gentlemen, not even to the
great Earl of Warwick will Edward IV. be so beholden for roiaulme and
renown, as to march but a companion to the conquest. If ye were raised
in Warwick's name, not mine,--why, be it so! I envy him such friends;
but I will have an army of mine own, to show mine English soldiery how
a Plantagenet battles for his crown. Gentlemen, ye are dismissed to your
repose. In three days we march! and if any of you know in these fair
realms the man, be he of York or of Lancaster, more fit to command brave
subjects than he who now addresses you, I say to that man, turn rein,
and leave us! Let tyrants and cowards enforce reluctant service,--my
crown was won by the hearts of my people! Girded by those hearts, let me
reign, or, mourned by them, let me fall! So God and Saint George favour
me as I speak the truth!"

And as the king ceased, he uncovered his head, and kissed the cross
of his sword. A thrill went through the audience. Many were there,
disaffected to his person, and whom Warwick's influence alone could have
roused to arms; but at the close of an address spirited and loyal in
itself, and borrowing thousand-fold effect by the voice and mien of the
speaker, no feeling but that of enthusiastic loyalty, of almost tearful
admiration, was left in those steel-clad breasts.

As the king lifted on high the cross of his sword, every blade leaped
from its scabbard, and glittered in the air; and the dusty banners in
the hall waved, as to a mighty blast, when, amidst the rattle of armour,
burst forth the universal cry, "Long live Edward IV.! Long live the
king!"

The sweet countess, even amidst the excitement, kept her eyes anxiously
fixed on Warwick, whose countenance, however shaded by the black plumes
of his casque, though the visor was raised, revealed nothing of
his mind. Her daughters were more powerfully affected; for Isabel's
intellect was not so blinded by her ambition but that the kingliness
of Edward forced itself upon her with a might and solemn weight, which
crushed, for the moment, her aspiring hopes.

Was this the man unfit to reign? This the man voluntarily to resign a
crown? This the man whom George of Clarence, without fratricide, could
succeed? No!--there spoke the soul of the First and the Third Edward!
There shook the mane and there glowed the eye of the indomitable lion
of the august Plantagenets! And the same conviction, rousing softer and
holier sorrow, sat on the heart of Anne; she saw, as for the first time,
clearly before her the awful foe with whom her ill-omened and beloved
prince had to struggle for his throne. In contrast beside that form,
in the prime of manly youth--a giant in its strength, a god in its
beauty--rose the delicate shape of the melancholy boy who, afar in
exile, coupled in his dreams, the sceptre and the bride! By one of those
mysteries which magnetism seeks to explain, in the strong intensity of
her emotions, in the tremor of her shaken nerves, fear seemed to grow
prophetic. A stream as of blood rose up from the dizzy floors. The image
of her young prince, bound and friendless, stood before the throne of
that warrior-king. In the waving glitter of the countless swords raised
on high, she saw the murderous blade against the boy-heir of Lancaster
descend--descend! Her passion, her terror, at the spectre which fancy
thus evoked, seized and overcame her; and ere the last hurrah sent its
hollow echo to the raftered roof, she sank from her chair to the ground,
hueless and insensible as the dead.

The king had not without design permitted the unwonted presence of the
women in this warlike audience,--partly because he was not unaware
of the ambitious spirit of Isabel, partly because he counted on the
affection shown to his boyhood by the countess, who was said to have
singular influence over her lord, but principally because in such a
presence he trusted to avoid all discussion and all questioning, and
to leave the effect of his eloquence, in which he excelled all his
contemporaries, Gloucester alone excepted, single and unimpaired; and
therefore, as he rose, and returned with a majestic bend the acclamation
of the warriors, his eye now turned towards the chairs where the ladies
sat, and he was the first to perceive the swoon of the fair Anne.

With the tender grace that always characterized his service to women, he
descended promptly from his throne, and raised the lifeless form in his
stalwart arms; and Anne, as he bent over her, looked so strangely lovely
in her marble stillness, that even in that hour a sudden thrill shot
through a heart always susceptible to beauty as the harp-string to the
breeze.

"It is but the heat, lady," said he, to the alarmed countess, "and let
me hope that interest which my fair kinswoman may take in the fortunes
of Warwick and of York, hitherto linked together--"

"May they ever be so!" said Warwick, who, on seeing his daughter's
state, had advanced hastily to the dais; and, moved by the king's words,
his late speech, the evils that surrounded his throne, the gentleness
shown to the beloved Anne, forgetting resentment and ceremony alike, he
held out his mailed hand. The king, as he resigned Anne to her mother's
arms, grasped with soldierly frankness, and with the ready wit of the
cold intellect which reigned beneath the warm manner, the hand thus
extended, and holding still that iron gauntlet in his own ungloved and
jewelled fingers, he advanced to the verge of the dais, to which, in
the confusion occasioned by Anne's swoon, the principal officers had
crowded, and cried aloud,--

"Behold! Warwick and Edward thus hand in hand, as they stood when the
clarions sounded the charge at Towton! and that link what swords forged
on a mortal's anvil can rend or sever?"

In an instant every knee there knelt; and Edward exultingly beheld that
what before had been allegiance to the earl was now only homage to the
king.




CHAPTER IX. WEDDED CONFIDENCE AND LOVE--THE EARL AND THE PRELATE--THE
PRELATE AND THE KING--SCHEMES--WILES--AND THE BIRTH OF A DARK THOUGHT
DESTINED TO ECLIPSE A SUN.

While, preparatory to the banquet, Edward, as was then the daily classic
custom, relaxed his fatigues, mental or bodily, in the hospitable bath,
the archbishop sought the closet of the earl.

"Brother," said he, throwing himself with some petulance into the only
chair the room, otherwise splendid, contained, "when you left me to
seek Edward in the camp of Anthony Woodville, what was the understanding
between us?"

"I know of none," answered the earl, who having doffed his armour, and
dismissed his squires, leaned thoughtfully against the wall, dressed
for the banquet, with the exception of the short surcoat, which lay
glittering on the tabouret.

"You know of none? Reflect! Have you brought hither Edward as a guest or
as a prisoner?"
