was not a matter of wages, but of political principle--of war against
capitalists--I could but injure myself and mislead others. He wanted to
reconcile me to old Gerard, or to let him find me employment elsewhere;
and when I told him that my honour forbade me to make terms for myself
till those with whom I was joined were satisfied, he said, 'But if
this lasts much longer, your children will not look so rosy;' then
poor Heloise began to wring her hands and cry, and he took me aside and
wanted to press money on me--as a loan. He spoke so kindly that I could
not be angry; but when he found I would take nothing, he asked me about
some families in the street of whom he had a list, and who, he was
informed, were in great distress. That is true; I am feeding some of
them myself out of my savings. You see, this young Monsieur belongs to
a society of men, many as young as he is, which visits the poor and
dispenses charity. I did not feel I had a right to refuse aid for
others, and I told him where his money would be best spent. I suppose he
went there when he left me."

"I know the society you mean, that of St. Francois de Sales. It
comprises some of the most ancient of that old noblesse to which the
ouvriers in the great Revolution were so remorseless."

"We ouvriers are wiser now; we see that in assailing them, we gave
ourselves worse tyrants in the new aristocracy of the capitalists. Our
quarrel now is that of artisans against employers."

"Of course, I am aware of that; but to leave general politics, tell me
frankly, How has the strike affected you as yet? I mean in purse? Can
you stand its pressure? If not, you are above the false pride of not
taking help from me, a fellow-conspirator, though you were justified
in refusing it when offered by Raoul de Vandemar, the servant of the
Church."

"Pardon, I refuse aid from any one, except for the common cause. But do
not fear for me, I am not pinched as yet. I have had high wages for some
years, and since I and Heloise came together, I have not wasted a sous
out of doors, except in the way of public duty, such as making converts
at the Jean Jacques and elsewhere; a glass of beer and a pipe don't cost
much. And Heloise is such a house-wife, so thrifty, scolds me if I buy
her a ribbon, poor love! No wonder that I would pull down a society that
dares to scoff at her--dares to say she is not my wife, and her children
are base born. No, I have some savings left yet. War to society, war to
the knife!"

"Monnier," said Lebeau, in a voice that evinced emotion, "listen to
me: I have received injuries from society which, when they were fresh,
half-maddened me--that is twenty years ago. I would then have thrown
myself into any plot against society that proffered revenge; but
society, my friend, is a wall of very strong masonry, as it now stands;
it may be sapped in the course of a thousand years, but stormed in a
day--no. You dash your head against it--you scatter your brains, and
you dislodge a stone. Society smiles in scorn, effaces the stain, and
replaces the stone. I no longer war against society. I do war against
a system in that society which is hostile to me--systems in France are
easily overthrown. I say this because I want to use you, and I do not
want to deceive."

"Deceive me, bah! You are an honest man," cried Monnier; and he seized
Lebeau's hand, and shook it with warmth and vigour.

"But for you I should have been a mere grumbler. No doubt I should have
cried out where the shoe pinched, and railed against laws that vex
me; but from the moment you first talked to me I became a new man. You
taught me to act, as Rousseau and Madame de Grantmesnil had taught me to
think and to feel. There is my brother, a grumbler too, but professes
to have a wiser head than mine. He is always warning me against
you--against joining a strike--against doing any thing to endanger my
skin. I always went by his advice till you taught me that it was well
enough for women to talk and complain; men should dare and do."

"Nevertheless," said Lebeau, "your brother is a safer counsellor to a
pere de famille than I. I repeat what I have so often said before:
I desire, and I resolve, that the Empire of M. Bonaparte shall be
overthrown. I see many concurrent circumstances to render that desire
and resolve of practicable fulfilment. You desire and resolve the same
thing. Up to that point we can work together. I have encouraged your
action only so far as it served my design; but I separate from you the
moment you would ask me to aid your design in the hazard of experiments
which the world has never yet favoured, and trust me, Monnier, the world
never will favour."

"That remains to be seen," said Monnier, with compressed, obstinate
lips. "Forgive me, but you are not young; you belong to an old school."

"Poor young man!" said Lebeau, readjusting his spectacles, "I recognise
in you the genius of Paris, be the genius good or evil. Paris is never
warned by experience. Be it so. I want you so much, your enthusiasm is
so fiery, that I can concede no more to the mere sentiment which makes
me say to myself, 'It is a shame to use this great-hearted, wrong-headed
creature for my personal ends.' I come at once to the point--that is,
the matter on which I seek you this evening. At my suggestion, you have
been a ringleader in strikes which have terribly shaken the Imperial
system, more than its Ministers deem; now I want a man like you to
assist in a bold demonstration against the Imperial resort to a rural
priest-ridden suffrage, on the part of the enlightened working class of
Paris."

"Good!" said Monnier.

"In a day or two the result of the plebiscite will be known. The
result of universal suffrage will be enormously in favour of the desire
expressed by one man."

"I don't believe it," said Monnier, stoutly. "France cannot be so
hoodwinked by the priests."

"Take what I say for granted," resumed Lebeau, calmly. "On the 8th of
this month we shall know the amount of the majority--some millions of
French votes. I want Paris to separate itself from France, and declare
against those blundering millions. I want an emeute, or rather a
menacing demonstration--not a premature revolution, mind. You must avoid
bloodshed."

"It is easy to say that beforehand; but when a crowd of men once meets
in the streets of Paris--"

"It can do much by meeting, and cherishing resentment if the meeting be
dispersed by an armed force, which it would be waste of life to resist."

"We shall see when the time comes," said Monnier, with a fierce gleam in
his bold eyes.

"I tell you, all that is required at this moment is an evident protest
of the artisans of Paris against the votes of the 'rurals' of France. Do
you comprehend me?"

"I think so; if not, I obey. What we ouvriers want is what we have not
got--a head to dictate action to us."

"See to this, then. Rouse the men you can command. I will take care that
you have plentiful aid from foreigners. We may trust to the confreres of
our council to enlist Poles and Italians; Gaspard le Noy will turn out
the volunteer rioters at his command. Let the emeute be within, say a
week, after the vote of the plebiscite is taken. You will need that time
to prepare."

"Be contented--it shall be done."

"Good night, then." Lebeau leisurely took up his hat and drew on his
gloves--then, as if struck by a sudden thought, he turned briskly on the
artisan and said in quick blunt tones:

"Armand Monnier, explain to me why it is that you--a Parisian artisan,
the type of a class the most insubordinate, the most self-conceited that
exists on the face of earth--take without question, with so docile
a submission, the orders of a man who plainly tells you he does not
sympathise in your ultimate objects, of whom you really know very
little, and whose views you candidly own you think are those of an old
and obsolete school of political reasoners."

"You puzzle me to explain," said Monnier, with an ingenuous laugh, that
brightened up features stern and hard, though comely when in repose.
"Partly, because you are so straightforward, and do not talk blague;
partly, because I don't think the class I belong to would stir an inch
unless we had a leader of another class--and you give me at least that
leader. Again, you go to that first stage which we all agree to take,
and--well, do you want me to explain more?"

"Yes."

"Et bien! you have warned me, like an honest man; like an honest man I
warn you. That first step we take together; I want to go a step further;
you retreat, you say, 'No:' I reply you are committed; that further
step you must take, or I cry 'Traitre!--au la lanterne!' You talk of
'superior experience:' bah! what does experience really tell you? Do you
suppose that Philippe Egalite, when he began to plot against Louis XVI.,
meant to vote for his kinsman's execution by the guillotine? Do you
suppose that Robespierre, when he commenced his career as the foe of
capital punishment, foresaw that he should be the Minister of the Reign
of Terror? Not a bit of it. Each was committed by his use of those he
designed for his tools: so must you be--or you perish."

Lebeau, leaning against the door, heard the frank avowal he had courted
without betraying a change of countenance. But when Armand Monnier had
done, a slight movement of his lips showed emotion; was it of fear or
disdain?

"Monnier," he said, gently; "I am so much obliged to you for the manly
speech you have made. The scruples which my conscience had before
entertained are dispelled. I dreaded lest I, a declared wolf, might
seduce into peril an innocent sheep. I see I have to deal with a wolf of
younger vigour and sharper fangs than myself, so much the better: obey
my orders now; leave it to time to say whether I obey yours later. Au
revoir."




CHAPTER VI.

Isaura's apartment, on the following Thursday evening, was more filled
than usual. Besides her habitual devotees in the artistic or literary
world, there were diplomatists and deputies commixed with many fair
chiefs of la jeunesse doree; amongst the latter the brilliant Enguerrand
de Vandemar, who, deeming the acquaintance of every celebrity essential
to his own celebrity in either Carthage, the beau monde, or the
demi-monde, had, two Thursdays before, made Louvier attend her soiree
and present him. Louvier, though gathering to his own salons authors and
artists, very rarely favoured their rooms with his presence; he did
not adorn Isaura's party that evening. But Duplessis was there, in
compensation. It had chanced that Valerie had met Isaura at some house
in the past winter, and conceived an enthusiastic affection for her:
since then, Valerie came very often to see her, and made a point of
dragging with her to Isaura's Thursday reunions her obedient father.
Soirees, musical or literary, were not much in his line; but he had no
pleasure like that of pleasing his spoilt child. Our old friend Frederic
Lemercier was also one of Isaura's guests that night. He had become more
and more intimate with Duplessis, and Duplessis had introduced him to
the fair Valerie as "un jeune homme plein de moyens, qui ira loin."

Savarin was there of course, and brought with him an English gentleman
of the name of Bevil, as well known at Paris as in London--invited
everywhere--popular everywhere,--one of those welcome contributors to
the luxuries of civilised society who trade in gossip, sparing no pains
to get the pick of it, and exchanging it liberally sometimes for a
haunch of venison, sometimes for a cup of tea. His gossip not being
adulterated with malice was in high repute for genuine worth.

If Bevil said, "This story is a fact," you no more thought of doubting
him than you would doubt Rothschild if he said, "This is Lafitte of
'48."

Mr. Bevil was at present on a very short stay at Paris, and, naturally
wishing to make the most of his time, he did not tarry beside Savarin,
but, after being introduced to Isaura, flitted here and there through
the assembly.

            "Apis Matinae--
             More modoque--
             Grata carpentis thyma"--

The bee proffers honey, but bears a sting.

The room was at its fullest when Gustave Rameau entered, accompanied by
Monsieur de Mauleon.

Isaura was agreeably surprised by the impression made on her by the
Vicomte's appearance and manner. His writings, and such as she had heard
of his earlier repute, had prepared her to see a man decidedly old, of
withered aspect and sardonic smile--aggressive in demeanour--forward or
contemptuous in his very politeness--a Mephistopheles engrafted on the
stem of a Don Juan. She was startled by the sight of one who, despite
his forty-eight years--and at Paris a man is generally older at
forty-eight than he is elsewhere--seemed in the zenith of ripened
manhood--startled yet more by the singular modesty of a deportment
too thoroughly high-bred not to be quietly simple--startled most by a
melancholy expression in eyes that could be at times soft, though always
so keen, and in the grave pathetic smile which seemed to disarm censure
of past faults in saying, "I have known sorrows."

He did not follow up his introduction to his young hostess by any of the
insipid phrases of compliment to which she was accustomed; but, after
expressing in grateful terms his thanks for the honour she had permitted
Rameau to confer on him, he moved aside, as if he had no right to detain
her from other guests more worthy her notice, towards the doorway,
taking his place by Enguerrand amidst a group of men of whom Duplessis
was the central figure.

At that time--the first week in May, 1870--all who were then in Paris
will remember that there were two subjects uppermost in the mouths
of men: first, the plebiscite; secondly, the conspiracy to murder the
Emperor--which the disaffected considered to be a mere fable, a pretence
got up in time to serve the plebiscite and prop the Empire.

Upon this latter subject Duplessis had been expressing himself with
unwonted animation. A loyal and earnest Imperialist, it was only with
effort that he could repress his scorn of that meanest sort of gossip
which is fond of ascribing petty motives to eminent men.

To him nothing could be more clearly evident than the reality of this
conspiracy, and he had no tolerance for the malignant absurdity of
maintaining that the Emperor or his Ministers could be silly and wicked
enough to accuse seventy-two persons of a crime which the police had
been instructed to invent.

As De Mauleon approached, the financier brought his speech to an abrupt
close. He knew in the Vicomte de Mauleon the writer of articles which
had endangered the Government, and aimed no pointless shafts against its
Imperial head.

"My cousin," said Enguerrand, gaily, as he exchanged a cordial shake
of the hand with Victor, "I congratulate you on the fame of journalist,
into which you have vaulted, armed cap-a pie, like a knight of old into
his saddle; but I don't sympathise with the means you have taken to
arrive at that renown. I am not myself an Imperialist--a Vandemar can be
scarcely that. But if I am compelled to be on board a ship, I don't
wish to take out its planks and let in an ocean, when all offered to me
instead is a crazy tub and a rotten rope."

"Tres bien," said Duplessis, in Parliamentary tone and phrase.

"But," said De Mauleon, with his calm smile, "would you like the captain
of the ship, when the sky darkened and the sea rose, to ask the common
sailors 'whether they approved his conduct on altering his course or
shortening his sail'? Better trust to a crazy tub and a rotten rope than
to a ship in which the captain consults a plebiscite."

"Monsieur," said Duplessis, "your metaphor is ill chosen no metaphor
indeed is needed. The head of the State was chosen by the voice of the
people, and, when required to change the form of administration which
the people had sanctioned, and inclined to do so from motives the most
patriotic and liberal, he is bound again to consult the people from
whom he holds his power. It is not, however, of the plebiscite we were
conversing, so much as of the atrocious conspiracy of assassins--so
happily discovered in time. I presume that Monsieur de Mauleon must
share the indignation which true Frenchmen of every party must feel
against a combination united by the purpose of murder."

The Vicomte bowed as in assent. "But do you believe," asked a Liberal
Depute, "that such a combination existed, except in the visions of the
police or the cabinet of a Minister?"

Duplessis looked keenly at De Mauleon while this question was put to
him. Belief or disbelief in the conspiracy was with him, and with many,
the test by which a sanguinary revolutionist was distinguished from an
honest politician.

"Ma foi," answered De Mauleon, shrugging his shoulders, "I have only one
belief left; but that is boundless. I believe in the folly of mankind
in general, and of Frenchmen in particular. That seventy-two men
should plot the assassination of a sovereign on whose life interests so
numerous and so watchful depend, and imagine they could keep a secret
which any drunkard amongst them would blab out, any tatterdemalion would
sell, is a betise so gross that I think it highly probable. But pardon
me if I look upon the politics of Paris much as I do upon its mud--one
must pass through it when one walks in the street. One changes one's
shoes before entering the salon. A word with you, Enguerrand,"--and
taking his kinsman's arm he drew him aside from the circle. "What has
become of your brother? I see nothing of him now."

"Oh, Raoul," answered Enguerrand, throwing himself on a couch in a
recess, and making room for De Mauleon beside him--"Raoul is devoting
himself to the distressed ouvriers who have chosen to withdraw from
work. When he fails to persuade them to return, he forces food and
fuel on their wives and children. My good mother encourages him in this
costly undertaking, and no one but you who believe in the infinity of
human folly would credit me when I tell you that his eloquence has drawn
from me all the argent de poche I get from our shop. As for himself,
he has sold his horses, and even grudges a cab-fare, saying, 'That is a
meal for a family.' Ah! if he had but gone into the Church, what a saint
would have deserved canonisation!"

"Do not lament--he will probably have what is a better claim than mere
saintship on Heaven--martyrdom," said De Mauleon, with a smile in which
sarcasm disappeared in melancholy. "Poor Raoul!--and what of my other
cousin, the beau Marquis? Several months ago his Legitimist faith seemed
vacillating--he talked to me very fairly about the duties a Frenchman
owed to France, and hinted that he should place his sword at the command
of Napoleon III. I have not yet heard of him as a soldat de France--I
hear a great deal of him as a viveur de Paris."

"Don't you know why his desire for a military career was frost-bitten?"

"No! why?"

"Alain came from Bretagne profoundly ignorant of most things known to a
gamin of Paris. When he conscientiously overcame the scruples natural to
one of his name and told the Duchesse de Tarascon that he was ready
to fight under the flag of France whatever its colour, he had a vague
reminiscence of ancestral Rochebriants earning early laurels at the head
of their regiments. At all events he assumed as a matter of course that
he, in the first rank as gentilhomme, would enter the army, if as a
sous-lieutenant, still as gentilhomme. But when told that, as he had
been at no military college, he could only enter the ranks as a private
soldier--herd with private soldiers--for at least two years before,
passing through the grade of corporal, his birth, education, habits
of life could, with great favour, raise him to the station of a
sous-lieutenant, you may conceive that the martial ardour of a
Rochebriant was somewhat cooled."

"If he knew what the dormitory of French privates is, and how difficult
a man well educated well brought up, finds it, first, to endure the
coarsest ribaldry and the loudest blasphemy, and then, having endured
and been compelled to share them, ever enforce obedience and discipline
as a superior among those with whom just before he was an equal, his
ardour would not have been merely cooled--it would have been changed
into despair for the armies of France, if hereafter they are met by
those whose officers have been trained to be officers from the outset
and have imbibed from their cradle an education not taught to the
boy-pedants from school--the two-fold education how with courtesy to
command, how with dignity to obey. To return to Rochebriant, such salons
as I frequent are somewhat formal--as befits my grave years and my
modest income; I may add, now that you know my vocation, befits me also
as a man who seeks rather to be instructed than amused. In those salons
I did, last year sometimes, however, meet Rochebriant--as I sometimes
still meet you; but of late he has deserted such sober reunions, and I
hear with pain that he is drifting among those rocks against which my
own youth was shipwrecked. Is the report true?"

"I fear," said Enguerrand, reluctantly, "that at least the report is not
unfounded. And my conscience accuses me of having been to blame in the
first instance. You see, when Alain made terms with Louvier by which he
obtained a very fair income, if prudently managed, I naturally wished
that a man of so many claims to social distinction, and who represents
the oldest branch of my family, should take his right place in our world
of Paris. I gladly therefore presented him to the houses and the
men most a la mode--advised him as to the sort of establishment,
in apartments, horses, &c., which it appeared to me that he might
reasonably afford--I mean such as, with his means, I should have
prescribed to myself--"

"Ah! I understand. But you, dear Enguerrand, are a born Parisian,
every inch of you: and a born Parisian is, whatever be thought to the
contrary, the best manager in the world. He alone achieves the difficult
art of uniting thrift with show. It is your Provincial who comes to
Paris in the freshness of undimmed youth, who sows his whole life on
its barren streets. I guess the rest: Alain is ruined." Enguerrand, who
certainly was so far a born Parisian that with all his shrewdness and
savoir faire, he had a wonderfully sympathetic heart, very easily moved,
one way or the other--Enguerrand winced at his elder kinsman's words
complimentarily reproachful, and said in unwonted tones of humility:
"Cousin, you are cruel, but you are in the right. I did not calculate
sufficiently on the chances of Alain's head being turned. Hear my
excuse. He seemed to me so much more thoughtful than most at our age
are, so much more stately and proud; well, also so much more pure, so
impressed with the responsibilities of station, so bent on retaining
the old lands in Bretagne; by habit and rearing so simple and
self-denying,--that I took it for granted he was proof against stronger
temptations than those which a light nature like my own puts aside with
a laugh. And at first I had no reason to think myself deceived, when,
some months ago, I heard that he was getting into debt, losing at play,
paying court to female vampires, who drain the life-blood of those on
whom they fasten their fatal lips. Oh, then I spoke to him earnestly!"

"And in vain?"

"In vain. A certain Chevalier de Finisterre, whom you may have heard
of--"

"Certainly, and met; a friend of Louvier's--"

"The same man--has obtained over him an influence which so far subdues
mine, that he almost challenged me when I told him his friend was a
scamp. In fine, though Alain and I have not actually quarrelled, we pass
each other with, 'Bon jour, mon ami.'"

"Hum! My dear Enguerrand, you have done all you could. Flies will be
flies, and spiders, spiders, till the earth is destroyed by a comet.
Nay, I met a distinguished naturalist in America who maintained that we
shall find flies and spiders in the next world."

"You have been in America? Ah, true--I remember, California!"

"Where have I not been? Tush! music--shall I hear our fair hostess
sing?"

"I am afraid not to-night: because Madame S---------- is to favour us,
and the Signorina makes it a rule not to sing at her own house when
professional artists do. You must hear the Cicogna quietly some day;
such a voice, nothing like it."

Madame S---------, who, since she had learned that there was no cause to
apprehend that Isaura might become her professional rival, conceived
for her a wonderful affection, and willingly contributed her magnificent
gifts of song to the charms of Isaura's salon, now began a fragment from
I Puritani, which held the audience as silent as the ghosts listening
to Sappho, and when it was over, several of the guests slipped away,
especially those who disliked music, and feared Madame S--------- might
begin again. Enguerrand was not one of such soulless recreants, but he
had many other places to go to. Besides, Madame S-------- was no novelty
to him.

De Mauleon now approached Isaura, who was seated next to Valerie, and
after well-merited encomium on Madame S------'s performance, slid into
some critical comparisons between that singer and those of a former
generation, which interested Isaura, and evinced to her quick
perceptions that kind of love for music which has been refined by more
knowledge of the art than is common to mere amateurs.

"You have studied music, Monsieur de Mauleon," she said. "Do you not
perform yourself?"

"I? No. But music has always had a fatal attraction for me. I ascribe
half the errors of my life to that temperament which makes me too
fascinated by harmonies--too revolted by discords."

"I should have thought such a temperament would have led from
errors--are not errors discords?"

"To the inner sense, yes; but to the outer sense not always. Virtues
are often harsh to the ear--errors very sweet-voiced. The sirens did not
sing out of tune. Better to stop one's ears than glide on Scylla or be
merged into Charybdis."

"Monsieur," cried Valerie, with a pretty brusquerie which became her
well, "you talk like a Vandal."

"It is, I think, by Mademoiselle Duplessis that I have the honour to be
rebuked. Is Monsieur your father very susceptible to music?"

"Well, I cannot say that he cares much for it. But then his mind is so
practical--"

"And his life so successful. No Scylla, no Charybdis for him. However,
Mademoiselle, I am not quite the Vandal you suppose, I do not say
that susceptibility to the influence of music may not be safe, nay,
healthful, to others it was not so to me in my youth. It can do me no
harm now."

Here Duplessis came up and whispered his daughter "it was time to leave;
they had promised the Duchesse de Tarascon to assist at the soiree she
gave that night." Valerie took her father's arm with a brightening smile
and a heightened colour. Alain de Rochebriant might probably be at the
Duchesse's.

"Are you not going also to the Hotel de Tarascon, M. de Mauleon?" asked
Duplessis.

"No; I was never there but once. The Duchesse is an Imperialist, at once
devoted and acute, and no doubt very soon divined my lack of faith in
her idols."

Duplessis frowned, and hastily led Valerie away.

In a few minutes the room was comparatively deserted. De Mauleon,
however, lingered by the side of Isaura till all the other guests
were gone. Even then he lingered still, and renewed the interrupted
conversation with her, the Venosta joining therein; and so agreeable did
he make himself to her Italian tastes by a sort of bitter-sweet wisdom
like that of her native proverbs--comprising much knowledge of mankind
on the unflattering side of humanity in that form of pleasantry which
has a latent sentiment of pathos--that the Venosta exclaimed, "Surely
you must have been brought up in Florence!"

There was that in De Mauleon's talk hostile to all which we call romance
that excited the imagination of Isaura, and compelled her instinctive
love for whatever is more sweet, more beautiful, more ennobling on the
many sides of human life, to oppose what she deemed the paradoxes of
a man who had taught himself to belie even his own nature. She became
eloquent, and her countenance, which in ordinary moments owed much of
its beauty to an expression of meditative gentleness, was now lighted
up by the energy of earnest conviction--the enthusiasm of an impassioned
zeal.

Gradually De Mauleon relaxed his share in the dialogue, and listened
to her, rapt and dreamily as in his fiery youth he had listened to the
songs of the sirens. No siren Isaura! She was defending her own cause,
though unconsciously--defending the vocation of art as the embellisher
of external nature, and more than embellisher of the nature which dwells
crude, but plastic in the soul of man: indeed therein the creator of a
new nature, strengthened, expanded, and brightened in proportion as it
accumulates the ideas that tend beyond the boundaries of the visible and
material nature, which is finite; for ever seeking in the unseen and
the spiritual the goals in the infinite which it is their instinct to
divine. "That which you contemptuously call romance," said Isaura, "is
not essential only to poets and artists. The most real side of every
life, from the earliest dawn of mind in the infant, is the romantic."

"When the child is weaving flower-chains, chasing butterflies, or
sitting apart and dreaming what it will do in the future, is not that
the child's real life, and yet is it not also the romantic?"

"But there comes a time when we weave no flower-chains, and chase no
butterflies."

"Is it so?--still on one side of life, flowers and butterflies may be
found to the last; and at least to the last are there no dreams of the
future? Have you no such dreams at this moment? and without the romance
of such dreams, would there be any reality to human life which could
distinguish it from the life of the weed that rots on Lethe?"

"Alas, Mademoiselle," said De Mauleon, rising to take leave, "your
argument must rest without answer. I would not, if I could, confute the
beautiful belief that belongs to youth, fusing into one rainbow all
the tints that can colour the world. But the Signora Venosta will
acknowledge the truth of an old saying expressed in every civilised
language, but best, perhaps in that of the Florentine--'You might as
well physic the dead as instruct the old.'"

"But you are not old!" said the Venosta, with Florentine politeness,--
"you! not a grey hair."

"'Tis not by the grey of the hair that one knows the age of the heart,"
answered De Mauleon, in another paraphrase of Italian proverb, and he
was gone.

As he walked homeward, through deserted streets, Victor de Mauleon
thought to himself, "Poor girl, how I pity her! married to a Gustave
Rameau--married to any man--nothing in the nature of man, be he the best
and the cleverest, can ever realise the dream of a girl who is pure and
has genius. Ah, is not the converse true? What girl, the best and the
cleverest, comes up to the ideal of even a commonplace man--if he ever
dreamed of an ideal!"

Then he paused, and in a moment or so afterwards his thought knew such
questionings no more. It turned upon personalities, on stratagems and
plots, on ambition. The man had more than his share of that
peculiar susceptibility which is one of the characteristics of his
countrymen--susceptibility to immediate impulse--susceptibility to
fleeting impressions. It was a key to many mysteries in his character
when he owned his subjection to the influence of music, and in music
recognised not the seraph's harp, but the siren's song. If you could
have permanently fixed Victor de Mauleon in one of the good moments
of his life--even now--some moment of exquisite kindness--of superb
generosity--of dauntless courage--you would have secured a very rare
specimen of noble humanity. But so to fix him was impossible.

That impulse of the moment vanished the moment after; swept aside by the
force of his very talents--talents concentrated by his intense sense
of individuality--sense of wrongs or of rights--interests or objects
personal to himself. He extended the royal saying, "L'etat, c'est moi,"
to words far more grandiloquent. "The universe, 'tis I." The Venosta
would have understood him and smiled approvingly, if he had said with
good-humoured laugh, "I dead, the world is dead!" That is an Italian
proverb, and means much the same thing.





BOOK VIII.




CHAPTER I.

On the 8th of May the vote of the plebiscite was recorded,--between
seven and eight millions of Frenchmen in support of the Imperial
programme--in plain words, of the Emperor himself--against a minority of
1,500,000. But among the 1,500,000 were the old throne-shakers-those who
compose and those who lead the mob of Paris. On the 14th, as Rameau was
about to quit the editorial bureau of his printing-office, a note
was brought in to him which strongly excited his nervous system.
It contained a request to see him forthwith, signed by those two
distinguished foreign members of the Secret Council of Ten, Thaddeus
Loubinsky and Leonardo Raselli.

The meetings of that Council had been so long suspended that Rameau
had almost forgotten its existence. He gave orders to admit the
conspirators. The two men entered, the Pole, tall, stalwart, and with
martial stride--the Italian, small, emaciated, with skulking, noiseless,
cat-like step, both looking wondrous threadbare, and in that state
called "shabby genteel," which belongs to the man who cannot work for
his livelihood, and assumes a superiority over the man who can.
Their outward appearance was in notable discord with that of the
poet-politician--he all new in the last fashions of Parisian elegance,
and redolent of Parisian prosperity and extrait de Mousseline!

"Confrere," said the Pole, seating himself on the edge of the table,
while the Italian leaned against the mantelpiece, and glanced round the
room with furtive eye, as if to detect its innermost secrets, or decide
where safest to drop a Lucifer-match for its conflagration,--"confrere,"
said the Pole, "your country needs you--"

"Rather the cause of all countries," interposed the Italian
softly,--"Humanity."

"Please to explain yourselves; but stay, wait a moment," said Rameau;
and rising, he went to the door, opened it, looked forth, ascertained
that the coast was clear, then reclosed the door as cautiously as a
prudent man closes his pocket whenever shabby-genteel visitors appeal
to him in the cause of his country, still more if they appeal in that of
Humanity.

"Confrere," said the Pole, "this day a movement is to be made--a
demonstration on behalf of your country--"

"Of Humanity," again softly interposed the Italian. "Attend and share
it," said the Pole.

"Pardon me," said Rameau, "I do not know what you mean. I am now
the editor of a journal in which the proprietor does not countenance
violence; and if you come to me as a member of the Council, you must be
aware that I should obey no orders but that of its president, whom I--I
have not seen for nearly a year; indeed I know not if the Council still
exists."

"The Council exists, and with it the obligation it imposes," replied
Thaddeus.

"Pampered with luxury," here the Pole raised his voice, "do you dare to
reject the voice of Poverty and Freedom?"

"Hush, dear but too vehement confrere," murmured the bland Italian;
"permit me to dispel the reasonable doubts of our confrere," and he took
out of his breast-pocket a paper which he presented to Rameau; on it
were written these words:

"This evening May 24th. Demonstration.--Faubourg du Temple.--Watch
events, under orders of A. M. Bid the youngest member take that first
opportunity to test nerves and discretion. He is not to act, but to
observe."

No name was appended to this instruction, but a cipher intelligible to
all members of the Council as significant of its president, Jean Lebeau.

"If I err not," said the Italian, "Citizen Rameau is our youngest
confrere."

Rameau paused. The penalties for disobedience to an order of the
President of the Council were too formidable to be disregarded. There
could be no doubt that,--though his name was not mentioned, he, Rameau,
was accurately designated as the youngest member of the Council. Still,
however he might have owed his present position to the recommendation
of Lebeau, there was nothing in the conversation of M. de Mauleon which
would warrant participation in a popular emeute by the editor of a
journal belonging to that mocker of the mob. Ah! but--and here again he
glanced over the paper--he was asked "not to act; but to observe." To
observe was the duty of a journalist. He might go to the demonstration
as De Mauleon confessed he had gone to the Communist Club, a
philosophical spectator.

"You do not disobey this order?" said the Pole, crossing his arms.

"I shall certainly go into the Faubourg du Temple this evening,"
answered Rameau, drily, "I have business that way."

"Bon!" said the Pole; "I did not think you would fail us, though you do
edit a journal which says not a word on the duties that bind the French
people to the resuscitation of Poland."

"And is not pronounced in decided accents upon the cause of the human
race," put in the Italian, whispering.

"I do not write the political articles in Le Seas Commun," answered
Rameau; "and I suppose that our president is satisfied with them since
he recommended me to the preference of the person who does. Have you
more to say? Pardon me, my time is precious, for it does not belong to
me."

"Eno'!" said the Italian, "we will detain you no longer." Here, with a
bow and a smile, he glided towards the door.

"Confrere," muttered the Pole, lingering, "you must have become
very rich!--do not forget the wrongs of Poland--I am their
Representative--I--speaking in that character, not as myself
individually--I have not breakfasted!"

Rameau, too thoroughly Parisian not to be as lavish of his own money as
he was envious of another's, slipped some pieces of gold in the Pole's
hand. The Pole's bosom heaved with manly emotion: "These pieces bear the
effigies of the tyrant--I accept them as redeemed from disgrace by their
uses to Freedom."

"Share them with Signor Raselli in the name of the same cause,"
whispered Rameau, with a smile he might have plagiarised from De
Mauleon.

The Italian, whose ear was inured to whispers, heard and turned round as
he stood at the threshold.

"No, confrere of France--no, confrere of Poland--I am Italian. All ways
to take the life of an enemy are honourable--no way is honourable which
begs money from a friend."

An hour or so later, Rameau was driven in his comfortable coupe to the
Faubourg du Temple.

Suddenly, at the angle of a street, his coachman was stopped--a
rough-looking man appeared at the door--__"Descends, mon petit
bourgeois__." Behind the rough-looking man were menacing faces.

Rameau was not physically a coward--very few Frenchmen are, still fewer
Parisians; and still fewer no matter what their birthplace, the men whom
we call vain--the men who over-much covet distinction, and over-much
dread reproach.

"Why should I descend at your summons?" said Rameau, haughtily. "Bah!
Coachman, drive on!"

The rough-looking man opened the door, and silently extended a hand to
Rameau, saying gently: "Take my advice, mon bourgeois. Get out--we want
your carriage. It is a day of barricades--every little helps, even your
coupe!"

While this man spoke others gesticulated; some shrieked out, "He is an
employer! he thinks he can drive over the employed!"

Some leader of the crowd--a Parisian crowd always has a classical
leader, who has never read the classics--thundered forth,
"Tarquin's car! Down with Tarquin!" Therewith came a yell, "A la
lanterne--Tarquin!"

We Anglo-Saxons, of the old country or the new, are not familiarised
to the dread roar of a populace delighted to have a Roman authority for
tearing us to pieces; still Americans know what is Lynch law. Rameau
was in danger of Lynch law, when suddenly a face not unknown to him
interposed between himself and the rough-looking man.

"Ha!" cried this new comer, "my young confrere, Gustave Rameau, welcome!
Citizens, make way. I answer for this patriot--I, Armand Monnier. He
comes to help use! Is this the way you receive him?" Then in a low voice
to Rameau, "Come out. Give your coupe to the barricade. What matters
such rubbish? Trust to me--I expected you. Hist!--Lebeau bids me
see that you are safe." Rameau then, seeking to drape himself in
majesty,--as the aristocrats of journalism in a city wherein no other
aristocracy is recognised naturally and commendably do, when ignorance
combined with physical strength asserts itself to be a power,
beside which the power of knowledge is what a learned poodle is to a
tiger--Rameau then descended from his coupe, and said to this Titan of
labour, as a French marquis might have said to his valet, and as, when
the French marquis has become a ghost of the past, the man who keeps
a coupe says to the man who mends its wheels, "Honest fellow, I trust
you."

Monnier led the journalist through the mob to the rear of the barricade
hastily constructed. Here were assembled very motley groups.

The majority were ragged boys, the gamins of Paris, commingled with
several women of no reputable appearance, some dingily, some gaudily
apparelled. The crowd did not appear as if the business in hand was a
very serious one. Amidst the din of voices the sounds of laughter rose
predominant, jests and bon mots flew from lip to lip. The astonishing
good-humour of the Parisians was not yet excited into the ferocity that
grows out of it by a street contest. It was less like a popular emeute
than a gathering of schoolboys, bent not less on fun than on mischief.
But, still, amid this gayer crowd were sinister, lowering faces; the
fiercest were not those of the very poor, but rather of artisans, who,
to judge by their dress, seemed well off of men belonging to yet higher
grades. Rameau distinguished amongst these the medecin des pauvres, the
philosophical atheist, sundry young, long-haired artists, middle aged
writers for the Republican press, in close neighbourhood with ruffians
of villainous aspect, who might have been newly returned from the
galleys. None were regularly armed; still revolvers and muskets and long
knives were by no means unfrequently interspersed among the rioters. The
whole scene was to Rameau a confused panorama, and the dissonant tumult
of yells and laughter, of menace and joke, began rapidly to act on his
impressionable nerves. He felt that which is the prevalent character of
a Parisian riot--the intoxication of an impulsive sympathy; coming there
as a reluctant spectator, if action commenced he would have been borne
readily into the thick of the action--he could not have helped it;
already he grew impatient of the suspense of strife. Monnier having
deposited him safely with his back to a wall, at the corner of a street
handy for flight, if flight became expedient, had left him for several
minutes, having business elsewhere. Suddenly the whisper of the Italian
stole into his ear--"These men are fools. This is not the way to do
business; this does not hurt the robber of Nice--Garibaldi's Nice: they
should have left it to me."

"What would you do?"

"I have invented a new machine," whispered the Friend of humanity; "it
would remove all at one blow--lion and lioness, whelp and jackals--and
then the Revolution if you will! not this paltry tumult. The cause of
the human race is being frittered away. I am disgusted with Lebeau.
Thrones are not overturned by gamins."

Before Rameau could answer, Monnier rejoined him. The artisan's face
was overcast--his lips compressed, yet quivering with indignation.
"Brother," he said to Rameau, "to-day the cause is betrayed"--(the word
trahi was just then coming into vogue at Paris)--"the blouses I counted
on are recreant. I have just learned that all is quiet in the other
quartiers where the rising was to have been simultaneous with this. We
are in a guet-apens--the soldiers will be down on us in a few minutes;
hark! don't you hear the distant tramp? Nothing for us but to die like
men. Our blood will be avenged later. Here," and he thrust a revolver
into Rameau's hand. Then with a lusty voice that rang through the crowd,
he shouted "Vive le peuple!" The rioters caught and re-echoed the
cry, mingled with other cries,' "Vive la Republique!" "Vive le drapeau
rouge!"

The shouts were yet at their full when a strong hand grasped Monnier's
arm, and a clear, deep, but low voice thrilled through his ear: "Obey!
I warned you. No fight to-day. Time not ripe. All that is needed is
done--do not undo it. Hist! the sergens de ville are force enough to
disperse the swarm of those gnats. Behind the sergens come soldiers who
will not fraternise. Lose not one life to-day. The morrow when we shall
need every man--nay, every gamin--will dawn soon. Answer not. Obey!" The
same strong hand quitting its hold on Monnier, then seized Rameau by the
wrist, and the same deep voice said, "Come with me." Rameau, turning in
amaze, not unmixed with anger, saw beside him a tall man with sombrero
hat pressed close over his head, and in the blouse of a labourer, but
through such disguise he recognized the pale grey whiskers and green
spectacles of Lebeau. He yielded passively to the grasp that led him
away down the deserted street at the angle.

At the further end of that street, however, was heard the steady thud of
hoofs.

"The soldiers are taking the mob at its rear," said Lebeau, calmly;
"we have not a moment to lose--this way," and he plunged into a dismal
court, then into a labyrinth of lanes, followed mechanically by Rameau.
They issued at last on the Boulevards, in which the usual loungers were
quietly sauntering, wholly unconscious of the riot elsewhere. "Now, take
that fiacre and go home; write down your impressions of what you have
seen, and take your MS. to M. de Mauleon." Lebeau here quitted him.

Meanwhile all happened as Lebeau had predicted. The sergens de ville
showed themselves in front of the barricades, a small troop of mounted
soldiers appeared in the rear. The mob greeted the first with yells
and a shower of stones; at the sight of the last they fled in all
directions; and the sergens de ville, calmly scaling the barricades,
carried off in triumph, as prisoners of war, 4 gamins, 3 women, and 1
Irishman loudly protesting innocence, and shrieking "Murther!" So ended
the first inglorious rise against the plebiscite and the Empire, on the
14th of May, 1870.

From Isaura Cicogna to Madame de Grantmesnil. Saturday. May 21.

"I am still, dearest Eulalie, under the excitement of impressions wholly
new to me. I have this day witnessed one of those scenes which take us
out of our private life, not into the world of fiction, but of history,
in which we live as in the life of a nation. You know how intimate I
have become with Valerie Duplessis. She is in herself so charming in her
combination of petulant wilfulness and guileless naivete, that she might
sit as a model for one of your exquisite heroines. Her father, who is in
great favour at Court, had tickets for the Salle des Etats of the
Louvre today--when, as the journals will tell you, the results of the
plebiscite were formally announced to the Emperor--and I accompanied him
and Valerie. I felt, on entering the hall, as if I had been living for
