"Michael was a good soldier and a brave man," said the trooper,
finishing the glass. "Our troop was covering the flank of his regiment
when he fell, and I rode over his body myself during the day. Poor
fellow! he lay on his back, and looked as composed as if he had died a
natural death after a year's consumption."

"Oh! Michael was a great consumer, and be sartin; two such as us make
dreadful inroads in the stock, sargeant. But ye're a sober, discrate
man, Mister Hollister, and would be a helpmate indeed."

"Why, Mrs. Flanagan, I've tarried to speak on a subject that lies heavy
at my heart, and I will now open my mind, if you've leisure to listen."

"Is it listen?" cried the impatient woman; "and I'd listen to you,
sargeant, if the officers never ate another mouthful. But take a second
drop, dear; 'twill encourage you to spake freely."

"I am already bold enough in so good a cause," returned the veteran,
rejecting her bounty. "Betty, do you think it was really the peddler spy
that I placed in this room the last night?"

"And who should it be else, darling?"

"The evil one."

"What, the divil?"

"Aye, even Beelzebub, disguised as the peddler; and them fellows we
thought to be Skinners were his imps."

"Well sure, sargeant dear, ye're but little out this time, anyway; for
if the divil's imps go at large in the county Westchester, sure it is
the Skinners, themselves."

"Mrs. Flanagan, I mean in their incarnate spirits; the evil one knew
there was no one we would arrest sooner than the peddler Birch, and he
took on his appearance to gain admission to your room."

"And what should the divil be wanting of me?" cried Betty, tartly. "And
isn't there divils enough in the corps already, without one's coming
from the bottomless pit to frighten a lone body?"

"'Twas in mercy to you, Betty, that he was permitted to come. You see he
vanished through the door in your form, which is a symbol of your fate,
unless you mend your life. Oh! I noticed how he trembled when I gave him
the good book. Would any Christian, think you, my dear Betty, write in a
Bible in this way; unless it might be the matter of births and deaths,
and such lawful chronicles?"

The washerwoman was pleased with the softness of her lover's manner, but
dreadfully scandalized at his insinuation. She, however, preserved her
temper, and with the quickness of her own country's people, rejoined,
"And would the divil have paid for the clothes, think ye?--aye, and
overpaid."

"Doubtless the money is base," said the sergeant, a little staggered at
such an evidence of honesty in one of whom, as to generals, he thought
so meanly. "He tempted me with his glittering coin, but the Lord gave me
strength to resist."

"The goold looks well; but I'll change it, anyway, with Captain Jack,
the day. He is niver a bit afeard of any divil of them all!"

"Betty, Betty," said her companion, "do not speak so disreverently of
the evil spirit; he is ever at hand, and will owe you a grudge, for your
language."

"Pooh! if he has any bowels at all, he won't mind a fillip or two from a
poor lone woman; I'm sure no other Christian would."

"But the dark one has no bowels, except to devour the children of men,"
said the sergeant, looking around him in horror; "and it's best to make
friends everywhere, for there is no telling what may happen till it
comes. But, Betty, no man could have got out of this place, and passed
all the sentinels, without being known. Take awful warning from the
visit therefore--"

Here the dialogue was interrupted by a peremptory summons to the sutler
to prepare the morning's repast, and they were obliged to separate; the
woman secretly hoping that the interest the sergeant manifested was more
earthly than he imagined; and the man, bent on saving a soul from the
fangs of the dark spirit that was prowling through their camp in quest
of victims.

During the breakfast several expresses arrived, one of which brought
intelligence of the actual force and destination of the enemy's
expedition that was out on the Hudson; and another, orders to send
Captain Wharton to the first post above, under the escort of a body of
dragoons. These last instructions, or rather commands, for they admitted
of no departure from their letter, completed the sum of Dunwoodie's
uneasiness. The despair and misery of Frances were constantly before his
eyes, and fifty times he was tempted to throw himself on his horse and
gallop to the Locusts; but an uncontrollable feeling prevented. In
obedience to the commands of his superior, an officer, with a small
party, was sent to the cottage to conduct Henry Wharton to the place
directed; and the gentleman who was intrusted with the execution of the
order was charged with a letter from Dunwoodie to his friend, containing
the most cheering assurances of his safety, as well as the strongest
pledges of his own unceasing exertions in his favor. Lawton was left
with part of his own troop, in charge of the few wounded; and as soon as
the men were refreshed, the encampment broke up, the main body marching
towards the Hudson. Dunwoodie repeated his injunctions to Captain Lawton
again and again--dwelt on every word that had fallen from the peddler,
and canvassed, in every possible manner that his ingenuity could devise,
the probable meaning of his mysterious warnings, until no excuse
remained for delaying his own departure. Suddenly recollecting, however,
that no directions had been given for the disposal of Colonel Wellmere,
instead of following the rear of the column, the major yielded to his
desires, and turned down the road which led to the Locusts. The horse of
Dunwoodie was fleet as the wind, and scarcely a minute seemed to have
passed before he gained sight, from an eminence, of the lonely vale, and
as he was plunging into the bottom lands that formed its surface, he
caught a glimpse of Henry Wharton and his escort, at a distance,
defiling through a pass which led to the posts above. This sight added
to the speed of the anxious youth, who now turned the angle of the hill
that opened to the valley, and came suddenly on the object of his
search. Frances had followed the party which guarded her brother, at a
distance; and as they vanished from her sight, she felt deserted by all
that she most prized in this world. The unaccountable absence of
Dunwoodie, with the shock of parting from Henry under such
circumstances, had entirely subdued her fortitude, and she had sunk on a
stone by the roadside, sobbing as if her heart would break. Dunwoodie
sprang from his charger, threw the reins over the neck of the animal,
and in a moment he was by the side of the weeping girl.

"Frances--my own Frances!" he exclaimed, "why this distress? Let not the
situation of your brother create any alarm. As soon as the duty I am now
on is completed, I will hasten to the feet of Washington, and beg his
release. The Father of his Country will never deny such a boon to one of
his favorite pupils."

"Major Dunwoodie, for your interest in behalf of my poor brother, I
thank you," said the trembling girl, drying her eyes, and rising with
dignity; "but such language addressed to me, surely, is improper."

"Improper! are you not mine--by the consent of your father--your
aunt--your brother--nay, by your own consent, my sweet Frances?"

"I wish not, Major Dunwoodie, to interfere with the prior claims that
any other lady may have to your affections," said Frances, struggling to
speak with firmness.

"None other, I swear by Heaven, none other has any claim on me!" cried
Dunwoodie, with fervor. "You alone are mistress of my inmost soul."

"You have practiced so much, and so successfully, Major Dunwoodie, that
it is no wonder you excel in deceiving the credulity of my sex,"
returned Frances, attempting a smile, which the tremulousness of her
muscles smothered at birth.

"Am I a villain, Miss Wharton, that you receive me with such language?
When have I ever deceived you, Frances? Who has practiced in this manner
on your purity of heart?"

"Why has not Major Dunwoodie honored the dwelling of his intended father
with his presence lately? Did he forget it contained one friend on a bed
of sickness, and another in deep distress? Has it escaped his memory
that it held his intended wife? Or is he fearful of meeting more than
one that can lay a claim to that title? Oh, Peyton--Peyton, how have I
been deceived in you! With the foolish credulity of my youth, I thought
you all that was brave, noble, generous, and loyal."

"Frances, I see how you have deceived yourself," cried Dunwoodie, his
face in a glow of fire. "You do me injustice; I swear by all that is
most dear to me, that you do me injustice."

"Swear not, Major Dunwoodie," interrupted Frances, her fine countenance
lighting with the luster of womanly pride. "The time is gone by for me
to credit oaths."

"Miss Wharton, would you have me a coxcomb--make me contemptible in my
own eyes, by boasting with the hope of raising myself in your
estimation?"

"Flatter not yourself that the task is so easy, sir," returned Frances,
moving towards the cottage. "We converse together in private for the
last time; but--possibly--my father would welcome my mother's kinsman."

"No, Miss Wharton, I cannot enter his dwelling now; I should act in a
manner unworthy of myself. You drive me from you, Frances, in despair. I
am going on desperate service, and may not live to return. Should
fortune prove severe, at least do my memory justice; remember that the
last breathings of my soul will be for your happiness." So saying, he
had already placed his foot in the stirrup, but his youthful mistress,
turning on him an eye that pierced his soul, arrested the action.

"Peyton--Major Dunwoodie," she said, "can you ever forget the sacred
cause in which you are enlisted? Duty both to your God and to your
country forbids your doing anything rashly. The latter has need of your
services; besides"--but her voice became choked, and she was unable
to proceed.

"Besides what?" echoed the youth, springing to her side, and offering to
take her hand in his own. Frances having, however, recovered herself,
coldly repulsed him, and continued her walk homeward.

"Is this our parting!" cried Dunwoodie, in agony. "Am I a wretch, that
you treat me so cruelly? You have never loved me, and wish to conceal
your own fickleness by accusations that you will not explain."

Frances stopped short in her walk, and turned on him a look of so much
purity and feeling, that, heart-stricken, Dunwoodie would have knelt at
her feet for pardon; but motioning him for silence, she once
more spoke:--

"Hear me, Major Dunwoodie, for the last time: it is a bitter knowledge
when we first discover our own inferiority; but it is a truth that I
have lately learned. Against you I bring no charges--make no
accusations; no, not willingly in my thoughts. Were my claims to your
heart just, I am not worthy of you. It is not a feeble, timid girl, like
me, that could make you happy. No, Peyton, you are formed for great and
glorious actions, deeds of daring and renown, and should be united to a
soul like your own; one that can rise above the weakness of her sex. I
should be a weight to drag you to the dust; but with a different spirit
in your companion, you might soar to the very pinnacle of earthly glory.
To such a one, therefore, I resign you freely, if not cheerfully; and
pray, oh, how fervently do I pray! that with such a one you may
be happy."

"Lovely enthusiast!" cried Dunwoodie, "you know not yourself, nor me. It
is a woman, mild, gentle, and dependent as yourself, that my very
nature loves; deceive not yourself with visionary ideas of generosity,
which will only make me miserable."

"Farewell, Major Dunwoodie," said the agitated girl, pausing for a
moment to gasp for breath; "forget that you ever knew me--remember the
claims of your bleeding country; and be happy."

"Happy!" repeated the youthful soldier, bitterly, as he saw her light
form gliding through the gate of the lawn, and disappearing behind its
shrubbery, "Yes, I am happy, indeed!"

Throwing himself into the saddle, he plunged his spurs into his horse,
and soon overtook his squadron, which was marching slowly over the hilly
roads of the county, to gain the banks of the Hudson.

But painful as were the feelings of Dunwoodie at this unexpected
termination of the interview with his mistress, they were but light
compared with those which were experienced by the fond girl herself.
Frances had, with the keen eye of jealous love, easily detected the
attachment of Isabella Singleton to Dunwoodie. Delicate and retiring
herself, it never could present itself to her mind that this love had
been unsought. Ardent in her own affections, and artless in their
exhibition, she had early caught the eye of the young soldier; but it
required all the manly frankness of Dunwoodie to court her favor, and
the most pointed devotion to obtain his conquest. This done, his power
was durable, entire, and engrossing. But the unusual occurrences of the
few preceding days, the altered mien of her lover during those events,
his unwonted indifference to herself, and chiefly the romantic idolatry
of Isabella, had aroused new sensations in her bosom. With a dread of
her lover's integrity had been awakened the never-failing concomitant of
the purest affection, a distrust of her own merits. In the moment of
enthusiasm, the task of resigning her lover to another, who might be
more worthy of him, seemed easy; but it is in vain that the imagination
attempts to deceive the heart. Dunwoodie had no sooner disappeared, than
our heroine felt all the misery of her situation; and if the youth found
some relief in the cares of his command, Frances was less fortunate in
the performance of a duty imposed on her by filial piety. The removal of
his son had nearly destroyed the little energy of Mr. Wharton, who
required all the tenderness of his remaining children to convince him
that he was able to perform the ordinary functions of life.




CHAPTER XX


     Flatter and praise, commend, extol their graces,
     Though ne'er so black, say they have angels' faces,
     That man who hath a tongue I say is no man,
     If with that tongue he cannot win a woman.
                                  --_Two Gentlemen of Verona_.

In making the arrangements by which Captain Lawton had been left, with
Sergeant Hollister and twelve men, as a guard over the wounded, and
heavy baggage of the corps, Dunwoodie had consulted not only the
information which had been conveyed in the letter of Colonel Singleton,
but the bruises of his comrade's body. In vain Lawton declared himself
fit for any duty that man could perform, or plainly intimated that his
men would never follow Tom Mason to a charge with the alacrity and
confidence with which they followed himself; his commander was firm, and
the reluctant captain was compelled to comply with as good a grace as he
could assume. Before parting, Dunwoodie repeated his caution to keep a
watchful eye on the inmates of the cottage; and especially enjoined him,
if any movements of a particularly suspicious nature were seen in the
neighborhood, to break up from his present quarters, and to move down
with his party, and take possession of the domains of Mr. Wharton. A
vague suspicion of danger to the family had been awakened in the breast
of the major, by the language of the peddler, although he was unable to
refer it to any particular source, or to understand why it was to be
apprehended.

For some time after the departure of the troops, the captain was walking
before the door of the "Hotel," inwardly cursing his fate, that
condemned him to an inglorious idleness, at a moment when a meeting with
the enemy might be expected, and replying to the occasional queries of
Betty, who, from the interior of the building, ever and anon demanded,
in a high tone of voice, an explanation of various passages in the
peddler's escape, which as yet she could not comprehend. At this instant
he was joined by the surgeon, who had hitherto been engaged among his
patients in a distant building, and was profoundly ignorant of
everything that had occurred, even to the departure of the troops.

"Where are all the sentinels, John?" he inquired, as he gazed around
with a look of curiosity, "and why are you here alone?"

"Off--all off, with Dunwoodie, to the river. You and I are left here to
take care of a few sick men and some women."

"I am glad, however," said the surgeon, "that Major Dunwoodie had
consideration enough not to move the wounded. Here, you Mrs. Elizabeth
Flanagan, hasten with some food, that I may appease my appetite. I have
a dead body to dissect and am in haste."

"And here, you Mister Doctor Archibald Sitgreaves," echoed Betty,
showing her blooming countenance from a broken window of the kitchen,
"you are ever a-coming too late; here is nothing to ate but the skin of
Jenny, and the body ye're mentioning."

"Woman!" said the surgeon, in anger, "do you take me for a cannibal,
that you address your filthy discourse to me, in this manner? I bid you
hasten with such food as may be proper to be received into the
stomach fasting."

"And I'm sure it's for a popgun that I should be taking you sooner than
for a cannon ball," said Betty, winking at the captain; "and I tell ye
that it's fasting you must be, unless ye'll let me cook ye a steak from
the skin of Jenny. The boys have ate me up intirely."

Lawton now interfered to preserve the peace, and assured the surgeon
that he had already dispatched the proper persons in quest of food for
the party. A little mollified with this explanation, the operator soon
forgot his hunger, and declared his intention of proceeding to
business at once.

"And where is your subject?" asked Lawton.

"The peddler," said the other, glancing a look at the signpost. "I made
Hollister put a stage so high that the neck would not be dislocated by
the fall, and I intend making as handsome a skeleton of him as there is
in the states of North America; the fellow has good points, and his
bones are well knit. I will make a perfect beauty of him. I have long
been wanting something of this sort to send as a present to my old aunt
in Virginia, who was so kind to me when a boy."

"The devil!" cried Lawton. "Would you send the old woman a dead man's
bones?"

"Why not?" said the surgeon. "What nobler object is there in nature than
the figure of a man--and the skeleton may be called his elementary
parts. But what has been done with the body?"

"Off too."

"Off! And who has dared to interfere with my perquisites?"

"Sure, jist the divil," said Betty; "and who'll be taking yeerself away
some of these times too, without asking yeer lave."

"Silence, you witch!" said Lawton, with difficulty suppressing a laugh.
"Is this the manner in which to address an officer?"

"Who called me the filthy Elizabeth Flanagan?" cried the washerwoman,
snapping her fingers contemptuously. "I can remimber a frind for a year
and don't forgit an inimy for a month."

But the friendship or enmity of Mrs. Flanagan was alike indifferent to
the surgeon, who could think of nothing but his loss; and Lawton was
obliged to explain to his friend the apparent manner in which it
had happened.

"And a lucky escape it was for ye, my jewel of a doctor," cried Betty,
as the captain concluded. "Sargeant Hollister, who saw him face to face,
as it might be, says it's Beelzeboob, and no piddler, unless it may be
in a small matter of lies and thefts, and sich wickedness. Now a pretty
figure ye would have been in cutting up Beelzeboob, if the major had
hanged him. I don't think it's very 'asy he would have been under
yeer knife."

Thus doubly disappointed in his meal and his business, Sitgreaves
suddenly declared his intention of visiting the Locusts, and inquiring
into the state of Captain Singleton. Lawton was ready for the excursion;
and mounting, they were soon on the road, though the surgeon was obliged
to submit to a few more jokes from the washerwoman, before he could get
out of hearing. For some time the two rode in silence, when Lawton,
perceiving that his companion's temper was somewhat ruffled by his
disappointments and Betty's attack, made an effort to restore the
tranquillity of his feelings.

"That was a charming song, Archibald, that you commenced last evening,
when we were interrupted by the party that brought in the peddler," he
said. "The allusion to Galen was much to the purpose."

"I knew you would like it, Jack, when you had got the fumes of the wine
out of your head. Poetry is a respectable art, though it wants the
precision of the exact sciences, and the natural beneficence of the
physical. Considered in reference to the wants of life, I should define
poetry as an emollient, rather than as a succulent."

"And yet your ode was full of the meat of wit."

"Ode is by no means a proper term for the composition; I should term it
a classical ballad."

"Very probably," said the trooper. "Hearing only one verse, it was
difficult to class the composition."

The surgeon involuntarily hemmed, and began to clear his throat,
although scarcely conscious himself to what the preparation tended. But
the captain, rolling his dark eyes towards his companion, and observing
him to be sitting with great uneasiness on his horse, continued,--

"The air is still, and the road solitary--why not give the remainder? It
is never too late to repair a loss."

"My dear John, if I thought it would correct the errors you have
imbibed, from habit and indulgence, nothing could give me more
pleasure."

"We are fast approaching some rocks on our left; the echo will double my
satisfaction."

Thus encouraged, and somewhat impelled by the opinion that he both sang
and wrote with taste, the surgeon set about complying with the request
in sober earnest. Some little time was lost in clearing his throat, and
getting the proper pitch of his voice; but no sooner were these two
points achieved, than Lawton had the secret delight of hearing his
friend commence--

     "'Hast thou ever'"--

"Hush!" interrupted the trooper. "What rustling noise is that among the
rocks?"

"It must have been the rushing of the melody. A powerful voice is like
the breathing of the winds.

     "'Hast thou ever'"--

"Listen!" said Lawton, stopping his horse. He had not done speaking,
when a stone fell at his feet, and rolled harmlessly across the path.

"A friendly shot, that," cried the trooper. "Neither the weapon, nor its
force, implies much ill will."

"Blows from stones seldom produce more than contusions," said the
operator, bending his gaze in every direction in vain, in quest of the
hand from which the missile had been hurled. "It must be meteoric; there
is no living being in sight, except ourselves."

"It would be easy to hide a regiment behind those rocks," returned the
trooper, dismounting, and taking the stone in his hand. "Oh! here is the
explanation along with the mystery." So saying, he tore a piece of paper
that had been ingeniously fastened to the small fragment of rock which
had thus singularly fallen before him; and opening it, the captain read
the following words, written in no very legible hand: "_A musket bullet
will go farther than a stone, and things more dangerous than yarbs for
wounded men lie hid in the rocks of Westchester. The horse may be good,
but can he mount a precipice?_"

"Thou sayest the truth, strange man," said Lawton. "Courage and activity
would avail but little against assassination and these rugged passes."
Remounting his horse, he cried aloud, "Thanks, unknown friend; your
caution will be remembered."

A meager hand was extended for an instant over a rock, in the air, and
afterwards nothing further was seen, or heard, in that quarter, by
the soldiers.

"Quite an extraordinary interruption," said the astonished Sitgreaves,
"and a letter of very mysterious meaning."

"Oh! 'tis nothing but the wit of some bumpkin, who thinks to frighten
two of the Virginians by an artifice of this kind," said the trooper,
placing the billet in his pocket. "But let me tell you, Mr. Archibald
Sitgreaves, you were wanting to dissect, just now, a damned
honest fellow."

"It was the peddler--one of the most notorious spies in the enemy's
service; and I must say that I think it would be an honor to such a man
to be devoted to the uses of science."

"He may be a spy--he must be one," said Lawton, musing; "but he has a
heart above enmity, and a soul that would honor a soldier."

The surgeon turned a vacant eye on his companion as he uttered this
soliloquy, while the penetrating looks of the trooper had already
discovered another pile of rocks, which, jutting forward, nearly
obstructed the highway that wound directly around its base.

"What the steed cannot mount, the foot of man can overcome," exclaimed
the wary partisan. Throwing himself again from his saddle, and leaping a
wall of stone, he began to ascend the hill at a pace which would soon
have given him a bird's-eye view of the rocks in question, together with
all their crevices. This movement was no sooner made, than Lawton caught
a glimpse of the figure of a man stealing rapidly from his approach, and
disappearing on the opposite side of the precipice.

"Spur, Sitgreaves--spur," shouted the trooper, dashing over every
impediment in pursuit, "and murder the villain as he flies."

The former part of the request was promptly complied with, and a few
moments brought the surgeon in full view of a man armed with a musket,
who was crossing the road, and evidently seeking the protection of the
thick wood on its opposite side.

"Stop, my friend--stop until Captain Lawton comes up, if you please,"
cried the surgeon, observing him to flee with a rapidity that baffled
his horsemanship. But as if the invitation contained new terrors, the
footman redoubled his efforts, nor paused even to breathe, until he had
reached his goal, when, turning on his heel, he discharged his musket
towards the surgeon, and was out of sight in an instant. To gain the
highway, and throw himself into his saddle, detained Lawton but a
moment, and he rode to the side of his comrade just as the figure
disappeared.

"Which way has he fled?" cried the trooper.

"John," said the surgeon, "am I not a noncombatant?"

"Whither has the rascal fled?" cried Lawton, impatiently.

"Where you cannot follow--into that wood. But I repeat, John, am I not
a noncombatant?"

The disappointed trooper, perceiving that his enemy had escaped him, now
turned his eyes, which were flashing with anger, upon his comrade, and
gradually his muscles lost their rigid compression, his brow relaxed,
and his look changed from its fierce expression, to the covert laughter
which so often distinguished his countenance. The surgeon sat in
dignified composure on his horse; his thin body erect, and his head
elevated with the indignation of one conscious of having been
unjustly treated.

"Why did you suffer the villain to escape?" demanded the captain. "Once
within reach of my saber, and I would have given you a subject for the
dissecting table."

"'Twas impossible to prevent it," said the surgeon, pointing to the
bars, before which he had stopped his horse. "The rogue threw himself on
the other side of this fence, and left me where you see; nor would the
man in the least attend to my remonstrances, or to an intimation that
you wished to hold discourse with him."

"He was truly a discourteous rascal; but why did you not leap the fence,
and compel him to a halt? You see but three of the bars are up, and
Betty Flanagan could clear them on her cow."

The surgeon, for the first time, withdrew his eyes from the place where
the fugitive had disappeared, and turned his look on his comrade. His
head, however, was not permitted to lower itself in the least, as he
replied,--

"I humbly conceive, Captain Lawton, that neither Mrs. Elizabeth
Flanagan, nor her cow, is an example to be emulated by Doctor Archibald
Sitgreaves. It would be but a sorry compliment to science, to say that a
doctor of medicine had fractured both his legs by injudiciously striking
them against a pair of barposts." While speaking, the surgeon raised the
limbs in question to a nearly horizontal position, an attitude which
really appeared to bid defiance to anything like a passage for himself
through the defile; but the trooper, disregarding this ocular proof of
the impossibility of the movement, cried hastily,--

"Here was nothing to stop you, man; I could leap a platoon through, boot
and thigh, without pricking with a single spur. Pshaw! I have often
charged upon the bayonets of infantry, over greater difficulties
than this."

