
Scott's temporary desertion of Constable in the "Tales of my Landlord"
may have had various motives. There was a slight grudge against
Constable, born of some complications of the Ballantynes' affairs.
Perhaps the mere amusement of the experiment on public sagacity was one
of the more powerful reasons for the change. In our day Lord Lytton and
Mr. Trollope made similar trials of their popularity when anonymous, the
former author with the greater success. The idea of these masquerades
and veils of the incognito appears to have bewitched Constable. William
Godwin was writing for him his novel "Mandeville," and Godwin had
obviously been counselled to try a disguise. He says (Jan. 30, 1816) "I
have amused my imagination a thousand times since last we parted with
the masquerade you devised for me. The world is full of wonder. An old
favourite is always reviewed with coldness. . . . 'Pooh,' they say;
'Godwin has worn his pen to the stump!' . . . But let me once be
equipped with a significant mask and an unknown character from your
masquerade shop, and admitted to figure in with the 'Last Minstrel,' the
'Lady of the Lake,' and 'Guy Mannering' in the Scottish carnival, Gods!
how the boys and girls will admire me! 'Here is a new wonder!' they
will say. 'Ah, this is something like! Here is Godwin beaten on his own
ground. . . Here is for once a Scottish writer that they cannot say has
anything of the Scotchman about him.'"

However, Mr. Godwin did not don the mask and domino. "Mandeville" came
out about the same time as "Rob Roy;" but the "craziness of the public"
for the Author of "Waverley" was not changed into a passion for the
father-in-law of Shelley.

"'The Antiquary,' after a little pause of hesitation, attained
popularity not inferior to 'Guy Mannering,' and though the author
appears for a moment to have shared the doubts which he read in the
countenance of James Ballantyne, it certainly was, in the sequel, his
chief favourite among all his novels.'"

As Scott said to Terry, "If a man will paint from nature, he will be
likely to amuse those who are daily looking at it." The years which saw
the first appearance of "Guy Mannering" also witnessed that of "Emma."
By the singular chance, or law, which links great authors closely
in time, giving us novelists in pairs, Miss Austen was "drawing from
nature" at the very moment when Scott was wedding nature with romance.
How generously and wisely he admired her is familiar, and it may, to
some, seem curious that he never deliberately set himself to a picture
of ordinary life, free from the intrusion of the unusual, of the heroic.
Once, looking down at the village which lies on the Tweed, opposite
Melrose, he remarked that under its roofs tragedies and tales were
doubtless being lived. 'I undertake to say there is some real romance at
this moment going on down there, that, if it could have justice done to
it, would be well worth all the fiction that was ever spun out of human
brains.' But the example he gave was terrible,--"anything more dreadful
was never conceived by Crabbe;" yet, adds Lockhart, "it would never have
entered into his head to elaborate such a tale." He could not dwell in
the unbroken gloom dear to some modern malingerers. But he could
easily have made a tale of common Scotch life, dark with the sorrow of
Mucklebackit, and bright with the mirth of Cuddie Headrigg. There was,
however, this difficulty,--that Scott cared not to write a story of a
single class. "From the peer to the ploughman," all society mingles in
each of his novels. A fiction of middle-class life did not allure him,
and he was not at the best, but at his worst, as Sydney Smith observed,
in the light talk of society. He could admire Miss Austen, and read her
novels again and again; but had he attempted to follow her, by way of
variety, then inevitably wild as well as disciplined humour would have
kept breaking in, and his fancy would have wandered like the old knights
of Arthur's Court, "at adventure." "St. Ronan's Well" proved the truth
of all this. Thus it happens that, in "The Antiquary," with all his
sympathy for the people, with all his knowledge of them, he does not
confine himself to their cottages. As Lockhart says, in his admirable
piece of criticism, he preferred to choose topics in which he could
display "his highest art, that of skilful contrast."

Even the tragic romance of "Waverley" does not set off its Macwheebles
and Callum Begs better than the oddities of Jonathan Oldbuck and
his circle are relieved, on the one hand by the stately gloom of the
Glenallans, on the other by the stern affliction of the poor fisherman,
who, when discovered repairing "the auld black bitch of a boat," in
which his boy had been lost, and congratulated by his visitors on being
capable of the exertion, makes answer, "And what would you have me to
do, unless I wanted to see four children starve, because one is drowned?
It 's weel with you gentles, that can sit in the house with handkerchers
at your een, when ye lose a friend; but the like o' us maun to our work
again, if our hearts were beating as hard as ony hammer." And to his
work again Scott had to go when he lost the partner of his life.

The simple unsought charm which Lockhart notes in "The Antiquary" may
have passed away in later works, when what had been the amusement of
happy days became the task of sadness. But this magic "The Antiquary"
keeps perhaps beyond all its companions,--the magic of pleasant memories
and friendly associations. The sketches of the epoch of expected
invasion, with its patriotic musters and volunteer drillings, are
pictures out of that part in the author's life which, with his early
Highland wanderings ("Waverley") and his Liddesdale raids ("Guy
Mannering"), was most dear to him. In "Redgauntlet," again, he makes, as
Alan Fairford, a return on his youth and his home, and in "Rob Roy" he
revives his Highland recollections, his Highland lairds of "the blawing,
bleezing stories." None of the rest of the tales are so intimate in
their connection with Scott's own personal history. "The Antiquary" has
always, therefore, been held in the very first rank of his novels.

As far as plot goes, though Godwin denied that it had any story, "The
Antiquary" may be placed among the most careful. The underplot of the
Glenallans, gloomy almost beyond endurance, is very ingeniously made
to unravel the mystery of Lovel. The other side-narrative, that of
Dousterswivel, is the weak point of the whole; but this Scott justifies
by "very late instances of the force of superstitious credulity, to a
much greater extent." Some occurrence of the hour may have suggested the
knavish adept with his divining-rod. But facts are never a real excuse
for the morally incredible, or all but incredible, in fiction. On the
wealth and vraisemblance and variety of character it were superfluous to
dilate. As in Shakspeare, there is not even a minor person but lives
and is of flesh and blood, if we except, perhaps, Dousterswivel and Sir
Arthur Wardour. Sir Arthur is only Sir Robert Hazlewood over again, with
a slightly different folly and a somewhat more amiable nature. Lovel's
place, as usual, is among the shades of heroes, and his love-affair is
far less moving, far more summarily treated, than that of Jenny Caxon.
The skilful contrasts are perhaps most remarkable when we compare
Elspeth of the Burnfoot with the gossiping old women in the post-office
at Fairport,--a town studied perhaps from Arbroath. It was the opinion
of Sydney Smith that every one of the novels, before "The Fortunes of
Nigel," contained a Meg Merrilies and a Dominie Sampson. He may have
recognized a male Meg in Edie Ochiltree,--the invaluable character who is
always behind a wall, always overhears everything, and holds the threads
of the plot. Or he may have been hypercritical enough to think that
Elspeth of the Burnfoot is the Meg of the romance. Few will agree with
him that Meg Merrilies, in either of these cases, is "good, but good too
often."

The supposed "originals" of certain persons in the tale have been
topics of discussion. The character of Oldbuck, like most characters in
fiction, is a combination of traits observed in various persons. Scott
says, in a note to the Ashiestiel fragment of Autobiography, that Mr.
George Constable, an old friend of his father's, "had many of those
peculiarities of character which long afterwards I tried to develop in
the character of Jonathan Oldbuck." Sir Walter, when a child, made Mr.
Constable's acquaintance at Prestonpans in 1777, where he explored the
battle-field "under the learned guidance of Dalgetty." Mr. Constable
first introduced him to Shakspeare's plays, and gave him his first
German dictionary. Other traits may have been suggested by John Clerk
of Eldin, whose grandfather was the hero of the story "Praetorian here,
Praetorian there, I made it wi' a flaughter spade." Lockhart is no
doubt right in thinking that Oldbuck is partly a caricature of Oldbuck's
creator,--Sir Walter indeed frankly accepted the kinship; and the book
which he began on his own collection he proposed to style "Reliquim
Trotcosienses; or, the Gabions of Jonathan Oldbuck."

Another person who added a few points to Oldbuck was "Sandy Gordon,"
author of the "Itinerarium Septentrionale" (1726), the very folio which
Monkbarns carried in the dilatory coach to Queensferry. Gordon had been
a student in the University of Aberdeen; he was an amateur in many arts,
but antiquarianism was his favourite hobby. He was an acquaintance of
Sir John Clerk of Eldin, the hero of the Praetorium. The words of Gordon
in his "Itinerarium," where he describes the battle of the Grampians,
have supplied, or suggested, the speech of Monkbarns at the Kaim
of Kinprunes. The great question was, Where is the Mons Grampius of
Tacitus? Dismissing Camden's Grantsbain, because he does not know where
it is, Gordon says, "As for our Scotch Antiquaries, they are so divided
that some will have it to be in the shire of Angus, or in the Mearns,
some at the Blair of Athol in Perthshire, or Ardoch in Strathallan, and
others at Inverpeffery." Gordon votes for Strathern, "half a mile short
of the Kirk of Comrie." This spot is both at the foot of the Montes
Grampii, "and boasts a Roman camp capable of holding an army fit to
encounter so formidable a number as thirty thousand Caledonians. . . .
Here is the Porta Decumana, opposite the Prcetoria, together with the
dextra and sinistra gates," all discovered by Sandy Gordon. "Moreover,
the situation of the ground is so very exact with the description
given by Tacitus, that in all my travels through Britain I never beheld
anything with more pleasure. . . . Nor is it difficult, in viewing this
ground, to say where the Covinarii, or Charioteers, stood. In fine, to
an Antiquary, this is a ravishing scene." He adds the argument "that
Galgacus's name still remains on this ground, for the moor on which the
camp stood is called to this day Galdachan, or Galgachan Rosmoor."
All this lore Gordon illustrates by an immense chart of a camp, and a
picture of very small Montes Grampii, about the size and shape of buns.
The plate is dedicated to his excellency General Wade.

In another point Monkbapns borrows from Gordon. Sandy has a plate (page
20) of "The Roman Sacellum of Mars Signifer, vulgarly called 'Arthur's
Oon.' With regard to its shape, it is not unlike the famous Pantheon at
Rome before the noble Portico was added to it by Marcus Agrippa." Gordon
agrees with Stukeley in attributing Arthur's Oon to Agricola, and
here Monkbarns and Lovel adopt almost his words. "Time has left Julius
Agricola's very name on the place; . . . and if ever those initial
letters J. A. M. P. M. P. T., mentioned by Sir Robert Sibbald, were
engraven on a stone in this building, it may not be reckoned altogether
absurd that they should bear this reading, JULIUS AGRICOLA MAGNUS
PIETATIS MONUMENTUM POSUIT TEMPLUM; but this my reader may either accept
or reject as he pleases. However, I think it may be as probably received
as that inscription on Caligula's Pharos in Holland, which having these
following letters, C. C. P. F., is read Caius Caligula Pharum Fecit."
"This," Monkbarns adds, "has ever been recorded as a sound exposition."

The character of Edie Ochiltree, Scott himself avers to have been
suggested by Andrew Gemmells, pleasantly described in the Introduction.
Mr. Chambers, in "Illustrations of the Author of 'Waverley," clears up
a point doubtful in Scott's memory, by saying that Geimells really was a
Blue-Gown. He rode a horse of his own, and at races was a bookmaker.
He once dropped at Rutherford, in Teviotdale, a clue of yarn containing
twenty guineas. Like Edie Ochiltree, he had served at Fontenoy. He
died at Roxburgh Newton in 1793, at the age of one hundred and five,
according to his own reckoning. "His wealth was the means of enriching
a nephew in Ayrshire, who is now (1825) a considerable landholder there,
and belongs to a respectable class of society."

An old Irus of similar character patrolled Teviotdale, while Andrew
Gemmells was attached to Ettrick and Yarrow. This was Blind Willie Craw.
Willie was the Society Journal of Hawick, and levied blackmail on the
inhabitants. He is thus described by Mr. Grieve, in the Diary already
quoted: "He lived at Branxholme Town, in a free house set apart for the
gamekeeper, and for many a year carried all the bread from Hawick used
in my father's family. He came in that way at breakfast-time, and got a
wallet which he put it in, and returned at dinner-time with the 'bawbee
rows' and two loaves. He laid the town of Hawick under contribution for
bawbees, and he knew the history of every individual, and went rhyming
through the town from door to door; and as he knew something against
every one which they would rather wish should not be rehearsed, a bawbee
put a stop to the paragraph which they wished suppressed. Willie Craw
was the son of a gamekeeper of the duke's, and enjoyed a free house at
Branxholme Town as long as he lived."

Had Burns ever betaken himself to the gaberlunzie's life, which he
speaks of in one of his poems as "the last o't, the worst o't," he would
have proved a much more formidable satirist than poor Willie Craw, the
last of the "blind crowders." Burns wrote, of course, in a spirit of
reckless humour; but he could not, even in sport, have alluded to the
life as "suited to his habits and powers," had gaberlunzies been mere
mendicants. In Herd's collection of Ballads is one on the ancient
Scottish beggar:--

                In Scotland there lived a humble beggar,
                  He had nor house, nor hald, nor hame;
                  But he was well liked by ilk a body,
                And they gave him sunkets to rax his wame.

                A sieve fu' o' meal, a handfu' o' groats,
                  A dad o' a bannock, or pudding bree,
                  Cauld porridge, or the lickings o' plates,
                Wad make him as blythe as a body could be.

The dress and trade of the beggar are said to have been adopted by
James V. in his adventures, and tradition attributes to him a song, "The
Gaberlunzie Man."

One of Edie's most charming traits is his readiness to "fight for his
dish, like the laird for his land," when a French invasion was expected.
Scott places the date of "The False Alarm," when he himself rode a
hundred miles to join his regiment, on Feb. 2, 1804.

Lockhart gives it as an event of 1805 (vol. ii. p. 275). The occasion
gave great pleasure to Scott, on account of the patriotism and courage
displayed by all classes. "Me no muckle to fight for?" says Edie. "Isna
there the country to fight for, and the burns I gang dandering beside,
and the hearths o' the gudewives that gie me my bit bread, and the bits
o' weans that come toddling to play wi' me when I come about a landward
town?" Edie had fought at Fontenoy, and was of the old school. Scott
would have been less pleased with a recruit from St. Boswells, on the
Tweed. This man was a shoemaker, John Younger, a very intelligent and
worthy person, famous as an angler and writer on angling, who has left
an account of the "False Alarm" in his memoirs. His view was that the
people, unlike Edie, had nothing to fight for, that only the rich had
any reason to be patriotic, that the French had no quarrel with the
poor. In fact, Mr. Younger was a cosmopolitan democrat, and sneered at
the old Border glories of the warlike days. Probably, however, he would
have done his duty, had the enemy landed, and, like Edie, might have
remembered the "burns he dandered beside," always with a fishingrod in
his hand.

     The Editor cannot resist the temptation to add that the patriotic
     lady mentioned in Scott's note, who "would rather have seen her son
     dead on that hearth than hear that he had been a horse's length
     behind his companions," was his paternal great-grandmother, Mrs.
     John Lang. Her husband, who died shortly afterwards, so that she was
     a widow when Scott conversed with her, chanced to be chief
     magistrate of Selkirk. His family was aroused late one night by the
     sound of a carriage hurrying down the steep and narrow street. Lord
     Napier was bringing, probably from Hawick, the tidings that the
     beacons were ablaze. The town-bell was instantly rung, the
     inhabitants met in the marketplace, where Scott's statue now stands,
     and the whole force, with one solitary exception, armed and marched
     to Dalkeith. According to the gentleman whose horse and arms were
     sent on to meet him, it was intended, if the French proved
     victorious, that the population of the Border towns should abandon
     their homes and retire to the hills.

No characters in the "Antiquary," except Monkbarns and Edie Ochiltree,
seem to have been borrowed from notable originals. The frauds of
Dousterswivel, Scott says, are rendered plausible by "very late
instances of the force of superstitious credulity to a much greater
extent." He can hardly be referring to the career of Cagliostro, but
he may have had in his memory some unsuccessful mining speculations by
Charles Earl of Traquair, who sought for lead and found little or none
in Traquair hills. The old "Statistical Account of Scotland" (vol. xii.
p. 370) says nothing about imposture, and merely remarks that "the noble
family of Traquair have made several attempts to discover lead mines,
and have found quantities of the ore of that metal, though not adequate
to indemnify the expenses of working, and have therefore given up the
attempt." This was published in 1794, so twenty years had passed
when "The Antiquary" was written. If there was here an "instance
of superstitious credulity," it was not "a very late instance." The
divining, or "dowsing," rod of Dousterswivel still keeps its place in
mining superstition and in the search for wells.

With "The Antiquary" most contemporary reviews of the novels lose their
interest. Their author had firmly established his position, at least
till "The Monastery" caused some murmurings. Even the "Quarterly Review"
was infinitely more genial in its reception of "The Antiquary" than of
"Guy Mannering." The critic only grumbled at Lovel's feverish dreams,
which, he thought, showed an intention to introduce the marvellous. He
complained of "the dark dialect of Anglified Erse," but found comfort in
the glossary appended. The "Edinburgh Review" pronounced the chapter on
the escape from the tide to be "I the very best description we have ever
met, inverse or in prose, in ancient or in modern writing." No reviewer
seems to have noticed that the sun is made to set in the sea, on the
east coast of Scotland. The "Edinburgh," however, declared that the
Antiquary, "at least in so far as he is an Antiquary," was the chief
blemish on the book. The "sweet heathen of Monkbarns" has not suffered
from this disparagement. The "British Critic" pledged its reputation
that Scott was the author. If an argument were wanted, "it would be that
which has been applied to prove the authenticity of the last book of
the Iliad,--that Homer must have written it, because no one else could."
Alas! that argument does not convince German critics.

                                            ANDREW LANG.





CHAPTER FIRST.

               Go call a coach, and let a coach be called,
               And let the man who calleth be the caller;
               And in his calling let him nothing call,
               But Coach! Coach! Coach! O for a coach, ye gods!
                                 Chrononhotonthologos.

It was early on a fine summer's day, near the end of the eighteenth
century, when a young man, of genteel appearance, journeying towards the
north-east of Scotland, provided himself with a ticket in one of those
public carriages which travel between Edinburgh and the Queensferry,
at which place, as the name implies, and as is well known to all my
northern readers, there is a passage-boat for crossing the Firth of
Forth. The coach was calculated to carry six regular passengers, besides
such interlopers as the coachman could pick up by the way, and intrude
upon those who were legally in possession. The tickets, which conferred
right to a seat in this vehicle, of little ease, were dispensed by a
sharp-looking old dame, with a pair of spectacles on a very thin nose,
who inhabited a "laigh shop," anglice, a cellar, opening to the High
Street by a straight and steep stair, at the bottom of which she sold
tape, thread, needles, skeins of worsted, coarse linen cloth, and such
feminine gear, to those who had the courage and skill to descend to
the profundity of her dwelling, without falling headlong themselves, or
throwing down any of the numerous articles which, piled on each side of
the descent, indicated the profession of the trader below.

The written hand-bill, which, pasted on a projecting board, announced
that the Queensferry Diligence, or Hawes Fly, departed precisely at
twelve o'clock on Tuesday, the fifteenth July 17--, in order to secure
for travellers the opportunity of passing the Firth with the flood-tide,
lied on the present occasion like a bulletin; for although that hour was
pealed from Saint Giles's steeple, and repeated by the Tron, no coach
appeared upon the appointed stand. It is true, only two tickets had been
taken out, and possibly the lady of the subterranean mansion might have
an understanding with her Automedon, that, in such cases, a little space
was to be allowed for the chance of filling up the vacant places--or the
said Automedon might have been attending a funeral, and be delayed by
the necessity of stripping his vehicle of its lugubrious trappings--or
he might have staid to take a half-mutchkin extraordinary with his crony
the hostler--or--in short, he did not make his appearance.

The young gentleman, who began to grow somewhat impatient, was now
joined by a companion in this petty misery of human life--the person who
had taken out the other place. He who is bent upon a journey is usually
easily to be distinguished from his fellow-citizens. The boots, the
great-coat, the umbrella, the little bundle in his hand, the hat pulled
over his resolved brows, the determined importance of his pace, his
brief answers to the salutations of lounging acquaintances, are all
marks by which the experienced traveller in mail-coach or diligence can
distinguish, at a distance, the companion of his future journey, as he
pushes onward to the place of rendezvous. It is then that, with worldly
wisdom, the first comer hastens to secure the best berth in the coach
for himself, and to make the most convenient arrangement for his baggage
before the arrival of his competitors. Our youth, who was gifted with
little prudence, of any sort, and who was, moreover, by the absence of
the coach, deprived of the power of availing himself of his priority of
choice, amused himself, instead, by speculating upon the occupation and
character of the personage who was now come to the coach office.

He was a good-looking man of the age of sixty, perhaps older,--but his
hale complexion and firm step announced that years had not impaired
his strength or health. His countenance was of the true Scottish
cast, strongly marked, and rather harsh in features, with a shrewd
and penetrating eye, and a countenance in which habitual gravity was
enlivened by a cast of ironical humour. His dress was uniform, and of a
colour becoming his age and gravity; a wig, well dressed and powdered,
surmounted by a slouched hat, had something of a professional air. He
might be a clergyman, yet his appearance was more that of a man of
the world than usually belongs to the kirk of Scotland, and his first
ejaculation put the matter beyond question.

He arrived with a hurried pace, and, casting an alarmed glance towards
the dial-plate of the church, then looking at the place where the coach
should have been, exclaimed, "Deil's in it--I am too late after all!"

The young man relieved his anxiety, by telling him the coach had not
yet appeared. The old gentleman, apparently conscious of his own want of
punctuality, did not at first feel courageous enough to censure that
of the coachman. He took a parcel, containing apparently a large folio,
from a little boy who followed him, and, patting him on the head, bid
him go back and tell Mr. B----, that if he had known he was to have had so
much time, he would have put another word or two to their bargain,--then
told the boy to mind his business, and he would be as thriving a lad as
ever dusted a duodecimo. The boy lingered, perhaps in hopes of a penny
to buy marbles; but none was forthcoming. Our senior leaned his little
bundle upon one of the posts at the head of the staircase, and, facing
the traveller who had first arrived, waited in silence for about five
minutes the arrival of the expected diligence.

At length, after one or two impatient glances at the progress of the
minute-hand of the clock, having compared it with his own watch, a huge
and antique gold repeater, and having twitched about his features to
give due emphasis to one or two peevish pshaws, he hailed the old lady
of the cavern.

"Good woman,--what the d--l is her name?--Mrs. Macleuchar!"

Mrs. Macleuchar, aware that she had a defensive part to sustain in the
encounter which was to follow, was in no hurry to hasten the discussion
by returning a ready answer.

"Mrs. Macleuchar,--Good woman" (with an elevated voice)--then apart, "Old
doited hag, she's as deaf as a post--I say, Mrs. Macleuchar!"

"I am just serving a customer.--Indeed, hinny, it will no be a bodle
cheaper than I tell ye."

"Woman," reiterated the traveller, "do you think we can stand here all
day till you have cheated that poor servant wench out of her half-year's
fee and bountith?"

"Cheated!" retorted Mrs. Macleuchar, eager to take up the quarrel upon a
defensible ground; "I scorn your words, sir: you are an uncivil
person, and I desire you will not stand there, to slander me at my ain
stair-head."

"The woman," said the senior, looking with an arch glance at his
destined travelling companion, "does not understand the words of
action.--Woman," again turning to the vault, "I arraign not thy
character, but I desire to know what is become of thy coach?"

"What's your wull?" answered Mrs. Macleuchar, relapsing into deafness.

"We have taken places, ma'am," said the younger stranger, "in your
diligence for Queensferry"--"Which should have been half-way on the road
before now," continued the elder and more impatient traveller, rising
in wrath as he spoke: "and now in all likelihood we shall miss the tide,
and I have business of importance on the other side--and your cursed
coach"--

"The coach?--Gude guide us, gentlemen, is it no on the stand yet?"
answered the old lady, her shrill tone of expostulation sinking into a
kind of apologetic whine. "Is it the coach ye hae been waiting for?"

"What else could have kept us broiling in the sun by the side of the
gutter here, you--you faithless woman, eh?"

Mrs. Macleuchar now ascended her trap stair (for such it might be
called, though constructed of stone), until her nose came upon a level
with the pavement; then, after wiping her spectacles to look for
that which she well knew was not to be found, she exclaimed, with
well-feigned astonishment, "Gude guide us--saw ever onybody the like o'
that?"

"Yes, you abominable woman," vociferated the traveller, "many have seen
the like of it, and all will see the like of it that have anything to do
with your trolloping sex;" then pacing with great indignation before
the door of the shop, still as he passed and repassed, like a vessel who
gives her broadside as she comes abreast of a hostile fortress, he
shot down complaints, threats, and reproaches, on the embarrassed Mrs.
Macleuchar. He would take a post-chaise--he would call a hackney coach--he
would take four horses--he must--he would be on the north side,
to-day--and all the expense of his journey, besides damages, direct and
consequential, arising from delay, should be accumulated on the devoted
head of Mrs. Macleuchar.

There, was something so comic in his pettish resentment, that the
younger traveller, who was in no such pressing hurry to depart, could
not help being amused with it, especially as it was obvious, that
every now and then the old gentleman, though very angry, could not help
laughing at his own vehemence. But when Mrs. Macleuchar began also to
join in the laughter, he quickly put a stop to her ill-timed merriment.

"Woman," said he, "is that advertisement thine?" showing a bit of
crumpled printed paper: "Does it not set forth, that, God willing, as
you hypocritically express it, the Hawes Fly, or Queensferry Diligence,
would set forth to-day at twelve o'clock; and is it not, thou falsest of
creatures, now a quarter past twelve, and no such fly or diligence to
be seen?--Dost thou know the consequence of seducing the lieges by
false reports?--dost thou know it might be brought under the statute of
leasing-making? Answer--and for once in thy long, useless, and evil
life, let it be in the words of truth and sincerity,--hast thou such
a coach?--is it in rerum natura?--or is this base annunciation a mere
swindle on the incautious to beguile them of their time, their patience,
and three shillings of sterling money of this realm?--Hast thou, I say,
such a coach? ay or no?"

"O dear, yes, sir; the neighbours ken the diligence weel, green picked
oat wi' red--three yellow wheels and a black ane."

"Woman, thy special description will not serve--it may be only a lie with
a circumstance."

"O, man, man!" said the overwhelmed Mrs. Macleuchar, totally exhausted
at having been so long the butt of his rhetoric, "take back your three
shillings, and make me quit o' ye."

"Not so fast, not so fast, woman--Will three shillings transport me to
Queensferry, agreeably to thy treacherous program?--or will it requite
the damage I may sustain by leaving my business undone, or repay the
expenses which I must disburse if I am obliged to tarry a day at the
South Ferry for lack of tide?--Will it hire, I say, a pinnace, for which
alone the regular price is five shillings?"

Here his argument was cut short by a lumbering noise, which proved to
be the advance of the expected vehicle, pressing forward with all the
dispatch to which the broken-winded jades that drew it could possibly
be urged. With ineffable pleasure, Mrs. Macleuchar saw her tormentor
deposited in the leathern convenience; but still, as it was driving off,
his head thrust out of the window reminded her, in words drowned amid
the rumbling of the wheels, that, if the diligence did not attain the
Ferry in time to save the flood-tide, she, Mrs. Macleuchar, should be
held responsible for all the consequences that might ensue.

The coach had continued in motion for a mile or two before the stranger
had completely repossessed himself of his equanimity, as was manifested
by the doleful ejaculations, which he made from time to time, on the too
great probability, or even certainty, of their missing the flood-tide.
By degrees, however, his wrath subsided; he wiped his brows, relaxed his
frown, and, undoing the parcel in his hand, produced his folio, on which
he gazed from time to time with the knowing look of an amateur, admiring
its height and condition, and ascertaining, by a minute and individual
inspection of each leaf, that the volume was uninjured and entire
from title-page to colophon. His fellow-traveller took the liberty
of inquiring the subject of his studies. He lifted up his eyes with
something of a sarcastic glance, as if he supposed the young querist
would not relish, or perhaps understand, his answer, and pronounced
the book to be Sandy Gordon's Itinerarium Septentrionale,* a book
illustrative of the Roman remains in Scotland.

* Note B. Sandy Gordon's Itinerarium.

The querist, unappalled by this learned title, proceeded to put
several questions, which indicated that he had made good use of a good
education, and, although not possessed of minute information on the
subject of antiquities, had yet acquaintance enough with the classics to
render him an interested and intelligent auditor when they were enlarged
upon. The elder traveller, observing with pleasure the capacity of
his temporary companion to understand and answer him, plunged, nothing
loath, into a sea of discussion concerning urns, vases, votive, altars,
Roman camps, and the rules of castrametation.

The pleasure of this discourse had such a dulcifying tendency, that,
although two causes of delay occurred, each of much more serious
duration than that which had drawn down his wrath upon the unlucky Mrs.
Macleuchar, our =Antiquary= only bestowed on the delay the honour of
a few episodical poohs and pshaws, which rather seemed to regard the
interruption of his disquisition than the retardation of his journey.

The first of these stops was occasioned by the breaking of a spring,
which half an hour's labour hardly repaired. To the second, the
Antiquary was himself accessory, if not the principal cause of it; for,
observing that one of the horses had cast a fore-foot shoe, he apprized
the coachman of this important deficiency. "It's Jamie Martingale that
furnishes the naigs on contract, and uphauds them," answered John, "and
I am not entitled to make any stop, or to suffer prejudice by the like
of these accidents."

"And when you go to--I mean to the place you deserve to go to, you
scoundrel,--who do you think will uphold you on contract? If you don't
stop directly and carry the poor brute, to the next smithy, I'll have
you punished, if there's a justice of peace in Mid-Lothian;" and,
opening the coach-door, out he jumped, while the coachman obeyed his
orders, muttering, that "if the gentlemen lost the tide now, they could
not say but it was their ain fault, since he was willing to get on."

I like so little to analyze the complication of the causes which
influence actions, that I will not venture to ascertain whether our
Antiquary's humanity to the poor horse was not in some degree aided by
his desire of showing his companion a Pict's camp, or Round-about,
a subject which he had been elaborately discussing, and of which a
specimen, "very curious and perfect indeed," happened to exist about a
hundred yards distant from the spot where this interruption took place.
But were I compelled to decompose the motives of my worthy friend (for
such was the gentleman in the sober suit, with powdered wig and slouched
hat), I should say, that, although he certainly would not in any case
have suffered the coachman to proceed while the horse was unfit for
service, and likely to suffer by being urged forward, yet the man of
whipcord escaped some severe abuse and reproach by the agreeable mode
which the traveller found out to pass the interval of delay.

So much time was consumed by these interruptions of their journey, that
when they descended the hill above the Hawes (for so the inn on the
southern side of the Queensferry is denominated), the experienced eye
of the Antiquary at once discerned, from the extent of wet sand, and
the number of black stones and rocks, covered with sea-weed, which were
visible along the skirts of the shore, that the hour of tide was past.
The young traveller expected a burst of indignation; but whether, as
Croaker says in "The Good-natured Man," our hero had exhausted himself
in fretting away his misfortunes beforehand, so that he did not feel
them when they actually arrived, or whether he found the company in
which he was placed too congenial to lead him to repine at anything
which delayed his journey, it is certain that he submitted to his lot
with much resignation.

"The d--l's in the diligence and the old hag, it belongs to!--Diligence,
quoth I? Thou shouldst have called it the Sloth--Fly, quoth she? why, it
moves like a fly through a glue-pot, as the Irishman says. But, however,
time and tide tarry for no man, and so, my young friend, we'll have a
snack here at the Hawes, which is a very decent sort of a place,
and I'll be very happy to finish the account I was giving you of the
difference between the mode of entrenching castra stativa and castra
aestiva, things confounded by too many of our historians. Lack-a-day, if
they had ta'en the pains to satisfy their own eyes, instead of following
each other's blind guidance!--Well! we shall be pretty comfortable at the
Hawes; and besides, after all, we must have dined somewhere, and it will
be pleasanter sailing with the tide of ebb and the evening breeze."

In this Christian temper of making the best of all occurrences, our
travellers alighted at the Hawes.




CHAPTER SECOND.

              Sir, they do scandal me upon the road here!
                A poor quotidian rack of mutton roasted
                Dry to be grated! and that driven down
