greater than that which they felt in the songs and legends of the
bards.

Beric generally chose stories relating to periods when Rome was
hardly pressed by her foes, showing how the intense feeling of
patriotism, and the obstinate determination to resist, in spite of
all dangers, upon the part of the population, and the discipline
and dogged valour of the soldiers, saved her from destruction. He
was cautious to draw no parallel openly to the case of Britain.
He knew that the Romans were made acquainted, by traitors in their
pay, with much that passed among the native tribes, and that at
first they were sure to interest themselves in his proceedings. At
present there could be no thought of a rising, and the slightest
sign of disaffection might bring disaster and ruin upon his tribe.
Only when some unexpected event, some invasion of the rights of
the Britons even more flagrant than those that had hitherto taken
place, should stir the smouldering fire of discontent, and fan it
into a fierce flame of revolt from end to end of Britain, could
success be hoped for.

No Roman could have found fault with Beric's relation of their
prowess or their valour; for he held them up to the admiration
of his hearers. "No wonder Rome is great and powerful," he said,
"when its people evince so deep a love of country, so resolute
a determination in the face of their enemies, so unconquerable a
spirit when misfortune weighs upon them."

To the men he addressed all this was new. It was true that a few
princes and chiefs had visited Rome, occasionally as travellers
desiring to see the centre of her greatness, more often as exiles
driven from Britain by defeat in civil strife, but these had only
brought back great tales of Rome's magnificence, and the Britons
knew nothing of the history of the invaders, and eagerly listened
to the stories that Beric had learned from their books in the course
of his studies. The report of his stories spread so far that visits
were paid to the village of Parta by chiefs and leading men from
other sections of the Iceni to listen to them.

Oratory was among the Britons, as among most primitive tribes,
highly prized and much cultivated. Oral tradition among such peoples
takes the place of books among civilized nations. Story and legend
are handed down from father to son, and the wandering bard is a
most welcome guest. Next only to valour oratory sways and influences
the minds of the people, and a Ulysses had greater influence than
an Ajax. From his earliest childhood Beric had listened to the
stories and legends told by bards in the rough palace of his father,
and his sole schooling before he went to Camalodunum had been
to learn these by heart, and to repeat them with due emphasis and
appropriate gesture. His father had been one of the most eloquent
and influential of the chiefs of the Iceni, and had early impressed
upon him the importance of cultivating the power of speech.

His studies in Roman history, too, had taught him the power
exercised by men with the gift of moving multitudes by their words;
he had learned from books how clearly and distinctly events could
be described by a careful choice of words, and attention to form
and expression, so that almost unconsciously to himself he had
practised the art in his relations of the tales and legends of
British history to Berenice and her mother. Thus, then, the manner
no less than the matter of his recitals of Roman story, gained him a
high estimation among his hearers, and he was already looked upon
as a young chief likely to rise to a very high position among
the Iceni. Among the common herd his glowing laudations of Roman
patriotism, devotion, and sacrifice, caused him to be regarded with
disfavour, and the epithet "the Roman" was frequently applied to
him. But the wiser spirits saw the hidden meaning of his stories,
and that, while holding up the Romans as an example, he was endeavouring
to teach how much can be done by patriotism, by a spirit of self
sacrifice, and by unity against a common foe. Parta was also proud
of the congratulations that distinguished chiefs, famed for their
wisdom throughout the tribe, offered to her on the occasion of
their visits.

"Beric will be a great chief," one of the wisest of these said
to her; "truly his sojourn among the Romans has done great things
for him. It would be well, indeed, if every noble youth throughout
the island were to have such schooling, if he had your son's wit
in taking advantage of it. He will be a great orator; never among
our bards have I heard narrations so clear and so well delivered;
although the deeds he praises are those of our oppressors, one
cannot but feel a thrill of enthusiasm as he tells them. Yea, for
the moment I myself felt half a Roman when he told us of the brave
youth who thrust his hand into the flames, and suffered it to be
consumed in order to impress the invader with a knowledge of the
spirit that animated the Romans, and of the three men who held
against a host the bridge that their friends were breaking down
behind them.

"If he could stir me thus by his tales of the deeds of our enemies,
what will it be when some day he makes the heroes of Britain his
theme, and calls upon his countrymen to imitate their deeds! I have
heard him called 'the Roman,' Parta. Now that I have listened to
him I know that he will, when the time comes, be one of Rome's most
formidable foes. I will tell you now that Prasutagus, our king,
and his queen Boadicea, spoke to me about Beric, and begged me to
come hither to see for myself this youth of whom they had heard
reports from others, some saying that he had returned a Roman
heart and soul, while others affirmed that, while he had learned
much from them, he had forgotten nothing of the injuries he had
received at their hands in the death of his father, and the disaster
of the tribe. I shall know now what to tell them. To Prasutagus,
whose fear of the Romans is even greater than his hatred for them,
I shall say that the lad is full of the glories of Roman story,
and that there is no fear of his doing or saying aught that will
excite the anger or suspicion of the Romans. To Boadicea, who hates
the Romans far more than she fears them, I shall tell the truth,
and shall inform her that when the time comes, as assuredly it some
day will, that the Iceni are called upon to defend their liberties
against Rome, in Beric she will find a champion of whom I predict
that he will be worthy to take his place in our history by the
side of Caractacus and Cassivelaunus. May our gods avert that, like
them, he fall a victim to British treachery!"

After leaving Boduoc, Beric crossed the bridge built by the Romans
over the Stour, and entered the city. Camalodunum was the chief
seat of the Roman power in England. Although but so short a time
had elapsed since Claudius had occupied it, it was already a large
city. A comparatively small proportion, however, was Roman work, but
all bore the impress of Roman art and civilization, for Cunobeline,
whose capital it had been, was a highly enlightened king, and had
introduced Roman ways and methods among his people. Men instructed
in their arts and architecture had been largely employed in the
building of the town, and its edifices would have borne comparison
with those in minor towns in the Roman provinces.

The conquerors, therefore, found much of their work done for them.
The original possessors of the houses and of the highly cultivated
lands lying round the town were ejected wholesale, and the Romans,
establishing themselves in their abodes and farms, then proceeded
to add to, embellish, and fortify the town. The 2nd, 9th, and 14th
Legions were selected by Claudius to found what was called the
colony, and to take possession of the surrounding country. Plautius
was appointed propraetor, or governor, and establishing himself in
the royal palace of Cunobeline, his first step was to protect the
city from renewed attacks by the Britons. He accordingly erected
vast works to the westward of the town, extending from the sea
to the river, by which means he not only protected the city from
attack, but gained, in case of an assault by overpowering numbers,
the means of retiring safely to Mersea Island, lying a short distance
from the shore.

A council house and a tribunal were erected for the Roman magistrates;
temples, a theatre, and baths raised. The civilian population
increased rapidly. Architects, artists, and musicians, decorators,
skilled artisans, and traders were attracted from the mainland to
the rising city, which rapidly increased in wealth and importance.
Conspicuous on the most elevated position stood a temple erected to
the honour of Claudius, who was raised by the grateful legionaries
to divine rank. So strong and populous was the city that the
Trinobantes, during the years that had elapsed since the Romans
took possession of it, remained passive under the yoke of their
oppressors, and watched, without attempting to take part in them,
the rising of the Iceni and Brigantes, the long and desperate war
of the Silures and Ordovices under Caractacus, and the reduction
of the Belgae and Dumnonii from Hampshire to Cornwall by Vespasian.
Yet, had their spirit remained unbroken, there was an opportunity
for revenge, for a large part of the veteran legionaries had been
withdrawn to take part in the struggle against the western tribes.
The tribe had, however, been disarmed, and with Camalodunum on the
north, and the rising towns of London and Verulamium on the south,
they were cut off from other tribes, and could not hope for final
success, unless the powerful Iceni, who were still semi-independent,
rose in the national cause. Whether their easy defeat of this tribe
soon after the occupation of Camalodunum had rendered the Romans
contemptuous of their fighting powers, or that they deemed it wiser
to subdue the southwest and west of England, and to strike a heavy
blow at the Brigantes to the north before interfering with a powerful
tribe so close to their doors, is uncertain; but doubtless they
felt that so long as Prasutagus reigned there was little fear of
trouble in that quarter, as that king protested himself the friend
and ally of Rome, and occupied himself wholly in acquiring wealth
and adding to his personal possessions.

The scene in Camalodunum was a familiar one to Beric. The streets
were thronged with people. Traders from Gaul and Italy, Roman
artisans and workmen, haughty legionaries with shield and helmet,
civil officials, Greek players, artists and decorators, native
tribesmen, with the products of their fields or the spoils of the
chase, walking with humble mien; and shopkeepers sitting at the open
fronts of their houses, while their slaves called the attention of
passersby to the merits of the goods. Here were the rich products
of Eastern looms, there the cloths and linen of Rome, further on a
smith's shop in full work, beyond that a silversmith's, next door
to which was a thriving trader who sold unguents and perfumes, dyes
for the ladies' cheeks and pigments for their eyebrows, dainty
requisites for the toilette, and perfumed soap. Bakers and butchers,
vendors of fish and game, of fruit, of Eastern spices and flavourings
abounded.

Druggists and dealers in dyes for clothing and in the pigments used
in wall decorations and paintings were also to be found; and, in
fact, this Roman capital of a scarcely subjugated country contained
all the appliances for luxury and comfort that could be found in
the cities of the civilized provinces.

The only shops at which Beric paused were those of the armourers
and of the scribes, at some of which were exhibited vellums with
the writings of the Greek and Roman poets and historians; and
Beric muttered to himself, "If I am ever present at the sack of
Camalodunum these shall be my share of the spoil, and I fancy that
no one is likely to dispute their possession with me."

But he did not linger long. Boduoc would be waiting for him, and
he could not hurry over his visit, the first he had paid since
his absence; therefore he pushed on, with scarce a glance at the
stately temple of Claudius, the magnificent baths or other public
buildings, until he arrived at the villa of Caius Muro, which stood
somewhat beyond the more crowded part of the town.



CHAPTER II: CITY AND FOREST


The house of Caius Muro had been built six years before on the model
of one owned by him in the Tuscan hills. Passing through the hall
or vestibule, with its mosaic pavement, on which was the word of
welcome, "Salve!" Beric entered the atrium, the principal apartment
in the house. From each side, at a height of some twenty feet from
the ground, extended a roof, the fall being slightly to the centre,
where there was an aperture of about eight feet square. Through this
light and air made their way down to the apartment, the rainfall
from the roofs and opening falling into a marble tank, called
the impluvium, below the level of the floor, which was paved with
squares of coloured marble. On either side of the atrium were the
small sleeping chambers, the bed places being raised and covered
with thick mats and rugs.

The walls of the bed chambers as well as of the atrium were painted
in black, with figures and landscapes in colour. On the centre of
the side facing the vestibule was the tablinum, the apartment of
Caius Muro himself. This formed his sitting room and study. The
floor was raised about a foot above that of the atrium, and it was
partly open both on that side and on the other, looking into the
peristylium, so that, while at work, he commanded a view of all that
was going on in the atrium and in the courtyard. In the centre of
this was a fountain surrounded by plants. From the courtyard opened
the triclinium, or dining room, and also rooms used as storerooms,
kitchen, and the sleeping places of the slaves.

At the back of the peristylium was the oecus, or state apartment,
where Caius received distinguished guests, and where, in the
lifetime of Julia, entertainments were given to the ladies of the
colony. Like the triclinium, this room was also partially open at
both ends, affording the guests a view of the graceful fountain
on the one side and of the garden on the other. In winter wooden
frames, with heavy hangings, were erected across these openings
and that of the tablinum, for the Romans soon found the necessity
for modifying the arrangements which, although well suited for an
Italian climate, were wholly unfit for that of Britain. The opening
in the centre of the atrium was then closed with an awning of
oiled canvas, which admitted a certain amount of light to pass,
but prevented the passage of rain and snow, and kept out much of
the cold. There was a narrow passage between the atrium and the
peristylium; this was called the fauces. Above the chambers round
the atrium was a second story, approached by a staircase from the
peristylium; here were the apartments of the ladies and of the
female slaves.

As Beric entered the atrium, a man, who was reading a roll of
parchment, rose to his feet.

"Welcome, Beric!" he said warmly.

"All hail, preceptor!" the lad replied. "Are all well here?"

"All well, Beric. We had looked to see you before, and Berenice
has been constantly asking me when you were coming."

"I had been absent over four years, you see," Beric replied, "and
it was not easy to get away from home again. Now I must speak to
Caius." He crossed the apartment, and stood at the entrance to the
tablinum. Caius looked up from a military treatise he was perusing.

"Ah, Beric! it is you! I am glad to see you again, though I am
sorry to observe that you have abandoned our fashions and taken to
the native garb again."

"It was necessary, Caius," Beric said. "I should have lost all
influence with the tribe had I not laid aside my Roman dress. As it
is, they regard me with some doubt, as one too enamoured of Roman
customs."

"We have heard of you, Beric, and, indeed, report says that you
speak well of us, and are already famous for your relations of our
history."

"I thought it well that my countrymen should know your great deeds,"
Beric said, "and should see by what means you have come to rule
the world. I received nought but kindness at your hands, and no
prisoner's lot was ever made more easy than mine. To you and yours
I am deeply grateful. If your people all behaved as kindly towards
the natives of this country as you did to me, Britain would be
conquered without need of drawing sword from scabbard."

"I know not that, Beric; to rule, one should be strong as well
as kind. Still, as you know, I think that things might have been
arranged far less harshly than they have been. It was needful that
we should show ourselves to be masters; but I regret the harshness
that has been too often used, and I would that not one of us here,
from the governor down to the poorest soldier, was influenced by a
desire for gain, but that each was animated, as he assuredly should
be, only by a desire to uphold the glory and power of Rome. But
that would be expecting too much from human nature, and even among
you there are plenty ready to side against their countrymen for the
sake of Roman gold. In that they have less excuse than we. Custom
and habit have made our wants many, and all aim at attaining the
luxuries of the rich. On the other hand, your wants are few, and
I see not that the piling up of wealth adds in any way to your
happiness."

"That is true, Caius. I quite agree with you that it is far more
excusable for a Roman to covet wealth than for a Briton; and while
I blame many officials and soldiers for the harshness with which
they strive to wring all their possessions from my countrymen, I
deem their conduct as worthy and honourable when compared with that
of Britons who sell their country for your gold."

"We must take the world as we find it, Beric. We may regret that
greed and the love of luxury should influence men, as we may grieve
that they are victims of other base passions; but it is of no use
quarrelling with human nature. Certain it is that all vices bring
their own punishment, and that the Romans were a far nobler race
when they were poor and simple, in the days of the early consuls,
than they are now, with all their power, their riches, and their
luxuries. Such is the history of all peoples--of Egypt, of Persia,
of Greece, and Carthage; and methinks that Rome, too, will run the
course of other nations, and that some day, far distant maybe, she
will sink beneath the weight of her power and her luxury, and that
some younger and more vigorous people will, bit by bit, wrest her
dominions from her and rule in her place.

"As yet, happily, I see no signs of failing in her powers. She is
still vigorous, and even in the distant outskirts of the empire
the wave of conquest flows onward. Happily for us, I think, it can
flow no farther this way; there is but one island beyond this to
conquer, and then, as in Western Gaul and Iberia, the ocean says
to Rome, 'Thou shalt go no farther.' Would that to the south, the
east, and north a similar barrier checked our progress, then we
could rest and be content, and need no longer waste our strength
in fresh conquests, or in opposing the incursions of hordes of
barbarians from regions unknown to us even by report. I could wish
myself, Beric, that nature had placed your island five days' sail
from the coasts of Gaul, instead of placing it within sight. Then
I might have been enjoying life in my villa among the Tuscan hills
with my daughter, instead of being exposed at any moment to march
with the Legion against the savage mountaineers of the west. Ah!
here comes Berenice," he broke off, as his daughter, attended by her
old nurse, entered the atrium from the vestibule. She hastened her
steps as she saw Beric standing before her father in the tablinum.

"I knew you would come back, Beric, because you promised me; but
you have been a long time in keeping your word."

"I am not my own master at home, any more than I was here, Berenice,"
he said, "and my mother would not hear before of my leaving her. I
have only come now for an hour's visit, to see that all goes well
in this house, and to tell you that I had not forgotten my promise;
the next time I hope to pay a longer visit. At daybreak tomorrow
we have a party to hunt the wolves, which have so multiplied as to
become a danger in the forests of late."

"I should like to go out to see a wolf hunt, Beric."

"I fear that would not be possible," he said; "the woods are thick
and tangled, and we have to force our way through to get to their
lair."

"But last winter they came close to the town, and I heard that some
came even into the streets."

"Yes, they will do so when driven by hunger; but they were hunting
then and not being hunted. No, Berenice, I fear that your wish to
see a wolf hunt cannot be gratified; they are savage beasts, and
are great trouble and no loss to us. In winter they carry off many
children, and sometimes devour grown up people, and in times of
long snow have been known to attack large parties, and, in spite
of a stout resistance by the men, to devour them. In summer they
are only met singly, but in winter they go in packs and kill numbers
of our cattle."

"I should like to go into the woods," the girl said earnestly, "I
am tired of this town. My father says he will take me with him some
day when he goes west, but so far I have seen nothing except this
town and Verulamium, and the country was all just as it is here,
fields and cultivation. We could see the forests in the distance,
but that was all. My father says, that if we went west, we should
travel for miles through the forest and should sleep in tents, but
that we cannot do it till everything is quiet and peaceful. Oh,
Beric! I do wish the Britons would not be always fighting."

Beric smiled. "The British girls, Berenice, say they wish the Romans
would not be always fighting."

"It is very troublesome," she said pettishly. "I should like
everyone to be friends, and then there would be no need to have so
many soldiers in Britain, and perhaps the emperor would order our
legions home. Father says that we ought to look upon this as home
now, for that the legion may remain here for years and years; but
he said the other day that he thought that if everything was quiet
here he should, when I am sixteen years old, obtain leave from the
governor, and go back to Rome for two or three years, and I think,
though he has not said so outright, that he will perhaps retire
and settle there."

"It would be much the best for you," Beric said earnestly. "I should be
sorry, because you have been very kind to me, and I should grieve
were you to leave me altogether; but there may be trouble here
again some day, and I think it would be far better for you to be
back in Rome, where you would have all the pleasures and delights
of the great capital, and live in ease and comfort, without the
risk of your father having to march away to the wars. I know that
if I were your father I would take you back. He says that his villa
there is exactly like this, and you have many relations there,
and there must be all sorts of pleasures and grand spectacles far
beyond anything there is here. I am sure it would be better for
you, and happier."

"I thought that you would be quite sorry," she said gravely.

"So I shall be very sorry for myself," Beric said; "as, next to
my own mother, there is no one I care for so much as you and your
father. I shall miss you terribly; but yet I am so sure that it
would be best for you to be at home with your own people, that I
should be glad to hear that your father was going to take you back
to Rome."

But Berenice did not altogether accept the explanation. She felt
really hurt that Beric should view even the possibility of her
going away with equanimity, and she very shortly went off to her
own apartment; while a few minutes later, Beric, after bidding
goodbye to Caius, started to rejoin Boduoc, whom he found waiting
at the edge of the forest.

That evening Berenice said to her father, "I was angry with Beric
today, father."

"Were you, child? what about?"

"I told him that perhaps in another three years, when I was sixteen,
you would take me to Rome, and that I thought, perhaps, if we went
there you would not come back again; and instead of being very
much grieved, as I thought he would, he seemed quite pleased at the
idea. Of course he said he was sorry, but he did not really seem
to be, and he says he thought it would be very much better for me.
I thought he was grateful, father, and liked us very much, and now
I am quite disappointed in him."

Caius was silent for a minute or two.

"I do not think Beric is ungrateful," he said, "and I am sure that
he likes us, Berenice."

"He said he did, father, that he cared for us more than anyone except
his mother; but if he cared for us, surely he would be very, very
sorry for us to go away."

"Beric is a Briton, my dear, and we are Romans. By this time he
must have thoroughly learned his people's feelings towards us. I
have never believed, as some do, that Britain is as yet completely
conquered, and that when we have finished with the Silures in the
west our work will be completely done.

"Beric, who knows his countrymen, may feel this even more strongly
than I do, and may know that, sooner or later, there will be another
great effort on the part of the Britons to drive us out. It may be
a year, and it may be twenty, but I believe myself that some day we
shall have a fierce struggle to maintain our hold here, and Beric,
who may see this also, and who knows the feeling of his countrymen,
may wish that we should be away before the storm comes.

"There is but little doubt, Berenice, that we despise these people
too much, still less that we treat them harshly and cruelly. Were
I propraetor of Britain, I would rule them differently. I am but the
commander of a legion, and my duty is but to rule my men. I would
punish, and punish sternly, all attempts at rising; but I would
give them no causes for discontent. We treat them as if their spirit
were altogether broken, as if they and their possessions were but
our chattels, as if they possessed no rights, not even the right to
live. Some day we shall find our mistake, and when the time comes
the awakening will be a rude one. It is partly because I see dimly
the storm gathering in the distance that I long to be home again.
As long as your mother lived this seemed a home to me, now I desire
rest and quiet. I have done my share of fighting, I have won honour
enough, and I may look before long to be a general; but I have
had enough of it, and long for my quiet villa in the Alban hills,
with an occasional visit to Rome, where you can take part in its
gaieties, and I can have the use of the libraries stored with the
learning of the world. So do not think harshly of Beric, my child;
he may see the distant storm more plainly than I do. I am sure that
he cares for us, and if he is glad at the news that we are going,
it is because he wishes us away and in safety before the trouble
comes.

"Nero has come to the imperial throne, and the men he is sending
hither are of a widely different stamp from the lieutenants of
Claudius. The latter knew that the Britons can fight, and that, wild
and untutored as they are, it needed all the skill and courage of
Ostorius and Vespasian to reduce them to order. The newcomers regard
them as slaves to be trampled upon, robbed, and ill used as they
choose. I am sure they will find their mistake. As long as they
