
[Sidenote:--18--] Other excellent men, also, had come to light during that
period, of whom the most distinguished were Turbo and Similis, who,
indeed, were honored with statues.

Turbo was a man of great qualities as a general, who had become prefect
(or commander of the Pretorians). He committed no act of luxury or
haughtiness, but lived like one of the multitude: the entire day he spent
in proximity to the palace and often he would go there even shortly before
midnight, when some of the others were beginning to sleep. A
characteristic anecdote is that which brings in the name of Cornelius
Fronto, at this time reputed to be the foremost Roman advocate in
lawsuits. One evening very late he was returning home from dinner and
ascertained from a man whose counsel he had promised to be that Turbo was
holding court. Accordingly, just as he was, in his dress for dinner, he
went into his courtroom and greeted him not with the morning salutation,
_I wish you joy_, but with that belonging to the evening, _I trust
your health continues good_.

Turbo was never seen at home in the daytime even when he was sick; and to
Hadrian, who advised him to remain quiet, he replied: "The prefect ought
to die on his feet."

[Sidenote:--19--] Similis, who was of greater age and more advanced rank,
in character was second to none of the great men, I think. Very slight
things may serve us as evidence. When he was centurion, Trajan had
summoned him to enter his presence before the prefects, whereupon he said:
"It is a shame for you, Caesar, to be talking with a centurion, while the
prefects stand outside." And he took unwillingly at that time the command
of the Pretorians, and after taking it resigned it. Having with difficulty
secured his release he spent the rest of his life, seven years, quietly in
the country, and upon his tomb he had this inscription placed: "Similis
lies here, who existed so-and-so many years, but lived for seven."

Julius (?) Fabius (?), not being able to endure his
son's effeminacy, desired to throw himself into the river.

[Sidenote: A.D. 138 (a.u. 891)] [Sidenote:--20--] Hadrian became
consumptive as a result of the great loss of blood, and that led to
dropsy. And as it happened that Lucius Commodus was suddenly removed from
the scene by the outgushing of a large quantity of blood all at once, he
convened at his house the foremost and most renowned of the senators; and
lying on a couch he spoke to them as follows: "I, my friends, was not
permitted by nature to secure offspring, but you have made it possible by
legal enactment. There is this difference between the two ways,--that a
begotten son turns out to be whatever sort of person Heaven pleases,
whereas one that is adopted a man takes to himself because he chooses just
that sort of being. Thus in process of nature a maimed and [Sidenote: A.D.
138 (a.u. 891)] senseless creature is often given to a parent, but by
process of voluntary decision one of sound body and sound mind is certain
to be selected. For this cause I formerly chose out Lucius from among all,
a person of such attainments as I could never have prayed to find in a
child. But since the Heavenly Power has taken him from among us, I have
found an emperor in his place whom I now give you, one who is noble, mild,
tractable, prudent, neither young enough to do anything reckless nor old
enough to neglect aught,--one brought up according to the laws, who has
held possession of authority according to his country's traditions, so
that he is not ignorant of any matters pertaining to his office, but can
handle them all effectively. I refer to Aurelius Antoninus here. Although
I know him to be the most retiring of men and to be far from desiring any
such thing, still I do not think that he will deliberately disregard
either me or you but will accept the office even against his will."

[Sidenote:--21--] So it was that Antoninus became emperor. Since he was
destitute of male children, Hadrian adopted for him Commodus's son
Commodus and, moreover, besides the latter, Marcus Annius Verus; for he
wished to appoint those who were afterwards to be emperors for as long a
time ahead as possible. (This Marcus Annius, earlier named Catilius, was a
grandson of Annius Verus who had thrice been consul and prefect of the
city). And though Hadrian urged Antoninus to adopt them both, he preferred
Verus on account of his kinship and his age and because he already
exhibited an extremely strong cast of mind. This led him to apply to the
young man the name Verissimus, with a play upon the meaning of the Latin
word.

[Sidenote:--22--] By certain charms and species of magic Hadrian was
relieved of the water, but shortly was full of it again. Since, therefore,
he was constantly growing worse and might be said to be slowly perishing
day by day, he began to long for death. Often he would ask for poison and
a sword, but no one would give them to him. As no one would obey him,
although he promised money and immunity, he sent for Mastor, an Iazygian
barbarian that had become a captive, whom he had employed in hunts on
account of his strength and daring. Then, partly by threatening him and
partly by making promises, he compelled the man to undertake the duty of
killing him. He drew a colored line around a spot beneath the nipple that
had been shown him by Hermogenes the physician, in order that he might
there be struck a finishing blow and perish painlessly. But even this plan
did not succeed, for Mastor became afraid of the project and in terror
withdrew. The emperor lamented bitterly the plight in which the disease
had placed him and bitterly his powerlessness, in that he was not able to
make away with himself, though he might still, even when so near death,
destroy anybody else. Finally he abandoned his careful regimen and through
using unsuitable foods and drinks met his death, saying and shouting aloud
the popular saying: "Many physicians have ruined a king."

[Sidenote:--23--] He had lived sixty-two years, five months and nineteen
[Footnote: Seventeen, according to the common tradition.] days, and had
been emperor twenty years and eleven months. He was buried near the river
itself, close to the Aelian bridge; that was where he had prepared his
tomb, for the one belonging to Augustus was full and no other body was
deposited there.

This emperor was hated [by the people, in spite of his excellent reign] on
account of the early and the late murders, since they had been unjustly
and impiously brought about. Yet he had so little of a bloodthirsty
disposition that even in the case of some who took pains to thwart him he
deemed it sufficient to write to their native lands the bare statement
that they did not please him. And if any man who had children was
absolutely obliged to receive punishment, still, in proportion to the
number of his children he would also lighten the penalty imposed.
[Notwithstanding, the senate persisted for a long time in its refusal to
vote him divine honors, and in its strictures upon some of those who had
committed excesses during his reign and had been honored therefor, when
they ought to have been chastised.]

After Hadrian's death there was erected to him a huge equestrian statue
representing him with a four-horse team. It was so large that the bulkiest
man could walk through the eye of each horse, yet because of the extreme
height of the monument persons passing along on the ground below are wont
to think that the horses themselves as well as Hadrian are very small.




DIO'S ROMAN HISTORY
70

Antoninus Pius, succeeding by adoption, effects the deification of Hadrian
(chapter 1).

The cognomen Pius is bestowed upon Antoninus by the senate (chapter 2).

He showed little hostility toward the Christians: was careful in trifles:
met a quiet death in old age (chapter 3).

Earthquake that damaged Bithynia, the Hellespontine region, and especially
Cyzicus (chapter 4).

He is compared with Numa: his gentleness and kindliness (chapter 5).

He was intent upon justice, not upon enlarging the empire: hence the
barbarians brought their quarrels to him to settle (chapters 6, 7).


DURATION OF TIME.

Camerinus, Niger. (A.D. 138 = a.u. 891 = First of Antoninus, from July
10th).

Antoninus Pius Aug. (II), Bruttius Praesens. (A.D. 139 = a.u. 892 = Second
of Antoninus).

Antoninus Pius Aug. (III), Aurelius Caesar (II). (A.D. 140 = a.u. 893 =
Third of Antoninus).

M. Peducaeus Sylloga Priscinus, T. Hoenius Severus. (A.D. 141 = a.u. 894 =
Fourth of Antoninus).

L. Cuspius Rufinus, L. Statius Quadratus. (A.D. 142 = a.u. 895 = Fifth of
Antoninus).

C. Bellicius Torquatus, Tib. Claudius Atticus Herodes. (A.D. 143 = a.u.
896 = Sixth of Antoninus).

Avitus, Maximus. (A.D. 144 = a.u. 897 = Seventh of Antoninus).

Antoninus Pius Aug. (IV), M. Aurelius Caesar (II). (A.D. 145 = a.u. 898 =
Eighth of Antoninus).

Sex. Erucius Clarus (II), Cn. Claudius Severus. (A.D. 146 = a.u. 899 =
Ninth of Antoninus).

Largus, Messalinus. (A.D. 147 = a.u. 900 = Tenth of Antoninus).

L. Torquatus (III), C. Iulianus Vetus. (A.D. 148 = a.u. 901 = Eleventh of
Antoninus). Sergius Scipio Orfitus, Q. Nonius Priscus. (A.D. 149 = a.u.
902 = Twelfth of Antoninus).

Gallicanus, Vetus. (A.D. 150 = a.u. 903 = Thirteenth of Antoninus).

Quintilius Condianus, Quintilius Maximus. (A.D. 151 = a.u. 904 =
Fourteenth of Antoninus).

M.' Acilius Glabrio, M. Valerius Homullus. (A.D. 152 = a.u. 905 =
Fifteenth of Antoninus).

C. Bruttius Praesens, A. Iunius Rufinus. (A.D. 153 = a.u. 906 = Sixteenth
of Antoninus).

L. Ael. Aurelius Commodus, T. Sextius Lateranus. (A.D. 154 = a.u. 907 =
Seventeenth of Antoninus).

C. Iulius Severus, M. Rufinius Sabinianus. (A.D. 155 = a.u. 908 =
Eighteenth of Antoninus).

M. Ceionius Silvanus, C. Serius Augurinus. (A.D. 158 = a.u. 909 =
Nineteenth of Antoninus).

Barbaras, Regulus. (A.D. 157 = a.u. 910 = Twentieth of Antoninus).

Tertullus, Sacerdos. (A.D. 158 = a.u. 911 = Twenty-first of Antoninus).

Plautius Quintilius, Statius Priscus. (A.D. 159 = a.u. 912 = Twenty-second
of Antoninus).

T. Clodius Vibius Varus, App. Annius Atilius Bradua. (A.D. 160 = a.u. 913
= Twenty-third of Antoninus).

M. Ael. Aurelius Verus Caesar (III), I. Ael. Aurelius Commodus (II). (A.D.
161 = a.u. 914 = Twenty-fourth of Antoninus, to March 7th).


I. From Dio:

[Sidenote: A.D. 138 (a.u. 891)] [Sidenote:--1--] It should be noted that
information about Antoninus Pius is not found in the copies of Dio,
probably because the books have met with some accident, so that the
history of his reign is almost wholly unknown, save that when Lucius
Commodus, whom Hadrian had adopted, died before Hadrian, Antoninus was
also adopted by him and became emperor, and that when the senate demurred
to giving heroic honors to Hadrian after his demise on account of certain
murders of eminent men, Antoninus addressed many words to them with tears
and laments, and finally said: "I will not govern you either, if he has
become base and inimical and a national foe in your eyes. For you will of
course be annulling all his acts, of which my adoption was one." On
hearing this the senate both through respect for the man and through a
certain fear of the soldiers bestowed the honors upon Hadrian.

[Sidenote:--2--] Only this in regard to Antoninus is preserved in Dio.
Yes, one thing more--that the senate gave him the titles both of Augustus
and of Pius for some such reason as the following. When in the beginning
of his imperial reign many men were accused and some of them had been
interceded for by name, he nevertheless punished no one, saying: "I must
not begin my career of supervision with such deeds."

[Sidenote: LXIX, 15, 3] [When Pharasmanes the Iberian came to Rome with
his wife, he increased his domain, allowed him to offer sacrifice on the
Capitoline, set up a statue of him on horseback in the temple of Bellona,
and viewed an exercise in arms of the chieftain, his son, and the other
prominent Iberians.]

[Sidenote: A.D. 139 (a.u. 892)] We do not find preserved, either, the
first part of the account of Marcus Verus, who ruled after Antoninus and
all that the latter himself did in the case of Lucius, son of Commodus,
whom Marcus made his son-in-law, and all that Lucius accomplished when
sent by his father to the war against Vologaesus. I shall speak briefly
about these matters, gathering my material from other books, and then I
shall go back to the continuation of Dio's narrative.

II. From Xiphilinus:

[Sidenote: LXX, 3] [Sidenote: A.D. 153 (a.u. 906)] Antoninus is admitted
by all to have been noble and good, not oppressive to the Christians nor
severe to any of his other subjects; instead, he showed the Christians
great respect and added to the honor in which Hadrian had been wont to
hold them. For Eusebius, son of Pamphilus, cites in his Church History
[Footnote: IV, 9.] some letters of Hadrian in which the latter is shown to
threaten terrible vengeance upon those who harm in any way or accuse the
Christians, and to swear by Hercules that they shall receive punishment.

Antoninus is said also to have been of an enquiring turn of mind and not
to have held aloof from careful investigation of even small and
commonplace matters; for this those disposed to scoff called him
Cumminsplitter.

[Sidenote: A.D. 161 (a.u. 914)] Quadratus states that he died at an
advanced age, and that the happiest death befell him, like unto gentlest
slumber.

[Sidenote:(A.D. 177?)] [Sidenote:--4--] In the days of Antoninus also a
most frightful earthquake is said to have occurred in the region of
Bithynia and the Hellespont. Various cities were severely damaged or fell
without a building left standing, and in particular Cyzicus; and the
temple there that was the greatest and most beautiful of all temples was
thrown down. Its columns were four cubits in thickness and fifty cubits in
height, each of a single block of stone; and each of the other features of
the edifice was more to be wondered at than to be praised. Somewhere in
the interior of the country the peak of a mountain rose upwards and surges
of the sea are said to have gushed out, while the spray from pure,
transparent sea-water was driven to a great distance over the land.
[Footnote: Compare also Zonaras V, 12 (p. 80, II. 3-11 Dind).. It is not
certain whether this earthquake properly belongs to the reign of Pius or
that of Marcus. If to the former, it must have occurred between 150 and
155 B.C. See _Hermes_ XXVI, pages 444-446 (Boissevain: _Zonaras
Quelle fuer die Romische Kaisergeschichte von Nerva bis Severus
Alexander_) and XXXII, pages 497-508 (B. Keil: _Kyzikenisches_);
also _Byzantinische Zeitschrift_ I, page 30 ff. (article by de
Boor).]--So much is the account of Antoninus at present extant. He reigned
twenty-four years.

III. Of Dio [or rather of Eutropius, or John of Antioch]. Taken from the
Writings of Suidas.

This prince Antoninus was an excellent man and deserves to be compared
especially with Numa on account of the similarity of his reign to that
king's, just as Trajan was seen to resemble Romulus. The private life that
Antoninus lived was thoroughly excellent and honorable, [Sidenote:--5--]
and in his position as ruler he seemed to be even more excellent and more
prudent. To no one was he harsh or oppressive, but he was gracious and
gentle toward all.

[Sidenote:--6--] In warfare he sought glory rather from an impulse of duty
than from one of gain, and was determined to preserve the borders of the
empire intact rather than to extend them to greater distances. In the
matter of men he appointed to the administration of public affairs, so far
as possible, those who were particularly scrupulous about right conduct,
and he rewarded good officials with the honors that were in his power to
grant, whereas he banished the worthless (though without any harshness)
from the conduct of public affairs.

[Sidenote:--7--] He was admired not alone by those of his own race, but
even by foreigners, as was shown by some of the neighboring barbarians
laying down their arms and permitting the prince to decide their quarrels
by his vote. And whereas he had in the course of his life as a private
citizen amassed a vast amount of money, when he entered upon office he
expended his own abundance upon gifts for the soldiers and for his
friends. To the public treasury he left a great deal of property of all
kinds.




DIO'S ROMAN HISTORY
71
