interest is to prolong the period of tutelage as much as possible.

But to return to Mr. Pennington's letter he complains that there has
been no 'proper trial of any one.' The fault is not ours. India has
consistently and insistently demanded a trial of all the officers
concerned in the crimes against the Punjab.

He next objects to be 'violence' of my language. If truth is violent, I
plead guilty to the charge of violence of language. But I could not,
without doing violence to truth, refrain from using the language, I
have, regarding General Dyer's action. It has been proved out of his own
mouth or hostile witnesses:

(1) That the crowd was unarmed.

(2) That it contained children.

(3) That the 13th was the day of Vaisakhi fair.

(4) That thousands had come to the fair.

(5) That there was no rebellion.

(6) That during the intervening two days before the 'massacre' there was
peace in Amritsar.

(7) That the proclamation of the meeting was made the same day as
General Dyer's proclamation.

(8) That General Dyer's proclamation prohibited not meetings but
processions or gatherings of four men on the streets and not in private
or public places.

(9) That General Dyer ran no risk whether outside or inside the city.

(10) That he admitted himself that many in the crowd did not know
anything of his proclamation.

(11) That he fired without warning the crowd and even after it had
begun to disperse. He fired on the backs of the people who were
in flight.

(12) That the men were practically penned in an enclosure.

In the face of these admitted facts I do call the deed a 'massacre.' The
action amounted not to 'an error of judgment' but its 'paralysis in the
face of fancied danger.'

I am sorry to have to say that Mr. Pennington's notes, which too the
reader will find published elsewhere, betray as much ignorance as
his letter.

Whatever was adopted on paper in the days of Canning was certainly not
translated into action in its full sense. 'Promises made to the ear were
broken to the hope,' was said by a reactionary Viceroy. Military
expenditure has grown enormously since the days of Canning.

The demonstration in favour of General Dyer is practically a myth.

No trace was found of the so-called Danda Fauj dignified by the name of
bludgeon-army by Mr. Pennington. There was no rebel army in Amritsar.
The crown that committed the horrible murders and incendiarism contained
no one community exclusively. The sheet was found posted only in Lahore
and not in Amritsar. Mr. Pennington should moreover have known by this
time that the meeting held on the 13th was held, among other things, for
the purpose of condemning mob excesses. This was brought out at the
Amritsar trial. Those who surrounded him could not stop General Dyer. He
says he made up his mind to shoot in a moment. He consulted nobody. When
the correspondent says that the troops would have objected to being
concerned in 'what might in that case be not unfairly called a
'massacre,' he writes as if he had never lived in India. I wish the
Indian troops had the moral courage to refuse to shoot innocent, unarmed
men in full flight. But the Indian troops have been brought in too
slavish an atmosphere to dare do any such correct act.

I hope Mr. Pennington will not accuse me again of making unverified
assertions because I have not quoted from the books. The evidence is
there for him to use. I can only assure him that the assertions are
based on positive proofs mostly obtained from official sources.

Mr. Pennington wants me to publish an exact account of what happened on
the 10th April. He can find it in the reports, and if he will patiently
go through them he will discover that Sir Michael O'Dwyer and his
officials goaded the people into frenzied fury--a fury which nobody, as
I have already said, has condemned more than I have. The account of the
following days is summed up in one word, _viz._ 'peace' on the part of
the crowd disturbed by indiscriminate arrests, the massacre and the
series of official crimes that followed.

I am prepared to give Mr. Pennington credit for seeking after the truth.
But he has gone about it in the wrong manner. I suggest his reading the
evidence before the Hunter Committee and the Congress Committee. He need
not read the reports. But the evidence will convince him that I have
understated the case against General Dyer.

When however I read his description of himself as "for 12 years Chief
Magistrate of Districts in the South of India before reform, by
assassination and otherwise, became so fashionable." I despair of his
being able to find the truth. An angry or a biased man renders himself
incapable of finding it. And Mr. Pennington is evidently both angry and
biased. What does he mean by saying, "before reform by assassination and
otherwise became so fashionable?" It ill becomes him to talk of
assassination when the school of assassination seems happily to have
become extinct. Englishmen will never see the truth so long as they
permit their vision to be blinded by arrogant assumption of superiority
or ignorant assumptions of infallibility.


MR. PENNINGTON'S LETTER TO MR. GANDHI

   Dear Sir,

   I do not like your scheme for "boycotting" the Government of India
   under what seems to be the somewhat less offensive (though more
   cumbrous) name of non-co-operation; but have always given you credit
   for a genuine desire to carry out revolution by peaceful means and am
   astonished at the violence of the language you use in describing
   General Dyer on page 4 of your issue of the 14th July last. You begin
   by saying that he is "by no means the worst offender," and, so far, I
   am inclined to agree, though as there has been no proper trial of
   anyone it is impossible to apportion their guilt; but then you say
   "his brutality is unmistakable," "his abject and unsoldierlike
   cowardice is apparent, he has called an _unarmed crowd_ of men and
   children--mostly holiday makers--a rebel army." "He believes himself
   to be the saviour of the Punjab in that he was able to shoot down
   like rabbits men who were _penned_ in an enclosure; such a man is
   unworthy to be considered a soldier. There was no bravery in his
   action. He ran no risk. He shot without the slightest opposition and
   without warning. This is not an error of judgement. It is paralysis
   of it in the face of _fancied_ danger. It is proof of criminal
   incapacity and heartlessness," etc.

   You must excuse me for saying that all this is mere rhetoric
   unsupported by any proof, even where proof was possible. To begin
   with, neither you nor I were present at the Jallianwalla Bagh on that
   dreadful day--dreadful especially for General Dyer for whom you show
   no sympathy,--and therefore cannot know for certain whether the crowd
   was or was not unarmed.' That it was an 'illegal,' because a
   'prohibited,' assembly is evident; for it is absurd to suppose that
   General Dyer's 4-1/2 hours march, through the city that very morning,
   during the whole of which he was warning the inhabitants against the
   danger of any sort of gathering, was not thoroughly well-known. You
   say they were 'mostly holiday makers,' but you give nor proof; and
   the idea of holiday gathering in Amritsar just then in incredible. I
   cannot understand your making such a suggestion. General Dyer was not
   the only officer present on the occasion and it is impossible to
   suppose that he would have been allowed to go on shooting into an
   innocent body of holiday-makers. Even the troops would have refused
   to carry out what might then have been not unfairly called a
   "massacre."

   I notice that you never even allude to the frightful brutality of the
   mob which was immediately responsible for the punitive measure
   reluctantly adopted by General Dyer. Your sympathies seem to be only
   with the murderers, and I am not sanguine enough to suppose that my
   view of the case will have much influence with you. Still I am bound
   to do what I can to get at the truth, and enclose a copy of some
   notes I have had occasion to make. If you can publish an _exact_
   account of what happened at Amritsar on the 10th of April, 1919 and
   the following days, especially on the 13th, including the
   demonstration in favour of General Dyer, (if there was one), I for
   one, as a mere seeker after the truth, should be very much obliged to
   you. Mere abuse is not convincing, as you so often observe in your
   generally reasonable paper,

   Yours faithfully,
   J. R. PENNINGTON, I.O.S. (Retd.)
   35, VICTORIA ROAD, WORTHING, SUSSEX
   27th Aug. 1920.

   For 12 years Chief Magistrate of Districts in the south of India
   before reform, by assassination and otherwise, became so fashionable.

   P.S. Let us get the case in this way. General Dyer, acting as the
   only representative of Government on the spot shot some hundreds of
   people (some of them _perhaps_ innocently mixed up in an illegal
   assembly), in the _bona fide_ belief that he was dealing with the
   remains of a very dangerous rebellion and was thereby saving the
   lives of very many thousands, and in the opinion of a great many
   people did actually save the city from falling in the hands of a
   dangerous mob.


SOME DOUBTS

Babu Janakdhari Prasad was a staunch coworker with me in Champaran. He
has written a long letter setting forth his reasons for his belief that
India has a great mission before her, and that she can achieve her
purpose only by non-violent non-co-operation. But he has doubts which he
would have me answer publicly. The letter being long, I am withholding.
But the doubts are entitled to respect and I must endeavour to answer
them. Here they are us framed by Bubu Janakdhari Prasad.

(a) Is not the non-co-operation movement creating a sort of race-hatred
between Englishmen and Indians, and is it in accordance with the Divine
plan of universal love and brotherhood?

(b) Does not the use of words "devilish," "satanic," etc., savour of
unbrotherly sentiment and incite feelings of hatred?

(c) Should not the non-co-operation movement be conducted on strictly
non-violent and non-emotional lines both in speech and action?

(d) Is there no danger of the movement going out of control and lending
to violence?

As to (a), I must say that the movement is not 'creating' race-hatred.
It certainly gives, as I have already said, disciplined expression to
it. You cannot eradicate evil by ignoring it. It is because I want to
promote universal brotherhood that I have taken up non-co-operation so
that, by self-purification, India may make the world better than it is.

As to (b), I know that the words 'satanic' and 'devilish' are strong,
but they relate the exact truth. They describe a system not persons: We
are bound to hate evil, if we would shun it. But by means of
non-co-operation we are able to distinguish between the evil and the
evil-doer. I have found no difficulty in describing a particular
activity of a brother of mine to be devilish, but I am not aware of
having harboured any hatred about him. Non-co-operation teaches us to
love our fellowmen in spite of their faults, not by ignoring or
over-looking them.

As to (c), the movement is certainly being conducted on strictly
non-violent lines. That all non-co-operators have not yet thoroughly
imbibed the doctrine is true. But that just shows what an evil legacy we
have inherited. Emotion there is in the movement. And it will remain. A
man without emotion is a man without feeling.

As to (d), there certainly is danger of the movement becoming violent.
But we may no more drop non-violent non-co-operation because of its
dangers, than we may stop freedom because of the danger of its abuse.


REJOINDER

Messrs. Popley and Philips have been good enough to reply to my letter
"To Every Englishman in India." I recognise and appreciate the friendly
spirit of their letter. But I see that there are fundamental differences
which must for the time being divide them and me. So long as I felt
that, in spite of grievous lapses the British Empire represented an
activity for the worlds and India's good, I clung to it like a child to
its mother's breast. But that faith is gone. The British nation has
endorsed the Punjab and Khilsfat crimes. The is no doubt a dissenting
minority. But a dissenting minority that satisfies itself with a mere
expression of its opinion and continues to help the wrong-doer partakes
in wrong-doing.

And when the sum total of his energy represents a minus quantity one may
not pick out the plus quantities, hold them up for admiration, and ask
an admiring public to help regarding them. It is a favourite design of
Satan to temper evil with a show of good and thus lure the unwary into
the trap. The only way the world has known of defeating Satan is by
shunning him. I invite Englishmen, who could work out the ideal the
believe in, to join the ranks of the non-co-operationists. W.T. Stead
prayed for the reverse of the British arms during the Boer war. Miss
Hobbhouse invited the Boers to keep up the fight. The betrayal of India
is much worse than the injustice done to the Boers. The Boers fought and
bled for their rights. When therefore, we are prepared to bleed, the
right will have become embodied, and idolatrous world will perceive it
and do homage to it.

But Messers. Popley and Phillips object that I have allied myself with
those who would draw the sword if they could. I see nothing wrong in
it. They represent the right no less than I do. And is it not worth
while trying to prevent an unsheathing of the sword by helping to win
the bloodless battle? Those who recognise the truth of the Indian
position can only do God's work by assisting this non-violent campaign.

The second objection raised by these English friends is more to the
point. I would be guilty of wrong-doing myself if the Muslim cause was
not just. The fact is that the Muslim claim is not to perpetuate foreign
domination of non-Muslim or Turkish races. The Indian Mussalmans do not
resist self-determination, but they would fight to the last the
nefarious plan of exploiting Mesopotamia under the plea of
self-determination. They must resist the studied attempt to humiliate
Turkey and therefore Islam, under the false pretext of ensuring Armenian
independence.

The third objection has reference to schools. I do object to missionary
or any schools being carried on with Government money. It is true that
it was at one time our money. Will these good missionaries be justified
in educating me with funds given to them by a robber who has robbed me
of my money, religion and honour because the money was originally mine.

I personally tolerated the financial robbery of India, but it would
have been a sin to have tolerated the robbery of honour through the
Punjab, and of religion through Turkey. This is strong language. But
nothing less would truly describe my deep conviction. Needless to add
that the emptying of Government aided, or affiliated, schools does not
mean starving the young mind National Schools are coming into being as
fast as the others are emptied.

Messrs. Popley and Phillips think that my sense of justice has been
blurred by the knowledge of the Punjab and the Khilafat wrongs. I hope
not. I have asked friends to show me some good fruit (intended and
deliberately produced) of the British occupation of India. And I assure
them that I shall make the amplest amends if I find that I have erred in
my eagerness about the Khilafat and the Punjab wrongs.


TWO ENGLISHMEN REPLY

Dear Mr. Gandhi,

Thank you for your letter to every Englishman in India, with its
hard-hitting and its generous tone. Something within us responds to the
note which you have struck. We are not representatives of any corporate
body, but we think that millions of our countrymen in England, and not
a few in India, feel as we do. The reading of your letter convinces us
that you and we cannot be real enemies.

May we say at once that in so far as the British Empire stands for the
domination and exploitation of other races for Britain's benefit, for
degrading treatment of any, for traffic in intoxicating liquors, for
repressive legislation, for administration such as that which to the
Amritsar incidents, we desire the end of it as much as you do? We quite
understand that in the excitement of the present crisis, owing to
certain acts of the British Administration, which we join with you in
condemning, the Empire presents itself to you under this aspect along.
But from personal contact with our countrymen, we know that working like
leaven in the midst of such tendencies, as you and we deplore, is the
faith in a better ideal--the ideal of a commonwealth of free peoples
voluntarily linked together by the ties of common experience in the past
and common aspirations for the future, a commonwealth which may hope to
spread liberty and progress through the whole earth. With vast numbers
of our countrymen we value the British Empire mainly as affording the
possibility of the realization of such an idea and on the ground give it
our loyal allegiance.

Meanwhile we do repent of that arrogant attitude to Indians which has
been all too common among our countrymen, we do hold Indians to be our
brothers and equals, many of them our superiors, and we would rather be
servants than rulers of India. We desire an administration which cannot
he intimated either by the selfish element in Anglo-Indian political
opinion or by any other sectional interest and which shall govern in
accordance with the best democratic principles. We should welcome the
convening of a National assembly of recognized leaders of the people,
representing all shades of political opinion of every caste, race and
creed, to frame a constitution for Swaraj. In all the things that matter
most we are with you. Surely you and we can co-operate in the service of
India, in such matters for example as education. It seems to us nothing
short of a tragedy that you should be rallying Indian Patriotism to
inaugurate a new era of good will under a watchword that divides,
instead of uniting all.

We have spoken of the large amount of common ground upon which you and
we can stand. But frankness demands that we express our anxiety about
some items in your programme. Leaving aside smaller questions on which
your letter seems to us to do the British side less than justice, may we
mention three main points? Your insistence on spiritual forces alone we
deeply respect and desire to emulate, but we cannot understand your
combining into it with a close alliance with those who, as you frankly
say, would draw the sword as soon as they could.

Your desire for an education truly national commands our whole-hearted
approval. But instead of Indianizing the present system, as you could
begin to do from the beginning of next year, or instead of creating a
hundred institutions such as that at Bolpur and turning into them the
stream of India's young intellectual life, you appear to be turning that
stream out of its present channel into open sands where it may dry up.
In other words, you seem to us to be risking the complete cessation, for
a period possibly, of years, of all education, for a large number of
boys and young men. Is it best, for those young men or for India that
the present imperfect education should cease before a better education
is ready to take its place?

Your desire to unite Mohammedan and Hindu and to share with your
Mohammedan brethren in seeking the satisfaction of Mohammedan
aspirations, we can understand and sympathize with. But is there no
danger, in the course which some of your party have urged upon the
Government, that certain races in the former Ottoman Empire might be
fixed under a foreign yoke, for worse than that which you hold the
English yoke to be? You could not wish to purchase freedom in India at
the price of enslavement in the middle East.

To sum up, we thank you for the spirit of your letter, to which we have
tried to respond in the same spirit. We are with you in the desire for
an India genuinely free to develop the best that is in her and in the
belief that best is something wonderful of which the world to-day
stands in need.

We are ready to co-operate with you and with every other man of any race
or nationality who will help India to realize her best. Are you going to
insist that you can have nothing to do with us if we receive a
government grant (i.e., Indian money), for an Indian School. Surely some
more inspiring battle cry than non-co-operation can be discovered. We
have ventured quite frankly to point out three items in your present
programme, which seem to us likely to hinder the attainment of your true
ideals for Indian greatness. But those ideals themselves command our
warm sympathy, and we desire to work, so far as we have opportunity, for
their attainment. In fact, it is only thus that we can interpret our
British citizenship.

Yours sincerely,
(Sd.) H.A. POPLEY,
(Sd.) G.E. PHILLIPS.
Bangalore,
November 15, 1920.


RENUNCIATION OF MEDALS

Mr. Gandhi has addressed the following letter to the Viceroy:--

It is not without a pang that I return the Kaisar-i-Hind gold medal
granted to me by your predecessor for my humanitarian work in South
