in case the Danes attempted to kindle a flame, they might attempt in
vain; others tore up lint and prepared bandages for the wounded, while
others passed into the upper apartments to see that no lights remained
which could direct the aim of the foe.

The night had somewhat changed its character while all these things
were going on; clouds obscured the moon, and light flakes of snow
commenced to fall. The wind began to moan, as if a storm were at hand.

Alfgar visited the outposts while Edmund assigned their several
stations to the men, who were now armed in readiness for the defence.
When the former reached the post on the river's bank lower down, he
saw that the sentinel had thrown himself ear to the earth, and was
listening intently; he imitated his example.

A deep dull sound from the distance was heard, and Alfgar recognised
the tread of an approaching host.

"Let us withdraw," he said.

They fell back quietly; Alfgar, passing rapidly round, warned all the
other sentinels, and when all had entered, the gates were closed; all
was done in profound silence.

Then Edmund caused the men to fit their arrows to the string, and to
lie upon the inward slope of the earthworks, so as to be invisible; he
placed all the rest of the men at the windows and loopholes of the
building. Similarly prepared, Edmund, with Alfgar and young Hermann by
his side, waited at the window commanding the gateway, when the Lady
Bertha came up to them.

"Has not Father Cuthbert returned?"

"Returned?"

"Yes, he went to the church to bring in the sacred vessels and
vestments."

Alfgar rose instantly.

"I will go and seek him," he cried.

"Then pass out by the postern gate, on the angle nearest the church; I
fear the danger is great, but he must be told that the foe is near, or
he may fall into their hands."

Alfgar left the hall and passed to an angle of the defences where a
little gate led out towards the church; the bridge had been removed,
and he had absolutely to descend into the ditch amongst the deep snow.

Emerging, he crossed the burial yard, and found the good father
returning heavily laden with the precious vessels and other objects he
had been able to save.

"Father," he said; "the enemy is near."

"Indeed! so soon?"

"We must enter by the postern gate."

"I could hardly cross the snow burdened as I am; is it unsafe to try
the other gate? I hear no sound, see no symptom of danger."

They paused; all was so quiet that Alfgar yielded, and they passed
round the mansion. The drawbridge was up, and no danger seemed near;
the trees were in deep shadow, for the clouds, obscuring the moon,
made the night very dark.

Alfgar gave the signal, and the drawbridge was lowered; but they had
scarcely set foot upon it when dark figures rushed from the shadows
behind them. The bridge, which they both had passed, was actually
rising, when the foremost Dane leapt upon it, but was rewarded by a
blow from the battle-axe of Alfgar, which sent him tumbling into the
snow; two or three others leapt forward and clung to the edge of the
bridge, but fell into the ditch like the first; the two fugitives
entered, and the gate was closed.

Then the awful war cry of the Danes arose from earth to heaven,
chilling the very blood and, disdaining all further concealment, the
murderous warriors rushed forward, doubtless expecting to find the
place almost undefended, and to carry the defences at a rush.

But they were soon fatally undeceived, for so perfect had been
Edmund's arrangements, that a storm of arrows burst from all parts of
the building and embankment, laying nearly half the assailants dying
or wounded on the ground.

Still the survivors threw themselves into the ditch, and strove in
vain to pass the palisades, which projected over their heads, and
which were vigorously defended by spear and battle-axe.

But in one place a gigantic warrior succeeded in hewing an aperture
with his axe, wielded by giant strength, and all might have been lost
had not Edmund perceived it, and rushed to its defence, collecting by
his shout half-a-dozen followers. Several Danes strove to pass the
breach; one was already through, and Edmund attacked him; meanwhile
two others had crept through, but were cut off from their fellows, for
the English rallied in front and presented an impenetrable barrier
with their spears, while from the windows above the arrows rained upon
the assailants.

Edmund's axe had found its victim; Herstan, who was by his side, had
engaged and wounded the second; and, meanwhile, Alfgar, who was
glaring about him for a foe, discovered the third, whose aspects and
form were at once recognised by him.

"What! you, Higbald!" he cried.

"You shall escape no more," cried his late gaoler, and brought his axe
down with a mighty rush. Alfgar leapt nimbly aside, and before his
bulky but clumsy antagonist could recover his guard, passed his keen
sword beneath the left arm, through the body, and the giant staggered
and fell, a bloody foam rising to his lips, as he quivered in the
agonies of death.

All was again silent. The Danes, discomfited for the moment, having
lost half their number, had retired, probably waiting for
reinforcements, and the victor addressed Edmund.

"Look," he cried; "this man is a servant of Edric Streorn."

"Is it true, fellow?" said Edmund sternly.

"What if it is? I am dying now, and it cannot matter to me."

The last words were interrupted by a convulsive struggle.

"Art thou an Englishman or a Dane?" said the Etheling, bending over
the dying ruffian in his anxiety to learn the whole truth.

"What is that to thee?"

"Much, if thou wouldst escape death."

"Escape death! I cannot. Neither wilt thou escape Edric Streorn, and I
shall not die unavenged. Ah! young springal, thou wilt not escape
again. To think that thy puny hand should give Higbald his death blow!
Ah, I am choked!"

Alfgar's sword had pierced his lungs, and a gush of blood rushing to
the mouth stopped the breath of Higbald for ever.

"I have brought the foe upon you. We are tracked," said Alfgar. "Edric
and the Danes are in alliance."

"But they have not taken this place yet; neither shall they, by God's
help! Ha! was that lightning? Nay, it is winter."

A sudden burst of fiery light illuminated the scene, and the defenders
looked forth, in spite of their danger, from their fortifications. The
little church of St. Michael burst forth into billowing eddies of
smoke and flame.

"This is a grievous sight, to see the place we had dedicated to God
destroyed by the bloody heathen. O that He would stretch forth His
hand as in the days of old!"

"Would I had but two hundred men; I would fall upon the villains in
the rear, and leave not one," said Edmund.

"Look--the farm buildings!" cried little Hermann.

"The poor horses and oxen!" cried the Lady Bertha.

"They are safe," said Edmund. "You may hear the trampling of hoofs
even now. The fools of Danes are hunting them in all directions. I do
not think they will catch many."

Lights appeared in two or three places, and soon it became evident
that the ruthless foe had gained their object, as the barns and
stables lit up in all directions, and the manor house was surrounded
by the double conflagration, so that every object was as distinctly
visible as in open daylight.

"To your buckets! Pour water upon the roof; and, archers, look out for
the enemy; keep him as far off as you can."

The boys and women were speedily on the roof pouring water in all
directions, in case the wind should deposit the burning brands upon
the structure. Meanwhile flights of arrows came from the distance, and
settled around them; but they were spent before arrival in most cases,
for the defenders kept the ground clear for a large circle around by
their well-sustained discharges. Not a few dead bodies lying in the
glare of the fire testified to their deadly skill.

The flames passed from stable to barn, and barn to shed. The
triumphant cries of the Danes added to the horror of the scene, heard
as they were amidst the continuous roaring of the flames. Crash,
crash, went roof after roof, the fall of the little church on the
opposite side first leading the awful chorus. Life seemed the penalty
of either Englishman or Dane who dared to trust his person within the
circle of light.

The Lady Bertha was comforting her two little girls, Ostryth and
Alfreda, where they sat, cowering and terrified, in their own little
bedchamber, the window so barricaded that no arrow could enter, but
yet not sufficiently to keep out the glare of the flames.

"Mother, how light it is!" said the little Ostryth; "how dreadfully
bright!"

"It will soon be darker again."

"But is it fire? Are they burning the house?"

"No, dearest. They have set the farm on fire. It cannot hurt us."

"But the horses, and my poor little pony?"

"Are safe, dearest one. The Etheling went and let them all loose."

"Oh! how good of him. I am so glad."

"Mother, let Hermann come and sit with us!"

"Nay, he will out to the fight. He is a boy, and must learn to be a
soldier."

"Oh, but he will get hurt, perhaps killed."

"Courage, dear child; remember how often I have told you how God helps
those who trust in Him. Say your prayers, your Pater and Credo, and
ask God to take care of dear father and Hermann."

"Mother!" said a voice. She locked up and saw Hermann, his forehead
covered with blood.

"It is nothing, mother," said the spirited lad, as he wiped the blood
away; "at least only the scratch of an arrow while I was on the roof.
Father wishes you to send all the women who are strong enough to help
to carry water from the river. The well is dry, and the men cannot be
spared from the embankment. We expect another attack, and there are
great patches of blazing straw flying about in the wind."

She spoke a few words to the women, and all but two or three, who were
too weak or ill, went forth to the work. One kiss she imprinted
eagerly on his brow, and dismissed him back to his perilous task
without allowing herself one sigh.

"Now, dear ones," she said to the little girls, "keep quiet till
mother comes back. I must go."

"O mother, do not leave us!"

But she could not listen to the earnest pleadings, for she felt that
where other women exposed themselves, she too must go, and cheer by
her example.

A long line, reaching to the brink of the river, was soon formed, and
buckets were being passed from hand to hand. A loud cry, and a boy in
the line fell from an arrow, which retained just sufficient strength
to pierce his heart. Herstan and Father Cuthbert carried the corpse
reverently within, the father remembering that but that morning he had
fed with the Bread of Life, at the altar of St. Michael, this poor
lad, so soon to be called to meet the Judge who had entertained him as
a guest at His holy Table that Christmas morn. Two or three others
were soon wounded, but not seriously, and when a supply of water ready
for all emergencies had been collected on the roof, the dangerous duty
was over.

Pale and collected, the Lady Bertha was returning to her children,
when she passed the corpse. One moment, and the thought struck her
that it was Hermann, and the mother's heart gave a great leap.
Tremblingly she put aside the cloth with which they had veiled it, and
was undeceived. Repressing her feelings, she was again by the side of
her little girls, when the fearful cries of the assailants once more
rang through the air.

"Stand to your post! Quit yourselves like men! Be firm!" shouted the
stentorian voice of Edmund.

Onward came the Danes, in three parties, to attack the three sides of
the building. The arrows diminished their numbers, but stayed them
not. They left a struggling dark line upon the ground, but the wounded
had to care for themselves. Edmund rushed to command the defence at
the gate, leaving Alfgar to superintend that upon the right hand, and
Herstan on the left. They had but one moment, and they were in the
thick of the conflict.

Shouts mingled with shrieks. Sword, battle-axe, and spear did their
deadly work through and above the palisade; arrows rained down from
the roof and windows on the assailants, women and boys doing their
part in that manner, while the men did theirs with battle-axe and
sword on the bulwarks. In one or two places the palisade threatened to
give way, and at last three or four stakes were dragged out in one
spot, blow after blow of the axe was spent upon the yielding fabric,
and a breach was effected.

The Etheling perceived it, and rushed to the scene just as two or
three of the English, less used to arms, were yielding before the
ponderous weapons of the Danes. Throwing himself into the breach, his
practised arm made a desert around him. Of immense muscular strength,
his blows came down like the fabled hammer of Thor, crushing helmet
and breastplate alike before the well-tempered steel of his favourite
weapon. The foe were driven back, and for one moment he stood in the
breach alone.

Then and then only was he recognised.

"The gleeman! the false gleeman the Etheling Edmund!" in various
energetic cries, attested his fame, and the hatred of his foes.

"Yes, dogs, ye know me, and the prize ye have to win. Back, drunkards
and cannibals, back to your royal parricide with the gleeman's
greetings, and tell him Hela is waiting for him and his friend the
accursed Edric."

A shower of arrows was the only answer, but they missed the joints,
and rattled harmlessly from the well-tempered armour which Edmund
wore. Still the position was critical, and Alfgar, with gentle
violence, persuaded him to descend from his perilous position.

Here the attack was foiled, and foiled so decidedly, that the ditch
was actually half filled with corpses. Cries of distress arose from
the opposite side, but Edmund's arm restored the balance there, so
great was the influence of one man, and so great the power of physical
force in the desperate conflicts of that day.

Foiled at every point, the invaders were driven from the embankment.
It was evident that they had miscalculated the forces of the
defenders, and that they had advanced beyond their main body in
insufficient strength to take the place by assault. Could they have
supplied the place of the fallen by fresh men, until they had wearied
the defenders out, they would have succeeded, but they were evidently
not in strength to do this so they slowly yielded, until the deadly
struggle ceased, and silence resumed her empire, while the besieged
repaired the damage the defences had sustained.

"They have retired," said Herstan, wiping the sweat from his brow and
the blood from his axe.
