might pass along without noticing us."

"Which side shall we sit, Desmond?"

"We will sit this side," the lieutenant replied. "If we were the other
side a man might possibly wrench himself way from our grasp, and might
outrun us, but on this side of the gate he couldn't do so; for even if
he did break away he would have to run back toward the village, the
gate would stop his going the other way."

Accordingly the young officers took their posts against the wall, one
on either side of the gate, and with their swords drawn awaited the
coming of a messenger to the Red Captain.

"There is no chance of any one being here for another twenty minutes,"
Desmond said. "The sergeant will not rouse the men up till a quarter
to six, therefore no one is likely to come along until within a few
minutes of the hour. It's precious cold here, though the wall does
shelter us from the wind a bit; still it's not a lively job having to
wait here half an hour, with the thermometer somewhere below freezing
point."

The time passed slowly. Occasionally they exchanged a few words in low
tones, but as the time approached when they knew that the sergeant
would be going his rounds to call the men they spoke less.

"It must be nearly six o'clock now," Desmond said at last. "The men
would be called at a quarter to, so if any one is coming he will most
likely be here in a few minutes. Hush! I think I can hear footsteps."

A few seconds later they dimly saw a figure running toward them at
full speed. As it dashed up to the gate they sprang out and seized it.
There was a sharp frightened cry.

"Don't make a noise," Desmond said sternly, "or it will be the worse
for you. Where were you going?"

It was a girl of about twelve years old whom they had captured. She
was silent a moment.

"Sure, your honor," she said in a whimper, "I was doing no harm. I was
only running to tell Mike Brenan that his ould mother is taken bad
with the cramps, and wanted to see him bad."

"Where do you expect to go to, you little liar?" Desmond asked. "We
know what you are up to. You were running to tell some one that the
soldiers were getting up. Now, if you are quiet and keep still no harm
will come to you; but if you try to scream or to get away we shall
hand you over to the police, and there's no saying whether they may
not make it a hanging matter for aiding the king's enemies."

"I suppose we needn't fasten her?" Ralph said.

"Not fasten her! Why, she is as slippery as a young eel, and if you
take your hand off her for a moment she would be off like a hare. No,
no, we must make her safe. Beside," he whispered in Ralph's ear, "she
would scream to a certainty if she saw any one else coming, then they
might strike off and get round us. No, no, we can't run any risks;
there is too much depends on it. Now just sit down there, young woman,
by the wall. We are not going to hurt you, but you have got to keep
quiet. Now put your feet together." Desmond took out his pocket
handkerchief and folded it, and tied the girl's ankles firmly
together. "Now then, Ralph, do the same with her wrists. That's right
now. Wrap that shawl of hers three or four times tightly round her
mouth. That's it; let her breathe through her nose. Now you keep a
sharp watch over her, and see she doesn't wriggle out of these things.
If you see any one coming clap your hand over her mouth, and see she
doesn't make a sound. When he comes up you can let go and help me if
necessary; it won't matter her giving a bit of a scream then."

"Now," he went on, this time speaking aloud, "if that girl makes the
least noise, run her through with your sword at once. Don't hesitate a
moment."

"Very well," Ralph said in the same tones. "I will silence her, never
fear."

Ralph sat down close to the girl and watched her sharply. They had
fixed the shawl as well as they could, but he felt sure that by a
sudden effort she could free her mouth sufficiently to scream. She sat
perfectly still; but in about three minutes he saw her suddenly throw
her head back, and in an instant he clapped his hand over her mouth.
She struggled violently in spite of her bonds, and tried to bite; but
with the other arm he held her head firmly, and succeeded in
preventing the slightest sound escaping her. Then he glanced up the
path. As he had expected the girl's quick ear had heard approaching
footsteps that were inaudible to him. A figure was bounding rapidly
toward them. As it reached the gate Desmond sprang upon it. There was
a sharp scuffle for a moment.

"All right, Conway. I have got him."

It was a lad of some fifteen years old this time. He struggled
furiously till Desmond placed a pistol against his head, and told him
that he would blow his brains out if he was not quiet, and taking out
the handcuffs fastened them on to his ankles.

"There is no fear of his doing any running now. Just come and sit down
by this wall, my lad, and remember if you make the slightest sound I
will run my sword through your body."

The lad shuffled to the wall and sat down. Ralph released his grasp of
the girl.

"This is a regular young wildcat, Desmond. She very nearly got my hand
in her mouth, and if she had she would have bitten a piece out. Well,
I shouldn't think there will be any more of them."

"No, I should think not. They would scarcely send off more than two
messengers. However, we must still keep a sharp lookout."

But no one else came along, and in a quarter of an hour they heard the
deep tramp of a body of men approaching, and Captain O'Connor soon
came up at the head of the company.

"Well, any news, gentlemen?" he asked as the two young officers
stepped out.

"Yes, Captain O'Connor. We have two prisoners--a girl and a boy. They
came along about ten minutes apart, both running at full speed and
evidently going with messages. We put the handcuffs on the boy's
ankles, and tied the girl's with our handkerchiefs."

"Sergeant, tell off two men and let them take these prisoners back to
the village, and guard them carefully till we return. They may as well
keep the handcuffs on the boy's ankles, and untie the girl's; but let
one of them keep a tight hold of her arm, and be sure that she doesn't
slip away."

Two men were told off for the duty, and the march was then resumed.
Daylight was faintly breaking when they reached the edge of the cliff.
Ralph, with ten men, was posted at the spot where a slight track was
visible going down into a sort of gulley. Captain O'Connor then
proceeded with half the company to the right, Desmond taking the
remainder to the left; each posting men at intervals along the edge of
the cliff, and placing parties of four at every point where there
appeared the smallest probability of an ascent being practicable.

All were ordered to load at once. They were to make prisoner any one
coming up the cliff, and in case of resistance to fire without
hesitation. The two officers then returned to the spot where they had
left Ralph. It was now nearly broad daylight. Leaving the soldiers
they went a short distance to a point where the rocks fell away
precipitately, and from here had a clear view of the face of the
cliffs.

"We had better wait here for a time," the captain said. "The chances
are that before long one of them will look out from their
hiding-place, and perhaps make his way up to the top to look round. If
he does, that will give us an index as to the direction at any rate of
their hiding-place. Now, I will take the ground in front; do you watch
to the left, Conway, and you to the right, Desmond. We had better lie
down, or on this jutting point we may catch the eye of any one down
there before we can see him. Keep a sharp lookout lads; it will save
us a world of trouble if we can see one of them."

For half an hour they lay quiet, then Desmond suddenly exclaimed:

"There is a man among those fallen rocks halfway up the side. There!
he is gone. Perhaps we shall see him again in a moment."

For five minutes they lay with their eyes fixed on the rocks that
Desmond pointed out, but there were no signs of life.

"Are you sure you were not mistaken, Desmond?" O'Connor asked.

"Quite certain. He suddenly appeared by the side of that gray bowlder,
stood there for a moment, and sunk down again. I expect he must have
got a view of one of the men somewhere along the top."

"We will wait another ten minutes," O'Connor said, "and then we will
take a party to the spot and search it thoroughly. There is the
coast-guard boat, so there is no fear of their getting away by water."

Another quarter of an hour passed.

"It is no use waiting any longer. Go along the line, one each way, and
bring ten men from points where they can be spared. We will leave them
at the top of the path and take the party there down with us. There
are only four or five of them, and ten men beside ourselves are ample
for the business."

The arrangements were soon made. Before starting on the descent
O'Connor said to the men: "We wish to take the fellows who are hiding
down there alive if possible. They are the gang of the fellow known as
the 'Red Captain,' and have committed a score of murders; but if it is
absolutely necessary you will of course fire. There is one man among
them who is there on compulsion, and is less guilty than the rest. He
is a fair-haired man, and I should think you would notice the
difference between him and the rest. Whatever resistance they make it
is not probable that he will join in it. At any rate, do not fire at
him unless it is absolutely necessary to save life. Now see to your
priming before we start, and fix bayonets. Mind how you climb over
these rocks, because if any of you fall your muskets may go off and
shoot some one in front of you. Wherever it is possible scatter out
abreast of each other, so as to prevent the possibility of accident.
Now, then, march!"

Leading the way, Captain O'Connor descended the little track. It
extended but a short distance. Beyond that a chaos of fallen
rocks--the remains of a landslip many years previously--stretched away
to the shore.

"There is no working along these sideways, Desmond," Captain O'Connor
said after they had climbed along for some little distance. "We had
better make straight down to the shore, follow that for a bit, and
then mount again to the spot where you saw the man."

It was difficult work, but at last the party reached the shore.
Lieutenant Adcock, who was himself in command of the boat, had watched
the party making their way down the rocks, and now rowed in to within
a few yards.

"Good-morning, lieutenant," Captain O'Connor said. "I think we have
got them fairly trapped; but doubtless they would have made off if
they hadn't seen you on the watch outside. It's that notorious
scoundrel the Red Captain of Galway who is, I hear, hiding here with
his gang."

"Indeed!" the revenue officer said; "that will be a capture worth
making. Shall I come ashore with four of my men? I expect they are
more accustomed to climbing about among the rocks than yours are, and
I should like to lend a hand."

"Do, by all means," Captain O'Connor replied. "I see you have got ten,
and six will be quite enough in the boat, even if they do manage to
get down and embark, which I don't think they will. Your men are all
armed, I suppose?"

"Yes; they have all carbines and cutlasses. Now, coxswain, I leave you
in charge. Row out a quarter of a mile, and if any boat pushes off you
are to stop it and arrest all on board. They will almost certainly
resist, and in that case you must use your arms. Now, the four bow
oars get out and step ashore."

When the lieutenant and his four men had landed, the boat again pushed
off, and the party on shore made their way along over the rocks at the
edge of the water until they were opposite the rock where Lieutenant
Desmond had seen the man appear. Then the ascent was commenced. The
four officers went first, the men following in a line.

"Bear a little to the left," Captain O'Connor said; "it is likely to
lie somewhere in that direction. The man we saw would have been making
toward the path and not from it. Keep a sharp lookout between these
great rocks; there is no saying where the entrance to their
hiding-place may be."

Almost as he spoke there was a sharp crack of a rifle, and the bullet
struck the rock on which he was standing.

"Come on, lads!" he shouted, "the sooner we are there the less time
they have got to fire;" and with a cheer the men hurried forward,
scrambling recklessly over the rocks. Again and again puffs of smoke
darted out from the rocks in front; and one of the soldiers fell, shot
through the heart.

"Don't stop to fire!" Captain O'Connor shouted as a yell of rage broke
from the men; "you will do no good, and it will only give them more
time."

A dozen more shots were fired. One of the coast-guard men was shot
through the shoulder; but this was the only casualty, for the quick
movements of the men as they scrambled over the bowlders disconcerted
the aim of those above. Breathless and panting the four officers
gained the spot from which the shots had been fired, the men close up
behind them; but not a soul was to be seen.

"Wait a moment till you get breath, lads," their leader said. "They
can't be far from here. We will find their hiding-place presently,
never fear."

As they stood panting there was a shout from above. The soldiers were
standing along the edge of the cliff, looking down upon the fight.
Sergeant Morris waved his arm.

"They have made away to your left, sir!" he shouted at the top of his
voice. "We have just caught sight of them among the rocks!"

In two or three minutes Captain O'Connor led the way in that
direction.

"Keep your eyes sharply about, lads. No doubt the place is cunningly
hidden. Search among every clump of bushes between the rocks."

Presently the sergeant shouted down again from above:

"I think you are far enough now, sir! We did not catch sight of them
beyond that!"

For an hour the search continued, but without avail.

"They must be here somewhere, lads!" Captain O'Connor said. "We will
find them if we have to stop here a week, and have provisions brought
down from the village. It's pretty evident there is no opening between
the great rocks or we must have found it. We must examine the smaller
bowlders. They may have one so placed that it can be dropped down over
the entrance. That flat slab is a likely-looking place, for instance.
Three or four of you get hold of it and heave it up."

The men gathered round to lift it. Ralph stooped down and peeped under
as they did so.

"Hurrah!" he shouted, "there is an opening here."

Several of the others now got hold of the stone. It was up-ended and
thrown backward, and the entrance to a passage some three feet high
and two feet wide was revealed.

"I can smell a peat fire!" one of the men exclaimed.

"This is the entrance, no doubt," Captain O'Connor said. "See, the
bottom is evidently worn by feet. The passage must have been used for
a long time; but it's an awkward place to follow desperate men into."

"It is, indeed," Lieutenant Adcock agreed. "They could shoot us down
one after one as we go in. They would see us against the light, while
we should be able to make out nothing."

"Surrender in there!" Captain O'Connor shouted. "You can't get away;
and I promise you all a fair trial."

His summons was followed by a taunting laugh; and a moment later there
was a sharp sound within, and a rifle bullet struck the side of the
entrance and flew out.

"It would be throwing away one's life to go in there," Captain
O'Connor said. "At any rate we have got them secure, and they must
come out in time. But it would be madness to crawl in there on one's
hands and feet to be picked off by those scoundrels at their ease.
Now, lads, two of you stand by this entrance. Keep out of the line of
fire, and be ready with your bayonets to run any one through who comes
out. Let the rest scatter and search round this place. They may have
another entrance. If so, we must find it. In the first place, it may
be easier of entry; in the second they might escape from it after
dark."

Again the search began.

"Do you think it is likely to be higher up or lower down, O'Connor?"
Lieutenant Desmond asked.

"There is no saying, Desmond; the passage seems to go straight in. I
should fancy above rather than below."

For a long time they searched without success; then Ralph, who had
gone higher up the rocks than the rest, came upon a clump of low
bushes growing between some large bowlders. There was nothing
suspicious about them, and he was just turning away when he perceived
a slight odor of peat smoke.

Silently he made his way down to the captain.

"I have found another entrance," he said. "At any rate I think so; for
I certainly smelled smoke. If we go quietly we may take them
unawares."

Captain O'Connor passed the word along for the men to gather silently,
and Ralph then led the way up to the clump of bushes.

"Yes, I can smell the peat plainly enough. Now, Conway, do you search
among the bushes. Carefully, lad, we don't know what the place is
like."

Cautiously Ralph pushed the bushes aside. He saw at once that these
had been carefully trained to cover a large hole. This was about three
feet wide; and descended at a sharp angle, forming a sloping passage
of sufficient height for a man to stand upright. Captain O'Connor
knelt down and looked in.

"This looks more possible," he said; "but it's very steep. I should
say it is not used by them, but acts as a sort of chimney to ventilate
the cavern and let the smoke out. At any rate we will try it; but we
must take our boots off so as to get a better hold on the rocks,
beside we shall make less noise. Blunt and Jervis, do you go down to
the other entrance again. It is likely enough that they may try to
make a bolt that way if they hear us coming. Keep a sharp lookout down
there, and be sure no one escapes."

"Don't you think, Captain O'Connor, that it will be a good thing to
enter from there also the moment a row is heard going on within. Their
attention will be taken up with your attack, and we may get in without
being noticed."

"That's a very good idea, Conway; and you shall carry it out. Take two
more men with you, and make your way in as soon as you hear us
engaged. But remember that it is quite possible we may not be able to
get down. This passage may get almost perpendicular presently; and
though I mean to go if possible, even if I have a straight drop for
it, it may close up and be altogether impracticable. So don't you try
to enter till you are quite sure they are engaged with us, otherwise
you will be only throwing away your life."

"I understand, sir," Ralph said as he turned to go off. "If you get in
you can reckon on our assistance immediately; if not, we shall make no
move."

Ralph now took up his station at the mouth of the cavern with his six
men, and lay down just in front of the opening listening attentively.
He could hear a continued murmur as of many voices.

"Get ready, lads, to follow me the instant you see me dive in," he
said. "I am sure by the sound there are more than four men in there,
and Captain O'Connor may want help badly."

Grasping a pistol in his left hand, and his sword in his right, Ralph
listened attentively. Suddenly he heard a shout, followed by a volley
of imprecations, and then the discharge of a gun or a pistol.

In an instant he threw himself forward along the low narrow passage.
He had not gone more than three or four yards when he found that it
heightened, and he was able to stand upright. He rushed on, keeping
his head low in case the roof should lower again, and after a few
paces entered a large cabin. It was dimly illuminated by two torches
stuck against the wall. In a moment a number of figures rushed toward
him with loud shouts; but before they reached him two of the soldiers
stood by his side.

"Fire!" he shouted as he discharged his pistol, and at the same moment
the soldiers beside him discharged their muskets.

A moment later he was engaged in a fierce hand-to-hand conflict.
Several firearms had flashed off almost in his face. One of the
soldiers fell with a sharp cry, but those who were following rushed
forward. Ralph narrowly escaped having his brains dashed out by a
clubbed rifle, but springing back just in time he ran his opponent
through before he could recover his guard.

Just at this moment a big man with a shock of red hair and a huge
beard leveled a blunderbuss at him. It flashed across him that his
