was buried in a far more consistent substance, seemingly composed of
volcanic ashes cemented by mud; Pompeii, on the contrary, was
buried only in ashes and loose stones. The casts of statues found in
Herculaneum show the plastic character of the material that fell there,
which time has hardened to rock-like consistency.

These statues represented Hercules and Cleopatra, and the theatre proved
to be that of the long-lost city of Herculaneum. The site of Pompeii was
not discovered until forty years afterward, but work there proved far
easier than at Herculaneum, and more progress was made in bringing it
back to the light of day.

The less solid covering of Pompeii has greatly facilitated the work of
excavation, and a great part of the city has been laid bare. Many of its
public buildings and private residences are now visible, and some whole
streets have been cleared, while a multitude of interesting relics have
been found. Among those are casts of many of the inhabitants, obtained
by pouring liquid plaster into the ash moulds that remained of them.
We see them to-day in the attitude and with the expression of agony and
horror with which death met them more than eighteen centuries ago.

In succeeding eruptions much lava was poured out; and in A. D. 472,
ashes were cast over a great part of Europe, so that much fear was
caused at Constantinople. The buried cities were more and more covered
up, and it was not until about A. D. 1700 that, as above stated, the
city of Herculaneum was discovered, the peasants of the vicinity being
in the habit of extracting marble from its ruins. They had also, in the
course of years, found many statues. In consequence, an excavation was
ordered by Charles III, the earliest result being the discovery of the
theatre, with the statues above named. The work of excavation,
however, has not progressed far in this city, on account of its extreme
difficulty, though various excellent specimens of art-work have been
discovered, including the finest examples of mural painting extant from
antiquity. The library was also discovered, 1803 papyri being found.
Though these had been charred to cinder, and were very difficult to
unroll and decipher, over 300 of them have been read.


PLINY'S CELEBRATED DESCRIPTION


Pliny the Younger, to whom we are indebted for the only contemporary
account of the great eruption under consideration, was at the time of
its occurrence resident with his mother at Misenum, where the Roman
fleet lay, under the command of his uncle, the great author of the
"Historia Naturalis". His account, contained in two letters to Tacitus
(lib. vi. 16, 20), is not so much a narrative of the eruption, as a
record of his uncle's singular death, yet it is of great interest as
yielding the impressions of an observer. The translation which follows
is adopted from the very free version of Melmoth, except in one or two
places, where it differs much from the ordinary text. The letters are
given entire, though some parts are rather specimens of style than good
examples of description.

"Your request that I should send an account of my uncle's death, in
order to transmit a more exact relation of it to posterity, deserves my
acknowledgments; for if this accident shall be celebrated by your pen,
the glory of it, I am assured, will be rendered forever illustrious.
And, notwithstanding he perished by a misfortune which, as it involved
at the same time a most beautiful country in ruins, and destroyed so
many populous cities, seems to promise him an everlasting remembrance;
notwithstanding he has himself composed many and lasting works; yet I
am persuaded the mention of him in your immortal works will greatly
contribute to eternize his name. Happy I esteem those to be, whom
Providence has distinguished with the abilities either of doing such
actions as are worthy of being related, or of relating them in a manner
worthy of being read; but doubly happy are they who are blessed with
both these talents; in the number of which my uncle, as his own writings
and your history will prove, may justly be ranked. It is with extreme
willingness, therefore, that I execute your commands; and should,
indeed, have claimed the task if you had not enjoined it.

"He was at that time with the fleet under his command at Misenum. On
the 24th of August, about one in the afternoon, my mother desired him to
observe a cloud which appeared of a very unusual size and shape. He had
just returned from taking the benefit of the sun, and, after bathing
himself in cold water, and taking a slight repast, had retired to his
study. He immediately arose, and went out upon an eminence, from whence
he might more distinctly view this very uncommon appearance. It was not
at that distance discernible from what mountain the cloud issued, but it
was found afterward to ascend from Mount Vesuvius. I cannot give a more
exact description of its figure than by comparing it to that of a pine
tree, for it shot up to a great height in the form of a trunk, which
extended itself at the top into a sort of branches; occasioned, I
imagine, either by a sudden gust of air that impelled it, the force
of which decreased as it advanced upwards, or the cloud itself being
pressed back again by its own weight, and expanding in this manner: it
appeared sometimes bright, and sometimes dark and spotted, as it was
more or less impregnated with earth and cinders.

"This extraordinary phenomenon excited my uncle's philosophical
curiosity to take a nearer view of it. He ordered a light vessel to be
got ready, and gave me the liberty, if I thought proper, to attend him.
I rather chose to continue my studies, for, as it happened, he had given
me an employment of that kind. As he was passing out of the house he
received dispatches: the marines at Retina, terrified at the imminent
peril (for the place lay beneath the mountain, and there was no retreat
but by ships), entreated his aid in this extremity. He accordingly
changed his first design, and what he began with a philosophical he
pursued with an heroical turn of mind."


THE VOYAGE TO STABIAE


"He ordered the galleys to put to sea, and went himself on board with
an intention of assisting not only Retina but many other places, for the
population is thick on that beautiful coast. When hastening to the place
from whence others fled with the utmost terror, he steered a direct
course to the point of danger, and with so much calmness and presence of
mind, as to be able to make and dictate his observations upon the motion
and figure of that dreadful scene. He was now so nigh the mountain that
the cinders, which grew thicker and hotter the nearer he approached,
fell into the ships, together with pumice-stones, and black pieces of
burning rock; they were in danger of not only being left aground by the
sudden retreat of the sea, but also from the vast fragments which rolled
down from the mountain, and obstructed all the shore.

"Here he stopped to consider whether he should return back again; to
which the pilot advised him. 'Fortune,' said he, 'favors the brave;
carry me to Pomponianus.' Pomponianus was then at Stabiae, separated by
a gulf, which the sea, after several insensible windings, forms upon
the shore. He (Pomponianus) had already sent his baggage on board; for
though he was not at that time in actual danger, yet being within view
of it, and indeed extremely near, if it should in the least increase, he
was determined to put to sea as soon as the wind should change. It was
favorable, however, for carrying my uncle to Pomponianus, whom he
found in the greatest consternation. He embraced him with tenderness,
encouraging and exhorting him to keep up his spirits; and the more to
dissipate his fears he ordered, with an air of unconcern, the baths
to be got ready; when, after having bathed, he sat down to supper with
great cheerfulness, or at least (what is equally heroic) with all the
appearance of it.

"In the meantime, the eruption from Mount Vesuvius flamed out in several
places with much violence, which the darkness of the night contributed
to render still more visible and dreadful. But my uncle, in order to
soothe the apprehensions of his friend, assured him it was only the
burning of the villages, which the country people had abandoned to the
flames; after this he retired to rest, and it was most certain he was so
little discomposed as to fall into a deep sleep; for, being pretty fat,
and breathing hard, those who attended without actually heard him snore.
The court which led to his apartment being now almost filled with stones
and ashes, if he had continued there any longer it would have been
impossible for him to have made his way out; it was thought proper,
therefore, to awaken him. He got up and went to Pomponianus and the rest
of his company, who were not unconcerned enough to think of going to
bed. They consulted together whether it would be most prudent to trust
to the houses, which now shook from side to side with frequent and
violent concussions; or to fly to the open fields, where the calcined
stone and cinders, though light indeed, yet fell in large showers and
threatened destruction. In this distress they resolved for the fields as
the less dangerous situation of the two--a resolution which, while
the rest of the company were hurried into it by their fears, my uncle
embraced upon cool and deliberate consideration.


DEATH OF PLINY THE ELDER


"They went out, then, having pillows tied upon their heads with napkins;
and this was their whole defence against the storm of stones that fell
around them. It was now day everywhere else, but there a deeper darkness
prevailed than in the most obscure night; which, however, was in some
degree dissipated by torches and other lights of various kinds. They
thought proper to go down further upon the shore, to observe if they
might safely put out to sea; but they found that the waves still ran
extremely high and boisterous. There my uncle, having drunk a draught or
two of cold water, threw himself down upon a cloth which was spread for
him, when immediately the flames, and a strong smell of sulphur which
was the forerunner of them, dispersed the rest of the company, and
obliged him to rise. He raised himself up with the assistance of two of
his servants, and instantly fell down dead, suffocated, as I conjecture,
by some gross and noxious vapor, having always had weak lungs, and being
frequently subject to a difficulty of breathing.

"As soon as it was light again, which was not till the third day after
this melancholy accident, his body was found entire, and without any
marks of violence upon it, exactly in the same posture as that in which
he fell, and looking more like a man asleep than dead. During all this
time my mother and I were at Misenum. But this has no connection with
your history, as your inquiry went no farther than concerning my uncle's
death; with that, therefore, I will put an end to my letter. Suffer me
only to add, that I have faithfully related to you what I was either
an eye-witness of myself, or received immediately after the accident
happened, and before there was any time to vary the truth. You will
choose out of this narrative such circumstances as shall be most
suitable to your purpose; for there is a great difference between what
is proper for a letter and a history: between writing to a friend and
writing to the public. Farewell."

In this account, which was drawn up some years after the event, from
the recollections of a student eighteen years old, we recognize the
continual earthquakes; the agitated sea with its uplifted bed; the
flames and vapors of an ordinary eruption, probably attended by lava as
well as ashes. But it seems likely that the author's memory, or rather
the information communicated to him regarding the closing scene of
Pliny's life, was defective. Flames and sulphurous vapors could hardly
be actually present at Stabiae, ten miles from the centre of the
eruption.

That lava flowed at all from Vesuvius on this occasion has been usually
denied; chiefly because at Pompeii and Herculaneum the causes of
destruction were different--ashes overwhelmed the former, mud concreted
over the latter. We observe, indeed, phenomena on the shore near Torre
del Greco which seem to require the belief that currents of lava had
been solidified there at some period before the construction of certain
walls and floors, and other works of Roman date. In the Oxford Museum,
among the specimens of lava to which the dates are assigned, is one
referred to A. D. 79, but there is no mode of proving it to have
belonged to the eruption of that date.


PLINY'S SECOND LETTER


A second letter from Pliny to Tacitus (Epist. 20) was required to
satisfy the curiosity of that historian; especially as regards the
events which happened under the eyes of his friend. Here it is according
to Melmoth:

"The letter which, in compliance with your request, I wrote to you
concerning the death of my uncle, has raised, it seems, your curiosity
to know what terrors and danger attended me while I continued at
Misenum: for there, I think, the account in my former letter broke off.

'Though my shocked soul recoils, my tongue shall tell.'

"My uncle having left us, I pursued the studies which prevented my going
with him till it was time to bathe. After which I went to supper, and
from thence to bed, where my sleep was greatly broken and disturbed.
There had been, for many days before, some shocks of an earthquake,
which the less surprised us as they are extremely frequent in Campania;
but they were so particularly violent that night, that they not only
shook everything about us, but seemed, indeed, to threaten total
destruction. My mother flew to my chamber, where she found me rising
in order to awaken her. We went out into a small court belonging to the
house, which separated the sea from the buildings. As I was at that time
but eighteen years of age, I know not whether I should call my behavior,
in this dangerous juncture, courage or rashness; but I took up Livy, and
amused myself with turning over that author, and even making extracts
from him, as if all about me had been in full security. While we were
in this posture, a friend of my uncle's, who was just come from Spain to
pay him a visit, joined us; and observing me sitting with my mother with
a book in my hand, greatly condemned her calmness at the same time that
he reproved me for my careless security. Nevertheless, I still went on
with my author.

"Though it was now morning, the light was exceedingly faint and languid;
the buildings all around us tottered; and, though we stood upon open
ground, yet as the place was narrow and confined, there was no remaining
there without certain and great danger: we therefore resolved to quit
the town. The people followed us in the utmost consternation, and, as to
a mind distracted with terror every suggestion seems more prudent than
its own, pressed in great crowds about us in our way out.

"Being got to a convenient distance from the houses, we stood still, in
the midst of a most dangerous and dreadful scene. The chariots which
we had ordered to be drawn out were so agitated backwards and forwards,
though upon the most level ground, that we could not keep them steady,
even by supporting them with large stones. The sea seemed to roll back
upon itself, and to be driven from its banks by the convulsive motion
of the earth; it is certain at least that the shore was considerably
enlarged, and many sea animals were left upon it. On the other side a
black and dreadful cloud, bursting with an igneous serpentine vapor,
darted out a long train of fire, resembling flashes of lightning, but
much larger.


FEAR VERSUS COMPOSURE


"Upon this the Spanish friend whom I have mentioned, addressed himself
to my mother and me with great warmth and earnestness; 'If your brother
and your uncle,' said he, 'is safe, he certainly wishes you to be so
too; but if he has perished, it was his desire, no doubt, that you might
both survive him: why therefore do you delay your escape a moment?' We
could never think of our own safety, we said, while we were uncertain
of his. Hereupon our friend left us, and withdrew with the utmost
precipitation. Soon afterward, the cloud seemed to descend, and cover
the whole ocean; as it certainly did the island of Capreae, and the
promontory of Misenum. My mother strongly conjured me to make my escape
at any rate, which, as I was young, I might easily do; as for herself,
she said, her age and corpulency rendered all attempts of that sort
impossible. However, she would willingly meet death, if she could have
the satisfaction of seeing that she was not the occasion of mine. But I
absolutely refused to leave her, and taking her by the hand, I led her
on; she complied with great reluctance, and not without many reproaches
to herself for retarding my flight.

"The ashes now began to fall upon us, though in no great quantity. I
turned my head and observed behind us a thick smoke, which came rolling
after us like a torrent. I proposed, while we yet had any light, to turn
out of the high road lest she should be pressed to death in the dark by
the crowd that followed us. We had scarce stepped out of the path when
darkness overspread us, not like that of a cloudy night, or when there
is no moon, but of a room when it is all shut up and all the lights
are extinct. Nothing then was to be heard but the shrieks of women,
the screams of children and the cries of men; some calling for their
children, others for their parents, others for their husbands, and only
distinguishing each other by their voices; one lamenting his own fate,
another that of his family; some wishing to die from the very fear
of dying; some lifting their hands to the gods; but the greater part
imagining that the last and eternal night was come, which was to destroy
the gods and the world together. Among them were some who augmented the
real terrors by imaginary ones, and made the frighted multitude believe
that Misenum was actually in flames.

"At length a glimmering light appeared, which we imagined to be rather
the forerunner of an approaching burst of flames, as in truth it was,
than the return of day. However, the fire fell at distance from us; then
again we were immersed in thick darkness, and a heavy shower of ashes
rained upon us, which we were obliged every now and then to shake off,
otherwise we should have been crushed and buried in the heap.

"I might boast that, during all this scene of horror, not a sigh or
expression of fear escaped me, had not my support been founded in that
miserable, though strong, consolation that all mankind were involved in
the same calamity, and that I imagined I was perishing with the world
itself! At last this dreadful darkness was dissipated by degrees, like a
cloud of smoke; the real day returned, and soon the sun appeared, though
very faintly, and as when an eclipse is coming on. Every object that
presented itself to our eyes (which were extremely weakened) seemed
changed, being covered over with white ashes, as with a deep snow. We
returned to Misenum, where we refreshed ourselves as well as we could,
and passed an anxious night between hope and fear, for the earthquake
still continued, while several greatly excited people ran up and
down, heightening their own and their friends' calamities by terrible
predictions. However, my mother and I, notwithstanding the danger we had
passed and that which still threatened us, had no thoughts of leaving
the place till we should receive some account from my uncle.

"And now you will read this narrative without any view of inserting it
in your history, of which it is by no means worthy; and, indeed, you
must impute it to your own request if it shall not even deserve the
trouble of a letter. Farewell!"


DION CASSIUS ON THE ERUPTION


The story told by Pliny is the only one upon which we can rely. Dion
Cassius, the historian, who wrote more than a century later, does not
hesitate to use his imagination, telling us that Pompeii was buried
under showers of ashes "while all the people were sitting in the
theatre." This statement has been effectively made use of by Bulwer, in
his "Last Days of Pompeii." In this he pictures for us a gladiatorial
combat in the arena, with thousands of deeply interested spectators
occupying the surrounding seats. The novelist works his story up to a
thrilling climax in which the volcano plays a leading part.

This is all very well as a vivid piece of fiction, but it does not
accord with fact, since Dion Cassius was undoubtedly incorrect in his
statement. We now know from the evidence furnished by the excavations
that none of the people were destroyed in the theatres, and, indeed,
that there were very few who did not escape from both cities. It is
very likely that many of them returned and dug down for the most valued
treasures in their buried habitations. Dion Cassius may have obtained
the material for his accounts from the traditions of the descendants of
survivors, and if so he shows how terrible must have been the impression
made upon their minds. He assures us that during the eruption a
multitude of men of superhuman nature appeared, sometimes on the
mountain and sometimes in the environs, that stones and smoke were
thrown out, the sun was hidden, and then the giants seemed to rise
again, while the sounds of trumpets were heard.


LAKE AVERNUS


Not far from Vesuvius lay the famous Lake Avernus, whose name was long
a popular synonym for the infernal regions. The lake is harmless to-day,
but its reputation indicates that it was not always so. There is every
reason to believe that it hides the outlet of an extinct volcano, and
that long after the volcano ceased to be active it emitted gases as
fatal to animal life as those suffocating vapors which annihilated all
the cattle on the Island of Lancerote, in the Canaries, in the year
1730. Its name signifies "birdless," indicating that its ascending
vapors were fatal to all birds that attempted to fly above its surface.

In the superstition of the Middle Ages Vesuvius assumed the character
which had before been given to Avernus, and was regarded as the mouth of
hell. Cardinal Damiano, in a letter to Pope Nicholas II., written about
the year 1060 tells the story of how a priest, who had left his mother
ill at Beneventum, went on his homeward way to Naples past the crater of
Vesuvius, and heard issuing therefrom the voice of his mother in great
agony. He afterward found that her death coincided exactly with the time
at which he had heard her voice.

A trip to the summit of Vesuvius is one of the principal attractions
for strangers who are visiting Naples. There is a fascination about that
awful slayer of cities which few can resist, and no less attractive
is the city of Pompeii, now largely laid bare after being buried for
eighteen centuries. We are indebted to Henry Haynie for the following
interesting description: "Once seen, it will never be forgotten. It is
full of suggestions. It kindles emotions that are worth the kindling,
and brings on dreams that are worth the dreaming. Of the three places
overwhelmed, Herculaneum, Pompeii and Stabiae, the last scarcely repays
excavation in one sense, and the first in another; but to watch the
diggers at Pompeii is fascinating, even when there is no reasonable
expectation of a find. Herculaneum was buried with lava, or rather with
tufa, and it is so very hard that the expense of uncovering of only a
small part of that city has been very great.


HOW POMPEII IMPRESSES ITS VISITORS


"Pompeii was smothered in ashes, however, and most of it is uncovered
now. But while there is much that is fascinating, and all of it is
instructive, there is nothing grand or awe-inspiring in the ruins of
Pompeii. No visitor stands breathless as in the great hall of Karnak or
in the once dreadful Coliseum at Rome, or dreams with sensuous delight
as before the Jasmine Court at Agra.

"The weirdness of the scene possesses us as a haunted chamber might. We
have before us the narrow lanes, paved with tufa, in which Roman wagon
wheels have worn deep ruts. We cross streets on stepping-stones which
sandaled feet ages ago polished. We see the wine shops with empty jars,
counters stained with liquor, stone mills where the wheat was ground,
and the very ovens in which bread was baked more than eighteen centuries
ago. 'Welcome' is offered us at one silent, broken doorway; at another
we are warned to 'Beware of the dog!' The painted figures,--some of
them so artistic and rich in colors that pictures of them are
disbelieved,--the mosaic pavements, the empty fountains, the altars and
household gods, the marble pillars and the small gardens are there just
as the owners left them. Some of the walls are scribbled over by the
small boys of Pompeii in strange characters which mock modern erudition.
In places we read the advertisements of gladiatorial shows, never to
come off, the names of candidates for legislative office who were never
to sit. There is nothing like this elsewhere.

"The value of Pompeii to those classic students who would understand,
not the speech only, but the life and the every-day habits, of the
ancient world, is too high for reckoning. Its inestimable evidence may
be seen in the fact that any high-school boy can draw the plan of a
Roman house, while ripest scholars hesitate on the very threshold of
a Greek dwelling. This is because no Hellenic Pompeii has yet been
discovered, but thanks to the silent city close to the beautiful Bay of
Naples, the Latin house is known from ostium to porticus, from the front
door to the back garden wall.


STREETS AND HOUSES OF POMPEII


"The streets of Pompeii must have had a charm unapproached by those
of any city now in existence. The stores, indeed, were wretched little
dens. Two or three of them commonly occupied the front of a house on
either side of the entrance, the ostium; but when the door lay open, as
