that no food can reach them and their allies the Tlascalans. If this is
done, within ten days from now, either they will surrender or they will
strive to break their way back to the coast. But to do this, first they
must win out of the city, and if dykes are cut through the causeways,
that will be no easy matter. Then when they strive to escape cumbered
with the gold they covet and came here to seek, then I say will be the
hour to attack them and to destroy them utterly.'

I ceased, and a murmur of applause went round the council.

'It seems that we came to a wise judgment when we determined to spare
this man's life,' said Cuitlahua, 'for all that he tells us is true, and
I would that we had followed this policy from the first. Now, lords, I
give my voice for acting as our brother points the way. What say you?'

'We say with you that our brother's words are good,' answered Guatemoc
presently, 'and now let us follow them to the end.'

Then, after some further talk, the council broke up and I sought my
chamber well nigh blind with weariness and crushed by the weight of all
that I had suffered on that eventful day. The dawn was flaring in
the eastern sky, and by its glimmer I found my path down the empty
corridors, till at length I came to the curtains of my sleeping place.
I drew them and passed through. There, far up the room, the faint light
gleaming on her snowy dress, her raven hair and ornaments of gold, stood
Otomie my bride.

I went towards her, and as I came she glided to meet me with
outstretched arms. Presently they were about my neck and her kiss was on
my brow.

'Now all is done, my love and lord,' she whispered, 'and come good or
ill, or both, we are one till death, for such vows as ours cannot be
broken.'

'All is done indeed, Otomie, and our oaths are lifelong, though other
oaths have been broken that they might be sworn,' I answered.


Thus then I, Thomas Wingfield, was wed to Otomie, princess of the
Otomie, Montezuma's daughter.



CHAPTER XXIV

THE NIGHT OF FEAR


Long before I awoke that day the commands of the council had been
carried out, and the bridges in the great causeways were broken down
wherever dykes crossed the raised roads that ran through the waters of
the lake. That afternoon also I went dressed as an Indian warrior with
Guatemoc and the other generals, to a parley which was held with Cortes,
who took his stand on the same tower of the palace that Montezuma had
stood on when the arrow of Guatemoc struck him down. There is little to
be said of this parley, and I remember it chiefly because it was then
for the first time since I had left the Tobascans that I saw Marina
close, and heard her sweet and gentle voice. For now as ever she was by
the side of Cortes, translating his proposals of peace to the Aztecs.
Among those proposals was one which showed me that de Garcia had not
been idle. It asked that the false white man who had been rescued from
the altars of the gods upon the teocalli should be given in exchange for
certain Aztec prisoners, in order that he might be hung according to
his merits as a spy and deserter, a traitor to the emperor of Spain. I
wondered as I heard, if Marina knew when she spoke the words, that 'the
false white man' was none other than the friend of her Tobascan days.

'You see that you are fortunate in having found place among us Aztecs,
Teule,' said Guatemoc with a laugh, 'for your own people would greet you
with a rope.'

Then he answered Cortes, saying nothing of me, but bidding him and all
the Spaniards prepare for death:

'Many of us have perished,' he said; 'you also must perish, Teules. You
shall perish of hunger and thirst, you shall perish on the altars of the
gods. There is no escape for you Teules; the bridges are broken.'

And all the multitude took up the words and thundered out, 'There is no
escape for you Teules; the bridges are broken!'

Then the shooting of arrows began, and I sought the palace to tell
Otomie my wife what I had gathered of the state of her father Montezuma,
who the Spaniards said still lay dying, and of her two sisters who were
hostages in their quarters. Also I told her how my surrender had been
sought, and she kissed me, and said smiling, that though my life was now
burdened with her, still it was better so than that I should fall into
the hands of the Spaniards.

Two days later came the news that Montezuma was dead, and shortly after
it his body, which the Spaniards handed over to the Aztecs for burial,
attired in the gorgeous robes of royalty. They laid it in the hall of
the palace, whence it was hurried secretly and at night to Chapoltepec,
and there hidden away with small ceremony, for it was feared that the
people might rend it limb from limb in their rage. With Otomie weeping
at my side, I looked for the last time on the face of that most unhappy
king, whose reign so glorious in its beginning had ended thus. And while
I looked I wondered what suffering could have equalled his, as fallen
from his estate and hated by the subjects whom he had betrayed, he lay
dying, a prisoner in the power of the foreign wolves who were tearing
out his country's heart. It is little wonder indeed that Montezuma
rent the bandages from his wounds and would not suffer them to tend his
hurts. For the real hurt was in his soul; there the iron had entered
deeply, and no leech could cure it except one called Death. And yet
the fault was not all his, the devils whom he worshipped as gods were
revenged upon him, for they had filled him with the superstitions of
their wicked faith, and because of these the gods and their high priest
must sink into a common ruin. Were it not for these unsubstantial
terrors that haunted him, the Spaniards had never won a foothold in
Tenoctitlan, and the Aztecs would have remained free for many a year to
come. But Providence willed it otherwise, and this dead and disgraced
monarch was but its instrument.

Such were the thoughts that passed through my mind as I gazed upon the
body of the great Montezuma. But Otomie, ceasing from her tears, kissed
his clay and cried aloud:

'O my father, it is well that you are dead, for none who loved you
could desire to see you live on in shame and servitude. May the gods you
worshipped give me strength to avenge you, or if they be no gods, then
may I find it in myself. I swear this, my father, that while a man is
left to me I will not cease from seeking to avenge you.'

Then taking my hand, without another word she turned and passed thence.
As will be seen, she kept her oath.


On that day and on the morrow there was fighting with the Spaniards, who
sallied out to fill up the gaps in the dykes of the causeway, a task
in which they succeeded, though with some loss. But it availed them
nothing, for so soon as their backs were turned we opened the dykes
again. It was on these days that for the first time I had experience of
war, and armed with my bow made after the English pattern, I did good
service. As it chanced, the very first arrow that I drew was on my hated
foe de Garcia, but here my common fortune pursued me, for being out of
practice, or over-anxious, I aimed too high, though the mark was an easy
one, and the shaft pierced the iron of his casque, causing him to reel
in his saddle, but doing him no further hurt. Still this marksmanship,
poor as it was, gained me great renown among the Aztecs, who were but
feeble archers, for they had never before seen an arrow pierce through
the Spanish mail. Nor would mine have done so had I not collected the
iron barbs off the crossbow bolts of the Spaniards, and fitted them to
my own shafts. I seldom found the mail that would withstand arrows made
thus, when the range was short and the aim good.

After the first day's fight I was appointed general over a body of three
thousand archers, and was given a banner to be borne before me and a
gorgeous captain's dress to wear. But what pleased me better was a chain
shirt which came from the body of a Spanish cavalier. For many years I
always wore this shirt beneath my cotton mail, and it saved my life more
than once, for even bullets would not pierce the two of them.

I had taken over the command of my archers but forty-eight hours, a
scant time in which to teach them discipline whereof they had little,
though they were brave enough, when the occasion came to use them in
good earnest, and with it the night of disaster that is still known
among the Spaniards as the noche triste. On the afternoon before that
night a council was held in the palace at which I spoke, saying, I was
certain that the Teules thought of retreat from the city, and in the
dark, for otherwise they would not have been so eager to fill up the
canals in the causeway. To this Cuitlahua, who now that Montezuma
was dead would be emperor, though he was not yet chosen and crowned,
answered that it might well be that the Teules meditated flight, but
that they could never attempt it in the darkness, since in so doing they
must become entangled in the streets and dykes.

I replied that though it was not the Aztec habit to march and fight at
night, such things were common enough among white men as they had seen
already, and that because the Spaniards knew it was not their habit,
they would be the more likely to attempt escape under cover of the
darkness, when they thought their enemies asleep. Therefore I counselled
that sentries should be set at all the entrances to every causeway.
To this Cuitlahua assented, and assigned the causeway of Tlacopan to
Guatemoc and myself, making us the guardians of its safety. That night
Guatemoc and I, with some soldiers, went out towards midnight to visit
the guard that we had placed upon the causeway. It was very dark and a
fine rain fell, so that a man could see no further before his eyes
than he can at evening through a Norfolk roke in autumn. We found and
relieved the guard, which reported that all was quiet, and we were
returning towards the great square when of a sudden I heard a dull sound
as of thousands of men tramping.

'Listen,' I said.

'It is the Teules who escape,' whispered Guatemoc.

Quickly we ran to where the street from the great square opens on to
the causeway, and there even through the darkness and rain we caught the
gleam of armour. Then I cried aloud in a great voice, 'To arms! To arms!
The Teules escape by the causeway of Tlacopan.'

Instantly my words were caught up by the sentries and passed from post
to post till the city rang with them. They were cried in every street
and canal, they echoed from the roofs of houses, and among the summits
of a hundred temples. The city awoke with a murmur, from the lake came
the sound of water beaten by ten thousand oars, as though myriads of
wild-fowl had sprung suddenly from their reedy beds. Here, there, and
everywhere torches flashed out like falling stars, wild notes were blown
on horns and shells, and above all arose the booming of the snakeskin
drum which the priests upon the teocalli beat furiously.

Presently the murmur grew to a roar, and from this direction and from
that, armed men poured towards the causeway of Tlacopan. Some came on
foot, but the most of them were in canoes which covered the waters
of the lake further than the ear could hear. Now the Spaniards to
the number of fifteen hundred or so, accompanied by some six or eight
thousand Tlascalans, were emerging on the causeway in a long thin line.
Guatemoc and I rushed before them, collecting men as we went, till we
came to the first canal, where canoes were already gathering by scores.
The head of the Spanish column reached the canal and the fight began,
which so far as the Aztecs were concerned was a fray without plan or
order, for in that darkness and confusion the captains could not
see their men or the men hear their captains. But they were there in
countless numbers and had only one desire in their breasts, to kill the
Teules. A cannon roared, sending a storm of bullets through us, and by
its flash we saw that the Spaniards carried a timber bridge with them,
which they were placing across the canal. Then we fell on them, every
man fighting for himself. Guatemoc and I were swept over that bridge by
the first rush of the enemy, as leaves are swept in a gale, and though
both of us won through safely we saw each other no more that night. With
us and after us came the long array of Spaniards and Tlascalans,
and from every side the Aztecs poured upon them, clinging to their
struggling line as ants cling to a wounded worm.

How can I tell all that came to pass that night? I cannot, for I saw
but little of it. All I know is that for two hours I was fighting like
a madman. The foe crossed the first canal, but when all were over the
bridge was sunk so deep in the mud that it could not be stirred, and
three furlongs on ran a second canal deeper and wider than the first.
Over this they could not cross till it was bridged with the dead. It
seemed as though all hell had broken loose upon that narrow ridge of
ground. The sound of cannons and of arquebusses, the shrieks of agony
and fear, the shouts of the Spanish soldiers, the war-cries of the
Aztecs, the screams of wounded horses, the wail of women, the hiss of
hurtling darts and arrows, and the dull noise of falling blows went up
to heaven in one hideous hurly-burly. Like a frightened mob of cattle
the long Spanish array swayed this way and that, bellowing as it swayed.
Many rolled down the sides of the causeway to be slaughtered in the
water of the lake, or borne away to sacrifice in the canoes, many were
drowned in the canals, and yet more were trampled to death in the mud.
Hundreds of the Aztecs perished also, for the most part beneath the
weapons of their own friends, who struck and shot not knowing on whom
the blow should fall or in whose breast the arrow would find its home.

For my part I fought on with a little band of men who had gathered about
me, till at last the dawn broke and showed an awful sight. The most of
those who were left alive of the Spaniards and their allies had crossed
the second canal upon a bridge made of the dead bodies of their fellows
mixed up with a wreck of baggage, cannon, and packages of treasure. Now
the fight was raging beyond it. A mob of Spaniards and Tlascalans were
still crossing the second breach, and on these I fell with such men
as were with me. I plunged right into the heart of them, and suddenly
before me I saw the face of de Garcia. With a shout I rushed at him. He
heard my voice and knew me. With an oath he struck at my head. The heavy
sword came down upon my helmet of painted wood, shearing away one side
of it and felling me, but ere I fell I smote him on the breast with the
club I carried, tumbling him to the earth. Now half stunned and blinded
I crept towards him through the press. All that I could see was a gleam
of armour in the mud. I threw myself upon it, gripping at the wearer's
throat, and together we rolled down the side of the causeway into the
shallow water at the edge of the lake. I was uppermost, and with a
fierce joy I dashed the blood from my eyes that I might see to kill my
enemy caught at last. His body was in the lake but his head lay upon the
sloping bank, and my plan was to hold him beneath the water till he was
drowned, for I had lost my club.

'At length, de Garcia!' I cried in Spanish as I shifted my grip.

'For the love of God let me go!' gasped a rough voice beneath me. 'Fool,
I am no Indian dog.'

Now I peered into the man's face bewildered. I had seized de Garcia, but
the voice was not his voice, nor was the face his face, but that of a
rough Spanish soldier.

'Who are you?' I asked, slackening my hold. 'Where is de Garcia--he whom
you name Sarceda?'

'Sarceda? I don't know. A minute ago he was on his back on the causeway.
The fellow pulled me down and rolled behind me. Let me be I say. I am
not Sarceda, and if I were, is this a time to settle private quarrels?
I am your comrade, Bernal Diaz. Holy Mother! who are you? An Aztec who
speaks Castilian?'

'I am no Aztec,' I answered. 'I am an Englishman and I fight with the
Aztecs that I may slay him whom you name Sarceda. But with you I have no
quarrel, Bernal Diaz. Begone and escape if you can. No, I will keep the
sword with your leave.'

'Englishman, Spaniard, Aztec, or devil,' grunted the man as he drew
himself from his bed of ooze, 'you are a good fellow, and I promise you
that if I live through this, and it should ever come about that I get
YOU by the throat, I will remember the turn you did me. Farewell;' and
without more ado he rushed up the bank and plunged into a knot of his
flying countrymen, leaving his good sword in my hand. I strove to follow
him that I might find my enemy, who once more had escaped me by craft,
but my strength failed me, for de Garcia's sword had bitten deep and I
bled much. So I must sit where I was till a canoe came and bore me back
to Otomie to be nursed, and ten days went by before I could walk again.

This was my share in the victory of the noche triste. Alas! it was a
barren triumph, though more than five hundred of the Spaniards were
slain and thousands of their allies. For there was no warlike skill or
discipline among the Aztecs, and instead of following the Spaniards till
not one of them remained alive, they stayed to plunder the dead and drag
away the living to sacrifice. Also this day of revenge was a sad one
to Otomie, seeing that two of her brothers, Montezuma's sons whom the
Spaniards held in hostage, perished with them in the fray.

As for de Garcia I could not learn what had become of him, nor whether
he was dead or living.



CHAPTER XXV

THE BURYING OF MONTEZUMA'S TREASURE


Cuitlahua was crowned Emperor of the Aztecs in succession to his brother
Montezuma, while I lay sick with the wound given me by the sword of
de Garcia, and also with that which I had received on the altar of
sacrifice. This hurt had found no time to heal, and in the fierce
fighting on the Night of Fear it burst open and bled much. Indeed it
gave me trouble for years, and to this hour I feel it in the autumn
season. Otomie, who nursed me tenderly, and so strange is the heart
of woman, even seemed to be consoled in her sorrow at the loss of her
father and nearest kin, because I had escaped the slaughter and won
fame, told me of the ceremony of the crowning, which was splendid
enough. Indeed the Aztecs were almost mad with rejoicing because the
Teules had gone at last. They forgot, or seemed to forget, the loss of
thousands of their bravest warriors and of the flower of their rank, and
as yet, at any rate, they did not look forward to the future. From
house to house and street to street ran troops of young men and maidens
garlanded with flowers, crying, 'The Teules are gone, rejoice with
us; the Teules are fled!' and woe to them who were not merry, ay, even
though their houses were desolate with death. Also the statues of the
gods were set up again on the great pyramid and their temples rebuilt,
the holy crucifix that the Spaniards had placed there being served as
the idols Huitzel and Tezcat had been served, and tumbled down the sides
of the teocalli, and that after sacrifice of some Spanish prisoners had
been offered in its presence. It was Guatemoc himself who told me
of this sacrilege, but not with any exultation, for I had taught him
something of our faith, and though he was too sturdy a heathen to change
his creed, in secret he believed that the God of the Christians was
a true and mighty God. Moreover, though he was obliged to countenance
them, because of the power of the priests, like Otomie, Guatemoc never
loved the horrid rites of human sacrifice.

Now when I heard this tale my anger overcame my reason, and I spoke
fiercely, saying:

'I am sworn to your cause, Guatemoc, my brother, and I am married to
your blood, but I tell you that from this hour it is an accursed cause;
because of your bloodstained idols and your priests, it is accursed.
That God whom you have desecrated, and those who serve Him shall come
back in power, and He shall sit where your idols sat and none shall stir
Him for ever.'

Thus I spoke, and my words were true, though I do not know what put them
into my heart, since I spoke at random in my wrath. For to-day Christ's
Church stands upon the site of the place of sacrifice in Mexico, a sign
and a token of His triumph over devils, and there it shall stand while
the world endures.

'You speak rashly, my brother,' Guatemoc answered, proudly enough,
though I saw him quail at the evil omen of my words. 'I say you speak
rashly, and were you overheard there are those, notwithstanding the rank
we have given you, the honour which you have won in war and council, and
that you have passed the stone of sacrifice, who might force you to look
again upon the faces of the beings you blaspheme. What worse thing has
been done to your Christian God than has been done again and again to
our gods by your white kindred? But let us talk no more of this matter,
and I pray you, my brother, do not utter such ill-omened words to me
again, lest it should strain our love. Do you then believe that the
Teules will return?'

'Ay, Guatemoc, so surely as to-morrow's sun shall rise. When you held
Cortes in your hand you let him go, and since then he has won a victory
at Otompan. Is he a man, think you, to sheathe the sword that he has
once drawn, and go down into darkness and dishonour? Before a year is
past the Spaniards will be back at the gates of Tenoctitlan.'

'You are no comforter to-night, my brother,' said Guatemoc, 'and yet I
fear that your words are true. Well, if we must fight, let us strive
to win. Now, at least, there is no Montezuma to take the viper to
his breast and nurse it till it stings him.' Then he rose and went in
silence, and I saw that his heart was heavy.

On the morrow of this talk I could leave my bed, and within a week I was
almost well. Now it was that Guatemoc came to me again, saying that he
had been bidden by Cuitlahua the emperor, to command me to accompany
him, Guatemoc, on a service of trust and secrecy. And indeed the nature
of the service showed how great a confidence the leaders of the Aztecs
now placed in me, for it was none other than the hiding away of the
treasure that had been recaptured from the Spaniards on the Night of
Fear, and with it much more from the secret stores of the empire.

At the fall of darkness we started, some of the great lords, Guatemoc
and I, and coming to the water's edge, we found ten large canoes, each
laden with something that was hidden by cotton cloths. Into these canoes
we entered secretly, thinking that none saw us, three to a canoe, for
there were thirty of us in all, and led by Guatemoc, we paddled for two
hours or more across the Lake Tezcuco, till we reached the further shore
at a spot where this prince had a fair estate. Here we landed, and the
cloths were withdrawn from the cargoes of the canoes, which were great
jars and sacks of gold and jewels, besides many other precious objects,
among them a likeness of the head of Montezuma, fashioned in solid gold,
which was so heavy that it was as much as Guatemoc and I could do to
lift it between us. As for the jars, of which, if my memory serves me,
there were seventeen, six men must carry each of them by the help of
paddles lashed on either side, and then the task was not light. All this
priceless stuff we bore in several journeys to the crest of a rise some
six hundred paces distant from the water, setting it down by the mouth
of a shaft behind the shelter of a mound of earth. When everything was
brought up from the boats, Guatemoc touched me and another man, a great
Aztec noble, born of a Tlascalan mother, on the shoulder, asking us if
we were willing to descend with him into the hole, and there to dispose
of the treasure.

'Gladly,' I answered, for I was curious to see the place, but the noble
hesitated awhile, though in the end he came with us, to his ill-fortune.

Then Guatemoc took torches in his hand, and was lowered into the shaft
by a rope. Next came my turn, and down I went, hanging to the cord like
a spider to its thread, and the hole was very deep. At length I found
myself standing by the side of Guatemoc at the foot of the shaft, round
which, as I saw by the light of the torch he carried, an edging of dried
bricks was built up to the height of a man above our heads. Resting on
this edging and against the wall of the shaft, was a massive block of
stone sculptured with the picture writing of the Aztecs. I glanced at
the writing, which I could now read well, and saw that it recorded
the burying of the treasure in the first year of Cuitlahua, Emperor of
Mexico, and also a most fearful curse on him who should dare to steal
it. Beyond us and at right angles to the shaft ran another passage, ten
paces in length and high enough for a man to walk in, which led to a
chamber hollowed in the earth, as large as that wherein I write to-day
at Ditchingham. By the mouth of this chamber were placed piles of adobe
bricks and mortar, much as the blocks of hewn stone had been placed in
that underground vault at Seville where Isabella de Siguenza was bricked
up living.

'Who dug this place?' I asked.

'Those who knew not what they dug,' answered Guatemoc. 'But see, here
is our companion. Now, my brother, I charge you be surprised at nothing
which comes to pass, and be assured I have good reason for anything that
I may do.'

Before I could speak again the Aztec noble was at our side. Then those
above began to lower the jars and sacks of treasure, and as they reached
us one by one, Guatemoc loosed the ropes and checked them, while the
Aztec and I rolled them down the passage into the chamber, as here in
England men roll a cask of ale. For two hours and more we worked, till
at length all were down and the tale was complete. The last parcel to be
lowered was a sack of jewels that burst open as it came, and descended
upon us in a glittering rain of gems. As it chanced, a great necklace of
emeralds of surpassing size and beauty fell over my head and hung upon
my shoulders.

'Keep it, brother,' laughed Guatemoc, 'in memory of this night,' and
nothing loth, I hid the bauble in my breast. That necklace I have yet,
and it was a stone of it--the smallest save one--that I gave to our
gracious Queen Elizabeth. Otomie wore it for many years, and for this
reason it shall be buried with me, though its value is priceless, so say
those who are skilled in gems. But priceless or no, it is doomed to lie
in the mould of Ditchingham churchyard, and may that same curse which
is graved upon the stone that hides the treasure of the Aztecs fall upon
him who steals it from my bones.

Now, leaving the chamber, we three entered the tunnel and began the work
of building the adobe wall. When it was of a height of between two and
three feet, Guatemoc paused from his labour and bade me hold a torch
aloft. I obeyed wondering what he wished to see. Then he drew back some
three paces into the tunnel and spoke to the Aztec noble, our companion,
by name.

'What is the fate of discovered traitors, friend?' he said in a voice
that, quiet though it was, sounded very terrible; and, as he spoke, he
loosed from his side the war club set with spikes of glass that hung
there by a thong.

Now the Aztec turned grey beneath his dusky skin and trembled in his
fear.

'What mean you, lord?' he gasped.

'You know well what I mean,' answered Guatemoc in the same terrible
voice, and lifted the club.
