was Madame de Bruhl and no other.

She began by addressing me in a tone of bitterness, for which I was not
altogether unprepared.

'Well, sir,' she exclaimed, her voice trembling with anger, 'you are
satisfied, I hope, with your work?'

I expected this and had my answer ready. 'I am not aware, Madame,' I
said, 'that I have cause to reproach myself. But, however that may be, I
trust you have summoned me for some better purpose than to chide me for
another's fault; though it was my voice which brought it to light.'

'Why did you shame me publicly?' she retorted, thrusting her
handkerchief to her lips and withdrawing it again with a passionate
gesture.

'Madame,' I answered patiently--I was full of pity for her, 'consider
for a moment the wrong your husband did me and how small and inadequate
was the thing I did to him in return.'

'To him!' she ejaculated so fiercely that I started. 'It was to me--to
me you did it! What had I done that you should expose me to the ridicule
of those who know no pity, and the anger of one as merciless? What had I
done, sir?'

I shook my head sorrowfully. 'So far, madame,' I answered, 'I allow I
owe you reparation, and I will make it should it ever be in my power.
Nay, I will say more,' I continued, for the tone in which she spoke had
wrung my heart. 'In one point I strained the case against your husband.
To the best of my belief he abducted the lady who was in my charge,
not for the love of her, but for political reasons, and as the agent of
another.'

She gasped. 'What?' she cried. 'Say that again!'

As I complied she tore off her mask and gazed into my face with
straining eyes and parted lips. I saw then how much she was changed,
even in these few days--how pale and worn were her cheeks, how dark
the circles round her eyes. 'Will you swear to it?' she said at last,
speaking with uncontrollable eagerness, while she laid a hand which
shook with excitement on my arm. Will you swear to it, sir?'

'It is true,' I answered steadfastly. I might have added that after the
event her husband had so treated mademoiselle as to lead her to fear the
worst. But I refrained, feeling that it was no part of my duty to come
between husband and wife.

She clasped her hands, and for a moment looked passionately upwards, as
though she were giving thanks to Heaven; while the flesh of health and
loveliness which I had so much admired returned, and illumined her
face in a wonderful manner. She seemed, in truth and for the moment,
transformed. Her blue eyes filled with tears, her lips moved; nor have
I ever seen anything bear so near a resemblance to those pictures of the
Virgin Mary which Romans worship as madame did then.

The change, however, was as evanescent as it was admirable. In an
instant she seemed to collapse. She struck her hands to her face and
moaned, and I saw tears, which she vainly strove to restrain, dropping
through her fingers. 'Too late!' she murmured, in a tone of anguish
which wrung my heart. 'Alas, you robbed me of one man, you give me back
another. I know him now for what he is. If he did not love her then, he
does now. It is too late!'

She seemed so much overcome that I assisted her to reach a bench which
stood against the wall a few paces away; nor, I confess, was it without
difficulty and much self-reproach that I limited myself to those prudent
offices only which her state and my duty required. To console her on the
subject of her husband was impossible; to ignore him, and so to console
her, a task which neither my discretion nor my sense of honour, though
sorely tried, permitted me to undertake.

She presently recovered and, putting on her mask again, said hurriedly
that she had still a word to say to me. 'You have treated me honestly,'
she continued, 'and, though I have no cause to do anything but hate you,
I say in return, look to yourself! You escaped last night--I know all,
for it was my velvet knot--which I had made thinking to send it to you
to procure this meeting--that he used as a lure. But he is not yet at
the end of his resources. Look to yourself, therefore.'

I thought of the appointment I had made with him for the morrow, but I
confined myself to thanking her, merely saying, as I bowed over the hand
she resigned to me in token of farewell, 'Madame, I am grateful. I am
obliged to you both for your warning and your forgiveness.'

'Bending her head coldly she drew away her hand. At that moment, as I
lifted my eyes, I saw something which for an instant rooted me to the
spot with astonishment. In the entrance of the passage which led to the
Rue St. Denys two people were standing, watching us. The one was Simon
Fleix, and the other, a masked woman, a trifle below the middle height,
and clad in a riding-coat, was Mademoiselle de la Vire!

I knew her in a moment. But the relief I experienced on seeing her safe
and in Blois was not unmixed with annoyance that Simon Fleix should have
been so imprudent as to parade her unnecessarily in the street. I felt
something of confusion also on my own account; for I could not tell how
long she and her escort had been watching me. And these two feelings
were augmented when, after turning to pay a final salute to Madame
de Bruhl, I looked again towards the passage and discovered that
mademoiselle and her squire were gone.

Impatient as I was, I would not seem to leave madame rudely or without
feeling, after the consideration she had shown me in her own sorrow; and
accordingly I waited uncovered until she disappeared within the 'Little
Sisters.' Then I started eagerly towards my lodging, thinking I might
yet overtake mademoiselle before she entered. I was destined to meet,
however, with another though very pertinent hindrance. As I passed from
the Rue St. Denys into the quiet of my street I heard a voice calling my
name, and, looking back, saw M. de Rambouillet's equerry, a man deep in
his confidence, running after me. He brought a message from his master,
which he begged me to consider of the first importance.

'The Marquis would not trust it to writing, sir,' he continued, drawing
me aside into a corner where we were conveniently retired, 'but he made
me learn it by heart. "Tell M. de Marsac," said he, "that that which he
was left in Blois to do must be done quickly, or not at all. There is
something afoot in the other camp, I am not sure what. But now is the
time to knock in the nail. I know his zeal, and I depend upon him."'

An hour before I should have listened to this message with serious
doubts and misgivings. Now, acquainted with mademoiselle's arrival, I
returned M. de Rambouillet an answer in the same strain, and parting
civilly from Bertram, who was a man I much esteemed, I hastened on to my
lodgings, exulting in the thought that the hour and the woman were come
at last, and that before the dawn of another day I might hope, all being
well, to accomplish with honour to myself and advantage to others the
commission which M. de Rosny had entrusted to me.

I must not deny that, mingled with this, was some excitement at the
prospect of seeing mademoiselle again. I strove to conjure up before me
as I mounted the stairs the exact expression of her face as I had last
seen it bending from the window at Rosny; to the end that I might have
some guide for my future conduct, and might be less likely to fall into
the snare of a young girl's coquetry. But I could come now, as then, to
no satisfactory or safe conclusion, and only felt anew the vexation I
had experienced on losing the velvet knot, which she had given me on
that occasion.

I knocked at the door of the rooms which I had reserved for her, and
which were on the floor below my own; but I got no answer. Supposing
that Simon had taken her upstairs, I mounted quickly, not doubting I
should find her there. Judge of my surprise and dismay when I found that
room also empty, save for the lackey whom M. de Rambouillet had lent me!

'Where are they?' I asked the man, speaking sharply, and standing with
my hand on the door.

'The lady and her woman, sir?' he answered, coming forward.

'Yes, yes!' I cried impatiently, a sudden fear at my heart.

She went out immediately after her arrival with Simon Fleix, sir, and
has not yet returned,' he answered.

The words were scarcely out of his mouth before I heard several persons
enter the passage below and begin to ascend the stairs. I did not;
doubt that mademoiselle and the lad had come home another way and, been
somehow detained; and I turned with a sigh of relief to receive them.
But when the persons whose steps I had heard appeared, they proved to be
only M. de Rosny's equerry, stout, burly, and bright-eyed as ever, and
two armed servants.



CHAPTER XXII. 'LA FEMME DISPOSE.'

The moment the equerry's foot touched the uppermost stair I advanced
upon him. 'Where is your mistress, man?' I said. 'Where is Mademoiselle
de la Vire? Be quick, tell me what you have done with her.'

His face fell amazingly. 'Where is she?' he answered, faltering between
surprise and alarm at my sudden onslaught. 'Here, she should be. I left
her here not an hour ago. Mon Dieu! Is she not here now?'

His alarm increased mine tenfold. 'No!' I retorted, 'she is not! She is
gone! And you--what business had you, in the fiend's name, to leave her
here, alone and unprotected? Tell me that!'

He leaned against the balustrade, making no attempt to defend himself,
and seemed, in his sudden terror, anything but the bold, alert fellow
who had ascended the stairs two minutes before. 'I was a fool,' he
groaned. 'I saw your man Simon here; and Fanchette, who is as good as a
man, was with her mistress. And I went to stable the horses. I thought
no evil. And now--My God!' he added, suddenly straightening himself,
while his face grew hard and grim, 'I am undone! My master will never
forgive me!'

'Did you come straight here?' I said, considering that, after all, he
was no more in fault than I had been on a former occasion.

'We went first to M. de Rosny's lodging,' he answered, 'where we found
your message telling us to come here. We came on without dismounting.'

'Mademoiselle may have gone back, and be there,' I said. 'It is
possible. Do you stay here and keep a good look-out, and I will go and
see. Let one of your men come with me.'

He uttered a brief assent; being a man as ready to take as to give
orders, and thankful now for any suggestion which held out a hope of
mademoiselle's safety. Followed by the servant he selected, I ran down
the stairs, and in a moment was hurrying along the Rue St. Denys. The
day was waning. The narrow streets and alleys were already dark, but the
air of excitement which I had noticed in the morning still marked the
townsfolk, of whom a great number were strolling abroad, or standing
in doorways talking to their gossips. Feverishly anxious as I was, I
remarked the gloom which dwelt on all faces; but as I set it down to
the king's approaching departure, and besides was intent on seeing that
those we sought did not by any chance pass us in the crowd, I thought
little of it. Five minutes' walking brought us to M. de Rosny's lodging.
There I knocked at the door; impatiently, I confess, and with little
hope of success. But, to my surprise, barely an instant elapsed before
the door opened, and I saw before me Simon Fleix!

Discovering who it was, he cowered back, with a terrified face, and
retreated to the wall with his arm raised.

'You scoundrel!' I exclaimed, restraining myself with difficulty. 'Tell
me this moment where Mademoiselle de la Vire is! Or, by Heaven, I shall
forget what my mother owed to you, and do you a mischief!'

For an instant he glared at me viciously, with all his teeth exposed, as
though he meant to refuse--and more. Then he thought better of it, and,
raising his hand, pointed sulkily upwards.

'Go before me and knock at the door,' I said, tapping the hilt of my
dagger with meaning.

Cowed by my manner, he obeyed, and led the way to the room in which M.
de Rambouillet had surprised us on a former occasion. Here he stopped
at the door and knocked gently; on which a sharp voice inside bade us
enter. I raised the latch and did so, closing the door behind me.

Mademoiselle, still wearing her riding-coat, sat in a chair before the
hearth, on which a newly kindled fire sputtered and smoked. She had her
back to me, and did not turn on my entrance, but continued to toy in
an absent manner with the strings of the mask which lay in her lap.
Fanchette stood bolt upright behind her, with her elbows squared and
her hands clasped; in such an attitude that I guessed the maid had
been expressing her strong dissatisfaction with this latest whim of her
mistress, and particularly with mademoiselle's imprudence in wantonly
exposing herself, with so inadequate a guard as Simon, in a place where
she had already suffered so much. I was confirmed in this notion on
seeing the woman's harsh countenance clear at sight of me; though the
churlish nod, which was all the greeting she bestowed on me, seemed to
betoken anything but favour or good-will. She touched her mistress on
the shoulder, however, and said, 'M. de Marsac is here.'

Mademoiselle turned her head and looked at me languidly, without
stirring in her chair or removing the foot she, was warming. 'Good
evening,' she said.

The greeting seemed so brief and so commonplace, ignoring, as it did,
both the pains and anxiety to which she had just put me and the great
purpose for which we were here--to say nothing of that ambiguous parting
which she must surely remember as well as I--that the words I had
prepared died on my lips, and I looked at her in honest confusion. All
her small face was pale except her lips. Her brow was dark, her eyes
were hard as well as weary. And not words only failed me as I looked at
her, but anger; having mounted the stairs hot foot to chide, I felt on a
sudden--despite my new cloak and scabbard, my appointment, and the same
I had made at Court--the same consciousness of age; and shabbiness and
poverty which had possessed me in her presence from the beginning. I
muttered, 'Good evening, mademoiselle,' and that was all I could say--I
who had frightened the burly Maignan a few minutes before!

Seeing, I have no doubt, the effect she produced on me, she maintained
for some time an embarrassing silence. At length she said, frigidly,
'Perhaps M. de Marsac will sit, Fanchette. Place a chair for him. I
am afraid, however, that after his successes at Court he may find our
reception somewhat cold. But we are only from the country,' she added,
looking at me askance, with a gleam of anger in her eyes.

I thanked her huskily, saying that I would not sit, as I could not stay.
'Simon Fleix,' I continued, finding my voice with difficulty, 'has, I am
afraid, caused you some trouble by bringing you to this house instead of
telling you that I had made preparation for you at my lodgings.'

'It was not Simon Fleix's fault,' she replied curtly. 'I prefer these
rooms. They are more convenient.'

'They are, perhaps, more convenient,' I rejoined humbly, 'But I have
to think of safety, mademoiselle, as you know. At my house I have a
competent guard, and can answer for your being unmolested.'

'You can send your guard here,' she said with a royal air.

'But, mademoiselle--'

'Is it not enough that I have said that I prefer these rooms?' she
replied sharply, dropping her mask on her lap and looking round at me in
undisguised displeasure. 'Are you deaf, sir? Let me tell you, I am in
no mood for argument. I am tired with riding. I prefer these rooms, and
that is enough!'

Nothing could exceed the determination with which she said these words,
unless it were the malicious pleasure in thwarting my wishes which made
itself seen through the veil of assumed indifference. I felt myself
brought up with a vengeance, and in a manner the most provoking that
could be conceived. But opposition so childish, so utterly wanton,
by exciting my indignation, had presently the effect of banishing the
peculiar bashfulness I felt in her presence, and recalling me to my
duty.

'Mademoiselle,' I said firmly, looking at her with a fixed countenance,
'pardon me if I speak plainly. This is no time for playing with straws.
The men from whom you escaped once are as determined and more desperate
now. By this time they probably know of your arrival. Do, then, as I
ask, I pray and beseech you. Or this time I may lack the power, though
never the will, to save you.'

Wholly ignoring my appeal, she looked into my face--for by this time I
had advanced to her side--with a whimsical smile. 'You are really much
improved in manner since I last saw you,' she said.

'Mademoiselle!' I replied, baffled and repelled. 'What do you mean?'

'What I say,' she answered, flippantly. 'But it was to be expected.'

'For shame!' I cried, provoked almost beyond bearing by her ill-timed
raillery, 'will you never be serious until you have ruined us and
yourself? I tell you this house is not safe for you! It is not safe for
me! I cannot bring my men to it, for there is not room for them. If you
have any spark of consideration, of gratitude, therefore--'

'Gratitude!' she exclaimed, swinging her mask slowly to and fro by a
ribbon, while she looked up at me as though my excitement amused her.
'Gratitude--'tis a very pretty phrase, and means much; but it is for
those who serve us faithfully, M. de Marsac, and not for others. You
receive so many favours, I am told, and are so successful at Court, that
I should not be justified in monopolising your services.'

'But, mademoiselle--' I said in a low tone. And there I stopped. I dared
not proceed.

'Well, sir,' she answered, looking up at she after a moment's silence,
and ceasing on a sudden to play with her toy, 'what is it?'

'You spoke of favours,' I continued, with an effort. 'I never received
but one from a lady. That was at Rosny, and from your hand.'

'From my hand?' she answered, with an air of cold surprise.

'It was so, mademoiselle.'

'You have fallen into some strange mistake, sir,' she replied, rousing
herself, and looking at me indifferently 'I never gave you a favour.'

I bowed low. 'If you say you did not, mademoiselle, that is enough,' I
answered.

'Nay, but do not let me do you an injustice, M. de Marsac,' she
rejoined, speaking more quickly and in an altered tone. 'If you can show
me the favour I gave you, I shall, of course, be convinced. Seeing
is believing, you know,' she added, with a light nervous laugh, and a
gesture of something like shyness.

If I had not sufficiently regretted my carelessness, and loss of the bow
at the time, I did so now. I looked at her in silence, and saw her face,
that had for a moment shown signs of feeling, almost of shame, grow
slowly hard again.

'Well, sir?' she said impatiently. 'The proof is easy.'

'It was taken from me; I believe, by M. de Rosny,' I answered lamely,
wondering what ill-luck had led her to put the question and press it to
this point.

'It was taken from you!' she exclaimed, rising and confronting me with
the utmost suddenness, while her eyes flashed, and her little hand
crumpled the mask beyond future usefulness. 'It was taken from you,
sir!' she repeated, her voice and her whole frame trembling with
anger and disdain. 'Then I thank you, I prefer my version. Yours is
impossible. For let me tell you, when Mademoiselle de la Vire does
confer a favour, it will be on a man with the power and the wit--and the
constancy, to keep it, even from M. de Rosny!'

Her scorn hurt, though it did not anger me. I felt it to be in a measure
deserved, and raged against myself rather than against her. But aware
through all of the supreme importance of placing her in safety, I
subjected my immediate feelings to the exigencies of the moment and
stooped to an argument which would, I thought, have weight though
private pleading failed.

'Putting myself aside, mademoiselle,' I said, with more formality than I
had yet used, 'there is one consideration which must weigh with you. The
king--'

'The king!' she cried, interrupting me violently, her face hot with
passion and her whole person instinct with stubborn self-will. 'I shall
not see the king!'

'You will not see the king?' I repeated in amazement.

'No, I will not!' she answered, in a whirl of anger, scorn, and
impetuosity. 'There! I will not! I have been made a toy and a tool long
enough, M. de Marsac,' she continued, 'and I will serve others' ends no
more. I have made up my mind. Do not talk to me; you will do no good,
sir. I would to Heaven,' she added bitterly, 'I had stayed at Chize and
never seen this place!'

'But, mademoiselle,' I said, 'you have not thought--'

'Thought!' she exclaimed, shutting her small white teeth so viciously
I all but recoiled. 'I have thought enough. I am sick of thought. I am
going to act now. I will be a puppet no longer. You may take me to the
castle by force if you will; but you cannot make me speak.'

I looked at her in the utmost dismay, and astonishment; being unable at
first to believe that a woman who had gone through so much, had run so
many risks, and ridden so many miles for a purpose, would, when all
was done and the hour come, decline to carry out her plan. I could
not believe it, I say, at first; and I tried arguments, and entreaties
without stint, thinking that she only asked to be entreated or coaxed.

But I found prayers and even threats breath wasted upon her; and beyond
these I would not go. I know I have been blamed by some and ridiculed by
others for not pushing the matter farther; but those who have stood face
to face with a woman of spirit--a woman whose very frailty and weakness
fought for her--will better understand the difficulties with which I had
to contend and the manner in which conviction was at last borne in on
my mind. I had never before confronted stubbornness of this kind. As
mademoiselle said again and again, I might force her to Court, but I
could not make her speak.

When I had tried every means of persuasion, and still found no way of
overcoming her resolution the while Fanchette looked on with a face of
wood, neither aiding me nor taking part against me--I lost, I confess,
in the chagrin of the moment that sense of duty which had hitherto
animated me; and though my relation to mademoiselle should have made me
as careful as ever of her safety, even in her own despite, I left her
at last in anger and went out without saying another word about removing
her--a thing which was still in my power. I believe a very brief
reflection would have recalled me to myself and my duty; but the
opportunity was not given me, for I had scarcely reached the head of the
stairs before Fanchette came after me, and called to me in a whisper to
stop.

She held a taper in her hand, and this she raised to my face, smiling at
the disorder which she doubtless read there. 'Do you say that this house
is not safe?' she asked abruptly, lowering the light as she spoke.

'You have tried a house in Blois before?' I replied with the same
bluntness. 'You should know as well as I, woman.'

'She must be taken from here, then,' she answered, nodding her head,
cunningly. 'I can persuade her. Do you send for your people, and be here
in half an hour. It may take me that time to wheedle her. But I shall do
it.'

'Then listen,' I said eagerly, seizing the opportunity and her sleeve
and drawing her farther from the door. 'If you can persuade her to that,
you can persuade to all I wish. Listen, my friend,' I continued, sinking
my voice still lower. 'If she will see the king for only ten minutes,
and tell him what she knows, I will give you--'

'What?' the woman asked suddenly and harshly, drawing at the same time
her sleeve from my hand.

'Fifty crowns,' I replied, naming in my desperation a sum which would
seem a fortune to a person in her position. 'Fifty crowns down, the
moment the interview is over.'

'And for that you would have me sell her!' the woman cried with a rude
intensity of passion which struck me like a blow. 'For shame! For
shame, man! You persuaded her to leave her home and her friends, and the
country where she was known; and now you would have me sell her! Shame
on you! Go!' she added scornfully. 'Go this instant and get your men.
The king, say you? The king! I tell you I would not have her finger ache
to save all your kings!'

She flounced away with that, and I retired crestfallen; wondering much
at the fidelity which Providence, doubtless for the well-being of the
gentle, possibly for the good of all, has implanted in the humble.
Finding Simon, to whom I had scarce patience to speak, waiting on the
stairs below, I despatched him to Maignan, to bid him come to me with
his men. Meanwhile I watched the house myself until their arrival,
and then, going up, found that Fanchette had been as good as her word.
Mademoiselle, with a sullen mien, and a red spot on either cheek,
consented to descend, and, preceded by a couple of links, which Maignan
had thoughtfully provided, was escorted safely to my lodgings; where I
bestowed her in the rooms below my own, which I had designed for her.

At the door she turned and bowed to me, her face on fire.

'So far, sir, you have got your way,' she said, breathing quickly. 'Do
not flatter yourself, however, that you will get it farther--even by
bribing my woman!'



CHAPTER XXIII. THE LAST VALOIS.

I stood for a few moments on the stairs, wondering what I should do in
an emergency to which the Marquis's message of the afternoon attached so
pressing a character. Had it not been for that I might have waited until
morning, and felt tolerably certain of finding mademoiselle in a more
reasonable mood then. But as it was I dared not wait. I dared not risk
the delay, and I came quickly to the conclusion that the only course
open to me was to go at once to M. de Rambouillet and tell him frankly
how the matter stood.

Maignan had posted one of his men at the open doorway leading into the
street, and fixed his own quarters on the landing at the top, whence he
could overlook an intruder without being seen himself. Satisfied with
the arrangement, I left Rambouillet's man to reinforce him, and took
with me Simon Fleix, of whose conduct in regard to mademoiselle I
entertained the gravest doubts.

The night, I found on reaching the street, was cold, the sky where it
was visible between the eaves being bright with stars. A sharp wind was
