to apply general principles to special cases. But different people
have different grounds of complaint; one, for instance, that he is
sick. That is not the trouble; it is in his principles. Another, that
he is poor; another, that he has a harsh father and mother; another,
that he is not in the good graces of Caesar. This is nothing else but
not understanding how to apply our principles. For who has not an idea
of evil, that it is hurtful; that it is to be avoided; that it is by
all means to be prudently guarded against? One principle does not
contradict another, except when it comes to be applied. What, then, is
this evil--thus hurtful and to be avoided? "Not to be the friend of
Caesar," says some one. He is gone; he has failed in applying his
principles; he is embarrassed; he seeks what is nothing to the
purpose. For if he comes to be Caesar's friend, he is still no nearer
to what he sought. For what is it that every man seeks? To be secure,
to be happy, to do what he pleases without restraint and without
compulsion. When he becomes the friend of Caesar, then does he cease to
be restrained; to be compelled? Is he secure? Is he happy? Whom shall
we ask? Whom can we better credit than this very man who has been his
friend? Come forth and tell us whether you sleep more quietly now than
before you were the friend of Caesar. You presently hear him cry,
"Leave off, for Heaven's sake! and do not insult me. You know not the
miseries I suffer; there is no sleep for me; but one comes and says
that Caesar is already awake; another, that he is just going out. Then
follow perturbations, then cares." Well, and when did you use to sup
the more pleasantly--formerly, or now? Hear what he says about this
too. When he is not invited, he is distracted; and if he is, he sups
like a slave with his master, solicitous all the while not to say or
do anything foolish. And what think you? Is he afraid of being whipt
like a slave! No such easy penalty. No; but rather, as becomes so
great a man, Caesar's friend, of losing his head. And when did you
bathe the more quietly; when did you perform your exercises the more
at your leisure; in short, which life would you rather wish to
live--your present, or the former? I could swear there is no one so
stupid and insensible as not to deplore his miseries, in proportion as
he is the more the friend of Caesar.

Since, then, neither they who are called kings nor the friends of
kings live as they like, who, then, after all, is free?...

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 110: From the "Discourses." Translated by Thomas Wentworth
Higginson. Copyright, 1865 and 1890, by Little, Brown & Co. Epictetus
has been valued not alone as an exposition of the Stoic philosophy,
but as a specimen of Greek of the later or Silver Age. Marcus
Aurelius, who in a later generation wrote in Greek himself, is said to
have ranked Epictetus with Socrates as a teacher. Origen, the early
Christian father, asserted that his writings had been of more value to
the world's morals than those of Plato.]




II

OF FRIENDSHIP[111]


To whatever objects a person devotes his attention, these objects he
probably loves. Do men ever devote their attention, then, to [what
they think] evils? By no means. Or even to things indifferent? No, nor
this. It remains, then, that good must be the sole object of their
attention; and if of their attention, of their love too. Whoever,
therefore, understands good, is capable likewise of love; and he who
can not distinguish good from evil, and things indifferent from both,
how is it possible that he can love? The wise person alone, then, is
capable of loving.

"How so? I am not this wise person, yet I love my child."

I protest it surprizes me that you should, in the first place, confess
yourself unwise. For in what are you deficient? Have not you the use
of your senses? Do you not distinguish the semblances of things? Do
you not provide such food and clothing and habitation as are suitable
to you? Why then do you confess that you want wisdom? In truth,
because you are often struck and disconcerted by semblances, and their
speciousness gets the better of you; and hence you sometimes suppose
the very same things to be good, then evil, and lastly, neither; and,
in a word, you grieve, you fear, you envy, you are disconcerted, you
change. Is it from this that you confess yourself unwise? And are you
not changeable too in love? Riches, pleasure, in short, the very same
things, you sometimes esteem good, and at other times evil. And do you
not esteem the same persons too alternately as good and bad, at one
time treating them with kindness, at another with enmity; at one time
commending, and at another time censuring them?

"Yes. This too is the case with me."

Well, then; can he who is deceived in another be his friend, think
you?

"No, surely."

Or does he who loves him with a changeable affection bear him genuine
good-will?

"Nor he, neither."

Or he who now vilifies, then admires him?

"Nor he."

Do you not often see little dogs caressing and playing with each
other, so that you would say nothing could be more friendly? But to
learn what this friendship is, throw a bit of meat between them, and
you will see. Do you too throw a bit of an estate betwixt you and your
son, and you will see that he will quickly wish you under ground, and
you him; and then you, no doubt, on the other hand will exclaim, What
a son have I brought up! He would bury me alive! Throw in a pretty
girl, and the old fellow and the young one will both fall in love with
her; or let fame or danger intervene, the words of the father of
Admetus will be yours:

    "You love to see the light. Doth not your father?
    You fain would still behold it. Would not he?"

Do you suppose that he did not love his own child when it was little;
that he was not in agonies when it had a fever, and often wished to
undergo that fever in its stead? But, after all, when the trial comes
home, you see what expressions he uses. Were not Eteocles and
Polynices born of the same mother and of the same father? Were they
not brought up, and did they not live and eat and sleep, together? Did
not they kiss and fondle each other? So that any one, who saw them,
would have laughed at all the paradoxes which philosophers utter about
love. And yet when a kingdom, like a bit of meat, was thrown betwixt
them, see what they say--

_Polynices._ Where wilt thou stand before the towers?

_Eteocles._ Why askest thou this of me?

_Polynices._ I will oppose myself to thee, to slay thee.

_Eteocles._ Me too the desire of this seizes.

Such are the prayers they offer. Be not therefore deceived. No living
being is held by anything so strongly as by its own needs. Whatever
therefore appears a hindrance to these, be it brother or father or
child or mistress or friend, is hated, abhorred, execrated; for by
nature it loves nothing like its own needs. This motive is father and
brother and family and country and God. Whenever, therefore, the gods
seem to hinder this, we vilify even them, and throw down their
statues, and burn their temples; as Alexander ordered the temple of
AEsculapius to be burnt, because he had lost the man he loved.

When, therefore, any one identifies his interest with those of
sanctity, virtue, country, parents, and friends, all these are
secured; but whenever he places his interest in anything else than
friends, country, family and justice, then these all give way, borne
down by the weight of self-interest. For wherever I and mine are
placed, thither must every living being gravitate. If in body, that
will sway us; if in our own will, that; if in externals, these. If,
therefore, I rest my personality in the will, then only shall I be a
friend, a son, or a father, such as I ought. For in that case it will
be for my interest to preserve the faithful, the modest, the patient,
the abstinent, the beneficent character; to keep the relations of life
inviolate. But if I place my personality in one thing, and virtue in
another, the doctrine of Epicurus will stand its ground, that virtue
is nothing, or mere opinion.

From this ignorance it was that the Athenians and Lacedaemonians
quarreled with each other, and the Thebans with both; the Persian king
with Greece, and the Macedonians with both; and now the Romans with
the Getes.[112] And in still remoter times the Trojan war arose from
the same cause. Alexander [Paris] was the guest of Menelaus; and
whoever had seen the mutual proofs of good-will that passed between
them would never have believed that they were not friends. But a
tempting bait, a pretty woman, was thrown in between them; and thence
came war. At present, therefore, when you see that dear brothers have,
in appearance, but one soul, do not immediately pronounce upon their
love; not tho they should swear it, and affirm it was impossible to
live asunder. For the governing faculty of a bad man is faithless,
unsettled, undiscriminating, successively vanquished by different
semblances. But inquire, not as others do, whether they were born of
the same parents, and brought up together, and under the same
preceptor; but this thing only, in what they place their interest--in
externals or in their own wills. If in externals, you can no more
pronounce them friends, than you can call them faithful, or constant,
or brave, or free; nay, nor even truly men, if you are wise. For it is
no principle of humanity that makes them bite and vilify each other,
and take possession of public assemblies, as wild beasts do of
solitudes and mountains; and convert courts of justice into dens of
robbers; that prompts them to be intemperate, adulterers, seducers; or
leads them into other offenses that men commit against each other--all
from that one single error, by which they risk themselves and their
own concerns on things uncontrollable by will.

But if you hear that these men in reality suppose good to be placed
only in the will, and in a right use of things as they appear, no
longer take the trouble of inquiring if they are father and son, or
old companions and acquaintances; but boldly pronounce that they are
friends, and also that they are faithful and just. For where else can
friendship be met, but joined with fidelity and modesty, and the
intercommunication of virtue alone?

"Well; but such a one paid me the utmost regard for so long a time,
and did he not love me?"

How can you tell, foolish man, if that regard be any other than he
pays to his shoes, or his horse, when he cleans them? And how do you
know but that when you cease to be a necessary utensil, he may throw
you away, like a broken stool?

"Well; but it is my wife, and we have lived together many years."

And how many did Eriphyle live with Amphiaraus, and was the mother of
children not a few? But a bauble came between them. What was this
bauble? A false conviction concerning certain things. This turned her
into a savage animal; this cut asunder all love, and suffered neither
the wife nor the mother to continue such.

Whoever, therefore, among you studies either to be or to gain a
friend, let him cut up all false convictions by the root, hate them,
drive them utterly out of his soul. Thus, in the first place, he will
be secure from inward reproaches and contests, from vacillation and
self-torment. Then, with respect to others, to every like-minded
person he will be without disguise; to such as are unlike he will be
patient, mild, gentle, and ready to forgive them, as failing in points
of the greatest importance; but severe to none, being fully convinced
of Plato's doctrine, that the soul is never willingly deprived of
truth. Without all this, you may, in many respects, live as friends
do; and drink and lodge and travel together, and even be born of the
same parents; and so may serpents too; but neither they nor you can
ever be really friends, while your accustomed principles remain brutal
and execrable.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 111: From the "Discourses." Translated by Thomas Wentworth
Higginson. Copyright, 1890, by Little, Brown & Co.]

[Footnote 112: The Getes were a Thracian people who dwelt north of the
Danube, at one time in what is now Bulgaria, and at another in what is
Bessarabia.]




III

THE PHILOSOPHER AND THE CROWD[113]


The first difference between one of the crowd and a philosopher is
this: the one says, "I am undone on the account of my child, my
brother, my father"; but the other, if ever he be obliged to say, "I
am undone!" reflects, and adds, "on account of myself." For the Will
can not be restrained or hurt by anything to which the Will does not
extend, but only by itself. If, therefore, we always would incline
this way, and whenever we are unsuccessful, would lay the fault on
ourselves, and remember that there is no cause of perturbation and
inconstancy but wrong principles, I pledge myself to you that we
should make some proficiency. But we set out in a very different way
from the very beginning. In infancy, for example, if we happen to
stumble, our nurse does not chide us, but beats the stone. Why, what
harm has the stone done? Was it to move out of its place for the folly
of your child? Again, if we do not find something to eat when we come
out of the bath, our tutor does not try to moderate our appetite, but
beats the cook. Why, did we appoint you tutor of the cook, man? No;
but of our child. It is he whom you are to correct and improve. By
these means even when we are grown up, we appear children. For an
unmusical person is a child in music; an illiterate person, a child in
learning; and an untaught one, a child in life.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 113: From the "Discourses." Translated by Thomas Wentworth
Higginson. Copyright, 1890, by Little, Brown & Co.]




LUCIAN

     Born at Samosata, Syria, about 120 A.D.; died about 200;
     apprenticed to his maternal uncle, who was a sculptor, but
     ran away in dislike of the art; becoming interested in the
     Rhetoricians, began to write himself; his works, as
     collected in English, comprize four volumes, among them
     "Dialogues of the Gods," "Dialogues of the Dead," "Zeus, the
     Tragedian," "The Ferryboat," and "Toxaris."[114]

I

A DESCENT TO THE UNKNOWN[115]


Dawn was approaching when we went down to the river to embark; he had
provided a boat, victims, hydromel, and all necessaries for our mystic
enterprise. We put all aboard, and then, Troubled at heart, with
welling tears, we went. For some distance we floated down stream,
until we entered the marshy lake in which the Euphrates disappears.
Beyond this we came to a desolate, wooded, sunless spot; there we
landed, Mithrobarzanes leading the way, and proceeded to dig a pit,
slay our sheep, and sprinkle their blood round the edge. Meanwhile the
Mage, with a lighted torch in his hand, abandoning his customary
whisper, shouted at the top of his voice an invocation to all spirits,
particularly the Poenae and Erinyes,

    Hecate's dark might, and dread Persephone,

with a string of other names, outlandish, unintelligible, and
polysyllabic.

As he ended, there was a great commotion, earth was burst open by the
incantation, the barking of Cerberus was heard far off, and all was
overcast and lowering:

    Quaked in his dark abyss the King of Shades;

for almost all was now unveiled to us, the lake, and Phlegethon, and
the abode of Pluto. Undeterred, we made our way down the chasm, and
came upon Rhadamanthus half dead with fear. Cerberus barked and looked
like getting up; but I quickly touched my lyre, and the first note
sufficed to lull him. Reaching the lake, we nearly missed our passage
for that time, the ferry-boat being already full; there was incessant
lamentation, and all the passengers had wounds upon them; mangled
legs, mangled heads, mangled everything; no doubt there was a war
going on. Nevertheless, when good Charon saw the lion's skin, taking
me for Heracles, he made room, was delighted to give me a passage, and
showed us our direction when we got off.

We were now in darkness; so Mithrobarzanes led the way, and I followed
holding on to him, until we reached a great meadow of asphodel, where
the shades of the dead, with their thin voices, came flitting round
us. Working gradually on, we reached the court of Minos; he was
sitting on a high throne, with the Poenae, Avengers, and Erinyes
standing at the sides. From another direction was being brought a long
row of persons chained together; I heard that they were adulterers,
procurers, publicans, sycophants, informers, and all the filth that
pollutes the stream of life. Separate from them came the rich and
usurers, pale, pot-bellied, and gouty, each with a hundredweight of
spiked collar upon him. There we stood looking at the proceedings and
listening to the pleas they put in; their accusers were orators of a
strange and novel species.

We left the court at last, and came to the place of punishment. Many a
piteous sight and sound was there--cracking of whips, shrieks of the
burning, rack and gibbet and wheel; Chimera tearing, Cerberus
devouring; all tortured together, kings and slaves, governors and
paupers, rich and beggars, and all repenting their sins. A few of
them, the lately dead, we recognized. These would turn away and shrink
from observation; or if they met our eyes, it would be with a slavish
cringing glance--how different from the arrogance and contempt that
had marked them in life! The poor were allowed half-time in their
tortures, respite and punishment alternating. Those with whom legend
is so busy I saw with my eyes--Ixion,[116] Sisyphus, the Phrygian
Tantalus in all his misery, and the giant Tityus--how vast, his bulk
covering a whole field!

Leaving these, we entered the Acherusian plain, and there found the
demigods, men and women both, and the common dead, dwelling in their
nations and tribes, some of them ancient and moldering "strengthless
heads," as Homer has it, others fresh, with substance yet in them,
Egyptians chiefly, these--so long last their embalming drugs. But to
know one from another was no easy task; all men are so like when the
bones are bared; yet with pains and long scrutiny we could make them
out. They lay pell-mell in undistinguished heaps, with none of their
earthly beauties left. With all those anatomies piled together as like
as could be, eyes glaring ghastly and vacant, teeth gleaming bare, I
knew not how to tell Thersites[117] from Nireus the beauty, beggar
Irus from the Phaeacian king, or cook Pyrrhias from Agamemnon's self.
Their ancient marks were gone, and their bones alike--uncertain,
unlabeled, indistinguishable.

When I saw all this, the life of man came before me under the
likeness of a great pageant, arranged and marshaled by Chance, who
distributed infinitely varied costumes to the performers. She would
take one and array him like a king, with tiara, body-guard, and crown
complete; another she drest like a slave; one was adorned with beauty,
another got up as a ridiculous hunchback: there must be all kinds in
the show. Often before the procession was over she made individuals
exchange characters; they could not be allowed to keep the same to the
end; Croesus must double parts and appear as slave and captive;
Maeandrius, starting as slave, would take over Polycrates'[118]
despotism, and be allowed to keep his new clothes for a little while.
And when the procession is done, every one disrobes, gives up his
character with his body, and appears, as he originally was, just like
his neighbor. Some, when Chance comes round collecting the properties,
are silly enough to sulk and protest, as tho they were being robbed of
their own instead of only returning loans. You know the kind of thing
on the stage--tragic actors shifting as the play requires from Creon
to Priam, from Priam to Agamemnon; the same man, very likely, whom you
saw just now in all the majesty of Cecrops or Erechtheus, treads the
boards next as a slave, because the author tells him to. The play
over, each of them throws off his gold-spangled robe and his mask,
descends from the buskin's height, and moves a mean ordinary creature;
his name is not now Agamemnon son of Atreus, or Creon son of
Menoeceus, but Polus son of Charicles of Sunium, or Satyrus son of
Theogiton of Marathon. Such is the condition of mankind, or so that
sight presented it to me.

_Philip._ Now, if a man occupies a costly towering sepulcher, or
leaves monuments, statues, inscriptions behind him on earth, does not
this place him in a class above the common dead?

_Menippus._ Nonsense, my good man; if you had looked on Mausolus[119]
himself--the Carian so famous for his tomb--I assure you, you would
never have stopt laughing; he was a miserable unconsidered unit among
the general mass of the dead, flung aside in a dusty hole, with no
profit of his sepulcher but its extra weight upon him. No, friend,
when AEacus gives a man his allowance of space--and it never exceeds a
foot's breadth, he must be content to pack himself into its limits.
You might have laughed still more if you had beheld the kings and
governors of earth begging in Hades, selling salt fish for a living,
it might be, or giving elementary lessons, insulted by any one who met
them, and cuffed like the most worthless of slaves. When I saw Philip
of Macedon,[120] I could not contain myself; some one showed him to me
cobbling old shoes for money in a corner. Many others were to be seen
begging--people like Xerxes, Darius, or Polycrates.

_Philip._ These royal downfalls are extraordinary--almost incredible.
But what of Socrates, Diogenes, and such wise men?
