shook hands with him when the interview was ended.

Agesilaus was equally pleased with Pharnabazus, and told him that he
should be proud to call him friend. He invited him to leave his master,
and come and live in Greece, where all noble men were free.

Pharnabazus did not accept this invitation, but renewed the war,
whereupon Agesilaus again won several important victories. When the
Persian king heard that all his soldiers could not get the better of the
Spartan king, he resolved to try the effect of bribery.

He therefore sent a messenger to Athens to promise this city and her
allies a very large sum of money provided that they would rise up in
revolt against Sparta, and thus force Agesilaus to come home.




LXXV. THE PEACE OF ANTALCIDAS.


The Athenians hated the Spartans, and were only waiting for an excuse to
make war against them: so they were only too glad to accept the bribe
which Artaxerxes offered, and were paid with ten thousand Persian coins
on which was stamped the figure of an archer.

As soon as the Spartan ephors heard that the Athenians had revolted,
they sent a message to Agesilaus to tell him to come home. The Spartan
king was about to deal a crushing blow to the Persians, but he was
forced to obey the summons. As he embarked he dryly said, "I could
easily have beaten the whole Persian army, and still ten thousand
Persian archers have forced me to give up all my plans."

The Thebans joined the Athenians in this revolt, so Agesilaus was very
indignant against them too. He energetically prepared for war, and met
the combined Athenian and Theban forces at Coronea, where he defeated
them completely.

The Athenians, in the mean while, had made their alliance with the
Persians, and used the money which they had received to strengthen their
ramparts, as you have seen, and to finish the Long Walls, which had been
ruined by the Spartans ten years before.

All the Greek states were soon in arms, siding with the Athenians or
with the Spartans; and the contest continued until everybody was weary
of fighting. There was, besides, much jealousy among the people
themselves, and even the laurels of Agesilaus were envied.

The person who was most opposed to him was the Spartan An-tal'ci-das,
who, fearing that further warfare would only result in increasing
Agesilaus' popularity and glory, now began to advise peace. As the
Greeks were tired of the long struggle, they sent Antalcidas to Asia to
try to make a treaty with the Persians.

Without thinking of anything but his hatred of Agesilaus, Antalcidas
consented to all that the Persians asked, and finally signed a shameful
treaty, by which all the Greek cities of Asia Minor and the Island of
Cy'prus were handed over to the Persian king. The other Greek cities
were declared independent, and thus Sparta was shorn of much of her
power. This treaty was a disgrace, and it has always been known in
history by the name of the man who signed it out of petty spite.




LXXVI. THE THEBAN FRIENDS.


Although all the Greek cities were to be free by the treaty of
Antalcidas, the Spartans kept the Messenians under their sway and, as
they were still the most powerful people in Greece, they saw that the
other cities did not infringe upon their rights in any way.

Under pretext of keeping all their neighbors in order, the Spartans were
always under arms, and on one occasion even forced their way into the
city of Thebes. The Thebans, who did not expect them, were not ready to
make war, and were in holiday dress.

They were all in the temple, celebrating the festival of Demeter, the
harvest goddess; and when the Spartans came thus upon them, they were
forced to yield without striking a single blow, as they had no weapons
at hand.

The Spartans were so afraid lest the best and richest citizens should
try to make the people revolt, that they exiled them all from Thebes,
allowing none but the poor and insignificant to remain.

To keep possession of the city which they had won by this trick, the
Spartans put three thousand of their best warriors in the citadel, with
orders to defend and hold it at any price.

Among the exiled Thebans there was a noble and wealthy man called
Pe-lop'i-das. He had been sorely wounded in a battle some time before,
and would have died had he not been saved by a fellow-citizen named
E-pam-i-non'das, who risked his own life in the rescue.

This man, too, was of noble birth, and was said to be a descendant of
the men who had sprung from the dragon teeth sown by Cadmus, the founder
of Thebes. Epaminondas, however, was very poor; and wealth had no charms
for him, for he was a disciple of Py-tha'o-ras, a philosopher who was
almost as celebrated as Socrates.

Now, although Epaminondas was poor, quiet, and studious, and Pelopidas
was particularly fond of noise and bustle, they became great friends and
almost inseparable companions. Pelopidas, seeing how good and generous a
man his friend was, did all he could to be like him, and even gave up
all his luxurious ways to live plainly too.

He therefore had plenty of money to spare, and this he spent very freely
for the good of the poor. When his former friends asked why he no
longer cared for his riches, he pointed to a poor cripple near by, and
said that money was of importance only to unhappy men like that one, who
could do nothing for themselves.




LXXVII. THEBES FREE ONCE MORE.


The Spartans, coming into Thebes, as we have seen, exiled the rich and
important Pelopidas, but allowed his friend Epaminondas to remain. They
little suspected that this quiet and seemingly stupid man would in time
become their greatest enemy, and that the mere sound of his name would
fill their hearts with dread.

Pelopidas, thus forced to leave home, withdrew to Athens, where he was
very kindly received. He was not happy, however, and was always longing
to return home, and see his friend Epaminondas, whose society he missed
very much.

He therefore called a few of the Theban exiles together, and proposed
that they should return to Thebes in disguise, and, taking advantage of
the Spartans' carelessness, kill their leaders, and restore the city to
freedom.

This proposal was received with joy, although the Spartans numbered
three thousand, and the Theban exiles only twelve. The chances were of
course against them; but the men were so anxious to free their city,
that they resolved to make the attempt.

They therefore set out from Athens with weapons and hunting dogs, as if
bent upon a day's sport in the country. Thus armed, they secretly
entered the house of Cha'ron, one of their friends in Thebes. Here they
exchanged their hunting garments for women's robes; for, hearing that
the Spartan general and his officers were feasting, they had resolved to
pretend that they were dancing girls, in order to gain an entrance into
the banquet hall, and kill the men while they were drinking.

They had just finished dressing, when a knock was heard at the door, and
a Spartan soldier came in and gravely informed Charon that the commander
wished to see him.

For a moment Pelopidas and his companions fancied that their plans were
discovered, and that Charon had betrayed them. He read this suspicion in
their frightened faces, and, before leaving the house with the soldier,
he placed his only son, a mere infant, in the arms of Pelopidas, saying,
"There, keep him; and if you find that I have betrayed you, avenge
yourselves by killing my only child, my dearest treasure."

After speaking thus, Charon went out, and soon came back to report that
all was well.

The Theban exiles now went to the banquet hall, where they were readily
allowed to enter to amuse the company. The Spartan officers, who were no
longer frugal and temperate as of old, were so heavy and stupid with
wine, that the supposed dancing girls easily killed them.

[Illustration: "Avenge yourselves by killing my only child."]

One version of the story is, that Pelopidas and his companions rushed
out into the street with lighted torches, and slew every Spartan they
met. The Spartan soldiers, deprived of most of their officers (who had
been killed in the banquet hall), and greatly frightened, fled in the
darkness from what they fancied was a large army, and returned in haste
to Sparta.

Imagine their shame, however, when it became known there that they had
been routed by only twelve determined men! The Spartan citizens were so
angry that they put the two remaining officers to death, and, collecting
another army, placed it under the leadership of Cle-om'bro-tus, their
second king, because Agesilaus was too ill at the time to fight.




LXXVIII. THE BATTLE OF LEUCTRA.


The Thebans, delighted at having thus happily got rid of their enemies,
had made Pelopidas and Epaminondas Boe'o-tarchs, or chiefs of
Boeotia, the country of which Thebes was the capital. These two men,
knowing well that the Spartans would soon send an army to win back the
city, now made great preparations to oppose them.

Epaminondas was made general of the army; and Pelopidas drilled a choice
company, called the Sacred Battalion. This was formed of three hundred
brave young Thebans, who took a solemn oath never to turn their backs
upon the enemy or to surrender, and to die for their native country if
necessary.

The Thebans then marched forth to meet their foes; and the two armies
met at Leuc'tra, a small town in Boeotia. As usual, the Thebans had
consulted the oracles to find out what they should do, and had been
told that all the omens were unfavorable. Epaminondas, however, nobly
replied that he knew of none which forbade fighting for the defense of
one's country, and he boldly ordered the attack.

The Spartans were greatly amused when they heard that Epaminondas, a
student, was the commander of the army, and they expected to win a very
easy victory. They were greatly surprised, therefore, when their
onslaught was met firmly, and when, in spite of all their valor, they
found themselves defeated, and heard that their leader, Cleombrotus, was
dead.

The Thebans, of course, gloried in their triumph; but Epaminondas
remained as modest and unassuming as ever, merely remarking that he was
glad for his country's and parents' sake that he had been successful. To
commemorate their good fortune, the Thebans erected a trophy on the
battlefield of Leuctra, where their troops had covered themselves with
glory.

The inhabitants of Sparta, who had counted confidently upon victory,
were dismayed when they saw only a few of their soldiers return from the
battle, and heard that the Thebans were pursuing them closely. Before
they could collect new troops, the enemy marched boldly down into
Laconia; and the women of Sparta now beheld the smoke of the enemy's
camp for the first time in many years. As there were neither walls nor
fortifications of any kind, you can easily imagine that the inhabitants
were in despair, and thought that their last hour had come.

If Epaminondas had been of a revengeful temper, he could easily have
destroyed the city; but he was gentle and humane, and, remaining at a
short distance from the place, he said that he would go away without
doing the Spartans any harm, provided they would promise not to attack
Thebes again, and to set the Messenians free.

These conditions were eagerly agreed to by the Spartans, who found
themselves forced to take a secondary place once more. Athens had ruled
Greece, and had been forced to yield to Sparta; but now Sparta was
compelled in her turn to recognize the supremacy of Thebes.




LXXIX. DEATH OF PELOPIDAS.


Thebes was the main power in Greece after the brilliant victory at
Leuctra, and for a short time the city managed to maintain its
supremacy. By virtue of its position, it decided the destiny of less
powerful cities; and when Al-ex-an'der, tyrant of Thessaly, became very
cruel, the Thebans sent Pelopidas to remonstrate with him.

Instead of treating the ambassador of the Thebans with courtesy,
however, the Thessalian tyrant loaded him with heavy chains, put him in
prison, and vowed he would keep him there as long as he lived.

When the news of this outrage reached the Thebans, they set out at once,
under the guidance of two new Boeotarchs, to deliver their beloved
fellow-citizen. Epaminondas, too, marched in the ranks; for, now that
his term of office was ended, he had contentedly returned to his former
obscure position.

The new Boeotarchs were unfortunately very poor generals. They met the
Thessalian army, but were defeated and driven back. Indeed, the Thebans
were soon in such danger, that the soldiers revolted against their
generals, and begged Epaminondas again to take the lead.

As they were in great distress, Epaminondas could not refuse to help
them: so he assumed the command, and beat such a skillful retreat that
he brought them out of the country in safety.

The following year, when again chosen Boeotarch, Epaminondas made
plans for a second campaign, and marched into Thessaly to deliver his
friend, who was still a prisoner.

When Alexander the tyrant heard that Epaminondas was at the head of the
army, he was frightened, and tried to disarm the wrath of the Thebans by
setting Pelopidas free, and sending him to meet the advancing army.

Of course, Epaminondas was very glad to see his friend; but when he
heard how cruelly Alexander treated all his subjects, he nevertheless
continued his march northward, hoping to rid the country of such a bad
ruler.

Just then the Spartans, in spite of their solemn promise, suddenly rose
up in arms against the Thebans; and Epaminondas, leaving part of the
army in Thessaly with Pelopidas, hurried southward with the rest to put
down the revolt.

Pelopidas marched boldly northward, met the Thessalians, and fought a
fierce battle. When it was over, the Thebans, although victorious, were
very sad; for their leader, Pelopidas, had been slain in the midst of
the fray.

Still, undaunted by his death, the army pursued the Thessalians, and
killed Alexander. Then, to show their scorn for such a vile wretch, they
dragged his body through the mud, and finally flung it out of a palace
window into the courtyard, where it was torn to pieces by his own
bloodhounds.




LXXX. THE BATTLE OF MANTINEA.

