of Southampton, and that Collier is Bishop of Thetford by the same
imposition? The Princess Anne has the gout and eats too much; when the
King returns, Collier will be an archbishop."

"Amen!" says Esmond, laughing; "and I hope to see your Eminence no
longer in jack-boots, but red stockings, at Whitehall."

"You are always with us--I know that--I heard of that when you were at
Cambridge; so was the late lord; so is the young viscount."

"And so was my father before me," said Mr. Esmond, looking calmly at the
other, who did not, however, show the least sign of intelligence in his
impenetrable gray eyes--how well Harry remembered them and their look!
only crows' feet were wrinkled round them--marks of black old Time had
settled there.

Esmond's face chose to show no more sign of meaning than the Father's.
There may have been on the one side and the other just the faintest
glitter of recognition, as you see a bayonet shining out of an ambush;
but each party fell back, when everything was again dark.

"And you, mon capitaine, where have you been?" says Esmond, turning
away the conversation from this dangerous ground, where neither chose to
engage.

"I may have been in Pekin," says he, "or I may have been in
Paraguay--who knows where? I am now Captain von Holtz, in the service of
his Electoral Highness, come to negotiate exchange of prisoners with his
Highness of Savoy."

'Twas well known that very many officers in our army were well-affected
towards the young king at St. Germains, whose right to the throne was
undeniable, and whose accession to it, at the death of his sister, by
far the greater part of the English people would have preferred, to
the having a petty German prince for a sovereign, about whose cruelty,
rapacity, boorish manners, and odious foreign ways, a thousand stories
were current. It wounded our English pride to think that a shabby
High-Dutch duke, whose revenues were not a tithe as great as those of
many of the princes of our ancient English nobility, who could not speak
a word of our language, and whom we chose to represent as a sort
of German boor, feeding on train-oil and sour-crout, with a bevy of
mistresses in a barn, should come to reign over the proudest and most
polished people in the world. Were we, the conquerors of the Grand
Monarch, to submit to that ignoble domination? What did the Hanoverian's
Protestantism matter to us? Was it not notorious (we were told and led
to believe so) that one of the daughters of this Protestant hero was
being bred up with no religion at all, as yet, and ready to be made
Lutheran or Roman, according as the husband might be whom her parents
should find for her? This talk, very idle and abusive much of it was,
went on at a hundred mess-tables in the army; there was scarce an ensign
that did not hear it, or join in it, and everybody knew, or affected to
know, that the Commander-in-Chief himself had relations with his nephew,
the Duke of Berwick ('twas by an Englishman, thank God, that we were
beaten at Almanza), and that his Grace was most anxious to restore the
royal race of his benefactors, and to repair his former treason.

This is certain, that for a considerable period no officer in the
Duke's army lost favor with the Commander-in-Chief for entertaining or
proclaiming his loyalty towards the exiled family. When the Chevalier de
St. George, as the King of England called himself, came with the dukes
of the French blood royal, to join the French army under Vendosme,
hundreds of ours saw him and cheered him, and we all said he was like
his father in this, who, seeing the action of La Hogue fought between
the French ships and ours, was on the side of his native country during
the battle. But this, at least the Chevalier knew, and every one knew,
that, however well our troops and their general might be inclined
towards the prince personally, in the face of the enemy there was no
question at all. Wherever my Lord Duke found a French army, he would
fight and beat it, as he did at Oudenarde, two years after Ramillies,
where his Grace achieved another of his transcendent victories; and the
noble young prince, who charged gallantly along with the magnificent
Maison-du-Roy, sent to compliment his conquerors after the action.

In this battle, where the young Electoral Prince of Hanover behaved
himself very gallantly, fighting on our side, Esmond's dear General
Webb distinguished himself prodigiously, exhibiting consummate skill
and coolness as a general, and fighting with the personal bravery of
a common soldier. Esmond's good-luck again attended him; he escaped
without a hurt, although more than a third of his regiment was killed,
had again the honor to be favorably mentioned in his commander's report,
and was advanced to the rank of major. But of this action there is
little need to speak, as it hath been related in every Gazette, and
talked of in every hamlet in this country. To return from it to the
writer's private affairs, which here, in his old age, and at a distance,
he narrates for his children who come after him. Before Oudenarde, after
that chance rencontre with Captain von Holtz at Brussels, a space of
more than a year elapsed, during which the captain of Jesuits and the
captain of Webb's Fusileers were thrown very much together. Esmond had
no difficulty in finding out (indeed, the other made no secret of it
to him, being assured from old times of his pupil's fidelity), that
the negotiator of prisoners was an agent from St. Germains, and that he
carried intelligence between great personages in our camp and that of
the French. "My business," said he--"and I tell you, both because I can
trust you and your keen eyes have already discovered it--is between the
King of England and his subjects here engaged in fighting the French
king. As between you and them, all the Jesuits in the world will not
prevent your quarrelling: fight it out, gentlemen. St. George for
England, I say--and you know who says so, wherever he may be."

I think Holt loved to make a parade of mystery, as it were, and would
appear and disappear at our quarters as suddenly as he used to return
and vanish in the old days at Castlewood. He had passes between both
armies, and seemed to know (but with that inaccuracy which belonged to
the good Father's omniscience) equally well what passed in the French
camp and in ours. One day he would give Esmond news of a great feste
that took place in the French quarters, of a supper of Monsieur de
Rohan's, where there was play and violins, and then dancing and masques;
the King drove thither in Marshal Villars' own guinguette. Another day
he had the news of his Majesty's ague: the King had not had a fit these
ten days, and might be said to be well. Captain Holtz made a visit to
England during this time, so eager was he about negotiating prisoners;
and 'twas on returning from this voyage that he began to open himself
more to Esmond, and to make him, as occasion served, at their various
meetings, several of those confidences which are here set down all
together.

The reason of his increased confidence was this: upon going to London,
the old director of Esmond's aunt, the dowager, paid her ladyship a
visit at Chelsey, and there learnt from her that Captain Esmond was
acquainted with the secret of his family, and was determined never to
divulge it. The knowledge of this fact raised Esmond in his old tutor's
eyes, so Holt was pleased to say, and he admired Harry very much for his
abnegation.

"The family at Castlewood have done far more for me than my own ever
did," Esmond said. "I would give my life for them. Why should I grudge
the only benefit that 'tis in my power to confer on them?" The good
Father's eyes filled with tears at this speech, which to the other
seemed very simple: he embraced Esmond, and broke out into many admiring
expressions; he said he was a noble coeur, that he was proud of him, and
fond of him as his pupil and friend--regretted more than ever that he
had lost him, and been forced to leave him in those early times, when
he might have had an influence over him, have brought him into that
only true church to which the Father belonged, and enlisted him in the
noblest army in which a man ever engaged--meaning his own society of
Jesus, which numbers (says he) in its troops the greatest heroes the
world ever knew;--warriors brave enough to dare or endure anything, to
encounter any odds, to die any death--soldiers that have won triumphs a
thousand times more brilliant than those of the greatest general; that
have brought nations on their knees to their sacred banner, the Cross;
that have achieved glories and palms incomparably brighter than those
awarded to the most splendid earthly conquerors--crowns of immortal
light, and seats in the high places of heaven.

Esmond was thankful for his old friend's good opinion, however little
he might share the Jesuit-father's enthusiasm. "I have thought of
that question, too," says he, "dear Father," and he took the other's
hand--"thought it out for myself, as all men must, and contrive to do
the right, and trust to heaven as devoutly in my way as you in yours.
Another six months of you as a child, and I had desired no better. I
used to weep upon my pillow at Castlewood as I thought of you, and I
might have been a brother of your order; and who knows," Esmond added,
with a smile, "a priest in full orders, and with a pair of mustachios,
and a Bavarian uniform?"

"My son," says Father Holt, turning red, "in the cause of religion and
loyalty all disguises are fair."

"Yes," broke in Esmond, "all disguises are fair, you say; and all
uniforms, say I, black or red,--a black cockade or a white one--or a
laced hat, or a sombrero, with a tonsure under it. I cannot believe that
St. Francis Xavier sailed over the sea in a cloak, or raised the dead--I
tried, and very nearly did once, but cannot. Suffer me to do the right,
and to hope for the best in my own way."

Esmond wished to cut short the good Father's theology, and succeeded;
and the other, sighing over his pupil's invincible ignorance, did not
withdraw his affection from him, but gave him his utmost confidence--as
much, that is to say, as a priest can give: more than most do; for he
was naturally garrulous, and too eager to speak.

Holt's friendship encouraged Captain Esmond to ask, what he long wished
to know, and none could tell him, some history of the poor mother
whom he had often imagined in his dreams, and whom he never knew. He
described to Holt those circumstances which are already put down in the
first part of this story--the promise he had made to his dear lord, and
that dying friend's confession; and he besought Mr. Holt to tell him
what he knew regarding the poor woman from whom he had been taken.

"She was of this very town," Holt said, and took Esmond to see the
street where her father lived, and where, as he believed, she was born.
"In 1676, when your father came hither in the retinue of the late king,
then Duke of York, and banished hither in disgrace, Captain Thomas
Esmond became acquainted with your mother, pursued her, and made a
victim of her; he hath told me in many subsequent conversations, which
I felt bound to keep private then, that she was a woman of great virtue
and tenderness, and in all respects a most fond, faithful creature. He
called himself Captain Thomas, having good reason to be ashamed of
his conduct towards her, and hath spoken to me many times with sincere
remorse for that, as with fond love for her many amiable qualities, he
owned to having treated her very ill: and that at this time his life was
one of profligacy, gambling, and poverty. She became with child of
you; was cursed by her own parents at that discovery; though she never
upbraided, except by her involuntary tears, and the misery depicted on
her countenance, the author of her wretchedness and ruin.

"Thomas Esmond--Captain Thomas, as he was called--became engaged in a
gaming-house brawl, of which the consequence was a duel, and a wound so
severe that he never--his surgeon said--could outlive it. Thinking his
death certain, and touched with remorse, he sent for a priest of the
very Church of St. Gudule where I met you; and on the same day, after
his making submission to our Church, was married to your mother a few
weeks before you were born. My Lord Viscount Castlewood, Marquis of
Esmond, by King James's patent, which I myself took to your father, your
lordship was christened at St. Gudule by the same cure who married your
parents, and by the name of Henry Thomas, son of E. Thomas, officier
Anglois, and Gertrude Maes. You see you belong to us from your birth,
and why I did not christen you when you became my dear little pupil at
Castlewood.

"Your father's wound took a favorable turn--perhaps his conscience was
eased by the right he had done--and to the surprise of the doctors
he recovered. But as his health came back, his wicked nature, too,
returned. He was tired of the poor girl, whom he had ruined; and
receiving some remittance from his uncle, my lord the old viscount, then
in England, he pretended business, promised return, and never saw your
poor mother more.

"He owned to me, in confession first, but afterwards in talk before your
aunt, his wife, else I never could have disclosed what I now tell you,
that on coming to London he writ a pretended confession to poor Gertrude
Maes--Gertrude Esmond--of his having been married in England previously,
before uniting himself with her; said that his name was not Thomas;
that he was about to quit Europe for the Virginian plantations, where,
indeed, your family had a grant of land from King Charles the First;
sent her a supply of money, the half of the last hundred guineas he had,
entreated her pardon, and bade her farewell.

"Poor Gertrude never thought that the news in this letter might be
untrue as the rest of your father's conduct to her. But though a young
man of her own degree, who knew her history, and whom she liked before
she saw the English gentleman who was the cause of all her misery,
offered to marry her, and to adopt you as his own child, and give you
his name, she refused him. This refusal only angered her father, who had
taken her home; she never held up her head there, being the subject
of constant unkindness after her fall; and some devout ladies of her
acquaintance offering to pay a little pension for her, she went into a
convent, and you were put out to nurse.

"A sister of the young fellow who would have adopted you as his son
was the person who took charge of you. Your mother and this person were
cousins. She had just lost a child of her own, which you replaced, your
own mother being too sick and feeble to feed you; and presently your
nurse grew so fond of you, that she even grudged letting you visit the
convent where your mother was, and where the nuns petted the little
infant, as they pitied and loved its unhappy parent. Her vocation became
stronger every day, and at the end of two years she was received as a
sister of the house.

"Your nurse's family were silk-weavers out of France, whither they
returned to Arras in French Flanders, shortly before your mother took
her vows, carrying you with them, then a child of three years old. 'Twas
a town, before the late vigorous measures of the French king, full of
Protestants, and here your nurse's father, old Pastoureau, he with
whom you afterwards lived at Ealing, adopted the reformed doctrines,
perverting all his house with him. They were expelled thence by the
edict of his most Christian Majesty, and came to London, and set up
their looms in Spittlefields. The old man brought a little money with
him, and carried on his trade, but in a poor way. He was a widower; by
this time his daughter, a widow too, kept house for him, and his son
and he labored together at their vocation. Meanwhile your father had
publicly owned his conversion just before King Charles's death (in whom
our Church had much such another convert), was reconciled to my Lord
Viscount Castlewood, and married, as you know, to his daughter.

"It chanced that the younger Pastoureau, going with a piece of brocade
to the mercer who employed him, on Ludgate Hill, met his old rival
coming out of an ordinary there. Pastoureau knew your father at once,
seized him by the collar, and upbraided him as a villain, who had
seduced his mistress, and afterwards deserted her and her son. Mr.
Thomas Esmond also recognized Pastoureau at once, besought him to calm
his indignation, and not to bring a crowd round about them; and bade
him to enter into the tavern, out of which he had just stepped, when
he would give him any explanation. Pastoureau entered, and heard the
landlord order the drawer to show Captain Thomas to a room; it was by
his Christian name that your father was familiarly called at his tavern
haunts, which, to say the truth, were none of the most reputable.

"I must tell you that Captain Thomas, or my Lord Viscount afterwards,
was never at a loss for a story, and could cajole a woman or a dun with
a volubility, and an air of simplicity at the same time, of which many
a creditor of his has been the dupe. His tales used to gather
verisimilitude as he went on with them. He strung together fact after
fact with a wonderful rapidity and coherence. It required, saving your
presence, a very long habit of acquaintance with your father to know
when his lordship was l----,--telling the truth or no.

"He told me with rueful remorse when he was ill--for the fear of death
set him instantly repenting, and with shrieks of laughter when he was
well, his lordship having a very great sense of humor--how in a half an
hour's time, and before a bottle was drunk, he had completely succeeded
in biting poor Pastoureau. The seduction he owned to: that he could not
help: he was quite ready with tears at a moment's warning, and shed them
profusely to melt his credulous listener. He wept for your mother even
more than Pastoureau did, who cried very heartily, poor fellow, as my
lord informed me; he swore upon his honor that he had twice sent money
to Brussels, and mentioned the name of the merchant with whom it was
lying for poor Gertrude's use. He did not even know whether she had
a child or no, or whether she was alive or dead; but got these facts
easily out of honest Pastoureau's answers to him. When he heard that
she was in a convent, he said he hoped to end his days in one himself,
should he survive his wife, whom he hated, and had been forced by a
cruel father to marry; and when he was told that Gertrude's son was
alive, and actually in London, 'I started,' says he; 'for then, damme,
my wife was expecting to lie in, and I thought should this old Put, my
father-in-law, run rusty, here would be a good chance to frighten him.'

"He expressed the deepest gratitude to the Pastoureau family for the
care of the infant: you were now near six years old; and on Pastoureau
bluntly telling him, when he proposed to go that instant and see the
darling child, that they never wished to see his ill-omened face again
within their doors; that he might have the boy, though they should all
be very sorry to lose him; and that they would take his money, they
being poor, if he gave it; or bring him up, by God's help, as they had
hitherto done, without: he acquiesced in this at once, with a sigh,
said, 'Well, 'twas better that the dear child should remain with
friends who had been so admirably kind to him;' and in his talk to
me afterwards, honestly praised and admired the weaver's conduct and
spirit; owned that the Frenchman was a right fellow, and he, the Lord
have mercy upon him, a sad villain.

"Your father," Mr. Holt went on to say, "was good-natured with his money
when he had it; and having that day received a supply from his uncle,
gave the weaver ten pieces with perfect freedom, and promised him
further remittances. He took down eagerly Pastoureau's name and place of
abode in his table-book, and when the other asked him for his own,
gave, with the utmost readiness, his name as Captain Thomas, New Lodge,
Penzance, Cornwall; he said he was in London for a few days only on
business connected with his wife's property; described her as a shrew,
though a woman of kind disposition; and depicted his father as a Cornish
squire, in an infirm state of health, at whose death he hoped for
something handsome, when he promised richly to reward the admirable
protector of his child, and to provide for the boy. 'And by Gad, sir,'
he said to me in his strange laughing way, 'I ordered a piece of brocade
of the very same pattern as that which the fellow was carrying, and
presented it to my wife for a morning wrapper, to receive company after
she lay in of our little boy.'

"Your little pension was paid regularly enough; and when your father
became Viscount Castlewood on his uncle's demise, I was employed to keep
a watch over you, and 'twas at my instance that you were brought home.
Your foster-mother was dead; her father made acquaintance with a woman
whom he married, who quarrelled with his son. The faithful creature came
back to Brussels to be near the woman he loved, and died, too, a few
months before her. Will you see her cross in the convent cemetery? The
Superior is an old penitent of mine, and remembers Soeur Marie Madeleine
fondly still."


Esmond came to this spot in one sunny evening of spring, and saw,
amidst a thousand black crosses, casting their shadows across the grassy
mounds, that particular one which marked his mother's resting-place.
Many more of those poor creatures that lay there had adopted that same
name, with which sorrow had rebaptized her, and which fondly seemed to
hint their individual story of love and grief. He fancied her in tears
and darkness, kneeling at the foot of her cross, under which her cares
were buried. Surely he knelt down, and said his own prayer there, not
in sorrow so much as in awe (for even his memory had no recollection of
her), and in pity for the pangs which the gentle soul in life had
been made to suffer. To this cross she brought them; for this heavenly
bridegroom she exchanged the husband who had wooed her, the traitor
who had left her. A thousand such hillocks lay round about, the gentle
daisies springing out of the grass over them, and each bearing its
cross and requiescat. A nun, veiled in black, was kneeling hard by, at a
sleeping sister's bedside (so fresh made, that the spring had scarce
had time to spin a coverlid for it); beyond the cemetery walls you had
glimpses of life and the world, and the spires and gables of the city. A
bird came down from a roof opposite, and lit first on a cross, and then
on the grass below it, whence it flew away presently with a leaf in its
mouth: then came a sound as of chanting, from the chapel of the
sisters hard by; others had long since filled the place which poor Mary
Magdeleine once had there, were kneeling at the same stall, and hearing
the same hymns and prayers in which her stricken heart had found
consolation. Might she sleep in peace--might she sleep in peace; and we,
too, when our struggles and pains are over! But the earth is the Lord's
as the heaven is; we are alike his creatures here and yonder. I took a
little flower off the hillock and kissed it, and went my way, like
the bird that had just lighted on the cross by me, back into the world
again. Silent receptacle of death; tranquil depth of calm, out of reach
of tempest and trouble! I felt as one who had been walking below the
sea, and treading amidst the bones of shipwrecks.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE CAMPAIGN OF 1707, 1708.


During the whole of the year which succeeded that in which the glorious
battle of Ramillies had been fought, our army made no movement of
importance, much to the disgust of very many of our officers remaining
inactive in Flanders, who said that his Grace the Captain-General had
had fighting enough, and was all for money now, and the enjoyment of his
five thousand a year and his splendid palace at Woodstock, which was
now being built. And his Grace had sufficient occupation fighting his
enemies at home this year, where it began to be whispered that his favor
was decreasing, and his duchess losing her hold on the Queen, who was
transferring her royal affections to the famous Mrs. Masham, and Mrs.
Masham's humble servant, Mr. Harley. Against their intrigues, our Duke
passed a great part of his time intriguing. Mr. Harley was got out
of office, and his Grace, in so far, had a victory. But her Majesty,
convinced against her will, was of that opinion still, of which the poet
says people are when so convinced, and Mr. Harley before long had his
revenge.

Meanwhile the business of fighting did not go on any way to the
satisfaction of Marlborough's gallant lieutenants. During all 1707,
with the French before us, we had never so much as a battle; our army in
Spain was utterly routed at Almanza by the gallant Duke of Berwick; and
we of Webb's, which regiment the young Duke had commanded before his
father's abdication, were a little proud to think that it was our
colonel who had achieved this victory. "I think if I had had Galway's
place, and my Fusileers," says our General, "we would not have laid down
our arms, even to our old colonel, as Galway did;" and Webb's officers
swore if we had had Webb, at least we would not have been taken
prisoners. Our dear old general talked incautiously of himself and of
others; a braver or a more brilliant soldier never lived than he; but
he blew his honest trumpet rather more loudly than became a commander of
his station, and, mighty man of valor as he was, shook his great spear
and blustered before the army too fiercely.

Mysterious Mr. Holtz went off on a secret expedition in the early part
of 1708, with great elation of spirits and a prophecy to Esmond that a
wonderful something was about to take place. This secret came out on
my friend's return to the army, whither he brought a most rueful and
dejected countenance, and owned that the great something he had been
engaged upon had failed utterly. He had been indeed with that luckless
expedition of the Chevalier de St. George, who was sent by the French
king with ships and an army from Dunkirk, and was to have invaded
and conquered Scotland. But that ill wind which ever opposed all the
projects upon which the Prince ever embarked, prevented the Chevalier's
invasion of Scotland, as 'tis known, and blew poor Monsieur von Holtz
back into our camp again, to scheme and foretell, and to pry about as
usual. The Chevalier (the king of England, as some of us held him) went
from Dunkirk to the French army to make the campaign against us. The
Duke of Burgundy had the command this year, having the Duke of Berry
with him, and the famous Mareschal Vendosme and the Duke of Matignon to
aid him in the campaign. Holtz, who knew everything that was passing
in Flanders and France (and the Indies for what I know), insisted that
there would be no more fighting in 1708 than there had been in the
previous year, and that our commander had reasons for keeping him quiet.
Indeed, Esmond's general, who was known as a grumbler, and to have a
hearty mistrust of the great Duke, and hundreds more officers besides,
did not scruple to say that these private reasons came to the Duke
in the shape of crown-pieces from the French King, by whom the
Generalissimo was bribed to avoid a battle. There were plenty of men in
our lines, quidnuncs, to whom Mr. Webb listened only too willingly, who
could specify the exact sums the Duke got, how much fell to Cadogan's
share, and what was the precise fee given to Doctor Hare.

And the successes with which the French began the campaign of 1708
served to give strength to these reports of treason, which were in
everybody's mouth. Our general allowed the enemy to get between us and
Ghent, and declined to attack him, though for eight and forty hours the
armies were in presence of each other. Ghent was taken, and on the same
day Monsieur de la Mothe summoned Bruges; and these two great cities
fell into the hands of the French without firing a shot. A few days
afterwards La Mothe seized upon the fort of Plashendall: and it began
to be supposed that all Spanish Flanders, as well as Brabant, would fall
into the hands of the French troops; when the Prince Eugene arrived from
the Mozelle, and then there was no more shilly-shallying.

The Prince of Savoy always signalized his arrival at the army by a great
feast (my Lord Duke's entertainments were both seldom and shabby): and
I remember our general returning from this dinner with the two
commanders-in-chief; his honest head a little excited by wine, which
was dealt out much more liberally by the Austrian than by the English
commander:--"Now," says my general, slapping the table, with an oath,
"he must fight; and when he is forced to it, d--- it, no man in Europe
can stand up against Jack Churchill." Within a week the battle of
Oudenarde was fought, when, hate each other as they might, Esmond's
general and the Commander-in-Chief were forced to admire each other, so
splendid was the gallantry of each upon this day.

The brigade commanded by Major-General Webb gave and received about
as hard knocks as any that were delivered in that action, in which Mr.
Esmond had the fortune to serve at the head of his own company in his
regiment, under the command of their own Colonel as Major-General; and
it was his good luck to bring the regiment out of action as commander
of it, the four senior officers above him being killed in the prodigious
slaughter which happened on that day. I like to think that Jack
Haythorn, who sneered at me for being a bastard and a parasite of
Webb's, as he chose to call me, and with whom I had had words, shook
hands with me the day before the battle began. Three days before, poor
Brace, our Lieutenant-Colonel, had heard of his elder brother's death,
and was heir to a baronetcy in Norfolk, and four thousand a year. Fate,
that had left him harmless through a dozen campaigns, seized on him just
as the world was worth living for, and he went into action knowing, as
he said, that the luck was going to turn against him. The Major had just
joined us--a creature of Lord Marlborough, put in much to the dislike of
the other officers, and to be a spy upon us, as it was said. I know
not whether the truth was so, nor who took the tattle of our mess to
headquarters, but Webb's regiment, as its Colonel, was known to be in
the Commander-in-Chief's black books: "And if he did not dare to break
it up at home," our gallant old chief used to say, "he was determined to
destroy it before the enemy;" so that poor Major Proudfoot was put into
a post of danger.

Esmond's dear young Viscount, serving as aide-de-camp to my Lord Duke,
received a wound, and won an honorable name for himself in the Gazette;
and Captain Esmond's name was sent in for promotion by his General, too,
whose favorite he was. It made his heart beat to think that certain eyes
at home, the brightest in the world, might read the page on which his
humble services were recorded; but his mind was made up steadily to keep
out of their dangerous influence, and to let time and absence conquer
that passion he had still lurking about him. Away from Beatrix, it did
not trouble him; but he knew as certain that if he returned home, his
fever would break out again, and avoided Walcote as a Lincolnshire man
avoids returning to his fens, where he is sure that the ague is lying in
wait for him.

We of the English party in the army, who were inclined to sneer at
everything that came out of Hanover, and to treat as little better than
boors and savages the Elector's court and family, were yet forced to
confess that, on the day of Oudenarde, the young Electoral Prince, then
making his first campaign, conducted himself with the spirit and courage
of an approved soldier. On this occasion his Electoral Highness had
better luck than the King of England, who was with his cousins in the
enemy's camp, and had to run with them at the ignominious end of the
day. With the most consummate generals in the world before them, and
an admirable commander on their own side, they chose to neglect the
councils, and to rush into a combat with the former, which would have
ended in the utter annihilation of their army but for the great skill
and bravery of the Duke of Vendosme, who remedied, as far as courage and
genius might, the disasters occasioned by the squabbles and follies of
his kinsmen, the legitimate princes of the blood royal.

"If the Duke of Berwick had but been in the army, the fate of the day
would have been very different," was all that poor Mr. von Holtz could
say; "and you would have seen that the hero of Almanza was fit to
measure swords with the conqueror of Blenheim."

The business relative to the exchange of prisoners was always going on,
and was at least that ostensible one which kept Mr. Holtz perpetually on
the move between the forces of the French and the Allies. I can answer
for it, that he was once very near hanged as a spy by Major-General
Wayne, when he was released and sent on to head-quarters by a special
order of the Commander-in-Chief. He came and went, always favored,
wherever he was, by some high though occult protection. He carried
messages between the Duke of Berwick and his uncle, our Duke. He seemed
to know as well what was taking place in the Prince's quarter as our
own: he brought the compliments of the King of England to some of our
officers, the gentlemen of Webb's among the rest, for their behavior on
that great day; and after Wynendael, when our General was chafing at the
neglect of our Commander-in-Chief, he said he knew how that action
was regarded by the chiefs of the French army, and that the stand made
before Wynendael wood was the passage by which the Allies entered Lille.

"Ah!" says Holtz (and some folks were very willing to listen to him),
"if the king came by his own, how changed the conduct of affairs would
be! His Majesty's very exile has this advantage, that he is enabled to
read England impartially, and to judge honestly of all the eminent men.
His sister is always in the hand of one greedy favorite or another,
through whose eyes she sees, and to whose flattery or dependants she
gives away everything. Do you suppose that his Majesty, knowing England
so well as he does, would neglect such a man as General Webb? He ought
to be in the House of Peers as Lord Lydiard. The enemy and all Europe
know his merit; it is that very reputation which certain great people,
who hate all equality and independence, can never pardon." It was
intended that these conversations should be carried to Mr. Webb. They
were welcome to him, for great as his services were, no man could value
them more than John Richmond Webb did himself, and the differences
between him and Marlborough being notorious, his Grace's enemies in
the army and at home began to court Webb, and set him up against
the all-grasping, domineering chief. And soon after the victory of
Oudenarde, a glorious opportunity fell into General Webb's way, which
that gallant warrior did not neglect, and which gave him the means of
immensely increasing his reputation at home.

After Oudenarde, and against the counsels of Marlborough, it was
said, the Prince of Savoy sat down before Lille, the capital of French
Flanders, and commenced that siege, the most celebrated of our time,
and almost as famous as the siege of Troy itself, for the feats of valor
performed in the assault and the defence. The enmity of the Prince of
Savoy against the French king was a furious personal hate, quite unlike
the calm hostility of our great English general, who was no more moved
by the game of war than that of billiards, and pushed forward his
squadrons, and drove his red battalions hither and thither as calmly as
he would combine a stroke or make a cannon with the balls. The game
over (and he played it so as to be pretty sure to win it), not the
least animosity against the other party remained in the breast of this
consummate tactician. Whereas between the Prince of Savoy and the French
it was guerre a mort. Beaten off in one quarter, as he had been at
Toulon in the last year, he was back again on another frontier of
France, assailing it with his indefatigable fury. When the Prince came
to the army, the smouldering fires of war were lighted up and burst
out into a flame. Our phlegmatic Dutch allies were made to advance at a
quick march--our calm Duke forced into action. The Prince was an army
in himself against the French; the energy of his hatred, prodigious,
indefatigable--infectious over hundreds of thousands of men. The
Emperor's general was repaying, and with a vengeance, the slight the
French King had put upon the fiery little Abbe of Savoy. Brilliant and
famous as a leader himself, and beyond all measure daring and intrepid,
and enabled to cope with almost the best of those famous men of war who
commanded the armies of the French King, Eugene had a weapon, the equal
of which could not be found in France, since the cannon-shot of Sasbach
laid low the noble Turenne, and could hurl Marlborough at the heads
of the French host, and crush them as with a rock, under which all the
gathered strength of their strongest captains must go down.

The English Duke took little part in that vast siege of Lille, which
the Imperial Generalissimo pursued with all his force and vigor, further
than to cover the besieging lines from the Duke of Burgundy's army,
between which and the Imperialists our Duke lay. Once, when Prince
Eugene was wounded, our Duke took his Highness's place in the trenches;
but the siege was with the Imperialists, not with us. A division under
Webb and Rantzau was detached into Artois and Picardy upon the most
painful and odious service that Mr. Esmond ever saw in the course of his
military life. The wretched towns of the defenceless provinces, whose
young men had been drafted away into the French armies, which year after
year the insatiable war devoured, were left at our mercy; and our orders
