Armagnacs were fried alive, when I sent you to hinder my men from growing
mere thieves?  Gentleman, forsooth!  One would think it the Dauphin
himself; or mayhap Buchan.  Ha! it is a Scot, then!'

'Yes, Sir,' said James; 'Sir Patrick Drummond, a good knight, hurt and
helpless, for whom I entreat your grace.'

'You disobeyed me to spare a Scot!' burst forth Henry.  'You, who call
yourself a captain of mine, and who know my will!  He hangs instantly!'

'Harry, bethink yourself.  This is no captive taken in battle.  He is a
sick man, left behind, sorely hurt.'

'Then wherefore must you be meddling, instead of letting him burn as he
deserved, and heeding what you undertook for me?  I _will_ have none of
your traitor ruffians here.  Since you have brought him in, the halter
for him!--Here, Ralf Percy, tell the Provost-marshal--'

He was interrupted, for James unbuckled his sword, and tendered it to
him.

'King Harry,' he said gravely, 'this morning I was your friend and
brother-in-arms; now I am your captive.  Hang Patrick Drummond, who aided
me at Meaux in saving my honour and such freedom as I have, and I return
to any prison you please, and never strike blow for you again.'

'Take back your sword,' said Henry.  'What folly is this?  You knew that
I count not your rebel subjects as prisoners of war.'

'I did not know that I was saving a defenceless man from the flames to be
used like a dog.  I never offered my arm to serve a savage tyrant.'

'Take your sword!' reiterated Henry, his passion giving way before
James's steady calmness.  'We will look into it to-morrow: but it was no
soldierly act to take advantage of my weariness, to let my commands be
broken the first day of taking the field, and bring the caitiff here.  We
will leave him for the night, I say.  Take up your sword.'

'Not till I am sure of my liegeman's life,' said James.

'No threats, Sir.  I will make no promise,' said Henry, haughtily; but
the words died away in a racking cough.

And Bedford, laying his hand on James's arm, said, 'He is fevered and
weary.  Fret him no longer, but take your sword, and get your fellow out
of the camp.'

James was too much hurt to make a compromise.  'No,' he said; 'unless
your brother freely spares the life of a man thus taken, I must be his
prisoner--but his soldier never!'

He left the tent, followed by Malcolm in an agony of despair and self-
reproach.

Henry's morning decisions were not apt to vary from his evening ones.
There was a terrible implacability about him at times, and he had never
ceased to visit his brother of Clarence's death upon the Scots, on the
plea that they were in arms against their king.  Even Bedford obviously
thought that the prisoner would be safest out of his reach; and this
could hardly be accomplished, since Patrick had been placed in James's
tent, in the very centre of the camp, near the King's own.  And though
Bedford and March might have connived at his being taken away, yet the
mass of the soldiery would, if they detected a Scot being smuggled away
into the town, have been persuaded that King James was acting
treacherously.

Besides, the captive himself proved to be so exhausted, that to transport
him any further in his present state would have been almost certainly
fatal.  A barber surgeon from Corbeil had been fetched, and was dealing
with the injuries, which had apparently been the effect of a fall some
days previously, probably when on his way to join the French army at
Cosne; and the first fever of these hurts had no doubt been aggravated by
the adventures of the day.  At any rate Patrick lay unconscious, or only
from time to time groaning or murmuring a few words, sometimes French,
sometimes Scotch.

Malcolm would have fallen on his knees by his side, and striven to win a
word or a look, but James forcibly withheld him.  'If you roused him into
loud ravings in our own tongue, all hope of saving him would be gone,' he
said.

'Shall we?  Oh, can we?' cried Malcolm, catching at the mere word _hope_.

'I only know,' said the King, 'that unless we do so by Harry's good-will,
I will never serve under him again.'

'And if he persists in his cruelty?'

'Then must some means be found of carrying Drummond into Corbeil.  It
will go hard with me but he shall be saved, Malcolm.  But this whole army
is against a Scot; and Harry's eye is everywhere, and his fierceness
unrelenting.  Malcolm, this _is_ bondage!  May God and St. Andrew aid
us!'

When the King came to saying that, it was plain he deemed the case past
all other aid.

Malcolm's misery was great.  The very sight of Patrick had made a mighty
revulsion in his feelings.  The almost forgotten associations of
Glenuskie were revived; the forms of his guardian and of Lily came before
him, as he heard familiar names and phrases in the dear home accent fall
from the fevered lips.  Coldingham rose up before him, and St. Abbs, with
Lily watching on the rocks for tidings of her knight--her knight, to whom
her brother had once promised to resign all his lands and honours, but
who now lay captured by plunderers, among whom that brother made one, and
in peril of a shameful death.  Oh, far better die in his stead, than
return to Lily with tidings such as these!

Was this retribution for his broken purpose, and for having fallen away,
not merely into secular life, but into sins that stood between him and
religious rites?  The King had called St. Andrew to aid!  Must a proof of
repentance and change be given, ere that aid would come?  Should he vow
himself again to the cloister, yield up the hope of Esclairmonde, and
devote himself for Patrick's sake?  Could he ever be happy with Patrick
dead, and Esclairmonde driven and harassed into being his wife?  Were it
not better to vow at once, that so his cousin were spared he would return
to his old purposes?

Almost had he uttered the vow, when, tugging hard at his heart, came the
vision of Esclairmonde's loveliness, and he felt it beyond his strength
to resign her voluntarily; besides, how Madame of Hainault and
Monseigneur de Therouenne would deride his uncertainties; and how
intolerable it would be to leave Esclairmonde to fall into the hands of
Boemond of Burgundy.

Such a renunciation could not be made; he did not even know that
Patrick's safety depended on it; and instead of that, he promised, with
great fervency of devotion, that if St. Andrew would save Patrick
Drummond, and bring about the two marriages, a most splendid monastery
for educational purposes, such as the King so much wished to found,
should be his reward.  It should be in honour of St. Andrew, and should
be endowed with Esclairmonde's wealth, which would be quite ample enough,
both for this and for a noble portion for Lily.  Surely St. Andrew must
accept such a vow, and spare Patrick!  So Malcolm tried to pacify an
anguish of suspense that would not be pacified.




CHAPTER XII: THE LAST PILGRIMAGE


The summer morning came; the _reveille_ sounded, Mass was sung in the
chapel tent, without which Henry never moved; and Malcolm tried to
reassure his sinking heart by there pledging his vow to St. Andrew.

The English king was not present; but the troops were drawing up in
complete array, that he might inspect them before the march.  And a
glorious array they were, of steel-clad men-at-arms on horseback, in
bands around their leader's banner, and of ranks of sturdy archers, with
their long-bows in leathern cases; the orderly multitude, stretching as
far as the eye could reach, glittering in the early sun, and waiting with
bold and glad hearts to greet the much-loved king, who had always led
them to victory.

The only unarmed knight was James of Scotland.  He stood in the space
beside the standard of England, in his plain suit of chamois leather, his
crimson cloak over his shoulder, but with no weapon about him, waiting
with crossed arms for the morning's decision.

Close outside the royal tent waited Henry's horse, and those of his
brother and other immediate attendants; and after a short interval the
King came forth in his brightest armour, with the coronal on his helmet,
and the beaver up; and as he mounted, not without considerable aid,
enthusiastic shouts of 'Long live King Harry!' broke forth, and came
echoing back and back from troop to troop, gathering fervour as they
rose.

The King rode forward towards the standard; but while yet the shouts were
pealing from the army, be suddenly caught at his saddle-bow, reeled
visibly, and would have fallen before Bedford could bring his horse to
his side, had not James sprung forward, and laid one arm round him, and a
hand on his rein.

'It is nothing,' said Henry.  'Let me alone.'

Ere the words were finished, he put his hand to his side, dropped his
bridle, and gasped, while a look of intense suffering passed over his
features; and he was passive while his horse was led back to the tent,
and he was lifted down and placed on the couch he had just quitted.

'Loose my belt,' he gasped; then trying to smile, 'Percy has strained it
three holes tighter.'

Alas! though it was indeed thus drawn in, his armour was hanging on him
like the shell of a last year's nut.  They released him from it, and he
lay against the cushions with short painful respiration, and frequent
cough.

'You must go on with the men at once, John,' he said.  'I will but be
blooded, and follow in the litter.'

'Warwick and Salisbury--' began Bedford.

'No, no!' peremptorily gasped Henry.  'It must be you or I, I would, but
this stitch in the side catches me, so that I can neither ride nor speak.
Go, instantly.  You know what I have ordered.  I'll be up with you ere
the battle.'

He brooked no resistance.  His impatience, and with it the oppression and
pain, only grew by remonstrance; and Bedford was forced to obey the
command to go himself, and leave no one he could help behind him.

'You will stay, at least,' said John, in his distress, turning to the
Scottish king.

'I must,' said James.

'You hold not your wrath?' said Bedford.  'It will madden me to leave him
to any save you in this stress.  Some are dull; some he will not heed.'

'I will tend him like yourself, John,' said the Scot, taking his hand.
'Do what he may, Harry is Harry still.  Hasten to your command, John; he
will be calmer when you are gone.'

Bedford groaned.  It was hard to leave his brother at a moment when he
must be more than himself--become general of an army, with a battle
imminent; but he was under dire necessity, and forced himself to listen
to and gather the import of the few terse orders and directions that
Henry, breathless as he was, rendered clear and trenchant as ever.

The King almost drove his brother away at last, while a barber was taking
a copious stream of blood from him; and as the army had already been set
in motion, a great stillness soon prevailed, no one being left save a
small escort, and part of the King's own immediate household, for Henry
had himself ordered away Montagu, his chamberlain, Percy, and almost all
on whom his eyes fell.  The bleeding relieved him; he breathed less
tightly, but became deadly pale, and sank into a doze of extreme
exhaustion.

'Who is here?' he said, awakening.  'Some drink!  What you, Jamie!  You
that were on fire to see a stricken field!'

'Not so much as to see you better at ease,' said James.

'I am better,' said Henry.  'I could move now; and I must.  This tent
will stifle me by noon.'

'You will not go forward?'

'No; I'll go back.  A sick man is best with his wife.  And I can battle
it no further, nor grudge the glory of the day to John.  He deserves it.'

The irascible sharpness had passed from his voice and manner, and given
place to a certain languid cheerfulness, as arrangements were made for
his return to Vincennes.

There proved to be a large and commodious barge, in which the transit
could be effected on the river, with less of discomfort than in the
springless horse litter by which he had travelled the day before; and
this was at once prepared.

Malcolm had meanwhile remained, as in duty bound, in attendance on his
king.  James had found time to enjoin him to stay, being, to say the
truth, unwilling to trust one so inexperienced and fragile in the _melee_
without himself; nor indeed would this have been a becoming moment for
him to put himself forward to win his spurs in the English cause.

Nothing had passed about Patrick Drummond, nor the high words of last
night.  Henry seemed to have forgotten them, between his bodily suffering
and the anxiety of being forced to relinquish the command just before a
battle; and James would have felt it ungenerous to harass him at such a
moment, when absolutely committed to his charge.  For the present, there
was no fear of the prisoner being summarily executed by any lawful
authority, since the King had promised to take cognizance of the case;
and the chief danger was from his chance discovery by some lawless man-at-
arms, who would think himself doing good service by killing a concealed
Scot under any circumstances.

Drummond himself, after his delirious night, had sunk into a heavy sleep;
and the King thought the best hope for him would be to remain under the
care of Sir Nigel Baird for the present, until he could obtain favour for
him from Henry, and could send back orders from Vincennes.  He would not
leave Malcolm to share the care of him, declaring that the canny Sir
Nigel would have quite enough to do in averting suspicion without him;
and, besides, he needed Malcolm himself, in the scarcity of attendants
who had any tenderness or dexterity of hand to wait upon the suffering
King.

Henry had rallied enough to walk down to the river, leaning upon James;
and he smiled thanks when he was assisted by Trenton and Kitson to lie
along on cushions.  'So, my Yorkshire knights,' he said, ''tis you that
have had to stop from the battle to watch a sick man home!'

'Ay, Sir,' said Sir Christopher; 'I did it with the better will, that
Trenton here has not been his own man since the fever; and 'twere no fair
play in the matter your Grace wets of, did I go into battle whole and
sound, and he sick and sorry.'

Henry's look of amusement brightened him into his old self, as he said,
'Honester guards could I scarce have, good friend.'

At that moment, after a nudge or two from Trenton, Kitson and he came
suddenly down on their knees, with an impetus that must have tried the
boards of the bottom of the barge.  'Sir,' said Kitson, always the
spokesman, 'we have a grace to ask of you.'

'Say on,' said Henry.  'Any boon, save the letting you cut one another's
throats.'

'No, Sir.  Will Trenton's scarce my match now, more's the pity; and,
moreover, we've lost the good will to it we once had.  No, Sir; 'twas
license to go a pilgrimage.'

'On pilgrimage!'

'Ay, Sir; to yon shrine at Breuil--St. Fiacre's, as they call him.  Some
of our rogues pillaged his shrine, as you know, Sir; and those that know
these parts best, say he was a Scottish hermit, and bears malice like a
Scot, saint though he be; and that your sickness, my lord, is all along
of that.  So we two have vowed to go barefoot there for your healing, my
liege, if so be we have your license.'

'And welcome, with my best thanks, good friends,' said Henry, exerting
himself to lean forward and give his hand to their kiss.  Then, as they
fell back into their places, with a few inarticulate blessings and
assurances that they only wished they could go to Rome, or to Jerusalem,
if it would restore their king, Henry said, smiling, as he looked at
James, 'Scotsmen here, there, and everywhere--in Heaven as well as earth!
What was it last night about a Scot that moved thine ire, Jamie?  Didst
not tender me thy sword?  By my faith, thou hast it not!  What was the
rub?'

James now told the story in its fulness.  How he had met Sir Patrick
Drummond at Glenuskie; how, afterwards, the knight had stood by him in
the encounter at Meaux; and how it had been impossible to leave him
senseless to the flames; and how he had trusted that a capture made thus,
accidentally, of a helpless man, would not fall under Henry's strict
rules against accepting Scottish prisoners.

'Hm!' said Henry; 'it must be as you will; only I trust to you not to let
him loose on us, either here or on the Border.  Take back your sword,
Jamie.  If I spoke over hotly last night--a man hardly knows what he says
when he has a goad in the side--you forgive it, Jamie.' And as the Scots
king, with the dew in his eyes, wrung his hand, he added anxiously, 'Your
sword!  What, not here!  Here's mine.  Which is it?'  Then, as James
handed it to him: 'Ay, I would fain you wore it!  'Tis the sword of my
knighthood, when poor King Richard dubbed me in Ireland; and many a brave
scheme came with it!'

The soft movement of the barge upon the water had a soothing influence;
and he was certainly in a less suffering state, though silent and dreamy,
as he lay half raised on cushions under an awning, James anxiously
watching over him, and Malcolm with a few other attendants near at hand;
stout bargemen propelling the craft, and the guard keeping along the bank
of the river.

His thoughts were perhaps with the battle, for presently he looked up,
and murmured the verse:

   '"I had a dream, a weary dream,
      Ayont the Isle of Skye;
   I saw a dead man win a fight,
      And I think that man was I."

That stave keeps ringing in my brain; nor can I tell where or when I have
heard it.'

''Tis from the Scottish ballad that sings of the fight of Otterburn,'
said James; 'I brought it with me from Scotland.'

'And got little thanks for your pains,' said Henry, smiling.  'But,
methinks, since no Percy is in the way, I would hear it again; there was
true knighthood in the Douglas that died there.'

James's harp was never far off; and again his mellow voice went through
that gallant and plaintive strain, though in a far more subdued manner
than the first time he had sung it; and Henry, weakened and softened,
actually dropped a brave man's tear at the 'bracken bush upon the lily
lea,' and the hero who lay there.

'That I should weep for a Douglas!' he said, half laughing; 'but the
hearts of all honest men lie near together, on whatever side they draw
their swords.  God have mercy on whosoever may fall to-morrow!  I trow,
Jamie, thou couldst not sing that rough rhyme of Agincourt.  I was
bashful and ungracious enough to loathe the very sound of it when I came
home in my pride of youth; but I would lief hear it once more.  Or,
stay--Yorkshiremen always have voices;' and raising his tone, he
unspeakably gratified Trenton and Kitson by the request; and their
voices, deep and powerful, and not uncultivated, poured forth the Lay of
Agincourt to the waves of the French river, and to its mighty victor:

   'Our King went forth to Normandye.'

Long and lengthily chanted was the triumphant song, with the Latin
choruses, which were echoed back by the escort on the bank; while Henry
lay, listening and musing; and Malcolm had time for many a thought and
