


All these wars which had been fought on American soil had cost a
great deal of money and many lives.  Now it seemed to the British
Government that the best way to be sure of peace in the future
was to keep an army in America.  They decided to do this.  They also
decided that America should pay for the army.  And in order to raise
the money a stamp tax was to be introduced.  Newspapers, marriage
licenses, wills, and all sorts of legal papers were henceforth to
be printed on stamped paper, the price of stamps varying according
to the importance of the paper from a few pence to as many pounds.

But when the Americans heard that this Act had been passed without
their consent they were angry.

"No," they said to the British Government, "you cannot tax us without
our consent.  It is one of the foundations of British freedom that
those who pay the tax must also consent to it.  We are not represented
in the British Parliament, our consent has not been asked, and we
deny your right to tax us."

The whole country was filled with clamour.  In every colony young
men banded themselves together, calling themselves Sons of Liberty,
and determined to resist the tax. "No taxation without representation"
was the cry.

When the first boxes of stamps arrived they were seized and destroyed.
Newspapers appeared with a skull and crossbones printed where the
stamp should have been.  There were riots and mass meetings everywhere.

The Americans did not merely resist, they resisted in a body.
Nothing but the idea that their liberty was in danger made them act
together.  Over everything else they had been divided.  Over that
they were united. "There ought to be no New England men, no New
Yorkers, known on the continent," said one man; "but all of us
Americans."

Even in Britain there were people who thought this Stamp Act was a
mistake.  The great Pitt had been ill when it was passed into law,
but when he returned to Parliament he spoke strongly against it.

"I was ill in bed," he said, "but if I could have been carried here
in my bed I would have asked some kind friend to lay my on this
floor, so that I might have spoken against it.  It is a subject of
greater importance than ever engaged the attention of this House;
that subject always excepted, when nearly a century ago it was the
question whether you yourselves were to be bond or free."

Pitt was thinking of the time when Englishmen strove with Charles
I.  He gloried in British liberty, and he could not bear to think
of Britons oppressing Britons. "Who that has an English heart," he
once said, "can ever be weary of asserting liberty?"

"I rejoice that America has resisted," he said later.

There were many against Pitt, but he won the day, and the Stamp
Act was repealed.

There was great rejoicing in America, and the matter seemed at an
end.  But the very next year a new bill for taxing the Americans was
brought into Parliament.  This time the tax was to be paid on tea,
glass, lead and a few other things brought into the country.

Once again the colonies were ablaze, and they refused to pay this
duty just as they had refused to pay the Stamp Tax.  Everywhere
there were indignation meetings.  But Boston seemed to be the heart
of the storm, and to Boston British troops were sent to keep order.

The soldiers had nothing to do, but the very sight of their red
coats made the colonists angry.  They taunted the soldiers, and
worried them every way they knew, and the soldiers were not slow
to reply.  So at last after eighteen months of bickering one March
evening it came to blows.  Two or three exasperated soldiers fired
upon the crowd of citizens, five of whom were killed and several
others wounded.

This was afterwards known as the Boston Massacre.  It made the people
terribly angry, and next day a great meeting was held in Old South
Church.  At this meeting the people demanded that the troops should
be at once removed from the town.  And seeing the temper of the
people the Lieutenant Governor withdrew them that same day to a
little island in the harbour.

And now finding how useless it was to try to force taxes on unwilling
subjects, the Government removed all the taxes except one.  King
George wanted to show his power.  He wanted to prove to the Americans
that he had the right to tax them if he liked.  So he insisted that
there should still be a tax on tea.

"The King will have it so, he means to try the question with
America," said Lord North, the easy-going, stupid minister who was
now in power.

But to prove that neither the King nor any one else had the right
to tax them, without their consent, was exactly for what the Americans
were fighting.  To them, one tax was as bad as a dozen.  It was not
a question of money, but a question of right or wrong, of freedom
or slavery.  So they refused to pay the tax on tea.  They refused to
buy tea from Britain at all, and smuggled it from Holland.  Ships
laden with tea came to port, and it was landed.  But no one would
buy it, and it rotted and mouldered in the cellars.  In Boston,
however, the people determined that it should not even land.  And
when three ships laden with tea came into Boston harbour, the people
refused to allow them to unload.

"Take your tea back again to England," they said to the captain.

But the captain could not do that, for the customs officers would
not allow him to leave until he had landed his cargo.  The people
were greatly excited.  Large meetings were held, and every possible
manner of getting rid of the tea was discussed.  But at length
some of the younger men grew tired of talk.  Time was passing.  If
something were not done, the tea would be landed by force.

That, these bold young men determined, should not be.  So about
fifty of them dressed themselves as Red Indians, staining their
faces brown and painting them hideously.  Then, tomahawk in hand,
they stole silently down to the ships, and uttering wild war cries
sprang on board.  They seized the tea chests and with their hatchets
burst them open, and poured the tea into the harbour.

There were nearly three hundred and fifty chests, and soon the harbour
was black with tea.  It was terrible waste, but no one stopped it.
From the shore people looked on quietly.  And when the work was done
the "Red Indians" vanished away as silently as they had come.  This
was afterwards called the Boston Tea Party.  Certainly no greater
brewing of tea has ever been known.

When George III heard of the Boston Tea Party he was very angry, and
he resolved to punish the people of Boston. "They will be lions,"
he said, "as long as we are lambs, but if we show them that we mean
to be firm they will soon prove very meek."

So he closed the port and forbade any ships to go there, thus
cutting off Boston from the trade of the world.  He also said that
Boston should no longer be the capital of Massachusetts, and made
Salem the capital instead.

Boston, of course, was well-nigh ruined by these acts.  But instead
of looking coldly on her misfortunes, the other colonies rallied
to her aid.  And grain, cattle and all sorts of merchandise poured
into Boston from them.

Boston could not be starved, neither could it be frightened into
submitting.

__________





Chapter 52 - Paul Revere's Ride - The Unsheathing of the Sword




All the colonies now felt that they must unite in truth, and that
they must have some centre to which all could appeal.  So a Congress
of all the colonies was called at Philadelphia.  This is called
the first Continental Congress, and to it all the colonies except
Georgia sent delegates.

This Congress drew up a Declaration of Rights.  They also sent an
address to the King in which they declared that they had no wish
to separate from Britain.

But the King called the Congress an unlawful and seditious gathering,
and would not listen to anything it had to say.  Still, far-seeing
statesmen with Pitt at their head struggled to bring about a
reconciliation.

"I contend, not for indulgence, but for justice to America," he said.
"The Americans are a brave, generous and united people, with arms
in their hands, and courage in their hearts.  It is not repealing
this act of Parliament, it is not repealing a piece of parchment,
that can restore America to our bosom.  You must repeal her fears and
her resentments.  And you may then hope for her love and gratitude."

But few people listened to Pitt, the bill which he brought into
Parliament was rejected with scorn, and the great struggle which
was to last for eight years began.

Already in America, men's minds had begun to turn to war, and on
every village green the farmers might be seen drilling every evening.
Bands of minute men, that is, men who would be ready at a minute's
notice, were organised.  All sorts of war stores were gathered.

Two of the leaders of the people in all these matters were Samuel
Adams and John Hancock.  These men Governor Gage, who was also
commander of the troops, was ordered to arrest and send to England
to be tried as traitors.  Gage having heard that both men were
staying at the village of Lexington decided to arrest them together.

For this he carefully laid his plans.  Eight hundred men were to
leave Boston in secret at dead of night.  First they were to go to
Lexington, and having arrested the "traitors" they were next to
march on to Concord to seize the large war stores which were known
to be gathered there.

All the preparations were made as silently and as secretly as possible.
But the colonists were on the alert.  They knew that something was
afoot, and guessed what it was.

On the 18th of April Gage gave strict orders that no one was to
be allowed to leave Boston that night.  But no orders could stop
determined men.

And as the moon was rising a little boat was rowed across the Charles
river almost under the shadow of the British man-of-war.  The boat
reached the farther shore and a man booted and spurred, and if ready
for a long ride, leaped out upon the bank.  This man was Paul Revere.

At ten o'clock the troops also were silently rowed across the
Charles River, and in the darkness set out for Lexington.  But not
far off on the bank of the same river, a man stood waiting beside
a saddled horse.  Quietly he waited, looking always towards the
tower of the Old North Church.  It was Paul Revere, and he waited
for a signal to tell him which way the red coats were going.

Suddenly about eleven o'clock two twinkling lights appeared upon
the tower, and without a moment's loss Paul Revere leaped into
the saddle and dashed away.  Swiftly he rode, urging his good horse
onward with voice and hand.

Near the lonely spot where stood the gallows he passed.  Here under
a tree, two horsemen waited, and as Revere came nearer he saw that
they were British soldiers.  Swiftly they darted at him.  One tried
to seize his bridle, the other to head him off.  But Revere was
a fearless rider, and knew the countryside by heart.  He swerved
suddenly, doubled, and was soon clear of his pursuers.

Then on through the darkness he galloped unhindered till he reached
Medford.  Here he stayed but to rouse the captain of the minute men,
and onward he sped once more.  Now at the door of every cottage or
farmhouse which he passed he loudly knocked, shouting his news "the
soldiers are coming," and thundered off again in the darkness.

A little after midnight he reached Lexington and stopped before the
house where Adams and Hancock were sleeping.  He found it guarded
by minute men, and as he excitedly shouted his news, they bade him
be quiet.

"Don't make such a noise," said the sergeant, "you will waken the
people in the house."

"Noise," cried Revere, "you will soon have noise enough - the
regulars are coming."

Hancock was awake, and hearing Revere's voice he threw up his
window, shouting to the guard to let him in.  So Revere went into
the house and told all he knew.  When they heard the news, Hancock
wanted to stay and fight, if fighting there was to be.  But the
others would not hear of it, so as day dawned the two men quietly
walked away, and were soon on the road to Philadelphia.

Meanwhile the British troops were steadily marching nearer and nearer.
At first all was silent: save the clatter and jingle of their arms
and the tramp of their feet, there was no sound.  No light was to
be seen far or near.  Then suddenly a bell rang, a shout was heard,
lights twinkled here and there.  The night was no longer silent and
dark.  The country was no longer asleep.

The colonel in command of the troops grew anxious.  He had expected
to take the people completely by surprise, and he had done so.
Somehow the secret had leaked out.  The whole countryside was up
and awake, and fearing lest with his small company of soldiers, he
would not be able to do what he had set out to do, he sent back to
Boston for more men.

And sure enough, his fears were well founded, for when in the cold
grey of early dawn the advance party reached Lexington, they found
a little guard of sixty or seventy armed men drawn up to receive
them.

"Disperse, ye rebels, disperse," shouted the commander as he rode
towards them.  But the men stood motionless and silent.

"Why don't you disperse, you villains?" he cried again.

Then seeing words had no effect, he gave the order to fire.  The
soldiers obeyed, and eight minute men fell dead, and several more
were wounded.  The minute men returned the fire, but just then more
British soldiers appeared in sight.  And seeing that it was useless
to try to resist so great a force the Americans dispersed.

Thus the terrible war, which was almost a civil war, began.  The
British now marched on to Concord.  They had failed to arrest the
men they had been sent to arrest at Lexington.  So there was all
the more reason to hurry on to Concord, and seize the war stores
before there was time to spirit them away.  But when about seven
o'clock in the morning the troops arrived at Concord the stores for
the most part had been already safely hidden.  A gun or two they
found, and a few barrels of flour.  The guns were spiked, the barrels
staved in, the court house set on fire.

But meanwhile the minute men had been gathering, and now a force
four hundred strong appeared on the further side of a bridge known
as the North Bridge.  The bridge was held by two hundred British,
and when they saw the minute men approach they began to destroy
it.

There was a sharp exchange of fire.  Then the minute men charged
across the narrow bridge, sweeping all before them.  The British
fled back to the village, and the minute men, hardly knowing what
they had done, retired again across the bridge and waited.

The British leader now decided to return to Boston.  He had done
nothing which he had set out to do.  But he saw this his position
was one of great danger.  Everywhere he was surrounded with enemies.
His men were hungry and worn out, so about twelve o'clock the march
back to Boston began.

But the return was not easy, for all the way the troops were harassed
by the Americans.  Every bush, every wall concealed an armed farmer,
whose aim was deadly and sure.  Man after man fell, and beneath the
constant and galling fire coming, it seemed from everywhere and
nowhere, the nerves of the wearied, hungry men gave way.  Faster and
faster the long red line swept along in every growing confusion.
There was no thought now of anything but safety, and the march
was almost a rout when at length the reinforcements from Boston
appeared.  These were a thousand strong, and their leader, Lord
Percy, seeing the confusion and distress of the British formed
his men into a hollow square.  Into this refuge the fugitives fled,
throwing themselves upon the ground in utter exhaustion, with their
tongues hanging out of their mouths "like those of dogs after a
chase."

Lord Percy had brought cannons with him, so with these he swept the
field, and for a time forced the colonists to retire.  But they did
not disperse; they still hovered near, and as soon as the retreat
again began, there began with it the constant galling fire from
every tree or bush, before, behind, on either side.  To return the
fire was useless, as the enemy were hidden.  It was a sort of warfare
not unlike that which Braddock had had to meet, a sort of warfare
in which the American farmer was skilled, but of which the British
soldier knew nothing.  So when, at length, as day darkened the British
troops reached Boston they were utterly spent and weary.  And in a
huddled, disorganised crowd, they hurried into shelter.

__________





Chapter 53 - The First Thrust-The Battle of Bunker Hill




The sword was at length unsheathed.  There was no more doubt about it.
There was to be a war between the Mother Country and her daughter
states.  And now far and wide throughout the colonies the call to
arms was heard and answered.  Farmers left their ploughs and seized
their rifles, trappers forsook their hunting grounds, traders left
their business, and hastened to join the army.

John Stark, a bold trapper learned in Indian ways and famous in
Indian warfare, marched from New Hampshire at the head of several
hundred men.  Israel Putnam, more famous still for his deeds of daring
in the Indian wars, came too.  He was busy on his farm at Pomfret,
Connecticut, when the news of the fight at Lexington reached him.
He was already a man of fifty-seven but there and then he left
his work and hastened round the neighbouring farms calling out
the militia.  Then, commanding them to follow him with all speed,
he mounted his horse, and turned its head towards Cambridge.  Hour
after hour throughout the night he rode onward, and as day dawned
on the 21st of April he galloped into Cambridge, having ridden a
hundred miles in eighteen hours without a change of horse.  Handsome
young Captain Benedict Arnold, half sailor, half merchant, gathered
his men on New Haven green.  And when the general of militia bade him
wait for regular orders and refused to supply him with ammunition
for his men, he threatened to break open the magazine if the
ammunition was not forthcoming at once.  So, seeing that nothing
would restrain him, the general yielded, and Arnold, gallant and
gay, with sixty men behind him marched for Cambridge.

Thus day by day men of all classes, and of all ages, poured in from
the countryside, until an army of sixteen thousand was gathered
around Boston.

Meetings, too, were held throughout the country, when patriots
urged the need of arming and fighting.  In the Virginian Convention,
Patrick Henry, the great orator, thrilled his hearers with his
fiery eloquence. "We must fight," he cried, "I repeat it, we must
fight! An appeal to arms and to the God of Hosts is all that is
left us." Brilliantly, convincingly he spoke, and ended with the
unforgettable words:-- "Is life so dear, or peace so sweet as to be
purchased at the price of chains and slavery! Forbid it, Almighty
God! I know not what course others may take, but as for me, give
me liberty or give me death!"

"His last exclamation," said one who heard him, "was like the shout
of the leader who turns back the rout of battle."

But even yet the leaders of the country hoped to avoid a war.  The
second Continental Congress met at Philadelphia on the 10th of
May and the members talked anxiously of ways and means to restore
peace.  But it was already too late.  For the gathered army was no
longer to be restrained, and the very day upon which Congress met
a British fortress had been seized by the colonists.

The chain of lakes and rivers connecting the Hudson with the St.
Lawrence was felt to be of great importance to the colonists.  For
if Britain had control of it it would cut the colonies in two, and
stop intercourse between New England and the south.  It would also
give the British an easy route by which to bring troops and supplies
from Canada.

Among those who felt the importance of this route was Benedict Arnold,
and the day after he arrived at Cambridge he laid his ideas before
the Massachusetts Committee of Safety, and asked to be allowed to
attack the forts guarding this waterway.  His request was granted.
He was given the rank of colonel, and authority to raise a company
of four hundred men for the purpose.

Arnold set out at once, but he soon found that he was not first in
the field.  For the people of Connecticut, too, had felt the value
of this waterway and Ethan Allen with a hundred and fifty volunteers
who went by the name of Green Mountain Boys had set out for the
same purpose.  These Green Mountain Boys took their name from the
district of Vermont which means Green Mountain.  That district,
under the name of New Hampshire Grants, had been claimed by New
York colony.  But the Green Mountain Boys had resisted the claim,
and by force of arms proved their right to be considered a separate
colony.  Thus having settled their own little revolution they were
now ready to take part in the great one.

At Castleton, Vermont, Arnold met Ethan Allen and his men, and
claimed the leadership of the expedition.  But the Green Mountain
Boys scouted the idea.  They would fight under their own leader or
not fight at all, they said, and as Arnold had gathered very few
of his four hundred men he had to give way.  So instead of leading
the expedition he joined it as a volunteer.

This matter settled the little company marched on to Lake Champlain,
and in the middle of the night they arrived at the southern
end, opposite Fort Ticonderoga.  Here the lake is hardly more than
a quarter of a mile wide and the men began at once to row across.
But they had only two or three boats and when day began to dawn
only about eighty men had got over.  With these Allen decided to
attack, for he feared if he waited till daylight that the garrison
would be awake and would no doubt resist stubbornly.  So placing
himself at the head of his men with Arnold beside him, he marched
quickly and silently up the hill to the gateway of the fort.  When
the astonished sentinel saw this body of men creeping out of the
morning dusk he fired at their leader.  But his gun missed fire and
he fled into the fort.

After him dashed the colonists uttering a loud, blood-curdling,
Indian yell as they reached the parade ground within the fort.  The
garrison which consisted of about forty men was completely taken
by surprise, and yielded with little resistance.  They Allen marched
to the door of the commandment's quarters, and striking three
blows upon it with his sword hilt, commanded him to come forth and
surrender.

As Allen struck, the door was flung open, and half dressed and half
awake the commandment appeared.

"In whose name," he demanded, "do you order me to surrender!"

"In the name of the great Jehovah and the Continental Congress,"
thundered Allen.

Really the Continental Congress had nothing to do with the matter.
The commandment could not know that.  But he had only to look about
him to see that the fort was already in the hands of the enemy.  So
seeing no help for it he yielded; and all his great stores of cannon
and ammunition were sent to supply the needs of the New England
army.

Two days after this Crown Point, further down the lake, was also
seized, for it was only guarded by twelve men.  Here a small ship
was found and Arnold's chance to lead came.  For he was a sailor,
and going on board with his own men he made a dash for St.  John's
at the northern end of the lake.  When he was about thirty miles
from the fort the wind dropped, and his ship lay rocking idly on
the water.  Arnold, however, was not the man to be easily beaten.
He had boats enough to carry thirty men, and with these he set off
to row to the fort.  All night the men bent to the oars, and at six
o'clock in the morning they reached St.  John's.

Once more the fort was easily taken.  For here too, there were no
more than twelve men.  Arnold, however, was only just in time, for
he learned from his prisoners that troops were expected from Canada.
He felt therefore that St.  John's was no safe place for him and
his little band of thirty.  So he seized a small ship which lay in
the harbour, sank everything else in the shape of a boat, and made
off.  And when the Canadian troops arrived next day they found the
fort deserted alike by friend and foe, and the boats which should
have carried them on their way to Ticonderoga at the bottom of the
lake.

By these quick bold attacks the control of the great waterway was
for a time at least in the hands of the colonists.  It was, moreover,
rendered useless to the British, for their boats being destroyed
they had no means of transporting soldiers southwards until new
boats could be built.  This caused a long delay, a delay very useful
to the colonists.

In the meantime Allen was appointed commandment of Ticonderoga, and
Arnold, with a little soreness at his heart returned to Cambridge.
He had been appointed leader of the expedition, but had been forced
to join it as a volunteer under another leader.  His knowledge and
dash had crowned the expedition with success, but another received
the rewards and praise.

When however the Continental Congress heard what had been done it
was rather taken aback.  It was not at all sure at first whether
it was a case for rewards or reprimands, for it was still vainly
hoping for peace.  So it ordered that an exact list of all cannon
and supplies which had been captured should be made, in order that
they might be given back to the Mother Country, "when the restoration
of the former harmony between Great Britain and these colonies
shall render it prudent and consistent."

Meanwhile the new army grew daily larger.  It was still almost entirely
made up of New Englanders, but it was now called the Continental
Army, and the Continental Congress appointed George Washington to
be commander-in-chief.

Washington was now a tall, handsome man, little over forty.  He was
as modest as he was brave, and he accepted the great honour and
heavy duties laid upon him with something of dread.

"Since the Congress desire it," he said, "I will enter upon this
momentous duty, and exert every power I possess in their service.
But I beg it may be remembered by every gentleman in this room
that I this day declare, with the utmost sincerity, I do not think
myself equal to the command I am honoured with,"

Meantime things had not been standing still; while Congress had
been choosing a commander-in-chief the army had been fighting.  By
this time, too, new troops had come out from England, and the British
force was now ten thousand strong.  Feeling sure that the Americans
would not stand against such a force, Governor Gage issued a
proclamation offering pardon to all who would lay down their arms,
except Samuel Adams and John Hancock.  These two, he said, were too
bad to be forgiven.  Instead they prepared to take possession of
the hills commanding Boston.

It was at Bunker Hill that the first real battle of the war was
fought.  For Lexington had after all been a mere skirmish, only of
importance because it was the first in this long and deadly war.
The forts on Lake Champlain had been taken without the shedding of
blood.

The battle is called Bunker Hill although it was really fought on
Breed's Hill which is quite close.  The mistake of the name was made
because the Americans had been sent to take possession of Bunker
Hill, but instead took possession of Breed's Hill.

It was during the night that the Americans took up their position
on the hill.  And when day dawned and the British saw them there,
they determined to dislodge them, and the battle began.

Up the hill the British charged with splendid courage, only to be
met and driven back by a withering fire from the American rifles.
Their front riles were mowed down, and the hillside was strewn
with dead and dying.  But again and yet again they came on.  At the
third charge they reached the top, for the Americans had used up all
their ammunition, and could fire no longer.  Still they would not
yield, and there was a fierce hand to hand fight before the Americans
were driven from their trenches and the hill was in possession of
the British.

For the British, it was a hard won victory, for they lost nearly
three times as many men as the Americans, among them some gallant
officers.  As to the Americans in spite of their defeat they rejoiced;
for they knew now what they could do.  They knew they could stand
up to the famous British regulars.

And now as Washington rode towards Charleston to take command of
the army, news of this battle was brought to him.

"Did our men fight?" asked Washington.  And when he was told how
well, his grave face lighted up.

"Then the liberties of the country are safe," he cried.

So with hope in his heart Washington rode on, and at length after
a journey of eleven days reached Cambridge, the headquarters of
the army.

The next day, the 3rd of July, the whole army was drawn up upon
the plain.  And mounted on a splendid white horse Washington rode
to the head of it.  Under a great elm tree he wheeled his horse, and
drawing his sword solemnly took command of the army of the United
Colonies.  And as the blade glittered in the sunshine, a great shout
went up from the soldiers.  They were New Englanders, for the most
part, but they welcomed their Virginian commander whole heartedly.
For were they not all Americans? Were they not all ready to stand
shoulder to shoulder for the one great cause?

But the army of which Washington had taken command was, perhaps,
the rawest, worst equipped army which ever marched into the field.

The men had neither uniforms, tents, stores nor ammunition, many of
them had no arms.  There was no organisation, and little discipline.
Even the exact numbers composing this army were not known.  They
were, in fact, as one of Washington's own officers said, "only a
gathering of brave, enthusiastic, undisciplined country lads."

But out of this crowd of brave enthusiastic men, Washington set
himself to make an army fit to do great deeds.  So he worked, and
rode, and wrote, unceasingly and unwearyingly.  For he had not only
to deal with the army but with Congress also.  He had to awaken
them to the fact that the country had to do great deeds, and that
to do them well money, and a great deal of money, was needed.

Meanwhile George III also was making free at preparations.  More
soldiers he saw were needed to subdue these rebel farmers.  And as
it was difficult to persuade Britons to go to fight their brothers
he hired a lot of Germans, and sent them out to fight the Americans.
Nothing hurt the Americans more than this; more than anything else
this act made them long to be independent.  After this there was no
more talk of making friends.

__________





Chapter 54 - The War In Canada




After Bunker Hill there was a pause in the fighting round Boston
which gave Washington time to get his raw recruits in hand a little.
Then during the summer news came that Sir Guy Carleton, the Governor
of Canada, was making plans to retake Ticonderoga, and the colonists
determined to invade Canada.  General Philip Schuyler was given
command of the expedition, and with two thousand men he set out for
St.  John's, which Arnold had taken, but had been unable to hold,
earlier in the year.

This time the colonists found St.  John's better guarded, and only at
the end of a two months' siege did it yield.  By this time Schuyler
had become ill, and the command was given to General Richard
Montgomery who crossed the St.  Lawrence, and entered Montreal in
triumph.

Almost at the same time Benedict Arnold set out with twelve hundred
men to attack Quebec.  He marched through the forest of Maine, then
an almost unknown country and uninhabited save by Indians.  It was
a tremendous march, and one that needed all the grit and endurance
of brave, determined men.  They climbed hills, struggled through
swamps, paddled across lakes and down unknown streams.  Sometimes
they waded up to their knees in icy waters pushing their canoes
before them against the rapid current, or again they carried them
over long portages, shouldering their way through forest so dense
that they could scarcely advance a mile an hour.  At night soaked
with rain and sleet they slept upon the snowy ground.  Their food
gave out, and the pangs of hunger were added to their other miseries.
Many died by the way; others, losing heart, turned back.  But sick
and giddy, starving and exhausted the rest stumbled onward, and at
length little more than five hundred ragged half armed, more than
half famished men, reached the shores of the St.  Lawrence.

They were a sorry little company with which to invade a vast
province.  But their courage was superb, their hope sublime, and
without delay they set out to take the great fortress which had
withstood so many sieges, and had only fallen at last before the
genius and daring of Wolfe.

Across the St.  Lawrence this little company of intrepid colonists
paddled, up the path where Wolfe had led his men they climbed, and
stood at length where they had stood upon the heights of Abraham.
They had no cannon, and half their muskets were useless.  Yet Arnold
at the head of his spectral little company boldly summoned the town
to surrender.

The town did not surrender, the Governor refused to come out and
fight.  So seeing the uselessness of his summons Arnold marched away
about twenty miles, and encamped to wait for Montgomery's arrival
from Montreal.  He soon arrived.  But even with hid men the colonists
only numbered about eight hundred, far too small a company with
which to besiege a fortress such as Quebec.  Still they resolved to
take the place by storm.

It was early on the morning of the 1st of January, 1776, that they
