sanguine, for the reasons I have already explained; and in the meantime
had recourse to my old remedy patience, consoling myself with the
flattering suggestions of a lively imagination, that never abandoned me
in my distress.

One day, while I stood sentinel at the gate of a general officer, a
certain nobleman came to the door, followed by a gentleman in mourning,
to whom, at parting, I heard him say, "You may depend upon my good
offices." This assurance was answered by a low bow of the person
in black, who, turning to go away, discovered to me the individual
countenance of my old friend and adherent Strap. I was so much
astonished at the sight, that I lost the power of utterance, and, before
I could recollect myself, he was gone without taking any notice of me.
Indeed, had he stayed, I scarcely should have ventured to accost him;
because, though I was perfectly well acquainted with the features of his
face, I could not be positively certain as to the rest of his person,
which was very much altered for the better since he left me at London,
neither could I conceive by which means he was enabled to appear in the
sphere of a gentleman, to which, while I knew him, he had not even
the ambition to aspire. But I was too much concerned in the affair to
neglect further information, and therefore took the first opportunity
of asking the porter if he knew the gentleman to whom the marquis spoke.
The Swiss told me his name was Monsieur d'Estrapes, that he had been
valet-de-chambre to an English gentleman lately deceased, and that he
was very much regarded by the marquis for his fidelity to his master,
between whom and that nobleman a very intimate friendship had subsisted.
Nothing could be more agreeable to me than this piece of intelligence,
which banished all doubt of its being my friend, who had found means to
frenchify his name as well as his behaviour since we parted. As soon,
therefore, as I was relieved, I went to his lodging, according to a
direction given me by the Swiss, and had the good fortune to find him
at home. That I might surprise him the more, I concealed my name and
business, and only desired the servant of the house to tell Monsieur
d'Estrapes that I begged the honour of half-an-hour's conversation with
him. He was confounded and dismayed at this message, when he understood
it was sent by a soldier; though he was conscious to himself of no
crime, all that he had heard of the Bastille appeared to his
imagination with aggravated horror, but it was not before I had waited a
considerable time that he had resolution enough to bid the servant show
me up-stairs.

When I entered his chamber, he returned my bow with great civility,
and endeavoured, with forced complaisance, to disguise his fear, which
appeared in the paleness of his face, the wildness of his looks, and
the shaking of his limbs. I was diverted at his consternation, which
redoubled, when I told him in French, I had business for his private ear
and demanded a particular audience. The valet being withdrawn, I asked
in the same language if his name was d'Estrapes, to which he answered
with a faltering tongue, "The same, at your service." "Are you a
Frenchman?" Said I. "I have not the honour of being a Frenchman born,"
replied he, "but I have an infinite veneration for the country." I then
desired he would do me the honour to look at me, which he no sooner did
than, struck with my appearance, he started back, and cried in
English, "O Jesus!--sure it can't! No 'tis impossible!" I smiled at his
interjections, saying, "I suppose you are too much of a gentleman to own
your friend in adversity." When he heard me pronounce these words in
our own language, he leaped upon me in a transport of joy, hung about
my neck, kissed me from ear to ear, and blubbered like a great schoolboy
who had been whipped. Then, observing my dress, he set up his throat,
crying, "O Lord! O Lord! that ever I should live to see my dearest
friend reduced to the condition of a foot soldier in the French service!
Why did you consent to my leaving you?--but I know the reason--you
thought you had got more creditable friends, and grew ashamed of my
acquaintance. Ah! Lord help us! though I was a little short-sighted, I
was not altogether blind: and though I did not complain, I was not the
less sensible of your unkindness, which was indeed the only thing that
induced me to ramble abroad, the Lord knows whither; but I must own
it has been a lucky ramble for me, and so I forgive you, and may God
forgive you! O Lord! Lord! is it come to this?" I was nettled at the
charge, which, though just, I could not help thinking unseasonable, and
told him with some tartness that, whether his suspicions were well or
ill grounded, he might have chosen a more convenient opportunity of
introducing them; and that the question now was whether or no he found
himself disposed to lend me any assistance. "Disposed!" replied he with
great emotion; "I thought you had known me so well as to assure yourself
without asking, that I, and all that belongs to me, are at your command.
In the meantime you shall dine with me, and I will tell you something
that, perhaps, will not be displeasing unto you." Then, wringing my
hand, he said, "It makes my heart bleed to see you in that garb!"
I thanked him for his invitation, which, I observed, could not be
unwelcome to a person who had not eaten a comfortable meal these seven
months; but I had another request to make, which I begged he would grant
before dinner, and that was the loan of a shirt; for although my back
had been many weeks a stranger to any comfort of that kind, my skin was
not yet familiarised to the want of it. He stared in my face, with a
woful countenance, at this declaration, which he could scarce believe,
until I explained it by unbuttoning my coat and disclosing my naked
body--a circumstance which shocked the tender-hearted Strap, who, with
tears in his eyes, ran to a chest of drawers, and taking out some linen,
presented to me a very fine ruffled Holland shirt and cambric neckcloth,
assuring me he had three dozen of the same kind at my service.

I was ravished at this piece of good news and, having accommodated
myself in a moment, hugged my benefactor for his generous offer, saying,
I was overjoyed to find him undebauched by prosperity, which seldom
fails to corrupt the heart. He bespoke for dinner some soup and bouilli,
a couple of pullets roasted, and a dish of asparagus, and in the
interim entertained me with biscuit and Burgundy, after which repast he
entreated me to gratify his longing desire of knowing every circumstance
of my fortune since his departure from London. This request I complied
with, beginning at the adventure of Gawky, and relating every particular
event in which I had been concerned from that day to the present hour.
During the recital, my friend was strongly affected, according to the
various situations described. He stared with surprise, glowed with
indignation, gaped with curiosity, smiled with pleasure, trembled with
fear, and wept with sorrow, as the vicissitudes of my life inspired
these different passions; and, when my story was ended, signified his
amazement on the whole, by lifting up his eyes and hands and protesting
that, though I was a young man, had suffered more than all the blessed
martyrs.

After dinner, I desired in my turn to know the particulars of his
peregrination, and he satisfied me in a few words, by giving me to
understand that he had lived a year at Paris with his master, who,
in that time having acquired the language, as well as the fashionable
exercises to perfection, made a tour of France and Holland, during
which excursion he was so unfortunate as to meet with three of his
own countrymen on their travels, in whose company he committed such
excesses, that his constitution failed, and he fell into a consumption;
that by the advice of physicians, he went to Montpelier for the benefit
of good air, and recovered so well in six weeks, that he returned to
Rheims seemingly in good health, where he had not continued above a
month, when he was seized with a looseness that carried him off in ten
days, to the unspeakable sorrow of all who knew him and especially
of Strap, who had been very happy in his service, and given such
satisfaction, that his master, on his death-bed recommended him
to several persons of distinction for his diligence, sobriety, and
affection, and left him by will his wearing apparel, gold watch, sword,
rings, ready money, and all the moveables he had in France, to the value
of three hundred pounds "which I now," said he, "in the sight of God and
man, surrender to your absolute disposal: here are my keys; take them,
I beseech you, and God give you joy of the possession." My brain was
almost turned by this sudden change of fortune, which I could scarce
believe real: however, I positively refused this extravagant proffer of
my friend, and put him in mind of my being a soldier; at which hint he
started, crying, "Odso! that's true! we must procure your discharge. I
have some interest with a nobleman who is able to do me that favour."

We consulted about this affair, and it was determined that Monsieur
d'Estrapes should wait upon the Marquis in the morning, and tell him he
had by accident found his brother, whom he had not seen for many years
before, a private soldier in the regiment of Picardy, and implore that
nobleman's interest for his discharge. In the meantime, we enjoyed
ourselves over a bottle of good Burgundy, and spent the evening in
concerting schemes for our future conduct, in case I should be so lucky
as to get rid of the army. The business was to make ourselves easy for
life by means of his legacy, a task very difficult, and, in the usual
methods of laying out money, altogether impracticable, so that, after
much canvassing, we could come to no resolution that night, but when we
parted, recommended the matter to the serious attention of each other.
As for my own part, I puzzled my imagination to no purpose. When I
thought of turning merchant, the smallness of our stock, and the risk
of seas, enemies, and markets, deterred me from that scheme. If I should
settle as a surgeon in my own country, I would find the business already
overstocked; or, if I pretended to set up in England, must labour under
want of friends and powerful opposition, obstacles insurmountable by the
most shining merit: neither should I succeed in my endeavours to rise in
the state, inasmuch as I could neither flatter nor pimp for courtiers,
nor prostitute my pen in defence of a wicked and contemptible
administration. Before I could form any feasible project, I fell asleep,
and my fancy was blest with the image of the dear Narcissa, who seemed
to smile upon my passion, and offer her hand as a reward for all my
toils.

Early in the morning, I went to the lodgings of my friend, whom I
found exulting over his happy invention! for I no sooner entered his
apartment, than he addressed himself to me in these words, with a smile
of self-applause: "Well, Mr. Random, a lucky thought may come into a
fool's head sometimes. I have hit it--I'll hold you a button my plan
is better than yours, for all your learning. But you shall have the
preference in this as in all other things; therefore proceed, and let
us know the effects of your meditation; and then I will impart my own
simple excogitations." I told him, that not one thought had occurred to
me which deserved the least notice, and signified my impatience to be
acquainted with the fruits of his reflection. "As we have not," said he,
"money sufficient to maintain us during a tedious expectation, it is
my opinion that a bold push must be made; and I see none so likely to
succeed as your appearing in the character of a gentleman (which is your
due), and making your addresses to some lady of fortune, who can render
you independent at once. Nay, don't stare--I affirm that this scheme
is both prudent and honourable; for I would not have you throw yourself
away upon an old toothless wheezing dame, whose breath would stink you
into a consumption in less than three months, neither would I advise
you to assume the character of a wealthy squire, as your common
fortune-hunters do, by which means many a poor lady is cheated into
matrimony, and instead of enjoying the pomp and grandeur that was
promised, sees her dowry seized by her husband's rapacious creditors,
and herself reduced to misery and despair. No, I know you have a soul
that disdains such imposition; and are master of qualifications, both
of mind and body, which alone entitle you to a match that will set you
above the world. I have clothes in my possession that a duke need not be
ashamed to wear. I believe they will fit you as they are, if not there
are plenty of tailors in France. Let us take a short trip to Paris, and
provide ourselves with all other necessaries, then set out for England,
where I intend to do myself the honour of attending you in quality of a
valet. This expedient will save you the expense of a servant, shaving,
and dressing; and I doubt not but, by the blessing of God, we shall
bring matters to a speedy and fortunate issue." Extravagant as this
proposal was, I listened to it with pleasure, because it flattered my
vanity, and indulged a ridiculous hope I began to entertain of inspiring
Narcissa with a mutual flame.

After breakfast, Monsieur d'Estrapes went to pay his devoirs to the
marquis, and was so successful in his application, that I obtained a
discharge in a few days, upon which we set out for Paris. Here I had
time to reflect and congratulate myself upon this sudden transition of
fate, which to bear with moderation required some degree of philosophy
and self-denial. This truth will be more obvious, if I give a detail
of the particulars, to the quiet possession of which I was raised in an
instant, from the most abject misery and contempt. My wardrobe consisted
of five fashionable coats full mounted, two of which were plain, one
of cut velvet, one trimmed with gold, and another with silver lace, two
frocks, one of white drab, with large plate buttons, the other of blue
with gold binding; one waistcoat of gold brocade; one of blue satin,
embroidered with silver; one of green silk, trimmed with figured broad
gold lace; one of black silk, with fringes; one of white satin, one of
black cloth, and one of scarlet; six pair of cloth breeches; one pair
of crimson, and another of black velvet; twelve pair of white silk
stockings, as many of black silk, and the same number of white cotton;
one hat, laced with gold point d'Espagne, another with silver lace
scolloped, a third with gold binding, and a fourth plain; three dozen
of fine ruffled shirts, as many neckcloths; one dozen of cambric
handkerchiefs, and the like number of silk. The other moveables, which
I possessed by the generosity and friendship of Strap, were a gold watch
with a chased case, two valuable diamond rings, two mourning swords, one
with a silver handle, and a fourth cut steel inlaid with gold, a diamond
stock buckle, and a set of stone buckles for the knees and shoes; a pair
of silver-mounted pistols with rich housings; a gold-headed cane, and a
snuff-box of tortoiseshell, mounted with gold, having the picture of a
lady in the top. The gentleman left many other things of value, which my
friend had converted into cash before I met with him; so that, over and
above these particulars, our stock in ready money amounted to something
more than two hundred pounds.

Thus equipped, I put on the gentleman of figure, and, attended by my
honest friend, who was contented with the station of my valet, visited
the Louvre, examined the gallery of Luxembourg, and appeared at
Versailles, where I had the honour of seeing his Most Christian Majesty
eat a considerable quantity of olives. During the month I spent at
Paris, I went several times to court, the Italian comedy, opera,
and playhouse, danced at a masquerade, and, in short, saw everything
remarkable in and about that capital. Then we set out for England by the
way of Flanders, passed through Brussels, Ghent, and Bruges, and took
shipping at Ostend, from whence, in fourteen hours, we arrived at Deal,
hired a postchaise, and in twelve hours more got safe to London, having
disposed of our heavy baggage in the waggon.






CHAPTER XLV

I inquire for my Uncle, and understand he is gone to sea--take Lodgings
at Charing Cross--go to the Play, where I meet with an adventure--Dine
at an ordinary--the Guests described--become acquainted with Medlar and
Doctor Wagtail

As soon as we alighted at the inn, I dispatched Strap to inquire for my
uncle at the Union Flag in Wapping; and he returned in a little time,
with an account of Mr. Bowling's having gone to sea, mate of a merchant
ship, after a long and unsuccessful application attendance at the
Admiralty; where, it seems, the interest he depended upon was not
sufficient to reinstate him, or recover the pay that was due to him when
he quitted the Thunder.

Next day I hired very handsome lodgings not far from Charing Cross; and
in the evening dressed myself in a plain suit of the true Paris cut, and
appeared in a front box at the play, where I saw a good deal of company,
and was vain enough to believe that I was observed with an uncommon
degree of attention and applause. This silly conceit intoxicated me so
much, that I was guilty of a thousand ridiculous coquetries; and I dare
say, how favourable soever the thoughts of the company might be at my
first appearance, they were soon changed by my absurd behaviour into
pity or contempt. I rose and sat down, covered and uncovered my head
twenty times between the acts; pulled out my watch, clapped it to
my ear, wound it up, set it, gave it the hearing again; displayed my
snuff-box, affected to take snuff, that I might have all opportunity of
showing my brilliant, and wiped my nose with perfumed handkerchief;
then dangled my cane, and adjusted my sword-knot, and acted many more
fooleries of the same kind, in hopes of obtaining the character of
a pretty fellow, in the acquiring of which I found two considerable
obstructions in my disposition--namely, a natural reserve and jealous
sensibility. Fain would I have entered into conversation with the people
around me: but I was restrained by the fear of being censured for
my assurance, as well as by reflecting that I was more entitled to a
compliment of this kind from them, than they to such condescension from
a stranger like me. How often did I redden at the frequent whispers and
loud laughter of my fellow beaux, which I imagined were excited by me;
and how often did I envy the happy indifference of those choice spirits,
who behold the distress of the scene without discovering the least
symptom of approbation or concern. My attention was engaged in spite
of myself, and I could not help weeping with the heroine of the stage,
though I practised a great many shifs to conceal this piece of unpolite
weakness.

When the play was ended, I sat waiting for an opportunity of handing
some lady to her coach; but everyone was attended by such a number of
officious gallants, that for a long time I was balked in my expectation.
At length, however, I perceived a very handsome creature, genteelly
dressed, sitting by herself in a box, at some distance from me; upon
which I went up to her, and offered my service. She seemed to be in
some confusion, thanked me for my complaisance, and with a tender look
declined giving me the trouble: looking at her watch, and testifying her
surprise at the negligence of her footman whom she had ordered to have
a chair ready for her at that hour. I repeated my entreaty with all the
eloquence and compliment I was master of; and, in the event, she was
prevailed upon to accept of a proposal I made, to send my servant for
a chair or coach: accordingly, Strap was detached for that purpose, and
returned without success. By this time the playhouse was quite empty,
and we were obliged to retire. As I led her through the passage, I
observed five or six young fellows of fashion standing in a corner,
one of whom, as I thought, tipped my charmer the wink, and when we were
passed, I heard a loud laugh. This note aroused my attention, and I was
resolved to be fully satisfied of this lady's character, before I should
have any nearer connection with her. As no convenience appeared, I
proposed to conduct her to a tavern, where we might stay a few minutes,
until my servant could fetch a coach from the Strand. She seemed
particularly shy of trusting herself in a tavern with a stranger, but
at last yielded to my pathetic remonstrances, rather than endanger
her health by remaining in a cold, damp thoroughfare. Having thus far
succeeded, I begged to know what wine she would be pleased to drink a
glass of; but she professed the greatest aversion to all sorts of strong
liquors, and it was with much difficulty that I could persuade her to
eat a jelly.

In the meantime, I endeavoured to alleviate the uneasiness she
discovered, by saying all the agreeable things I could think of; at
which she would often sigh, and regard me with a languishing look, that
seemed, however, too near akin to the lewd leer of a courtesan. This
discovery added to my former suspicion, while it put me upon my guard
against her arts, divested me of reserve, and enabled me to entertain
her with gaiety and freedom. In the course of our conversation, I
pressed her to allow me the honour of waiting upon her next day at her
lodgings, a request which she, with many apologues, refused, lest it
should give umbrage to Sir John, who was of a disposition apt to be
fretted with trifles. This information, by which I was to understand
that her husband was a knight, did not check my addresses, which became
more and more importunate, and I was even hardy enough to ravish a kiss.
But, O heavens! instead of banqueting on the ambrosial flavour, that her
delicacy of complexion promised, I was almost suffocated with the steams
of Geneva! An exhalation of this kind, from a mouth which had just
before declared an utter abhorrence of all spirituous liquors, not only
changed my doubts into certainty, but my raptures into loathing; and it
would have been impossible for me to have preserved common complaisance
five minutes longer, when my servant returned with a coach. I took the
advantage of this occasion, and presented my hand to the lady, who
put in practice against me the whole artillery of her charms, ogling,
languishing, sighing, and squeezing, with so little reserve that Strap
perceived her tenderness, and rubbed his hands with joy as he followed
us to the door; but I was proof against all her endearments, and handed
her into the coach with an intention to take my leave immediately. She
guessed my design, and invited me to her house, whispering, that now Sir
John was gone to bed, she could have the pleasure of my conversation for
half-an-hour without interruption. I told her there was no mortification
I would not undergo, rather than endanger the repose of her ladyship;
and, bidding the coachman drive on, wished her a good night. She lost
all temper at my indifference, and, stopping the coach, at the distance
of about twenty yards from me, popped out her head, and howled with the
lungs of a fishwoman, "D--n you, you dog, won't you pay the coach-hire?"
As I made no answer, she held forth against me with an eloquence
peculiar to herself; calling me pitifull fellow, scoundrel, and a
hundred such appellations; concluding with an oath, that, for all my
appearance, she believed I had got no money in my pocket.

Having thus vented her indignation, she ordered her coachman to proceed,
and I returned to the tavern, where I bespoke something for supper,
very well pleased at the issue of this adventure. I dispensed with the
attendance of the waiter at table, on pretence that my own servant
was present, and, when we were alone, said to Strap, "Well, Monsieur
d'Estrapes, what d'ye think of this lady?" My friend, who had not
opened his mouth since her departure, could make no other reply than
the monosyllable "Think!" which he pronounced with a note of fear and
astonishment. Surprised at this emphasis, I surveyed my valet,
and, perceiving a wildness in his looks, asked if he had seen his
grandfather's ghost? "Ghost!" said he, "I am sure I have seen a devil
incarnate! Who would have thought that so much devilish malice and
Billingsgate could lurk under so much sweetness of countenance and
modesty of behaviour? Ah! God help us! Fronti nulla fides--nimium ne
crede colori--but we ought to down on our knees, and bless God for
delivering us from the jaws of that painted sepulchre!" I was pretty
much of Strap's opinion, and, though I did not believe myself in any
danger from the allurements of that sisterhood, I determined to act with
great circumspection for the future, and shun all commerce of that kind,
as equally prejudicial to my purse and constitution.

My next care was to introduce myself into a set of good acquaintance:
for which purpose I frequented a certain coffee-house, noted for
the resort of good company, English as well as foreigners, where my
appearance procured all the civilities and advances I could desire. As
there was an ordinary in the same house, I went upstairs to dinner with
the other guests, and found myself at a table with thirteen people, the
greatest part of whom were better dressed than myself. The conversation,
which was mostly carried on in French, turned chiefly on politics; and
I soon found the whole company were in the French interest, myself
excepted, and a testy old gentleman, who contradicted everything that
was advanced in favour of his Most Christian Majesty, with a surliness
truly English. But this trusty patriot, who had never been out of his
own country, and drew all his maxims and notions from prejudice and
hearsay, was very unequal to his antagonists, who were superior to him
in learning and experience, and often took the liberty of travellers
in asserting things which were not strictly true, because they thought
themselves in no danger of being detected by him. The claim of the Queen
Of Spain to the Austrian dominions in Italy was fully explained and
vindicated, by a person who sat opposite to me, and, by the solemnity
of his manner and the richness of his apparel, seemed to be a foreign
ambassador. This dissertation produced another on the Pragmatic
Sanction, handled with great warmth by a young gentleman at my right
hand, dressed in a green frock, trimmed with gold, who justified the
French king for his breach of that contract; and affirmed that he could
not have observed it without injuring his own glory. Although I was
not at all convinced by this gentleman's arguments, I could not help
admiring his vivacity which, I imagined, must be the effect of his
illustrious birth and noble education, and accordingly rated him, in
my conjecture, as a young prince on his travels. The discourse was
afterwards shifted by an old gentleman, of a very martial appearance, to
the last campaign, when the battle of Dettingen was fought over again,
with so many circumstances to the honour of the French and disadvantages
if the Allies, that I began to entertain some doubts of my having been
there in person, and took the liberty to mention some objections to
what he advanced. This freedom introduced a dispute, which lasted a good
while, to the mortification of all present; and was at last referred to
the determination of a grave person, whom they styled Doctor, and who,
under a show of great moderation, decided it against me, with so little
regard to truth, that I taxed him with partiality in pretty severe
terms, to the no small entertainment of the true English politician,
who rejoiced at my defence of a cause he had so often espoused without
success.

My opponent, pleased with the victory he had gained, affected a great
deal of candour, and told me, he should not have been so positive, if
he had not been at great pains to inform himself of each particular.
"Indeed," said he, "I am convinced that the previous steps considered,
things could not happen otherwise; for we generals who have seen
service, though we may not be on the spot ourselves, know by the least
sketch of the disposition what must be the event." He then censured,
with great freedom, every circumstance of the conduct of those who
commanded the Allies; from thence made a transition to the ministry,
which he honoured with many invectives for employing people who had
neither experience nor capacity, to the prejudice of old officers,
who had been distinguished for both; dropped many hints of his own
importance, and concluded with observing, that the French and Spaniards
knew better how to value generals of merit; the good effects of which
are seen in the conquests they gain, and the discipline of their troops,
which are at the same time better clothed and paid than any soldiers
in the universe. These remarks furnished the green knight with an
opportunity of launching out in the praise of the French government
in general, civil as well as military; on which occasion he made many
odious comparisons to the disadvantage of the English. Everybody,
almost, assented to the observations he made, and the doctor gave his
sanction, by saying, the people of France were undoubtedly the happiest
subjects in the world. I was so much astonished and confounded at their
infatuation and effrontery, that I had not power to utter one word in
opposition to their assertions; but my morose associate could not put up
with the indignity that was offered to Old England, and therefore with
a satirical grin addressed himself to the general in these words: "Sir,
sir, I have often heard it said, She's a villainous bird that befouls
her own nest. As for what those people who are foreigners say, I don't
mind it; they know no better; but you who were bred and born, and have
got your bread, under the English government, should have more regard
to gratitude, as well as truth in censuring your native country. If the
ministry have thought fit to lay you aside, I suppose they have their
own reasons for so doing; and you ought to remember, that you still live
on the bounty of this nation. As for these gentlemen (meaning the prince
and ambassador), who make so free with our constitution, laws, and
genius of our people, I think they might show a little more respect
for their benefactors, who, I must own, are to blame in harbouring and
protecting, and encouraging such ungrateful vagrants as they are." At
these words, the chevalier in green started up in a great passion, and
laying his hand on the hilt of his hanger, exclaimed, "Ah! foutre!" The
Englishman on the other hand, grasping his cane cried, "Don't foutre
me, sirrah, or by G--d I'll knock you down." The company interposed,
the Frenchman sat down again, and his antagonist proceeded--"Lookey,
Monsieur, you know very well that had you dared to speak so freely of
the administration of your own country in Paris as you have done of ours
in London, you would have been sent to the Bastille without ceremony,
where you might have rotted in a dungeon, and never seen the light of
the sun again. Now, sir, take my word for it, although our constitution
screens us from such oppression, we want not laws to chastise the
authors of seditious discourse, and if I hear another syllable out of
your mouth in contempt or prejudice of this kingdom, I will give you a
convincing proof of what I advance, and have you laid by the heels for
your presumption." This declaration had an effect on the company as
sudden as surprising. The young prince became as supple as a spaniel,
the ambassador trembled, the general sat silent and abashed, and the
doctor, who it seems, had felt the rod of power, grew pale as death,
and assured us all, that he had no intention to affront any person or
people. "Your principles, doctor," resumed the old gentleman, "are
no secret--I have nothing to say upon that head; but am very much
surprised, that a man who despises us so much, should notwithstanding
live among us, when he has no visible motive for so doing. Why don't you
take up your habitation in your beloved France, where you may rail at
England without censure?" To this remonstrance the doctor thought proper
to make no reply, and an unsocial silence ensued; which I perceiving,
took notice, that it was pity such idle disputes, maintained very often
through whim or diversion, should create any misunderstanding among
gentlemen of good sense, and proposed to drink down all animosity in
another bottle.

This motion was applauded by the whole company. The wine was brought,
and the English champion, declaring he had no spleen against any man
for differing in opinion from him, any more than for difference of
complexion, drank to the good health of all present; the compliment was
returned, and the conversation once more became unreserved though
more general than before. Among other topics, the subject of war
was introduced, on which the general declaimed with great eloquence,
recounting many of his own exploits by way of illustration. In the
course of his harangue he happened to mention the word epaulement, upon
which the testy gentleman asked the meaning, of that term. "I'll tell
you what an epaulement is," replied he, "I never saw an epaulement but
once, and that was at the siege of Namur. In a council of war, Monsieur
Cohorn, the famous engineer, affirmed that the place could not be
taken." "Yes," said the Prince of Vandemont, "it may be taken by
an epaulement." "This was immediately put into execution, and in
twenty-four hours Mareschal Boufflers was fain to capitulate." Here he
made a full stop, and the old gentleman repeated the question, "But
pray what is an epaulement?" To this interrogation the officer made no
immediate reply, but rang the bell, and called for the bill, which being
brought, he threw down his proportion of the reckoning, and, telling the
company he would show them an epaulement when his majesty should think
fit to entrust him with the command of our army abroad, strutted away
with great dignity. I could not imagine why he was so shy of explaining
one of the most simple terms of fortification, which I forthwith
described as a side-work composed of earth, gabions, or fascines; but
I was very much surprised when I afterwards understood that his reserve
proceeded from his ignorance.

Having paid our bill, we adjourned to the coffee-room, where my
fellow-labourer insisted on treating me with a dish, giving me to
understand, at the same time, that I had acquired his good opinion, both
with respect to my principles and understanding. I thanked him for his
compliment, and, professing myself an utter stranger in this part of the
world, begged he would have the goodness to inform me of the quality and
characters of the people who dined above. This request was a real favour
to one of his disposition, which was no less communicative than curious;
he therefore complied with great satisfaction, and told me, to my
extreme astonishment, that the supposed young prince was a dancer at one
of the theatres, and the ambassador no other than a fiddler belonging
to the opera. "The doctor," said he "is a Roman Catholic priest, who
sometimes appears in the character of an officer, and assumes the name
of captain; but more generally takes the garb, title, and behaviour of a
physician, in which capacity he wheedles himself into the confidence
of weak-minded people, and by arguments no less specious than false,
converts them from their religion and allegiance. He has been in the
hands of justice more than once for such practices, but he is a sly dog,
and manages matters with so much craft, that hitherto he has escaped for
a short imprisonment. As for the general, you may see he has owed his
promotion more to his interest than his capacity; and, now that the eyes
of the ministry are opened, his friends dead or become inconsiderable,
he is struck off the list, and obliged to put up with a yearly pension.
In consequence of this reduction, he is become malcontent, and inveighs
against the government in all companies, with so little discretion, that
I am surprised at the lenity of the administration, in overlooking his
insolence, but the truth of the matter is, he owes his safety to his
weakness and want of importance. He has seen a little, and but a little,
service, and yet, if you will take his word to it, there has not been
a great action performed in the field since the Revolution, in which
he was not principally concerned. When a story is told of any great
general, he immediately matches it with one of himself, though he is
often unhappy in his invention, and commits such gross blunders in the
detail, that everybody is in pain for him. Caesar, Pompey, and Alexander
the Great, are continually in his mouth; and, as he reads a good deal
without any judgment to digest it, his ideas are confused, and his
harangues as unintelligible as infinite; for, if once he begin, there is
no chance of his leaving off speaking while one person remains to yield
attention; therefore the only expedient I know, for putting a stop to
his loquacity, is to lay hold of some incongruity he has uttered, and
demand an explanation; or ask the meaning of some difficult term that he
knows by name; this method will effectually put him to silence, if not
to flight, as it happened when I inquired about an epaulement. Had he
been acquainted with the signification of that word, his triumph would
have been intolerable, and we must have quitted the field first, or been
worried with impertinence."

Having thus gratified my curiosity, the old gentleman began to discover
his own, in questions relating to myself, to which I thought proper
to return ambiguous answers. "I presume, Sir," said he, "you have
travelled." I answered, "Yes." "I dare say you have found it very
expensive," said he. I replied, "To be sure, one cannot travel without
