
The doubt was in Laura whether an Englishman's wits were to be relied on
in such an emergency; but she admitted that the doctor had looked full
enough of serious meaning, and that the Englishman named Merthyr Powys
was keen and ready. They sat a long half-hour, that thumped itself
out like an alarm-bell, under the poplars, by the clamouring Passeyr,
watching the roll and spring of the waters, and the radiant foam, while
band-music played to a great company of visitors, and sounds of thunder
drew near. Over the mountains above the Adige, the leaden fingers of
an advance of the thunder-cloud pushed slowly, and on a sudden a mighty
gale sat heaped blank on the mountain-top and blew. Down went the heads
of the poplars, the river staggered in its leap, the vale was shuddering
grey. It was like the transformation in a fairy tale; Beauty had taken
her old cloak about her, and bent to calamity. The poplars streamed
their length sideways, and in the pauses of the strenuous wind nodded
and dashed wildly and white over the dead black water, that waxed in
foam and hissed, showing its teeth like a beast enraged. Laura
and Vittoria joined hands and struggled for shelter. The tent of a
travelling circus from the South, newly-pitched on a grassplot near the
river, was caught up and whirled in the air and flung in the face of
a marching guard of soldiery, whom it swathed and bore sheer to earth,
while on them and around them a line of poplars fell flat, the wind
whistling over them. Laura directed Vittoria's eyes to the sight. "See,"
she said, and her face was set hard with cold and excitement, so that
she looked a witch in the uproar; "would you not say the devil is loose
now Angelo is abroad?" Thunder and lightning possessed the vale, and
then a vertical rain. At the first gleam of sunlight, Laura and Vittoria
walked up to the Laubengasse--the street of the arcades, where they
made purchases of numerous needless articles, not daring to enter the
Italian's shop. A woman at a fruitstall opposite to it told them that no
carriage could have driven up there. During their great perplexity, mud
and rain-stained soldiers, the same whom they had seen borne to earth by
the flying curtain, marched before the shop; the shop and the house were
searched; the Italian and his old liming wife were carried away.

"Tell me now, that storm was not Angelo's friend!" Laura muttered.

"Can he have escaped?" said Vittoria.

"He is 'on horseback.'" Laura quoted the Italian proverb to signify that
he had flown; how, she could not say, and none could inform her. The joy
of their hearts rose in one fountain.

"I shall feel better blood in my body from this moment," Laura said; and
Vittoria, "Oh! we can be strong, if we only resolve."

"You want to sing?"

"I do."

"I shall find pleasure in your voice now."

"The wicked voice!"

"Yes, the very wicked voice! But I shall be glad to hear it. You can
sing to-night, and drown those Lenkensteins."

"If my Carlo could hear me!"

"Ah!" sighed the signora, musing. "He is in prison now. I remember him,
the dearest little lad, fencing with my husband for exercise after they
had been writing all day. When Giacomo was imprisoned, Carlo sat outside
the prison walls till it was time for him to enter; his chin and upper
lip were smooth as a girl's. Giacomo said to him, 'May you always have
the power of going out, or not have a wife waiting for you.' Here they
come." (She spoke of tears.) "It's because I am joyful. The channel for
them has grown so dry that they prick and sting. Oh, Sandra! it would be
pleasant to me if we might both be buried for seven days, and have one
long howl of weakness together. A little bite of satisfaction makes
me so tired. I believe there's something very bad for us in our always
being at war, and never, never gaining ground. Just one spark of triumph
intoxicates us. Look at all those people pouring out again. They are
the children of fair weather. I hope the state of their health does not
trouble them too much. Vienna sends consumptive patients here. If you
regard them attentively, you will observe that they have an anxious air.
Their constitutions are not sound; they fear they may die."

Laura's irony was unforced; it was no more than a subtle discord
naturally struck from the scene by a soul in contrast with it.

They beheld the riding forth of troopers and a knot of officers hotly
conversing together. At another point the duchess and the Lenkenstein
ladies, Count Lenkenstein, Count Serabiglione, and Wilfrid paced up and
down, waiting for music. Laura left the public places and crossed an
upper bridge over the Passeyr, near the castle, by which route she
skirted vines and dropped over sloping meadows to some shaded boulders
where the Passeyr found a sandy bay, and leaped in transparent green,
and whitened and swung twisting in a long smooth body down a narrow
chasm, and noised below. The thundering torrent stilled their
sensations: and the water, making battle against great blocks of
porphyry and granite, caught their thoughts. So strong was the
impression of it on Vittoria's mind, that for hours after, every image
she conceived seemed proper to the inrush and outpour; the elbowing, the
tossing, the foaming, the burst on stones, and silvery bubbles under and
silvery canopy above, the chattering and huzzaing; all working on to the
one-toned fall beneath the rainbow on the castle-rock.

Next day, the chasseur Jacob Baumwalder Feckelwitz deposed in full
company at Sonnenberg, that, obeying Count Serabiglione's instructions,
he had gone down to the city, and had there seen Lieutenant Pierson with
the ladies in front of the hotel; he had followed the English carriage,
which took up a man who was standing ready on crutches at the corner
of the Laubengasse, and drove rapidly out of the North-western gate,
leading to Schlanders and Mals and the Engadine. He had witnessed the
transfer of the crippled man from one carriage to another, and had
raised shouts and given hue and cry, but the intervention of the storm
had stopped his pursuit.

He was proceeding to say what his suppositions were. Count Lenkenstein
lifted his finger for Wilfrid to follow him out of the room. Count
Serabiglione went at their heels. Then Count Lenkenstein sent for his
wife, whom Anna and Lena accompanied.

"How many persons are you going to ruin in the course of your crusade,
my dear?" the duchess said to Laura.

"Dearest, I am penitent when I succeed," said Laura.

"If that young man has been assisting you, he is irretrievably ruined."

"I am truly sorry for him."

"As for me, the lectures I shall get in Vienna are terrible to think
of. This is the consequence of being the friend of both parties, and a
peace-maker."

Count Serabiglione returned alone from the scene at the examination,
rubbing his hands and nodding affably to his daughter. He maliciously
declined to gratify the monster of feminine curiosity in the lump, and
doled out the scene piecemeal. He might state, he observed, that it was
he who had lured Beppo to listen at the door during the examination
of the prisoners; and who had then planted a spy on him--following
the dictation of precepts exceedingly old. "We are generally beaten,
duchess; I admit it; and yet we generally contrive to show the brain. As
I say, wed brains to brute force!--but my Laura prefers to bring about
a contest instead of an union, so that somebody is certain to be struck,
and"--the count spread out his arms and bowed his head--"deserves the
blow." He informed them that Count Lenkenstein had ordered Lieutenant
Pierson down to Meran, and that the lieutenant might expect to be
cashiered within five days. "What does it matter?" he addressed
Vittoria. "It is but a shuffling of victims; Lieutenant Pierson in the
place of Guidascarpi! I do not object."

Count Lenkenstein withdrew his wife and sisters from Sonnenberg
instantly. He sent an angry message of adieu to the duchess, informing
her that he alone was responsible for the behaviour of the ladies of his
family. The poor duchess wept. "This means that I shall be summoned to
Vienna for a scolding, and have to meet my husband," she said to Laura,
who permitted herself to be fondled, and barely veiled her exultation in
her apology for the mischief she had done. An hour after the departure
of the Lenkensteins, the castle was again officially visited by Colonel
Zofel. Vittoria and Laura received an order to quit the district of
Meran before sunset. The two firebrands dropped no tears. "I really am
sorry for others when I succeed," said Laura, trying to look sad upon
her friend.

"No; the heart is eaten out of you both by excitement," said the
duchess.

Her tender parting, "Love me," in the ear of Vittoria, melted one heart
of the two.

Count Serabiglione continued to be buoyed up by his own and his
daughter's recent display of a superior intellectual dexterity until the
carriage was at the door and Laura presented her cheek to him. He
said, "You will know me a wise man when I am off the table." His
gesticulations expressed "Ruin, headlong ruin!" He asked her how she
could expect him to be for ever repairing her follies. He was going
to Vienna; how could he dare to mention her name there? Not even in a
trifle would she consent to be subordinate to authority. Laura checked
her replies--the surrendering, of a noble Italian life to the Austrians
was such a trifle! She begged only that a poor wanderer might depart
with a father's blessing. The count refused to give it; he waved her
off in a fury of reproof; and so got smoothly over the fatal moment
when money, or the promise of money, is commonly extracted from parental
sources, as Laura explained his odd behaviour to her companion. The
carriage-door being closed, he regained his courtly composure; his fury
was displaced by a chiding finger, which he presently kissed. Father.
Bernardus was on the steps beside the duchess, and his blessing had not
been withheld from Vittoria, though he half confessed to her that she
was a mystery in his mind, and would always be one.

"He can understand robust hostility," Laura said, when Vittoria recalled
the look of his benevolent forehead and drooping eyelids; "but robust
ductility does astonish him. He has not meddled with me; yet I am the
one of the two who would be fair prey for an enterprising spiritual
father, as the destined roan of heaven will find out some day."

She bent and smote her lap. "How little they know us, my darling! They
take fever for strength, and calmness for submission. Here is the world
before us, and I feel that such a man, were he to pounce on me now,
might snap me up and lock me in a praying-box with small difficulty. And
I am the inveterate rebel! What is it nourishes you and keeps you always
aiming straight when you are alone? Once in Turin, I shall feel that I
am myself. Out of Italy I have a terrible craving for peace. It seems
here as if I must lean down to him, my beloved, who has left me."

Vittoria was in alarm lest Wilfrid should accost her while she drove
from gate to gate of the city. They passed under the archway of the gate
leading up to Schloss Tyrol, and along the road bordered by vines. An
old peasant woman stopped them with the signal of a letter in her hand.
"Here it is," said Laura, and Vittoria could not help smiling at her
shrewd anticipation of it.

"May I follow?"

Nothing more than that was written.

But the bearer of the missive had been provided with a lead pencil to
obtain the immediate reply.

"An admirable piece of foresight!" Laura's honest exclamation burst
forth.

Vittoria had to look in Laura's face before she could gather her will
to do the cruel thing which was least cruel. She wrote firmly:--"Never
follow me."




CHAPTER XXIX

EPISODES OF THE REVOLT AND THE WAR--THE TOBACCO-RIOTS--RINALDO
GUIDASCARPI

Anna von Lenkenstein was one who could wait for vengeance. Lena punished
on the spot, and punished herself most. She broke off her engagement
with Wilfrid, while at the same time she caused a secret message to be
conveyed to him, telling him that the prolongation of his residence in
Meran would restore him to his position in the army.

Wilfrid remained at Meran till the last days of December.

It was winter in Milan, turning to the new year--the year of flames
for continental Europe. A young man with a military stride, but out
of uniform, had stepped from a travelling carriage and entered a
cigar-shop. Upon calling for cigars, he was surprised to observe the
woman who was serving there keep her arms under her apron. She cast a
look into the street, where a crowd of boys and one or two lean men had
gathered about the door. After some delay, she entreated her customer to
let her pluck his cloak halfway over the counter; at the same time she
thrust a cigar-box under that concealment, together with a printed song
in the Milanese dialect. He lifted the paper to read it, and found it
tough as Russ. She translated some of the more salient couplets. Tobacco
had become a dead business, she said, now that the popular edict had
gone forth against 'smoking gold into the pockets of the Tedeschi.' None
smoked except officers and Englishmen.

"I am an Englishman," he said.

"And not an officer?" she asked; but he gave no answer. "Englishmen are
rare in winter, and don't like being mobbed," said the woman.

Nodding to her urgent petition, he deferred the lighting of his cigar.
The vetturino requested him to jump up quickly, and a howl of "No
smoking in Milan--fuori!--down with tobacco-smokers!" beset the
carriage. He tossed half-a-dozen cigars on the pavement derisively. They
were scrambled for, as when a pack of wolves are diverted by a garment
dropped from the flying sledge, but the unluckier hands came after his
heels in fuller howl. He noticed the singular appearance of the streets.
Bands of the scum of the population hung at various points: from time
to time a shout was raised at a distance, "Abasso il zigarro!" and "Away
with the cigar!" went an organized file-firing of cries along the open
place. Several gentlemen were mobbed, and compelled to fling the cigars
from their teeth. He saw the polizta in twos and threes taking counsel
and shrugging, evidently too anxious to avoid a collision. Austrian
soldiers and subalterns alone smoked freely; they puffed the harder
when the yells and hootings and whistlings thickened at their heels.
Sometimes they walked on at their own pace; or, when the noise swelled
to a crisis, turned and stood fast, making an exhibition of curling
smoke, as a mute form of contempt. Then commenced hustlings and a
tremendous uproar; sabres were drawn, the whitecoats planted themselves
back to back. Milan was clearly in a condition of raging disease. The
soldiery not only accepted the challenge of the mob, but assumed the
offensive. Here and there they were seen crossing the street to puff
obnoxiously in the faces of people. Numerous subalterns were abroad,
lively for strife, and bright with the signal of their readiness. An icy
wind blew down from the Alps, whitening the housetops and the ways, but
every street, torso, and piazza was dense with loungers, as on a
summer evening; the clamour of a skirmish anywhere attracted streams of
disciplined rioters on all sides; it was the holiday of rascals.

Our traveller had ordered his vetturino to drive slowly to his hotel,
that he might take the features of this novel scene. He soon showed
his view of the case by putting an unlighted cigar in his mouth. The
vetturino noted that his conveyance acted as a kindling-match to awaken
cries in quiet quarters, looked round, and grinned savagely at the sight
of the cigar.

"Drop it, or I drop you," he said; and hearing the command to drive on,
pulled up short.

They were in a narrow way leading to the Piazza de' Mercanti. While the
altercation was going on between them, a great push of men emerged from
one of the close courts some dozen paces ahead of the horse, bearing
forth a single young officer in their midst.

"Signore, would you like to be the froth of a boiling of that sort?" The
vetturino seized the image at once to strike home his instance of the
danger of outraging the will of the people.

Our traveller immediately unlocked a case that lay on the seat in front
of him, and drew out a steel scabbard, from which he plucked the sword,
and straightway leaped to the ground. The officer's cigar had been
dashed from his mouth: he stood at bay, sword in hand, meeting a rush
with a desperate stroke. The assistance of a second sword got him clear
of the fray. Both hastened forward as the crush melted with the hiss of
a withdrawing wave. They interchanged exclamations: "Is it you, Jenna!"

"In the devil's name, Pierson, have you come to keep your appointment in
mid-winter?"

"Come on: I'll stick beside you."

"On, then!"

They glanced behind them, heeding little the tail of ruffians whom they
had silenced.

"We shall have plenty of fighting soon, so we'll smoke a cordial cigar
together," said Lieutenant Jenna, and at once struck a light and blazed
defiance to Milan afresh--an example that was necessarily followed by
his comrade. "What has happened to you, Pierson? Of course, I knew you
were ready for our bit of play--though you'll hear what I said of you.
How the deuce could you think of running off with that opera girl, and
getting a fellow in the mountains to stab our merry old Weisspriess,
just because you fancied he was going to slip a word or so over the back
of his hand in Countess Lena's ear? No wonder she's shy of you now."

"So, that's the tale afloat," said Wilfrid. "Come to my hotel and dine
with me. I suppose that cur has driven my luggage there."

Jenna informed him that officers had to muster in barracks every
evening.

"Come and see your old comrades; they'll like you better in bad
luck--there's the comfort of it: hang the human nature! She's a good
old brute, if you don't drive her hard. Our regiment left Verona in
November. There we had tolerable cookery; come and take the best we can
give you."

But this invitation Wilfrid had to decline.

"Why?" said Jenna.

He replied: "I've stuck at Meran three months. I did it, in obedience to
what I understood from Colonel Zofel to be the General's orders. When I
was as perfectly dry as a baked Egyptian, I determined to believe that I
was not only in disgrace, but dismissed the service. I posted to Botzen
and Riva, on to Milan; and here I am. The least I can do is to show
myself here."

"Very well, then, come and show yourself at our table," said Jenna.
"Listen: we'll make a furious row after supper, and get hauled in by the
collar before the General. You can swear you have never been absent from
duty: swear the General never gave you forcible furlough. I'll swear
it; all our fellows will swear it. The General will say, 'Oh! a very
big lie's equal to a truth; big brother to a fact, or something; as he
always does, you know. Face it out. We can't spare a good stout sword in
these times. On with me, my Pierson."

"I would," said Wilfrid, doubtfully.

A douse of water from a window extinguished their cigars.

Lieutenant Jenna wiped his face deliberately, and lighting another
cigar, remarked--"This is the fifth poor devil who has come to an
untimely end within an hour. It is brisk work. Now, I'll swear I'll
smoke this one out."

The cigar was scattered in sparks from his lips by a hat skilfully
flung. He picked it up miry and cleaned it, observing that his honour
was pledged to this fellow. The hat he trampled into a muddy lump.
Wilfrid found it impossible to ape his coolness. He swung about for an
adversary. Jenna pulled him on.

"A salute from a window," he said. "We can't storm the houses. The
time'll come for it--and then, you cats!"

Wilfrid inquired how long this state of things had been going on. Jenna
replied that they appeared to be in the middle of it;--nearly a week.
Another week, and their day would arrive; and then!

"Have you heard anything of a Count Ammiani here?" said Wilfrid.

"Oh! he's one of the lot, I believe. We have him fast, as we'll have
the bundle of them. Keep eye on those dogs behind us, and manoeuvre your
cigar. The plan is, to give half-a-dozen bright puffs, and then keep it
in your fist; and when you see an Italian head, volcano him like fury.
Yes, I've heard of that Ammiani. The scoundrels, made an attempt to get
him out of prison--I fancy he's in the city prison--last Friday night.
I don't know exactly where he is; but it's pretty fair reckoning to say
that he'll enjoy a large slice of the next year in the charming solitude
of Spielberg, if Milan is restless. Is he a friend of yours?"

"Not by any means," said Wilfrid.

"Mio prigione!" Jenna mouthed with ineffable contemptuousness; "he'll
have time to write his memoirs, as, one of the dogs did. I remember my
mother crying over, the book. I read it? Not I! I never read books. My
father said--the stout old colonel--'Prison seems to make these Italians
take an interest in themselves.' 'Oh!' says my mother, 'why can't they
be at peace with us?' 'That's exactly the question,' says my father,
'we're always putting to them.' And so I say. Why can't they let us
smoke our cigars in peace?"

Jenna finished by assaulting a herd of faces with smoke.

"Pig of a German!" was shouted; and "Porco, porco," was sung in a scale
of voices. Jenna received a blinding slap across the eyes. He staggered
back; Wilfrid slashed his sword in defence of him. He struck a man down.
"Blood! blood!" cried the gathering mob, and gave space, but hedged the
couple thickly. Windows were thrown up; forth came a rain of household
projectiles. The cry of "Blood! blood!" was repeated by numbers pouring
on them from the issues to right and left. It is a terrible cry in a
city. In a city of the South it rouses the wild beast in men to madness.
Jenna smoked triumphantly and blew great clouds, with an eye aloft
for the stools, basins, chairs, and water descending. They were in
the middle of one of the close streets of old Milan. The man felled by
Wilfrid was raised on strong arms, that his bleeding head might be seen
of all, and a dreadful hum went round. A fire of missiles, stones, balls
of wax, lumps of dirt, sticks of broken chairs, began to play. Wilfrid
had a sudden gleam of the face of his Verona assailant. He and Jenna
called "Follow me," in one breath, and drove forward with sword-points,
which they dashed at the foremost; by dint of swift semicirclings of
the edges they got through, but a mighty voice of command thundered;
the rearward portion of the mob swung rapidly to the front, presenting
a scattered second barrier; Jenna tripped on a fallen body, lost his
cigar, and swore that he must find it. A dagger struck his sword-arm.
He staggered and flourished his blade in the air, calling "On!" without
stirring. "This infernal cigar!" he said; and to the mob, "What mongrel
of you took my cigar?" Stones thumped on his breast; the barrier-line
ahead grew denser. "I'll go at them first; you're bleeding," said
Wilfrid. They were refreshed by the sound of German cheering, as in
approach. Jenna uplifted a crow of the regimental hurrah of the charge;
it was answered; on they went and got through the second fence, saw
their comrades, and were running to meet them, when a weighted ball hit
Wilfrid on the back of the head. He fell, as he believed, on a cushion
of down, and saw thousands of saints dancing with lamps along cathedral
aisles.

The next time he opened his eyes he fancied he had dropped into the
vaults of the cathedral. His sensation of sinking was so vivid that he
feared lest he should be going still further below. There was a lamp
in the chamber, and a young man sat reading by the light of the lamp.
Vision danced fantastically on Wilfrid's brain. He saw that he rocked
as in a ship, yet there was no noise of the sea; nothing save the remote
thunder haunting empty ears at strain for sound. He looked again; the
young man was gone, the lamp was flickering. Then he became conscious of
a strong ray on his eyelids; he beheld his enemy gazing down on him and
swooned. It was with joy, that when his wits returned, he found himself
looking on the young man by the lamp. "That other face was a dream,"
he thought, and studied the aspect of the young man with the unwearied
attentiveness of partial stupor, that can note accurately, but cannot
deduce from its noting, and is inveterate in patience because it is
unideaed. Memory wakened first.

"Guidascarpi!" he said to himself.

The name was uttered half aloud. The young man started and closed his
book.

"You know me?" he asked.

"You are Guidascarpi?"

"I am."

"Guidascarpi, I think I helped to save your life in Meran."

The young man stooped over him. "You speak of my brother Angelo. I am
Rinaldo. My debt to you is the same, if you have served him."

"Is he safe?"

"He is in Lugano."

"The signorina Vittoria?"

"In Turin."

"Where am I?"

The reply came from another mouth than Rinaldo's.

"You are in the poor lodging of the shoemaker, whose shoes, if you had
thought fit to wear them, would have conducted you anywhere but to this
place."

"Who are you?" Wilfrid moaned.

"You ask who I am. I am the Eye of Italy. I am the Cat who sees in
the dark." Barto Rizzo raised the lamp and stood at his feet. "Look
straight. You know me, I think."

Wilfrid sighed, "Yes, I know you; do your worst."

His head throbbed with the hearing of a heavy laugh, as if a hammer had
knocked it. What ensued he knew not; he was left to his rest. He lay
there many days and nights, that were marked by no change of light; the
lamp burned unwearyingly. Rinaldo and a woman tended him. The sign of
his reviving strength was shown by a complaint he launched at the earthy
smell of the place.

"It is like death," said Rinaldo, coming to his side. "I am used to it,
and familiar with death too," he added in a musical undertone.

"Are you also a prisoner here?" Wilfrid questioned him.

"I am."

"The brute does not kill, then?"

"No; he saves. I owe my life to him. He has rescued yours."

"Mine?" said Wilfrid.

"You would have been torn to pieces in the streets but for Barto Rizzo."

The streets were the world above to Wilfrid; he was eager to hear of the
doings in them. Rinaldo told him that the tobacco-war raged still;
the soldiery had recently received orders to smoke abroad, and
street battles were hourly occurring. "They call this government!" he
interjected.

He was a soft-voiced youth; slim and tall and dark, like Angelo, but
with a more studious forehead. The book he was constantly reading was
a book of chemistry. He entertained Wilfrid with very strange talk. He
spoke of the stars and of a destiny. He cited certain minor events
of his life to show the ground of his present belief in there being a
written destiny for each individual man. "Angelo and I know it well. It
was revealed to us when we were boys. It has been certified to us up to
this moment. Mark what I tell you," he pursued in a devout sincerity of
manner that baffled remonstrance, "my days end with this new year. His
end with the year following. Our house is dead."

Wilfrid pressed his hand. "Have you not been too long underground?"

"That is the conviction I am coming to. But when I go out to breathe the
air of heaven, I go to my fate. Should I hesitate? We Italians of this
period are children of thunder and live the life of a flash. The worms
may creep on: the men must die. Out of us springs a better world.
Romara, Ammiani, Mercadesco, Montesini, Rufo, Cardi, whether they see it
or not, will sweep forward to it. To some of them, one additional day of
breath is precious. Not so for Angelo and me. We are unbeloved. We have
neither mother nor sister, nor betrothed. What is an existence that can
fly to no human arms? I have been too long underground, because, while I
continue to hide, I am as a drawn sword between two lovers."

The previous mention of Ammiani's name, together with the knowledge he
had of Ammiani's relationship to the Guidascarpi, pointed an instant
identification of these lovers to Wilfrid.

He asked feverishly who they were, and looked his best simplicity, as
one who was always interested by stories of lovers.

The voice of Barto Rizzo, singing "Vittoria!" stopped Rinaldo's reply:
but Wilfrid read it in his smile at that word. He was too weak to
restrain his anguish, and flung on the couch and sobbed. Rinaldo
supposed that he was in fear of Barto, and encouraged him to meet the
man confidently. A lusty "Viva l'Italia! Vittoria!" heralded Barto's
entrance. "My boy! my noblest! we have beaten them the cravens! Tell me
now--have I served an apprenticeship to the devil for nothing? We have
struck the cigars out of their mouths and the monopoly-money out of
their pockets. They have surrendered. The Imperial order prohibits
soldiers from smoking in the streets of Milan, and so throughout
Lombardy! Soon we will have the prisons empty, by our own order. Trouble
yourself no more about Ammiani. He shall come out to the sound of
trumpets. I hear them! Hither, my Rosellina, my plump melon; up with
your red lips, and buss me a Napoleon salute--ha! ha!"

Barto's wife went into his huge arm, and submissively lifted her face.
He kissed her like a barbaric king, laughing as from wine.

Wilfrid smothered his head from his incarnate thunder. He was unnoticed
by Barto. Presently a silence told him that he was left to himself. An
idea possessed him that the triumph of the Italians meant the release
of Ammiani, and his release the loss of Vittoria for ever. Since her
graceless return of his devotion to her in Meran, something like a
passion--arising from the sole spring by which he could be excited
to conceive a passion--had filled his heart. He was one of those who
delight to dally with gentleness and faith, as with things that are
their heritage; but the mere suspicion of coquettry and indifference
plunged him into a fury of jealous wrathfulness, and tossed so
desireable an image of beauty before him that his mad thirst to embrace
it seemed love. By our manner of loving we are known. He thought it no
meanness to escape and cause a warning to be conveyed to the Government
that there was another attempt brewing for the rescue of Count Ammiani.
Acting forthwith on the hot impulse, he seized the lamp. The door was
unlocked. Luckier than Luigi had been, he found a ladder outside, and
a square opening through which he crawled; continuing to ascend along
close passages and up narrow flights of stairs, that appeared to him to
be fashioned to avoid the rooms of the house. At last he pushed a
door, and found himself in an armoury, among stands of muskets, swords,
bayonets, cartouche-boxes, and, most singular of all, though he observed
them last, small brass pieces of cannon, shining with polish. Shot was
piled in pyramids beneath their mouths. He examined the guns admiringly.
There were rows of daggers along shelves; some in sheath, others bare;
one that had been hastily wiped showed a smear of ropy blood. He stood
debating whether he should seize a sword for his protection. In the act
of trying its temper on the floor, the sword-hilt was knocked from his
hand, and he felt a coil of arms around him. He was in the imprisoning
embrace of Barto Rizzo's wife. His first, and perhaps natural,
impression accused her of a violent display of an eccentric passion for
his manly charms; and the tighter she locked him, the more reasonably
was he held to suppose it; but as, while stamping on the floor, she
offered nothing to his eyes save the yellow poll of her neck, and hung
neither panting nor speaking, he became undeceived. His struggles were
preposterous; his lively sense of ridicule speedily stopped them. He
remained passive, from time to time desperately adjuring his living
prison to let him loose, or to conduct him whither he had come; but the
inexorable coil kept fast--how long there was no guessing--till he could
have roared out tears of rage, and that is extremity for an Englishman.
Rinaldo arrived in his aid; but the woman still clung to him. He was
freed only by the voice of Barto Rizzo, who marched him back. Rinaldo
subsequently told him that his discovery of the armoury necessitated his
confinement.

"Necessitates it!" cried Wilfrid. "Is this your Italian gratitude?"

The other answered: "My friend, you risked your fortune for my brother;
but this is a case that concerns our country."

He deemed these words to be an unquestionable justification, for he said
no more. After this they ceased to converse.

Each lay down on his strip of couch-matting; rose and ate, and passed
the dreadful untamed hours; nor would Wilfrid ask whether it was day or
night. We belong to time so utterly, that when we get no note of time,
it wears the shrouded head of death for us already. Rinaldo could quit
the place as he pleased; he knew the hours; and Wilfrid supposed that
it must be hatred that kept him from voluntarily divulging that blessed
piece of knowledge. He had to encourage a retorting spirit of hatred
in order to mask his intense craving. By an assiduous calculation of
seconds and minutes, he was enabled to judge that the lamp burned a
space of six hours before it required replenishing. Barto Rizzo's wife
trimmed it regularly, but the accursed woman came at all seasons. She
brought their meals irregularly, and she would never open her lips: she
was like a guardian of the tombs. Wilfrid abandoned his dream of the
variation of night and day, and with that the sense of life deadened, as
the lamp did toward the sixth hour. Thenceforward his existence fed on
the movements of his companion, the workings of whose mind he began to
read with a marvellous insight. He knew once, long in advance of the
act or an indication of it, that Rinaldo was bent on prayer. Rinaldo had
slightly closed his eyelids during the perusal of his book; he had taken
a pencil and traced lines on it from memory, and dotted points here and
there; he had left the room, and returned to resume his study.
Then, after closing the book softly, he had taken up the mark he was
accustomed to place in the last page of his reading, and tossed it away.
Wilfrid was prepared to clap hands when he should see the hated fellow
drop on his knees; but when that sight verified his calculation, he
huddled himself exultingly in his couch-cloth:--it was like a confirming
clamour to him that he was yet wholly alive. He watched the anguish of
the prayer, and was rewarded for the strain of his faculties by sleep.
Barto Rizzo's rough voice awakened him. Barto had evidently just
communicated dismal tidings to Rinaldo, who left the vault with him,
and was absent long enough to make Wilfrid forget his hatred in an
irresistible desire to catch him by the arm and look in his face.

"Ah! you have not forsaken me," the greeting leaped out.

"Not now," said Rinaldo.

"Do you think of going?"

"I will speak to you presently, my friend."

"Hound!" cried Wilfrid, and turned his face to the wall.

Until he slept, he heard the rapid travelling of a pen; on his
awakening, the pen vexed him like a chirping cricket that tells us that
cock-crow is long distant when we are moaning for the dawn. Great drops
of sweat were on Rinaldo's forehead. He wrote as one who poured forth
a history without pause. Barto's wife came to the lamp and beckoned him
out, bearing the lamp away. There was now for the first time darkness
in this vault. Wilfrid called Rinaldo by name, and heard nothing but
the fear of the place, which seemed to rise bristling at his voice and
shrink from it. He called till dread of his voice held him dumb. "I am,
then, a coward," he thought. Nor could he by-and-by repress a start of
terror on hearing Rinaldo speak out of the darkness. With screams for
the lamp, and cries that he was suffering slow murder, he underwent a
paroxysm in the effort to conceal his abject horror. Rinaldo sat by his
side patiently. At last, he said: "We are both of us prisoners on
equal terms now." That was quieting intelligence to Wilfrid, who asked
eagerly: "What hour is it?"

It was eleven of the forenoon. Wilfrid strove to dissociate his
recollection of clear daylight from the pressure of the hideous
featureless time surrounding him. He asked: "What week?" It was the
first week in March. Wilfrid could not keep from sobbing aloud. In the
early period of such a captivity, imagination, deprived of all other
food, conjures phantasms for the employment of the brain; but there is
still some consciousness within the torpid intellect wakeful to laugh at
them as they fly, though they have held us at their mercy. The face of
time had been imaged like the withering mask of a corpse to him. He had
felt, nevertheless, that things had gone on as we trust them to do at
the closing of our eyelids: he had preserved a mystical remote faith
in the steady running of the world above, and hugged it as his most
precious treasure. A thunder was rolled in his ears when he heard of
the flight of two months at one bound. Two big months! He would have
guessed, at farthest, two weeks. "I have been two months in one shirt?
Impossible!" he exclaimed. His serious idea (he cherished it for the
support of his reason) was, that the world above had played a mad prank
since he had been shuffled off its stage.

"It can't be March," he said. "Is there sunlight overhead?"

"It is a true Milanese March," Rinaldo replied.

"Why am I kept a prisoner?"

"I cannot say. There must be some idea of making use of you."

