and a fourth held some salt.

"How lucky it is," muttered the anchorite, as he quitted the cave, "that
the old anchorite was such a glutton."

By the time he returned to Sirona, the sun was going down.

There was something in the nature and demeanor of Paulus, which made all
distrust of him impossible, and Sirona was ready to follow him, but she
felt so weak that she could scarcely support herself on her feet.

"I feel," she said, "as if I were a little child, and must begin again
to learn to walk."

"Then let me be your nurse. I knew a Spartan dame once, who had a beard
almost as rough as mine. Lean confidently on me, and before we go down
the slope, we will go up and down the level here two or three times."
She took his arm, and he led her slowly up and down.

It vividly recalled a picture of the days of his youth, and he
remembered a day when his sister, who was recovering from a severe
attack of fever, was first allowed to go out into the open air. She had
gone out, clinging to his arm into the peristyle of his father's house;
as he walked backward and forwards with poor, weary, abandoned Sirona,
his neglected figure seemed by degrees to assume the noble aspect of a
high-born Greek; and instead of the rough, rocky soil, he felt as if
he were treading the beautiful mosaic pavement of his father's court.
Paulus was Menander again, and if there was little in the presence of
the recluse, which could recall his identity with the old man he had
trodden down, the despised anchorite felt, while the expelled and sinful
woman leaned on his arm, the same proud sense of succoring a woman, as
when he was the most distinguished youth of a metropolis, and when he
had led forward the master's much courted daughter in the midst of a
shouting troop of slaves.

Sirona had to remind Paulus that night was coming on, and was startled,
when the hermit removed her hand from his arm with ungentle haste, and
called to her to follow him with a roughness that was quite new to him.
She obeyed, and wherever it was necessary to climb over the rocks, he
supported and lifted her, but he only spoke when she addressed him.

When they had reached their destination, he showed her the bed, and
begged her to keep awake, till he should have prepared a dish of warm
food for her, and he shortly brought her a simple supper, and wished her
a good night's rest, after she had taken it.

Sirona shared the bread and the salted meal-porridge with her dog,
and then lay down on the couch, where she sank at once into a deep,
dreamless sleep, while Paulus passed the night sitting by the hearth.

He strove to banish sleep by constant prayer, but fatigue frequently
overcame him, and he could not help thinking of the Gaulish lady, and of
the many things, which if only he were still the rich Menander, he would
procure in Alexandria for her and for her comfort. Not one prayer could
he bring to its due conclusion, for either his eyes closed before he
came to the "Amen," or else worldly images crowded round him, and
forced him to begin his devotions again from the beginning, when he
had succeeded in recollecting himself. In this half-somnolent state he
obtained not one moment of inward collectedness, of quiet reflection;
not even when he gazed up at the starry heavens, or looked down on the
oasis, veiled in night, where many others like himself were deserted by
sleep. Which of the citizens could it be that was watching by that light
which he saw glimmering down there in unwonted brightness?--till he
himself, overpowered by fatigue, fell asleep.




CHAPTER XIII.

The light in the town, which had attracted Paulus, was in Petrus'
house, and burnt in Polykarp's room, which formed the whole of a small
upper-story, which the senator had constructed for his son over the
northern portion of the spacious flat roof of the main building. The
young man had arrived about noon with the slaves he had just procured,
had learned all that had happened in his absence, and had silently
withdrawn into his own room after supper was ended. Here he still
lingered over his work.

A bed, a table on and under which lay a multitude of wax-tablets,
papyrus-rolls, metal-points, and writing-reeds, with a small bench, on
which stood a water-jar and basin, composed the furniture of this room;
on its whitewashed walls hung several admirable carvings in relief, and
figures of men and animals stood near them in long rows. In one corner,
near a stone water-jar, lay a large, damp, shining mass of clay.

Three lamps fastened to stands abundantly lighted this work-room, but
chiefly a figure standing on a high trestle, which Polykarp's fingers
were industriously moulding.

Phoebicius had called the young sculptor a fop, and not altogether
unjustly, for he loved to be well dressed and was choice as to the cut
and color of his simple garments, and he rarely neglected to arrange his
abundant hair with care, and to anoint it well; and yet it was almost
indifferent to him, whether his appearance pleased other people or no,
but he knew nothing nobler than the human form, and an instinct, which
he did not attempt to check, impelled him to keep his own person as nice
as he liked to see that of his neighbor.

Now at this hour of the night, he wore only a shirt of white woollen
stuff, with a deep red border. His locks, usually so well-kept, seemed
to stand out from his head separately, and instead of smoothing and
confining them, he added to their wild disorder, for, as he worked, he
frequently passed his hand through them with a hasty movement. A bat,
attracted by the bright light, flew in at the open window--which was
screened only at the bottom by a dark curtain--and fluttered round the
ceiling; but he did not observe it, for his work absorbed his whole soul
and mind. In this eager and passionate occupation, in which every nerve
and vein in his being seemed to bear a part, no cry for help would have
struck his ear--even a flame breaking out close to him would not have
caught his eye. His cheeks glowed, a fine dew of glistening sweat
covered his brow, and his very gaze seemed to become more and more
firmly riveted to the sculpture as it took form under his hand. Now
and again he stepped back from it, and leaned backwards from his hips,
raising his hands to the level of his temples, as if to narrow the field
of vision; then he went up to the model, and clutched the plastic mass
of clay, as though it were the flesh of his enemy.

He was now at work on the flowing hair of the figure before him, which
had already taken the outline of a female head, and he flung the bits of
clay, which he removed from the back of it, to the ground, as violently
as though he were casting them at an antagonist at his feet. Again his
finger-tips and modelling-tool were busy with the mouth, nose, cheeks,
and eyes, and his own eyes took a softer expression, which gradually
grew to be a gaze of ecstatic delight, as the features he was moulding
began to agree more and more with the image, which at this time excluded
every other from his imagination.

At last, with glowing cheeks, he had finished rounding the soft form of
the shoulders, and drew back once more to contemplate the effect of the
completed work; a cold shiver seized him, and he felt himself impelled
to lift it up, and dash it to the ground with all his force. But he soon
mastered this stormy excitement, he pushed his hand through his hair
again and again, and posted himself, with a melancholy smile and with
folded hands, in front of his creation; sunk deeper and deeper in his
contemplation of it, he did not observe that the door behind him was
opened, although the flame of his lamps flickered in the draught, and
that his mother had entered the work-room, and by no means endeavored
to approach him unheard, or to surprise him. In her anxiety for her
darling, who had gone through so many bitter experiences during the
past day, she had not been able to sleep. Polykarp's room lay above her
bedroom, and when his steps over head betrayed that, though it was now
near morning, he had not yet gone to rest, she had risen from her
bed without waking Petrus, who seemed to be sleeping. She obeyed her
motherly impulse to encourage Polykarp with some loving words, and
climbing up the narrow stair that led to the roof, she went into his
room. Surprised, irresolute, and speechless she stood for some time
behind the young man, and looked at the strongly illuminated and
beautiful features of the newly-formed bust, which was only too like its
well-known prototype. At last she laid her hand on her son's shoulder,
and spoke his name. Polykarp stepped back, and looked at his mother
in bewilderment, like a man roused from sleep; but she interrupted the
stammering speech with which he tried to greet her, by saying, gravely
and not without severity, as she pointed to the statue, "What does this
mean?"

"What should it mean, mother?" answered Polykarp in a low tone, and
shaking his head sadly. "Ask me no more at present, for if you gave me
no rest, and even if I tried to explain to you how to-day--this very
day--I have felt impelled and driven to make this woman's image, still
you could not understand me--no, nor any one else."

"God forbid that I should ever understand it!" cried Dorothea. "'Thou
shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife,' was the commandment of the Lord on
this mountain. And you? You think I could not understand you? Who
should understand you then, if not your mother? This I certainly do not
comprehend, that a son of Petrus and of mine should have thrown all the
teaching and the example of his parents so utterly to the wind. But what
you are aiming at with this statue, it seems to me is not hard to guess.
As the forbidden-fruit hangs too high for you, you degrade your art, and
make to yourself an image that resembles her according to your taste.
Simply and plainly it comes to this; as you can no longer see the Gaul's
wife in her own person, and yet cannot exist without the sweet presence
of the fair one, you make a portrait of clay to make love to, and you
will carry on idolatry before it, as once the Jews did before the golden
calf and the brazen serpent."

Polykarp submitted to his mother's angry blame in silence, but in
painful emotion. Dorothea had never before spoken to him thus, and to
hear such words from the very lips which were used to address him with
such heart-felt tenderness, gave him unspeakable pain. Hitherto she
had always been inclined to make excuses for his weaknesses and little
faults, nay, the zeal with which she had observed and pointed out his
merits and performances before strangers as well as before their own
family, had often seemed to him embarrassing. And now? She had indeed
reason to blame him, for Sirona was the wife of another, she had never
even noticed his admiration, and now, they all said, had committed a
crime for the sake of a stranger. It must seem both a mad and a sinful
thing in the eyes of men that he of all others should sacrifice the best
he had--his Art--and how little could Dorothea, who usually endeavored
to understand him, comprehend the overpowering impulse which had driven
him to his task.

He loved and honored his mother with his whole heart, and feeling that
she was doing herself an injustice by her false and low estimate of
his proceedings, he interrupted her eager discourse, raising his hands
imploringly to her.

"No, mother, no!" he exclaimed. "As truly as God is my helper, it is not
so. It is true that I have moulded this head, but not to keep it, and
commit the sin of worshipping it, but rather to free myself from the
image that stands before my mind's eye by day and by night, in the city
and in the desert, whose beauty distracts my mind when I think, and my
devotions when I try to pray. To whom is it given to read the soul of
man? And is not Sirona's form and face the loveliest image of the
Most High? So to represent it, that the whole charm that her presence
exercises over me might also be felt by every beholder, is a task that I
have set myself ever since her arrival in our house. I had to go back
to the capital, and the work I longed to achieve took a clearer form; at
every hour I discovered something to change and to improve in the pose
of the head, the glance of the eye or the expression of the mouth.
But still I lacked courage to put the work in hand, for it seemed too
audacious to attempt to give reality to the glorious image in my soul,
by the aid of gray clay and pale cold marble; to reproduce it so that
the perfect work should delight the eye of sense, no less than the image
enshrined in my breast delights my inward eye. At the same time I was
not idle, I gained the prize for the model of the lions, and if I have
succeeded with the Good Shepherd blessing the flock, which is for the
sarcophagus of Comes, and if the master could praise the expression
of devoted tenderness in the look of the Redeemer, I know--nay, do not
interrupt me, mother, for what I felt was a pure emotion and no sin--I
know that it was because I was myself so full of love, that I was
enabled to inspire the very stone with love. At last I had no peace, and
even without my father's orders I must have returned home; then I saw
her again, and found her even more lovely than the image which reigned
in my soul. I heard her voice, and her silvery bell-like laughter--and
then--and then--. You know very well what I learned yesterday. The
unworthy wife of an unworthy husband, the woman Sirona, is gone from
me for ever, and I was striving to drive her image from my soul, to
annihilate it and dissipate it--but in vain! and by degrees a wonderful
stress of creative power came upon me. I hastily placed the lamps, took
the clay in my hand, and feature by feature I brought forth with bitter
joy the image that is deeply graven in my heart, believing that thus I
might be released from the spell. There is the fruit which was ripened
in my heart, but there, where it so long has dwelt, I feel a dismal
void, and if the husk which so long tenderly enfolded this image were to
wither and fall asunder, I should not wonder at it.--To that thing there
clings the best part of my life."

"Enough!" exclaimed Dorothea, interrupting her son who stood before her
in great agitation and with trembling lips. "God forbid that that mask
there should destroy your life and soul. I suffer nothing impure within
my house, and you should not in your heart. That which is evil can never
more be fair, and however lovely the face there may look to you, it
looks quite as repulsive to me when I reflect that it probably smiled
still more fascinatingly on some strolling beggar. If the Gaul brings
her back I will turn her out of my house, and I will destroy her image
with my own hands if you do not break it in pieces on the spot."

Dorothea's eyes were swimming in tears as she spoke these words. She
had felt with pride and emotion during her son's speech how noble and
high-minded he was, and the idea that this rare and precious treasure
should be spoilt or perhaps altogether ruined for the sake of a lost
woman, drove her to desperation, and filled her motherly heart with
indignation.

Firmly resolved to carry out her threat she stepped towards the figure,
but Polykarp placed himself in her way, raising his arm imploringly to
defend it, and saying, "Not to-day--not yet, mother! I will cover it
up, and will not look at it again till to-morrow, but once--only once--I
must see it again by sunlight."

"So that to-morrow the old madness may revive in you!" cried Dorothea.
"Move out of my way or take the hammer yourself."

"You order it, and you are my mother," said Polykarp.

He slowly went up to the chest in which his tools and instruments lay,
and bitter tears ran down his cheeks, as he took his heaviest hammer in
his hand.

When the sky has shown for many days in summer-blue, and then suddenly
the clouds gather for a storm, when the first silent but fearful flash
with it noisy but harmless associate the thunder-clap has terrified the
world, a second and third thunder-bolt immediately follow. Since the
stormy night of yesterday had broken in on the peaceful, industrious,
and monotonous life by the senator's hearth, many things had happened
that had filled him and his wife with fresh anxiety.

In other houses it was nothing remarkable that a slave should run away,
but in the senator's it was more than twenty years since such a thing
had occurred, and yesterday the goat-herd Miriam had disappeared. This
was vexatious, but the silent sorrow of his son Polykarp was a greater
anxiety to Petrus. It did not please him that the youth, who was usually
so vehement, should submit unresistingly and almost indifferently to the
Bishop Agapitus, who prohibited his completing his lions. His son's sad
gaze, his crushed and broken aspect were still in his mind when at last
he went to rest for the night; it was already late, but sleep avoided
him even as it had avoided Dorothea. While the mother was thinking of
her son's sinful love and the bleeding wound in his young and betrayed
heart, the father grieved for Polykarp's baffled hopes of exercising his
art on a great work and recalled the saddest, bitterest day of his own
youth; for he too had served his apprenticeship under a sculptor in
Alexandria, had looked up to the works of the heathen as noble models,
and striven to form himself upon them. He had already been permitted by
his master to execute designs of his own, and out of the abundance of
subjects which offered themselves, he had chosen to model an Ariadne,
waiting and longing for the return of Thescus, as a symbolic image of
his own soul awaiting its salvation. How this work had filled his mind!
how delightful had the hours of labor seemed to him!--when, suddenly,
his stern father had come to the city, had seen his work before it was
quite finished, and instead of praising it had scorned it; had abused
it as a heathen idol, and had commanded Petrus to return home with him
immediately, and to remain there, for that his son should be a pious
Christian, and a good stone-mason withal--not half a heathen, and a
maker of false gods.

