who kept signing to him to be quiet and hushing him down, while he took
no notice of their demonstrations but kept clearing his throat with
obtrusive emphasis and at last scraped and shuffled his feet on the
floor, though not very noisily. But Eusebius began again:

"And now, my brethren, how ought we to demean ourselves in these fateful
times of disturbance? As Christians; only--or rather, by God's aiding
grace as Christians in the true sense of our Lord and Master, according
to the precepts given by Him through the Apostles. Their words shall
be mine. They say there are two paths--the path of Life and the path of
Death, and there is a great difference between them. The path of Life is
this: First, Thou shalt love God who hath created thee; next thou shalt
love thy neighbor as thyself, and whatsoever thou wouldst men should do
unto thee even so do unto them; but what thou wouldst not have done unto
thee do thou not to them. And the sum of the doctrine contained in these
words is this: Bless those that curse you, pray for your enemies and
repent for those who persecute you, for 'if ye love them that love you
what thank have ye? Do not even the heathen the same?' Love those that
hate you and you will have no enemies.

"Take this teaching of the holy Apostles to heart this day. Beware of
mocking or persecuting those who have been your enemies. Even the nobler
heathen regarded it as an act of grace to respect the conquered foe, and
to you, as Christians, it should be a law. It is not so hard to forgive
an enemy when we regard him as a possible friend in the future; and the
Christian can go so far as to love him when he remembers that every man
is his brother and neighbor, and equally precious in the sight of the
Saviour who is dearer to us than life.

"The heathen, the idolater, is the Christian's archfoe; but soon he will
be in fetters at our feet. And, then, my brethren, pray for him; for if
the Almighty, who is without spot or stain and perfect beyond words,
can forgive the sinner, ye who are base and guilty may surely forgive.
'Fishers of souls' we all should be; try to fulfil the injunction. Draw
the enemy to you by kindness and love; show him by your example
the beauty of the Christian life; let him perceive the benefits of
Salvation; lead those whose gods and temples we have overthrown, into
our churches; and when, after triumphing over those blind souls by the
sword, we have also conquered them by love, faith and prayer--when they
can rejoice with us in the Redemption by our Lord Jesus Christ--then
shall we all be as one fold under one shepherd, and peace and joy shall
reign in the city which is now torn by dissension and strife."

At this point the preacher was interrupted, for a loud uproar broke out
in the Narthex--[The vestibule of the early Christian basilica which was
open to penitents.]--shouts and cries of men fighting, mingled with the
dull roar of a bull.

The congregation started to their feet in extreme consternation, and the
door was flung open and a host of heathen youths rushed into the nave,
followed by an overwhelming force of Christians from whom they had
sought refuge in the sanctuary. Here they turned at bay to make a last
desperate resistance. Garlands, stripped of their leaves and flowers,
still crowned their heads and hung over their shoulders. They had been
attacked close to the church, by a party of monks when in the act of
driving a gaily-decorated steer to the temple of Apollo, in defiance of
the Imperial edict; and the beast, terrified by the tumult, had rushed
into the narthex for shelter.

The fight in the church was a short one; the idolaters were soon
vanquished; but Eusebius threw himself between them and the monks, and
tried to save the victims from the revengeful fury of the conquerors.
The women had all made for the door, but they did not venture out into
the vestibule, for the young bull was still raging there, trampling or
tossing everything that came in his way. At last, however, a soldier of
the city-watch dealt him a sword-thrust in the neck, and he fell
rolling in his own blood. At once the congregation forced their way out,
shrieking with alarm and excitement, Dada among the number, dragging
the child with her. Papias pulled with all his might to keep her back,
declaring with vehement insistence that he had seen Agne in the church
and wanted to go back to her. Dada, however, neither heard nor heeded;
frightened out of her wits she went on with the crowd, taking him with
her.

She never paused till she reached the house of Medius, quite out of
breath; but then, as the little boy still asserted that he had seen his
sister in the sanctuary, she turned back with him, as soon as the throng
had dispersed. In the church there was no one to hinder them; but they
got no further than the dividing screen, for on the floor beyond lay
the mutilated and bleeding bodies of many a youth who had fallen in the
contest.

How she made her way back to the house of Medius once more she never
knew. For the first time she had been brought face to face with life in
hideous earnest, and when the singer went to look for her in her room,
at dusk, he was startled to find her bright face clouded and her eyes
dim with tears. How bitterly she had been weeping Medius indeed could
not know; he ascribed her altered appearance to fear of the approaching
cataclysm and was happy to be able to tell her, in all good faith, that
the danger was as good as over. Posidonius, the Magian, had been to see
him, and had completely reassured him. This man, whose accomplice he
had been again and again in producing false apparitions of spirits and
demons, had once gained an extraordinary influence over him by
casting some mysterious spell upon him and reducing his will to abject
subjection to his own; and this magician, who had recovered his
own self-possession, had assured him, with an inimitable air of
infallibility, that the fall of the Temple of Serapis would involve no
greater catastrophe than that of any old worn-out statue. Since this
announcement Medius had laughed at his own alarms; he had recovered his
"strong-mindedness," and when Posidonius had given him three tickets for
the Hippodrome he had jumped at the offer.

The races were to be run next day, in spite of the general panic that
had fallen on the citizens; and Dada, when he invited her to join him
and his daughter in-the enjoyment of so great a treat, dried her eyes
and accepted gleefully.




CHAPTER XVIII.

Alarming as was the outlook in Alexandria, the races, were to be held
as usual. This had been decided only a few hours since at the Bishop's
palace, and criers had been sent abroad throughout the streets
and squares of the city to bid the inhabitants to this popular
entertainment. In the writing-office of the Ephemeris, which would be
given to the public the first thing in the morning, five hundred slaves
or more were occupied in writing from dictation a list of the owners of
the horses, of the 'agitatores' who would drive them, and of the prizes
offered to the winners, whether Christians or heathen.

   [Ephemeris--The news-sheet, which was brought out, not only in Rome,
   but in all the cities of the Empire, and which kept the citizens
   informed of all important events.]

The heat in the Episcopal council-hall had been oppressive, and not less
so the heat of temper among the priests assembled there; for they
had fully determined, for once, not to obey their prelate with blind
submission, and they knew full well that Theophilus, on occasion, if his
will were opposed, could not merely thunder but wield the bolt.

Besides the ecclesiastical members of the council, Cynegius,
the Imperial legate--Evagrius, the Prefect--and Romanus, the
commander-in-chief and Comes of Egypt,--had all been present. The
officials of the Empire--Roman statesmen who knew Alexandria and her
citizens well, and who had often smarted under the spiritual haughtiness
of her Bishop--were on the prelate's side. Cynegius was doubtful; but
the priests, who had not altogether escaped the alarms that had stricken
the whole population, were so bold as to declare against a too hasty
decision, and to say that the celebration of the games at a time of such
desperate peril was not only presumptuous but sinful, and a tempting of
God.

In answer to a scornful enquiry from Theophilus as to where the danger
lay if--as the Comes promised--Serapis were to be overthrown on the
morrow, one of the assembly answered in the name of his colleagues. This
man, now very old, had formerly been a wonderfully successful exorcist,
and, notwithstanding that he was a faithful Christian, he was the leader
of a gnostic sect and a diligent student of magic. He proceeded to
argue, with all the zeal and vehemence of conviction, that Serapis was
the most terrible of all the heathen daemons, and that all the oracles
of antiquity, all the prophecies of the seers, and all the conclusions
of the Magians and astrologers would be proved false if his fall--which
the present assembly could only regard as a great boon from Heaven--did
not entail some tremendous convulsion of nature.

At this Theophilus gave the reins to his wrath; he snatched a little
crucifix from the wall above his episcopal throne, and broke it in
fragments, exclaiming in deep tones that quavered with wrath:

"And which do you regard as the greater: The only-begotten Son of God,
or that helpless image?" And he flung the pieces of the broken crucifix
down on the table round which they were sitting. Then, as though
horror-stricken at his own daring act, he fell on his knees, raised his
eyes and hands in prayer, and gathering up the broken image, kissed it
devoutly.

This rapid scene had a tremendous effect. Amazement and suspense were
painted on every face, not a hand, not a lip moved as Theophilus rose
again and cast a glance of proud and stern defiance round the assembly,
which each man took to himself. For some moments he remained silent,
as though awaiting a reply; but his repellent mien and majestic bearing
made it sufficiently clear that he was ready to annihilate any opponent.
In fact none of the priests contradicted him; and, though Evagrius
looked at him with a doubting shake of his shrewd head, Cynegius on
the other hand nodded assent. The Bishop, however, seemed to care for
neither dissent nor approval, and it was in brief and cutting terms,
with no flourish of rhetoric, that he laid it down that wood and stone
had nothing to do with the divine Majesty, even though they were made
in the image of all that was Holy and worshipful or were most lavishly
beautified by the hand of man with the foul splendors of perishable
wealth. The greater the power ascribed by superstition to the base
material--whatever form it bore--the more odious must it be to the
Christian. Any man who should believe that a daemon could turn even a
breath of the Most High to its own will and purpose, would do well to
beware of idolatry, for Satan had already laid his clutches somewhere on
his robe.

At this sweeping accusation many a cheek colored wrathfully, and not
a word was spoken when the Bishop proceeded to require of his hearers
that, if the Serapeum should fall into the hands of the Imperial troops,
it should be at once and ruthlessly destroyed, and that his hearers
should not cease from the work of ruin till this scandal of the city
should be swept from the face of the earth.

"If then the world crumbles to atoms!" he cried, "well and good--the
heathen are right and we are wrong, and in that case it were better
to perish; but as surely as I sit on this throne by the grace of God,
Serapis is the vain imagining of fools and blind, and there is no god
but the God whose minister I am!"

"Whose Kingdom is everlasting, Amen!" chanted an old priest; and
Cynegius rose to explain that he should do nothing to hinder the total
overthrow of the temple and image.

Then the Comes spoke in defence of the Bishop's resolution to allow
the races to be held, as usual, on the morrow. He sketched a striking
picture of the shallow, unstable nature of the Alexandrians, a people
wholly given over to enjoyment. The troops at his command were few in
number in comparison with the heathen population of the city, and it was
a very important matter to keep a large proportion of the worshippers
of Serapis occupied elsewhere at the moment of the decisive onset.
Gladiator-fights were prohibited, and the people were tired of wild
beasts; but races, in which heathen and Christian alike might enter
their horses for competition, must certainly prove most attractive just
at this time of bitter rivalry and oppugnancy between the two religions,
and would draw thousands of the most able-bodied idolaters to the
Hippodrome. All this he had already considered and discussed with the
Bishop and Cynegius; nay, that zealous destroyer of heathen worship
had come to Alexandria with the express purpose of overthrowing the
Serapeum; but, as a prudent statesman, he had first made sure that the
time and circumstances were propitious for the work of annihilation. All
that he had here seen and heard had only strengthened his purpose; so,
after suggesting a few possible difficulties, and enjoining moderation
and mercy as the guiding principles of his sovereign, he commanded, in
the Emperor's name, that the sanctuary of Serapis should be seized by
force of arms and utterly destroyed, and that the races should be held
on the morrow.

The assembled council bowed low; and when Theophilus had closed the
meeting with a prayer he withdrew to his ungarnished study, with his
head bent and an air of profound humility, as though he had met with a
defeat instead of gaining a victory.

       .......................

The fate of the great god of the heathen was sealed, but in the wide
precincts of the Serapeum no one thought of surrender or of prompt
defeat. The basement of the building, on which stood the grandest temple
ever erected by the Hellenes, presented a smooth and slightly scarped
rampart of impregnable strength to the foe. A sloping way extended up
over a handsomely-decorated incline, and from the middle of the grand
curve described by this road, two flights of steps led up to the three
great doors in the facade of the building.

The heathen had taken care to barricade this approach in all haste,
piling the road and steps with statuary-images of the gods of the finest
workmanship, figures and busts of kings, queens, and heroes, Hermes,
columns, stelae, sacrificial stones, chairs and benches-torn from their
places by a thousand eager hands. The squared flags of the pavement and
the granite blocks of the steps had been built up into walls and these
were still being added to after the besiegers had surrounded the temple;
for the defenders tore down stones, pilasters, gutters and pieces of the
cornice, and flung them on to the outworks, or, when they could, on to
the foe who for the present were not eager to commence hostilities.

The captains of the Imperial force had miscalculated the strength of
the heathen garrison. They supposed a few hundreds might have entrenched
themselves, but on the roof alone above a thousand men were to be seen,
and every hour seemed to increase the number of men and women crowding
into the Serapeum. The Romans could only suppose that this constantly
growing multitude had been concealed in the secret halls and chambers of
the temple ever since Cynegius had first arrived, and had no idea that
they were still being constantly reinforced.

Karnis, Herse, and Orpheus, among others, had made their way thither
from the timber-yard, down the dry conduit, and an almost incessant
stream of the adherents of the old gods had preceded and followed them.

While Eusebius had been exhorting his congregation in the church of St.
Mark to Christian love towards the idolaters, these had collected in the
temple precincts to the number of about four thousand, all eager for
the struggle. A vast multitude! But the extent of the Serapeum was so
enormous that the mass of people was by no means densely packed on the
roof, in the halls, and in the underground passages and rooms. There was
no crowding anywhere, least of all in the central halls of the temple
itself; indeed, in the great vestibule crowned with a dome which formed
the entrance, in the vast hall next to it, and in the magnificent
hypostyle with a semicircular niche on the furthest side in which stood
the far-famed image of the god, there were only scattered groups of men,
who looked like dwarfs as the eye compared them with the endless rows of
huge columns.

The full blaze of day penetrated nowhere but into the circular
vestibule, which was lighted by openings in the drum of the cupola that
rested on four gigantic columns. In the inner hall there was only dim
twilight; while the hypostyle was quite dark, but for a singularly
contrived shaft of light which produced a most mysterious effect.

The shadows of the great columns in the fore hall, and of the double
colonnade on each side of the hypostyle, lay like bands of crape on
the many-colored pavement; borders, circles, and ellipses of mosaic
diversified the smooth and lucent surface, in which were mirrored the
astrological figures which sparkled in brighter hues on the ceiling,
the trophies of symbols and mythological groups that graced the walls
in tinted high relief, and the statues and Hermes between the columns.
A wreath of lovely forms and colors dazzled the eye with their
multiplicity and profusion, and the heavy atmosphere of incense which
filled the halls was almost suffocating, while the magical and mystical
signs and figures were so many and so new that the enquiring mind,
craving for an explanation and an interpretation of all these
incomprehensible mysteries, hardly dared investigate them in detail.

A heavy curtain, that looked as though giants must have woven it on a
loom of superhuman proportions, hung, like a thick cloud shrouding a
mountain-peak, from the very top of the hypostyle, in grand folds over
the niche containing the statue, and down to the floor; and while it
hid the sacred image from the gaze of the worshipper it attracted his
attention by the infinite variety of symbolical patterns and beautiful
designs which were woven in it and embroidered on it.

The gold and silver vessels and precious jewels that lay concealed by
this hanging were of more value than many a mighty king's treasure; and
everything was on so vast a scale that man shuddered to feel his own
littleness, and the mind sought some new standard of measurement by
which to realize such unwonted proportions. The finite here seemed to
pass into the infinite; and as the spectator gazed up, with his head
thrown back, at the capitals of the lofty columns and the remote
height of the ceiling, his sight failed him before he had succeeded
in distinguishing or even perceiving a small portion only of the
bewildering confusion of figures and emblems that were crowded on to
the surface. Greek feeling for beauty had here worked hand in hand with
Oriental taste for gorgeous magnificence, and every detail could bear
examination; for there was not a motive of the architecture, not a work
of sculpture, painting, or mosaic, not a product of the foundry or the
loom, which did not bear the stamp of thorough workmanship and elaborate
finish. The ruddy, flecked porphyry, the red, white, green, or yellow
marbles which had been used for the decorations were all the finest and
purest ever wrought upon by Greek craftsmen. Each of the hundreds of
sculptured works which here had found a home was the masterpiece of some
great artist; as the curious visitor lingered in loving contemplation of
the mosaics on the polished floor, or examined the ornamental mouldings
that framed the reliefs, dividing the walls into panels, he was
filled with wonder and delight at the beauty, the elegance and the
inventiveness that had given charm, dignity, and significance to every
detail.

Adjoining these great halls devoted especially to the worship of the
god, were hundreds of courts, passages, colonnades and rooms, and
others not less numerous lay underground. There were long rows of rooms
containing above a hundred thousand rolls of books, the famous library
of the Serapeum, with separate apartments for readers and copyists;
there were store-rooms, refectories and assembly-rooms for the
high-priests of the temple, for teachers and disciples; while acrid
odors came up from the laboratories, and the fragrance of cooking from
the kitchen and bake-houses. In the very thickness of the walls of the
basement were cells for penitents and recluses, long since abandoned,
and rooms for the menials and slaves, of whom hundreds were employed
in the precincts; under ground spread the mystical array of halls,
grottoes, galleries and catacombs dedicated to the practice of the
Mysteries and the initiation of neophytes; on the roof stood various
observatories--among them one erected for the study of the heavens by
Eratosthenes, where Claudius Ptolemaeus had watched and worked. Up here
astronomers, star-gazers, horoscopists and Magians spent their nights,
while, far below them, in the temple-courts that were surrounded by
store-houses and stables, the blood of sacrificed beasts was shed and
the entrails of the victims were examined.

The house of Serapis was a whole world in little, and centuries had
enriched it with wealth, beauty, and the noblest treasures of art and
learning. Magic and witchcraft hedged it in with a maze of mystical and
symbolical secrets, and philosophy had woven a tissue of speculation
round the person of the god. The sanctuary was indeed the centre of
Hellenic culture in the city of Alexander; what marvel then, that
the heathen should believe that with the overthrow of Serapis and his
temple, the earth, nay the universe itself must sink into the abyss?

Anxious spirits and throbbing hearts were those that now sought shelter
in the Serapeum, fully prepared to perish with their god, and yet eager
with enthusiasm to avert his fall if possible.

A strange medley indeed of men and women had collected within
these sacred precincts! Grave sages, philosophers, grammarians,
mathematicians, naturalists, and physicians clung to Olympius and obeyed
him in silence. Rhetoricians with shaven faces, Magians and sorcerers,
whose long beards flowed over robes embroidered with strange figures;
students, dressed after the fashion of their forefathers in the palmy
days of Athens; men of every age, who dubbed themselves artists though
they were no more than imitators of the works of a greater epoch,
unhappy in that no one at this period of indifference to beauty called
upon them to prove what they could do, or to put forth their highest
powers. Actors, again, from the neglected theatres, starving histrions,
to whom the stage was prohibited by the Emperor and Bishop, singers and
