
After that interview with Orion, Philippus hurried off through the
town, paying so little heed to the people he met and to the processions
besieging Heaven with loud psalms to let the Nile at last begin to rise,
that he ran up against more than one passer-by, and had many a word of
abuse shouted after him. He went into two or three houses, and neither
his patients nor their attendants could recognize, in this abrupt and
hasty visitor, the physician and friend who was usually so sympathetic
to the sufferer: who would speak with a cordiality that brought new life
to his heart, who would toss the children in the air, kiss one and nod
merrily to another. To-day their elders even felt shy and anxious in
his presence. For the first time he found the duty he loved a wearisome
burthen; the sick man was a tormenting spirit in league with the world
against his peace of mind. What possessed him, that he should feel such
love of his fellow-men as to deprive himself of all comfort in life and
of his night's rest for their sake? Rufinus was right. In these times
each man lived solely to spite his neighbor, and he who could be most
brazenly selfish, looking neither to the right hand nor to the left, was
the most certain to get on in life. Fool that he was to let other folks'
woes destroy his peace and hinder him in his scientific advancement!

Tormented by such bitter thoughts as these, he went into a neat little
house by the harbor where a worthy pilot lay dying, surrounded by his
wife and children; and there, at once, he was himself again, putting
forth all his knowledge and heartfelt kindliness, quitting the scene
with a bleeding heart and an empty purse; but no sooner was he out of
doors than his former mood closed in upon him with double gloom. The
case was plain: Even with the fixed determination not to sacrifice
himself for others he could not help doing it; the impulse was too
strong for him. He could no more help suffering with the sufferer,
and giving the best he had to give with no hope of a return, than the
drunkard can help drinking. He was made to be plundered; it was his
fate!

With a drooping head he returned to his old friend's work-room.
Horapollo was sitting, just as he had sat the night before, at his
writing-table with his scrolls and his three lamps, a slave below,
snoring while he awaited his master's pleasure.

The leech's pretty Greek greeting "Rejoice!" sounded rather like "May
you choke!" as he flung aside his upper garment; and to the old man's
answer and anxious exclamation: "How badly you look, Philip!" he
answered crossly: "Like a man who deserves a kick rather than a welcome;
a booby who has submitted to have his nose pulled; a cur who has licked
the hand of the lout who has thrashed him!"

He threw himself on the divan and told Horapollo all that had passed
between him and Orion. "And the maddest part of it all," he ended, "is
that I almost like the man; that he really seems to me to be on the high
road to become a capital fellow; and that I no longer feel inclined to
pitch him into a lime-kiln at the mere thought of his putting out a hand
to Paula. At the same time," and he started to his feet, "even if I help
him to bring the poor little girl away from that demented old hag, I
cannot and will not continue to be her physician. There are plenty of
quacks about in this corpse of a town, and they may find one of them.

"You will continue to treat the child," interrupted the old man quietly.

"To have my heart daily flogged with nettles!" exclaimed the leech,
going towards Horapollo with wild gesticulations. "And do you believe
that I have any desire to meet that young fellow's sweetheart day after
day, often twice a day, that the barb may be twisted round and round in
my bleeding wound?"

"I expect a quite different result from your frequent meeting," said the
other. "You will get accustomed to see her under the aspect which alone
she can hence forth bear to you: that of a handsome girl--there are
thousands such in Egypt,--and the betrothed of another."

"Certainly, if my heart were like a hunting-dog that lies down the
moment it is bid," said Philippus with a scornful laugh. "The end of
it is that I must go away, away from Memphis--away from this miserable
world for all I care! I?--Recover my peace of mind within reach of her?
Alas, for my blissful, lost peace!"

"And why not? To every man a thing is only as he conceives of it. Only
listen to me: I had finished a treatise on the old and new Calendars,
and my master desired me to deliver a lecture on it in the Museum--if
the school of pedants in Alexandria now deserves the name; but I did
not wish to do so because I knew that the presence of such a large and
learned audience would embarrass me. But my master advised me to imagine
that my hearers were not men, but mere cabbages. This gave me new light;
I took his advice, got over my shyness, and my speech flowed like oil."

"A very good story," said Philippus, "but I do not see...."

"The moral of it for you," interrupted the old man, "is that you must
regard the supremely adorable lady of your love as one among a dozen
others--I will not say as a cabbage--as one with whom your heart has
no more concern. Put a little strength of will into it, and you will
succeed."

"If a heart were a cipher, and if passion were calendar-making!..."
retorted Philippus. "You are a very wise man, and your manuscripts and
tables have stood like walls between you and passion."

"Who can tell?" said Horapollo. "But at any rate, it never should have
had such power over me as to make me embitter the few remaining days
under the sun yet granted to my father and friend for the sake of a
woman who scorned my devotion. Will you promise me to talk no more
nonsense about flying from Memphis, or anything of the kind?"

"Teach me first to measure my strength of will."

"Will you try, at any rate?"

"Yes, for your sake."

"Will you promise to continue your treatment of that poor little girl,
whom I love dearly in spite of her forbears?"

"As long as I can endure the daily meeting with her--you know..."

"That, then, is a bargain.--Now, come and let us translate a few more
chapters."

The friends sat at work together till a late hour, and when the old man
was alone again he reflected: "So long as he can be of use to the child
he will not go away, and by that time I shall have dug a pit for that
damned siren."

       .........................

Orion had his hands full of work for the next morning. Before it was
light he sent off two trustworthy messengers to Doomiat, giving each of
them a letter with instructions that a sailing vessel should be held
in readiness for the fugitives. One was to start three hours after the
other, so that the business in hand should not fail if either of them
should come to grief.

He then went out; first to the harbor, where he succeeded in hiring a
large, good Nile-boat from Doomiat, whose captain, a trustworthy and
experienced man, promised to keep their agreement a secret and to be
prepared to start by noon next day. Next, after taking council with
himself, he went to the treasurer's office, and there, with the
assistance of Nilus, made his will, to be ratified and signed next
morning in the presence of a notary and witnesses. His mother, little
Mary, and Paula were to inherit the bulk of his property. He also
bequeathed a considerable sum as a legacy to the hospitals and orphan
asylums, as well as to the Church, to the end that they might pray
for his soul; and a legacy to Nilus "as the most just judge of his
household." Eudoxia, Mary's Greek governess, was not forgotten; and
finally he commanded that all his house-slaves should be liberated, and
to the end that they might not suffer from want he bequeathed to them
one of his largest estates in Upper Egypt, where they might settle and
labor for their common good. He increased the handsome sums already
devised by his father to the freedmen of his family.

This business occupied several hours. Nilus, who wrote while Orion
dictated, giving the document a legal form, was deeply touched by
the young man's fore thought and kindness; for in truth, since his
desecration of the judgment-seat, he had given him up for a lost soul.

By Orion's orders this will was to be opened after four weeks, in case
he should not have returned from a journey on which he proposed starting
on the morrow, and this injunction revealed to the faithful steward, who
had grown grey in the service, that the last scion of the house
expected to run considerable risk; however, he was too modest to ask any
questions, and his master did not take him into his confidence.

When, after all this, the two men went back into the anteroom, Anubis,
the young clerk and Katharina's ally, was standing there. Nilus took no
notice of him, and while he, with tearful eyes, stooped to kiss the hand
Orion held out to him as he bid him come to take leave of him once
more next evening, Anubis, who had withdrawn respectfully to a little
distance, keeping his ears open, however, officiously opened the heavy
iron-plated door.

Orion was exhausted and hungry; he enquired for his mother, and hearing
that she had gone to lie down, he went into the dining-room to get some
food. Although breakfast had but just been served, Eudoxia was awaiting
him with evident impatience. Her heart was bursting with a great piece
of news, and as Orion entered, greeting her, she cried out:

"Have you heard? Do you know?" Then she began, encouraged by his curt
negative, to pour out to him how that Neforis, by the desire of the
physician who had lately been to see her, had decided on sending her,
Eudoxia, away with her granddaughter to enjoy better air under the roof
of a friend of the leech's; they were to go this very day, or to-morrow
at latest.

Orion was disagreeably startled by this intelligence. He had not
expected that Philippus would come so early, and he himself had been the
first to promote a scheme which now no longer seemed advisable.

"How very provoking!" he muttered between his teeth, as a slave offered
him a roast fowl and asparagus.

"Is it not? And perhaps we shall have to go quite far into the country,"
said the Greek, with a languishing look, as she drew one of the long
stems between her teeth.

The words and the glance made Orion feel as if he grudged the old
fool the good food she was eating, and his voice was not particularly
ingratiating as he replied that town and country were all the same, the
only point was which would be best for the child. When he went on to say
that he was quitting home next evening, Eudoxia cried out, let a
stick of asparagus drop in her lap, and said despairingly: "Oh, then
everything is at an end!"

He, however, interposed reproachfully: "On the contrary, then your duty
begins; you must devote yourself wholly and exclusively to the child.
You know that her own grandmother is averse to her. Give her your best
affection, as you have already begun to do, be a mother to her; and if
you really are my well-wisher, show it in that way. For my part you will
find me grateful, and not in words alone. Go tomorrow to the treasurer's
office; Nilus will give you the only thing by which I can at present
prove my gratitude. Do your best to cherish the child; I have taken care
to provide for your old age."

He rose, cutting short the Greek's profuse expressions of thanks, and
betook himself to his mother. She was still in her room; however, he now
sent word that he had come to see her, and she was ready to admit him,
having expected that he would come even sooner.

She was reclining, half-sitting, on a divan in her cool and shady
bedroom, and she at once told her son of her determination to follow the
physician's advice and entrust the little girl to his friend. She spoke
in a tone of sleepy indifference; but as soon as Orion opposed her and
begged her to keep Mary at home, she grew more lively, and looking him
wrathfully in the face exclaimed: "Can you wish that? How can you ask
me?" and she went on in repining lamentation:

"Everything is changed nowadays. Old age no longer forgets; it is youth
that has a short memory. Your head has long been full of other things,
but I--I still remember who it was that made my lost dear one's last
hours on earth a hell, even in view of the gates of Heaven!" Her breast
heaved with feeble, tearless sobs--a short, convulsive gasping, and
Orion did not dare contravene her wishes. He sought to soothe her
with loving words and, when she recovered herself, he told her that he
proposed to leave her for a short time to look after his estates, as
the law required, and this information gladdened her greatly. To be
alone--solitary and unobserved now seemed delightful. Those white pills
did more for her, raised her spirits better, than any human society.
They brought her dreams, sleeping or waking; dreams a thousand times
more delightful than her real, desolate existence. To give herself up to
memory, to pray, to dream, to picture herself in the other world among
her beloved dead--and besides that to eat and drink, which she was
always ready to do very freely--this was all she asked henceforth of
life on earth.

When, to her further questions, Orion replied that he was going first
to the Delta, she expressed her regret, since, if he had gone to Upper
Egypt, he might have visited his sister-in-law, Mary's mother, in her
convent. She sat up as she spoke, passed her hand across her forehead,
and pointed to a little table near the head of the couch, on which, by
the side of a cup with fruit syrup, phials, boxes, and other objects,
lay a writing-tablet and a letter-scroll. This she took up and handed to
Orion, saying:

"A letter from your sister-in-law. It came last evening and I began
to read it; but the first words are a complaint of your father, and
that--you know, just before going to sleep--I could not read any more;
I could not bear it! And to-day; first there was church, and then the
physician came with his request about the child; I have not yet found
courage to read the rest of it.--What can any letter bring to me but
evil! Do you know at all whence anything pleasant could come to me? But
now: read me the letter. Not that part again about your father; that I
will keep till presently for myself alone."

Orion undid the roll, and with quivering lips glanced over the nun's
accusations against his father. The wildest fanaticism breathed in
every line of this epistle from the martyr's widow. She had found in the
cloister all she sought: she lived now, she said, in God alone and in
the Divine Saviour. She thought of her child, even, only as an alien,
one of God's young creatures for whom it was a joy to pray. At the same
time it was her duty to care for the little one's soul, and if it were
not too hard for her grandmother to part from her, she longed to see
Mary once more. She had lately been chosen abbess of her convent--and
no one could prevent her taking possession of the child; but she feared
lest an overwhelming natural affection might drag her back to the carnal
world, which she had for ever renounced, so she would have Mary brought
up in a neighboring nunnery, and led to Heavenly joys, not to earthly
misery--to be the wife of no sinful husband, but a pure bride of Christ.

Orion shuddered as he read and, when he laid the letter down, his mother
exclaimed:

"Perhaps she is right, perhaps it is already ordained that the child
should be sent to the convent, and not to the leech's friend, and
started on the only path that leads to Heaven without danger or
hindrance!"

But Orion said to himself that he would make it his duty to guard the
happy-hearted child from this fate, and he begged his mother to consider
that the first important point was to restore the little girl to health.
He now saw that she had been right. His father had always obeyed the
prescriptions of Philippus, and for that reason, if for no other, it
would be her duty to act by his advice.

Neforis, who for some time had been casting longing eyes at a small box
by her side, did not contradict him; and in the course of the afternoon
Orion conducted little Mary and her governess to the house of Rufinus,
who, notwithstanding the doubts he had expressed the day before, made
them heartily welcome.

When Mary was lying in her bed, close by the side of Paula's, the child
threw her arms round the young girl's neck as she leaned over her, and
laying her head on her bosom, felt herself in soft and warm security.
There, as one released from prison and bondage, she wept out her woes,
pouring all the grief of her deeply wounded child's heart into that of
her friend.

Paula, however, heard Orion's voice, and she longed to go down to her
lover, whom she had greeted but briefly on his arrival; still, she
could not bear to snatch the child from her bosom, to disturb her in her
newly-found happiness and leave her at this very moment! And yet, she
must--she must see him! Every impulse urged her towards him and, when
Pulcheria came into the room, she placed Mary's hand in hers and said:
"There, now make friends and stay together like good children till I
come back again and have something nice to tell you. You are fond of
Orion, little one, my story shall be all about him."

"He was obliged to go," said Pulcheria, interrupting her. "Here is his
message on this tablet. He was almost dying of impatience, and when he
could wait no longer he wrote this for you."

Paula took the tablet, with a cry of regret, and carried it to her room
to read. He had longed for their meeting as eagerly as herself, but at
last he could wait no longer. How differently--so he wrote--had he hoped
to end this day which must be devoted to the rescue of her friends.

Why, oh why had she allowed herself to be detained here? Why had she not
flown to him, at least for a few moments, to thank him for his kindness
and faithfulness, and to hear him confess publicly and aloud what he had
but murmured in her ear the day before? She returned to the little girl,
anxious and dissatisfied with herself.

Orion had in fact postponed his departure till the last moment; he
thought it necessary to give Amru due notice of his journey and of his
rupture with the patriarch. Of all the motives which could prompt him to
aid the nuns, revenge was that which the Arab could best understand.




CHAPTER VI.

As Orion rode across the bridge of boats to Fostat, the gladness that
had inspired him died away. Could not--ought not Paula to have spared
him a small part of the time she had devoted to the child? He had been
left to make the most of a kind grasp of the hand and a grateful look of
welcome. Would she not have flown to meet him, if the love of which she
had assured him yesterday were as fervent, as ardent as his own? Was
the proud spirit of this girl, who, as his mother said, was cold and
unapproachable, incapable of passionate, self-forgetting devotion? Was
there no way of lighting up in her the sacred fire which burnt in him?
He was tormented by many doubts and a bitter feeling of disappointment,
and a crowd of suspicions forced themselves upon him, which would never
have troubled him if only he had seen her once more, had heard her happy
words of love, and felt his lips consecrated by his mistress' first
kiss.

He was out of spirits, indeed out of temper, as he entered the Arab
general's dwelling. In the anteroom he was met by rejected petitioners,
and he said to himself, with a bitter smile, that he had just been sent
about his business in the same unsatisfied mood--yes, sent about his
business--and by whom?

He was announced, and his spirits rose a little when he was at once
admitted and led past many, who were left waiting, into the Arab
governor's presence-chamber. He was received with paternal warmth; and,
when Amru heard that Orion and the patriarch had come to high words, he
jumped up and holding out both his hands exclaimed:

"My right hand on that, my friend; come over to Islam, and with my left
I will appoint you your father's successor, in the Khaliff's name,
in spite of your youth. Away with hesitation! Clasp hands; at once,
quickly! I cannot bear to quit Egypt and know that there is no governor
at Memphis!"

The blood tingled in the young man's veins. His father's successor!
He, the new Mukaukas! How it flattered his ambition, what a way to all
activity it opened out to him! It dazzled his vision, and moved him
strongly to grasp the right hand which his generous patron still held
out to him. But suddenly his excited fancy showed him the image of the
Redeemer with whom he had entered into a silent covenant in the church,
sadly averting his gentle face. At this he remembered what he had vowed;
at this he forgot all his grievance against Paula; he took the general's
hand, indeed, but only to raise it to his lips as he thanked him with
all his heart. But then he implored him, with earnest, pleading urgency,
not to be wroth with him if he remained firm and clung to the faith of
his father and his ancestors. And Amru was not wroth, though it was with
none of the hearty interest with which he had at first welcomed him,
that he hastily warned Orion to be on his guard against the prelate,
since, so long as he remained a Christian, he had no power to protect
him against Benjamin.

When Orion went on to tell him that he was intending to travel for a
short time, and had, in fact, come to take leave of him, the Arab was
much annoyed. He, too, he said, must be going away and was starting
within two days for Medina.

"And in casting my eye on you," he went on, "in spite of your youth, to
fill your father's place, I took care to find a task for you which would
enable you to prove that I had not put too great confidence in you.
But, if you persist in your own opinions, I cannot possibly entrust so
important a post as the governorship of Memphis to a Christian so
young as you are; with the youthful Moslem I might have ventured on
it.--However, I will not deprive you of the enterprise which I had
intended for you. If you succeed in it, it will be a good thing for
yourself, and I can, I believe, turn it to the benefit of the whole
province--for what could take me from hence at this time, when my
presence is so needful for a hundred incomplete projects, but my anxiety
for the good of this country--in which I am but an alien, while you
must love it as your native soil, the home of your race?--I am going to
Medina because the Khaliff, in this letter, complains that I send too
small a revenue into the treasury from so rich a land as Egypt. And yet
not a single dinar of your taxes finds its way into my own coffers. I
keep a hundred and fifty thousand laborers at work to restore the canals
and waterworks which my predecessors, the blood-sucking Byzantines,
neglected so disgracefully and left to fall to ruin--I build, and plan,
and sow seed for posterity to reap. All this costs money. It swallows up
the lion's share of the revenue. And I am making the journey, not merely
to purge myself from reproach, but to obtain Omar's permission for the
future to exact no extortionate payments, but to consider only the true
weal of the province. I am most unwilling to go, for a thousand reasons;
and you, young man, if you care for your native land, ought.... Do you
really love it and wish it well?"

"With all my soul!" cried Orion.

"Well then, at this time, if by any possibility you can arrange it so,
you ought to remain at home, and devote yourself heart and soul to the
task I have to propose to you. I hate postponements. Ride straight at
the foe, and do not canter up and down till you tire the horses! that is
my principle, and not in battle only. Take the moral to heart!--And you
will have no time to waste; what I require is no light matter: It is
that you should endeavor to sketch a new division of the districts,
drawing on your own knowledge of the country and its inhabitants,
and using the records and lists in the archives of your ancient
government-offices, of which your father has told me; you must have
special regard to the financial condition of each district. That the old
mode of levying taxes is unsatisfactory we find every day; you will have
ample room for improvements in every respect. Overthrow the existing
arrangements, if you consider it necessary. Other men have attempted
to redistribute the divisions and devise new modes of collecting the
revenue. The best scheme will have the preference; and you seem to me
to be the man to win the prize, and, with it, a wide and noble field of
work in the future. It is not a mere sense of tedium, or a longing
for the pleasures of the capital to which you are accustomed, that are
tempting you to quit Memphis the melancholy...."

"No, indeed, my Lord," Orion assured him. "The duty I have in view does
not even profit me, and if I had not given my word I would throw myself,
heart and soul, into so grand a task, no later than to-morrow. That you
should expect me to solve so hard a problem is the most precious incense
ever offered me. If it is only to be worthy of your confidence, I
will return as soon as possible and put forth my utmost powers of
intelligence and prudence, of endurance and patriotism. I have
always been a diligent student; and it would be a shame indeed, if
my experiences as a youth could hinder the man from outdoing the
school-boy."

"That is right, well said!" replied Amru, holding out his hand. "Do your
best, and you shall have ample opportunity of proving your powers.--Take
my warnings to heart as regards the patriarch and the black Vekeel. I
unfortunately have no one who could fill his place except the worthy
Kadi Othman; but he is no soldier, and he cannot be spared from his
post. Keep out of Obada's way, return soon, and may the All-merciful
protect you...."

When Orion had recrossed the bridge on his way home, he saw a
gaily-dressed Nile-boat, such as now but rarely stopped at Memphis,
lying at anchor in the dock, and on the road he met two litters followed
by beasts of burden and a train of servants. The whole party had a
brilliant and wealthy appearance, and at any other time would have
roused his curiosity; but to-day he merely wondered for a moment who
these new-comers might be, and then continued to meditate on the task
proposed to him by Amru. From the bottom of his heart he cursed the hour
in which he had pledged himself to take the part of these strangers;
for after such long idleness he longed to be able to prove his powers.
Suddenly, and as if by a miracle, he saw the way opened before him which
he had himself hoped to tread, and now he was fettered and held back
from an enterprise which he felt he could carry out with success
and benefit to his country, while it attracted him as with a hundred
lode-stones.

Next morning, when his will had been duly signed and witnessed, he
called the treasurer for an interview alone with him. He had made up his
mind that one person, at least, must be informed of the enterprise he
had planned, and that one could be no other than Nilus. So he begged him
to accompany him to the impluvium of his private residence; and several
office scribes who were present heard the invitation given. They did
not, however, allow themselves to be disturbed in their work; the
youngest only--a handsome lad of sixteen, an olive-complexioned
Egyptian, with keen, eager black eyes, who had listened sharply to
every word spoken by the treasurer and his master, quietly rose from his
squatting posture as soon as they had quitted the office, and, stole,
unobserved into the anteroom. From thence he flew up the ladder-like
steps which led to the dovecote of which he had the care, sprang on
to the roof of the lower story, and crept flat on his face till he was
close to the edge of the large square opening which gave light and air
to the impluvium below. With a swift movement of the hand he pushed
back the awning which shaded it at midday, and listened intently to the
dialogue that went on below.

This listener was Anubis, the water-wagtail's foster-brother; and
he seemed to be in no way behind his beloved mistress in the art of
listening; for no one could prick up his ears more sharply than Anubis.
He knew, too, what was to be his reward for exposing himself on a roof
to the shafts of the pitiless African sun, for Katharina, his adored
play-fellow and the mistress of his ardent boy's heart, had promised him
a sweet kiss, if only he would bring her back some more exact news as to
Orion's perilous journey. Anubis had told her, the evening before, all
he had heard in the anteroom to the office, but such general information
had not satisfied her. She must see clearly before her, must know
exactly what was going on, and she was not mistaken when she imagined
that the reward she had promised the lad would spur him to the utmost.

Anubis had not indeed expected to gain his end so soon, boldly as he
dared to hope; scarcely had he pushed aside the awning, when Orion began
to explain to Nilus all his plan and purpose.

When he had finished speaking, the boy did not wait to hear Nilus reply.
Intoxicated with his success, and the prospect of a guerdon which to him
included all the bliss of heaven, he crept back to the dovecote. But
he could not go back by the way by which he had come; for if one of the
older scribes should meet him in the anteroom, he would be condemned to
return to his work. He therefore wriggled along the ridge of the roof
towards the fishing-cove, got over it, and laid hold of a gutter pipe,
intending to slip down it; unfortunately it was old and rotten-rain was
rare in Memphis--and hardly had he trusted his body after his hands when
the lead gave way. The rash youth fell with the clattering fragments of
the gutter from a height of four men; a heavy thump on the pavement was
followed by a loud cry, and in a few minutes all the officials had
heard that poor Anubis, nimble as he was, had fallen from the roof while
attending to his pets, and had broken his leg.

The two men in the impluvium were not informed of the accident till some
time later, for strict orders had been given that they were not to be
disturbed.

Nilus had received his young master's communication with growing
amazement, indignation, and horror. When Orion ended, the treasurer put
forth all the eloquence of a faithful heart, anxious for the safety of
the body and soul of the youth he loved, to dissuade him from a deed of
daring which could bring him nothing but misapprehension, disaster, and
persecution. Nilus was with all his soul a Jacobite; and the idea that
his young master was about to risk everything for a party of Melchite
nuns, and draw down upon himself the wrath and maledictions of the
patriarch, was more than he could bear.

His faithful friend's warnings and entreaties did not leave Orion
unmoved; but he clung to his determination, representing to Nilus that
he had pledged his word to Rufinus, and could not now draw back, though
he had already lost all his pleasure in the enterprise. But it went
against him to leave the brave old man to face the danger alone--indeed,
it was out of the question.

Genuine anxiety is fertile in expedient; Orion had scarcely done
speaking, when Nilus had a proposal to make which seemed well calculated
to dispel the youth's last objections. Melampus, the chief shipbuilder,
was a Greek and a zealous Melchite, though he no longer dared to confess
his creed openly. He and his sons, two bold and sturdy ships carpenters,
had often given proof of their daring, and Nilus had no doubt that they
would be more than willing to share in an expedition which had for its
object the rescue of so many pious fellow-believers. They might take
Orion's place, and would be far more helpful to the old man than Orion
himself.

Orion so far approved of this suggestion as to promise himself good aid
from the brave artisans, who were well known to him; and he was willing
to take them with him, though he would not give up his own share in the
business.

Nilus, though he adhered firmly to his objections, was at last
reduced to silence. However, Orion went with his anxious friend to the
ship-yard; the old ship-builder, a kind-hearted giant, was as ready and
glad to undertake the rescue of the Sisters as if each one was his own
mother. It would be a real treat to the youngsters to have a hand in
such a job,--and he was right, for when they were taken into confidence
one flourished his hatchet with enthusiasm, and the tether struck his
horny fist against his left palm as gleefully as though he were bidden
to a dance.

Orion took boat at once with the three men, and was rowed to the
house of Rufinus, to whom he introduced them; the old man was entirely
satisfied.

Orion remained with him after dismissing them. He had promised last
evening to breakfast with him, and the meal was waiting. Paula had gone,
about an hour since, to the convent, and Joanna expected her to return
at any moment. They began without her, however; the various dishes were
carried away, the meal was nearly ended-still she had not returned.
Orion, who had at first been able to conceal his disappointment, was
now so uneasy that his host could with difficulty extract brief and
inadvertent replies to his repeated questions. Rufinus himself was
anxious; but just as he rose to go in search of her, Pulcheria, who was
at the window, saw her coming, and joyfully exclaiming: "There she is!"
ran out.

But now again minute after minute passed, a quarter of an hour grew to
half an hour, and still Orion was waiting in vain. Glad expectation
had long since turned to impatience, impatience to a feeling of injured
dignity, and this to annoyance and bitter vexation, when at last
Pulcheria came back instead of Paula, and begged him from Paula to join
her in the garden.

She had been detained too long at the convent. The terrible rumor had
scared the pious sisters out of their wonted peace and put them all into
confusion, like smoke blown into a bee-hive. The first thing was to pack
their most valuable possessions; and although Orion had expressly said
only a small number of cases and bags could be taken on board, one was
for dragging her prayer-desk, another a large picture of some saint, a
third a copper fish-kettle, and the fourth, fifth, and sixth the great
reliquary with the bones of Ammonius the Martyr, to which the chapel
owed its reputation for peculiar sanctity. To reduce this excess
of baggage, the abbess had been obliged to exert all her energy and
authority, and many a sister retired weeping over some dear but too
bulky treasure.

The superior had therefore been unable to devote herself to Paula till
this portable property had been under review. Then the damsel had
been admitted to her parlor, a room furnished with rich and elegant
simplicity, and there she had been allowed to pour out her whole heart
to warm and sympathetic ears.

Any one who could have seen these two together might have thought that
this was a daughter in grief seeking counsel on her mother's breast.
In her youth the grey-haired abbess must have been very like Thomas'
daughter; but the lofty and yet graceful mien of the younger woman had
changed in the matron to majestic and condescending dignity, and it was
impossible to guess from her defiantly set mouth that it had once been
the chief charm of her face.

As she listened to the girl's outpourings the expression of her calm
eyes changed frequently; when her soul was fired by fanatical zeal
they could gleam brightly; but now she was listening to a variety of
experiences, for Paula regarded this interview as a solemn confession,
and concealed nothing from the friend who was both mother and
priest-neither of what had happened to her in external circumstances,
nor of what had moved her heart and mind ever since she had first
entered the house of the Mtikaukas. Not a corner of her soul did she
leave unsearched; she neither concealed nor palliated anything; and
when she described her lover's strenuous efforts to apprehend the whole
seriousness of life, her love and enthusiasm fairly carried her away,
making his image shine all the more brightly by comparison with the
brief, but dark shadow, that had fallen upon it. When Paula had at last
ended her confession, the superior had remained silent for some time;
then drawing the girl to her, she had affectionately asked her:

"And now? Now, tell me truly, does not the passion that has such
wonderful power over you prompt and urge your inmost soul to yield--to
fly to the embrace of the man you love--to give all up for him and say:
'Here I am--I am yours! Call a priest to bless our union!--Is it not
so--am I not right?'"

Paula, deeply blushing, bowed assent; but the old woman drew her head on
to her motherly bosom, and went on thoughtfully:

"I saw him drive past in his quadriga, and was reminded of many a noble
statue of the heathen Greeks. Beauty, rank, wealth, aye--and talents and
intellect--all that could ruin the heart of a Paula are his, and she--I
see it plainly--will give it to him gladly."

And again the maiden bowed her head. The abbess sighed, and went on as
though she had with difficulty succeeded in submitting to the inevitable
"Then all warning would be in vain.--Still, he is not of our confession,
he...."

"But how highly he esteems it!" cried Paula. "That he proves by risking
his freedom and life for you and your household."

"Say rather for you whom he loves," replied the other. "But putting that
out of the question, it pains me deeply to think of Thomas' daughter
as the wife of a Jacobite. You will not, I know, give him up; and the
Father of Love often leads true love to good ends by wonderful ways,
even though they are ways of error, passing through pitfalls and
abysses."

Paula fell on her neck to kiss her gratefully: but the abbess could only
allow the girl a few minutes to enjoy her happiness. She desired her
to sit down by her side, and holding Paula's hand in both her own, she
spoke to her in a tone of calm deliberation. She and her sisterhood, she
began by saying, were deeply indebted to Orion. She had no dearer
wish than that Paula should find the greatest earthly happiness in her
marriage; still, it was her part to tender advice, and she dared not
blind herself to the dangers which threatened this happiness. She
herself had a long life behind her of varied experience, in which she
had seen hundreds of young men who had been given up as lost sinners
by father and mother--lost to the Church and to all goodness--and among
these many a one, like Saul, had had his journey to Damascus. A turning
point had come to them, and the outcast sons had become excellent and
pious men.

Paula, as she listened, had drawn closer to the speaker, and her eyes
beamed with joy; but the elder woman shook her head, and her gaze grew
more devout and rapt, as she went on with deep solemnity:

"But then, my child, in all of these Grace had done its perfect work;
the miracle was accomplished which we term regeneration. They were still
the same men in the flesh and in the elements of their sensible nature,
but their relation to the world and to life was altogether new. All that
they had formerly thought desirable they could now hate; what they had
deemed important was now worthless, and the worthless precious in their
eyes; whereas they once referred everything to their own desires, they
now referred all to God and His will. Their impulses were the same as of
old, but they kept them within bounds by a never-sleeping consciousness
that they led, not to joys, but to everlasting punishment. These
regenerate souls learned to contemn the world, and instead of gazing
down at the dust their eyes were fixed upwards on Heaven. If either of
them tottered, his whole 'new man' prompted him to recover his balance
before he fell to the ground.--But Orion! Your lover? His guilt seems
to have passed over him; he hopes for reunion with God from a more
meritorious life in the world. Not only is his nature unaltered, but his
attitude with regard to life and to the joys it offers to the children
of this world. Earthly love is spurring him on to strive for what is
noble and great and he earnestly seeks to attain it; but he will fall
over every stone that the devil casts in his path, and find it hard to
pick himself up again, for misfortune has not led him to the new birth
or the new life in God. Just such men have I seen, numbers of times,
relapsing into the sins they had escaped from. Before we can entirely
trust a man who has once--though but once-wandered so far from God's
ways, while Grace has not yet worked effectually in him, we shall do
well to watch his dealings and course for more than a few short days. If
you still feel that you must follow the dictates of your heart, at any
rate do not fly into your lover's open arms, do not abandon to him the
pure sanctuary of your body and soul, do not be wholly his till he has
been fully put to the proof."

"But I believe in him entirely!" cried Paula, with a flood of tears.

"You believe because you love him," replied the abbess.

"And because he deserves it."

"And how long has he deserved it?"

"Was he not a splendid man before his fall?"

"And so was many a murderer. Most criminals become outcasts from society
in a single moment."

"But society still accepts Orion."

"Because he is the son of the Mukaukas."

"And because he wins all hearts!"

"Even that of the Almighty?"

"Oh! Mother, Mother! why do you measure him by the standard of your own
sanctified soul? How few are the elect who find a share of the grace of
which you speak!"

"But those who have sinned like him must strive for it."

"And he does so, Mother, in his way."

"It is the wrong way; wrong for those who have sinned as he has. All he
strives for is worldly happiness."

"No, no. He is firm in his faith in God and the Saviour. He is not a
liar."

"And yet he thinks he may escape the penalty?"
