hold her.'

'At your peril!' I said. 'Gentlemen, I am the widow of your brave
officer, Captain de Bellaise, killed at Freibourg. Will you see this
wrong done?'

'I command you, as your officer--forward!' he said; and though one
wavered, the others stepped forward.

Then I saw there was only one thing to do. A big stone image stood near
me. Before they could touch me I had fallen on my knees, and wound
my arms so closely round it that they could not unloose them without
absolute violence and injury. I knew that in such a position it was
impossible even to go through the semblance of marrying me. I felt
Armand's hand and the Abbe's try to untwist my arms and unclasp my
hands, but they could not prevail against that grip with which I held,
and I spoke not one word.

At last they drew back, and I heard them say one to the other: 'It is of
no use. She must yield in time. Leave her.'

I heard them all clank out with their spurs, and lock the door, and then
I looked up. There was no other way out of the little convent chapel,
which looked as if it had been unused for years, except perhaps for
an annual mass, but the altar had been dressed in preparation for the
sacrilege that was intended. Then I turned to the figure to which I had
clung, and I was encouraged by seeing that it bore the emblems of St.
Margaret, my own patroness. I knew very well that my brother and sister
would shake their heads, and say it was a superstitious fancy, if they
called it by no harder name; but they did not understand our feelings
towards the saints. Still it was not to St. Margaret I turned to help
me, but to St. Margaret's Master and mine, when I prayed to be delivered
from the mouth of the dragon, though I did trust that she was entreating
for me.

I would not move away from her, I might need to clasp her at any moment;
but I prayed fervently before the altar, where I knelt till I grew faint
with weariness; and then I sat at her feet, and thought over all the
possibilities of being rescued. If my sister were free I knew she would
leave no stone unturned to deliver me, and that my rescue could be only
a matter of time; but she might also have been seized, and if so--?
Anyhow, I was absolutely determined that they should kill me before I
consented to become the wife of M. de Lamont, or to give him any right
over my son.

After a time the door was cautiously opened, and one of the dragoons
came in, having taken off his boots and spurs that he might move more
noiselessly.

'Madame,' he said, 'pardon me. I loved our brave captain; I know you.
You sent me new linen in the hospital. Captain de Bellaise was a brave
man.'

'And you will see no wrong done to his widow and child, my good friend?'
I cried.

'Ah, Madame, you should command all of us. But we are under orders.'

'And that means doing me unmanly violence, unworthy of a brave soldier!
You cannot help me?'

'If Madame would hear me! The gentlemen are at dinner. They may sit
long over their wine to give them courage to encounter Madame again.
My comrade, Benlot, is on duty. I might find a messenger to Madame's
friends.'

Then he told me what I had little guessed, that we had been driven
round and round, and were really only in the Faubourg St. Medand, in
the Priory of the Benedictines, giving title and revenue to the Abbe St.
Leu, which had contained no monks ever since the time of the Huguenots.
He could go into Paris and return again before his turn to change guard
was likely to come.

Should I send him, or should I thus only lose a protector? He so far
reassured me that he said his comrades were, like himself, resolved not
to proceed to extremities with the widow of their captain--above all in
a chapel. They would take care not to exert all their strength, and if
they could, without breach of discipline, they would defend me.

I decided. I knew not where my sister might be searching, or if she
might not be likewise a prisoner; so I directed him first to the house
of M. Darpent, who was more likely to know what to do than Sir Francis
Ommaney. Besides, the Rue des Marmousets, where stood Maison Darpent,
was not far off.

I heard a great clock strike four, five, six, seven, eight o'clock,
and by and by there was a parley. M. de Lamont opened the door of the
chapel, and as I shuddered and kept my arm on my patroness, he implored
me to believe that no injury was intended to me--the queen of his
thoughts, or some such nonsense--I might understand that by the presence
of my brother-in-law. He only besought me not to hurt my precious
health, but to leave the cold chapel for a room that had been prepared
for me, and where I should find food.

'No,' I said; 'nothing should induce me to leave my protectress.'

At least, then, he conjured me to accept food and wine, if I took
it where I was. I hastily considered the matter. There was nothing
I dreaded so much as being drugged; and yet, on the other hand, the
becoming faint for want of nourishment might be equally dangerous, and
I had taken nothing that day except a cup of milk before we set out from
home; and it was now a matter of time.

I told him, therefore, that I would accept nothing but a piece of bread
and some pure water, if it were brought me where I was.

'Ah, Madame! you insult me by your distrust,' he cried.

'I have no reason to trust you,' I said, with a frigidity that I hoped
would take from him all inclination for a nearer connection; but he
only smote his forehead as if it had been a drum, and complained of
my cruelty and obduracy. 'Surely I had been nurtured by tigresses,' he
said, quoting the last pastoral comedy he had seen.

He sent M. d'Aubepine to conduct some servant with a tray of various
meats and drinks; I took nothing but some bread and water, my
brother-in-law trying to argue with me. This was a mistake on their
part, for I was more angry with him than with his friend, in whom there
was a certain element of extravagant passion, less contemptible than
d'Aubepine's betrayal of Phillipe de Bellaise's widow merely out of
blind obedience to his Prince. He assured me that resistance was
utterly useless, that bets had passed at the Prince's court on the
Englishwoman's being subdued by Lamont before mid-night, and the Prince
himself had staked, I know not how much, against those who believed in
my obstinacy. Therefore Armand d'Aubepine, who was flushed with wine,
and not in the least able to perceive how contemptible he was, urged me
to yield with the best grace I could, since there was no help for it.
And so saying he suddenly pinioned both my arms with his own.

No help! Was there no help in Heaven above, or earth below? Was my
dragoon on his way?

The doors opened. Again the Abbe opened his book.

'Brave dragoons!' I cried out; 'if there be not a man among you who
will stir a hand to save me, bear witness that I, Margaret de Ribaumont,
widow of Philippe de Bellaise, your own officer, protest against this
shameful violence. Whatever is here done is null and void, and shall be
made known to M. l'Abbe's superiors.'

There was a dead pause. Then Lamont whispered something to the priest,
who began again. I felt Armand's held relaxing, and making a sudden
struggle, I shook myself free with such force that he staggered back,
while I bounded forward and snatched the book from the priest's hand,
throwing it on the floor, and then, regaining once more the statue of
St. Margaret, I stood grasping her with one arm with desperate energy,
while I cried: 'A moi, soldiers of Freibourg!'

'Drag her away,' said d'Aubepine to the men.

'By your leave, my captain,' said their sergeant, 'except in time of
war, it is not permitted to lay hands on any one in sanctuary. It is not
within our discipline.'

D'Aubepine swore an oath that they would see what their Colonel said
to their insubordination; but the sergeant replied, not without some
malice:

'It falls within the province of the reverend Father.'

'I command you, then!' shrieked the Abbe, in a furry.

'Nay, Monsieur l'Abbe is not our officer,' said the sergeant, saluting
with great politeness.

'Madame,' cried Lamont, 'will you cause these men to be put to death for
disobedience to their officer?'

I scarcely believed him. And yet--

There was a sound at the outside.

'Make haste!' cried d'Aubepine. 'Here is the Prince come to see whether
he has won his wager.'




CHAPTER XXII. -- ST. MARGARET AND THE DRAGON

(By Annora)



A fine country to live in was la belle France, where a godly, modest,
discreet, and well-living widow could be spirited away by main force
from her sister and her servants, on the King's highway in broad
daylight, and by soldiers wearing the King's own uniform! 'In the name
of the Prince!' said they. Verily, I think it was in the name of the
Prince of darkness. They tore poor Meg from me, though we both fought
and struggled as hard as we could, in hopes of some one coming to our
rescue. Luckily my gloves were off, and I think I gave a few tolerable
scratches to somebody's face, in spite of his abominable cache-nez. If
the servants had had a tenth part of the valour of our poor fellows who
lie dead at Newburry and Alresford we could have brought her off;
but these were but Frenchmen, and were overawed by those dragoons, or
dragons, in their cuirasses.

When poor Meg was dragged out, I held her fast, and tumbled out with
her; but even as we fell, she was rent from me, and I think I must have
been half-stunned. At any rate, I found myself flung back into our own
carriage, and the door shut upon me, while the horses were turned round,
and we were made to gallop back by the road we had come.

Our women, screaming and crying like mad things, helped me up from the
bottom of the carriage. I bade them hold their tongues and stop the
horses. The one they could not do, the other they would not. So I was
forced to open the door myself, and shout to the coachman to stop that
instant. He would not at first, but happily I saw a pistol, which one of
the wretches had dropped in the scuffle, and I threatened him with
it. Then, when my voice could be heard, I ordered the two outriders to
gallop after the coach in which my sister had been carried off, and see
where she was taken, while we made as much speed as we could after them;
but the cowardly rogues absolutely began to cry, and say that the leader
of the party had turned the horses' heads, and declared that he would
shoot any one dead who attempted to follow.

Luckily I was in a close-fitting black cloth suit, being still in
mourning for our blessed martyr, and intending to make my toilette at
Rambouillet. I bade one of the fellows who had dismounted to give me
his cloak, and while they were still staring at me, I sprang into the
saddle, arranged the cloak, and rode off in pursuit. I knew I could keep
my seat even on a man's saddle, for cavaliers' daughters had had to do
strange things, and it was thus that I was obliged to come away from
my dear Berenger's side. But then I rode between my father and Eustace.
Now, if I did not find out where my poor Margaret was gone, who was to
deliver her?

The men had heart of grace enough to follow me, more of them, indeed,
than I wanted, as of course it was better to go quietly than to have
them clattering with me. I told them to keep a little in the rear, and
I rode on, trying to see above the hedges the glancing of the helmets
of the dragoons. Across some vineyards I once caught sight of something
like a carriage and a troop of horse, quite in a different direction
from what I expected, and presently, when I came to a cross-road, I saw
by the marks in the mud and more that they must have turned that way.
I must follow by such guidance as these supplied, and fortunately
there had recently been rain, so that the wheel and hoof marks could be
tracked. To my amazement they led through many turns and twists at last
towards Paris; but to my dismay, when I came to the paved roads that
surround the city, I lost all traces. I knew I was a remarkable figure
when we were on the high roads, and so I kept back, making one of the
servants inquire at a little cabaret on the road whether a carriage,
attended by dragoons, had passed that way.

'Yes,' they brought me word. 'A close carriage, no doubt containing
a state prisoner, had been escorted by dragoons on the way to the
Bastille.'

The man brought me back the answer, weeping. I scolded the fellow well
for thinking that these rogues SAYING Madame was at the Bastille made
it so, and yet it echoed my own alarm. I had at least ascertained one
point. She had not been transported to some solitary castle in the
country, but must be near at hand.

I must now go home, and see what help was to be had; but as they would
never let me pass the gates of Paris looking as I knew I must look,
I was obliged to ride back and meet the carriage, which had bidden to
follow us, and return to it in order to re-enter the city.

My mother was at St. Germain with our own Queen; who would be my
resource? I thought I had better first go home and see what Sir
Francis Ommaney's counsel would be, and whether he thought the
English ambassador, Sir Richard Browne, could give any help, though,
unfortunately, poor Meg was no longer an English subject. There was
consternation enough when I came in with my terrible news, but at least
there was common-sense, and not shrieking. Sir Francis recommended me at
once to dress myself to go to St. Germain, while he would repair to
the embassy, since Sir Richard was the most likely person to be able
to advise him. We also thought of sending a courier to Solivet, who
was with the army on the frontier; and I put on a dress fit to obtain
admission at St. Germain. Lady Ommaney was scolding me into taking
some food before starting, and crying, because she had a bad attack of
rheumatism, and her husband would not let her go with us, when there was
a knock, and one of the women ran in. 'News, news, Mademoiselle! News of
Madame la Vicomtesse! But ah! she is in a sad plight.'

Down I ran headlong, and whom should I find but the dear and excellent
Madame Darpent. She, who never left her home but for Church, had come to
help us in our extremity. It seemed that Meg's dragoon (about whom she
has told her own story) had disguised himself as soon as he came within
Paris, and come in hot haste to M. Darpent, telling him how once my
brave sister had repulsed the whole crew of villains, and how he had
hurried away while the gentlemen (pretty gentlemen, indeed!) were
drinking wine to get up their courage for another encounter, in which
they were determined to succeeded since they were heavy bets at the
Prince's camp that the pride of la grand Anglaise should be subdued
before midnight. The dragoon had not ventured to come any farther than
Maison Darpent, lest he should be missed and his comrades should not be
able to conceal his absence but he assured M. Darpent that though they
might appear to obey orders, they were resolved to give the lady every
opportunity of resistance. Was she not the wife of the best captain they
had ever had, and had she not knelt like one of the holy saints in a
mystery play?

I was for setting forth at once with Sir Francis, sure that the iniquity
could not proceed when it was made public. Of course we would have
risked it, but we might not have been able to force our way in without
authority, since the vile Abbe was on his own ground, and Madame Darpent
told us her son had devised a better plan. He had gone to the Coadjutor,
who in the dotage of his uncle, the Archbishop of Paris, exercised
all his powers. As one of their monkish clergy, this same Abbe was not
precisely under his jurisdiction, but the celebration of a marriage, and
at such an hour, in a Priory Chapel, was an invasion of the privileges
of the parish priest, and thus the Bishop of the See had every right to
interfere. And this same Coadjutor was sure to have an especial delight
in detecting a scandal, and overthrowing a plan of the Prince of Conde
and the ruling party at Court, so that if he could be found there was
little doubt of his assistance.

In order to lose no time, Clement Darpent had gone instantly in search
of him, and his good mother had come at once in her sedan to see if I
were returned, relieve our minds about my sister, and if my mother
were within reach, prepare her to go in search of Margaret, since the
Coadjutor, Bishop though he were, was still young, and not at all the
sort of man who could be suffered to bring her home without some elder
matron as her escort. Or if my mother were out of reach, Madame Darpent
was prepared, as an act of charity and goodness, to go herself in quest
of our poor Meg. The carriage had followed her to the door for the
purpose as soon as it could be got ready, and to add to my exceeding
gratitude, she was willing to take me with her. Sir Francis insisted
on going to my mother. He said it was right, but we doubted whether it
would do any good. We waited only for tidings which her son had promised
to send, and they came at last in a small billet sent by one of his
clerks. The Coadjutor had absolutely fired at the notion of such a hit
to the opposite party, and was only getting together what were called
the "First of Corinthians," namely, the corps who had belonged to him
during the siege, and had obtained the nickname because he was titular
Archbishop of Corinth.

Clement would not leave him a moment, lest he should be diverted from
his purpose, but sent word to Madame Darpent that she, or whoever was to
escort Madame de Bellaise, was to meet him at seven o'clock in the
open space by the Barriere, showing a green light through the carriage
window, when he would show a red one.

Oh! what might not had happened before we could get there! I thought I
was used enough to suspense, I who had heard the rattle of the musketry
in more than one battle, but I should have been wild had not that best
of women held my hands and soothed me and helped me to say my prayers.

Hours seemed to go by as we sat in the dark with our lamp behind the
green curtain over the window, but at last the trampling of horses was
heard and the red light appeared. Presently Clement came to our door,
and exchanged a few words, but he said he must return to the Coadjutor,
who was in the best humour in the world.

The gates were closed, but the Coadjutor had no difficulty in passing
them, and we followed in his train. It was a dark night, but mounted
servants carried flambeaux, and we saw the light glance on the
Corinthians who guarded us. At last we stopped. We could not see then,
but I visited the place afterwards, and saw it was a tall brick house,
with a high wall round a courtyard. Here the Coadjutor's carriage drew
up, and entrance was demanded for "Monseigneur l'Archeveque de Corinthe,
Coadjutor de Paris." It may be supposed that the dragoon who kept the
door made no difficulty.

The carriage moved on, we drew up, and Clement, who had waited, handed
us out saying: 'He tells me we are just in time. Be as silent as
possible.'

We found the court lighted with torches, the Coadjutor's chaplain
arranging his purple robe, as he walked on through the doors that were
opened for him. Sir Francis led Madame Darpent, Clement gave me his had,
as we followed closely and noiselessly.

The chapel had its great wax candles alight on the altar. We could see
in, as we paused in the darkness of the antechapel, outside the screen,
while the Coadjutor advanced the door. My Margaret knelt, clinging
closely to a great stone image. The vile coward d'Aubepine was
commanding--for we heard him--his soldiers to seize her. The Abbe stood
finding the place in his book; Lamont was at a safe distance, however,
trying to induce her to rise. The Coadjutor's clear voice was heard.

'Benedicite, Messieurs,' he said, and oh! the start they gave! 'What
hole function am I interrupting, M. l'Abbe? The lady is in the attitude
of a penitent, but I was not aware that it was one of the customs of
your order to absolve thus in public.'

'Monseigneur,' said the Abbe, 'neither was I aware that Episcopal
surveillance extended to religious houses.'

 Margaret  here broke in.  She had risen to her feet, and looking at
the Archbishop, with eyes beaming in her pale face, she cried: 'Oh!
Monseigneur, you are come to save me! These wicked men are striving to
marry me against my will.'

'To celebrate the marriage sacrament,' continued the Coadjutor, in his
calm sneering tone; 'then M. l'Abbe, I suppose you have procured the
necessary permission from the curate of the parish to perform the rite
at this strange time and place? I am sorry, Messieurs, to break up so
romantic a plan, savouring of the fine days of the quatre fils Aymon,
but I must stand up for the claims of the diocese and the parish.'

M. de Lamont turned round to my sister, and made one of his lowest bows,
such as no one but a French courtier CAN make (thank Heaven!).

'Madame,' he said, 'we are disconcerted, but I shall still put my trust
in the truth that beauty ever pardons the efforts of love.'

'So it may be Monsieur,' returned Margaret, already fully herself, and
looking as tall, white, and dignified among them as a goddess among
apes, 'so it may be, where there is either beauty or love;' and she made
him a most annihilating curtsey. Then turning to the Coadjutor she
said: 'Monseigneur, I cannot express my obligations to you;' and then
as Clement stood behind him, she added: 'Ah, Monsieur, I knew I might
reckon on you,' holding out her hand, English fashion. She did not see
us, but M. d'Aubepine, who was slinking off the scene, like a beaten
hound, as well he might, unaware that we were in the antechapel, caught
his foot and spur in Madame Darpent's long trailing cloak, and came down
at full length on the stone floor, being perhaps a little flustered with
wine. He lay still for the first moment, and there was an outcry. One of
the soldiers cried out to the other as Madame Darpent's black dress and
white cap flashed into the light:

'It is the holy saint who has appeared to avenge the sacrilege! She has
struck him dead.'

And behold the superstition affected even the licentious
good-for-nothing Abbe. Down he dropped upon his knees, hiding his eyes,
and sobbing out: 'Sancta Margarita, spare me, spare me! I vow thee a
silver image. I vow to lead a changed life. I was drawn into it, holy
Lady Saint. They showed me the Prince's letter.'

He got it all out in one breath, while some of them were lifting up
d'Aubepine, and the Coadjutor was in convulsions of suppressed laughter,
and catching hold of Clement's arm whispered: 'No, no, Monsieur, I
entreat of you, do not undeceive him. Such a scene is worth anything!
Madame, I entreat of you,' to Meg, who was stepping forward.

However, of course it could not last long, though as d'Aubepine almost
instantly began to swear, as he recovered his senses, Madame Darpent
unconsciously maintained the delusion, by saying solemnly in her voice,
the gravest and deepest that I ever heard in a Frenchwoman: 'Add not
another sin, sir, to those with which you have profaned this holy
place.'

The Abbe thereupon took one look and broke into another tempest of
entreaties and vows, which Madame Darpent by this time heard. 'M.
