sad earnest!--Place me on the ground at my length, most rustical victor,
born to quench the pride of the burning light of the most felicitous
court of Feliciana--O saints and angels---knights and ladies--masques
and theatres--quaint devices--chain-work and broidery--love, honour, and
beauty!----"

While muttering these last words, which slid from him, as it were
unawares, while doubtless he was calling to mind the glories of the
English court, the gallant Sir Piercie Shafton stretched out his
limbs--groaned deeply, shut his eyes, and became motionless.

The victor tore his hair for very sorrow, as he looked on the pale
countenance of his victim. Life, he thought, had not utterly fled, but
without better aid than his own, he saw not how it could be preserved.

"Why," he exclaimed in vain penitence, "why did I provoke him to an
issue so fatal! Would to God I had submitted to the worst insult man
could receive from man, rather than be the bloody instrument of this
bloody deed--and doubly cursed be this evil-boding spot, which, haunted
as I knew it to be by a witch or a devil, I yet chose for the place of
combat! In any other place, save this, there had been help to be gotten
by speed of foot, or by uplifting of voice--but here there is no one to
be found by search, no one to hear my shouts, save the evil spirit who
has counselled this mischief. It is not her hour--I will essay the spell
howsoever; and if she can give me aid, she _shall_ do it, or know of
what a madman is capable even against those of another world!"

He spurned his bloody shoe from his foot, and repeated the spell with
which the reader is well acquainted; but there was neither voice,
apparition, nor signal of answer. The youth, in the impatience of his
despair, and with the rash hardihood which formed the basis of his
character, shouted aloud, "Witch--Sorceress--Fiend!--art thou deaf to
my cries of help, and so ready to appear and answer those of vengeance?
Arise and speak to me, or I will choke up thy fountain, tear down thy
hollybush, and leave thy haunt as waste and bare as thy fatal assistance
has made me waste of comfort and bare of counsel!"--This furious
and raving invocation was suddenly interrupted by a distant sound,
resembling a hollo, from the gorge of the ravine. "Now may Saint Mary
be praised," said the youth, hastily fastening his sandal, "I hear
the voice of some living man, who may give me counsel and help in this
fearful extremity."

Having donned his sandal, Halbert Glendinning, hallooing at intervals,
in answer to the sound which he had heard, ran with the speed of a
hunted buck down the rugged defile, as if paradise had been before him,
hell and all her furies behind, and his eternal happiness or misery had
depended upon the speed which he exerted. In a space incredibly short
for any one but a Scottish mountaineer having his nerves strung by the
deepest and most passionate interest, the youth reached the entrance
of the ravine, through which the rill that flows down Corri-nan-shian
discharges itself, and unites with the brook that waters the little
valley of Glendearg.

Here he paused, and looked around him upwards and downwards through the
glen, without perceiving a human form. His heart sank within him. But
the windings of the glen intercepted his prospect, and the person, whose
voice he had heard, might therefore, be at no great distance, though not
obvious to his sight. The branches of an oak-tree, which shot straight
out from the face of a tall cliff, proffered to his bold spirit,
steady head, and active limbs, the means of ascending it as a place of
out-look, although the enterprise was what most men would have shrunk
from. But by one bound from the earth, the active youth caught hold of
the lower branch, and swung himself up into the tree, and in a minute
more gained the top of the cliff, from which he could easily descry a
human figure descending the valley. It was not that of a shepherd, or
of a hunter, and scarcely any others used to traverse this deserted
solitude, especially coming from the north, since the reader may
remember that the brook took its rise from an extensive and dangerous
morass which lay in that direction.

But Halbert Glendinning did not pause to consider who the traveller
might be, or what might be the purpose of his journey. To know that he
saw a human being, and might receive, in the extremity of his distress,
the countenance and advice of a fellow-creature, was enough for him at
the moment. He threw himself from the pinnacle of the cliff once more
into the arms of the projecting oak-tree, whose boughs waved in middle
air, anchored by the roots in a huge rift or chasm of the rock. Catching
at the branch which was nearest to him, he dropped himself from that
height upon the ground; and such was the athletic springiness of his
youthful sinews, that he pitched there as lightly, and with as little
injury, as the falcon stooping from her wheel.

To resume his race at full speed up the glen, was the work of an
instant; and as he turned angle after angle of the indented banks of the
valley, without meeting that which he sought, he became half afraid that
the form which he had seen at such a distance had already melted into
thin air, and was either a deception of his own imagination, or of the
elementary spirits by which the valley was supposed to be haunted.

But to his inexpressible joy, as he turned round the base of a huge
and distinguished crag, he saw, straight before and very near to him,
a person, whose dress, as he viewed it hastily, resembled that of a
pilgrim.

He was a man of advanced life, and wearing a long beard, having on his
head a large slouched hat, without either band or brooch. His dress was
a tunic of black serge, which, like those commonly called hussar-cloaks,
had an upper part, which covered the arms and fell down on the lower;
a small scrip and bottle, which hung at his back, with a stout staff in
his hand, completed his equipage. His step was feeble, like that of one
exhausted by a toilsome journey.

"Save ye, good father!" said the youth. "God and Our Lady have sent you
to my assistance."

"And in what, my son, can so frail a creature as I am, be of service to
you?" said the old man, not a little surprised at being thus accosted
by so handsome a youth, his features discomposed by anxiety, his face
flushed with exertion, his hands and much of his dress stained with
blood. "A man bleeds to death in the valley here, hard by. Come with
me--come with me! You are aged--you have experience--you have at least
your senses--and mine have well nigh left me."

"A man--and bleeding to death--and here in this desolate spot!" said the
stranger.

"Stay not to question it, father," said the youth, "but come instantly
to his rescue. Follow me,--follow me, without an instant's delay."

"Nay, but, my son," said the old man, "we do not lightly follow the
guides who present themselves thus suddenly in the bosom of a howling
wilderness. Ere I follow thee, thou must expound to me thy name, thy
purpose, and thy cause."

"There is no time to expound any thing," said Halbert; "I tell thee a
man's life is at stake, and thou must come to aid him, or I will carry
thee thither by force!"

"Nay, thou shalt not need," said the traveller; "if it indeed be as thou
sayest, I will follow thee of free-will--the rather that I am not wholly
unskilled in leech-craft, and have in my scrip that which may do thy
friend a service--Yet walk more slowly, I pray thee, for I am already
well-nigh forespent with travel."

With the indignant impatience of the fiery steed when compelled by
his rider to keep pace with some slow drudge upon the highway, Halbert
accompanied the wayfarer, burning with anxiety which he endeavoured to
subdue, that he might not alarm his companion, who was obviously afraid
to trust him. When they reached the place where they were to turn off
the wider glen into the Corri, the traveller made a doubtful pause, as
if unwilling to leave the broader path--"Young man," he said, "if thou
meanest aught but good to these gray hairs, thou wilt gain little by thy
cruelty--I have no earthly treasure to tempt either robber or murderer."

"And I," said the youth, "am neither--and yet--God of Heaven!--I _may_
be a murderer, unless your aid comes in time to this wounded wretch!"

"Is it even so," said the traveller; "and do human passions disturb the
breast of nature, even in her deepest solitude?--Yet why should I marvel
that where darkness abides the works of darkness should abound?--By its
fruits is the tree known--Lead on, unhappy youth--I follow thee!"

And with better will to the journey than he had evinced hitherto, the
stranger exerted himself to the uttermost, and seemed to forget his own
fatigue in his efforts to keep pace with his impatient guide.

What was the surprise of Halbert Glendinning, when, upon arriving at the
fatal spot, he saw no appearance of the body of Sir Piercie Shafton!
The traces of the fray were otherwise sufficiently visible. The knight's
cloak had indeed vanished as well as his body, but his doublet remained
where he had laid it down, and the turf on which he had been stretched
was stained with blood in many a dark crimson spot.

As he gazed round him in terror and astonishment, Halbert's eyes fell
upon the place of sepulture which had so lately appeared to gape for a
victim. It was no longer open, and it seemed that earth had received the
expected tenant; for the usual narrow hillock was piled over what had
lately been an open grave, and the green sod was adjusted over all with
the accuracy of an experienced sexton. Halbert stood aghast. The idea
rushed on his mind irresistibly, that the earth-heap before him enclosed
what had lately been a living, moving, and sentient fellow-creature,
whom, on little provocation, his fell act had reduced to a clod of the
valley, as senseless and as cold as the turf under which he rested. The
hand that scooped the grave had completed its word; and whose hand could
it be save that of the mysterious being of doubtful quality, whom his
rashness had invoked, and whom he had suffered to intermingle in his
destinies?

As he stood with clasped hands and uplifted eyes, bitterly ruing his
rashness, he was roused by the voice of the stranger, whose suspicions
of his guide had again been awakened by finding the scene so different
from what Halbert had led him to expect.--"Young man," he said, "hast
thou baited thy tongue with falsehood to cut perhaps only a few days
from the life of one whom Nature will soon call home, without guilt on
thy part to hasten his journey?"

"By the blessed Heaven!--by our dear Lady!" ejaculated Halbert--

"Swear not at all!" said the stranger, interrupting him, "neither
by Heaven, for it is God's throne, nor by earth, for it is his
footstool--nor by the creatures whom he hath made, for they are but
earth and clay as we are. Let thy yea be yea, and thy nay, nay. Tell me
in a word, why and for what purpose thou hast feigned a tale, to lead a
bewildered traveller yet farther astray?"

"As I am a Christian man," said Glendinning, "I left him here bleeding
to death--and now I nowhere spy him, and much I doubt that the tomb that
thou seest has closed on his mortal remains."

"And who is he for whose fate thou art so anxious?" said the stranger;
"or how is it possible that this wounded man could have been either
removed from, or interred in, a place so solitary?"

"His name," said Halbert, after a moment's pause, "is Piercie
Shafton--there, on that very spot I left him bleeding; and what power
has conveyed him hence, I know no more than thou dost."

"Piercie Shafton?" said the stranger; "Sir Piercie Shafton of Wilverton,
a kinsman, as it is said, of the great Piercie of Northumberland? If
thou hast slain him, to return to the territories of the proud Abbot is
to give thy neck to the gallows. He is well known, that Piercie Shafton;
the meddling tool of wiser plotters--a harebrained trafficker in
treason--a champion of the Pope, employed as a forlorn hope by those
more politic heads, who have more will to work mischief, than valour to
encounter danger.--Come with me, youth, and save thyself from the evil
consequences of this deed--Guide me to the Castle of Avenel, and thy
reward shall be protection and safety."

Again Halbert paused, and summoned his mind to a hasty council. The
vengeance with which the Abbot was likely to visit the slaughter of
Shafton, his friend, and in some measure his guest, was likely to
be severe; yet, in the various contingencies which he had considered
previous to their duel, he had unaccountably omitted to reflect what was
to be his line of conduct in case of Sir Piercie falling by his hand.
If he returned to Glendearg, he was sure to draw on his whole family,
including Mary Avenel, the resentment of the Abbot and community,
whereas it was possible that flight might make him be regarded as the
sole author of the deed, and might avert the indignation of the
monks from the rest of the inhabitants of his paternal tower. Halbert
recollected also the favour expressed for the household, and especially
for Edward, by the Sub-Prior; and he conceived that he could, by
communicating his own guilt to that worthy ecclesiastic, when at a
distance from Glendearg, secure his powerful interposition in favour
of his family. These thoughts rapidly passed through his mind, and he
determined on flight. The stranger's company and his promised protection
came in aid of that resolution; but he was unable to reconcile the
invitation which the old man gave him to accompany him for safety to the
Castle of Avenel, with the connexions of Julian, the present usurper of
that inheritance.

"Good father," he said, "I fear that you mistake the man with whom you
wish me to harbour. Avenel guided Piercie Shafton into Scotland, and his
henchman, Christie of the Clinthill, brought the Southron hither."

"Of that," said the old man, "I am well aware. Yet if thou wilt trust
to me, as I have shown no reluctance to confide in thee, thou shalt find
with Julian Avenel welcome, or at least safety."

"Father," replied Halbert, "though I can ill reconcile what thou sayest
with what Julian Avenel hath done, yet caring little about the safety of
a creature so lost as myself, and as thy words seem those of truth and
honesty, and finally, as thou didst render thyself frankly up to my
conduct, I will return the confidence thou hast shown, and accompany
thee to the Castle of Avenel by a road which thou thyself couldst never
have discovered." He led the way, and the old man followed for some time
in silence.

       *       *       *       *       *



Chapter the Twenty-Third.


  'Tis when the wound is stiffening with the cold.
  The warrior first feels pain--'tis when the heat
  And fiery fever of his soul is pass'd,
  The sinner feels remorse.
                               OLD PLAY.

The feelings of compunction with which Halbert Glendinning was visited
upon this painful occasion, were deeper than belonged to an age and
country in which human life was held so cheap. They fell far short
certainly of those which might have afflicted a mind regulated by better
religious precepts, and more strictly trained under social laws; but
still they were deep and severely felt, and divided in Halbert's heart
even the regret with which he parted from Mary Avenel and the tower of
his fathers.

The old traveller walked silently by his side for some time, and then
addressed him.--"My son, it has been said that sorrow must speak or
die--Why art thou so much cast down?--Tell me thy unhappy tale, and
it may be that my gray head may devise counsel and aid for your young
life."

"Alas!" said Halbert Glendinning, "can you wonder why I am cast
down?--I am at this instant a fugitive from my father's house, from my
mother, and from my friends, and I bear on my head the blood of a man
who injured me but in idle words, which I have thus bloodily requited.
My heart now tells me I have done evil--it were harder than these rocks
if it could bear unmoved the thought, that I have sent this man to a
long account, unhousled and unshrieved."

"Pause there, my son," said the traveller. "That thou hast defaced God's
image in thy neighbour's person--that thou hast sent dust to dust in
idle wrath or idler pride, is indeed a sin of the deepest dye--that
thou hast cut short the space which Heaven might have allowed him for
repentance, makes it yet more deadly--but for all this there is balm in
Gilead."

"I understand you not, father," said Halbert, struck by the solemn tone
which was assumed by his companion.

The old man proceeded. "Thou hast slain thine enemy--it was a cruel
deed: thou hast cut him off perchance in his sins--it is a fearful
aggravation. Do yet by my counsel, and in lieu of him whom thou hast
perchance consigned to the kingdom of Satan, let thine efforts wrest
another subject from the reign of the Evil One."

"I understand you, father," said Halbert; "thou wouldst have me atone
for my rashness by doing service to the soul of my adversary--But how
may this be? I have no money to purchase masses, and gladly would I
go barefoot to the Holy Land to free his spirit from purgatory, only
that--"

"My son," said the old man, interrupting him, "the sinner for whose
redemption I entreat you to labour, is not the dead but the living. It
is not for the soul of thine enemy I would exhort thee to pray--that has
already had its final doom from a Judge as merciful as he is just; nor,
wert thou to coin that rock into ducats, and obtain a mass for each one,
would it avail the departed spirit. Where the tree hath fallen, it must
lie. But the sapling, which hath in it yet the vigour and juice of life,
may be bended to the point to which it ought to incline."

"Art thou a priest, father?" said the young man, "or by what commission
dost thou talk of such high matters?"

"By that of my Almighty Master," said the traveller, "under whose banner
I am an enlisted soldier."

Halbert's acquaintance with religious matters was no deeper than could
be derived from the Archbishop of Saint Andrew's Catechism, and the
pamphlet called the Twapennie Faith, both which were industriously
circulated and recommended by the monks of Saint Mary's. Yet, however
indifferent and superficial a theologian, he began to suspect that he
was now in company with one of the gospellers, or heretics, before
whose influence the ancient system of religion now tottered to the very
foundation. Bred up, as may well be presumed, in a holy horror against
these formidable sectaries, the youth's first feelings were those of a
loyal and devoted church vassal. "Old man," he said, "wert thou able to
make good with thy hand the words that thy tongue hath spoken against
our Holy Mother Church, we should have tried upon this moor which of our
creeds hath the better champion."

"Nay," said the stranger, "if thou art a true soldier of Rome, thou wilt
not pause from thy purpose because thou hast the odds of years and of
strength on thy side. Hearken to me, my son. I have showed thee how to
make thy peace with Heaven, and thou hast rejected my proffer. I will
now show thee how thou shalt make thy reconciliation with the powers of
this world. Take this gray head from the frail body which supports it,
and carry it to the chair of proud Abbot Boniface; and when thou tellest
him thou hast slain Piercie Shafton, and his ire rises at the deed, lay
the head of Henry Warden at his foot, and thou shalt have praise instead
of censure."

Halbert Glendinning stepped back in surprise. "What! are you that Henry
Warden so famous among the heretics, that even Knox's name is scarce
more frequently in their mouths? Art thou he, and darest thou to
approach the Halidome of Saint Mary's?"

"I am Henry Warden, of a surety," said the old man, "far unworthy to
be named in the same breath with Knox, but yet willing to venture on
whatever dangers my master's service may call me to."

"Hearken to me, then," said Halbert; "to slay thee, I have no heart--to
make thee prisoner, were equally to bring thy blood on my head--to leave
thee in this wild without a guide, were little better. I will conduct
thee, as I promised, in safety to the Castle of Avenel; but breathe not,
while we are on the journey, a word against the doctrines of the holy
church of which I am an unworthy--but though an ignorant, a zealous
member.--When thou art there arrived, beware of thyself--there is a
high price upon thy head, and Julian Avenel loves the glance of gold
bonnet-pieces." [Footnote: A gold coin of James V., the most beautiful
of the Scottish series; so called because the effigy of the sovereignty
is represented wearing a bonnet.]

"Yet thou sayest not," answered the Protestant preacher, for such he
was, "that for lucre he would sell the blood of his guest?"

"Not if thou comest an invited stranger, relying on his faith," said
the youth; "evil as Julian may be, he dare not break the rites of
hospitality; for, loose as we on these marches may be in all other
ties, these are respected amongst us even to idolatry, and his
nearest relations would think it incumbent on them to spill his blood
themselves, to efface the disgrace such treason would bring upon their
name and lineage. But if thou goest self-invited, and without assurance
of safety, I promise thee thy risk is great."

"I am in God's hand," answered the preacher; "it is on His errand that I
traverse these wilds amidst dangers of every kind; while I am useful for
my master's service, they shall not prevail against me, and when, like
the barren fig-tree, I can no longer produce fruit, what imports it when
or by whom the axe is laid to the root?"

"Your courage and devotion," said Glendinning, "are worthy of a better
cause."

"That," said Warden, "cannot be--mine is the very best."

They continued their journey in silence, Halbert Glendinning tracing
with the utmost accuracy the mazes of the dangerous and intricate
morasses and hills which divided the Halidome from the barony of
Avenel. From time to time he was obliged to stop, in order to assist
his companion to cross the black intervals of quaking bog, called in the
Scottish dialect _hags_, by which the firmer parts of the morass were
intersected.

"Courage, old man," said Halbert, as he saw his companion almost
exhausted with fatigue, "we shall soon be upon hard ground. And yet soft
as this moss is, I have seen the merry falconers go through it as light
as deer when the quarry was upon the flight."

"True, my son," answered Warden, "for so I will still call you, though
you term me no longer father; and even so doth headlong youth pursue its
pleasures, without regard to the mire and the peril of the paths through
which they are hurried."

"I have already told thee," answered Halbert Glendinning, sternly, "that
I will hear nothing from thee that savours of doctrine."

"Nay, but, my son," answered Warden, "thy spiritual father himself
would surely not dispute the truth of what I have now spoken for your
edification!"

Glendinning stoutly replied, "I know not how that may be--but I wot
well it is the fashion of your brotherhood to bait your hook with fair
discourse, and to hold yourselves up as angels of light, that you may
the better extend the kingdom of darkness."

"May God," replied the preacher, "pardon those who have thus reported
of his servants! I will not offend thee, my son, by being instant out of
season--thou speakest but as thou art taught--yet sure I trust that so
goodly a youth will be still rescued, like a brand from the burning."

While he thus spoke, the verge of the morass was attained, and their
path lay on the declivity. Green-sward it was, and, viewed from a
distance, chequered with its narrow and verdant line the dark-brown
heath which it traversed, though the distinction was not so easily
traced when they were walking on it. [Footnote: This sort of path,
visible when looked at from a distance, but not to be seen when you
are upon it, is called on the Border by the significant name of a
Blind-road.] The old man pursued his journey with comparative ease; and,
unwilling again to awaken the jealous zeal of his young companion
for the Roman faith, he discoursed on other matters. The tone of his
conversation was still grave, moral, and instructive. He had travelled
much, and knew both the language and manners of other countries,
concerning which Halbert Glendinning, already anticipating the
possibility of being obliged to leave Scotland for the deed he had done,
was naturally and anxiously desirous of information. By degrees he
was more attracted by the charms of the stranger's conversation than
repelled by the dread of his dangerous character as a heretic, and
Halbert had called him father more than once, ere the turrets of Avenel
Castle came in view.

The situation of this ancient fortress was remarkable. It occupied a
small rocky islet in a mountain lake, or _tarn,_ as such a piece of
water is called in Westmoreland. The lake might be about a mile in
circumference, surrounded by hills of considerable height, which, except
where old trees and brushwood occupied the ravines that divided them
from each other, were bare and heathy. The surprise of the spectator was
chiefly excited by finding a piece of water situated in that high and
mountainous region, and the landscape around had features which might
rather be termed wild, than either romantic or sublime; yet the scene
was not without its charms. Under the burning sun of summer, the clear
azure of the deep unruffled lake refreshed the eye, and impressed the
mind with a pleasing feeling of deep solitude. In winter, when the snow
lay on the mountains around, these dazzling masses appeared to ascend
far beyond their wonted and natural height, while the lake, which
stretched beneath, and filled their bosom with all its frozen waves, lay
like the surface of a darkened and broken mirror around the black and
rocky islet, and the walls of the gray castle with which it was crowned.

As the castle occupied, either with its principal buildings, or with its
flanking and outward walls, every projecting point of rock, which served
as its site, it seemed as completely surrounded by water as the nest of
a wild swan, save where a narrow causeway extended betwixt the islet and
the shore. But the fortress was larger in appearance than in reality;
and of the buildings which it actually contained, many had become
ruinous and uninhabitable. In the times of the grandeur of the Avenel
family, these had been occupied by a considerable garrison of followers
and retainers, but they were now in a great measure deserted; and Julian
Avenel would probably have fixed his habitation in a residence better
suited to his diminished fortunes, had it not been for the great
security which the situation of the old castle afforded to a man of his
precarious and perilous mode of life. Indeed, in this respect, the spot
could scarce have been more happily chosen, for it could be rendered
almost completely inaccessible at the pleasure of the inhabitant. The
distance betwixt the nearest shore and the islet was not indeed above an
hundred yards; but then the causeway which connected them was extremely
narrow, and completely divided by two cuts, one in the mid-way between
the islet and shore, and another close under the outward gate of
the castle. These formed a formidable, and almost insurmountable
interruption to any hostile approach. Each was defended by a drawbridge,
one of which, being that nearest to the castle, was regularly raised at
all times during the day, and both were lifted at night. [Footnote:
It is in vain to search near Melrose for any such castle as is here
described. The lakes at the head of the Yarrow, and those at the rise of
the water of Ale, present no object of the kind. But in Vetholm Loch, (a
romantic sheet of water, in the dry march, as it is called,) there
are the remains of a fortress called Lochside Tower, which, like the
supposed Castle of Avenel, is built upon an island, and connected with
the land by a causeway. It is much smaller than the Castle of Avenel is
described, consisting only of a single tower.]

The situation of Julian Avenel, engaged in a variety of feuds, and a
party to almost every dark and mysterious transaction which was on foot
in that wild and military frontier, required all these precautions
for his security. His own ambiguous and doubtful course of policy had
increased these dangers; for as he made professions to both parties in
the state, and occasionally united more actively with either the one or
the other, as chanced best to serve his immediate purpose, he could
not be said to have either firm allies and protectors, or determined
enemies. His life was a life of expedients and of peril; and while,
in pursuit of his interest, he made all the doubles which he thought
necessary to attain his object, he often overran his prey, and missed
that which he might have gained by observing a straighter course.

       *      *       *       *       *



Chapter the Twenty-Fourth.


  I'll walk on tiptoe; arm my eye with caution,
  My heart with courage, and my hand with weapon,
  Like him who ventures on a lion's den.
                             OLD PLAY.

When, issuing from the gorge of a pass which terminated upon the lake,
the travellers came in sight of the ancient castle of Avenel, the old
man looked with earnest attention upon the scene before him. The castle
was, as we have said, in many places ruinous, as was evident, even at
this distance, by the broken, rugged, and irregular outline of the walls
and of the towers. In others it seemed more entire, and a pillar of dark
smoke, which ascended from the chimneys of the donjon, and spread
its long dusky pennon through the clear ether, indicated that it was
inhabited. But no corn-fields or enclosed pasture-grounds on the side
of the lake showed that provident attention to comfort and subsistence
which usually appeared near the houses of the greater, and even of the
lesser barons. There were no cottages with their patches of infield, and
their crofts and gardens, surrounded by rows of massive sycamores; no
church with its simple tower in the valley; no herds of sheep among
the hills; no cattle on the lower ground; nothing which intimated the
occasional prosecution of the arts of peace and of industry. It was
plain that the inhabitants, whether few or numerous, must be considered
as the garrison of the castle, living within its defended precincts, and
subsisting by means which were other than peaceful.

Probably it was with this conviction that the old man, gazing on the
castle, muttered to himself, "_Lapis offensionis et petra scandali!_"
and then, turning to Halbert Glendinning, he added, "We may say of
yonder fort as King James did of another fastness in this province,
that he who built it was a thief in his heart." [Footnote: It was of
Lochwood, the hereditary fortress of the Johnstones of Aunandale, a
strong castle situated in the centre of a quaking bog, that James VI.
made this remark.]

"But it was not so," answered Glendinning; "yonder castle was built
by the old lords of Avenel, men as much beloved in peace as they
were respected in war. They were the bulwark of the frontiers against
foreigners, and the protectors of the natives from domestic oppression.
The present usurper of their inheritance no more resembles them, than
the night-prowling owl resembles a falcon, because she builds on the
same rock."

"This Julian Avenel, then, holds no high place in the love and regard of
his neighbours?" said Warden.

"So little," answered Halbert, "that besides the jack-men and riders
with whom he has associated himself, and of whom he has many at his
disposal, I know of few who voluntarily associate with him. He has been
more than once outlawed both by England and Scotland, his lands declared
forfeited, and his head set at a price. But in these unquiet times, a
man so daring as Julian Avenel has ever found some friends willing to
protect him against the penalties of the law, on condition of his secret
services."

"You describe a dangerous man," replied Warden.

"You may have experience of that," replied the youth, "if you deal
not the more warily;--though it may be that he also has forsaken the
community of the church, and gone astray in the path of heresy."

"What your blindness terms the path of heresy," answered the reformer,
"is indeed the straight and narrow way, wherein he who walks turns not
aside, whether for worldly wealth or for worldly passions. Would to
God this man were moved by no other and no worse spirit than that which
prompts my poor endeavours to extend the kingdom of Heaven! This Baron
of Avenel is personally unknown to me, is not of our congregation or of
our counsel; yet I bear to him charges touching my safety, from those
whom he must fear if he does not respect them, and upon that assurance I
will venture upon his hold--I am now sufficiently refreshed by these few
minutes of repose."

"Take then this advice for your safety," said Halbert, "and believe that
it is founded upon the usage of this country and its inhabitants. If you
can better shift for yourself, go not to the Castle of Avenel--if you do
risk going thither, obtain from him, if possible, his safe conduct, and
beware that he swears it by the Black Rood--And lastly, observe whether
he eats with you at the board, or pledges you in the cup; for if he
gives you not these signs of welcome, his thoughts are evil towards
you."

"Alas!" said the preacher, "I have no better earthly refuge for the
present than these frowning towers, but I go thither trusting to aid
which is not of this earth--But thou, good youth, needest thou trust
thyself in this dangerous den?"

"I," answered Halbert, "am in no danger. I am well known to Christie of
the Clinthill, the henchman of this Julian Avenel; and, what is a yet
better protection, I have nothing either to provoke malice or to tempt
plunder."

The tramp of a steed, which clattered along the shingly banks of the
loch, was now heard behind them; and, when they looked back, a rider was
visible, his steel cap and the point of his long lance glancing in the
setting sun, as he rode rapidly towards them.

