"How now, sirrah!" said the Prelate; "when was it that jugglers
and minstrels pressed into the company of such as we without
permission?"

"So please you," said the man, "my instant business was not with
your reverend lordship, but with my lord the Constable, to whom I
will hope that my good news may atone for my evil apparel."

"Speak, sirrah, does my kinsman live?" said the Constable eagerly.

"And is like to live, my lord," answered the man--"a favourable
crisis (so the leeches call it) hath taken place in his disorder,
and they are no longer under any apprehensions for his life."

"Now, God be praised, that hath granted me so much mercy!" said
the Constable.

"Amen, amen!" replied the Archbishop solemnly.--"About what period
did this blessed change take place?"

"Scarcely a quarter of an hour since," said the messenger, "a soft
sleep fell on the sick youth, like dew upon a parched field in
summer--he breathed freely--the burning heat abated--and, as I
said, the leeches no longer fear for his life."

"Marked you the hour, my Lord Constable?" said the Bishop, with
exultation--"Even then you stooped to those counsels which Heaven
suggested through the meanest of its servants! But two words
avouching penitence--but one brief prayer--and some kind saint has
interceded for an instant hearing, and a liberal granting of thy
petition. Noble Hugo," he continued, grasping his hand in a
species of enthusiasm, "surely Heaven designs to work high things
by the hand of him whose faults are thus readily forgiven--whose
prayer is thus instantly heard. For this shall _Te Deum
Laudamus_ be said in each church, and each convent in
Gloucester, ere the world be a day older."

The Constable, no less joyful, though perhaps less able to
perceive an especial providence in his nephew's recovery,
expressed his gratitude to the messenger of the good tidings, by
throwing him his purse.

"I thank you, noble lord," said the man; "but if I stoop to pick
up this taste of your bounty, it is only to restore it again to
the donor."

"How now, sir?" said the Constable, "methinks thy coat seems not
so well lined as needs make thee spurn at such a guerdon."

"He that designs to catch larks, my lord," replied the messenger,
"must not close his net upon sparrows--I have a greater boon to
ask of your lordship, and therefore I decline your present
gratuity."

"A greater boon, ha!" said the Constable,--"I am no knight-errant,
to bind myself by promise to grant it ere I know its import; but
do thou come to my pavilion to-morrow, and thou wilt not find me
unwilling to do what is reason."

So saying, he took leave of the Prelate, and returned homeward,
failing not to visit his nephew's lodging as he passed, where he
received the same pleasant assurances which had been communicated
by the messenger of the particoloured mantle.




CHAPTER THE NINETEENTH.


  He was a minstrel--in his mood
    Was wisdom mix'd with folly;
  A tame companion to the good,
  But wild and fierce among the rude,
    And jovial with the jolly.
    ARCHIBALD ARMSTRONG.


The events of the preceding day had been of a nature so
interesting, and latterly so harassing, that the Constable felt
weary as after a severely contested battle-field, and slept
soundly until the earliest beams of dawn saluted him through the
opening of the tent. It was then that, with a mingled feeling of
pain and satisfaction, he began to review the change which had
taken place in his condition since the preceding morning. He had
then risen an ardent bridegroom, anxious to find favour in the
eyes of his fair bride, and scrupulous about his dress and
appointments, as if he had been as young in years as in hopes and
wishes. This was over, and he had now before him the painful task
of leaving his betrothed for a term of years, even before wedlock
had united them indissolubly, and of reflecting that she was
exposed to all the dangers which assail female constancy in a
situation thus critical. When the immediate anxiety for his nephew
was removed, he was tempted to think that he had been something
hasty in listening to the arguments of the Archbishop, and in
believing that Damian's death or recovery depended upon his own
accomplishing, to the letter, and without delay, his vow for the
Holy Land. "How many princes and kings," he thought to himself,
"have assumed the Cross, and delayed or renounced it, yet lived
and died in wealth and honour, without sustaining such a
visitation as that with which Baldwin threatened me; and in what
case or particular did such men deserve more indulgence than I?
But the die is now cast, and it signifies little to inquire
whether my obedience to the mandates of the Church has saved the
life of my nephew, or whether I have not fallen, as laymen are
wont to fall, whenever there is an encounter of wits betwixt them
and those of the spirituality. I would to God it may prove
otherwise, since, girding on my sword as Heaven's champion, I
might the better expect Heaven's protection for her whom I must
unhappily leave behind me."

As these reflections passed through his mind, he heard the warders
at the entrance of his tent challenge some one whose footsteps
were heard approaching it. The person stopped on their challenge,
and presently after was heard the sound of a rote, (a small
species of lute,) the strings of which were managed by means of a
small wheel. After a short prelude, a manly voice, of good
compass, sung verses, which, translated into modern language,
might run nearly thus:

    I.

  "Soldier, wake--the day is peeping:,
  Honour ne'er was won in sleeping,
  Never when the sunbeams still
  Lay unreflected on the hill:
  'Tis when they are glinted back
  From axe and armour, spear and jack,
  That they promise future story
  Many a page of deathless glory.
  Shields that are the foe man's terror,
  Ever are the morning's mirror.

    II.

  "Arm and up--the morning beam
  Hath call'd the rustic to his team,
  Hath call'd the falc'ner to the lake,
  Hath call'd the huntsman to the brake;
  The early student ponders o'er
  His dusty tomes of ancient lore.
  Soldier, wake--thy harvest, fame;
  Thy study, conquest; war, thy game.
  Shield, that would be foeman's terror,
  Still should gleam the morning's mirror.

    III.

  "Poor hire repays the rustic's pain;
  More paltry still the sportsman's gain;
  Vainest of all, the student's theme
  End in gome metaphysic dream.
  Yet each is up, and each has toil'd
  Since first the peep of dawn has smiled;
  And each is eagerer in his aim
  Than he who barters life for fame.
  Up, up, and arm thee, son of terror!
  Be thy bright shield the morning's mirror."

When the song was finished, the Constable heard some talking
without, and presently Philip Guarine entered the pavilion to tell
that a person, come hither as he said by the Constable's
appointment, waited permission to speak with him.

"By my appointment?" said De Lacy; "admit him immediately."

The messenger of the preceding evening entered the tent, holding
in one hand his small cap and feather, in the other the rote on
which he had been just playing. His attire was fantastic,
consisting of more than one inner dress of various colours, all of
the brightest and richest dyes, and disposed so as to contrast
with each other--the upper garment was a very short Norman cloak,
in bright green. An embroidered girdle sustained, in lieu of
offensive weapons, an inkhorn with its appurtenances on the one
side, on the other a knife for the purposes of the table. His hair
was cut in imitation of the clerical tonsure, which was designed
to intimate that he had arrived to a certain rank in his
profession; for the Joyous Science, as the profession of
minstrelsy was termed, had its various ranks, like the degrees in
the church and in chivalry. The features and the manners of the
man seemed to be at variance with his profession and habit; for,
as the latter was gay and fantastic, the former had a cast of
gravity, and almost of sternness, which, unless when kindled by
the enthusiasm of his poetical and musical exertions, seemed
rather to indicate deep reflection, than the thoughtless vivacity
of observation which characterized most of his brethren. His
countenance, though not handsome, had therefore something in it
striking and impressive, even from its very contrast with the
particoloured hues and fluttering shape of his vestments; and the
Constable felt something inclined to patronize him, as he said,
"Good-morrow, friend, and I thank thee for thy morning greeting;
it was well sung and well meant, for when we call forth any one to
bethink him how time passes, we do him the credit of supposing
that he can employ to advantage that flitting treasure."

The man, who had listened in silence, seemed to pause and make an
effort ere he replied, "My intentions, at least, were good, when I
ventured to disturb my lord thus early; and I am glad to learn
that my boldness hath not been evil received at his hand."

"True," said the Constable, "you had a boon to ask of me. Be
speedy, and say thy request--my leisure is short."

"It is for permission to follow you to the Holy Land, my lord,"
said the man.

"Thou hast asked what I can hardly grant, my friend," answered De
Lacy--"Thou art a minstrel, art thou not?"

"An unworthy graduate of the Gay Science, my lord," said the
musician; "yet let me say for myself, that I will not yield to the
king of minstrels, Geoffrey Rudel, though the King of England hath
given him four manors for one song. I would be willing to contend
with him in romance, lay, or fable, were the judge to be King
Henry himself."

"You have your own good word, doubtless," said De Lacy;
"nevertheless, Sir Minstrel, thou goest not with me. The Crusade
has been already too much encumbered by men of thy idle
profession; and if thou dost add to the number, it shall not be
under my protection. I am too old to be charmed by thy art, charm
thou never so wisely."

"He that is young enough to seek for, and to win, the love of
beauty," said the minstrel, but in a submissive tone, as if
fearing his freedom might give offence, "should not term himself
too old to feel the charms of minstrelsy."

The Constable smiled, not insensible to the flattery which
assigned to him the character of a younger gallant. "Thou art a
jester," he said, "I warrant me, in addition to thy other
qualities."

"No," replied the minstrel, "it is a branch of our profession
which I have for some time renounced--my fortunes have put me out
of tune for jesting."

"Nay, comrade," said the Constable, "if thou hast been hardly
dealt within the world, and canst comply with the rules of a
family so strictly ordered as mine, it is possible we may agree
together better than I thought. What is thy name and country? thy
speech, methinks, sounds somewhat foreign."

"I am an Armorican, my lord, from the merry shores of Morbihan;
and hence my tongue hath some touch of my country speech. My name
is Renault Vidal."

"Such being the case, Renault," said the Constable, "thou shalt
follow me, and I will give orders to the master of my household to
have thee attired something according to thy function, but in more
orderly guise than thou now appearest in. Dost thou understand the
use of a weapon?"

"Indifferently, my lord," said the Armorican; at the same time
taking a sword from the wall, he drew, and made a pass with it so
close to the Constable's body as he sat on the couch, that he
started up, crying, "Villain, forbear!"

"La you! noble sir," replied Vidal, lowering with all submission
the point of his weapon--"I have already given you a proof of
sleight which has alarmed even your experience--I have an hundred
other besides."

"It may be so," said De Lacy, somewhat ashamed at having shown
himself moved by the sudden and lively action of the juggler; "but
I love not jesting with edge-tools, and have too much to do with
sword and sword-blows in earnest, to toy with them; so I pray you
let us have no more of this, but call me my squire and my
chamberlain, for I am about to array me and go to mass."

The religious duties of the morning performed, it was the
Constable's intention to visit the Lady Abbess, and communicate,
with the necessary precautions and qualifications, the altered
relations in which he was placed towards her niece, by the
resolution he had been compelled to adopt, of departing for the
Crusade before accomplishing his marriage, in the terms of the
precontract already entered into. He was conscious that it would
be difficult to reconcile the good lady to this change of
measures, and he delayed some time ere he could think of the best
mode of communicating and softening the unpleasant intelligence.
An interval was also spent in a visit to his nephew, whose state
of convalescence continued to be as favourable, as if in truth it
had been a miraculous consequence of the Constable's having
complied with the advice of the Archbishop.

From the lodging of Damian, the Constable proceeded to the convent
of the Benedictine Abbess. But she had been already made
acquainted with the circumstances which he came to communicate, by
a still earlier visit from the Archbishop Baldwin himself. The
Primate had undertaken the office of mediator on this occasion,
conscious that his success of the evening before must have placed
the Constable in a delicate situation with the relations of his
betrothed bride, and willing, by his countenance and authority, to
reconcile the disputes which might ensue. Perhaps he had better
have left Hugo de Lacy to plead his own cause; for the Abbess,
though she listened to the communication with all the respect due
to the highest dignitary of the English Church, drew consequences
from the Constable's change of resolution which the Primate had
not expected. She ventured to oppose no obstacle to De Lacy's
accomplishment of his vows, but strongly argued that the contract
with her niece should be entirely set aside, and each, party left
at liberty to form a new choice.

It was in vain that the Archbishop endeavoured to dazzle the
Abbess with the future honours to be won by the Constable in the
Holy Land; the splendour of which would attach not to his lady
alone, but to all in the remotest degree allied to or connected
with her. All his eloquence was to no purpose, though upon so
favourite a topic he exerted it to the utmost. The Abbess, it is
true, remained silent for a moment after his arguments had been
exhausted, but it was only to consider how she should intimate in
a suitable and reverent manner, that children, the usual
attendants of a happy union, and the existence of which she looked
to for the continuation of the house of her father and brother,
could not be hoped for with any probability, unless the
precontract was followed by marriage, and the residence of the
married parties in the same country. She therefore insisted, that
the Constable having altered his intentions in this most important
particular, the _fiancailles_ should be entirely abrogated
and set aside; and she demanded of the Primate, as an act of
justice, that, as he had interfered to prevent the bridegroom's
execution of his original purpose, he should now assist with his
influence wholly to dissolve an engagement which had been thus
materially innovated upon.

The Primate, who was sensible he had himself occasioned De Lacy's
breach of contract, felt himself bound in honour and reputation to
prevent consequences so disagreeable to his friend, as the
dissolution of an engagement in which his interest and
inclinations were alike concerned. He reproved the Lady Abbess for
the carnal and secular views which she, a dignitary of the church,
entertained upon the subject of matrimony, and concerning the
interest of her house. He even upbraided her with selfishly
preferring the continuation of the line of Berenger to the
recovery of the Holy Sepulchre, and denounced to her that Heaven
would be avenged of the shortsighted and merely human policy,
which postponed the interests of Christendom to those of an
individual family.

After this severe homily, the Prelate took his departure, leaving
the Abbess highly incensed, though she prudently forbore returning
any irreverent answer to his paternal admonition.

In this humour the venerable lady was found by the Constable
himself, when with some embarrassment, he proceeded to explain to
her the necessity of his present departure for Palestine.

She received the communication with sullen dignity; her ample
black robe and scapular seeming, as it were, to swell out in yet
prouder folds as she listened to the reasons and the emergencies
which compelled the Constable of Chester to defer the marriage
which he avowed was the dearest wish of his heart, until after his
return from the Crusade, for which he was about to set forth.

"Methinks," replied the Abbess, with much coldness, "if this
communication is meant for earnest,--and it were no fit business--
I myself no fit person,--for jesting with--methinks the
Constable's resolution should have been proclaimed to us yesterday
before the _fiancailles_ had united his troth with that of
Eveline Berenger, under expectations very different from those
which he now announces."

"On the word of a knight and a gentleman, reverend lady," said the
Constable, "I had not then the slightest thought that I should be
called upon to take a step no less distressing to me, than, as I
see with pain, it is unpleasing to you."

"I can scarcely conceive," replied the Abbess, "the cogent
reasons, which, existing as they must have done yesterday, have
nevertheless delayed their operation until to-day."

"I own," said De Lacy, reluctantly, "that I entertained too ready
hopes of obtaining a remission from my vow, which my Lord of
Canterbury hath, in his zeal for Heaven's service, deemed it
necessary to refuse me."

"At least, then," said the Abbess, veiling her resentment under
the appearance of extreme coldness, "your lordship will do us the
justice to place us in the same situation in which we stood
yesterday morning; and, by joining with my niece and her friends
in desiring the abrogation of a marriage contract, entered into
with very different views from those which you now entertain, put
a young person in that state of liberty of which she is at present
deprived by her contract with you."

"Ah, madam!" said the Constable, "what do you ask of me? and in a
tone how cold and indifferent do you demand me to resign hopes,
the dearest which my bosom ever entertained since the life-blood
warmed it!"

"I am unacquainted with language belonging to such feelings, my
lord," replied the Abbess; "but methinks the prospects which could
be so easily adjourned for years, might, by a little, and a very
little, farther self-control, be altogether abandoned."

Hugo de Lacy paced the room in agitation, nor did he answer until
after a considerable pause. "If your niece, madam, shares the
sentiments which you have expressed, I could not, indeed, with
justice to her, or perhaps to myself, desire to retain that
interest in her, which our solemn espousals have given me. But I
must know my doom from her own lips; and if it is as severe as
that which your expressions lead me to fear, I will go to
Palestine the better soldier of Heaven, that I shall have little
left on earth that can interest me."

The Abbess, without farther answer, called on her Praecentrix, and
desired her to command her niece's attendance immediately. The
Praecentrix bowed reverently, and withdrew.

"May I presume to inquire," said De Lacy, "whether the Lady
Eveline hath been possessed of the circumstances which have
occasioned this unhappy alteration in my purpose?"

"I have communicated the whole to her from point to point," said
the Abbess, "even as it was explained to me this morning by my
Lord of Canterbury, (for with him I have already spoken upon the
subject,) and confirmed but now by your lordship's own mouth."

"I am little obliged to the Archbishop," said the Constable, "for
having forestalled my excuses in the quarter where it was most
important for me that they should be accurately stated, and
favourably received."

"That," said the Abbess, "is but an item of the account betwixt
you and the Prelate,--it concerns not us."

"Dare I venture to hope," continued De Lacy, without taking
offence at the dryness of the Abbess's manner, "that Lady Eveline
has heard this most unhappy change of circumstances without
emotion,--I would say, without displeasure?"

"She is the daughter of a Berenger, my lord," answered the Abbess,
"and it is our custom to punish a breach of faith or to contemn
it--never to grieve over it. What my niece may do in this case, I
know not. I am a woman of religion, sequestered from the world,
and would advise peace and Christian forgiveness, with a proper
sense of contempt for the unworthy treatment which she has
received. She has followers and vassals, and friends, doubtless,
and advisers, who may not, in blinded zeal for worldly honour,
recommend to her to sit down slightly with this injury, but desire
she should rather appeal to the King, or to the arms of her
father's followers, unless her liberty is restored to her by the
surrender of the contract into which she has been enticed.--But
she comes, to answer for herself."

Eveline entered at the moment, leaning on Rose's arm. She had laid
aside mourning since the ceremony of the _fiancailles_, and
was dressed in a kirtle of white, with an upper robe of pale blue.
Her head was covered with a veil of white gauze, so thin, as to
float about her like the misty cloud usually painted around the
countenance of a seraph. But the face of Eveline, though in beauty
not unworthy one of that angelic order, was at present far from
resembling that of a seraph in tranquillity of expression. Her
limbs trembled, her cheeks were pale, the tinge of red around the
eyelids expressed recent tears; yet amidst these natural signs of
distress and uncertainty, there was an air of profound
resignation--a resolution to discharge her duty in every emergence
reigning in the solemn expression of her eye and eyebrow, and
showing her prepared to govern the agitation which she could not
entirely subdue. And so well were these opposing qualities of
timidity and resolution mingled on her cheek, that Eveline, in the
utmost pride of her beauty, never looked more fascinating than at
that instant; and Hugo de Lacy, hitherto rather an unimpassioned
lover, stood in her presence with feelings as if all the
exaggerations of romance were realized, and his mistress were a
being of a higher sphere, from whose doom he was to receive
happiness or misery, life or death.

It was under the influence of such a feeling, that the warrior
dropped on one knee before Eveline, took the hand which she rather
resigned than gave to him, pressed it to his lips fervently, and,
ere he parted with it, moistened it with one of the few tears
which he was ever known to shed. But, although surprised, and
carried out of his character by a sudden impulse, he regained his
composure on observing that the Abbess regarded his humiliation,
if it can be so termed, with an air of triumph; and he entered on
his defence before Eveline with a manly earnestness, not devoid of
fervour, nor free from agitation, yet made in a tone of firmness
and pride, which seemed assumed to meet and control that of the
offended Abbess.

"Lady," he said, addressing Eveline, "you have heard from the
venerable Abbess in what unhappy position I have been placed since
yesterday by the rigour of the Archbishop--perhaps I should rather
say by his just though severe interpretation of my engagement in
the Crusade. I cannot doubt that all this has been stated with
accurate truth by the venerable lady; but as I must no longer call
her my friend, let me fear whether she has done me justice in her
commentary upon the unhappy necessity which must presently compel
me to leave my country, and with my country to forego--at best to
postpone--the fairest hopes which man ever entertained. The
venerable lady hath upbraided me, that being myself the cause that
the execution of yesterday's contract is postponed, I would fain
keep it suspended over your head for an indefinite term of years.
No one resigns willingly such rights as yesterday gave me; and,
let me speak a boastful word, sooner than yield them up to man of
woman born, I would hold a fair field against all comers, with
grinded sword and sharp spear, from sunrise to sunset, for three
days' space. But what I would retain at the price of a thousand
lives, I am willing to renounce if it would cost you a single
sigh. If, therefore, you think you cannot remain happy as the
betrothed of De Lacy, you may command my assistance to have the
contract annulled, and make some more fortunate man happy."
