devout task was impossible, and it was only by a high bribe that he
could prevail on the same Moslem whom he had before employed, to slip
into the sleeve of the holy man's robe a paper containing his name, and
that of the Khan in which the Vakeel had taken up his residence. The
agent brought back for answer, that the Fakir, immersed, as was to be
expected, in the holy service which he was in the act of discharging,
had paid no visible attention to the symbol of intimation which the
Feringi Sahib [European gentleman] had sent to him. Distracted with
the loss of time, of which each moment was precious, Hartley next
endeavoured to prevail on the Mussulman to interrupt the Fakir's
devotions with a verbal message; but the man was indignant at the very
proposal.

"Dog of a Christian!" he said, "what art thou and thy whole generation,
that Barak el Hadgi should lose a divine thought for the sake of an
infidel like thee?"

Exasperated beyond self-possession, the unfortunate Hartley was now
about to intrude upon the precincts of the Mosque in person, in hopes
of interrupting the formal prolonged recitation which issued from its
recesses, when an old man laid his hand on his shoulder, and prevented
him from a rashness which might have cost him his life, saying, at the
same time, "You are a Sahib Angrezie, [English gentleman;] I have been
a Telinga [a private soldier] in the Company's service, and have eaten
their salt. I will do your errand for you to the Fakir Barak el Hadgi."

So saying, he entered the Mosque, and presently returned with the
Fakir's answer, in these enigmatical words:--"He who would see the sun
rise must watch till the dawn."

With this poor subject of consolation, Hartley retired to his inn,
to meditate on the futility of the professions of the natives, and to
devise some other mode of finding access to Hyder than that which he
had hitherto trusted to. On this point, however, he lost all hope, being
informed by his late fellow-traveller, whom he found at the Khan, that
the Nawaub was absent from the city on a secret expedition, which might
detain him for two or three days. This was the answer which the Vakeel
himself had received from the Dewan, with a farther intimation, that
he must hold himself ready, when he was required, to deliver his
credentials to Prince Tippoo, instead of the Nawaub; his business being
referred to the former, in a way not very promising for the success of
his mission.

Hartley was now nearly thrown into despair. He applied to more than one
officer supposed to have credit with the Nawaub, but the slightest hint
of the nature of his business seemed to strike all with terror. Not one
of the persons he applied to would engage in the affair, or even consent
to give it a hearing; and the Dewan plainly told him, that to engage in
opposition to Prince Tippoo's wishes, was the ready way to destruction,
and exhorted him to return to the coast. Driven almost to distraction by
his various failures, Hartley betook himself in the evening to the Khan.
The call of the Muezzins thundering from the minarets, had invited the
faithful to prayers, when a black servant, about fifteen years old,
stood before Hartley, and pronounced these words, deliberately, and
twice over,--"Thus says Barak el Hadgi, the watcher in the Mosque: He
that would see the sun rise, let him turn towards the east." He then
left the caravanserai; and it may be well supposed that Hartley,
starting from the carpet on which he had lain down to repose himself,
followed his youthful guide with renewed vigour and palpitating hope.




CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH.


  'Twas the hour when rites unholy
    Call'd each Paynim voice to prayer,
  And the star that faded slowly,
    Left to dews the freshened air.

  Day his sultry fires had wasted,
    Calm and cool the moonbeams shone;
  To the Vizier's lofty palace
    One bold Christian came alone.

    THOMAS CAMPBELL. _Quoted from memory._

The twilight darkened into night so fast, that it was only by his white
dress that Hartley could discern his guide, as he tripped along the
splendid Bazaar of the city. But the obscurity was so far favourable,
that it prevented the inconvenient attention which the natives might
otherwise have bestowed upon the European in his native dress, a sight
at that time very rare in Seringapatam.

The various turnings and windings through which he was conducted, ended
at a small door in a wall, which, from the branches that hung over it,
seemed to surround a garden or grove.

The postern opened on a tap from his guide, and the slave having
entered, Hartley prepared to follow, but stepped back as a gigantic
African brandished at his head a scimetar three fingers broad. The young
slave touched his countryman with a rod which he held in his hand, and
it seemed as if the touch disabled the giant, whose arm and weapon sunk
instantly. Hartley entered without farther opposition, and was now in a
grove of mango-trees, through which an infant moon was twinkling faintly
amid the murmur of waters, the sweet song of the nightingale, and the
odours of the rose, yellow jasmine, orange and citron flowers, and
Persian narcissus. Huge domes and arches, which were seen imperfectly in
the quivering light, seemed to intimate the neighbourhood of some sacred
edifice, where the Fakir had doubtless taken up his residence.

Hartley pressed on with as much haste as he could, and entered a
side-door and narrow vaulted passage, at the end of which was another
door. Here his guide stopped, but pointed and made indications that
the European should enter. Hartley did so, and found himself in a small
cell, such as we have formerly described, wherein sate Barak el Hadgi,
with another Fakir, who, to judge from the extreme dignity of a white
beard, which ascended up to his eyes on each side, must be a man of
great sanctity, as well as importance.

Hartley pronounced the usual salutation of Salam Alaikum in the most
modest and deferential tone; but his former friend was so far from
responding in their former strain of intimacy, that, having consulted
the eye of his older companion, he barely pointed to a third carpet,
upon which the stranger seated himself cross-legged, after the country
fashion, and a profound silence prevailed for the space of several
minutes. Hartley knew the Oriental customs too well to endanger the
success of his suit by precipitation. He waited an intimation to speak.
At length it came, and from Barak.

"When the pilgrim Barak," he said, "dwelt at Madras, he had eyes and
a tongue; but now he is guided by those of his father, the holy Scheik
Hali ben Khaledoun, the superior of his convent."

This extreme humility Hartley thought inconsistent with the affectation
of possessing superior influence, which Barak had shown while at the
Presidency; but exaggeration of their own consequence is a foible common
to all who find themselves in a land of strangers. Addressing the senior
Fakir, therefore, he told him in as few words as possible the villanous
plot which was laid to betray Menie Gray into the hands of the Prince
Tippoo. He made his suit for the reverend father's intercession with the
Prince himself, and with his father the Nawaub, in the most persuasive
terms. The Fakir listened to him with an inflexible and immovable
aspect, similar to that with which a wooden saint regards his eager
supplicants. There was a second pause, when, after resuming his pleading
more than once, Hartley was at length compelled to end it for want of
matter.

The silence was broken by the elder Fakir, who, after shooting a
glance at his younger companion by a turn of the eye, without the least
alteration of the position of the head and body, said, "The unbeliever
has spoken like a poet. But does he think that the Nawaub Khan Hyder Ali
Behauder will contest with his son Tippoo the victorious, the possession
of an infidel slave?"

Hartley received at the same time a side glance from Barak, as if
encouraging him to plead his own cause. He suffered a minute to elapse,
and then replied,--

"The Nawaub is in the place of the Prophet, a judge over the low as
well as high. It is written, that when the Prophet decided a controversy
between the two sparrows concerning a grain of rice, his wife Fatima
said to him, 'Doth the Missionary of Allah well to bestow his time in
distributing justice on a matter so slight, and between such despicable
litigants?'--'Know, woman,' answered the Prophet,'that the sparrows and
the grain of rice are the creation of Allah. They are not worth more
than thou hast spoken; but justice is a treasure of inestimable price,
and it must be imparted by him who holdeth power to all who require it
at his hand. The Prince doth the will of Allah, who gives it alike in
small matters as in great, and to the poor as well as the powerful.
To the hungry bird, a grain of rice is as a chaplet of pearls to a
sovereign.'--I have spoken."

"Bismallah!--Praised be God! he hath spoken like a Moullah," said the
elder Fakir, with a little more emotion, and some inclination of his
head towards Barak, for on Hartley he scarcely deigned even to look.

"The lips have spoken it which cannot lie," replied Barak, and there was
again a pause.

It was once more broken by Scheick Hali, who, addressing himself
directly to Hartley, demanded of him, "Hast thou heard, Feringi, of
aught of treason meditated by this Kafr [infidel] against the Nawaub
Behander?"

"Out of a traitor cometh treason," said Hartley, "but, to speak after my
knowledge, I am not conscious of such design."

"There is truth in the words of him," said the Fakir, "who accuseth not
his enemy save on his knowledge. The things thou hast spoken shall be
laid before the Nawaub; and as Allah and he will, so shall the issue be.
Meantime, return to thy Khan, and prepare to attend the Vakeel of thy
government, who is to travel with dawn to Bangalore, the strong, the
happy, the holy city. Peace be with thee!--Is it not so, my son?"

Barak, to whom this appeal was made, replied, "Even as my father hath
spoken."

Hartley had no alternative but to arise and take his leave with the
usual phrase, "Salam--God's peace be with you!"

His youthful guide, who waited his return without, conducted him once
more to his Khan, through by-paths which he could not have found out
without pilotage. His thoughts were in the mean time strongly engaged
on his late interview. He knew the Moslem men of religion were not
implicitly to be trusted. The whole scene might be a scheme of Barak, to
get rid of the trouble of patronizing a European in a delicate affair;
and he determined to be guided by what should seem to confirm or
discredit the intimation which he had received.

On his arrival at the Khan, he found the Vakeel of the British
government in a great bustle, preparing to obey directions transmitted
to him by the Nawaub's Dewan, or treasurer, directing him to depart the
next morning with break of day for Bangalore.

He expressed great discontent at the order, and when Hartley intimated
his purpose of accompanying him, seemed to think him a fool for his
pains, hinting the probability that Hyder meant to get rid of them both
by means of the freebooters, through whose countries they were to pass
with such a feeble escort. This fear gave way to another, when the time
of departure came, at which moment there rode up about two hundred
of the Nawaub's native cavalry. The Sirdar who commanded these troops
behaved with civility, and stated that he was directed to attend upon
the travellers, and to provide for their safety and convenience on
the journey; but his manner was reserved and distant, and the Vakeel
insisted that the force was intended to prevent their escape, rather
than for their protection. Under such unpleasant auspices, the journey
between Seringapatam and Bangalore was accomplished in two days and part
of a third, the distance being nearly eighty miles.

On arriving in view of this fine and populous city, they found an
encampment already established within a mile of its walls. It occupied a
tope or knoll, covered with trees, and looked full on the gardens which
Tippoo had created in one quarter of the city. The rich pavilions of
the principal persons flamed with silk and gold; and spears with gilded
points, or poles supporting gold knobs, displayed numerous little
banners inscribed with the name of the Prophet. This was the camp of
the Begum Mootee Mahul, who, with a small body of her troops, about
two hundred men, was waiting the return of Tippoo under the walls of
Bangalore. Their private motives for desiring a meeting the reader
is acquainted with; to the public the visit of the Begum had only the
appearance of an act of deference, frequently paid by inferior and
subordinate princes to the patrons whom they depend upon.

These facts ascertained, the Sirdar of the Nawaub took up his own
encampment within sight of that of the Begum, but at about half a mile's
distance, despatching to the city a messenger to announce to the Prince
Tippoo, as soon as he should arrive, that he had come hither with the
English Vakeel.

The bustle of pitching a few tents was soon over, and Hartley, solitary
and sad, was left to walk under the shade of two or three mango-trees,
and looking to the displayed streamers of the Begum's encampment, to
reflect that amid these insignia of Mahomedanism Menie Gray remained,
destined by a profligate and treacherous lover to the fate of slavery
to a heathen tyrant. The consciousness of being in her vicinity added
to the bitter pangs with which Hartley contemplated her situation, and
reflected how little chance there appeared of his being able to rescue
her from it by the mere force of reason and justice, which was all he
could oppose to the selfish passions of a voluptuous tyrant. A lover
of romance might have meditated some means of effecting her release by
force or address; but Hartley, though a man of courage, had no spirit of
adventure, and would have regarded as desperate any attempt of the kind.

His sole gleam of comfort arose from the impression which he had
apparently made upon the elder Fakir, which he could not help hoping
might be of some avail to him. But on one thing he was firmly resolved,
and that was not to relinquish the cause he had engaged in whilst a
grain of hope remained. He had seen in his own profession a quickening
and a revival of life in the patient's eye, even when glazed apparently
by the hand of Death; and he was taught confidence amidst moral evil by
his success in relieving that which was physical only.

While Hartley was thus meditating, he was roused to attention by a heavy
firing of artillery from the high bastions of the town; and turning his
eyes in that direction, he could see advancing, on the northern side of
Bangalore, a tide of cavalry, riding tumultuously forward, brandishing
their spears in all different attitudes, and pressing their horses to
a gallop. The clouds of dust which attended this vanguard, for such it
was, combined with the smoke of the guns, did not permit Hartley to see
distinctly the main body which followed; but the appearance of howdahed
elephants and royal banners dimly seen through the haze, plainly
intimated the return of Tippoo to Bangalore; while shouts, and irregular
discharges of musketry, announced the real or pretended rejoicing of the
inhabitants. The city gates received the living torrent, which rolled
towards them; the clouds of smoke and dust were soon dispersed, and the
horizon was restored to serenity and silence.

The meeting between persons of importance, more especially of royal
rank, is a matter of very great consequence in India, and generally much
address is employed to induce the person receiving the visit, to come as
far as possible to meet the visitor. From merely rising up, or going to
the edge of the carpet, to advancing to the gate of the palace, to that
of the city, or, finally, to a mile or two on the road, is all subject
to negotiation. But Tippoo's impatience to possess the fair European
induced him to grant on this occasion a much greater degree of courtesy
than the Begum had dared to expect, and he appointed his garden,
adjacent to the city walls, and indeed included within the precincts of
the fortifications, as the place of their meeting; the hour noon, on
the day succeeding his arrival; for the natives seldom move early in the
morning, or before having broken their fast. This was intimated to the
Begum's messenger by the Prince in person, as, kneeling before him, he
presented the _mizzar_, (a tribute consisting of three, five, or seven
gold Mohurs, always an odd number,) and received in exchange a khelaut,
or dress of honour. The messenger, in return, was eloquent in describing
the importance of his mistress, her devoted veneration for the Prince,
the pleasure which she experienced on the prospect of their motakul,
or meeting, and concluded with a more modest compliment to his own
extraordinary talents, and the confidence which the Begum reposed in
him. He then departed; and orders were given that on the next day all
should be in readiness for the _Sowarree_, a grand procession, when
the Prince was to receive the Begum as his honoured guest at his
pleasure-house in the gardens.

Long before the appointed hour, the rendezvous of Fakirs, beggars,
and idlers, before the gate of the palace, intimated the excited
expectations of those who usually attend processions; while a more
urgent set of mendicants, the courtiers, were hastening thither, on
horses or elephants, as their means afforded, always in a hurry to show
their zeal, and with a speed proportioned to what they hoped or feared.

At noon precisely, a discharge of cannon, placed in the outer courts, as
also of match-locks and of small swivels, carried by camels, (the poor
animals shaking their long ears at every discharge,) announced that
Tippoo had mounted his elephant. The solemn and deep sound of the
naggra, or state drum, borne upon an elephant, was then heard like the
distant discharge of artillery, followed by a long roll of musketry, and
was instantly answered by that of numerous trumpets and tom-toms, (or
common drums,) making a discordant, but yet a martial din. The noise
increased as the procession traversed the outer courts of the palace in
succession, and at length issued from the gates, having at their head
the Chobdars, bearing silver sticks and clubs, and shouting, at the
pitch of their voices, the titles and the virtues of Tippoo, the great,
the generous, the invincible--strong as Rustan, just as Noushirvan--with
a short prayer for his continued health.

After these came a confused body of men on foot, bearing spears,
match-locks, and banners, and intermixed with horsemen, some in complete
shirts of mail, with caps of steel under their turbans, some in a sort
of defensive armour, consisting of rich silk dresses, rendered sabre
proof by being stuffed with cotton. These champions preceded the Prince,
as whose body guards they acted. It was not till after this time that
Tippoo raised his celebrated Tiger-regiment, disciplined and armed
according to the European fashion. Immediately before the Prince came,
on a small elephant, A hard-faced, severe-looking man, by office the
distributor of alms, which he flung in showers of small copper money
among the Fakirs and beggars, whose scrambles to collect them seemed to
augment their amount; while the grim-looking agent of Mahomedan charity,
together with his elephant, which marched with half angry eyes, and its
trunk curled upwards, seemed both alike ready to chastise those whom
poverty should render too importunate.

Tippoo himself next appeared, richly apparelled, and seated on
an elephant, which, carrying its head above all the others in the
procession, seemed proudly conscious of superior dignity. The howdah, or
seat which the Prince occupied, was of silver, embossed and gilt, having
behind a place for a confidential servant, who waved the great chowry,
or cow-tail, to keep off the flies; but who could also occasionally
perform the task of spokesman, being well versed in all terms of
flattery and compliment. The caparisons of the royal elephant were of
scarlet cloth, richly embroidered with gold. Behind Tippoo came the
various courtiers and officers of the household, mounted chiefly on
elephants, all arrayed in their most splendid attire, and exhibiting the
greatest pomp.

In this manner the procession advanced down the principal street of the
town, to the gate of the royal gardens. The houses were ornamented
by broad cloth, silk shawls, and embroidered carpets of the richest
colours, displayed from the verandahs and windows; even the meanest hut
was adorned with some piece of cloth, so that the whole street had a
singularly rich and gorgeous appearance.

This splendid procession having entered the royal gardens, approached,
through a long avenue of lofty trees, a chabootra, or platform of white
marble, canopied by arches of the same material, which occupied the
centre. It was raised four or five feet from the ground, covered with
white cloth and Persian carpets. In the centre of the platform was the
musnud, or state cushion of the prince, six feet square, composed
of crimson velvet, richly embroidered. By special grace, a small low
