face to work with horror; the arms stretched forth, the form writhed
on the couch, distorted fragments from the lips: "Sanguelac!
Sanguelac!--the Lake of Blood," shrieked forth the dying King, "the
Lord hath bent his bow--the Lord hath bared his sword.  He comes down
as a warrior to war, and his wrath is in the steel and the flame.  He
boweth the mountains, and comes down, and darkness is under his feet!"

As if revived but for these tremendous denunciations, while the last
word left his lips the frame collapsed, the eyes set, and the King
fell a corpse in the arms of Harold.

But one smile of the sceptic or the world-man was seen on the paling
lips of those present: that smile was not on the lips of warriors and
men of mail.  It distorted the sharpened features of Stigand, the
world-man and the miser, as, passing down, and amidst the group, he
said, "Tremble ye at the dreams of a sick old man?" [218]




CHAPTER II.


The time of year customary for the National Assembly; the recent
consecration of Westminster, for which Edward had convened all his
chief spiritual lords, the anxiety felt for the infirm state of the
King, and the interest as to the impending succession--all concurred
to permit the instantaneous meeting of a Witan worthy, from rank and
numbers, to meet the emergency of the time, and proceed to the most
momentous election ever yet known in England.  The thegns and prelates
met in haste.  Harold's marriage with Aldyth, which had taken place
but a few weeks before, had united all parties with his own; not a
claim counter to the great Earl's was advanced; the choice was
unanimous.  The necessity of terminating at such a crisis all suspense
throughout the kingdom, and extinguishing the danger of all counter
intrigues, forbade to men thus united any delay in solemnising their
decision; and the august obsequies of Edward were followed on the same
day by the coronation of Harold.

It was in the body of the mighty Abbey Church, not indeed as we see it
now, after successive restorations and remodellings, but simple in its
long rows of Saxon arch and massive column, blending the first Teuton
with the last Roman masonries, that the crowd of the Saxon freemen
assembled to honour the monarch of their choice.  First Saxon king,
since England had been one monarchy, selected not from the single
House of Cerdic--first Saxon king, not led to the throne by the pale
shades of fabled ancestors tracing their descent from the Father-God
of the Teuton, but by the spirits that never know a grave--the arch-
eternal givers of crowns, and founders of dynasties-Valour and Fame.

Alred and Stigand, the two great prelates of the realm, had conducted
Harold to the church [219], and up the aisle to the altar, followed by
the chiefs of the Witan in their long robes; and the clergy with their
abbots and bishops sung the anthems--"Fermetur manus tua," and "Gloria
Patri."

And now the music ceased; Harold prostrated himself before the altar,
and the sacred melody burst forth with the great hymn, "Te Deum."

As it ceased, prelate and thegn raised their chief from the floor, and
in imitation of the old custom of Teuton and Northman--when the lord
of their armaments was borne on shoulder and shield--Harold mounted a
platform, and rose in full view of the crowd.

"Thus," said the arch-prelate, "we choose Harold son of Godwin for
lord and for king."  And the thegns drew round, and placed hand on
Harold's knee, and cried aloud, "We choose thee, O Harold, for lord
and for king."  And row by row, line by line, all the multitude
shouted forth, "We choose thee, O Harold, for lord and king."  So
there he stood with his calm brow, facing all, Monarch of England, and
Basileus of Britain.

Now unheeded amidst the throng, and leaning against a column in the
arches of the aisle, was a woman with her veil round her face; and she
lifted the veil for a moment to gaze on that lofty brow, and the tears
were streaming fast down her cheek, but her face was not sad.

"Let the vulgar not see, to pity or scorn thee, daughter of kings as
great as he who abandons and forsakes thee!" murmured a voice in her
ear; and the form of Hilda, needing no support from column or wall,
rose erect by the side of Edith.  Edith bowed her head and lowered the
veil, as the King descended the platform and stood again by the altar,
while clear through the hushed assembly rang the words of his triple
promise to his people:

"Peace to His Church and the Christian flock."

"Interdict of rapacity and injustice."

"Equity and mercy in his judgments, as God the gracious and just might
show mercy to him."

And deep from the hearts of thousands came the low "Amen."

Then after a short prayer, which each prelate repeated, the crowd saw
afar the glitter of the crown held over the head of the King.  The
voice of the consecrator was heard, low till it came to the words "So
potently and royally may he rule, against all visible and invisible
foes, that the royal throne of the Angles and Saxons may not desert
his sceptre."

As the prayer ceased, came the symbolical rite of anointment.  Then
pealed the sonorous organ [220], and solemn along the aisles rose the
anthem that closed with the chorus which the voice of the multitude
swelled, "May the King live for ever!"  Then the crown that had
gleamed in the trembling hand of the prelate, rested firm in its
splendour on the front of the King.  And the sceptre of rule, and the
rod of justice, "to sooth the pious and terrify the bad," were placed
in the royal hands.  And the prayer and the blessings were renewed,--
till the close; "Bless, Lord, the courage of this Prince, and prosper
the works of his hand.  With his horn, as the horn of the rhinoceros,
may he blow the waters to the extremities of the earth; and may He who
has ascended to the skies be his aid for ever!"

Then Hilda stretched forth her hand to lead Edith from the place.  But
Edith shook her head and murmured "But once again, but once!" and with
involuntary step moved on.

Suddenly, close where she paused, the crowd parted, and down the
narrow lane so formed amidst the wedged and breathless crowd came the
august procession;--prelate and thegn swept on from the Church to the
palace; and alone, with firm and measured step, the diadem on his
brow, the sceptre in his hand, came the King.  Edith checked the
rushing impulse at her heart, but she bent forward, with veil half
drawn aside, and so gazed on that face and form of more than royal
majesty, fondly, proudly.  The King swept on and saw her not; love
lived no more for him.




CHAPTER III.


The boat shot over the royal Thames.  Borne along the waters, the
shouts and the hymns of swarming thousands from the land shook, like a
blast, the gelid air of the Wolf month.  All space seemed filled and
noisy with the name of Harold the King.  Fast rowed the rowers,--on
shot the boat; and Hilda's face, stern and ominous, turned to the
still towers of the palace, gleaming wide and white in the wintry sun.
Suddenly Edith lifted her hand from her bosom, and said passionately:

"O mother of my mother, I cannot live again in the house where the
very walls speak to me of him; all things chain my soul to the earth;
and my soul should be in heaven, that its prayers may be heard by the
heedful angels.  The day that the holy Lady of England predicted hath
come to pass, and the silver cord is loosed at last. Ah why, why did I
not believe her then? why did I then reject the cloister?  Yet no, I
will not repent; at least I have been loved!  But now I will go to the
nunnery of Waltham, and kneel at the altars he hath hallowed to the
mone and the monechyn."

"Edith," said the Vala, "thou wilt not bury thy life yet young in the
living grave!  And, despite all that now severs you--yea, despite
Harold's new and loveless ties--still clearer than ever it is written
in the heavens, that a day shall come, in which you are to be evermore
united.  Many of the shapes I have seen, many of the sounds I have
heard, in the trance and the dream, fade in the troubled memory of
waking life.  But never yet hath grown doubtful or dim the prophecy,
that the truth pledged by the grave shall be fulfilled."

"Oh, tempt not!  Oh, delude not!" cried Edith, while the blood rushed
over her brow.  "Thou knowest this can not be.  Another's! he is
another's! and in the words thou hast uttered there is deadly sin."

"There is no sin in the resolves of a fate that rules us in spite of
ourselves.  Tarry only till the year bring round the birth-day of
Harold; for my sayings shall be ripe with the grape, and when the feet
of the vineherd are red in the Month of the Vine [221], the Nornas
shall knit ye together again!"

Edith clasped her hands mutely, and looked hard into the face of
Hilda,--looked and shuddered she knew not why.

The boat landed on the eastern shore of the river, beyond the walls of
the city, and then Edith bent her way to the holy walls of Waltham.
The frost was sharp in the glitter of the unwarming sun; upon leafless
boughs hung the barbed ice-gems; and the crown was on the brows of
Harold! and at night, within the walls of the convent, Edith heard the
hymns of the kneeling monks; and the blasts howled, and the storm
arose, and the voices of destroying hurricanes were blent with the
swell of the choral hymns.




CHAPTER IV.


Tostig sate in the halls of Bruges, and with him sate Judith, his
haughty wife.  The Earl and his Countess were playing at chess, (or
the game resembling it, which amused the idlesse of that age,) and the
Countess had put her lord's game into mortal disorder, when Tostig
swept his hand over the board, and the pieces rolled on the floor.

"That is one way to prevent defeat," said Judith, with a half smile
and half frown.

"It is the way of the bold and the wise, wife mine," answered Tostig,
rising, "let all be destruction where thou thyself canst win not!
Peace to these trifles!  I cannot keep my mind to the mock fight; it
flies to the real.  Our last news sours the taste of the wine, and
steals the sleep from my couch.  It says that Edward cannot live
through the winter, and that all men bruit abroad, there can be no
king save Harold my brother."

"And will thy brother as King give to thee again thy domain as Earl?"

"He must!" answered Tostig, "and, despite all our breaches, with soft
message he will.  For Harold has the heart of the Saxon, to which the
sons of one father are dear; and Githa, my mother, when we first fled,
controlled the voice of my revenge, and bade me wait patient and hope
yet."

Scarce had these words fallen from Tostig's lips, when the chief of
his Danish house-carles came in, and announced the arrival of a bode
from England.

"His news? his news?" cried the Earl, "with his own lips let him speak
his news."

The house-carle withdrew but to usher in the messenger, an Anglo-Dane.

"The weight on thy brow shows the load on thy heart," cried Tostig.
"Speak, and be brief."

"Edward is dead."

"Ha? and who reigns?"

"Thy brother is chosen and crowned."

The face of the Earl grew red and pale in a breath, and successive
emotions of envy and old rivalship, humbled pride and fierce
discontent, passed across his turbulent heart.  But these died away as
the predominant thought of self-interest, and somewhat of that
admiration for success which often seems like magnanimity in grasping
minds, and something too of haughty exultation, that he stood a King's
brother in the halls of his exile, came to chase away the more hostile
