
The earl knit his brows--"A prisoner, archbishop?"

The prelate regarded him with a cold smile.

"Warwick, you, who would deceive no other man, now seek to deceive
yourself." The earl drew back, and his hardy countenance grew a shade
paler. The prelate resumed: "You have carried Edward from his camp, and
severed him from his troops; you have placed him in the midst of your
own followers; you have led him, chafing and resentful all the way, to
this impregnable keep; and you now pause, amazed by the grandeur of
your captive,--a man who leads to his home a tiger, a spider who has
entangled a hornet in its web!"

"Nay, reverend brother," said the earl, calmly, "ye churchmen never know
what passes in the hearts of those who feel and do not scheme. When I
learned that the king had fled to the Woodvilles, that he was bent upon
violating the pledge given in his name to the insurgent commons, I vowed
that he should redeem my honour and his own, or that forever I would
quit his service. And here, within these walls which sheltered his
childhood, I trusted, and trust still, to make one last appeal to his
better reason."

"For all that, men now, and history hereafter, will consider Edward as
your captive."

"To living men my words and deeds can clear themselves; and as for
history, let clerks and scholars fool themselves in the lies of
parchment! He who has acted history, despises the gownsmen who sit in
cloistered ease, and write about what they know not." The earl paused,
and then continued: "I confess, however, that I have had a scheme.
I have wished to convince the king how little his mushroom lords can
bestead him in the storm; and that he holds his crown only from his
barons and his people."

"That is, from the Lord Warwick!"

"Perhaps I am the personation of both seignorie and people; but I design
this solely for his welfare. Ah, the gallant prince--how well he bore
himself to-day!"

"Ay, when stealing all hearts from thee to him."

"And, Vive Dieu, I never loved him so well as when he did! Methinks it
was for a day like this that I reared his youth and achieved his crown.
Oh, priest, priest, thou mistakest me. I am rash, hot, haughty, hasty;
and I love not to bow my knees to a man because they call him king, if
his life be vicious and his word be false. But could Edward be ever as
to-day, then indeed should I hail a sovereign whom a baron may reverence
and a soldier serve!"

Before the archbishop could reply, the door gently opened, and the
countess appeared. Warwick seemed glad of the interruption; he turned
quickly--"And how fares my child?"

"Recovered from her strange swoon, and ready to smile at thy return. Oh,
Warwick, thou art reconciled to the king?"

"That glads thee, sister?" said the archbishop.

"Surely. Is it not for my lord's honour?"

"May he find it so!" said the prelate, and he left the room.

"My priest-brother is chafed," said the earl, smiling. "Pity he was not
born a trader, he would have made a shrewd hard bargain. Verily, our
priests burn the Jews out of envy! Ah, m'amie, how fair thou art to-day!
Methinks even Isabel's cheek less blooming." And the warrior drew the
lady towards him, and smoothed her hair, and tenderly kissed her brow.
"My letter vexed thee, I know, for thou lovest Edward, and blamest me
not for my love to him. It is true that he hath paltered with me, and
that I had stern resolves, not against his crown, but to leave him to
his fate, and in these halls to resign my charge. But while he spoke,
and while he looked, methought I saw his mother's face, and heard his
dear father's tone, and the past rushed over me, and all wrath was gone.
Sonless myself, why would he not be my son?" The earl's voice trembled,
and the tears stood in his dark eyes.

"Speak thus, dear lord, to Isabel, for I fear her overvaulting spirit--"

"Ah, had Isabel been his wife!" he paused and moved away. Then, as
if impatient to escape the thoughts that tended to an ungracious
recollection, he added, "And now, sweetheart, these slight fingers have
ofttimes buckled on my mail; let them place on my breast this badge of
St. George's chivalry; and, if angry thoughts return, it shall remind me
that the day on which I wore it first, Richard of York said to his young
Edward, 'Look to that star, boy, if ever, in cloud and trouble, thou
wouldst learn what safety dwells in the heart which never knew deceit.'"

During the banquet, the king, at whose table sat only the Duke of
Clarence and the earl's family, was gracious as day to all, but
especially to the Lady Anne, attributing her sudden illness to some
cause not unflattering to himself; her beauty, which somewhat resembled
that of the queen, save that it had more advantage of expression and
of youth, was precisely of the character he most admired. Even her
timidity, and the reserve with which she answered him, had their charms;
for, like many men, themselves of imperious nature and fiery will,
he preferred even imbecility in a woman to whatever was energetic or
determined; and hence perhaps his indifference to the more dazzling
beauty of Isabel. After the feast, the numerous demoiselles, high-born
and fair, who swelled the more than regal train of the countess, were
assembled in the long gallery, which was placed in the third story
of the castle and served for the principal state apartment. The dance
began; but Isabel excused herself from the pavon, and the king led
out the reluctant and melancholy Anne. The proud Isabel, who had
never forgiven Edward's slight to herself, resented deeply his evident
admiration of her sister, and conversed apart with the archbishop, whose
subtle craft easily drew from her lips confessions of an ambition higher
even than his own. He neither encouraged nor dissuaded; he thought
there were things more impossible than the accession of Clarence to the
throne, but he was one who never plotted,--save for himself and for the
Church.

As the revel waned, the prelate approached the earl, who, with that
remarkable courtesy which charmed those below his rank and contrasted
with his haughtiness to his peers, had well played amongst his knights
the part of host, and said, in a whisper, "Edward is in a happy
mood--let us lose it not. Will you trust me to settle all differences
ere he sleep? Two proud men never can agree without a third of a gentler
temper."

"You are right," said Warwick, smiling; "yet the danger is that I should
rather concede too much than be too stubborn. But look you, all I demand
is satisfaction to mine own honour and faith to the army I disbanded in
the king's name."

"All!" muttered the archbishop, as he turned away, "but that call is
everything to provoke quarrel for you, and nothing to bring power to
me!"

The earl and the archbishop attended the king to his chamber, and after
Edward was served with the parting refection, or livery, the earl said,
with his most open smile, "Sire, there are yet affairs between us; whom
will you confer with,--me or the archbishop?"

"Oh, the archbishop, by all means, fair cousin," cried Edward, no less
frankly; "for if you and I are left alone, the Saints help both of
us!--when flint and steel meet, fire flies, and the house may burn."

The earl half smiled at the candour, half sighed at the levity, of the
royal answer, and silently left the room. The king, drawing round him
his loose dressing-robe, threw himself upon the gorgeous coverlid of the
bed, and lying at lazy length, motioned to the prelate to seat himself
at the foot. The archbishop obeyed. Edward raised himself on his elbow,
and, by the light of seven gigantic tapers, set in sconces of massive
silver, the priest and the king gravely gazed on each other without
speaking.

At last Edward, bursting into his hale, clear, silvery laugh, said,
"Confess, dear sir and cousin,--confess that we are like two skilful
masters of Italian fence, each fearing to lay himself open by commencing
the attack."

"Certes," quoth the archbishop, "your Grace over-estimates my vanity, in
opining that I deemed myself equal to so grand a duello. If there were
dispute between us, I should only win by baring my bosom."

The king's bow-like lip curved with a slight sneer, quickly replaced by
a serious and earnest expression. "Let us leave word-making, and to
the point, George. Warwick is displeased because I will not abandon my
wife's kindred; you, with more reason, because I have taken from your
hands the chancellor's great seal--"

"For myself, I humbly answer that your Grace errs. I never coveted other
honours than those of the Church."

"Ay," said Edward, keenly examining the young prelate's smooth face, "is
it so? Yes, now I begin to comprehend thee. What offence have I given
to the Church? Have I suffered the law too much to sleep against the
Lollards. If so, blame Warwick."

"On the contrary, sire, unlike other priests, I have ever deemed that
persecution heals no schism. Blow not dying embers. Rather do I think
of late that too much severity hath helped to aid, by Lollard bows and
pikes, the late rising. My lady, the queen's mother, unjustly accused of
witchcraft, hath sought to clear herself, and perhaps too zealously, in
exciting your Grace against that invisible giant yclept heresy."

"Pass on," said Edward. "It is not then indifference to the ecclesia
that you complain of. Is it neglect of the ecclesiastic? Ha, ha! you
and I, though young, know the colours that make up the patchwork world.
Archbishop, I love an easy life; if your brother and his friends will
but give me that, let them take all else. Again, I say, to the point,--I
cannot banish my lady's kindred, but I will bind your House still more
to mine. I have a daughter, failing male issue, the heiress to my crown.
I will betroth her to your nephew, my beloved Montagu's son. They are
children yet, but their ages not unsuited. And when I return to London,
young Nevile shall be Duke of Bedford, a title hitherto reserved to the
royal race. [And indeed there was but one Yorkist duke then in England
out of the royal family,--namely, the young boy Buckingham, who
afterwards vainly sought to bend the Ulysses bow of Warwick against
Richard III.] Let that be a pledge of peace between the queen's mother,
bearing the same honours, and the House of Nevile, to which they pass."

The cheek of the archbishop flushed with proud pleasure; he bowed his
head, and Edward, ere he could answer, went on: "Warwick is already
so high that, pardie, I have no other step to give him, save my throne
itself, and, God's truth, I would rather be Lord Warwick than King
of England! But for you--listen--our only English cardinal is old and
sickly; whenever he pass to Abraham's bosom, who but you should have
the suffrage of the holy college? Thou knowest that I am somewhat in
the good favour of the sovereign pontiff. Command me to the utmost.
Now, George, are we friends?" The archbishop kissed the gracious hand
extended to him, and, surprised to find, as by magic, all his schemes
frustrated by sudden acquiescence in the objects of them all, his
voice faltered with real emotion as he gave vent to his gratitude.
But abruptly he checked himself, his brow lowered, and with a bitter
remembrance of his brother's plain, blunt sense of honour, he said,
"Yet, alas! my liege, in all this there is nought to satisfy our
stubborn host."

"By dear Saint George and my father's head!" exclaimed Edward,
reddening, and starting to his feet, "what would the man have?"

"You know," answered the archbishop, "that Warwick's pride is only
roused when he deems his honour harmed. Unhappily, as he thinks, by your
Grace's full consent, he pledged himself to the insurgents of Olney to
the honourable dismissal of the lords of the Woodville race. And unless
this be conceded, I fear me that all else he will reject, and the love
between ye can be but hollow!"

Edward took but three strides across the chamber, and then halted
opposite the archbishop, and lay both hands on his shoulders, as,
looking him full in the face, he said, "Answer me frankly, am I a
prisoner in these towers or not?"

"Not, sire."

"You palter with me, priest. I have been led hither against my will.
I am almost without an armed retinue. I am at the earl's mercy. This
chamber might be my grave, and this couch my bed of death."

"Holy Mother! Can you think so of Warwick? Sire, you freeze my blood."

"Well, then, if I refuse to satisfy Warwick's pride, and disdain to give
up loyal servants to rebel insolence, what will Warwick do? Speak out,
archbishop."

"I fear me, sire, that he will resign all office, whether of peace or
war. I fear me that the goodly army now at sleep within and around these
walls will vanish into air, and that your Highness will stand alone
amidst new men, and against the disaffection of the whole land!"

Edward's firm hand trembled. The prelate continued, with a dry, caustic
smile,--

"Sire, Sir Anthony Woodville, now Lord Rivers, has relieved you of
all embarrassment; no doubt, my Lord Dorset and his kinsmen will be
chevaliers enough to do the same. The Duchess of Bedford will but
suit the decorous usage to retire a while into privacy, to mourn her
widowhood. And when a year is told, if these noble persons reappear at
court, your word and the earl's will at least have been kept."

"I understand thee," said the king, half laughing; "but I have my pride
as well as Warwick. To concede this point is to humble the conceder."

"I have thought how to soothe all things, and without humbling either
party. Your Grace's mother is dearly beloved by Warwick and revered by
all. Since your marriage she hath lived secluded from all state affairs.
As so nearly akin to Warwick, so deeply interested in your Grace, she is
a fitting mediator in all disputes. Be they left to her to arbitrate."

"Ah, cunning prelate, thou knowest how my proud mother hates the
Woodvilles; thou knowest how her judgment will decide."

"Perhaps so; but at least your Grace will be spared all pain and all
abasement."

"Will Warwick consent to this?"

"I trust so."

"Learn, and report to me. Enough for to-night's conference." Edward was
left alone, and his mind ran rapidly over the field of action open to
him.

"I have half won the earl's army," he thought; "but it would be to
lose all hold in their hearts again, if they knew that these unhappy
Woodvilles were the cause of a second breach between us. Certes, the
Lancastrians are making strong head! Certes, the times must be played
with and appeased! And yet these poor gentlemen love me after my own
fashion, and not with the bear's hug of that intolerable earl. How came
the grim man by so fair a daughter? Sweet Anne! I caught her eye often
fixed on me, and with a soft fear which my heart beat loud to read
aright. Verily, this is the fourth week I have passed without hearing
a woman's sigh! What marvel that so fair a face enamours me! Would
that Warwick made her his ambassador; and yet it were all over with
the Woodvilles if he did! These men know not how to manage me, and
well-a-day, that task is easy eno' to women!" He laughed gayly to
himself as he thus concluded his soliloquy, and extinguished the tapers.
But rest did not come to his pillow; and after tossing to and fro for
some time in vain search for sleep, he rose and opened his casement to
cool the air which the tapers had overheated. In a single casement, in a
broad turret, projecting from an angle in the building, below the tower
in which his chamber was placed, the king saw a solitary light
burning steadily. A sight so unusual at such an hour surprised him.
"Peradventure, the wily prelate," thought he. "Cunning never sleeps."
But a second look showed him the very form that chased his slumbers.
Beside the casement, which was partially open, he saw the soft profile
of the Lady Anne; it was bent downwards; and what with the clear
moonlight, and the lamp within her chamber, he could see distinctly that
she was weeping. "Ah, Anne," muttered the amorous king, "would that I
were by to kiss away those tears!" While yet the unholy wish murmured on
his lips, the lady rose. The fair hand, that seemed almost transparent
in the moonlight, closed the casement; and though the light lingered for
some minutes ere it left the dark walls of the castle without other sign
of life than the step of the sentry, Anne was visible no more.

"Madness! madness! madness!" again murmured the king. "These Neviles are
fatal to me in all ways,--in hatred or in love!"




BOOK VIII. IN WHICH THE LAST LINK BETWEEN KING-MAKER AND KING SNAPS
ASUNDER.




CHAPTER I. THE LADY ANNE VISITS THE COURT.

It was some weeks after the date of the events last recorded. The storm
that hung over the destinies of King Edward was dispersed for the hour,
though the scattered clouds still darkened the horizon: the Earl of
Warwick had defeated the Lancastrians on the frontier, [Croyl. 552] and
their leader had perished on the scaffold; but Edward's mighty sword had
not shone in the battle. Chained by an attraction yet more powerful than
slaughter, he had lingered at Middleham, while Warwick led his army to
York; and when the earl arrived at the capital of Edward's ancestral
duchy, he found that the able and active Hastings--having heard, even
before he reached the Duke of Gloucester's camp, of Edward's apparent
seizure by the earl and the march to Middleham--had deemed it best
to halt at York, and to summon in all haste a council of such of the
knights and barons as either love to the king or envy to Warwick could
collect. The report was general that Edward was retained against his
will at Middleham; and this rumour Hastings gravely demanded Warwick,
on the arrival of the latter at York, to disprove. The earl, to clear
himself from a suspicion that impeded all his military movements,
despatched Lord Montagu to Middleham, who returned not only with the
king, but the countess and her daughters, whom Edward, under pretence
of proving the complete amity that existed between Warwick and himself,
carried in his train. The king's appearance at York reconciled all
differences; but he suffered Warwick to march alone against the enemy,
and not till after the decisive victory, which left his reign for a
while without an open foe, did he return to London.

Thither the earl, by the advice of his friends, also repaired, and in
a council of peers, summoned for the purpose, deigned to refute the
rumours still commonly circulated by his foes, and not disbelieved
by the vulgar, whether of his connivance at the popular rising or his
forcible detention of the king at Middleham. To this, agreeably to the
counsel of the archbishop, succeeded a solemn interview of the heads of
the Houses of York and Warwick, in which the once fair Rose of Raby (the
king's mother) acted as mediator and arbiter. The earl's word to
the commons at Olney was ratified. Edward consented to the temporary
retirement of the Woodvilles, though the gallant Anthony yet delayed his
pilgrimage to Compostella. The vanity of Clarence was contented by the
government of Ireland, but, under various pretences, Edward deferred
his brother's departure to that important post. A general amnesty was
proclaimed, a parliament summoned for the redress of popular grievances,
and the betrothal of the king's daughter to Montagu's heir was
proclaimed: the latter received the title of Duke of Bedford; and the
whole land rejoiced in the recovered peace of the realm, the retirement
of the Woodvilles, and the reconciliation of the young king with his
all-beloved subject. Never had the power of the Neviles seemed so
secure; never did the throne of Edward appear so stable.

It was at this time that the king prevailed upon the earl and his
countess to permit the Lady Anne to accompany the Duchess of Clarence
in a visit to the palace of the Tower. The queen had submitted so
graciously to the humiliation of her family, that even the haughty
Warwick was touched and softened; and the visit of his daughter at such
a time became a homage to Elizabeth which it suited his chivalry to
render.

The public saw in this visit, which was made with great state and
ceremony, the probability of a new and popular alliance. The archbishop
had suffered the rumour of Gloucester's attachment to the Lady Anne to
get abroad, and the young prince's return from the North was anxiously
expected by the gossips of the day.

It was on this occasion that Warwick showed his gratitude for Marmaduke
Nevile's devotion. "My dear and gallant kinsman," he said, "I forget not
that when thou didst leave the king and the court for the discredited
minister and his gloomy hall,--I forget not that thou didst tell me
of love to some fair maiden, which had not prospered according to thy
merits. At least it shall not be from lack of lands, or of the gold
spur, which allows the wearer to ride by the side of king or kaisar,
that thou canst not choose thy bride as the heart bids thee. I pray
thee, sweet cousin, to attend my child Anne to the court, where the king
will show thee no ungracious countenance; but it is just to recompense
thee for the loss of thy post in his highness's chamber. I hold the
king's commission to make knights of such as can pay the fee, and
thy lands shall suffice for the dignity. Kneel down and rise up, Sir
Marmaduke Nevile, lord of the Manor of Borrodaile, with its woodlands
and its farms, and may God and our Lady render thee puissant in battle
and prosperous in love!"

Accordingly, in his new rank, and entitled to ruffle it with the
bravest, Sir Marmaduke Nevile accompanied the earl and the Lady Anne to
the palace of the Tower.

As Warwick, leaving his daughter amidst the brilliant circle that
surrounded Elizabeth, turned to address the king, he said, with simple
and unaffected nobleness,--

"Ah, my liege, if you needed a hostage of my faith, think that my heart
is here, for verily its best blood were less dear to me than that slight
girl,--the likeness of her mother, when her lips first felt the touch of
mine!"

Edward's bold brow fell, and he blushed as he answered, "My Elizabeth
will hold her as a sister. But, cousin, part you not now for the North?"

"By your leave I go first to Warwick."

"Ah, you do not wish to approve of my seeming preparations against
France?"

"Nay, your Highness is not in earnest. I promised the commons that you
would need no supplies for so thriftless a war."

"Thou knowest I mean to fulfil all thy pledges. But the country so
swarms with disbanded soldiers, that it is politic to hold out to them a
hope of service, and so let the clouds gradually pass away."

"Alack, my liege," said Warwick, gravely, "I suppose that a crown
teaches the brow to scheme; but hearty peace or open war seems ever the
best to me."

Edward smiled, and turned aside. Warwick glanced at his daughter, whom
Elizabeth flatteringly caressed, stifled a sigh, and the air seemed
lighter to the insects of the court as his proud crest bowed beneath the
doorway, and, with the pomp of his long retinue, he vanished from the
scene.

"And choose, fair Anne," said the queen, "choose from my ladies whom
you will have for your special train. We would not that your attendance
should be less than royal."

The gentle Anne in vain sought to excuse herself from an honour at once
arrogant and invidious, though too innocent to perceive the cunning
so characteristic of the queen; for, under the guise of a special
compliment, Anne had received the royal request to have her female
attendants chosen from the court, and Elizabeth now desired to
force upon her a selection which could not fail to mortify those not
preferred. But glancing timidly round the circle, the noble damsel's eye
rested on one fair face, and in that face there was so much that awoke
her own interest, and stirred up a fond and sad remembrance, that she
passed involuntarily to the stranger's side, and artlessly took her
hand. The high-born maidens, grouped around, glanced at each other with
a sneer, and slunk back. Even the queen looked surprised; but recovering
herself, inclined her head graciously, and said, "Do we read your
meaning aright, Lady Anne, and would you this gentlewoman, Mistress
Sibyll Warner, as one of your chamber?"

"Sibyll, ah, I knew that my memory failed me not," murmured Anne; and,
after bowing assent to the queen, she said, "Do you not also recall,
fair demoiselle, our meeting, when children long years ago?"

"Well, noble dame," [The title of dame was at that time applied
indiscriminately to ladies whether married or single, if of high birth.]
answered Sibyll. And as Anne turned, with her air of modest gentleness,
yet of lofty birth and breeding, to explain to the queen that she had
met Sibyll in earlier years, the king approached to monopolize his
guest's voice and ear. It seemed natural to all present that Edward
should devote peculiar attention to the daughter of Warwick and the
sister of the Duchess of Clarence; and even Elizabeth suspected no
guiltier gallantry in the subdued voice, the caressing manner, which
her handsome lord adopted throughout that day, even to the close of the
nightly revel, towards a demoiselle too high (it might well appear) for
licentious homage.

But Anne herself, though too guileless to suspect the nature of Edward's
courtesy, yet shrank from it in vague terror. All his beauty, all his
fascination, could not root from her mind the remembrance of the exiled
prince; nay, the brilliancy of his qualities made her the more averse
to him. It darkened the prospects of Edward of Lancaster that Edward
of York should wear so gracious and so popular a form. She hailed with
delight the hour when she was conducted to her chamber, and dismissing
gently the pompous retinue allotted to her, found herself alone with the
young maiden whom she had elected to her special service.

"And you remember me, too, fair Sibyll?" said Anne, with her dulcet and
endearing voice.

"Truly, who would not? for as you, then, noble lady, glided apart from
the other children, hand in hand with the young prince, in whom all
dreamed to see their future king, I heard the universal murmur of--a
false prophecy!"

"Ah! and of what?" asked Anne.

"That in the hand the prince clasped with his small rosy fingers--the
hand of great Warwick's daughter--lay the best defence of his father's
throne."

Anne's breast heaved, and her small foot began to mark strange
characters on the floor.

"So," she said musingly, "so even here, amidst a new court, you forget
not Prince Edward of Lancaster. Oh, we shall find hours to talk of the
past days. But how, if your childhood was spent in Margaret's court,
does your youth find a welcome in Elizabeth's?"

"Avarice and power had need of my father's science. He is a scholar of
good birth, but fallen fortunes, even now, and ever while night lasts,
he is at work. I belonged to the train of her grace of Bedford; but when
the duchess quitted the court, and the king retained my father in his
own royal service, her highness the queen was pleased to receive me
among her maidens. Happy that my father's home is mine!--who else could
tend him?"

"Thou art his only child?--he must--love thee dearly?"

"Yet not as I love him; he lives in a life apart from all else that
live. But after all, peradventure it is sweeter to love than to be
loved."

Anne, whose nature was singularly tender and woman-like, was greatly
affected by this answer. She drew nearer to Sibyll; she twined her arm
round her slight form, and kissed her forehead.

"Shall I love thee, Sibyll?" she said, with a girl's candid simplicity,
"and wilt thou love me?"

"Ah, lady! there are so many to love thee,--father, mother, sister,--all
the world; the very sun shines more kindly upon the great!"

"Nay!" said Anne, with that jealousy of a claim to suffering to which
the gentler natures are prone, "I may have sorrows from which thou
art free. I confess to thee, Sibyll, that something I know not how to
explain draws me strangely towards thy sweet face. Marriage has lost me
my only sister, for since Isabel is wed she is changed to me--would that
her place were supplied by thee! Shall I steal thee from the queen when
I depart? Ah, my mother--at least thou wilt love her! for verily, to
love my mother you have but to breathe the same air. Kiss me, Sibyll."

Kindness, of late, had been strange to Sibyll, especially from her own
sex, one of her own age; it came like morning upon the folded blossom.
She threw her arms round the new friend that seemed sent to her from
heaven; she kissed Anne's face and hands with grateful tears.

"Ah!" she said at last, when she could command a voice still broken with
emotion--"if I could ever serve--ever repay thee--though those gracious
words were the last thy lips should ever deign to address to me!"

Anne was delighted; she had never yet found one to protect; she had
never yet found one in whom thoroughly to confide. Gentle as her mother
was, the distinction between child and parent was, even in the fond
family she belonged to, so great in that day, that she could never have
betrayed to the countess the wild weakness of her young heart.

The wish to communicate, to reveal, is so natural to extreme youth, and
in Anne that disposition was so increased by a nature at once open and
inclined to lean on others, that she had, as we have seen, sought a
confidante in Isabel; but with her, even at the first, she found but
the half-contemptuous pity of a strong and hard mind; and lately, since
Edward's visit to Middleham, the Duchess of Clarence had been so rapt in
her own imperious egotism and discontented ambition, that the timid
Anne had not even dared to touch, with her, upon those secrets which it
flushed her own bashful cheek to recall. And this visit to the
court, this new, unfamiliar scene, this estrangement from all the old
accustomed affections, had produced in her that sense of loneliness
which is so irksome, till grave experience of real life accustoms us to
the common lot. So with the exaggerated and somewhat morbid sensibility
that belonged to her, she turned at once, and by impulse, to this
sudden, yet graceful friendship. Here was one of her own age, one who
had known sorrow, one whose voice and eyes charmed her, one who would
not chide even folly, one, above all, who had seen her beloved prince,
one associated with her fondest memories, one who might have a thousand
tales to tell of the day when the outlaw boy was a monarch's heir. In
the childishness of her soft years, she almost wept at another channel
for so much natural tenderness. It was half the woman gaining a
woman-friend, half the child clinging to a new playmate.

"Ah, Sibyll," she whispered, "do not leave me to-night; this strange
place daunts me, and the figures on the arras seem so tall and
spectre-like, and they say the old tower is haunted. Stay, dear Sibyll!"

And Sibyll stayed.




CHAPTER II. THE SLEEPING INNOCENCE--THE WAKEFUL CRIME.

While these charming girls thus innocently conferred; while, Anne's
sweet voice running on in her artless fancies, they helped each other to
undress; while hand in hand they knelt in prayer by the crucifix in
the dim recess; while timidly they extinguished the light, and stole to
rest; while, conversing in whispers, growing gradually more faint and
low, they sank into guileless sleep,--the unholy king paced his solitary
chamber, parched with the fever of the sudden and frantic passion that
swept away from a heart in which every impulse was a giant all the
memories of honour, gratitude, and law.

The mechanism of this strong man's nature was that almost unknown to the
modern time; it belonged to those earlier days which furnish to Greece
the terrible legends Ovid has clothed in gloomy fire, which a similar
civilization produced no less in the Middle Ages, whether of Italy or
the North,--that period when crime took a grandeur from its excess; when
power was so great and absolute that its girth burst the ligaments of
conscience; when a despot was but the incarnation of WILL; when honour
was indeed a religion, but its faith was valour, and it wrote its
decalogue with the point of a fearless sword.

The youth of Edward IV. was as the youth of an ancient Titan, of an
Italian Borgia; through its veins the hasty blood rolled as a devouring
flame. This impetuous and fiery temperament was rendered yet more
fearful by the indulgence of every intemperance; it fed on wine and
lust; its very virtues strengthened its vices,--its courage stifled
every whisper of prudence; its intellect, uninured to all discipline,
taught it to disdain every obstacle to its desires. Edward could,
indeed, as we have seen, be false and crafty, a temporizer, a
dissimulator; but it was only as the tiger creeps,--the better to
spring, undetected, on its prey. If detected, the cunning ceased, the
daring rose, and the mighty savage had fronted ten thousand foes, secure
in its fangs and talons, its bold heart and its deadly spring. Hence,
with all Edward's abilities, the astonishing levities and indiscretions
of his younger years. It almost seemed, as we have seen him play fast
and loose with the might of Warwick, and with that power, whether of
barons or of people, which any other prince of half his talents would
have trembled to arouse against an unrooted throne,--it almost seemed
as if he loved to provoke a danger for the pleasure it gave the brain
to baffle or the hand to crush it. His whole nature coveting excitement,
nothing was left to the beautiful, the luxurious Edward, already wearied
with pomp and pleasure, but what was unholy and forbidden. In his court
were a hundred ladies, perhaps not less fair than Anne, at least of a
beauty more commanding the common homage, but these he had only to smile
on with ease to win. No awful danger, no inexpiable guilt, attended
those vulgar frailties, and therefore they ceased to tempt. But here
the virgin guest, the daughter of his mightiest subject, the beloved
treasure of the man whose hand had built a throne, whose word had
dispersed an army--here, the more the reason warned, the conscience
started, the more the hell-born passion was aroused.

Like men of his peculiar constitution, Edward was wholly incapable of
pure and steady love. His affection for his queen the most resembled
that diviner affection; but when analyzed, it was composed of feelings
widely distinct. From a sudden passion, not otherwise to be gratified,
he had made the rashest sacrifices for an unequal marriage. His vanity,
and something of original magnanimity, despite his vices, urged him to
protect what he himself had raised,--to secure the honour of the subject
who was honoured by the king. In common with most rude and powerful
natures, he was strongly alive to the affections of a father, and the
faces of his children helped to maintain the influence of the mother.
But in all this, we need scarcely say that that true love, which is at
once a passion and a devotion, existed not. Love with him cared not for
the person loved, but solely for its own gratification; it was desire
for possession,--nothing more. But that desire was the will of a king
who never knew fear or scruple; and, pampered by eternal indulgence,
it was to the feeble lusts of common men what the storm is to the west
wind. Yet still, as in the solitude of night he paced his chamber, the
shadow of the great crime advancing upon his soul appalled even that
dauntless conscience. He gasped for breath; his cheeks flushed crimson,
and the next moment grew deadly pale. He heard the loud beating of his
heart. He stopped still. He flung himself on a seat, and hid his face
with his hands; then starting up, he exclaimed, "No, no! I cannot shut
out that sweet face, those blue eyes from my gaze. They haunt me to my
destruction and her own. Yet why say destruction? If she love me, who
shall know the deed? If she love me not, will she dare to reveal her
shame? Shame!--nay, a king's embrace never dishonours. A king's bastard
is a House's pride. All is still,--the very moon vanishes from heaven.
The noiseless rushes in the gallery give no echo to the footstep. Fie on
me! Can a Plantagenet know fear?" He allowed himself no further time to
pause; he opened the door gently and stole along the gallery. He knew
well the chamber, for it was appointed by his command, and, besides the
usual door from the corridor, a small closet conducted to a secret panel
behind the arras. It was the apartment occupied, in her visits to the
court, by the queen's rival, the Lady Elizabeth Lucy. He passed into the
closet; he lifted the arras; he stood in that chamber, which gratitude
and chivalry and hospitable faith should have made sacred as a shrine.
And suddenly, as he entered, the moon, before hid beneath a melancholy
cloud, broke forth in awful splendour, and her light rushed through
the casement opposite his eye, and bathed the room with the beams of a
ghostlier day.

The abruptness of the solemn and mournful glory scared him as the
rebuking face of a living thing; a presence as if not of earth seemed to
interpose between the victim and the guilt. It was, however, but for a
moment that his step halted. He advanced: he drew aside the folds of
the curtain heavy with tissue of gold, and the sleeping face of Anne
lay hushed before him. It looked pale in the moonlight, but ineffably
serene, and the smile on its lips seemed still sweeter than that which
it wore awake. So fixed was his gaze, so ardently did his whole heart
and being feed through his eyes upon that exquisite picture of innocence
and youth, that he did not see for some moments that the sleeper was not
alone. Suddenly an exclamation rose to his lips. He clenched his hand
in jealous agony; he approached; he bent over; he heard the regular
breathing which the dreams of guilt never know; and then, when he saw
that pure and interlaced embrace,--the serene yet somewhat melancholy
face of Sibyll, which seemed hueless as marble in the moonlight, bending
partially over that of Anne, as if even in sleep watchful; both charming
forms so linked and woven that the two seemed as one life, the very
breath in each rising and ebbing with the other; the dark ringlets of
Sibyll mingling with the auburn gold of Anne's luxuriant hair, and the
darkness and the gold, tress within tress, falling impartially over
either neck, that gleamed like ivory beneath that common veil,--when
he saw this twofold loveliness, the sentiment, the conviction of that
mysterious defence which exists in purity, thrilled like ice through his
burning veins. In all his might of monarch and of man, he felt the awe
of that unlooked-for protection,--maidenhood sheltering maidenhood,
innocence guarding innocence. The double virtue appalled and baffled
him; and that slight arm which encircled the neck he would have perilled
his realm to clasp, shielded his victim more effectually than the
bucklers of all the warriors that ever gathered round the banner of the
lofty Warwick. Night and the occasion befriended him; but in vain. While
Sibyll was there, Anne was saved. He ground his teeth, and muttered to
himself. At that moment Anne turned restlessly. This movement disturbed
the light sleep of her companion. She spoke half inaudibly, but the
sound was as the hoot of shame in the ear of the guilty king. He let
fall the curtain, and was gone. And if one who lived afterwards to hear
and to credit the murderous doom which, unless history lies, closed the
male line of Edward, had beheld the king stealing, felon-like, from
the chamber,--his step reeling to and fro the gallery floors, his face
distorted by stormy passion, his lips white and murmuring, his beauty
and his glory dimmed and humbled,--the spectator might have half
believed that while Edward gazed upon those harmless sleepers, A VISION
OF THE TRAGEDY TO COME had stricken down his thought of guilt, and
filled up its place with horror,--a vision of a sleep as pure, of two
forms wrapped in an embrace as fond, of intruders meditating a crime
scarce fouler than his own; and the sins of the father starting into
grim corporeal shapes, to become the deathsmen of the sons!




CHAPTER III. NEW DANGERS TO THE HOUSE OF YORK--AND THE KING'S HEART
ALLIES ITSELF WITH REBELLION AGAINST THE KING'S THRONE.

Oh, beautiful is the love of youth to youth, and touching the tenderness
of womanhood to woman; and fair in the eyes of the happy sun is the
waking of holy sleep, and the virgin kiss upon virgin lips smiling and
murmuring the sweet "Good-morrow!"

Anne was the first to wake; and as the bright winter morn, robust with
frosty sunbeams shone cheerily upon Sibyll's face, she was struck with
a beauty she had not sufficiently observed the day before; for in the
sleep of the young the traces of thought and care vanish, the aching
heart is lulled in the body's rest, the hard lines relax into flexile
ease, a softer, warmer bloom steals over the cheek, and, relieved
from the stiff restraints of dress, the rounded limbs repose in a more
alluring grace! Youth seems younger in its slumber, and beauty more
beautiful, and purity more pure. Long and dark, the fringe of the
eyelash rested upon the white lids, and the freshness of the parting
pouted lips invited the sister kiss that wakened up the sleeper.

"Ah, lady," said Sibyll, parting her tresses from her dark blue eyes,
"you are here, you are safe!--blessed be the saints and our Lady! for I
had a dream in the night that startled and appalled me."

"And my dreams were all blithe and golden," said Anne. "What was thine?"

"Methought you were asleep and in this chamber, and I not by your side,
but watching you at a little distance; and lo! a horrible serpent glided
from yon recess, and, crawling to your pillow, I heard its hiss, and
strove to come to your aid, but in vain; a spell seemed to chain my
limbs. At last I found voice, I cried aloud, I woke; and mock me not,
but I surely heard a parting footstep, and the low grating of some
sliding door."

"It was the dream's influence, enduring beyond the dream. I have often
felt it so,--nay, even last night; for I, too, dreamed of another,
dreamed that I stood by the altar with one far away, and when I
woke--for I woke also--it was long before I could believe it was thy
hand I held, and thine arm that embraced me."

The young friends rose, and their toilet was scarcely ended, when again
appeared in the chamber all the stateliness of retinue allotted to the
Lady Anne. Sibyll turned to depart. "And whither go you?" asked Anne.

"To visit my father; it is my first task on rising," returned Sibyll, in
a whisper.

"You must let me visit him, too, at a later hour. Find me here an hour
before noon, Sibyll."

The early morning was passed by Anne in the queen's company. The
refection, the embroidery frame, the closheys, filled up the hours.
The Duchess of Clarence had left the palace with her lord to visit
the king's mother at Baynard's Castle; and Anne's timid spirits were
saddened by the strangeness of the faces round her, and Elizabeth's
habitual silence. There was something in the weak and ill-fated queen
that ever failed to conciliate friends. Though perpetually striving to
form and create a party, she never succeeded in gaining confidence
or respect. And no one raised so high was ever left so friendless as
Elizabeth, when, in her awful widowhood, her dowry home became the
sanctuary. All her power was but the shadow of her husband's royal sun,
and vanished when the orb prematurely set; yet she had all gifts of
person in her favour, and a sleek smoothness of manner that seemed to
the superficial formed to win; but the voice was artificial, and the
eye cold and stealthy. About her formal precision there was an
eternal consciousness of self, a breathing egotism. Her laugh was
displeasing,--cynical, not mirthful; she had none of that forgetfulness
of self, that warmth when gay, that earnestness when sad, which create
sympathy. Her beauty was without loveliness, her character without
charm; every proportion in her form might allure the sensualist; but
there stopped the fascination. The mind was trivial, though cunning
and dissimulating; and the very evenness of her temper seemed but
the clockwork of a heart insensible to its own movements. Vain in
prosperity, what wonder that she was so abject in misfortune? What
wonder that even while, in later and gloomier years, [Grafton, 806]
accusing Richard III. of the murder of her royal sons, and knowing him,
at least, the executioner of her brother and her child by the bridegroom
of her youth, [Anthony Lord Rivers, and Lord Richard Gray. Not the least
instance of the frivolity of Elizabeth's mind is to be found in her
willingness, after all the woes of her second widowhood, and when she
was not very far short of sixty years old, to take a third husband,
James III., of Scotland,--a marriage prevented only by the death of the
Scotch king.] she consented to send her daughters to his custody, though
subjected to the stain of illegitimacy, and herself only recognized as
the harlot?

The king, meanwhile, had ridden out betimes alone, and no other of the
male sex presumed in his absence to invade the female circle. It was
with all a girl's fresh delight that Anne escaped at last to her own
chamber, where she found Sibyll; and, with her guidance, she threaded
the gloomy mazes of the Tower. "Let me see," she whispered, "before we
visit your father, let me see the turret in which the unhappy Henry is
confined."

And Sibyll led her through the arch of that tower, now called "The
Bloody," and showed her the narrow casement deep sunk in the mighty
wall, without which hung the starling in the cage, basking its plumes in
the wintry sun. Anne gazed with that deep interest and tender reverence
which the parent of the man she loves naturally excites in a woman; and
while thus standing sorrowful and silent, the casement was unbarred,
and she saw the mild face of the human captive; he seemed to talk to
the bird, which, in shrill tones and with clapping wings, answered
his address. At that time a horn sounded at a little distance off; a
clangour of arms, as the sentries saluted, was heard; the demoiselles
retreated through the arch, and mounted the stair conducting to the
very room, then unoccupied, in which tradition records the murder of the
Third Richard's nephews; and scarcely had they gained this retreat, ere
towards the Bloody Gate, and before the prison tower, rode the king who
had mounted the captive's throne. His steed, gaudy with its housing, his
splendid dress, the knights and squires who started forward from every
corner to hold his gilded stirrup, his vigorous youth, so blooming and
so radiant,--all contrasted, with oppressive force, the careworn face
that watched him meekly through the little casement of the Wakefield
tower. Edward's large, quick blue eye caught sudden sight of the once
familiar features. He looked up steadily, and his gaze encountered the
fallen king's. He changed countenance: but with the external chivalry
that made the surface of his hollow though brilliant character, he bowed
low to his saddle-bow as he saw his captive, and removed the plumed cap
from his high brow.

Henry smiled sadly, and shook his reverend head, as if gently to rebuke
the mockery; then he closed the casement; and Edward rode into the yard.

"How can the king hold here a court and here a prison? Oh, hard heart!"
murmured Anne, as, when Edward had disappeared, the damsels bent their
way to Adam's chamber.

"Would the Earl Warwick approve thy pity, sweet Lady Anne?" asked
Sibyll.

"My father's heart is too generous to condemn it," returned Anne, wiping
the tears from her eyes; "how often in the knight's galliard shall I see
that face!"

The turret in which Warner's room was placed flanked the wing inhabited
by the royal family and their more distinguished guests (namely,
the palace, properly speaking, as distinct from the fortress), and
communicated with the regal lodge by a long corridor, raised above
cloisters and open to a courtyard. At one end of this corridor a door
opened upon the passage, in which was situated the chamber of the Lady
Anne; the other extremity communicated with a rugged stair of stone,
conducting to the rooms tenanted by Warner. Leaving Sibyll to present
her learned father to the gentle Anne, we follow the king into the
garden, which he entered on dismounting. He found here the Archbishop
of York, who had come to the palace in his barge, and with but a slight
retinue, and who was now conversing with Hastings in earnest whispers.

The king, who seemed thoughtful and fatigued, approached the two, and
said, with a forced smile, "What learned sententiary engages you two
scholars?"

"Your Grace," said the archbishop, "Minerva was not precisely the
goddess most potent over our thoughts at that moment. I received a
letter last evening from the Duke of Gloucester, and as I know the love
borne by the prince to the Lord Hastings, I inquired of your chamberlain
how far he would have foreguessed the news it announced."

"And what may the tidings be?" asked Edward, absently.

The prelate hesitated.

"Sire," he said gravely, "the familiar confidence with which both your
Highness and the Duke of Gloucester distinguish the chamberlain, permits
me to communicate the purport of the letter in his presence. The young
duke informs me that he hath long conceived an affection which he would
improve into marriage, but before he address either the demoiselle or
her father, he prays me to confer with your Grace, whose pleasure in
this, as in all things, will be his sovereign law."

"Ah, Richard loves me with a truer love than George of Clarence! But who
can he have seen on the Borders worthy to be a prince's bride?"

"It is no sudden passion, sire, as I before hinted; nay, it has been for
some time sufficiently notorious to his friends and many of the court;
it is an affection for a maiden known to him in childhood, connected to
him by blood,--my niece, Anne Nevile."

As if stung by a scorpion, Edward threw off the prelate's arm, on which
he had been leaning with his usual caressing courtesy.

"This is too much!" said he, quickly, and his face, before somewhat
pale, grew highly flushed. "Is the whole royalty of England to be one
Nevile? Have I not sufficiently narrowed the basis of my throne? Instead
of mating my daughter to a foreign power,--to Spain or to Bretagne,--she
is betrothed to young Montagu! Clarence weds Isabel, and now
Gloucester--no, prelate, I will not consent!"
