game at last, quoth my lady's brach to the wolf hound. But ho! Sir
Burgomaster, you come like Mars, with Beauty by your side. Who is this
fair one?--Unveil, unveil--no woman calls her beauty her own tonight."

"It is my daughter, noble leader," answered Pavillon, "and I am to pray
your forgiveness for her wearing a veil. She has a vow for that effect
to the Three Blessed Kings."

"I will absolve her of it presently," said De la Marck, "for here, with
one stroke of a cleaver, will I consecrate myself Bishop of Liege, and I
trust one living bishop is worth three dead kings."

There was a shuddering and murmur among the guests, for the community
of Liege, and even some of the rude soldiers, reverenced the Kings of
Cologne, as they were commonly called, though they respected nothing
else.

"Nay, I mean no treason against their defunct majesties," said De la
Marck, "only Bishop I am determined to be. A prince both secular and
ecclesiastical, having power to bind and loose, will best suit a band of
reprobates such as you, to whom no one else would give absolution.--But
come hither, noble Burgomaster--sit beside me, when you shall see me
make a vacancy for my own preferment.--Bring in our predecessor in the
holy seat."

A bustle took place in the hall, while Pavillon, excusing himself from
the proffered seat of honour, placed himself near the bottom of the
table, his followers keeping close behind him, not unlike a flock of
sheep which, when a stranger dog is in presence, may be sometimes seen
to assemble in the rear of an old bell wether, who is, from office and
authority, judged by them to have rather more courage than themselves.
Near the spot sat a very handsome lad, a natural son, as was said,
of the ferocious De la Marck, and towards whom he sometimes showed
affection, and even tenderness. The mother of the boy, a beautiful
concubine, had perished by a blow dealt her by the ferocious leader in
a fit of drunkenness or jealousy, and her fate had caused her tyrant
as much remorse as he was capable of feeling. His attachment to the
surviving orphan might be partly owing to these circumstances. Quentin,
who had learned this point of the leader's character from the old
priest, planted himself as close as he could to the youth in question,
determined to make him, in some way or other, either a hostage or a
protector, should other means of safety fail them.

While all stood in a kind of suspense, waiting the event of the orders
which the tyrant had issued, one of Pavillon's followers whispered
Peter, "Did not our master call that wench his daughter?--Why, it cannot
be our Trudchen. This strapping lass is taller by two inches, and there
is a black lock of hair peeps forth yonder from under her veil. By Saint
Michael of the Marketplace, you might as well call a black bullock's
hide a white heifer's!

"Hush! hush!" said Peter, with some presence of mind. "What if our
'master hath a mind to steal a piece of doe venison out of the Bishop's
parks here, without our good dame's knowledge? And is it for thee or me
to be a spy on him?"

"That will not I," answered the other, "though I would not have thought
of his turning deer stealer at his years. Sapperment--what a shy fairy
it is! See how she crouches down on yonder seat, behind folks' backs, to
escape the gaze of the Marckers.--But hold, hold, what are they about to
do with the poor old Bishop?"

As he spoke, the Bishop of Liege, Louis of Bourbon, was dragged into the
hall of his own palace by the brutal soldiery. The dishevelled state
of his hair, beard, and attire bore witness to the ill treatment he had
already received, and some of his sacerdotal robes, hastily flung over
him, appeared to have been put on in scorn and ridicule of his quality
and character. By good fortune, as Quentin was compelled to think it,
the Countess Isabelle, whose feelings at seeing her protector in such an
extremity might have betrayed her own secret and compromised her safety,
was so situated as neither to hear nor see what was about to take place,
and Durward sedulously interposed his own person before her, so as to
keep her from observing alike and from observation.

The scene which followed was short and fearful. When the unhappy Prelate
was brought before the footstool of the savage leader, although in
former life only remarkable for his easy and good natured temper, he
showed in this extremity a sense of his dignity and noble blood,
well becoming the high race from which he was descended. His look was
composed and undismayed, his gesture, when the rude hands which dragged
him forward were unloosed, was noble, and at the same time resigned,
somewhat between the bearing of a feudal noble and of a Christian martyr
and so much was even De la Marck himself staggered by the firm demeanour
of his prisoner and recollection of the early benefits he had received
from him, that he seemed irresolute, cast down his eyes, and it was not
until he had emptied a large goblet of wine, that, resuming his haughty
insolence of look and manner, he thus addressed his unfortunate captive.

"Louis of Bourbon," said the truculent soldier, drawing hard his breath,
clenching 'his hands, setting his teeth, and using the other mechanical
actions to rouse up and sustain his native ferocity of temper, "I sought
your friendship, and you rejected mine. What would you now give that it
had been otherwise?--Nikkel, be ready."

The butcher rose, seized his weapon, and stealing round behind De la
Marck's chair, stood with it uplifted in his bare and sinewy hands.

"Look at that man, Louis of Bourbon," said De la Marck again,--"What
terms wilt thou now offer, to escape this dangerous hour?"

The Bishop cast a melancholy but unshaken look upon the grisly
satellite, who seemed prepared to execute the will of the tyrant, and
then he said with firmness, "Hear me, William de la Marck, and good men
all, if there be any here who deserve that name, hear the only terms I
can offer to this ruffian.

"William de la Marck, thou hast stirred up to sedition an imperial
city--hast assaulted and taken the palace of a Prince of the Holy German
Empire--slain his people--plundered his goods--maltreated his person,
for this thou art liable to the Ban of the Empire [to put a prince
under the ban of the empire was to divest him of his dignities, and
to interdict all intercourse and all offices of humanity with the
offender]--hast deserved to be declared outlawed and fugitive, landless
and rightless. Thou hast done more than all this. More than mere
human laws hast thou broken, more than mere human vengeance hast thou
deserved. Thou hast broken into the sanctuary of the Lord--laid violent
hands upon a Father of the Church--defiled the house of God with blood
and rapine, like a sacrilegious robber--"

"Hast thou yet done?" said De la Marck, fiercely interrupting him, and
stamping with his foot.

"No," answered the Prelate, "for I have not yet told thee the terms
which you demanded to hear from me."

"Go on," said De la Marck, "and let the terms please me better than the
preface, or woe to thy gray head!"

And flinging himself back in his seat, he grinded his teeth till the
foam flew from his lips, as from the tusks of the savage animal whose
name and spoils he wore.

"Such are thy crimes," resumed the Bishop, with calm determination, "now
hear the terms, which, as a merciful Prince and a Christian Prelate,
setting aside all personal offence, forgiving each peculiar injury,
I condescend to offer. Fling down thy heading staff--renounce thy
command--unbind thy prisoners--restore thy spoil--distribute what else
thou hast of goods, to relieve those whom thou hast made orphans and
widows--array thyself in sackcloth and ashes--take a palmer's staff in
thy hand, and go barefooted on pilgrimage to Rome, and we will ourselves
be intercessors for thee with the Imperial Chamber at Ratisbon for thy
life, With our Holy Father the Pope for thy miserable soul."

While Louis of Bourbon proposed these terms, in a tone as decided as if
he still occupied his episcopal throne, and as if the usurper kneeled
a suppliant at his feet, the tyrant slowly raised himself in his chair,
the amazement with which he was at first filled giving way gradually to
rage, until, as the Bishop ceased, he looked to Nikkel Blok, and raised
his finger, without speaking a word. The ruffian struck as if he had
been doing his office in the common shambles, and the murdered Bishop
sunk, without a groan, at the foot of his own episcopal throne. The
Liegeois, who were not prepared for so horrible a catastrophe, and who
had expected to hear the conference end in some terms of accommodation,
started up unanimously, with cries of execration, mingled with shouts of
vengeance.

[In assigning the present date to the murder of the Bishop of Liege,
Louis de Bourbon, history has been violated. It is true that the Bishop
was made prisoner by the insurgents of that city. It is also true that
the report of the insurrection came to Charles with a rumour that the
Bishop was slain, which excited his indignation against Louis, who was
then in his power. But these things happened in 1468, and the Bishop's
murder did not take place till 1482. In the months of August and
September of that year, William de la Marck, called the Wild Boar of
Ardennes, entered into a conspiracy with the discontented citizens
of Liege against their Bishop, Louis of Bourbon, being aided with
considerable sums of money by the King of France. By this means, and the
assistance of many murderers and banditti, who thronged to him as to a
leader befitting them, De la Marck assembled a body of troops, whom he
dressed in scarlet as a uniform, with a boar's head on the left sleeve.
With this little army he approached the city of Liege. Upon this the
citizens, who were engaged in the conspiracy, came to their Bishop, and,
offering to stand by him to the death, exhorted him to march out against
these robbers. The Bishop, therefore, put himself at the head of a few
troops of his own, trusting to the assistance of the people of Liege.
But so soon as they came in sight of the enemy, the citizens, as before
agreed, fled from the Bishop's banner, and he was left with his own
handful of adherents. At this moment De la Marck charged at the head of
his banditti with the expected success. The Bishop was brought before
the profligate Knight, who first cut him over the face, then murdered
him with his own hand, and caused his body to be exposed naked in the
great square of Liege before Saint Lambert's Cathedral. S.]

But William de la Marck, raising his tremendous voice above the tumult,
and shaking his clenched hand and extended arm, shouted aloud, "How now,
ye porkers of Liege! ye wallowers in the mud of the Maes!--do ye dare to
mate yourselves with the Wild Boar of Ardennes?--Up, ye Boar's brood!"
(an expression by which he himself, and others, often designated his
soldiers) "let these Flemish hogs see your tusks!"

Every one of his followers started up at the command, and mingled as
they were among their late allies, prepared too for such a surprisal,
each had, in an instant, his next neighbour by the collar, while his
right hand brandished a broad dagger that glimmered against lamplight
and moonshine. Every arm was uplifted, but no one struck, for the
victims were too much surprised for resistance, 'and it was probably the
object of De la Marck only to impose terror on his civic confederates.

But the courage of Quentin Durward, prompt and alert in resolution
beyond his years, and stimulated at the moment by all that could add
energy to his natural shrewdness and resolution, gave a new turn to the
scene. Imitating the action of the followers of De la Marck, he sprang
on Carl Eberson, the son of their leader, and mastering him with ease,
held his dirk at the boy's throat, while he exclaimed, "Is that your
game? then here I play my part."

"Hold! hold!" exclaimed De la Marck, "it is a jest--a jest.--Think you I
would injure my good friends and allies of the city of Liege!--Soldiers,
unloose your holds, sit down, take away the carrion" (giving the
Bishop's corpse a thrust with his foot) "which hath caused this strife
among friends, and let us drown unkindness in a fresh carouse."

All unloosened their holds, and the citizens and the soldiers stood
gazing on each other, as if they scarce knew whether they were friends
or foes. Quentin Durward took advantage of the moment.

"Hear me," he said, "William de la Marck, and you, burghers and citizens
of Liege--and do you, young sir, stand still" (for the boy Carl was
attempting to escape from his grip)--"no harm shall befall you unless
another of these sharp jests shall pass around."

"Who art thou, in the fiend's name," said the astonished De la Marck,
"who art come to hold terms and take hostages from us in our own
lair--from us, who exact pledges from others, but yield them to no one?"

"I am a servant of King Louis of France," said Quentin, boldly, "an
Archer of his Scottish Guard, as my language and dress may partly tell
you. I am here to behold and to report your proceedings, and I see
with wonder that they are those of heathens, rather than Christians--of
madmen, rather than men possessed of reason. The hosts of Charles of
Burgundy will be instantly in motion against you all, and if you wish
assistance from France, you must conduct yourself in a different manner.

"For you, men of Liege, I advise your instant return to your own city,
and if there is any obstruction offered to your departure, I denounce
those by whom it is so offered, foes to my master, his Most Gracious
Majesty of France."

"France and Liege! France and Liege!" cried the followers of Pavillon,
and several other citizens whose courage began to rise at the bold
language held by Quentin.

"France and Liege, and long live the gallant Archer! We will live and
die with him!"

William de la Marck's eyes sparkled, and he grasped his dagger as if
about to launch it at the heart of the audacious speaker, but glancing
his eye around, he read something in the looks of his soldiers which
even he was obliged to respect. Many of them were Frenchmen, and all of
them knew the private support which William had received, both in men
and in money, from that kingdom, nay, some of them were rather startled
at the violent and sacrilegious action which had been just committed.
The name of Charles of Burgundy, a person likely to resent to the utmost
the deeds of that night, had an alarming sound, and the extreme impolicy
of at once quarrelling with the Liegeois and provoking the Monarch of
France, made an appalling impression on their minds, confused as their
intellects were. De la Marck, in short, saw he would not be supported,
even by his own band, in any farther act of immediate violence, and
relaxing the terrors of his brow and eye, declared that he had not the
least design against his good friends of Liege, all of whom were at
liberty to depart from Schonwaldt at their pleasure, although he had
hoped they would revel one night with him, at least, in honour of their
victory. He added, with more calmness than he commonly used, that he
would be ready to enter into negotiation concerning the partition of
spoil, and the arrangement of measures for their mutual defence, either
the next day, or as soon after as they would. Meantime he trusted that
the Scottish gentleman would honour his feast by remaining all night at
Schonwaldt.

The young Scot returned his thanks, but said his motions must be
determined by those of Pavillon, to whom he was directed particularly
to attach himself, but that, unquestionably, he would attend him on his
next return to the quarters of the valiant William de la Marck.

"If you depend on my motions," said Pavillon, hastily and aloud, "you
are likely to quit Schonwaldt without an instant's delay--and, if you do
not come back to Schonwaldt, save in my company, you are not likely to
see it again in a hurry."

This last part of the sentence the honest citizen muttered to himself,
afraid of the consequences of giving audible vent 'to feelings which,
nevertheless, he was unable altogether to suppress.

"Keep close about me, my brisk Kurschner [a worker in fur] lads." he
said to his bodyguard, "and we will get as fast as we can out of this
den of thieves."

Most of the better classes of the Liegeois seemed to entertain similar
opinions with the Syndic, and there had been scarce so much joy amongst
them at the obtaining possession of Schonwaldt as now seemed to arise
from the prospect of getting safe out of it. They were suffered to leave
the castle without opposition of any kind, and glad was Quentin when he
turned his back on those formidable walls.

For the first time since they had entered that dreadful hall, Quentin
ventured to ask the young Countess how she did.

"Well, well," she answered, in feverish haste, "excellently well--do
not stop to ask a question, let us not lose an instant in words.--Let us
fly--let us fly!"

She endeavoured to mend her pace as she spoke, but with so little
success that she must have fallen from exhaustion had not Durward
supported her. With the tenderness of a mother, when she conveys her
infant out of danger, the young Scot raised his precious charge in his
arms, and while she encircled his neck with one arm, lost to every other
thought save the desire of escaping, he would not have wished one of the
risks of the night unencountered, since such had been the conclusion.

The honest Burgomaster was, in his turn, supported and dragged forward
by his faithful counsellor Peter, and another of his clerks, and thus,
in breathless haste, they reached the banks of the river, encountering
many strolling bands of citizens, who were eager to know the event of
the siege, and the truth of certain rumours already afloat that the
conquerors had quarrelled among themselves.

Evading their curiosity as they best could, the exertions of Peter and
some of his companions at length procured a boat for the use of the
company, and with it an opportunity of enjoying some repose, equally
welcome to Isabelle, who continued to lie almost motionless in the arms
of her deliverer, and to the worthy Burgomaster, who, after delivering a
broken string of thanks to Durward, whose mind was at the time too much
occupied to answer him, began a long harangue, which he addressed to
Peter, upon his own courage and benevolence, and the dangers to which
these virtues had exposed him, on this and other occasions.

"Peter, Peter," he said, resuming the complaint of the preceding
evening, "if I had not had a bold heart, I would never have stood out
against paying the burghers twentieths, when every other living soul
was willing to pay the same.--Ay, and then a less stout heart had not
seduced me into that other battle of Saint Tron, where a Hainault man
at arms thrust me into a muddy ditch with his lance, which neither heart
nor hand that I had could help me out of till the battle was over.--Ay,
and then, Peter, this very night my courage seduced me, moreover, into
too strait a corselet, which would have been the death of me, but
for the aid of this gallant young gentleman, whose trade is fighting,
whereof I wish him heartily joy. And then for my tenderness of heart,
Peter, it has made a poor man of me, that is, it would have made a
poor man of me, if I had not been tolerably well to pass in this wicked
world--and Heaven knows what trouble it is likely to bring on me yet,
with ladies, countesses, and keeping of secrets, which, for aught I
know, may cost me half my fortune, and my neck into the bargain!"

Quentin could remain no longer silent, but assured him that whatever
danger or damage he should incur on the part of the young lady now under
his protection should be thankfully acknowledged, and, as far as was
possible, repaid.

"I thank you, young Master Squire Archer, I thank you," answered the
citizen of Liege "but who was it told you that I desired any repayment
at your hand for doing the duty of an honest man? I only regretted that
it might cost me so and so, and I hope I may have leave to say so much
to my lieutenant, without either grudging my loss or my peril."

Quentin accordingly concluded that his present friend was one of the
numerous class of benefactors to others, who take out their reward in
grumbling, without meaning more than, by showing their grievances,
to exalt a little the idea of the valuable service by which they have
incurred them, and therefore prudently remained silent, and suffered the
Syndic to maunder on to his lieutenant concerning the risk and the
loss he had encountered by his zeal for the public good, and his
disinterested services to individuals, until they reached his own
habitation.

The truth was, that the honest citizen felt that he had lost a little
consequence, by suffering the young stranger to take the lead at the
crisis which had occurred at the castle hall of Schonwaldt, and, however
delighted with the effect of Durward's interference at the moment, it
seemed to him, on reflection, that he had sustained a diminution
of importance, for which he endeavoured to obtain compensation by
exaggerating the claims which he had upon the gratitude of his country
in general, his friends in particular, and more especially still, on the
Countess of Croye, and her youthful protector.

But when the boat stopped at the bottom of his garden, and he had got
himself assisted on shore by Peter, it seemed as if the touch of his own
threshold had at once dissipated those feelings of wounded self opinion
and jealousy, and converted the discontented and obscured demagogue into
the honest, kind, hospitable, and friendly host. He called loudly for
Trudchen, who presently appeared, for fear and anxiety would permit few
within the walls of Liege to sleep during that eventful night. She was
charged to pay the utmost attention to the care of the beautiful and
half fainting stranger, and, admiring her personal charms, while she
pitied her distress, Gertrude discharged the hospitable duty with the
zeal and affection of a sister.

Late as it now was, and fatigued as the Syndic appeared, Quentin, on his
side, had difficulty to escape a flask of choice and costly wine, as old
as the battle of Azincour, and must have submitted to take his share,
however unwilling, but for the appearance of the mother of the family,
whom Pavillon's loud summons for the keys of the cellar brought forth
from her bedroom. She was a jolly little roundabout, woman, who had
been pretty in her time, but whose principal characteristics for several
years had been a red and sharp nose, a shrill voice, and a determination
that the Syndic, in consideration of the authority which he exercised
when abroad, should remain under the rule of due discipline at home.

So soon as she understood the nature of the debate between her husband
and his guest, she declared roundly that the former, instead of having
occasion for more wine, had got too much already, and, far from using,
in furtherance of his request, any of the huge bunch of keys which
hung by a silver chain at her waist, she turned her back on him without
ceremony, and ushered Quentin to the neat and pleasant apartment in
which he was to spend the night, amid such appliances to rest and
comfort as probably he had till that moment been entirely a stranger
to, so much did the wealthy Flemings excel, not merely the poor and rude
Scots, but the French themselves in all the conveniences of domestic
life.



CHAPTER XXIII: THE FLIGHT

     Now bid me run,
     And I will strive with things impossible;
     Yea, get the better of them.

     Set on your foot;
     And, with a heart new fired, I follow you,
     To do I know not what.

     JULIUS CAESAR


In spite of a mixture of joy and fear, doubt, anxiety, and other
agitating passions, the exhausting fatigues of the preceding day were
powerful enough to throw the young Scot into a deep and profound repose,
which lasted until late on the day following, when his worthy host
entered the apartment with looks of care on his brow.

He seated himself by his guest's bedside, and began a long and
complicated discourse upon the domestic duties of a married life, and
especially upon the awful power and right supremacy which it became
married men to sustain in all differences of opinion with their wives.
Quentin listened with some anxiety. He knew that husbands, like other
belligerent powers, were sometimes disposed to sing Te Deum [Te Deum
laudamus: We praise Thee, O God; the first words of an ancient
hymn, sung in the morning service of the Anglican and Roman Catholic
Churches], rather to conceal a defeat than to celebrate a victory, and
he hastened to probe the matter more closely, by hoping their arrival
had been attended with no inconvenience to the good lady of the
household.

"Inconvenience!--no," answered the Burgomaster.--"No woman can be
less taken unawares than Mother Mabel--always happy to see her
friends--always a clean lodging and a handsome meal ready for them, with
God's blessing on bed and board.--No woman on earth so hospitable--only
'tis pity her temper is something particular."

"Our residence here is disagreeable to her, in short?" said the Scot,
starting out of bed, and beginning to dress himself hastily. "Were I but
sure the Lady Isabelle were fit for travel after the horrors of the last
night, we would not increase the offence by remaining here an instant
longer."

"Nay," said Pavillon, "that is just what the young lady herself said to
Mother Mabel, and truly I wish you saw the colour that came to her face
as she said it--a milkmaid that has skated five miles to market against
the frost wind is a lily compared to it--I do not wonder Mother Mabel
may be a little jealous, poor dear soul."

"Has the Lady Isabelle then left her apartment?" said the youth,
continuing his toilette operations with more dispatch than before.

"Yes," replied Pavillon, "and she expects your approach with much
impatience, to determine which way you shall go since you are both
determined on going. But I trust you will tarry breakfast?"

"Why did you not tell me this sooner?" said Durward, impatiently.

"Softly--softly," said the Syndic, "I have told it you too soon, I
think, if it puts you into such a hasty fluster. Now I have some more
matter for your ear, if I saw you had some patience to listen to me."

"Speak it, worthy sir, as soon and as fast as you can--I listen
devoutly."

"Well," resumed the Burgomaster, "I have but one word to say, and that
is that Trudchen, who is as sorry to part with yonder pretty lady as if
she had been some sister of hers, wants you to take some other disguise,
for there is word in the town that the Ladies of Croye travel the
country in pilgrim's dresses, attended by a French life guardsman of the
Scottish Archers, and it is said one of them was brought into Schonwaldt
last night by a Bohemian after we had left it, and it was said still
farther, that this same Bohemian had assured William de la Marck that
you were charged with no message either to him or to the good people of
Liege, and that you had stolen away the young Countess, and travelled
with her as her paramour. And all this news hath come from Schonwaldt
this morning, and it has been told to us and the other councillors, who
know not well what to advise, for though our own opinion is that William
de la Marck has been a thought too rough both with the Bishop and with
ourselves, yet there is a great belief that he is a good natured soul at
bottom--that is, when he is sober--and that he is the only leader in
the world to command us against the Duke of Burgundy, and, in truth, as
matters stand, it is partly my own mind that we must keep fair with him,
for we have gone too far to draw back."

"Your daughter advises well," said Quentin Durward, abstaining from
reproaches or exhortations, which he saw would be alike unavailing to
sway a resolution which had been adopted by the worthy magistrate in
compliance at once with the prejudices of his party and the inclination
of his wife.

"Your daughter counsels well.--We must part in disguise, and that
instantly. We may, I trust, rely upon you for the necessary secrecy, and
for the means of escape?"

"With all my heart--with all my heart," said the honest citizen, who,
not much satisfied with the dignity of his own conduct, was eager to
find some mode of atonement. "I cannot but remember that I owed you my
life last night, both for unclasping that accursed steel doublet, and
helping me through the other scrape, which was worse, for yonder Boar
and his brood look more like devils than men. So I will be true to you
as blade to haft, as our cutlers say, who are the best in the whole
world. Nay, now you are ready, come this way--you shall see how far I
can trust you."

The Syndic led him from the chamber in which he had slept to his own
counting room, in which he transacted his affairs of business, and after
bolting the door, and casting a piercing and careful eye around him,
he opened a concealed and vaulted closet behind the tapestry, in which
stood more than one iron chest. He proceeded to open one which was full
of guilders, and placed it at Quentin's discretion to take whatever sum
he might think necessary for his companion's expenses and his own.

As the money with which Quentin was furnished on leaving Plessis was
now nearly expended, he hesitated not to accept the sum of two hundred
guilders, and by doing so took a great weight from the mind of Pavillon,
who considered the desperate transaction in which he thus voluntarily
became the creditor as an atonement for the breach of hospitality which
various considerations in a great measure compelled him to commit.

Having carefully locked his treasure chamber, the wealthy Fleming next
conveyed his guest to the parlour, where, in full possession of her
activity of mind and body, though pale from the scenes of the preceding
night, he found the Countess attired in the fashion of a Flemish maiden
of the middling class. No other was present excepting Trudchen, who was
sedulously employed in completing the Countess's dress, and instructing
her how to bear herself. She extended her hand to him, which, when he
had reverently kissed, she said to him, "Seignior Quentin, we must leave
our friends here unless I would bring on them a part of the misery which
has pursued me ever since my father's death. You must change your dress
and go with me, unless you also are tired of befriending a being so
unfortunate."

"I!--I tired of being your attendant!--To the end of the earth will
I guard you! But you--you yourself--are you equal to the task you
undertake!--Can you, after the terrors of last night"

"Do not recall them to my memory," answered the Countess, "I remember
but the confusion of a horrid dream.--Has the excellent Bishop escaped?"

"I trust he is in freedom," said Quentin, making a sign to Pavillon, who
seemed about to enter on the dreadful narrative, to be silent.

"Is it possible for us to rejoin him?--Hath he gathered any power?" said
the lady.

"His only hopes are in Heaven," said the Scot, "but wherever you wish to
go, I stand by your side, a determined guide and guard."

"We will consider," said Isabelle, and after a moment's pause, she
added, "A convent would be my choice, but that I fear it would prove a
weak defence against those who pursue me."

"Hem! hem!" said the Syndic, "I could not well recommend a convent
within the district of Liege, because the Boar of Ardennes, though in
the main a brave leader, a trusty confederate, and a well wisher to our
city, has, nevertheless, rough humours, and payeth, on the whole, little
regard to cloisters, convents, nunneries, and the like. Men say that
there are a score of nuns--that is, such as were nuns--who march always
with his company."

"Get yourself in readiness hastily, Seignior Durward," said Isabelle,
interrupting this detail, "since to your faith I must needs commit
myself."

No sooner had the Syndic and Quentin left the room than Isabelle began
to ask of Gertrude various questions concerning the roads, and so forth,
with such clearness of spirit and pertinence, that the latter could
not help exclaiming, "Lady, I wonder at you!--I have heard of masculine
firmness, but yours appears to me more than belongs to humanity."

"Necessity," answered the Countess,--"necessity, my friend, is the
mother of courage, as of invention. No long time since, I might have
fainted when I saw a drop of blood shed from a trifling cut--I have
since seen life blood flow around me, I may say, in waves, yet I have
retained my senses and my self possession.--Do not think it was an easy
task," she added, laying on Gertrude's arm a trembling hand, although
she still spoke with a firm voice, "the little world within me is like
a garrison besieged by a thousand foes, whom nothing but the most
determined resolution can keep from storming it on every hand, and at
every moment. Were my situation one whit less perilous than it is--were
I not sensible that my only chance to escape a fate more horrible than
death is to retain my recollection and self possession--Gertrude,
I would at this moment throw myself into your arms, and relieve my
bursting bosom by such a transport of tears and agony of terror as never
rushed from a breaking heart."

"Do not do so, lady!" said the sympathizing Fleming, "take courage, tell
your beads, throw yourself on the care of Heaven, and surely, if
ever Heaven sent a deliverer to one ready to perish, that bold and
adventurous young gentleman must be designed for yours. There is one,
too," she added, blushing deeply, "in whom I have some interest. Say
nothing to my father, but I have ordered my bachelor, Hans Glover, to
wait for you at the eastern gate, and never to see my face more, unless
he brings word that he has guided you safe from the territory."

To kiss her tenderly was the only way in which the young Countess
could express her thanks to the frank and kind hearted city maiden, who
returned the embrace affectionately, and added, with a smile, "Nay, if
two maidens and their devoted bachelors cannot succeed in a disguise and
an escape, the world is changed from what I am told it wont to be."

A part of this speech again called the colour into the Countess's
pale cheeks, which was not lessened by Quentin's sudden appearance. He
entered completely attired as a Flemish boor of the better class, in the
holyday suit of Peter, who expressed his interest in the young Scot by
the readiness with which he parted with it for his use, and swore, at
the same time, that, were he to be curried and tugged worse than
ever was bullock's hide, they should make nothing out of him, to the
betraying of the young folks. Two stout horses had been provided by
the activity of Mother Mabel, who really desired the Countess and her
attendant no harm, so that she could make her own house and family clear
of the dangers which might attend upon harbouring them. She beheld them
mount and go off with great satisfaction, after telling them that they
would find their way to the east gate by keeping their eye on Peter, who
was to walk in that direction as their guide, but without holding any
visible communication with them. The instant her guests had departed,
Mother Mabel took the opportunity to read a long practical lecture
to Trudchen upon the folly of reading romances, whereby the flaunting
ladies of the Court were grown so bold and venturous, that, instead of
applying to learn some honest housewifery, they must ride, forsooth,
a-damsel erranting through the country, with no better attendant than
some idle squire, debauched page, or rake belly archer from foreign
parts, to the great danger of their health, the impoverishing of their
substance, and the irreparable prejudice of their reputation. All this
Gertrude heard in silence, and without reply, but, considering her
character, it might be doubted whether she derived from it the practical
inference which it was her mother's purpose to enforce. Meantime, the
travellers had gained the eastern gate of the city, traversing crowds of
people, who were fortunately too much busied in the political events and
rumours of the hour to give any attention to a couple who had so little
to render their appearance remarkable. They passed the guards in virtue
of a permission obtained for them by Pavillon, but in the name of
his colleague Rouslaer, and they took leave of Peter Geislaer with a
friendly though brief exchange of good wishes on either side.

Immediately afterwards, they were joined by a stout young man, riding
a good gray horse, who presently made himself known as Hans Glover, the
bachelor of Trudchen Pavillon. He was a young fellow with a good Flemish
countenance--not, indeed, of the most intellectual cast, but arguing
more hilarity and good humour than wit, and, as the Countess could not
