she--the foolish tattler--who had set the report abroad regarding the
poor Indian woman. As for Madam Esmond, she had repelled the insinuation
with scorn when Parson Stack brought it to her, and said, "I should as
soon fancy Mr. Esmond stealing the spoons, or marrying a negro woman
out of the kitchen." But, though she disdained to find the poor Biche
guilty, and even thanked her for attending her son in his illness, she
treated her with such a chilling haughtiness of demeanour, that the
Indian slunk away into the servants' quarters, and there tried to drown
her disappointments with drink. It was not a cheerful picture that which
George gave of his two months at home. "The birthright is mine, Harry,"
he said, "but thou art the favourite, and God help me! I think my mother
almost grudges it to me. Why should I have taken the pas, and preceded
your worship into the world? Had you been the eider, you would have had
the best cellar, and ridden the best nag, and been the most popular
man in the country, whereas I have not a word to say for myself, and
frighten people by my glum face: I should have been second son, and set
up as lawyer, or come to England and got my degrees, and turned parson,
and said grace at your honour's table. The time is out of joint, sir. O
cursed spite, that ever I was born to set it right!"

"Why, Georgy, you are talking verses, I protest you are!" says Harry.

"I think, my dear, some one else talked those verses before me," says
George, with a smile.

"It's out of one of your books. You know every book that ever was wrote,
that I do believe!" cries Harry, and then told his brother how he had
seen the two authors at Tunbridge, and how he had taken off his hat to
them. "Not that I cared much about their books, not being clever enough.
But I remembered how my dear old George used to speak of 'em," says
Harry, with a choke in his voice, "and that's why I liked to see them. I
say, dear, it's like a dream seeing you over again. Think of that bloody
Indian with his knife at my George's head! I should like to give that
Monsieur de Florac something for saving you--but I haven't got much now,
only my little gold knee-buckles, and they ain't worth two guineas."

"You have got the half of what I have, child, and we'll divide as soon
as I have paid the Frenchman," George said.

On which Harry broke out not merely into blessings but actual
imprecations, indicating his intense love and satisfaction; and he swore
that there never was such a brother in the world as his brother George.
Indeed, for some days after his brother's arrival his eyes followed
George about: he would lay down his knife and fork, or his newspaper,
when they were sitting together, and begin to laugh to himself. When he
walked with George on the Mall or in Hyde Park, he would gaze round at
the company, as much as to say, "Look here, gentlemen! This is he.
This is my brother, that was dead and is alive again! Can any man in
Christendom produce such a brother as this?"

Of course he was of opinion that George should pay to Museau's heirs
the sum which he had promised for his ransom. This question had been the
cause of no small unhappiness to poor George at home. Museau dead, Madam
Esmond argued with much eagerness, and not a little rancour, the bargain
fell to the ground, and her son was free. The man was a rogue in the
first instance. She would not pay the wages of iniquity. Mr. Esmond had
a small independence from his father, and might squander his patrimony
if he chose. He was of age, and the money was in his power; but she
would be no party to such extravagance, as giving twelve thousand livres
to a parcel of peasants in Normandy with whom we were at war, and who
would very likely give it all to the priests and the pope. She would not
subscribe to any such wickedness. If George wanted to squander away his
father's money (she must say that formerly he had not been so eager,
and when Harry's benefit was in question had refused to touch a penny of
it!)--if he wished to spend it now, why not give it to his own flesh and
blood, to poor Harry, who was suddenly deprived of his inheritance, and
not to a set of priest-ridden peasants in France? This dispute had raged
between mother and son during the whole of the latter's last days
in Virginia. It had never been settled. On the morning of George's
departure, Madam Esmond had come to his bedside after a sleepless night,
and asked him whether he still persisted in his intention to fling away
his father's property?

He replied in a depth of grief and perplexity, that his word was passed,
and he must do as his honour bade him. She answered that she would
continue to pray that Heaven might soften his proud heart, and enable
her to bear her heavy trials: and the last view George had of his
mother's face was as she stood yet a moment by his bedside, pale and
with tearless eyes, before she turned away and slowly left his chamber.

"Where didst thou learn the art of winning over everybody to thy side,
Harry?" continued George; "and how is it that you and all the world
begin by being friends? Teach me a few lessons in popularity, nay,
I don't know that I will have them; and when I find and hear certain
people hate me, I think I am rather pleased than angry. At first, at
Richmond, Mr. Esmond Warrington, the only prisoner who had escaped from
Braddock's field--the victim of so much illness and hardship--was a
favourite with the town-folks, and received privately and publicly with
no little kindness. The parson glorified my escape in a sermon; the
neighbours came to visit the fugitive; the family coach was ordered out,
and Madam Esmond and I paid our visits in return. I think some pretty
little caps were set at me. But these our mother routed off, and
frightened with the prodigious haughtiness of her demeanour; and my
popularity was already at the decrease before the event occurred which
put the last finishing stroke to it. I was not jolly enough for the
officers, and didn't care for their drinking-bouts, dice-boxes, and
swearing. I was too sarcastic for the ladies, and their tea and tattle
stupefied me almost as much as the men's blustering and horse-talk. I
cannot tell thee, Harry, how lonely I felt in that place, amidst the
scandal and squabbles: I regretted my prison almost, and found myself
more than once wishing for the freedom of thought, and the silent ease
of Duquesne. I am very shy, I suppose: I can speak unreservedly to very
few people. Before most, I sit utterly silent. When we two were at home,
it was thou who used to talk at table, and get a smile now and then from
our mother. When she and I were together we had no subject in common,
and we scarce spoke at all until we began to dispute about law and
divinity.

"So the gentlemen had determined I was supercilious, and a dull
companion (and, indeed, I think their opinion was right), and the ladies
thought I was cold and sarcastic,--could never make out whether I was
in earnest or no, and, I think, generally voted I was a disagreeable
fellow, before my character was gone quite away; and that went with the
appearance of the poor Biche. Oh, a nice character they made for me, my
dear!" cried George, in a transport of wrath, "and a pretty life they
led me after Museau's unlucky messenger had appeared amongst us! The
boys hooted the poor woman if she appeared in the street; the ladies
dropped me half-curtseys, and walked over to the other side. That
precious clergyman went from one tea-table to another preaching on the
horrors of seduction, and the lax principles which young men learned in
popish countries and brought back thence. The poor Fawn's appearance
at home a few weeks after my return home, was declared to be a scheme
between her and me; and the best informed agreed that she had waited on
the other side of the river until I gave her the signal to come and
join me in Richmond. The officers bantered me at the coffee-house, and
cracked their clumsy jokes about the woman I had selected. Oh, the world
is a nice charitable world! I was so enraged that I thought of going to
Castlewood and living alone there,--for our mother finds the place dull,
and the greatest consolation in precious Mr. Stack's ministry,--when
the news arrived of your female perplexity, and I think we were all glad
that I should have a pretext for coming to Europe."

"I should like to see any of the infernal scoundrels who said word
against you, and break their rascally bones," roars out Harry, striding
up and down the room.

"I had to do something like it for Bob Clubber."

"What! that little sneaking, backbiting, toad-eating wretch, who is
always hanging about my lord at Greenway Court, and spunging on every
gentleman in the country? If you whipped him, I hope you whipped him
well, George?"

"We were bound over to keep the peace; and I offered to go into Maryland
with him and settle our difference there, and of course the good folk
said, that having made free with the seventh commandment I was inclined
to break the sixth. So, by this and by that--and being as innocent of
the crime imputed to me as you are--I left home, my dear Harry, with as
awful a reputation as ever a young gentleman earned."

Ah, what an opportunity is there here to moralise! If the esteemed
reader and his humble servant could but know--could but write down in
a book--could but publish, with illustrations, a collection of the
lies which have been told regarding each of us since we came to man's
estate,--what a harrowing and thrilling work of fiction that romance
would be! Not only is the world informed of everything about you, but
of a great deal more. Not long since the kind postman brought a paper
containing a valuable piece of criticism, which stated--"This author
states he was born in such and such a year. It is a lie. He was born in
the year so and so." The critic knew better: of course he did. Another
(and both came from the country which gave MULLIGAN birth) warned some
friend, saying, "Don't speak of New South Wales to him. He has a brother
there, and the family never mention his name." But this subject is too
vast and noble for a mere paragraph. I shall prepare a memoir, or let
us have rather, par une societe de gens de lettres, a series of
biographies, of lives of gentlemen, as told by their dear friends whom
they don't know.

George having related his exploits as champion and martyr, of course
Harry had to unbosom himself to his brother, and lay before his elder
an account of his private affairs. He gave up all the family of
Castlewood--my lord, not for getting the better of him at play; for
Harry was a sporting man, and expected to pay when he lost, and receive
when he won; but for refusing to aid the chaplain in his necessity, and
dismissing him with such false and heartless pretexts. About Mr. Will he
had made up his mind, after the horse-dealing matter, and freely
marked his sense of the latter's conduct upon Mr. Will's eyes and nose.
Respecting the Countess and Lady Fanny, Harry spoke in a manner more
guarded, but not very favourable. He had heard all sorts of stories
about them. The Countess was a card-playing old cat; Lady Fanny was a
desperate flirt. Who told him? Well, he had heard the stories from a
person who knew them both very well indeed. In fact, in those days
of confidence, of which we made mention in the last volume, Maria had
freely imparted to her cousin a number of anecdotes respecting her
stepmother and her half-sister, which were by no means in favour of
those ladies.

But in respect to Lady Maria herself, the young man was staunch and
hearty. "It may be imprudent: I don't say no, George. I may be a fool:
I think I am. I know there will be a dreadful piece of work at home, and
that Madam and she will fight. Well! we must live apart. Our estate is
big enough to live on without quarrelling, and I can go elsewhere than
to Richmond or Castlewood. When you come to the property, you'll give me
a bit--at any rate, Madam will let me off at an easy rent--or I'll make
a famous farmer or factor. I can't and won't part from Maria. She has
acted so nobly by me, that I should be a rascal to turn my back on her.
Think of her bringing me every jewel she had in the world, dear
brave creature! and flinging them into my lap with her last
guineas,--and--and--God bless her!" Here Harry dashed his sleeve across
his eyes, with a stamp of his foot, and said, "No, brother, I won't part
with her--not to be made Governor of Virginia tomorrow; and my dearest
old George would never advise me to do so, I know that."

"I am sent here to advise you," George replied. "I am sent to break the
marriage off, if I can: and a more unhappy one I can't imagine. But I
can't counsel you to break your word, my boy."

"I knew you couldn't! What's said is said, George. I have made my bed,
and must lie on it," says Mr. Harry, gloomily.

Such had been the settlement between our two young worthies, when
they first talked over Mr. Harry's love affair. But after George's
conversation with his aunt, and the further knowledge of his family,
which he acquired through the information of that keen old woman of the
world, Mr. Warrington, who was naturally of a sceptical turn, began to
doubt about Lady Maria, as well as regarding her brothers and sister,
and looked at Harry's engagement with increased distrust and alarm. Was
it for his wealth that Maria wanted Harry? Was it his handsome young
person that she longed after? Were those stories true which Aunt
Bernstein had told of her? Certainly he could not advise Harry to
break his word; but he might cast about in his mind for some scheme for
putting Maria's affection to the trial; and his ensuing conduct, which
appeared not very amiable, I suppose resulted from this deliberation.




CHAPTER LVI. Ariadne


My Lord Castlewood had a house in Kensington Square spacious enough to
accommodate the several members of his noble family, and convenient for
their service at the palace hard by, when his Majesty dwelt there. Her
ladyship had her evenings, and gave her card-parties here for such as
would come; but Kensington was a long way from London a hundred years
since, and George Selwyn said he for one was afraid to go, for fear
of being robbed of a night,--whether by footpads with crape over their
faces, or by ladies in rouge at the quadrille-table, we have no means of
saying. About noon on the day after Harry had made his reappearance at
White's, it chanced that all his virtuous kinsfolks partook of breakfast
together, even Mr. Will being present, who was to go into waiting in the
afternoon.

The ladies came first to their chocolate: them Mr. Will joined in his
court suit; finally, my lord appeared, languid, in his bedgown and
nightcap, having not yet assumed his wig for the day. Here was news
which Will had brought home from the Star and Garter last night, when he
supped in company with some men who had heard it at White's and seen it
at Ranelagh!

"Heard what? seen what?" asked the head of the house, taking up his
Daily Advertiser.

"Ask Maria!" says Lady Fanny. My lord turns to his elder sister, who
wears a face of portentous sadness, and looks as pale as a tablecloth.

"'Tis one of Will's usual elegant and polite inventions," says Maria.

"No," swore Will, with several of his oaths; "it was no invention of
his. Tom Claypool of Norfolk saw 'em both at Ranelagh; and Jack Morris
came out of White's, where he heard the story from Harry Warrington's
own lips. Curse him, I'm glad of it!" roars Will, slapping the table.
"What do you think of your Fortunate Youth, your Virginian, whom your
lordship made so much of, turning out to be a second son?"

"The elder brother not dead?" says my lord.

"No more dead than you are. Never was. It's my belief that it was a
cross between the two."

"Mr. Warrington is incapable of such duplicity!" cries Maria.

"I never encouraged the fellow, I am sure you will do me justice there,"
says my lady. "Nor did Fanny: not we, indeed!"

"Not we, indeed!" echoes my Lady Fanny.

"The fellow is only a beggar, and, I dare say, has not paid for the
clothes on his back," continues Will. "I'm glad of it, for, hang him, I
hate him!"

"You don't regard him with favourable eyes; especially since he blacked
yours, Will!" grins my lord. "So the poor fellow has found his brother,
and lost his estate!" And here he turned towards his sister Maria, who,
although she looked the picture of woe, must have suggested something
ludicrous to the humourist near whom she sate; for his lordship, having
gazed at her for a minute, burst into a shrill laugh, which caused the
poor lady's face to flush, and presently her eyes to pour over with
tears. "It's a shame! it's a shame!" she sobbed out, and hid her face
in her handkerchief. Maria's stepmother and sister looked at each other.
"We never quite understand your lordship's humour," the former lady
remarked, gravely.

"I don't see there is the least reason why you should," said my lord,
coolly. "Maria, my dear, pray excuse me if I have said--that is, done
anything, to hurt your feelings."

"Done anything! You pillaged the poor lad in his prosperity, and laugh
at him in his ruin!" says Maria, rising from table, and glaring round at
all her family.

"Excuse me, my dear sister, I was not laughing at him," said my lord,
gently.

"Oh, never mind at what or whom else, my lord! You have taken from him
all he had to lose. All the world points at you as the man who feeds on
his own flesh and blood. And now you have his all, you make merry over
his misfortune!" And away she rustled from the room, flinging looks of
defiance at all the party there assembled.

"Tell us what has happened, or what you have heard, Will, and my
sister's grief will not interrupt us." And Will told, at great length,
and with immense exultation at Harry's discomfiture, the story now
buzzed through all London, of George Warrington's sudden apparition.
Lord Castlewood was sorry for Harry: Harry was a good, brave lad, and
his kinsman liked him, as much as certain worldly folks like each other.
To be sure he played Harry at cards, and took the advantage of the
market upon him; but why not? The peach which other men would certainly
pluck, he might as well devour. Eh! if that were all my conscience had
to reproach me with, I need not be very uneasy! my lord thought. "Where
does Mr. Warrington live?"

Will expressed himself ready to enter upon a state of reprobation if he
knew or cared.

"He shall be invited here, and treated with every respect," said my
lord.

"Including piquet, I suppose!" growls Will.

"Or will you take him to the stables, and sell him one of your bargains
of horseflesh, Will?" asks Lord Castlewood. "You would have won of Harry
Warrington fast enough, if you could; but you cheat so clumsily at your
game that you got paid with a cudgel. I desire, once more, that every
attention may be paid to our cousin Warrington."

"And that you are not to be disturbed, when you sit down to play, of
course, my lord!" cries Lady Castlewood.

"Madam, I desire fair play, for Mr. Warrington, and for myself, and
for every member of this amiable family," retorted Lord Castlewood,
fiercely.

"Heaven help the poor gentleman if your lordship is going to be kind to
him," said the stepmother, with a curtsey; and there is no knowing
how far this family dispute might have been carried, had not, at this
moment, a phaeton driven up to the house, in which were seated the two
young Virginians.

It was the carriage which our young Prodigal had purchased in the days
of his prosperity. He drove it still: George sate in it by his side;
their negroes were behind them. Harry had been for meekly giving the
whip and reins to his brother, and ceding the whole property to him.
"What business has a poor devil like me with horses and carriages,
Georgy?" Harry had humbly said. "Beyond the coat on my back, and
the purse my aunt gave me, I have nothing in the world. You take
the driving-seat, brother; it will ease my mind if you will take the
driving-seat." George laughingly said he did not know the way, and Harry
did; and that, as for the carriage, he would claim only a half of it,
as he had already done with his brother's wardrobe. "But a bargain is
a bargain; if I share thy coats, thou must divide my breeches' pocket,
Harry; that is but fair dealing!" Again and again Harry swore there
never was such a brother on earth. How he rattled his horses over the
road! How pleased and proud he was to drive such a brother! They came
to Kensington in famous high spirits; and Gumbo's thunder upon Lord
Castlewood's door was worthy of the biggest footman in all St. James's.

Only my Lady Castlewood and her daughter Lady Fanny were in the room
into which our young gentlemen were ushered. Will had no particular
fancy to face Harry, my lord was not dressed, Maria had her reasons
for being away, at least till her eyes were dried. When we drive up to
friends' houses nowadays in our coaches-and-six, when John carries up
our noble names, when, finally, we enter the drawing-room with our
best hat and best Sunday smile foremost, does it ever happen that we
interrupt a family row! that we come simpering and smiling in, and
stepping over the delusive ashes of a still burning domestic heat? that
in the interval between the hall-door and the drawing-room, Mrs., Mr.,
and the Misses Jones have grouped themselves in a family tableau;
this girl artlessly arranging flowers in a vase, let us say; that one
reclining over an illuminated work of devotion; mamma on the sofa, with
the butcher's and grocer's book pushed under the cushion, some elegant
work in her hand, and a pretty little foot pushed out advantageously;
while honest Jones, far from saying, "Curse that Brown, he is always
calling here!" holds out a kindly hand, shows a pleased face, and
exclaims, "What, Brown my boy, delighted to see you! Hope you've come
to lunch!" I say, does it ever happen to us to be made the victims of
domestic artifices, the spectators of domestic comedies got up for our
special amusement? Oh, let us be thankful, not only for faces, but
for masks! not only for honest welcome, but for hypocrisy, which hides
unwelcome things from us! Whilst I am talking, for instance, in this
easy, chatty way, what right have you, my good sir, to know what is
really passing in my mind? It may be that I am racked with gout, or
that my eldest son has just sent me in a thousand pounds' worth of
college-bills, or that I am writhing under an attack of the Stoke Pogis
Sentinel, which has just been sent me under cover, or that there is a
dreadfully scrappy dinner, the evident remains of a party to which I
didn't invite you, and yet I conceal my agony, I wear a merry smile; I
say, "What! come to take pot-luck with us, Brown my boy! Betsy! put a
knife and fork for Mr. Brown. Eat! Welcome! Fall to! It's my best!" I
say that humbug which I am performing is beautiful self-denial--that
hypocrisy is true virtue. Oh, if every man spoke his mind what an
intolerable society ours would be to live in!

As the young gentlemen are announced, Lady Castlewood advances towards
them with perfect ease and good-humour. "We have heard, Harry," she
says, looking at the latter with a special friendliness, "of this most
extraordinary circumstance. My Lord Castlewood said at breakfast that he
should wait on you this very day, Mr. Warrington, and, cousin Harry, we
intend not to love you any the less because you are poor."

"We shall be able to show now that it is not for your acres that we like
you, Harry!" says Lady Fanny, following her mamma's lead.

"And I to whom the acres have fallen?" says Mr. George, with a smile and
a bow.

"Oh, cousin, we shall like you for being like Harry!" replies the arch
Lady Fanny.

Ah! who that has seen the world, has not admired that astonishing ease
with which fine ladies drop you and pick you up again? Both the ladies
now addressed themselves almost exclusively to the younger brother. They
were quite civil to Mr. George: but with Mr. Harry they were fond, they
were softly familiar, they were gently kind, they were affectionately
reproachful. Why had Harry not been for days and days to see them?

"Better to have had a dish of tea and a game at piquet with them than
with some other folks," says Lady Castlewood. "If we had won enough
to buy a paper of pins from you we should have been content; but young
gentlemen don't know what is for their own good," says mamma.

"Now you have no more money to play with, you can come and play with
us, cousin!" cries fond Lady Fanny, lifting up a finger, "and so your
misfortune will be good fortune to us."

George was puzzled. This welcome of his brother was very different from
that to which he had looked. All these compliments and attentions paid
to the younger brother, though he was without a guinea! Perhaps the
people were not so bad as they were painted? The Blackest of all Blacks
is said not to be of quite so dark a complexion as some folks describe
him.

This affectionate conversation continued for some twenty minutes, at the
end of which period my Lord Castlewood made his appearance, wig on head,
and sword by side. He greeted both the young men with much politeness:
one not more than the other. "If you were to come to us--and I, for one,
cordially rejoice to see you--what a pity it is you did not come a few
months earlier! A certain evening at piquet would then most likely never
have taken place. A younger son would have been more prudent."

"Yes, indeed," said Harry.

"Or a kinsman more compassionate. But I fear that love of play runs in
the blood of all of us. I have it from my father, and it has made me the
poorest peer in England. Those fair ladies whom you see before you are
not exempt. My poor brother Will is a martyr to it; and what I, for my
part, win on one day, I lose on the next. 'Tis shocking, positively, the
rage for play in England. All my poor cousin's bank-notes parted company
from me within twenty-four hours after I got them."

"I have played, like other gentlemen, but never to hurt myself, and
never indeed caring much for the sport," remarked Mr. Warrington.

"When we heard that my lord had played with Harry, we did so scold him,"
cried the ladies.

"But if it had not been I, thou knowest, cousin Warrington, some other
person would have had thy money. 'Tis a poor consolation, but as such
Harry must please to take it, and be glad that friends won his money,
who wish him well, not strangers, who cared nothing for him, and fleeced
him."

"Eh! a tooth out is a tooth out, though it be your brother who pulls it,
my lord!" said Mr. George, laughing. "Harry must bear the penalty of his
faults, and pay his debts, like other men."

"I am sure I have never said or thought otherwise. 'Tis not like an
Englishman to be sulky because he is beaten," says Harry.

"Your hand, cousin! You speak like a man!" cries my lord, with delight.
The ladies smiled to each other.

"My sister, in Virginia, has known how to bring up her sons as
gentlemen!" exclaims Lady Castlewood, enthusiastically.

"I protest you must not be growing so amiable now you are poor, cousin
Harry!" cries cousin Fanny. "Why, mamma, we did not know half his good
qualities when he was only Fortunate Youth and Prince of Virginia! You
are exactly like him, cousin George, but I vow you can't be as amiable
as your brother!"

"I am the Prince of Virginia, but I fear I am not the Fortunate Youth,"
said George, gravely.

Harry was beginning, "By Jove, he is the best----" when the noise of a
harpsichord was heard from the upper room. The lad blushed: the ladies
smiled.

"'Tis Maria, above," said Lady Castlewood. "Let some of us go up to
her."

The ladies rose, and made way towards the door; and Harry followed
them, blushing very much. George was about to join the party, but Lord
Castlewood checked him. "Nay, if all the ladies follow your brother"
his lordship said, "let me at least have the benefit of your company and
conversation. I long to hear the account of your captivity and rescue,
cousin George!"

"Oh, we must hear that too!" cried one of the ladies, lingering.

"I am greedy, and should like it all by myself," said Lord Castlewood,
looking at her very sternly; and followed the women to the door, and
closed it upon them with a low bow.

"Your brother has no doubt acquainted you with the history of all
that has happened to him in this house, cousin George?" asked George's
kinsman.

"Yes, including the quarrel with Mr. Will and the engagement to my Lady
Maria," replies George, with a bow. "I may be pardoned for saying that
he hath met with but ill fortune here, my lord."

"Which no one can deplore more cordially than myself. My brother lives
with horse jockeys and trainers, and the wildest bloods of the town,
and between us there is very little sympathy. We should not all live
together, were we not so poor. This is the house which our grandmother
occupied before she went to America and married Colonel Esmond. Much
of the furniture belonged to her." George looked round the wainscoted
parlour with some interest. "Our house has not flourished in the last
twenty years; though we had a promotion of rank a score of years since,
owing to some interest we had at court, then. But the malady of play has
been the ruin of us all. I am a miserable victim to it: only too
proud to sell myself and title to a roturiere, as many noblemen, less
scrupulous, have done. Pride is my fault, my dear cousin. I remember how
I was born!" And his lordship laid his hand on his shirt-frill, turned
out his toe, and looked his cousin nobly in the face.

Young George Warrington's natural disposition was to believe everything
which everybody said to him. When once deceived, however, or undeceived
about the character of a person, he became utterly incredulous, and
he saluted this fine speech of my lord's with a sardonical, inward
laughter, preserving his gravity, however, and scarce allowing any of
his scorn to appear in his words.

"We have all our faults, my lord. That of play hath been condoned over
and over again in gentlemen of our rank. Having heartily forgiven my
brother, surely I cannot presume to be your lordship's judge in the
matter; and instead of playing and losing, I wish sincerely that you had
both played and won!"

"So do I, with all my heart!" says my lord with a sigh. "I augur
well for your goodness when you can speak in this way, and for your
experience and knowledge of the world, too, cousin, of which you seem to
possess a greater share than most young men of your age. Your poor Harry
hath the best heart in the world; but I doubt whether his head be very
strong."

"Not very strong, indeed. But he hath the art to make friends wherever
he goes, and in spite of all his imprudences most people love him."

"I do--we all do, I'm sure! as if he were our brother!" cries my lord.

"He has often described in his letters his welcome at your lordship's
house. My mother keeps them all, you may be sure. Harry's style is not
very learned, but his heart is so good, that to read him is better than
wit."

"I may be mistaken, but I fancy his brother possesses a good heart and a
good wit, too!" says my lord, obstinately gracious.

"I am as Heaven made me, cousin; and perhaps some more experience and
sorrow than has fallen to the lot of most young men."

"This misfortune of your poor brother--I mean this piece of good
fortune, your sudden reappearance--has not quite left Harry without
resources?" continued Lord Castlewood, very gently.

"With nothing but what his mother can leave him, or I, at her death,
can spare him. What is the usual portion here of a younger brother, my
lord?"

"Eh! a younger brother here is--you know--in fine, everybody knows what
a younger brother is," said my lord, and shrugged his shoulders and
looked his guest in the face.

The other went on: "We are the best of friends, but we are flesh and
blood: and I don't pretend to do more for him than is usually done for
younger brothers. Why give him money? That he should squander it at
cards or horse-racing? My lord, we have cards and jockeys in Virginia,
too; and my poor Harry hath distinguished himself in his own country
already, before he came to yours. He inherits the family failing for
dissipation."

"Poor fellow, poor fellow, I pity him!"

"Our estate, you see, is great, but our income is small. We have little
more money than that which we get from England for our tobacco--and very
little of that too--for our tobacco comes back to us in the shape of
goods, clothes, leather, groceries, ironmongery, nay, wine and beer for
our people and ourselves. Harry may come back and share all these:
there is a nag in the stable for him, a piece of venison on the table,
a little ready money to keep his pocket warm, and a coat or two every
year. This will go on whilst my mother lives, unless, which is far from
improbable, he gets into some quarrel with Madam Esmond. Then, whilst I
live he will have the run of the house and all it contains: then, if I
die leaving children, he will be less and less welcome. His future,
my lord, is a dismal one, unless some strange piece of luck turn up on
which we were fools to speculate. Henceforth he is doomed to dependence,
and I know no worse lot than to be dependent on a self-willed woman like
our mother. The means he had to make himself respected at home he
hath squandered away here. He has flung his patrimony to the dogs,
and poverty and subserviency are now his only portion." Mr. Warrington
delivered this speech with considerable spirit and volubility, and his
cousin heard him respectfully.

"You speak well, Mr. Warrington. Have you ever thought of public life?"
said my lord.

"Of course I have thought of public life like every man of my
station--every man, that is, who cares for something beyond a dice-box
or a stable," replies George. "I hope, my lord, to be able to take my
own place, and my unlucky brother must content himself with his. This I
say advisedly, having heard from him of certain engagements which he has
formed, and which it would be misery to all parties were he to attempt
to execute now."

"Your logic is very strong," said my lord. "Shall we go up and see the
ladies? There is a picture above-stairs which your grandfather is said
to have executed. Before you go, my dear cousin, you will please to fix
a day when our family may have the honour of receiving you. Castlewood,
you know, is always your home when we are there. It is something like
your Virginian Castlewood, cousin, from your account. We have beef,
and mutton, and ale, and wood, in plenty; but money is woefully scarce
amongst us."

They ascended to the drawing-room, where, however, they found only one
of the ladies of the family. This was my Lady Maria, who came out of the
embrasure of a window, where she and Harry Warrington had been engaged
in talk.

George made his best bow, Maria her lowest curtsey. "You are indeed
wonderfully like your brother," she said, giving him her hand. "And from
what he says, cousin George, I think you are as good as he is."

At the sight of her swollen eyes and tearful face George felt a pang
of remorse. "Poor thing!" he thought. "Harry has been vaunting my
generosity and virtue to her, and I have beer, playing the selfish elder
brother downstairs! How old she looks! How could he ever have a passion
for such a woman as that?" How? Because he did not see with your eyes,
Mr. George. He saw rightly too now with his own, perhaps. I never know
whether to pity or congratulate a man on coming to his senses.

After the introduction a little talk took place, which for a while Lady
Maria managed to carry on in an easy manner: but though ladies in this
matter of social hypocrisy are, I think, far more consummate performers
than men, after a sentence or two the poor lady broke out into a sob,
and, motioning Harry away with her hand, fairly fled from the room.

Harry was rushing forward, but stopped--checked by that sign. My lord
said his poor sister was subject to these fits of nerves, and had
already been ill that morning. After this event our young gentlemen
thought it was needless to prolong their visit. Lord Castlewood followed
them downstairs, accompanied them to the door, admired their nags in the
phaeton, and waved them a friendly farewell.

"And so we have been coaxing and cuddling in the window, and we part
good friends, Harry? Is it not so?" says George to his charioteer.

"Oh, she is a good woman!" cries Harry, lashing the horses. "I know
you'll think so when you come to know her."

"When you take her home to Virginia? A pretty welcome our mother will
give her. She will never forgive me for not breaking the match off, nor
you for making it."

"I can't help it, George! Don't you be popping your ugly head so close
to my ears, Gumbo! After what has passed between us, I am bound in
honour to stand by her. If she sees no objection, I must find none. I
told her all. I told her that Madam would be very rusty at first; but
that she was very fond of me, and must end by relenting. And when you
come to the property, I told her that I knew my dearest George so well,
that I might count upon sharing with him."

"The deuce you did! Let me tell you, my dear, that I have been telling
my Lord Castlewood quite a different story. That as an elder brother I
intend to have all my rights--there, don't flog that near horse so--and
that you can but look forward to poverty and dependence."

"What! You won't help me?" cries Harry, turning quite pale.

"George, I don't believe it, though I hear it out of your own mouth!
There was a minute's pause after this outbreak, during which Harry did
not even look at his brother, but sate, gazing blindly before him, the
picture of grief and gloom. He was driving so near to a road-post that
the carriage might have been upset but for George's pulling the rein.

"You had better take the reins, sir," said Harry. "I told you you had
better take them."

"Did you ever know me fail you, Harry?" George asked.

"No," said the other, "not till now"--the tears were rolling down his
cheeks as he spoke.

"My dear, I think one day you will say I have done my duty."

"What have you done? asked Harry.

"I have said you were a younger brother--that you have spent all your
patrimony, and that your portion at home must be very slender. Is it not
true?"

"Yes, but I would not have believed it, if ten thousand men had told
me," said Harry. "Whatever happened to me, I thought I could trust you,
George Warrington." And in this frame of mind Harry remained during the
rest of the drive.

Their dinner was served soon after their return to their lodgings, of
which Harry scarce ate any, though he drank freely of the wine before
him.

"That wine is a bad consoler in trouble, Harry," his brother remarked.

"I have no other, sir," said Harry, grimly; and having drunk glass after
glass in silence, he presently seized his hat, and left the room.

He did not return for three hours. George, in much anxiety about his
brother, had not left home meanwhile, but read his book, and smoked the
pipe of patience. "It was shabby to say I would not aid him, and,
God help me, it was not true. I won't leave him, though he marries a
blackamoor," thought George "have I not done him harm enough already, by
coming to life again? Where has he gone; has he gone to play?"

"Good God! what has happened to thee?" cried George Warrington,
presently, when his brother came in, looking ghastly pale.

He came up and took his brother's hand. "I can take it now, Georgy,"
he said. "Perhaps what you did was right, though. I for one will never
believe that you would throw your brother off in distress. I'll tell you
what. At dinner, I thought suddenly, I'll go back to her and speak to
her. I'll say to her, 'Maria, poor as I am, your conduct to me has been
so noble, that, by heaven! I am yours to take or to leave. If you will
have me, here I am: I will enlist: I will work: I will try and make a
livelihood for myself somehow, and my bro----my relations will relent,
and give us enough to live on.' That's what I determined to tell her;
and I did, George. I ran all the way to Kensington in the rain--look, I
am splashed from head to foot,--and found them all at dinner, all except
Will, that is. I spoke out that very moment to them all, sitting round
the table, over their wine. 'Maria,' says I, 'a poor fellow wants to
redeem his promise which he made when he fancied he was rich. Will you
take him?' I found I had plenty of words, and didn't hem and stutter as
I'm doing now. I spoke ever so long, and I ended by saying I would do my
best and my duty by her, so help me God!

"When I had done, she came up to me quite kind. She took my hand, and
kissed it before the rest. 'My dearest, best Harry!' she said (those
were her words, I don't want otherwise to be praising myself), 'you are
a noble heart, and I thank you with all mine. But, my dear, I have long
seen it was only duty, and a foolish promise made by a young man to an
old woman, that has held you to your engagement. To keep it would make
you miserable, my dear. I absolve you from it, thanking you with all my
heart for your fidelity, and blessing and loving my dear cousin always.'
And she came up and kissed me before them all, and went out of the
room quite stately, and without a single tear. They were all crying,
especially my lord, who was sobbing quite loud. I didn't think he had so
much feeling. And she, George? Oh, isn't she a noble creature?"

"Here's her health!" cries George, filling one of the glasses that still
stood before him.

"Hip, hip, huzzay!" says Harry. He was wild with delight at being free.




CHAPTER LVII. In which Mr. Harry's Nose continues to be put out of joint


Madame de Bernstein was scarcely less pleased than her Virginian
nephews at the result of Harry's final interview with Lady Maria. George
informed the Baroness of what had passed, in a billet which he sent
to her the same evening; and shortly afterwards her nephew Castlewood,
whose visits to his aunt were very rare, came to pay his respects to
her, and frankly spoke about the circumstances which had taken place;
for no man knew better than my Lord Castlewood how to be frank upon
occasion, and now that the business between Maria and Harry was ended
what need was there of reticence or hypocrisy? The game had been played,
and was over: he had no objection now to speak of its various
moves, stratagems, finesses. "She is my own sister," said my lord,
affectionately; "she won't have many more chances--many more such
chances of marrying and establishing herself. I might not approve of the
match in all respects, and I might pity your ladyship's young Virginian
favourite: but of course such a piece of good fortune was not to be
thrown away, and I was bound to stand by my own flesh and blood."

"Your candour does your lordship honour," says Madame de Bernstein, "and
your love for your sister is quite edifying!"

"Nay, we have lost the game, and I am speaking sans rancune. It is not
for you, who have won, to bear malice," says my lord, with a bow.

Madame de Bernstein protested she was never in her life in better
humour. "Confess, now, Eugene, that visit of Maria to Harry at the
spunging-house--that touching giving up of all his presents to her, was
a stroke of thy invention?"

"Pity for the young man, and a sense of what was due from Maria to her
friend--her affianced lover--in misfortune, sure these were motives
sufficient to make her act as she did," replies Lord Castlewood,
demurely.

"But 'twas you advised her, my good nephew?"

Castlewood, with a shrug of his shoulders, owned that he did advise his
sister to see Mr. Henry Warrington. "But we should have won, in spite
of your ladyship," he continued, "had not the elder brother made his
appearance. And I have been trying to console my poor Maria by showing
her what a piece of good fortune it is after all, that we lost."

"Suppose she had married Harry, and then cousin George had made his
appearance?" remarks the Baroness.

"Effectivement," cries Eugene, taking snuff. "As the grave was to give
up its dead, let us be thankful to the grave for disgorging in time! I
am bound to say, that Mr. George Warrington seems to be a man of sense,
and not more selfish than other elder sons and men of the world. My poor
Molly fancied that he might be a--what shall I say?--a greenhorn perhaps
is the term--like his younger brother. She fondly hoped that he might be
inclined to go share and share alike with Twin junior; in which case, so
infatuated was she about the young fellow, that I believe she would have
taken him. 'Harry Warrington, with half a loaf, might do very well,'
says I, 'but Harry Warrington with no bread, my dear!'"

"How no bread?" asks the Baroness.

"Well, no bread except at his brother's side-table. The elder said as
much."

"What a hard-hearted wretch!" cries Madame de Bernstein.

"Ah, bah! I play with you, aunt, cartes sur table! Mr. George only did
what everybody else would do; and we have no right to be angry with him,
really we haven't. Molly herself acknowledged as much, after her first
burst of grief was over, and I brought her to listen to reason. The
silly old creature! to be so wild about a young lad at her time of
life!"

"'Twas a real passion, I almost do believe," said Madame de Bernstein.

"You should have heard her take leave of him. C'etait touchant, ma
parole d'honneur! I cried. Before George, I could not help myself. The
young fellow with muddy stockings, and his hair about his eyes, flings
himself amongst us when we were at dinner; makes his offer to Molly in a
very frank and noble manner, and in good language too; and she replies.
Begad, it put me in mind of Mrs. Woffington in the new Scotch play, that
Lord Bute's man has wrote--Douglas--what d'ye call it? She clings round
the lad: she bids him adieu in heartrending accents. She steps out of
the room in a stately despair--no more chocolate, thank you. If she had
made a mauvais pas no one could retire from it with more dignity. 'Twas
a masterly retreat after a defeat. We were starved out of our position,
but we retired with all the honours of war."

"Molly won't die of the disappointment!" said my lord's aunt, sipping
her cup.

My lord snarled a grin, and showed his yellow teeth. "He, he!" he
said, "she hath once or twice before had the malady very severely, and
recovered perfectly. It don't kill, as your ladyship knows, at Molly's
age."

How should her ladyship know? She did not marry Doctor Tusher until she
was advanced in life. She did not become Madame de Bernstein until still
later. Old Dido, a poet remarks, was not ignorant of misfortune, and
hence learned to have compassion on the wretched.

People in the little world, as I have been told, quarrel and fight, and
go on abusing each other, and are not reconciled for ever so long. But
people in the great world are surely wiser in their generation. They
have differences; they cease seeing each other. They make it up and come
together again, and no questions are asked. A stray prodigal, or a stray
puppy-dog, is thus brought in under the benefit of an amnesty, though
you know he has been away in ugly company. For six months past, ever
since the Castlewoods and Madame de Bernstein had been battling for
possession of poor Harry Warrington, these two branches of the Esmond
family had remained apart. Now, the question being settled, they were
free to meet again, as though no difference ever had separated them: and
Madame de Bernstein drove in her great coach to Lady Castlewood's rout,
and the Esmond ladies appeared smiling at Madame de Bernstein's drums,
and loved each other just as much as they previously had done.

"So, sir, I hear you have acted like a hard-hearted monster about your
poor brother Harry!" says the Baroness, delighted, and menacing George
with her stick.

"I acted but upon your ladyship's hint, and desired to see whether it
was for himself or his reputed money that his kinsfolk wanted to have
him," replies George, turning rather red.

"Nay, Maria could not marry a poor fellow who was utterly penniless, and
whose elder brother said he would give him nothing!"

"I did it for the best, madam," says George, still blushing.

"And so thou didst, O thou hypocrite!" cries the old lady.

"Hypocrite, madam! and why?" asks Mr. Warrington, drawing himself up in
much state.

"I know all, my infant!" says the Baroness in French. "Thou art very
like thy grandfather. Come, that I embrace thee! Harry has told me all,
and that thou hast divided thy little patrimony with him!"

"It was but natural, madam. We have had common hearts and purses since
we were born. I but feigned hard-heartedness in order to try those
people yonder," says George, with filling eyes.

"And thou wilt divide Virginia with him too?" asks the Bernstein.

"I don't say so. It were not just," replied Mr. Warrington. "The land
must go to the eldest born, and Harry would not have it otherwise: and
it may be I shall die, or my mother outlive the pair of us. But half of
what is mine is his: and he, it must be remembered, only was extravagant
because he was mistaken as to his position."

"But it is a knight of old, it is a Bayard, it is the grandfather
come to life!" cried Madame de Bernstein to her attendant, as she was
retiring for the night. And that evening, when the lads left her, it was
to poor Harry she gave the two fingers, and to George the rouged cheek,
who blushed, for his part, almost as deep as that often-dyed rose, at
such a mark of his old kinswoman's favour.

Although Harry Warrington was the least envious of men, and did honour
to his brother as in all respects his chief, guide, and superior, yet no
wonder a certain feeling of humiliation and disappointment oppressed the
young man after his deposition from his eminence as Fortunate Youth and
heir to boundless Virginian territories. Our friends at Kensington might
promise and vow that they would love him all the better after his fall;
Harry made a low bow and professed himself very thankful; but he
could not help perceiving, when he went with his brother to the state
entertainment with which my Lord Castlewood regaled his new-found
kinsman, that George was all in all to his cousins: had all the talk,
compliments, and petits soins for himself, whilst of Harry no one took
any notice save poor Maria, who followed him with wistful looks, pursued
him with eyes conveying dismal reproaches, and, as it were, blamed him
because she had left him. "Ah!" the eyes seemed to say, "'tis mighty
well of you, Harry, to have accepted the freedom which I gave you; but I
had no intention, sir, that you should be so pleased at being let off."
She gave him up, but yet she did not quite forgive him for taking her
at her word. She would not have him, and yet she would. Oh, my young
friends, how delightful is the beginning of a love-business, and how
undignified, sometimes, the end! What a romantic vista is before young
Damon and young Phillis (or middle-aged ditto ditto) when, their artless
loves made known to each other, they twine their arms round each other's
waists and survey that charming pays du tendre which lies at their feet!
Into that country, so linked together, they will wander from now until
extreme old age. There may be rocks and roaring rivers, but will not
Damon's strong true love enable him to carry Sweetheart over them? There
may be dragons and dangers in the path, but shall not his courageous
sword cut them down? Then at eve, how they will rest cuddled together,
like two pretty babes in the wood, the moss their couch, the stars their
canopy, their arms their mutual pillows! This is the wise plan young
folks make when they set out on the love journey; and--O me!--they have
not got a mile when they come to a great wall and find they must walk
back again. They are squabbling with the post-boy at Barnet (the first
stage on the Gretna Road, I mean), and, behold, perhaps Strephon has not
got any money, or here is papa with a whacking horsewhip, who takes Miss
back again, and locks her up crying in the schoolroom. The parting
is heart-breaking; but, when she has married the banker and had eight
children, and he has become, it may be, a prosperous barrister,--it may
be, a seedy raff who has gone twice or thrice into the Gazette; when,
I say, in after years Strephon and Delia meet again, is not the meeting
ridiculous? Nevertheless, I hope no young man will fall in love, having
any doubt in his mind as to the eternity of his passion. 'Tis when a
man has had a second or third amorous attack that he begins to grow
doubtful; but some women are romantic to the end, and from eighteen to
eight-and-fifty (for what I know) are always expecting their hearts to
break. In fine, when you have been in love and are so no more, when the
King of France, with twenty thousand men, with colours flying, music
playing, and all the pomp of war, having marched up the hill, then
proceeds to march down again, he and you are in an absurd position.

This is what Harry Warrington, no doubt, felt when he went to Kensington
and encountered the melancholy, reproachful eyes of his cousin. Yes! it
is a foolish position to be in; but it is also melancholy to look into
a house you have once lived in, and see black casements and emptiness
where once shone the fires of welcome. Melancholy? Yes; but, ha! how
bitter, how melancholy, how absurd to look up as you pass sentimentally
by No. 13, and see somebody else grinning out of window, and evidently
on the best terms with the landlady. I always feel hurt, even at an inn
which I frequent, if I see other folks' trunks and boots at the doors
of the rooms which were once mine. Have those boots lolled on the sofa
which once I reclined on? I kick you from before me, you muddy, vulgar
highlows!

So considering that his period of occupation was over, and Maria's
rooms, if not given up to a new tenant, were, at any rate, to let, Harry
did not feel very easy in his cousin's company, nor she possibly in his.
He found either that he had nothing to say to her, or that what she had
to say to him was rather dull and commonplace, and that the red lip of
a white-necked pipe of Virginia was decidedly more agreeable to him now
than Maria's softest accents and most melancholy moue. When George went
to Kensington, then, Harry did not care much about going, and pleaded
other engagements.

At his uncle's house in Hill Street the poor lad was no better amused,
and, indeed, was treated by the virtuous people there with scarce any
attention at all. The ladies did not scruple to deny themselves when
he came; he could scarce have believed in such insincerity after their
caresses, their welcome, their repeated vows of affection; but happening
to sit with the Lamberts for an hour after he had called upon his aunt,
he saw her ladyship's chairmen arrive with an empty chair, and his aunt
step out and enter the vehicle, and not even blush when he made her a
bow from the opposite window. To be denied by his own relations--to have
that door which had opened to him so kindly, slammed in his face! He
would not have believed such a thing possible, poor simple Harry said.
Perhaps he thought the door-knocker had a tender heart, and was not made
of brass; not more changed than the head of that knocker was my Lady
Warrington's virtuous face when she passed her nephew.

"My father's own brother's wife! What have I done to offend her? Oh,
Aunt Lambert, Aunt Lambert, did you ever see such cold-heartedness?"
cries out Harry, with his usual impetuosity.

"Do we make any difference to you, my dear Harry?" says Aunt Lambert,
with a side look at her youngest daughter. "The world may look coldly at
you, but we don't belong to it: so you may come to us in safety."

"In this house you are different from other people," replies Harry. "I
don't know how, but I always feel quiet and happy somehow when I come to
you."

    "Quis me uno vivit felicior? aut magis hac est
     Optandum vita dicere quis potuit?"

calls out General Lambert. "Do you know where I got these verses, Mr.
Gownsman?" and he addresses his son from college, who is come to pass
an Easter holiday with his parents. "You got them out of Catullus, sir,"
says the scholar.

"I got them out of no such thing, sir. I got them out of my favourite
Democritus Junior--out of old Burton, who has provided many indifferent
scholars with learning;" and who and Montaigne, were favourite authors
with the good General.




CHAPTER LVIII. Where we do what Cats may do


We have said how our Virginians, with a wisdom not uncommon in
youth, had chosen to adopt strong Jacobite opinions, and to profess a
prodigious affection for the exiled royal family. The banished prince
had recognised Madam Esmond's father as Marquis of Esmond, and she did
not choose to be very angry with an unfortunate race, that, after all,
was so willing to acknowledge the merits of her family. As for any
little scandal about her sister, Madame de Bernstein, and the Old
Chevalier, she tossed away from her with scorn the recollection of that
odious circumstance, asserting, with perfect truth, that the two first
monarchs of the House of Hanover were quite as bad as any Stuarts in
regard to their domestic morality. But the king de facto was the king,
as well as his Majesty de jure. De Facto had been solemnly crowned and
anointed at church, and had likewise utterly discomfited De Jure, when
they came to battle for the kingdom together. Madam's clear opinion was,
then, that her sons owed it to themselves as well as the sovereign to
appear at his royal court. And if his Majesty should have been minded
to confer a lucrative post, or a blue or red ribbon upon either of them,
she, for her part, would not have been in the least surprised. She made
no doubt but that the King knew the Virginian Esmonds as well as any
other members of his nobility. The lads were specially commanded, then,
to present themselves at court, and, I dare say, their mother would have
been very angry had she known that George took Harry's laced coat on the
day when he went to make his bow at Kensington.

A hundred years ago the King's drawing-room was open almost every day
to his nobility and gentry; and loyalty--especially since the war had
begun--could gratify itself a score of times in a month with the august
sight of the sovereign. A wise avoidance of the enemy's ships of war, a
gracious acknowledgment of the inestimable loss the British Isles would
suffer by the seizure of the royal person at sea, caused the monarch to
forgo those visits to his native Hanover which were so dear to his
royal heart, and compelled him to remain, it must be owned, unwillingly
amongst his loving Britons. A Hanoverian lady, however, whose virtues
had endeared her to the prince, strove to console him for his enforced
absence from Herrenhausen. And from the lips of the Countess of Walmoden
(on whom the imperial beneficence had gracefully conferred a high title
of British honour) the revered Defender of the Faith could hear the
accents of his native home.

To this beloved Sovereign, Mr. Warrington requested his uncle, an
assiduous courtier, to present him; and as Mr. Lambert had to go
to court likewise, and thank his Majesty for his promotion, the
two gentlemen made the journey to Kensington together, engaging a
hackney-coach for the purpose, as my Lord Wrotham's carriage was now
wanted by its rightful owner, who had returned to his house in town.
They alighted at Kensington Palace Gate, where the sentries on duty knew
and saluted the good General, and hence modestly made their way on foot
to the summer residence of the sovereign. Walking under the portico
of the Palace, they entered the gallery which leads to the great black
marble staircase (which hath been so richly decorated and painted by Mr.
Kent), and then passed through several rooms, richly hung with tapestry
and adorned with pictures and bustos, until they came to the King's
great drawing-room, where that famous "Venus" by Titian is, and, amongst
other masterpieces, the picture of "St. Francis adoring the infant
Saviour," performed by Sir Peter Paul Rubens; and here, with the rest of
the visitors to the court, the gentlemen waited until his Majesty issued
from his private apartments, where he was in conference with certain
personages who were called in the newspaper language of that day his
M-j-ty's M-n-st-rs.

George Warrington, who had never been in a palace before, had leisure to
admire the place, and regard the people round him. He saw fine pictures
for the first time too, and I dare say delighted in that charming piece
of Sir Athony Vandyck, representing King Charles the First, his Queen
and Family, and the noble picture of "Esther before Ahasuerus," painted
by Tintoret, and in which all the figures are dressed in the magnificent
Venetian habit. With the contemplation of these works he was so
enraptured, that he scarce heard all the remarks of his good friend the
General, who was whispering into his young companion's almost heedless
ear the names of some of the personages round about them.

"Yonder," says Mr. Lambert, "are two of my Lords of the Admiralty, Mr.
Gilbert Elliot and Admiral Boscawen: your Boscawen, whose fleet fired
the first gun in your waters two years ago. That stout gentleman all
belated with gold is Mr. Fox, that was Minister, and is now content to
be Paymaster with a great salary.

"He carries the auri fames on his person. Why, his waistcoat is a
perfect Potosi!" says George.

"Aliena appetens--how goes the text? He loves to get money and to spend
it," continues General Lambert. "Yon is my Lord Chief Justice Willes,
talking to my Lord of Salisbury, Doctor Headley, who, if he serve
his God as he serves his King, will be translated to some very high
promotion in Heaven. He belongs to your grandfather's time, and was
loved by Dick Steele and hated by the Dean. With them is my Lord of
London, the learned Doctor Sherlock. My lords of the lawn sleeves have
lost half their honours now. I remember when I was a boy in my mother's
hand, she made me go down on my knees to the Bishop of Rochester; him
who went over the water, and became Minister to somebody who shall be
nameless--Perkin's Bishop. That handsome fair man is Admiral Smith. He
was president of poor Byng's court-martial, and strove in vain to get
him off his penalty; Tom of Ten Thousand they call him in the fleet. The
French Ambassador had him broke, when he was a lieutenant, for making a
French man-of-war lower topsails to him, and the King made Tom a
captain the next day. That tall, haughty-looking man is my Lord George
Sackville, who, now I am a Major-General myself, will treat me somewhat
better than a footman. I wish my stout old Blakeney were here; he is the
soldier's darling, and as kind and brave as yonder poker of a nobleman
is brave and--I am your lordship's very humble servant. This is a young
gentleman who is just from America, and was in Braddock's sad business
two years ago."

"Oh, indeed!" says the poker of a nobleman. "I have the honour of
speaking to Mr.----?"

"To Major-General Lambert, at your lordship's service, and who was in
his Majesty's some time before you entered it. That, Mr. Warrington, is
the first commoner in England, Mr. Speaker Onslow. Where is your uncle?
I shall have to present you myself to his Majesty if Sir Miles delays
much longer." As he spoke, the worthy General addressed himself entirely
to his young friend, making no sort of account of his colleague, who
stalked away with a scared look as if amazed at the other's audacity. A
hundred years ago, a nobleman was a nobleman, and expected to be admired
as such.

Sir Miles's red waistcoat appeared in sight presently, and many cordial
greetings passed between him, his nephew, and General Lambert: for we
have described how Sir Miles was the most affectionate of men. So
the General had quitted my Lord Wrotham's house? It was time, as his
lordship himself wished to occupy it? Very good; but consider what a
loss for the neighbours!

"We miss you, we positively miss you, my dear General," cries Sir Miles.
"My daughters were in love with those lovely young ladies--upon my word,
they were; and my Lady Warrington and my girls were debating over
and over again how they should find an opportunity of making the
acquaintance of your charming family. We feel as if we were old friends
already; indeed we do, General, if you will permit me the liberty of
saying so; and we love you, if I may be allowed to speak frankly, on
account of your friendship and kindness to our dear nephews: though we
were a little jealous, I own a little jealous of them, because they went
so often to see you. Often and often have I said to my Lady Warrington,
'My dear, why don't we make acquaintance with the General? Why don't we
ask him and his ladies to come over in a family way and dine with some
other plain country gentlefolks?' Carry my most sincere respects to
