Deadly danger of icebergs--Dozens of ships perish in collision--Other
disasters.

CHAPTER XXVI DEVELOPMENT OF SHIPBUILDING

Evolution of water travel--Increases in size of vessels--Is there any
limit?--Achievements in speed--Titanic not the last word.

CHAPTER XXVII SAFETY AND LIFE-SAVING DEVICES

Wireless telegraphy--Water-tight bulkheads--Submarine
signals--Life-boats and rafts--Nixon's pontoon--Life-preservers and
buoys--Rockets.

CHAPTER XXVIII TIME FOR REFLECTION AND REFORM

Speed and luxury overemphasized--Space needed for life-boats devoted to
swimming pools and squash-courts--Mania for speed records compels use of
dangerous routes and prevents proper caution in foggy weather--Life
more valuable than luxury--Safety more important than speed--An aroused
public opinion necessary--International conference recommended--Adequate
life-saving equipment should be compulsory--Speed regulations in bad
weather--Co-operation in arranging schedules to keep vessels within
reach of each other--Legal regulations.

CHAPTER XXIX THE SENATORIAL INVESTIGATION

Prompt action of the Government--Senate committee probes disaster and
brings out details--Testimony of Ismay, officers, crew passengers and
other witnesses.




FACTS ABOUT THE WRECK OF THE TITANIC

NUMBER of persons aboard, 2340. Number of life-boats and rafts, 20.
Capacity of each life-boat, 50 passengers and crew of 8. Utmost capacity
of life-boats and rafts, about 1100. Number of life-boats wrecked in
launching, 4. Capacity of life-boats safely launched, 928. Total number
of persons taken in life-boats, 711. Number who died in life-boats, 6.
Total number saved, 705. Total number of Titanic's company lost, 1635.

The cause of the disaster was a collision with an iceberg in latitude
41.46 north, longitude 50.14 west. The Titanic had had repeated warnings
of the presence of ice in that part of the course. Two official warnings
had been received defining the position of the ice fields. It had been
calculated on the Titanic that she would reach the ice fields about 11
o'clock Sunday night. The collision occurred at 11.40. At that time the
ship was driving at a speed of 21 to 23 knots, or about 26 miles, an
hour.

There had been no details of seamen assigned to each boat.

Some of the boats left the ship without seamen enough to man the oars.

Some of the boats were not more than half full of passengers.

The boats had no provisions, some of them had no water stored, some were
without sail equipment or compasses.

In some boats, which carried sails wrapped and bound, there was not a
person with a knife to cut the ropes. In some boats the plugs in the
bottom had been pulled out and the women passengers were compelled to
thrust their hands into the holes to keep the boats from filling and
sinking.

The captain, E. J. Smith, admiral of the White Star fleet, went down
with his ship.



CHAPTER I. FIRST NEWS OF THE GREATEST MARINE DISASTER IN HISTORY

"THE TITANIC IN COLLISION, BUT EVERYBODY SAFE"--ANOTHER TRIUMPH SET
DOWN TO WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY--THE WORLD GOES TO SLEEP PEACEFULLY--THE SAD
AWAKENING.

LIKE a bolt out of a clear sky came the wireless message on Monday,
April 15, 1912, that on Sunday night the great Titanic, on her maiden
voyage across the Atlantic, had struck a gigantic iceberg, but that
all the passengers were saved. The ship had signaled her distress and
another victory was set down to wireless. Twenty-one hundred lives
saved!

Additional news was soon received that the ship had collided with a
mountain of ice in the North Atlantic, off Cape Race, Newfoundland, at
10.25 Sunday evening, April 14th. At 4.15 Monday morning the Canadian
Government Marine Agency received a wireless message that the Titanic
was sinking and that the steamers towing her were trying to get her into
shoal water near Cape Race, for the purpose of beaching her.

Wireless despatches up to noon Monday showed that the passengers of the
Titanic were being transferred aboard the steamer Carpathia, a Cunarder,
which left New York, April 13th, for Naples. Twenty boat-loads of the
Titanic's passengers were said to have been transferred to the Carpathia
then, and allowing forty to sixty persons as the capacity of each
life-boat, some 800 or 1200 persons had already been transferred from
the damaged liner to the Carpathia. They were reported as being taken to
Halifax, whence they would be sent by train to New York.

Another liner, the Parisian, of the Allan Company, which sailed from
Glasgow for Halifax on April 6th, was said to be close at hand and
assisting in the work of rescue. The Baltic, Virginian and Olympic were
also near the scene, according to the information received by wireless.

While badly damaged, the giant vessel was reported as still afloat, but
whether she could reach port or shoal water was uncertain. The White
Star officials declared that the Titanic was in no immediate danger of
sinking, because of her numerous water-tight compartments.

"While we are still lacking definite information," Mr. Franklin,
vice-president of the White Star Line, said later in the afternoon, "we
believe the Titanic's passengers will reach Halifax, Wednesday evening.
We have received no further word from Captain Haddock, of the Olympic,
or from any of the ships in the vicinity, but are confident that there
will be no loss of life."

With the understanding that the survivors would be taken to Halifax the
line arranged to have thirty Pullman cars, two diners and many passenger
coaches leave Boston Monday night for Halifax to get the passengers
after they were landed. Mr. Franklin made a guess that the Titanic's
passengers would get into Halifax on Wednesday. The Department of
Commerce and Labor notified the White Star Line that customs and
immigration inspectors would be sent from Montreal to Halifax in
order that there would be as little delay as possible in getting the
passengers on trains.

Monday night the world slept in peace and assurance. A wireless message
had finally been received, reading:

"All Titanic's passengers safe."

It was not until nearly a week later that the fact was discovered that
this message had been wrongly received in the confusion of messages
flashing through the air, and that in reality the message should have
read:

"Are all Titanic's passengers safe?"

With the dawning of Tuesday morning came the awful news of the true fate
of the Titanic.



CHAPTER II. THE MOST SUMPTUOUS PALACE AFLOAT

DIMENSIONS OF THE TITANIC--CAPACITY--PROVISIONS FOR THE COMFORT AND
ENTERTAINMENT OF PASSENGERS--MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT THE ARMY OF ATTENDANTS
REQUIRED.

THE statistical record of the great ship has news value at this time.

Early in 1908 officials of the White Star Company announced that they
would eclipse all previous records in shipbuilding with a vessel of
staggering dimensions. The Titanic resulted.

The keel of the ill-fated ship was laid in the summer of 1909 at the
Harland & Wolff yards, Belfast. Lord Pirrie, considered one of the
best authorities on shipbuilding in the world, was the designer. The
leviathan was launched on May 31, 1911, and was completed in February,
1912, at a cost of $10,000,000.


SISTER SHIP OF OLYMPIC

The Titanic, largest liner in commission, was a sister ship of the
Olympic. The registered tonnage of each vessel is estimated as 45,000,
but officers of the White Star Line say that the Titanic measured 45,328
tons. The Titanic was commanded by Captain E. J. Smith, the White Star
admiral, who had previously been on the Olympic.

She was 882 1/2 long, or about four city blocks, and was 5000 tons
bigger than a battleship twice as large as the dreadnought Delaware.

Like her sister ship, the Olympic, the Titanic was a four-funneled
vessel, and had eleven decks. The distance from the keel to the top of
the funnels was 175 feet. She had an average speed of twenty-one knots.

The Titanic could accommodate 2500 passengers. The steamship was divided
into numerous compartments, separated by fifteen bulkheads. She was
equipped with a gymnasium, swimming pool, hospital with operating room,
and a grill and palm garden.


CARRIED CREW OF 860

The registered tonnage was 45,000, and the displacement tonnage 66,000.
She was capable of carrying 2500 passengers and the crew numbered 860.

The largest plates employed in the hull were 36 feet long, weighing 43
1/2 tons each, and the largest steel beam used was 92 feet long, the
weight of this double beam being 4 tons. The rudder, which was operated
electrically, weighed 100 tons, the anchors 15 1/2 tons each, the center
(turbine) propeller 22 tons, and each of the two "wing" propellers 38
tons each. The after "boss-arms," from which were sus-pended the three
propeller shafts, tipped the scales at 73 1/2 tons, and the forward
"boss-arms" at 45 tons. Each link in the anchor-chains weighed 175
pounds. There were more than 2000 side-lights and windows to light the
public rooms and passenger cabins.

Nothing was left to chance in the construction of the Titanic. Three
million rivets (weighing 1200 tons) held the solid plates of steel
together. To insure stability in binding the heavy plates in the double
bottom, half a million rivets, weighing about 270 tons, were used.

All the plating of the hulls was riveted by hydraulic power, driving
seven-ton riveting machines, suspended from traveling cranes. The double
bottom extended the full length of the vessel, varying from 5 feet 3
inches to 6 feet 3 inches in depth, and lent added strength to the hull.


MOST LUXURIOUS STEAMSHIP

Not only was the Titanic the largest steamship afloat but it was the
most luxurious. Elaborately furnished cabins opened onto her eleven
decks, and some of these decks were reserved as private promenades that
were engaged with the best suites. One of these suites was sold for
$4350 for the boat's maiden and only voyage. Suites similar, but which
were without the private promenade decks, sold for $2300.

The Titanic differed in some respects from her sister ship. The Olympic
has a lower promenade deck, but in the Titanic's case the staterooms
were brought out flush with the outside of the superstructure, and the
rooms themselves made much larger. The sitting rooms of some of the
suites on this deck were 15 x 15 feet.

The restaurant was much larger than that of the Olympic and it had a
novelty in the shape of a private promenade deck on the starboard side,
to be used exclusively by its patrons. Adjoining it was a reception
room, where hosts and hostesses could meet their guests.

Two private promenades were connected with the two most luxurious suites
on the ship. The suites were situated about amidships, one on either
side of the vessel, and each was about fifty feet long. One of the
suites comprised a sitting room, two bedrooms and a bath.

These private promenades were expensive luxuries. The cost figured out
something like forty dollars a front foot for a six days' voyage. They,
with the suites to which they are attached, were the most expensive
transatlantic accommodations yet offered.


THE ENGINE ROOM

The engine room was divided into two sections, one given to the
reciprocating engines and the other to the turbines. There were two
sets of the reciprocating kind, one working each of the wing propellers
through a four-cylinder triple expansion, direct acting inverted engine.
Each set could generate 15,000 indicated horse-power at seventy-five
revolutions a minute. The Parsons type turbine takes steam from the
reciprocating engines, and by developing a horse-power of 16,000 at 165
revolutions a minute works the third of the ship's propellers, the one
directly under the rudder. Of the four funnels of the vessel three
were connected with the engine room, and the fourth or after funnel for
ventilating the ship including the gallery.

Practically all of the space on the Titanic below the upper deck
was occupied by steam-generating plant, coal bunkers and propelling
machinery. Eight of the fifteen water-tight compartments contained the
mechanical part of the vessel. There were, for instance, twenty-four
double end and five single end boilers, each 16 feet 9 inches in
diameter, the larger 20 feet long and the smaller 11 feet 9 inches long.
The larger boilers had six fires under each of them and the smaller
three furnaces. Coal was stored in bunker space along the side of the
ship between the lower and middle decks, and was first shipped from
there into bunkers running all the way across the vessel in the lowest
part. From there the stokers handed it into the furnaces.

One of the most interesting features of the vessel was the refrigerating
plant, which comprised a huge ice-making and refrigerating machine and
a number of provision rooms on the after part of the lower and orlop
decks. There were separate cold rooms for beef, mutton, poultry, game,
fish, vegetables, fruit, butter, bacon, cheese, flowers, mineral water,
wine, spirits and champagne, all maintained at different temperatures
most suitable to each. Perishable freight had a compartment of its own,
also chilled by the plant.

COMFORT AND STABILITY

Two main ideas were carried out in the Titanic. One was comfort and the
other stability. The vessel was planned to be an ocean ferry. She was
to have only a speed of twenty-one knots, far below that of some other
modern vessels, but she was planned to make that speed, blow high or
blow low, so that if she left one side of the ocean at a given time she
could be relied on to reach the other side at almost a certain minute of
a certain hour.

One who has looked into modern methods for safeguarding

{illust. caption = LIFE-BOAT AND DAVITS ON THE TITANIC

This diagram shows very clearly the arrangement of the life-boats and
the manner in which they were launched.}


a vessel of the Titanic type can hardly imagine an accident that could
cause her to founder. No collision such as has been the fate of any ship
in recent years, it has been thought up to this time, could send her
down, nor could running against an iceberg do it unless such an accident
were coupled with the remotely possible blowing out of a boiler. She
would sink at once, probably, if she were to run over a submerged rock
or derelict in such manner that both her keel plates and her double
bottom were torn away for more than half her length; but such a
catastrophe was so remotely possible that it did not even enter the
field of conjecture.

The reason for all this is found in the modern arrangement of
water-tight steel compartments into which all ships now are divided
and of which the Titanic had fifteen so disposed that half of them,
including the largest, could be flooded without impairing the safety
of the vessel. Probably it was the working of these bulkheads and the
water-tight doors between them as they are supposed to work that saved
the Titanic from foundering when she struck the iceberg.

These bulkheads were of heavy sheet steel and started at the very bottom
of the ship and extended right up to the top side. The openings in the
bulkheads were just about the size of the ordinary doorway, but the
doors did not swing as in a house, but fitted into water-tight grooves
above the opening. They could be released instantly in several ways,
and once closed formed a barrier to the water as solid as the bulkhead
itself.

In the Titanic, as in other great modern ships, these doors were held
in place above the openings by friction clutches. On the bridge was
a switch which connected with an electric magnet at the side of the
bulkhead opening. The turning of this switch caused the magnet to draw
down a heavy weight, which instantly released the friction clutch, and
allowed the door to fall or slide down over the opening in a second.
If, however, through accident the bridge switch was rendered useless the
doors would close automatically in a few seconds. This was arranged by
means of large metal floats at the side of the doorways, which rested
