all things over Olaf, who (as Sweyn supposed) was lowly born. But Olaf
stoutly maintained that as it was he who had proposed the expedition,
and as he had the larger number of men and ships, the sole command
should be his own, Sweyn taking the second place. In the end it was
agreed that this should be so, and that, in the event of their success,
they were to divide the kingdom of England between them--Sweyn taking
the Northern half, including Northumbria and the upper part of Mercia,
and Olaf the Southern half, including East Anglia and the whole of
Wessex.

The first point of attack was to be London--a city which, although not
yet the capital of the kingdom, was a chief bulwark of the land and
daily becoming one of the most important centres of trade in Western
Europe. Alfred the Great, who had himself rescued the city from the
Danes, had built a strong fortress for her defence, and her citizens
had always been regarded as among the most valiant and patriotic in all
England. Olaf Triggvison was well aware that if he should succeed in
taking London, his conquest of the rest of Ethelred's realm would be a
comparatively easy matter. Unfortunately for his plans, he did not
foresee the obstacles which were to meet him.

He led his procession of battleships up the Thames. Never before had
such a splendid array been seen upon those waters. The early morning
sun shone upon the gilded birds and dragons on the tops of the masts.
At the prow of each vessel there was reared the tall figure of some
strange and terrible animal, formed of carved and gilded wood or of
wrought brass, silver, or even amber. Many of the ships had sails made
of the finest silk, woven in beautiful designs. The decks were crowded
with men whose glittering spears and burnished helmets gave them a very
warlike aspect, and struck terror into the hearts of the people who saw
them from the river's banks.

The alarm spread quickly from point to point, and before the invaders
had come well within sight of the city the gates were securely closed
and barricaded, and the valiant burghers were fully prepared to make a
stout resistance.

As the ships came abreast of the Tower they were assailed by volleys of
well aimed arrows, fired from the battlements. Heedless of Olaf's
plans, King Sweyn drew his division yet nearer under the walls, with
the intention of making an assault upon the citadel. But the attempt
was useless. The defenders were hidden behind the ramparts and beyond
reach of all missiles, while Sweyn's forces were fully exposed to the
ceaseless hail of arrows and stones which seemed to issue out of the
very walls. So many of his men fell that Sweyn was forced to retire.

The garrison could frustrate an assault upon the fortress, but they
could not prevent so vast a number of ships from passing higher up the
river and making an attack upon the old Roman rampart. While King Sweyn
crossed to the opposite side of the stream and led an attack upon
Southwark, Olaf effected a landing near Billing's Gate and directed all
his strength upon the wall. He lost many men in the attempt, but at
last a breach was made, and at the head of many hundreds of desperate
warriors he entered the city. He had depended upon Sweyn following him;
and had the Danish king been content to obey, London might indeed have
been taken by sheer strength. As it was, however, Olaf quickly found
that he had made a fatal mistake. Vast crowds of armed citizens met him
at the end of each narrow street and dealt the invaders such lusty
blows, with their bills and swords and volleys of heavy stones, that
those who were not maimed or killed outright were forced back by
overpowering strength, their ranks being driven into hopeless
confusion. At one moment Olaf Triggvison found himself, with some six
or seven of his men, surrounded by several scores of the defenders. He
fought his way through them back to the city wall, where, through the
breach that had been made, his hosts were escaping on board the ships.
The besiegers were utterly defeated. Once again had the men of London
rescued their city from its foes.

Sweyn Forkbeard had fared no better than Olaf had done. He had made a
bold attempt to burn the town, but, like Olaf, he had been driven back
to his ships with great slaughter.

On that same day the two defeated chiefs sailed away in wrath and
sorrow, and with the loss of seven ships and two thousand men.

Now, under Alfred or Athelstane such a reverse as the invaders had met
with before London would surely have been followed up by some crushing
victory. But under the wretched Ethelred there was no attempt made to
prevent the more fearful desolation of other parts of the kingdom. Olaf
and Sweyn were calmly allowed to avenge their defeat by ravaging the
coast at pleasure, and to pillage, burn and murder without meeting the
slightest resistance. At the mouth of the Thames the two chiefs had
divided their forces, Sweyn sailing northward towards the Humber, while
Olaf took his course southward, and ravaged far and wide in the old
kingdoms of Kent and Sussex.

Late in the summer, Olaf crossed into Hampshire, and now at last King
Ethelred was roused, for the invaders threatened not only the royal
city of Andover but also the royal person. The king had no army of
sufficient strength to encounter his Norse enemy, and his navy was of
still less consequence. The only course he seems to have thought of,
therefore, was the old cowardly policy of again buying peace with gold.
Olaf was allowed to anchor his fleet for the winter at Southampton, and
in order to avert any raiding into the surrounding country, Ethelred
levied a special tax upon the people of Wessex to supply the crews with
food and pay. He also levied a general tax upon all England to raise
the sum of sixteen thousand pounds as a bribe to the invaders to quit
the kingdom.

This large sum of money was conveyed to Olaf Triggvison by the king's
ambassadors, among whom was a certain Bishop Elfheah--a zealous
Christian, who, in addition to gaining Olaf's solemn promise that he
would keep the peace, took upon himself the task of converting the
young chief to the Christian faith. Olaf had already been baptized by
the good hermit of the Scillys; but he had not yet received the rite of
confirmation. He now declared that he was willing to become entirely a
Christian, and to set aside his belief in the old gods of Scandinavia.
The bishop then led Olaf to the court at Andover, where Ethelred
received him with every honour and enriched him with royal gifts. At
the confirmation of Olaf, which took place with great pomp, King
Ethelred himself was present, and even stood sponsor.

Olaf lived for many weeks at Andover, as King Ethelred's friendly
guest, and before he left to join his ships he signed a treaty in which
he engaged never again to invade England. This promise he faithfully
kept, and for a time there was peace in the land. Ethelred believed
that he had now rid his kingdom of all danger from the vikings. But he
did not reckon with King Sweyn Forkbeard. Tempted by the great sums of
money that had been extorted from the English, Sweyn returned again and
again, and at last succeeded in expelling Ethelred from the land. For
many years Sweyn was the virtual ruler of England, and he thus prepared
the way for his son, Canute the Mighty, who was afterwards the chosen
king of the English people.

Now, while Olaf Triggvison was still the guest of King Ethelred, there
also lived at the court a certain princess named Gyda. She was the
sister of the King of Dublin, in Ireland, and she was considered very
beautiful. A great many wooers sought to wed with her, and among others
a man named Alfwin, a renowned champion and man slayer. A day was fixed
on which Gyda had promised to choose a husband, and many high born men
had come together, hoping to be chosen. All were splendidly attired.

Olaf Triggvison, clad in a coarse, wet weather cloak with a fur hood,
stood apart with a few of his comrades, merely to look on.

Gyda went here and there among her wooers, but seemed to find none that
pleased her. But at length she came to where Olaf stood, with his head
half hidden under his fur hood. She went nearer to him, lifted up his
hood and looked long and earnestly into his eyes.

"A taller and handsomer man I have never seen," said she. "Who art
thou, and whence came you?"

"I am an outland man here," he answered; "and I am named Ole the
Esthonian."

Gyda said, "Wilt thou have me? Then will I choose thee for my husband."

Olaf replied that he was not unwilling to take her at her word. So they
talked the matter over and, being of one mind, they were forthwith
betrothed.

Alfwin was ill content at this, and in great wrath he challenged Olaf
to fight. It was the custom of those days in England that if any two
men contended about a matter they should each bring twelve men and
dispute their rights in a pitched battle. So when these two rivals met,
Olaf gave the word to his men to do as he did. He had a great axe, and
when Alfwin attacked him with his sword, he quickly overpowered him,
and then bound him fast with ropes. In like wise were all Alfwin's men
defeated; and Olaf forced them to depart from the land and never come
back. Alfwin was a very wealthy man, and his wealth was forfeited to
Olaf. Then Olaf wedded Princess Gyda, and went with her to Ireland, and
lived in great happiness for many days.



CHAPTER XIV: THORIR KLAKKA.


During all this time of Olaf Triggvison's wanderings Earl Hakon of Lade
continued to hold the sovereign rule in Norway, and there was great
peace in the land, with fruitful harvests and good fishing. In his
early years he was very popular for his kindliness and generosity, his
fearless courage and his great strength in battle. But it seems that
the greater power which he afterwards acquired disturbed the fine
balance of his mind, and he became deceitful, even to his nearest
friends, and cruel to a degree which presently won for him the hatred
of his people, who murmured against him in secret while fearing to
break out into open rebellion.

Earl Hakon knew nothing of the strong feelings that were rising against
him, nor did he doubt that he should enjoy his power unmolested to the
end of his days. One thought alone disturbed his sense of security. It
chanced that rumours had reached him concerning a certain viking who
called himself Ole, and who was said to have won great renown in the
realm of King Ethelred. Now Hakon was told that this same Ole had spent
his younger days in Gardarike, and he deemed that the lad must be of
the blood of the Norse kings, for it was no secret that King Triggvi
Olafson had had a son who had fared east into Gardarike, and been
nourished there at the court of King Valdemar, and that he was called
Olaf.

Earl Hakon had sought far and wide for Olaf Triggvison, but in vain.
Some men had, indeed, said that in the battle of the Jomsvikings they
had seen a young champion, named Ole the Esthonian, whose aspect was
that of the race of Harald Fairhair, and it was said that this same
champion was one of those who had been made prisoners and put to death.
But, in spite of this story, Hakon still believed in the later rumours.
He believed that the adventurous Ole the Viking was none other than
Olaf Triggvison, nor could he doubt that this daring young rover would
sooner or later lay claim to the kingdom of Norway.

As his own popularity grew less and less, Hakon looked forward with
increasing uneasiness to the inevitable conflict. He well understood
the devotion of the Norse people to the family of Harald Fairhair, and
he now considered that his own safety could only be secured by the
death of this possible rival.

Earl Hakon had a great friend named Thorir Klakka, a man who had been
many years at viking work, and had often gone on trading voyages to
England and Ireland and other lands bordering on the Western Sea. The
earl spoke with Thorir and confided to him his plan, bidding him go on
a trading voyage to Dublin, where Ole the Esthonian was then supposed
to be living, and if it was found that this man Ole was indeed the son
of King Triggvi, or any other offspring of the kingly stem of the
north, then Thorir was either to kill him or to entice him over to
Norway where Hakon himself would deal with him.

So without delay, Thorir went forth upon his mission, and sailed west
into Ireland. It was in the early springtime when he reached Dublin,
and he was not long in learning that Ole was then living at the court
of King Kuaran, his brother-in-law.

On a certain day Thorir was in the marketplace, buying some Irish
horses that were for sale. There was a beautiful white pony that he
greatly coveted, and he offered a high price for it. But there was
another who offered yet more--a tall young man, with long fair hair and
very clear blue eyes, who wore a very beautiful cloak of crimson silk
bordered with gold lace. Thorir at once knew him to be a Norseman, and
he also guessed that this was the man of whom he was in search. Now the
pony at last fell to Thorir's bidding. Then Thorir took the animal by
its halter and went and stood by the side of the handsome Norseman.

"I beg you will take the pony as a gift from me," said he, speaking in
the English tongue; "for I see that you are a great lord in this land,
and such a beautiful animal is better suited to such as you than to a
mere seafarer who has little use for it."

"And why should I take such a gift from a stranger, who owes me nothing
in the world?" returned Olaf Triggvison. "The pony is yours, my man,
for you have bought it and paid for it in fair market. If it indeed be
that you have no wish to keep the animal, then I will gladly buy it
from you at the price you paid. But I cannot take it as a free gift."

Olaf paid him his price in gold of Ethelred's coinage, and sent the
pony away in charge of one of his servants. But even when the business
was over, Thorir did not seem willing to leave, but stood near to Olaf
looking searchingly into his face.

"Why do you linger?" asked Olaf. "Is there something so very unusual
about me that you stare at me so?"

"There is much that is unusual about you, lord," answered Thorir; "and
little marvel is there that I should look upon you with interest.
Nowhere, save in my own birthland of Norway, have I ever seen a man so
tall and strong and fair."

"Certainly, there are many such men in Norway," said Olaf; "but also
there are many in these western lands; as to which witness those who
are about us here in this marketplace."

He glanced across to where his friend Kolbiorn Stallare was standing.

"There is one at your back who seems not less strong than I."

Thorir looked round at Kolbiorn, then back at Olaf. "You are well nigh
a head and shoulders taller than that one," said he; "and there is that
about you which seems to tell me you have spent the larger part of your
life in Norway."

Olaf said: "Since I was a babe in arms, I have been but once in that
land; and then only during two changes of the moon or so. Nevertheless,
I will not deny that there is indeed a vein of the Norse blood in me,
and for that reason I should be well enough pleased to hear from you
some news of what has been happening in Norway these few summers past."

"Little is there to tell," returned Thorir; "for, since the rascally
sons of Erik Bloodaxe were driven from the land, there have been no
great wars. True it is, that Earl Sigvaldi of Jomsburg did lately make
an attempt to win dominion in Norway. He led his host of vikings, with
I know not how many battleships, against Earl Hakon; but he was
defeated with great slaughter and took to flight."

"Of that famous fight I have already had tidings," said Olaf. "I have
heard that many well known vikings were vanquished on that day, and
that Vagn Akison was the only chief who stood his ground to the end."

Thorir looked with quick eyes into Olaf's face, and said: "Yes, Vagn
proved himself a valiant warrior in that encounter. But there was one
who was quite as brave and mighty as he--one who named himself Ole the
Esthonian. Men say that this same Ole has since won great renown in
England."

Olaf smiled, but was silent for some moments. Then at last he began to
ask many questions concerning the Upland kings, and who of them were
yet alive, and what dominion they had. Of Earl Hakon also he asked, and
how well beloved he might be in the land.

Thorir answered: "The earl is so mighty a man that he now has the whole
of Norway in his power, and none dares to speak a word but in his
praise. And yet," he added, remembering the terms of his mission, "Earl
Hakon is not all that a peaceful people would wish. Many would prefer
some other monarch if they but knew where to find one better to their
taste. A pity it is that there is no man of the blood of King Harald
Fairhair living, whom the Norsemen could put upon the throne. None such
have we to turn to; and for this cause it would little avail any man
not kingly born to contend with Earl Hakon."
