"You will please to remember, Captain John Lawton, that I am not the
riding master of the regiment--nor a drill sergeant--nor a crazy cornet;
no, sir--and I speak it with a due respect for the commission of the
Continental Congress--nor an inconsiderate captain, who regards his own
life as little as that of his enemies. I am only, sir, a poor humble man
of letters, a mere doctor of medicine, an unworthy graduate of
Edinburgh, and a surgeon of dragoons; nothing more, I do assure you,
Captain John Lawton." So saying, he turned his horse's head towards the
cottage, and recommenced his ride.

"Aye, you speak the truth," muttered the dragoon. "Had I but the meanest
rider of my troop with me, I should have taken the scoundrel, and given
at least one victim to the laws. But, Archibald, no man can ride well
who straddles in this manner like the Colossus of Rhodes. You should
depend less on your stirrup, and keep your seat by the power of
the knee."

"With proper deference to your experience, Captain Lawton," returned the
surgeon, "I conceive myself to be no incompetent judge of muscular
action, whether in the knee, or in any other part of the human frame.
And although but humbly educated, I am not now to learn that the wider
the base, the more firm is the superstructure."

"Would you fill a highway, in this manner, with one pair of legs, when
half a dozen might pass together in comfort, stretching them abroad like
the scythes of the ancient chariot wheels?"

The allusion to the practice of the ancients somewhat softened the
indignation of the surgeon, and he replied, with rather less hauteur,--

"You should speak with reverence of the usages of those who have gone
before us, and who, however ignorant they were in matters of science,
and particularly that of surgery, yet furnished many brilliant hints to
our own improvements. Now, sir, I have no doubt that Galen has operated
on wounds occasioned by these very scythes that you mention, although we
can find no evidence of the fact in contemporary writers. Ah! they must
have given dreadful injuries, and, I doubt not, caused great uneasiness
to the medical gentlemen of that day."

"Occasionally a body must have been left in two pieces, to puzzle the
ingenuity of those gentry to unite. Yet, venerable and learned as they
were, I doubt not they did it."

"What! unite two parts of the human body, that have been severed by an
edged instrument, to any of the purposes of animal life?"

"That have been rent asunder by a scythe, and are united to do military
duty," said Lawton.

"'Tis impossible--quite impossible," cried the surgeon. "It is in vain,
Captain Lawton, that human ingenuity endeavors to baffle the efforts of
nature. Think, my dear sir; in this case you separate all the
arteries--injure all of the intestines--sever all of the nerves and
sinews, and, what is of more consequence, you--"

"You have said enough, Dr. Sitgreaves, to convince a member of a rival
school. Nothing shall ever tempt me willingly to submit to be divided in
this irretrievable manner."

"Certes, there is little pleasure in a wound which, from its nature, is
incurable."

"I should think so," said Lawton, dryly.

"What do you think is the greatest pleasure in life?" asked the operator
suddenly.

"That must greatly depend on taste."

"Not at all," cried the surgeon; "it is in witnessing, or rather
feeling, the ravages of disease repaired by the lights of science
cooperating with nature. I once broke my little finger intentionally, in
order that I might reduce the fracture and watch the cure: it was only
on a small scale, you know, dear John; still the thrilling sensation
excited by the knitting of the bone, aided by the contemplation of the
art of man thus acting in unison with nature, exceeded any other
enjoyment that I have ever experienced. Now, had it been one of the more
important members, such as the leg, or arm, how much greater must the
pleasure have been!"

"Or the neck," said the trooper; but their desultory discourse was
interrupted by their arrival at the cottage of Mr. Wharton. No one
appearing to usher them into an apartment, the captain proceeded to the
door of the parlor, where he knew visitors were commonly received. On
opening it, he paused for a moment, in admiration at the scene within.
The person of Colonel Wellmere first met his eye, bending towards the
figure of the blushing Sarah, with an earnestness of manner that
prevented the noise of Lawton's entrance from being heard by either of
the parties. Certain significant signs which were embraced at a glance
by the prying gaze of the trooper, at once made him a master of their
secret; and he was about to retire as silently as he had advanced, when
his companion, pushing himself through the passage, abruptly entered the
room. Advancing instantly to the chair of Wellmere, the surgeon
instinctively laid hold of his arm, and exclaimed,--

"Bless me!--a quick and irregular pulse--flushed cheek and fiery
eye--strong febrile symptoms, and such as must be attended to." While
speaking, the doctor, who was much addicted to practicing in a summary
way,--a weakness of most medical men in military practice,--had already
produced his lancet, and was making certain other indications of his
intentions to proceed at once to business. But Colonel Wellmere,
recovering from the confusion of the surprise, arose from his seat
haughtily, and said,--

"Sir, it is the warmth of the room that lends me the color, and I am
already too much indebted to your skill to give you any further trouble.
Miss Wharton knows that I am quite well, and I do assure you that I
never felt better or happier in my life."

There was a peculiar emphasis on the latter part of this speech, that,
however it might gratify the feelings of Sarah, brought the color to her
cheeks again; and Sitgreaves, as his eye followed the direction of those
of his patient, did not fail to observe it.

"Your arm, if you please, madam," said the surgeon, advancing with a
bow. "Anxiety and watching have done their work on your delicate frame,
and there are symptoms about you that must not be neglected."

"Excuse me, sir," said Sarah, recovering herself with womanly pride;
"the heat is oppressive, and I will retire and acquaint Miss Peyton with
your presence."

There was but little difficulty in practicing on the abstracted
simplicity of the surgeon; but it was necessary for Sarah to raise her
eyes to return the salutation of Lawton, as he bowed his head nearly to
a level with the hand that held open the door for her passage. One look
was sufficient; she was able to control her steps sufficiently to retire
with dignity; but no sooner was she relieved from the presence of all
observers, than she fell into a chair and abandoned herself to a feeling
of mingled shame and pleasure.

A little nettled at the contumacious deportment of the British colonel,
Sitgreaves, after once more tendering services that were again rejected,
withdrew to the chamber of young Singleton, whither Lawton had already
preceded him.




CHAPTER XXI


     Oh! Henry, when thou deign'st to sue,
        Can I thy suit withstand?
     When thou, loved youth, hast won my heart,
        Can I refuse my hand?
                    --_Hermit of Warkevorth._

The graduate of Edinburgh found his patient rapidly improving in health,
and entirely free from fever. His sister, with a cheek that was, if
possible, paler than on her arrival, watched around his couch with
tender care; and the ladies of the cottage had not, in the midst of
their sorrows and varied emotions, forgotten to discharge the duties of
hospitality. Frances felt herself impelled towards their disconsolate
guest, with an interest for which she could not account, and with a
force that she could not control. She had unconsciously connected the
fates of Dunwoodie and Isabella in her imagination, and she felt, with
the romantic ardor of a generous mind, that she was serving her former
lover most by exhibiting kindness to her he loved best. Isabella
received her attentions with gratitude, but neither of them indulged in
any allusions to the latent source of their uneasiness. The observation
of Miss Peyton seldom penetrated beyond things that were visible, and to
her the situation of Henry Wharton seemed to furnish an awful excuse for
the fading cheeks and tearful eyes of her niece. If Sarah manifested
less of care than her sister, still the unpracticed aunt was not at a
loss to comprehend the reason. Love is a holy feeling with the virtuous
of the female sex, and it hallows all that come within its influence.
Although Miss Peyton mourned with sincerity over the danger which
threatened her nephew, she well knew that an active campaign was not
favorable to love, and the moments that were thus accidentally granted
were not to be thrown away.

Several days now passed without any interruption of the usual avocations
of the inhabitants of the cottage, or the party at the Four Corners.
The former were supporting their fortitude with the certainty of Henry's
innocence, and a strong reliance on Dunwoodie's exertions in his behalf,
and the latter waiting with impatience the intelligence, that was hourly
expected, of a conflict, and their orders to depart. Captain Lawton,
however, waited for both these events in vain. Letters from the major
announced that the enemy, finding that the party which was to cooperate
with them had been defeated, and was withdrawn, had retired also behind
the works of Fort Washington, where they continued inactive, threatening
constantly to strike a blow in revenge for their disgrace. The trooper
was enjoined to vigilance, and the letter concluded with a compliment to
his honor, zeal, and undoubted bravery.

"Extremely flattering, Major Dunwoodie," muttered the dragoon, as he
threw down this epistle, and stalked across the floor to quiet his
impatience. "A proper guard have you selected for this service: let me
see--I have to watch over the interests of a crazy, irresolute old man,
who does not know whether he belongs to us or to the enemy; four women,
three of whom are well enough in themselves, but who are not immensely
flattered by my society; and the fourth, who, good as she is, is on the
wrong side of forty; some two or three blacks; a talkative housekeeper,
that does nothing but chatter about gold and despisables, and signs and
omens; and poor George Singleton. Well, a comrade in suffering has a
claim on a man,--so I'll make the best of it."

As he concluded this soliloquy, the trooper took a seat and began to
whistle, to convince himself how little he cared about the matter, when,
by throwing his booted leg carelessly round, he upset the canteen that
held his whole stock of brandy. The accident was soon repaired, but in
replacing the wooden vessel, he observed a billet lying on the bench, on
which the liquor had been placed. It was soon opened, and he read: _"The
moon will not rise till after midnight--a fit time for deeds of
darkness."_ There was no mistaking the hand; it was clearly the same
that had given him the timely warning against assassination, and the
trooper continued, for a long time, musing on the nature of these two
notices, and the motives that could induce the peddler to favor an
implacable enemy in the manner that he had latterly done. That he was a
spy of the enemy, Lawton knew; for the fact of his conveying
intelligence to the English commander in chief, of a party of Americans
that were exposed to the enemy was proved most clearly against him on
the trial for his life. The consequences of his treason had been
avoided, it is true, by a lucky order from Washington, which withdrew
the regiment a short time before the British appeared to cut it off, but
still the crime was the same. "Perhaps," thought the partisan, "he
wishes to make a friend of me against the event of another capture; but,
at all events, he spared my life on one occasion, and saved it on
another. I will endeavor to be as generous as himself, and pray that my
duty may never interfere with my feelings."

Whether the danger, intimated in the present note, threatened the
cottage or his own party, the captain was uncertain; but he inclined to
the latter opinion, and determined to beware how he rode abroad in the
dark. To a man in a peaceable country, and in times of quiet and order,
the indifference with which the partisan regarded the impending danger
would be inconceivable. His reflections on the subject were more
directed towards devising means to entrap his enemies, than to escape
their machinations. But the arrival of the surgeon, who had been to pay
his daily visit to the Locusts, interrupted his meditations. Sitgreaves
brought an invitation from the mistress of the mansion to Captain
Lawton, desiring that the cottage might be honored with his presence at
an early hour on that evening.

"Ha!" cried the trooper; "then they have received a letter also."

"I think nothing more probable," said the surgeon. "There is a chaplain
at the cottage from the royal army, who has come out to exchange the
British wounded, and who has an order from Colonel Singleton for their
delivery. But a more mad project than to remove them now was
never adopted."

"A priest, say you!--is he a hard drinker--a real camp-idler--a fellow
to breed a famine in a regiment? Or does he seem a man who is earnest in
his trade?"

"A very respectable and orderly gentleman, and not unreasonably given to
intemperance, judging from the outward symptoms," returned the surgeon;
"and a man who really says grace in a very regular and appropriate
manner."

"And does he stay the night?"

"Certainly, he waits for his cartel; but hasten, John, we have but
little time to waste. I will just step up and bleed two or three of the
Englishmen who are to move in the morning, in order to anticipate
inflammation, and be with you immediately."

The gala suit of Captain Lawton was easily adjusted to his huge frame,
and his companion being ready, they once more took their route towards
the cottage. Roanoke had been as much benefited by a few days' rest as
his master; and Lawton ardently wished, as he curbed his gallant steed,
on passing the well-remembered rocks, that his treacherous enemy stood
before him, mounted and armed as himself. But no enemy, nor any
disturbance whatever, interfered with their progress, and they reached
the Locusts just as the sun was throwing his setting rays on the valley,
and tingeing the tops of the leafless trees with gold. It never required
more than a single look to acquaint the trooper with the particulars of
every scene that was not uncommonly veiled, and the first survey that he
took on entering the house told him more than the observations of a day
had put into the possession of Doctor Sitgreaves. Miss Peyton accosted
him with a smiling welcome, that exceeded the bounds of ordinary
courtesy and which evidently flowed more from feelings that were
connected with the heart, than from manner. Frances glided about,
tearful and agitated, while Mr. Wharton stood ready to receive them,
decked in a suit of velvet that would have been conspicuous in the
gayest drawing-room. Colonel Wellmere was in the uniform of an officer
of the household troops of his prince, and Isabella Singleton sat in the
parlor, clad in the habiliments of joy, but with a countenance that
belied her appearance; while her brother by her side looked, with a
cheek of flitting color, and an eye of intense interest, like anything
but an invalid. As it was the third day that he had left his room, Dr.
Sitgreaves, who began to stare about him in stupid wonder, forgot to
reprove his patient for imprudence. Into this scene Captain Lawton moved
with all the composure and gravity of a man whose nerves were not easily
discomposed by novelties. His compliments were received as graciously as
they were offered, and after exchanging a few words with the different
individuals present, he approached the surgeon, who had withdrawn, in a
kind of confused astonishment, to rally his senses.

"John," whispered the surgeon, with awakened curiosity, "what means this
festival?"

"That your wig and my black head would look the better for a little of
Betty Flanagan's flour; but it is too late now, and we must fight the
battle armed as you see."

"Observe, here comes the army chaplain in his full robes, as a Doctor
Divinitatis; what can it mean?"

"An exchange," said the trooper. "The wounded of Cupid are to meet and
settle their accounts with the god, in the way of plighting faith to
suffer from his archery no more."

The surgeon laid a finger on the side of his nose, and he began to
comprehend the case.

"Is it not a crying shame, that a sunshine hero, and an enemy, should
thus be suffered to steal away one of the fairest plants that grow in
our soil," muttered Lawton; "a flower fit to be placed in the bosom
of any man!"

"If he be not more accommodating as a husband than as a patient, John, I
fear me that the lady will lead a troubled life."

"Let her," said the trooper, indignantly; "she has chosen from her
country's enemies, and may she meet with a foreigner's virtues in
her choice."

Further conversation was interrupted by Miss Peyton, who, advancing,
acquainted them that they had been invited to grace the nuptials of her
eldest niece and Colonel Wellmere. The gentlemen bowed; and the good
aunt, with an inherent love of propriety, went on to add, that the
acquaintance was of an old date, and the attachment by no means a sudden
thing. To this Lawton merely bowed still more ceremoniously; but the
surgeon, who loved to hold converse with the virgin, replied,--

"That the human mind was differently constituted in different
individuals. In some, impressions are vivid and transitory; in others,
more deep and lasting: indeed, there are some philosophers who pretend
to trace a connection between the physical and mental powers of the
animal; but, for my part, madam, I believe that the one is much
influenced by habit and association, and the other subject altogether to
the peculiar laws of matter."

Miss Peyton, in her turn, bowed her silent assent to this remark, and
retired with dignity, to usher the intended bride into the presence of
the company. The hour had arrived when American custom has decreed that
the vows of wedlock must be exchanged; and Sarah, blushing with a
variety of emotions, followed her aunt to the drawing-room. Wellmere
sprang to receive the hand that, with an averted face, she extended
towards him, and, for the first time, the English colonel appeared fully
conscious of the important part that he was to act in the approaching
ceremony. Hitherto his air had been abstracted, and his manner uneasy;
but everything, excepting the certainty of his bliss, seemed to vanish
at the blaze of loveliness that now burst on his sight. All arose from
their seats, and the reverend gentleman had already opened the sacred
volume, when the absence of Frances was noticed! Miss Peyton withdrew in
search of her youngest niece, whom she found in her own apartment,
and in tears.

"Come, my love, the ceremony waits but for us," said the aunt,
affectionately entwining her arm in that of her niece. "Endeavor to
compose yourself, that proper honor may be done to the choice of
your sister."

"Is he--can he be, worthy of her?"

"Can he be otherwise?" returned Miss Peyton. "Is he not a gentleman?--a
gallant soldier, though an unfortunate one? and certainly, my love, one
who appears every way qualified to make any woman happy."

Frances had given vent to her feelings, and, with an effort, she
collected sufficient resolution to venture to join the party below. But
to relieve the embarrassment of this delay, the clergyman had put sundry
questions to the bridegroom; one of which was by no means answered to
his satisfaction. Wellmere was compelled to acknowledge that he was
unprovided with a ring; and to perform the marriage ceremony without
one, the divine pronounced to be canonically impossible. His appeal to
Mr. Wharton, for the propriety of this decision, was answered
affirmatively, as it would have been negatively, had the question been
put in a manner to lead to such a result. The owner of the Locusts had
lost the little energy he possessed, by the blow recently received
through his son, and his assent to the objection of the clergyman was as
easily obtained as had been his consent to the premature proposals of
Wellmere. In this stage of the dilemma, Miss Peyton and Frances
appeared. The surgeon of dragoons approached the former, and as he
handed her to a chair, observed,--

"It appears, madam, that untoward circumstances have prevented Colonel
Wellmere from providing all of the decorations that custom, antiquity,
and the canons of the church have prescribed, as indispensable to enter
into the honorable state of wedlock."

Miss Peyton glanced her quiet eye at the uneasy bridegroom, and
perceiving him to be adorned with what she thought sufficient splendor,
allowing for the time and the suddenness of the occasion, she turned her
look on the speaker, as if to demand an explanation.

The surgeon understood her wishes, and proceeded at once to gratify
them.

"There is," he observed, "an opinion prevalent, that the heart lies on
the left side of the body, and that the connection between the members
of that side and what may be called the seat of life is more intimate
than that which exists with their opposites. But this is an error which
grows out of an ignorance of the organic arrangement of the human frame.
In obedience to this opinion, the fourth finger of the left hand is
thought to contain a virtue that belongs to no other branch of that
digitated member; and it is ordinarily encircled, during the
solemnization of wedlock, with a cincture or ring, as if to chain that
affection to the marriage state, which is best secured by the graces of
the female character." While speaking, the operator laid his hand
expressively on his heart, and he bowed nearly to the floor when he had
concluded.

"I know not, sir, that I rightly understand your meaning," said Miss
Peyton, whose want of comprehension was sufficiently excusable.

"A ring, madam--a ring is wanting for the ceremony."

The instant that the surgeon spoke explicitly, the awkwardness of the
situation was understood. She glanced her eyes at her nieces, and in the
younger she read a secret exultation that somewhat displeased her; but
the countenance of Sarah was suffused with a shame that the considerate
aunt well understood. Not for the world would she violate any of the
observances of female etiquette. It suggested itself to all the females,
at the same moment, that the wedding ring of the late mother and sister
was reposing peacefully amid the rest of her jewelry in a secret
receptacle, that had been provided at an early day, to secure the
valuables against the predatory inroads of the marauders who roamed
through the county. Into this hidden vault, the plate, and whatever was
most prized, made a nightly retreat, and there the ring in question had
long lain, forgotten until at this moment. But it was the business of
the bridegroom, from time immemorial, to furnish this indispensable to
wedlock, and on no account would Miss Peyton do anything that
transcended the usual reserve of the sex on this solemn occasion;
certainly not until sufficient expiation for the offense had been made,
by a due portion of trouble and disquiet. This material fact, therefore,
was not disclosed by either; the aunt consulting female propriety; the
bride yielding to shame; and Frances rejoicing that an embarrassment,
proceeding from almost any cause, should delay her sister's vow. It was
reserved for Doctor Sitgreaves to interrupt the awkward silence.

"If, madam, a plain ring, that once belonged to a sister of my own--" He
paused and hemmed--"If, madam, a ring of that description might be
admitted to this honor, I have one that could be easily produced from my
quarters at the Corners, and I doubt not it would fit the finger for
which it is desired. There is a strong resemblance between--hem--between
my late sister and Miss Wharton in stature and anatomical figure; and,
in all eligible subjects, the proportions are apt to be observed
throughout the whole animal economy."

A glance of Miss Peyton's eye recalled Colonel Wellmere to a sense of
his duty, and springing from his chair, he assured the surgeon that in
no way could he confer a greater obligation on himself than by sending
for that very ring. The operator bowed a little haughtily, and withdrew
to fulfill his promise, by dispatching a messenger on the errand. The
aunt suffered him to retire; but unwillingness to admit a stranger into
the privacy of their domestic arrangements induced her to follow and
tender the services of Caesar, instead of those of Sitgreaves' man, who
had volunteered for this duty. Katy Haynes was accordingly directed to
summon the black to the vacant parlor, and thither Miss Peyton and the
surgeon repaired, to give their several instructions.

The consent to this sudden union of Sarah and Wellmere, and especially
at a time when the life of a member of the family was in such imminent
jeopardy, was given from a conviction that the unsettled state of the
country would probably prevent another opportunity to the lovers of
meeting, and a secret dread on the part of Mr. Wharton, that the death
of his son might, by hastening his own, leave his remaining children
without a protector. But notwithstanding Miss Peyton had complied with
her brother's wish to profit by the accidental visit of a divine, she
had not thought it necessary to blazon the intended nuptials of her
niece to the neighborhood, had even time been allowed; she thought,
therefore, that she was now communicating a profound secret to the
negro, and her housekeeper.

"Caesar," she commenced, with a smile, "you are now to learn that your
young mistress, Miss Sarah, is to be united to Colonel Wellmere
this evening."

"I t'ink I see him afore," said Caesar, chuckling. "Old black man can
tell when a young lady make up he mind."

"Really, Caesar, I find I have never given you credit for half the
observation that you deserve; but as you already know on what emergency
your services are required, listen to the directions of this gentleman,
and observe them."

The black turned in quiet submission to the surgeon, who commenced as
follows:--

"Caesar, your mistress has already acquainted you with the important
event about to be solemnized within this habitation; but a cincture or
ring is wanting to encircle the finger of the bride; a custom derived
from the ancients, and which has been continued in the marriage forms of
several branches of the Christian church, and which is even, by a
species of typical wedlock, used in the installation of prelates, as you
doubtless understand."

"P'r'aps Massa Doctor will say him over ag'in," interrupted the old
negro, whose memory began to fail him, just as the other made so
confident an allusion to his powers of comprehension. "I t'ink I get him
by heart dis time."

"It is impossible to gather honey from a rock, Caesar, and therefore I
will abridge the little I have to say. Ride to the Four Corners, and
present this note to Sergeant Hollister, or to Mrs. Elizabeth Flanagan,
either of whom will furnish the necessary pledge of connubial affection;
and return forthwith."

The letter which the surgeon put into the hands of his messenger, as he
ceased, was conceived in the following terms:--

"If the fever has left Kinder, give him nourishment. Take three ounces
more of blood from Watson. Have a search made that the woman Flanagan
has left none of her jugs of alcohol in the hospital. Renew the
dressings of Johnson, and dismiss Smith to duty. Send the ring, which is
pendent from the chain of the watch, that I left with you to time the
doses, by the bearer.

"ARCHIBALD SITGREAVES, M. D.",
_"Surgeon of Dragoons."_

"Caesar," said Katy, when she was alone with the black, "put the ring,
when you get it, in your left pocket, for that is nearest your heart;
and by no means endeavor to try it on your finger, for it is unlucky."

"Try um on he finger?" interrupted the negro, stretching forth his bony
knuckles. "T'ink a Miss Sally's ring go on old Caesar finger?"

"'Tis not consequential whether it goes on or not," said the
housekeeper; "but it is an evil omen to place a marriage ring on the
finger of another after wedlock, and of course it may be
dangerous before."

"I tell you, Katy, I neber t'ink to put um on a finger."

"Go, then, Caesar, and do not forget the left pocket; be careful to take
off your hat as you pass the graveyard, and be expeditious; for
nothing, I am certain, can be more trying to the patience, than thus to
be waiting for the ceremony, when a body has fully made up her mind
to marry."

With this injunction Caesar quitted the house, and he was soon firmly
fixed in the saddle. From his youth, the black, like all of his race,
had been a hard rider; but, bending under the weight of sixty winters,
his African blood had lost some of its native heat. The night was dark,
and the wind whistled through the vale with the dreariness of November.
When Caesar reached the graveyard, he uncovered his grizzled head with
superstitious awe, and threw around him many a fearful glance, in
momentary expectation of seeing something superhuman. There was
sufficient light to discern a being of earthly mold stealing from among
the graves, apparently with a design to enter the highway. It is in vain
that philosophy and reason contend with early impressions, and poor
Caesar was even without the support of either of these frail allies. He
was, however, well mounted on a coach horse of Mr. Wharton's and,
clinging to the back of the animal with instinctive skill, he abandoned
the rein to the beast. Hillocks, woods, rocks, fences, and houses flew
by him with the rapidity of lightning, and the black had just begun to
think whither and on what business he was riding in this headlong
manner, when he reached the place where the roads met, and the "Hotel
Flanagan" stood before him in its dilapidated simplicity. The sight of a
cheerful fire first told the negro that he had reached the habitation of
man, and with it came all his dread of the bloody Virginians; his duty
must, however, be done, and, dismounting, he fastened the foaming animal
to a fence, and approached the window with cautious steps, to
reconnoiter.

Before a blazing fire sat Sergeant Hollister and Betty Flanagan,
enjoying themselves over a liberal potation.

"I tell ye, sargeant dear," said Betty, removing the mug from her mouth,
"'tis no r'asonable to think it was more than the piddler himself; sure
now, where was the smell of sulphur, and the wings, and the tail, and
the cloven foot? Besides, sargeant, it's no dacent to tell a lone famale
that she had Beelzeboob for a bedfellow."
