    of Old Greece; Harding, Stories of Greek Gods, Heroes and Men; E.M.
    Tappan, The Story of the Greek People; and Plutarch's Lives. There
    are several abridged editions of the latter, but those by C.E.
    Byles, Greek Lives from Plutarch, and Edwin Ginn, Plutarch's Lives,
    are best adapted to the use of schools.

    _(d) Various features of Greek Life_, as the home, the schools,
    food, clothing, occupations, amusements, or government have been
    described in the books on Greek Life.

    Among these are Bluemner, Home Life of the Ancient Greeks (translated
    by Alice Zimmern); C.B. Gulick, The Life of the Ancient Greeks;
    Mahaffy, Social Life in Greece; and T.G. Tucker, Life in
    Ancient Athens.

    _(e) Descriptions of Athens and Alexandria_. Descriptions of these
    great centers of Greek civilization will be found in any history of
    Greece; that in Gulick, Life of the Ancient Greeks, ch. 2, or
    Tucker, Life in Ancient Athens, for Athens, and in Draper,
    Intellectual Development of Europe, 1. pp. 187-204, for Alexandria,
    will serve the purpose.

    _(f)_ A description of the battle of Marathon, abridged from the
    History of the World by Herodotus, will be found in F.M. Fling's
    Source Book of Greek History. This little book gives many incidents
    in Greek History as the Greek writers told them.

    _(g)_ A description of the materials, methods of building,
    decoration of public buildings, and the uses of the temples,
    theaters, gymnasia, and stadia in Fowler and Wheeler's Greek
    Archaeology, ch. 2; and Tarbell's History of Greek Art.

    _(h)_ Some may wish to read the careful statement in Holm's History
    of the Greeks, Vol. I, pp. 103-121, on the Truth about the Old Greek
    Legends, or the same author's account, Vol. I, pp. 272-295, of
    Emigration to the Colonies in the Olden Day.

    B. ANCIENT TIMES. THE ROMAN PEOPLE. (For use with chapters v, vi,
    vii, viii and ix.)

    _(a) Histories of the Romans_.

    Either Botsford, History of Rome; Pelham, Outlines of Roman History;
    How and Leigh, History of Rome; or Schuckburgh, History of Rome;
    though the last two do not cover the entire period of Roman history.
    Duruy, History of Rome, 8 volumes, is attractive in style and
    supplied with a great variety of pictures and other
    illustrative matter.

    Botsford, History of the Ancient World; Goodspeed, History of the
    Ancient World; Myers, Ancient History; Wolfson, Essentials in
    Ancient History; and West, Ancient World, give short accounts of the
    chief events in Roman history.

    _(b) Versions of famous old Roman stories_, especially the
    wanderings of Aeneas, the Story of Romulus and Remus, of the Sabine
    Women, Horatius at the Bridge, and Cincinnatus.

    A.J. Church, Stories from Virgil; C.M. Gayley, Classical Myths; H.A.
    Guerber, Myths of Greece and Rome; the same author's Story of the
    Romans; Haaren and Poland, Famous Men of Rome; and Harding, City of
    Seven Hills. Macaulay, Lays of Ancient Rome, gives the story of
    Horatius at the Bridge, together with several other stories from
    early Roman history.

    _(c) Versions of the German myths about Odin (Wodan), Thor, Freya,
    and Tyr (Tiw)._ C.M. Gayley. Classical Myths; Guerber, Myths of
    Northern Lands; Haaren and Poland, Famous Men of the Middle Ages;
    Mary E. Litchfield, The Nine Worlds; H.W. Mabie, Norse Stories; Eva
    March Tappan, European Hero Stories; Alice Zimmern, Gods and Heroes
    of the North.

    _(d) The Story of Hermann_ (or the struggle between the Romans and
    Germans) is told by Arthur Gilman, Magna Charta Stories, pp.
    139-155; and by Maude B. Dutton, Little Stories of Germany.

    _(e) Short Biographies of some famous Romans_. Short accounts of the
    lives of Romulus, the Gracchi, Caesar, Cicero, and Constantine are
    given in Haaren and Poland, Famous Men of Rome; Harding, The City of
    Seven Hills; and several of them in Plutarch's Lives. A simple
    account of the Life of Hannibal, the Carthaginian enemy of Rome,
    will also be found in these books.

    _(f) Interesting phases of Roman Life_: for example, the Roman boy,
    country life in Italy, the Roman house, traveling, amusements, etc.
    See W.W. Fowler, Social Life at Rome in the Age of Cicero; H.W.
    Johnston, The Private Life of the Romans; S.B. Platner, Topography
    and Monuments of Ancient Rome; T.G. Tucker, Life in the Roman World
    of Nero and St. Paul. Many phases of Roman life are described in
    F.M. Crawford's Ave Roma.

    _(g)_ For descriptions of incidents in Roman history and phases of
    Roman life as the Greek and Roman writers told them, see Botsford,
    Story of Rome, and Munro, Source Book of Roman History.

    C. THE MIDDLE AGES. (For use with chapters x, xi, xii, and xiii.)

    _(a) Histories of the people of Europe in the Middle Ages_. G.B.
    Adams, Growth of the French Nation; U.R. Burke, A History of Spain
    from the Earliest Times to the Death of Ferdinand the Catholic;
    J.R. Green, Short History of the English People; E.F. Henderson, A
    Short History of German; H.D. Sedgwick, A Short History of Italy.

    _(b) Collection of stories adapted to children of the grades_: The
    Story of Beowulf, King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table,
    the Treasure of the Niebelungs, and of Roland. These stories have
    all been written many times, and any librarian can give the reader
    copies of them as told by several writers. The following is a
    partial list only:

    A.J. Church, Heroes and Romances; E.G. Crommelin, Famous Legends
    Adapted for Children; H.A. Guerber, Legends of the Middle Ages;
    Louise Maitland, Heroes of Chivalry; and Eva March Tappan, European
    Hero Stories; James Baldwin, The Story of Roland; Frances N. Greene,
    Legends of King Arthur and His Court; Florence Holbrook, Northland
    Heroes (Beowulf); Sidney Lanier, The Boy's King Arthur; Stevens and
    Allen, King Arthur Stories from Malory.

    _(c) Famous Men of the Middle Ages_; for example, Charlemagne, King
    Alfred, Rollo the Viking, William the Conqueror, Frederick
    Barbarossa, Richard the Lion-Hearted, King John, Saint Louis of
    France, Marco Polo, and Gutenberg.

    See A.F. Blaisdell, Stories from English History; Louise Creighton,
    Stories from English History; Maude B. Dutton, Little Stories of
    Germany; H.A. Guerber, The Story of the English; Haaren and Poland,
    Famous Men of the Middle Ages; Harding, The Story of the Middle
    Ages; S.B. Harding and W.F. Harding, The Story of England;
    M.F. Lansing, Barbarian and Noble; A.M. Mowry, First Steps in the
    History of England; L.N. Pitman, Stories of Old France; Eva March
    Tappan, European Hero Stories; H.P. Warren, Stories from English
    History; Bates and Coman, English History as told by the Poets.
    Edward Atherton, The Adventures of Marco Polo, the Great Traveler,
    is a convenient modernized version of Polo's own story of his
    travels. Marco Polo's description of Japan and Java has been
    reprinted in Old South Leaflets, Vol. II, No. 32.

    _(d) Viking Tales_. The interesting stories of the Northern
    discoveries and explorations have been told many times. Jennie Hall,
    Viking Tales, includes the story of Eric the Red, Leif the Lucky,
    and the attempt to settle in Vinland (Wineland).

    _(e) The Trial of Criminals in the Middle Ages--Ordeals_. Other
    kinds of Ordeals than those described in this book will be obtained
    in Ogg, Source Book of Mediaeval History, pp. 196-202; Pennsylvania
    Translations and Reprints, Vol. IV, No. 4. pp. 7-16; or in Thatcher
    and McNeal, Source Book, pp. 401-412. See Emerton, Introduction to
    the Middle Ages, pp. 79-81, for excellent explanation of mediaeval
    methods of trial.

    _(f) Famous accounts of how the People of England won the Magna
    Charta_.

    Use either Cheyney, Readings in English History, pp. 179-181;
    Kendall, Source Book of English History, pp. 72-78; Robinson,
    Readings in European History, Vol. I, pp. 231-333; or Ogg, Source
    Book of Mediaeval History, pp. 297-303.

    _(g) Simple descriptions of Mediaeval Life_. Maude B. Dutton, Little
    Stories of Germany; for example, the chapters on How a Page became a
    Knight, and A Mediaeval Town. S.B. Harding, The Story of the Middle
    Ages, especially the chapters describing life in castle, life in
    village, and life in monastery. Eva March Tappan, European Hero
    Stories, especially the topic, Life in Middle Ages, p. 118, the
    Crusades, p. 136, and Winning the Magna Charta, p. 111.

    D. THE BEGINNINGS OF MODERN TIMES. The Discovery of America. (For
    use with chapters xiv to xxi inclusive.)

    _(a) Histories of American Discoveries and Explorations_. E.G.
    Bourne, Spain in America; Fiske, Discovery of America, 2 volumes;
    and Parkman, Pioneers of France in the New World.

    _(b) Short, easy biographies of famous explorers_. (Da Gama,
    Columbus, Magellan, De Soto, Coronado, Cartier, Drake, and Raleigh.)

    Foote and Skinner, Explorers and Founders of America; W.F. Gordy,
    Stories of American Explorers; W.E. Griffis, The Romance of
    Discovery; Haaren and Poland, Famous Men of Modern Times; Higginson,
    Young Folks' Book of American Explorers; Jeannette B. Hodgdon, A
    First Course in American History, Book I; W.H. Johnson, The World's
    Discoverers, 2 volumes; Lawyer, The Story of Columbus and Magellan;
    Lummis, The Spanish Pioneers; Mara L. Pratt, America's Story for
    America's Children, Book 2; Gertrude V.D. Southworth, Builders of
    our Country, Book I; Rosa V. Winterburn, The Spanish in the
    Southwest.

    _(c) Stories of explorations as told by the explorers themselves_.

    Columbus' own account of his discovery of America is in Hart, Source
    Readers in American History, No. 1, pp. 4-7. Early accounts of John
    Cabot's discovery and of Drake's Voyage in Hart, Source Readers, No.
    1, pp. 7-10, 23-25. The Death and Burial of De Soto as described by
    one of his followers, in Hart, Source Readers, pp. 16-19. The Old
    South Leaflets, No. 20, Coronado; Nos. 29 and 31, Columbus; No. 31,
    the Voyages to Vinland; No. 35, Cortes' Account of the City of
    Mexico; No. 36, The Death of De Soto; Nos. 37 and 115, the Voyages
    of the Cabots; No. 89, The Founding of St. Augustine; No. 92, The
    First Voyage to Roanoke; No. 102, Columbus' Account of Cuba; No.
    116, Sir Francis Drake on the Coast of California; No. 118,
    Gilbert's Expedition; No. 119, Raleigh's Colony at Roanoke.

    _(d) The Stories of Indian Life in Spanish America,_ of Cortes,
    Coronado, and the Seven Cities of Cibola, and of the Missions. (See
    Rosa V. Winterburn, The Spanish in the Southwest.)




INDEX


Acropolis,
Africa, explored,
Aldine Press,
Alexander the Great,
Alexandria,
  founded,
  end of trade route,
Alfred, King,
Alps,
  Hannibal crosses,
Alva, in Netherlands,
America,
  discovered by Columbus,
  origin of name,
Amphitheater,
  at Rome,
  Arles,
Anglo-Saxons,
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle,
Apollo,
Aqueducts,
  Roman,
  Aztec,
Arabic numerals,
Arabs,
  see Mohammedans,
Arches,
  Roman,
  triumphal,
  Gothic,
  in Renaissance,
Architecture,
  Greek,
  Roman,
  early Church,
  Mediaeval,
  Renaissance,
Aristocracy,
  origin of,
Armada (ar-ma'da),
  expedition of,
Arms, Athenian,
  Gallic,
  Mediaeval,
  Aztec,
Arthur, King,
Astrolabe,
Athens,
Augustus, Emperor,
Azores,
Aztecs,

Bahama Islands,
Balboa (balbo'a),
Basilicas,
Bayeux tapestry (ba-yu),
Beggars of the Sea,
Black Sea,
Bologna (bo-lon'ya),
  University of,
Boniface,
Books,
  Greek,
  carried to Italy,
  see printing,
Borromeo (bor-ro-me'o),
Boxing, Greek,
Britain,
  name changed to England,
Byzantium (bi-zan'shi-um),
  founded,
  named Constantinople,

Cabot, John,
Cabot, Sebastian,
Caesar, Julius,
Calvin, John,
Cambridge, University of,
Canary Islands,
Cannae, battle of,
Canterbury,
Cape of Good Hope,
Cape Horn,
Caroline, Fort,
  settlement,
  destroyed,
Carthaginians,
Cartier, Jacques (kar'tya),
Castles,
Cathedrals,
Caudine Forks,
Caxton, William,
Census, Roman,
Charles V of Germany (Charles I of Spain),
Charybdis (ka-rib'dis),
China,
Christianity,
Cibola,
  see Seven Cities
Cincinnatus,
Clergy,
Coligny (ko'len'ye),
Colonies, Greek,
  Roman,
  Spanish,
  French,
  English,
Colorado, Canyon of,
Colosseum,
Columbus, Christopher.
  discoveries of,
Compass, origin of,
Constantine,
Constantinople,
  founded,
  renamed,
  educated men of,
  taken by Turks,
Consuls, at Rome,
Corinth,
Corinthian pillars,
Coronado, Francisco,
Cortes, Hernando,
  conquest of Mexico,
Courts,
  Greek,
  English,
Crusades,
Cuba,
Cumae,

Danes,
  see Northmen,
  Normans,
Dare, Virginia,
Delphi,
Demosthenes (de-mos'the-nez),
De Soto, Fernando,
Diaz, Bartholomew,
Discus thrower,
Doric pillars,
Drake, Sir Francis,
  adventures in America,
  voyage around world,
  attack on Spain,
Duke, origin of word,
Dutch, war for independence,

East, The,
  defined,
  search for sea routes,
Education,
  Greek,
