said Hugh Calveley, solemnly. "Promise me this, or I shall not die
content. Speak! Let me hear you."

And she reluctantly gave the required promise.

Sir Jocelyn uttered an exclamation of anguish.

"What afflicts you, my son?" demanded the Puritan.

"To whom have you promised your daughter in marriage?" inquired the
young man. "You have constituted me her brother, and I am therefore
entitled to inquire."

"You will learn when the demand is made," said the Puritan. "You will
then know why I have given the promise, and the nature of the obligation
imposed upon my daughter to fulfil it."

"But is this obligation ever to remain binding?" demanded Sir Jocelyn.

"If the claim be not made within a year after my death, she is
discharged from it," replied Hugh Calveley.

"O, thanks, father, thanks!" exclaimed Aveline.

At this moment the door of the vault was thrown open, and two persons
entered, the foremost of whom Sir Jocelyn instantly recognised as the
King. The other was his Majesty's physician, Doctor Mayerne Turquet. A
glance sufficed to explain to the latter the state of the Puritan.

"Ah! parbleu! the man is dying, your Majesty," he exclaimed.

"Deeing! is he?" cried James. "The mair reason he suld tell his secret,
to us without procrastination. Harkye, prophet of ill!" he continued, as
he strode forward. "The judgment of Heaven ye predicated for us, seems
to have fallen on your ainsell, and to have laid you low, even afore our
arm could touch you. Ye have gude reason to be thankful you have escaped
the woodie; sae e'en make a clean breast of it, confess your enormities,
and reveal to us the secret matter whilk we are tauld ye hae to
communicate!"

"Let all else withdraw a few paces," said Hugh Calveley, "and do thou, O
King, approach me. What I have to say is for thine ear alone."

"There will be no danger in granting his request?" inquired James of
his physician.

"None whatever," replied Doctor Mayerne Turquet. "The only danger is in
delay. Your Majesty should lose no time. The man is passing rapidly
away. A few moments more, and he will have ceased to exist."

On a sign from the King, Sir Jocelyn then stepped aside, but Aveline
refused to quit her father, even for a moment.

As James drew near, Hugh Calveley raised himself a little in order to
address him. "I say unto thee, O King," he cried, "as Elijah said unto
Ahab, 'Because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight of the
Lord--behold! I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy
posterity. And I will make thine house like the house of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah, for the
provocation wherewith thou hast provoked me to anger, and made Israel to
sin.'"

"Now the muckle Diel seize thee, villain!" exclaimed James furiously.
"Is it to listen to thy texts that thou hast brought me hither?" And as
Hugh Calveley, exhausted by the effort he had made, fell back with a
groan, he bent his head towards him, crying, "The secret, man, the
secret! or the tormenter shall wring it from thee?"

The Puritan essayed to speak, but his voice was so low that it did not
reach the ears of the King.

"What sayest thou?" he demanded. "Speak louder. Saul of our body!" he
exclaimed, after a moment's pause, during which the sudden alteration
that took place in the prisoner's features made him suspect that all was
over. "Our belief is he will never speak again. He hath escaped us, and
ta'en his secret wi' him."

A loud shriek burst from Aveline, as she fell upon her father's lifeless
body.

"Let us forth," cried the King, stopping his ears. "We carena to be
present at scenes like this. We hae had a gude riddance o' this traitor,
though we wad hae gladly heard what he had to tell. Sir Jocelyn
Mounchensey, ye will see that this young woman be cared for; and when ye
have caused her to be removed elsewhere, follow us to the tennis-court,
to which we shall incontinently adjourn."

So saying, he quitted the vault with his physician.




CHAPTER XXIX.

Luke Hatton.


Feigning sudden indisposition (and the excuse was not altogether without
foundation), the Countess of Exeter quitted Theobalds Palace on the day
after her unlucky visit to Lord Roos's chamber, and proceeded to her
husband's residence at Wimbledon, where she was speedily joined by her
lover, who brought her word of the advantage he had gained over their
foe.

"I have fairly checkmated my gracious mother-in-law," he cried, with a
laugh; "and it would have diverted you as much as it did me and De
Gondomar, who was present on the occasion, if you could have witnessed
her rage and mortification, when she discovered the change that had been
effected; and that in place of your magnificent black ringlet (which I
now wear next my heart, and shall ever keep as a love-token), she had
only a sorry specimen of your hand-maiden's lint-white locks. As I live,
it was truly laughable. The good lady would have annihilated me if she
could; and threatened me with terrible reprisals. At first, she tried to
attribute the transformation, which she could not otherwise account for,
to witchcraft; and though I derided the charge, I must needs say, the
trick was so cleverly performed, that it _did_ look like magic. The
packet containing the tress of hair had never been out of her own
keeping. This she affirmed; and it was true. But there was a friendly
hand to open it nevertheless; to purloin its priceless treasure; and to
substitute something of a similar kind, though of comparatively little
value in its place. That hand,--one not likely to be suspected, was no
other than that of my lady's confidential attendant, Sarah Swarton. The
juggle was played by her at the instance of Diego. Anticipating some
such occurrence as the present, and desirous of having a spy upon the
movements of our enemies, I some time since directed Diego to pay secret
court to Sarah, and my forethought has now been rewarded. The main
difficulty lay with poor Gillian. She was greatly embarrassed by her
situation; and her perplexity was increased by the presence of a jealous
lover in the shape of an apprentice, who refused to leave her till his
doubts should be satisfied. This was awkward, as the story could not be
very well reconciled so as to suit all parties. Accordingly, when the
discovery was made, which seemed to proclaim the poor girl's infidelity,
the youth's rage and consternation were nearly equal to Lady Lake's; a
circumstance that added considerable zest to the comedy. But I see it
does not divert you so much as I expected, and therefore, to relieve
your mind, I may tell you that the jealous varlet soon repented of his
rash determination, and pursuing his mistress, whom Do Gondomar had
considerately taken under his protection, prevailed upon her to give the
amorous ambassador the slip, and return with him to her father's abode
at Tottenham."

"I am right glad to hear it," said the Countess. "Though I have seen so
little of Gillian, I cannot help taking an interest in her; she is so
pretty, and so innocent in appearance, and her manners are so artless
and engaging. I owe her some reparation for the mischief I have done
her, and will not neglect to make it. I am sorry I ever was induced by
you to take her into my service; and I am thankful to hear she has
escaped De Gondomar's snares."

"You are wonderfully interested about her, methinks, Frances; and I hope
she will be grateful for your consideration," rejoined Lord Roos, with a
laugh. "But I should not be surprised if De Gondomar still gained his
point. It is not his way to give up a pursuit he has once undertaken.
However, to leave the pretty damsel to her fate, which will depend
entirely on her own conduct, let us return to ourselves. We have good
reason to be satisfied with the issue of this adventure of the lock of
hair. Nevertheless, that recurrence to the charge of witchcraft on the
part of my vindictive mother-in-law shows the extent of her malice, and
I cannot doubt that in threatening me with reprisals she will be as good
as her word. It behoves us, therefore, to be beforehand with her. What
she may intend I cannot say, but I am satisfied she has a formidable
scheme on foot, and that nothing but her husband's interposition
prevented its disclosure when she was so violently incensed against me."

"You fill me with terror, William," exclaimed the Countess. "Will this
woman's hostility towards me never cease?"

"Never," replied Lord Roos, with a sudden change of manner, and laying
aside the levity he had hitherto exhibited. "There is but one way of
ending the struggle. Luke Hatton can help us to it. Persuaded we should
require him, I have brought him with me. He waits in the hall below with
Diego. Shall I summon him to our conference?"

"On no account," exclaimed Lady Exeter hastily; "I will not see him. You
have done wrong to bring that poisoner here, my lord. You will destroy
me."

"Listen to me, Frances," replied Lord Roos. "The next step taken by Lady
Lake will be fatal to us. There must be no delay, no irresolution on our
part, or all is lost. I cannot depend upon myself, or I would not call
in another's aid. You will comprehend how wanting in firmness I am, when
I tell you what happened the other night. Incredible as it may sound, my
wife, in order to prove her devotion to me and to free me from further
annoyance on her part, offered to take poison; and but for my
interference (fool that I was to stay her!) would have drained the
phial containing the deadly potion. The weakness was momentary, and I
reproached myself for it when too late. But it convinced me that a
firmer hand than mine must be employed in the task."

"And can you, after what you have related, William,--can you seriously
meditate the destruction of a fond woman, who has generosity enough to
lay down her life for you? This is more incredible than the rest--more
monstrously wicked."

"Wicked it may be; but the excuse--if I have any--lies in my
overwhelming passion for you, Frances," replied Lord Roos in a frenzied
tone. "And it seems decided by the relentless destiny that governs me,
that the continued indulgence of the fatal passion shall only be
purchased at the price of my soul. That penalty I am prepared to pay
rather than lose you. I will become obdurate, will turn my heart to
stone, so that it shall no more melt at the tears of this fond, foolish
woman; and I will slay her without remorse. Any other obstacle between
us shall be removed;--be it her mother, her father--your husband! I will
immolate a hundred victims at the altar of our love. I will shrink from
nothing to make you mine for ever. For I would rather share eternal bale
with you, Frances, than immortal bliss with another."

"You almost make me fancy some evil being has obtained possession of
you, William," said the Countess, gazing at him with affright.

"It may be that the Fiend himself hath accepted my wild offer," he
rejoined gloomily; "but if my wish be granted it matters not."

"I will not listen to such fearful impiety," said the Countess,
shuddering. "Let us dismiss this subject for the present, and recur to
it when you are calmer."

"It cannot be postponed, Frances. Time presses, and even now Lady Lake
may have got the start of us. I shall be calm enough when this is over.
Will you consent to see Luke Hatton?"

"Why need I see him?" inquired the Countess with increasing uneasiness.
"Why will you force his hateful presence upon me? If the deed must be
done, why can you not alone undertake it?"

"I will tell why I cannot," he replied in a sombre tone, and regarding
her fixedly. "I must have a partner in the crime. It will bind us to
each other in links not to be severed. I shall have no fear of losing
you then, Countess. I go to bring Luke Hatton to you."

And without waiting for her reply he strode out of the room. Lady Exeter
would have arrested him, but she had not the nerve to do so, and with an
exclamation of anguish she fell back in her chair.

"What dominion sin has usurped over me!" she mentally ejaculated. "I
have lost the power of resisting its further encroachment. I see the
enormity of the offence I am about to commit, and though my soul revolts
at it, I cannot hold back. I am as one on the brink of a precipice, who
beholds the dreadful gulf before him, into which another step must
plunge him, yet is too giddy to retreat, and must needs fall over. Pity
me, kind Heaven! I am utterly helpless without thy aid."

While the unhappy lady thus unavailingly deplored the sad position in
which her own misconduct had placed her, and from which she felt wholly
incapable of extricating herself; while in this wretched frame of mind,
she awaited her lover's return,--with, as we have shown, some remains of
good struggling with the evil in her bosom,--we will cast a hasty glance
round the chamber in which she sat. And we are prompted to do this, not
because it merits particular description, but because it was the room
referred to by Lady Lake as the scene of the confession she had forged.

The apartment, then, was spacious and handsomely furnished in the heavy
taste of the period, with but little to distinguish it from other rooms
visited by us in the course of this story. Like most of them, it had a
gloomy air, caused by the dark hue of its oaken panels, and the heavy
folds of its antiquated and faded tapestry. The latter was chiefly hung
against the lower end of the chamber, and served as a screen to one of
the doors. At the opposite end, there was a wide and deep bay window,
glowing with stained glass, amid the emblazonry of which might be
discerned the proud escutcheon of the house of Exeter, with the two
lions rampant forming its supporters. On the right of the enormous
carved mantel-piece, which, with its pillars, statues, 'scutcheons, and
massive cornice, mounted to the very ceiling, was hung a portrait of the
Earl of Exeter--a grave, dignified personage, clad in the attire of
Elizabeth's time; and on the left, was a likeness of the Countess
herself, painted in all the pride of her unequalled beauty, and
marvellous in resemblance then; but how different in expression from her
features now!

In the recess of the window stood an oak table, covered with a piece of
rich carpet fringed with gold, on which a massive silver inkstand and
materials for writing were placed; and this table was seized upon by
Lady Lake as a feature in her plot. Here she would have it the
confession was signed by the Countess.

Another point in reference to this scheme must not be passed unnoticed.
We have mentioned the heavy hangings at the lower end of the room.
According to the plotter, it was behind these that Sarah Swarton--the
intended witness of the imaginary scene--was concealed. The principal
subjects represented on the arras were the Judgment of Solomon, and the
Temptation of our first Parents in the Garden by the Serpent. The
hangings had evidently not been removed for years, and did not reach
within two feet of the ground--a circumstance that had escaped the
attention of Lady Lake--proving the truth of her husband's observation,
that in the best contrived plot some imperfection will exist certain to
operate in its detection.

To return to the unhappy Countess. So lost was she in reflection, that
she did not remark Lord Roos's return till made aware of it by a slight
touch on the shoulder. When she raised her eyes, they fell upon an
object that inspired her with the dread and aversion that a noxious
reptile might have produced. She had never seen Luke Hatton before; and
if she had figured him to her mind at all, it was not as anything
agreeable; but she was not prepared for so hideous and revolting a
personage as he appeared to be. His face was like an ugly mask, on which
a sardonic grin was stamped. His features were large and gaunt, and he
had the long, hooked nose, and the sharp-pointed bestial ears of a
satyr, with leering eyes--betokening at once sensuality and cunning. He
had the chin and beard of a goat, and crisply-curled hair of a pale
yellow colour. With all this, there was something sordid in his looks as
well as his attire, which showed that to his other vices he added that
of avarice. A mock humility, belied by the changeless sneer upon his
countenance, distinguished his deportment. It could be seen at once
that, however cringing he might be, he despised the person he addressed.
Moreover, in spite of all his efforts to control it, there was something
sarcastic in his speech. His doublet and hose, both of which had endured
some service, and were well-nigh threadbare, were tawny-coloured; and he
wore a short yellow cloak, a great ruff of the same colour, and carried
a brown steeple-crowned hat in his hand.

"I await your ladyship's commands," said Luke Hatton, bowing
obsequiously.

"I have none to give you," Lady Exeter rejoined with irrepressible
disgust. "I have not sent for you. Go hence."

Not at all abashed by this reception, Luke Hatton maintained his place,
and threw an inquiring glance at Lord Roos.

"My dear Countess," said the young nobleman, seating himself negligently
upon a tabouret beside her, "I must pray you not to dismiss this worthy
man so hastily. You will find him eminently serviceable; and as to his
trustworthiness, I have the best reasons for feeling satisfied of it,
because I hold in my hand a noose, which, whenever I please, I can
tighten round his neck. Of this he is quite aware, and therefore he
will serve us faithfully, as well from fear as from gratitude."

"Her ladyship may place entire confidence in me," remarked Luke Hatton,
with a grin. "This is not the first affair of the kind in which I have
been engaged. I have prepared potions and powders which Mistress Turner
(with whose reputation your ladyship must needs be acquainted) used to
vend to her customers. My draughts have removed many a troublesome
husband, and silenced many a jealous wife. I have helped many an heir to
the speedy enjoyment of an inheritance, which, but for my assistance,
would not have come to him for years. The lover with a rival in his way,
who has come to me, has soon been freed from all anxiety on that score.
The courtier, eager for a post which a superior held, has gained it by
my aid. Yet none of those whom I have thus benefited have been
suspected. Your ladyship, I repeat, need have no fears of me--and no
scruples with me. State your wishes, and they shall be implicitly
obeyed."

"I have no wish, except to be relieved of a presence which is
disagreeable to me," replied the Countess.

Again Luke Hatton consulted Lord Roos with a regard.

"I find I must act for her ladyship," said the young nobleman. "You will
take, therefore, the instructions I shall give you, as proceeding from
her. What two names do you find upon that paper?"

"Those of your lordship's wife and mother-in-law," returned Luke Hatton.

"You comprehend what her ladyship would have done with those persons?"
said Lord Roos, looking at him steadfastly.

"Perfectly," replied Luke Hatton.

"O, do not give this fatal order, my Lord!" cried Lady Exeter,
trembling.

"How many days do you require to effect their removal?" demanded Lord
Roos, without appearing to notice her remark.

"I do not require many hours," replied Luke Hatton; "but it will be well
not to be too precipitate. Neither must they die at the same time. All
precaution shall be taken. The names are placed in a particular order.
Is it so the Countess would have them taken? In that case I must
commence with Lady Roos."

"Wretch! dost thou dare to make such an appeal to me?" cried Lady Exeter
rising. "Begone, instantly, I say. Thou hast no order whatever from me;
or if thou fanciest so, I revoke it."

"The order cannot be revoked," cried Lord Roos, grasping her arm. "This
is not a time for hesitation or repentance. Having commenced the work,
you must go through with it--whether you will or not."

"Whether I will or not!" exclaimed Lady Exeter, regarding him with
angry surprise. "Have I heard you aright, my Lord? Am I to be forced
into association in this foul deed? Have I sunk so low in your esteem
that you venture to treat me thus?"

"Pardon me, Frances--pardon me!" he cried, imploringly. "I have said
more than I intended. If I appear to exercise undue influence over you
now, you will forgive me hereafter, because the situation is one that
requires decision, and that quality I possess in a higher degree than
yourself. Luke Hatton must obey the orders given him. And you must
sanction them."

"Never!" she exclaimed, emphatically.

"Then we part for ever," cried Lord Roos. "No matter what the pang may
be--nor what befals me--I will go. Farewell for ever, Countess!"

"Stay!" she cried. "We must not part thus."

"Then you consent?" he exclaimed. "Luke Hatton receives his orders from
you?"

"Ask me not that question!" she cried, with a shudder.

"If her ladyship will but sign this," said Luke Hatton, holding towards
her the paper on which the names were written, "it will suffice for me."

"You hear what he says, Frances. You will do it?" cried Lord Roos. "'Tis
but a few strokes of a pen."

