must go to Halfden and his brothers in the great hall. And then
came remembrance to me. For now must I refuse to eat of the horse
sacrifice, and maybe there would be danger in that. Yet I thought
that no man would trouble more about me and my ways, so that I said
naught of it to Osritha.

So I sat between Halfden and Thormod at the high place, and the
whole hall was full of men seated at the long tables that ran from
end to end, and across the wide floor. The womenfolk and thralls
went busily up and down serving, and it was a gay show enough to
look on, for all were in their best array.

Yet it seemed to me that the men were silent beyond their wont,
surly even in their talk, for the fear of the omen of that eddying
smoke was yet on them. And presently I felt and saw that many eyes
were watching me, and those in no very friendly wise. Some of the
men who watched were strangers to me, but as they sat among our
crew, they must be the rest of the saved from Rorik's following.
Others were men from beyond the village walls, and as Rorik's men
had some reason and the others knew me not, I thought little of
their unfriendly looks.

At last they brought round great cauldrons, in which were flesh
hooks; to every man in turn, and first of all to Ingvar himself. He
thrust the hook in, and brought up a great piece of meat, cutting
for himself therefrom, and at once every man before whom a cauldron
waited, did likewise, and it passed on. They signed Thor's hammer
over the meat and began to eat.

Now after Ingvar had helped himself, the cauldron came to Guthrum,
and then to Halfden, and then it must come to me, and I had heaped
food before me that I might pass it by more easily, knowing that
this was the sacrificed meat of which I might not eat. But the men
stayed before me, and I made a sign to them to pass by, and honest
Thormod leaned across me to take his share quickly, and they passed
to him, wondering at me a little, but maybe thinking nothing of it.
They were but thralls, and had not been at the Ve.

But Rorik's men had their eyes on me, and when the cauldron passed
Thormod, and I had not taken thereout, one rose up and said,
pointing to me:

"Lo! this Saxon will not eat of the sacrifice."

At that was a growl of wrath from the company, and Ingvar rose,
looking over the heads of my comrades, saying:

"Have a care, thou fool; go not too far with me."

Then Guthrum laughed and said:

"This is foolishness to mind him; moreover, he has fought for and
won his right to please himself in the matter."

So too said Halfden and Thormod, but against their voices were now
many raised, saying that ill luck would be with the host for long
enough, if this were suffered openly.

Now a Dane or Norseman takes no heed of the religion of other folk
unless the matter is brought forward in this way, too plainly to be
overlooked. But then, being jealous for his own gods, whom he knows
to be losing ground, he must needs show that he is so. Nor do I
blame him, for it is but natural.

So to these voices Ingvar the godar must needs pay heed, even if
his own patience were not gone, so that he might not suffer that
one should sit at the board of Thor and Odin, untasting and
unacknowledging.

He called to two of his courtmen.

"Take this man away," he said, very sternly, "and put him in ward
till tomorrow. Today is the feast, and we have had enough trouble
over the business already."

The two men came towards me, and all men were hushed, waiting to
see if I would fight. As they came I rose from my place, and they
thought I would resist, for they shifted their sword hilts to the
front, ready to hand. But I unbuckled my sword belt, and cast the
weapon down, following them quietly, for it was of no good to fight
hopelessly for freedom in a strange land.

Many men scowled at me as I passed, and more than one cried out on
me. But Halfden and Thormod and Hubba, and more than were angry,
seemed glad that this was all the harm that came to me just now.
And Ingvar leaned back in his great chair and did not look at me,
though his face was dark.

They put me into a cell, oak walled and strong, and there left me,
unfettered, but with a heavily-barred door between me and freedom;
and if I could get out, all Denmark and the sea around me held me
prisoner.

Yet I despaired not altogether, for already I had gone through much
danger, and my strength had not failed me.

Now, how I spent the daylight hours of that imprisonment any
Christian man may know, seeing that I looked for naught but death.
And at last, when darkness fell, I heard low voices talking outside
for a little while, and I supposed that a watch was set, for the
cell door opened to the courtyard from the back of the great house.

Now I thought I would try to sleep, for the darkness was very
great, and just as I lay down in a corner the barring of the door
was moved, and the door opened gently.

"Do you sleep, Wulfric?" said Halfden's voice, speaking very low.

"What is it, brother?" I asked in as low a voice, for I had not
been a viking for naught.

I saw his form darken the gray square of the doorway, and he came
in and swung to the door after him; then his hand sought my
shoulder, and I heard a clank of arms on the floor.

"See here, Wulfric," he said, "you are in evil case; for all
Rorik's men and the men from outside are calling for your death;
they say that Rorik had no luck against you because the Asir are
angry, and that so it will be with all the host until you have paid
penalty."

"What say you and our crew?"

"Why, we had good luck with you on board, and hold that Rorik had
done somewhat which set Thor against him, for he got shipwrecked,
and now is killed. So we know that your ways do not matter to Thor
or Odin or any one of the Asir, who love a good fighter. But we
know not why you are so obstinate; still that is your business, not
ours."

"What says Ingvar?" I asked.

"Naught; but he is godar."

"Aye," said I. "So I must die, that is all. What said Ragnar
Lodbrok about that?"

And I spoke to him the brave words that his forefather sang as he
died, and which he loved:

"Whether in weapon play
Under the war cloud,
Full in the face of Death
Fearless he fronts him,
Death is the bane of
The man who is bravest,
He loveth life best who
Furthest from danger lives.
Sooth is the saying that
Strongest the Norns are.
Lo! at my life's end
I laugh--and I die."

"Nay, my brother," said Halfden earnestly; "think of me, and of
Osritha, and seem to bow at least."

That word spoken by my friend was the hardest I ever had to bear,
for now I was drawn by the love that had been so newly given me.
And I put my hands before my face and thought, while he went on:

"If I were asked to give up these gods of ours, who, as it seems to
me, pay mighty little heed to us--and I knew that good exchange was
offered me--well then--I should--"

I ended that word for him.

"You would do even as your father, and say that unless for better
reason than gain--aye, however longed for--you would not."

"Aye--maybe I would, after all," he answered, and was silent.

Then he said, "Guthrum and I spoke just now, and he said that your
faith must be worth more than he knew, to set you so fixedly on
it."

Now I would have told him that it was so, but there came a little
sound at the door, and Halfden went and opened it. Across its half
darkness came a woman's form, and Osritha spoke in her soft voice.

"Brother, are you here yet?"

"Aye, sister, both of us--come and persuade this foolish Wulfric."

Then I spoke quickly, for it seemed to me that if Osritha spoke and
urged me, I should surely give way.

"Nay, but you must not persuade me--would you have had us
Christians bid your father choose between death and gain for the
sake of winning him to our faith?"

Then said Halfden, "That would I not."

But in the dark Osritha came to my side and clung to me, so that I
was between those two whom I loved and must lose, for Halfden held
my right hand, and Osritha my left, and she was weeping silently
for me.

"Listen," I said, for the speaking must be mine lest they should
prevail. "Should I die willingly for one who has given His life for
me?"

"Aye, surely--if that might be," said Halfden.

"Now it comes into my mind that hereafter you will know that I do
not die for naught. For He whom I worship died for me. Nor may I
refuse to spend life in His honour."

Then they were silent, until Osritha found her voice and said:

"We knew not that. I will not be the one to hold you from what is
right."

At that Halfden rose up, for he had found a seat of logs and sat by
me on it, sighing a long sigh, but saying:

"Well, this is even as I thought, and I will not blame you, my
brother. Fain would I have kept you here, and sorely will Osritha
pine when you are gone. But you shall not die, else will the
justice of Ulfkytel come to naught."

Then I heard again the clank of arms, and Halfden bent down, as I
might feel.

"Can you arm yourself in the dark?" he said.

"Why, surely! It is not for the first time," I answered.

He thrust my mail shirt against me, and laid a sword in my hand,
and set my helm on my head, all awry because of the darkness.

"Quickly," he said.

Then a new hope that came to me made me clasp Osritha's hand and
kiss it before I must see to arming myself; but she clung to me
yet, and I kissed her gently, then turning away sorely troubled
went to work.

Soon I was ready for Halfden's word, and Osritha buckled on my
sword for me, for she had felt and taken it. Halfden opened the
door and went out into the night, speaking low to one whom I could
not see; and so I bade farewell to her whom I loved so dearly, not
knowing if I should ever look on her again.

But she bade me hope ever, for nor she nor I knew what the days to
come might bring us.

"Ready," said Halfden; "follow me as if you were a courtman till we
come to the outer gate."

Then with Osritha's handclasp still warm on mine I went out and
followed him, and she sought the maiden who waited beside the door,
and was gone.

When we came to the great gates, they were shut. The sounds of
feasting went on in the hall, and the red light glared from the
high windows. Forgotten was all but revelling--and the guard who
kept the gate was Raud the forester, my friend. He opened the gates
a little, and we three slipped out and stood for a moment together.
The night was very dark, and the wind howled and sang through the
stockading, and none seemed to be about the place.

There Halfden took my hand and bade me farewell very sadly.

"This is the best I may do for you, my brother. Go with Raud to his
house, and thence he and Rolf and Thoralf your shield man, who all
love you, will take you even to Hedeby, where there are Christian
folk who will help you to the sea and find passage to England. And
fare you well, my brother, for the days we longed for in your land
will never be--"

"Come in the ship to England, that so there may be good times even
yet," I said.

"Aye, to England I shall surely come--not to seek you, but at
Ingvar's bidding. Yet to East Anglia for your sake I will not
come."

Then he grasped my hand again in farewell, and he went inside the
gates and closed them, and Raud and I went quickly to his place.

There we found those two other good friends of mine waiting, and
they told me that all was well prepared to save them from the wrath
of Ingvar, for they had been bidden to carry messages, and other
men of the crew who lived far off would do this for them, for I
feared for their lives also when the flight was known.

Long was the way to Hedeby, where Ansgar the Bishop had built the
first church in all Denmark. But we won there at last and in
safety. And there Ansgar's folk received me well, and I parted from
my three comrades, not without grief, so that I asked them to take
service with us in England. Almost they consented, but Rolf and
Thoralf had wives and children, and Raud would by no means leave
his brother.

Now in a few days, a company of merchants went from Hedeby with
goods for England, and with them I went; and in no long time I came
into Ingild's house by London Bridge, and was once more at home as
the second week in May began.



CHAPTER XI. THE COMING OF INGVAR'S HOST.


Aught but joy did I look for in my homecoming, but it was all too
like that of Halfden, my friend.

No need to say how my kind godfather met me as one come back from
the dead, nor how I sent gifts back to Ansgar's people, who sorely
needed help in those days.

But very gently the old man told me that Elfric my father was dead,
passing suddenly but a month since, while by his side sat Ulfkytel
the Earl, blaming himself for his blindness and for his haste in
not waiting for the king's judgment, and yet bidding my father take
heart, for he had never known his ways of justice fail. And he
asked forgiveness also, for there had been a deadly feud concerning
this between him and my people, so that but for Eadmund the King
there would have been fighting. Yet when one told Ulfkytel that men
held that my father's heart broke at my loss, the great earl had
made haste to come and see him, and to say these things. So they
made peace at last.

When I knew this it seemed to me that I had lost all, and for long
I cared for nothing, going about listless, so that Ingild feared
that I too should grow sick and die. But I was young and strong,
and this could not last, and at length I grew reconciled to things
as they were, and Ingild would speak with me of all that I had seen
in Denmark.

Now when I told him what I feared of the coming of Ingvar's host he
grew grave, and asked many things about it.

"Ethelred the King is at Reading," he said; "let us go and speak to
him of this matter."

