last moment had come, when a man behind leaped suddenly upon the
ruffian's back and they fell to the ground together, the blunderbuss
going off in the fall and riddling a soldier standing next to Ralph
with slugs.

For two or three minutes a desperate struggle went on between Ralph
and his six men and those who attempted to break through them.
Sturdily as the soldiers fought they had been driven back toward the
entrance by the assailants, armed with pikes and clubbed guns. There
was no sound of conflict at the other end of the cave, and Ralph felt
that the attack there had for some reason failed.

"Shoulder to shoulder, lads!" he shouted. "We shall have help in a
minute or two."

He had emptied both his double-barrelled pistols. His sword had just
broken short in his hand while guarding his head from a heavy blow. He
himself had been almost struck to the ground, when there was a rush of
men from behind, and the rest of the soldiers poured in.

"Give them a volley, lads!" he shouted; "and then charge them with
the bayonets!"

The muskets rang out, and then there was a shout of "We surrender! we
surrender!"

A minute later the men were disarmed. There was still a desperate
struggle going on on the ground.

"Here, lads," Ralph said to two of his men. "Secure this red fellow,
he is their leader. One of you bring a torch here."

The light was brought. It was seen that the man who had sprung upon
the Red Captain's back had pinioned his arms to his sides, and held
them there in spite of the efforts of the ruffian to free himself. Two
of the soldiers took off their belts and fastened them together,
passed them between the back of the man and his captor, and then
strapped his arms firmly to his side. The man who held them then
released his grip.

"Stand over him with fixed bayonets, and if he moves run him through.
Now, where's Captain O'Connor?"

"I don't know, sir. He and Mr. Desmond and the naval officer went down
the hole in front of us. We were following when the naval officer
shouted up to us to run round to this entrance and make our way in
there, for he could go no further."

"I am here, Conway," a faint voice said from the other end of the
cabin; "but I have broken my leg I think, and Desmond has knocked all
the wind out of my body."

Ralph hastened to the spot whence the voice came and found Captain
O'Connor lying on the ground, and Lieutenant Desmond insensible beside
him.

"What has happened?" Ralph exclaimed. "Have they shot you?"

"No. Hold the torch up and you will see the way we came."

The soldier did so, and Ralph looking up saw a hole in the top of the
cave twenty feet above.

"You don't mean to say you came through there, O'Connor?"

"I did, worse luck to it!" O'Connor said. "The passage got steeper and
steeper, and at last my foot slipped, and I shot down and came plump
into the middle of a peat fire; and a moment later Desmond shot down
on to the top of me. We scattered the fire all over the place, as you
can imagine; but I burned my hands and face, and I believe the leg of
my breeches is on fire--something is hurting me confoundedly."

"Yes, it is all smoldering!" Ralph exclaimed, putting it out with his
hands.

"Have you got them all?" Captain O'Connor asked.

"Everyone; not one has made his escape. It would have fared badly with
us, though, if Lieutenant Adcock had not sent down the men to our
assistance. Where is your leg broken, O'Connor?"

"Above the knee," the captain said.

"Here is some whisky and water," Ralph said, handing him his bottle.
"Now, I will see what has happened to Desmond," and he stooped over
the insensible officer.

"He has got a nasty gash on his forehead, and I think his right arm is
broken," he said. "I will pour a little spirits between his lips, and
then he had better be carried out into the air."

This was done; and then Ralph went outside, and shouted to Sergeant
Morris to bring down another twenty men.

"If you please, sir," one of the coast-guard men said, touching his
hat, "I don't see any signs of our officer. Have you seen him?"

"No," Ralph said. "Perhaps he is still in that passage. You had better
run up to the top and see."

Two minutes later the man returned:

"He's down there, sir; but he says he can't get up or down."

"You had better run down to the boat at once," Ralph said. "I see she
is close inshore. Bring a couple more of your men up with you and a
rope. If you tie that round your body you can go down and bring him
up."

Ralph then returned to the cavern, where the men were still guarding
the prisoners.

"You can march them outside now," he said. "Then make them sit down,
and stand over them with fixed bayonets till Sergeant Morris arrives.
Now let us look to the wounded."

An examination showed that two of the soldiers were dead, and three
others badly wounded. Seven of the party in the cave lay on the
ground. One only was alive; the rest had fallen either from bullet or
bayonet wounds. Seeing that nothing could be done here Ralph looked
round the cavern. He soon saw that just where Captain O'Connor had
fallen there was an entrance into another cave. He reloaded his
pistols before he entered this, but found it deserted.

It contained two large stills, with mash tubs and every appliance, two
or three hundred kegs of whisky, and some thirty sacks of barley. This
at once accounted for the cave being known, and for the number of men
found in it; for in addition to the seven that had fallen six
prisoners had been taken. The walls of the cave were deeply
smoke-stained, showing that it had been used as a distillery for a
great number of years.

"That is satisfactory," Captain O'Connor said when Ralph reported to
him the discovery he had made. "That place where I came down is of
course the chimney. Peat does not give much smoke, and making its way
out through that screen of bushes it would be so light that it would
not be noticed by any one on the cliffs. Well, it's been a good
morning's work--a band of notorious scoundrels captured and an illicit
still discovered in full work. It was a cleverly contrived place. Of
course it is a natural cavern, and was likely enough known before the
fall of rocks from above so completely concealed the entrance. I wish
those fellows would come, though, for my leg is hurting me amazingly,
and these burns on my hands and face are smarting horribly. Shout out
to them on the cliff, Conway, and tell them to send at once to fetch
Dr. Doran from the village. The wounded ought to be seen to as soon as
possible, and it is likely enough that some of them cannot be taken up
over the rocks to the top of the cliff. I dread the business myself."

In a quarter of an hour Sergeant Morris arrived with his party. By
this time Lieutenant Desmond had recovered consciousness, and although
in great pain from his broken arm was consoled upon hearing of the
complete success of the expedition. The soldiers were furious on
hearing that three of their comrades had been killed, and two of their
officers badly injured.

"Sergeant," Ralph said, "bring four of your men into the cave with me.
Now," he continued when they entered, "there is a pile of blankets in
that corner; take one of them and fasten it across two of the men's
muskets, so as to make a litter. Then we must lift Captain O'Connor
carefully and put him on it and get him outside. It will be a
difficult business getting him through the narrow entrance, but we
must manage it as well as we can. But first let us thoroughly examine
the caves; there may be another entrance somewhere."

Searching carefully they found a passage behind the stack of kegs. It
was some eight feet high and as much wide. They followed it for a
short distance, and then saw daylight. Their way was, however,
speedily blocked by a number of rocks piled over the entrance.

"This was evidently the original entrance to these caves," Ralph said,
"but it was covered up when the rocks came down from above. That would
account for the place not being known to the coast-guards. I thought
the passage we came in by looked as if it had been enlarged by the
hand of man. No doubt it was originally a small hole, and when the
entrance was blocked the men who made up their minds to establish a
still here thought that it would be the best way to enlarge that and
to leave the original entrance blocked.

"Well, it's evident we must take Captain O'Connor and the wounded out
by the small entrance. It would be a tremendous business to clear
those great rocks away."

Captain O'Connor and the two wounded men were with great difficulty
taken through the narrow passage. The soldier who was alive was the
one who had received the charge of the blunderbuss in his legs; he was
terribly injured below the knee, and Ralph had little doubt that
amputation would be necessary. The other man lived but a short time
after being brought into the air.

Ralph now turned to the peasant who had saved his life by grappling
with the Red Captain at the moment he was about to discharge his
blunderbuss, and who had by his orders been left unbound. He was
sitting a short distance from the other prisoners.

"Your name is Denis Moore?" he said.

"It is, your honor," the man replied in surprise; "though how you came
to know it beats me entirely."

"I heard it from your wife last night," Ralph said.

"From Bridget?" the man exclaimed. "Why, I thought she was a hundred
miles away!"

"She came down here like a brave woman to try and save you," Ralph
said, "and gave us information that brought us to this hiding-place;
but her name is not to appear, and no one will know how we heard of
it. We promised her that no harm should come to you if we could help
it, and, thanks to the act by which you saved my life, you have
escaped, for being down on the ground you were out of the line of the
fire of our bullets. Of course at present we shall treat you as a
prisoner, as you were captured with the others; but I think we shall
manage to let you slip away. Your wife is to remain at Dunmanway till
she hears the news of this affair and that you are safe, and she bade
me tell you that you would find her at home, so no one will dream that
either she or you had any hand in this affair. Now, point me out which
are the four men that belong to this gang that brought you down here."

"The man who has just died was one of them," Denis replied. "None of
the other three are here, so I expect they fell in the cabin. They
were in the front of the fight. I saw one go down just as I grappled
with our captain."

"So much the better," Ralph said. "As to their leader, there will be
no difficulty in getting evidence about him. The regiment he belonged
to is in Dublin, and they can prove the shooting of his officer;
beside, they can get any amount of evidence from Galway."

"Ay; they will be ready enough to speak out now the whole gang are
down," Denis Moore said. "They would not have dared to open their lips
otherwise. The other prisoners all belong about here. One of their
party is the captain's brother. That's how it is they came to take us
in. But I think they would have been glad to get rid of us, for the
Red Captain's lot were too bad for anything; and it isn't because men
are ready to cheat the king's revenue that they are fond of such
villains and murderers as these."

In a short time the doctor arrived. He had brought a case of
instruments with him.

"There's nothing for it but amputation here," he said when he examined
the wounded soldier. "His legs are just splintered. The sooner I do it
the better."

Sergeant Morris and three of the men held the poor fellow while the
operation was performed. As soon as it was over the doctor applied
splints and bandages to Captain O'Connor's leg and Lieutenant
Desmond's arm, and dressed the wounds of three of the other men, who
had suffered more or less severely.




CHAPTER XIII.

STARTLING NEWS.


"What do you think is the best thing to be done now doctor?" Ralph
asked.

"I don't know," he replied. "I don't see how on earth we are going to
get them over these rocks and up to the top. A slip or a fall would
cost either of your friends their limbs, and that poor fellow his
life. I don't see how it is to be managed. It's hard work for a man to
climb those rocks, and how a litter is to be carried I can't see. If
it were anywhere else I should say build a hut for them; but it would
be a tremendous business getting the materials down, and I don't think
it could possibly be managed by night."

"I am sure it couldn't," Ralph said, shaking his head. "I think,
though, if we got two long poles and slung a piece of canvas like a
hammock between them we may possibly get them down to the shore. You
see we have plenty of strength to get them over rough places."

"We could manage that easy enough," Lieutenant Adcock, who had some
time before joined the party, said. "There are some sixteen-feet oars
in the boat and some sails. We could easily rig up the hammock. I
suppose you mean to take them off in the boat, Mr. Conway?"

"Yes; that's what I meant," Ralph said. "Then you can land them in
your cove, and they might stop in the village till they are fit to be
moved."

"That would be an excellent plan," the doctor said. "Let us set about
it at once."

In half an hour the sailors brought up the hammock.

"I will go first," Captain O'Connor said, "as I am the heaviest. You
will see how you manage to get me down. If it's done pretty easily you
can bring down the two others; if not, they had better stop in the
cave for to-night, and we will get a hut for them to-morrow. By the
way, Conway, you had better get the dead carried out and taken down to
the seashore. Have them laid down out of reach of the tide. Some of
them belong about here, and their friends will wish to give them a
decent burial. Our own dead had better be put in the boat, if Mr.
Adcock will allow it, and taken to the village with us. Then they can
be carried over to Ballyporrit for burial. A corporal with four men
must be left for to-night in charge of the caves."

"I shall want my men to row the boat," Lieutenant Adcock said. "In the
morning I will send over a warrant officer and four men to take charge
of the cave till I can take its contents round to our stores."

Captain O'Connor was now lifted into the hammock, and six sailors
carried him down to the water. They managed it excellently, easing him
down with the greatest care over the rocks, and succeeded in getting
him down to the sea without a single jerk. Lieutenant Desmond and the
wounded soldiers were then taken down in the same way, while the men
carried down the dead bodies of their three comrades and of the
peasants who had fallen.

"I will take charge of the wounded," Lieutenant Adcock said, "and see
them comfortably housed and cared for. I suppose Dr. Doran will go
with us."

"Certainly," the doctor said, stepping into the boat. "I shall not
give up charge of them until I see them all safely in bed."

"I shall come over and see you O'Connor," Ralph said, "as soon as I
get the company back to the village. Shall I write a report of this
business, or do you feel equal to doing so?"

"I will manage it, Conway. I can dictate it if I don't feel up to
writing it. But you had better not come over to-day. There will be a
good deal of excitement over this capture, and no doubt several of the
killed and prisoners belong to Ballyporrit; so it wouldn't do for you
to leave the detachment without an officer. Be sure you have a strict
guard put over the prisoners, and keep an eye upon them yourself. You
can send over to inquire about us, but till you have got them off your
hands you had better not leave the village. If a party are wanted for
still-hunting send Sergeant Morris with them. I shall dispatch my
report to-night, and no doubt the colonel will send an officer out to
help you as soon as he gets it."

The boat now pushed off. A corporal and four men were told off to
occupy the cave until relieved by the revenue men, and then, with the
prisoners in their center, the party climbed the cliff, and again,
having been joined at the top by the rest of the company, marched to
Ballyporrit. They found the village in a state of excitement. The
soldier who had gone to fetch the doctor had brought the news that a
fight had take place down on the face of the cliff, but he could not
say whether any had been killed. As soon as the detachment returned
with the prisoners in their midst many women flocked round with cries
and lamentations, and exchanged greetings with the prisoners.

Ralph at once took possession of the stables at the inn, and saw that
the prisoners were all handcuffed, the Red ruffian's legs being also
securely bound. Then he placed two sentries inside and two out. The
news that some of the men had been killed soon spread, and many of the
villagers who did not see their relations among the prisoners hurried
off toward the scene of action. Ralph informed the landlord that the
dead had all been placed together on the seashore, and that their
friends were at liberty to remove and bury them without any questions
being asked. He then sent a corporal over to bring back news how the
wounded men had borne the journey, and how they were disposed. But
before his return the doctor drove up in a trap that he had borrowed.

"Adcock has put up the two officers in his own house," he said, "and
his wife will look after them, so you need not worry about them. The
other poor fellows are in the cottage next door. It belongs to the
coxswain of the boat, who is also a married man. So you need be under
no uneasiness about any of them. As far as I can see, they are all
likely to do well. I shall go over the first thing in the morning, and
will bring you news of them as soon as I get back."

Ralph had given orders that Denis Moore was not to be treated as a
prisoner; and he now told the sergeant to send him in to him.

"I have been thinking it over, Moore," he said; "and it seems to me
the best plan will be to allow you to go quietly away. Your conduct in
the fight in the cave in itself showed that you were not voluntarily
with the others; and I do not think, therefore, that it is necessary
to report you among the prisoners. I suppose the Red Captain's gang
have not done any unlawful act beyond taking part in the still
business since they took you away from home?"

"No, your honor. We just came straight down here, traveling at night
and hiding away by day."

"Very well. In that case you can give no special evidence against
them. It is probable that at the trial evidence may be required from
Galway as to the deeds that that red-bearded scoundrel committed
there; and it is possible that you may be summoned with others, but I
should think that the evidence of the constabulary will be sufficient.
So, if you will give me your address there I will take it upon myself
to let you go at once. In that case you can join your wife this
evening and travel back with her."

"Thank you, sir," Denis replied. "I have no objection at all to give
evidence as to what I know, so that it does not come out it was
Bridget who tould you where they were hiding."

"You need not be afraid of that, Denis. Captain O'Connor gave her his
word that her name should not be mentioned. At the same time I have no
doubt he will claim for her the hundred pounds reward that was
offered; and if he obtains it he will send it to you, so that nobody
will be any the wiser."

"I should not like to take informer's money," Denis said.

"Not in ordinary cases," Ralph replied. "But you see she spoke out,
not for the sake of money, but to get you out of their hands. And
considering how much mischief those fellows have done, and how much
more they would have done had we not laid hands on them, it is a very
different case from that of an ordinary informer. None of your
neighbors will know that she has had anything to do with the capture
of these men, therefore no one will be any the wiser, and no doubt a
hundred pounds will be very useful to you. I am sure you deserve some
sort of compensation for being dragged away from home, and for the
risk you ran in that fight; for a bullet might just as well have
struck you as any of the others. I know that if I were in your place I
should accept it without the least hesitation. And now, as I don't
suppose they have left any money on you, and as your wife is not
likely to be very well provided, I will give you five pounds on
account; and remember that I shall always feel your debtor for the
manner in which you saved my life by springing upon that ruffian just
at the critical moment."

"You will deduct it from the other money, your honor?" Denis said,
hesitating.

"Certainly I will, Denis. I should not think of offering you money for
such a service as you rendered me. Now, if you will just give me your
address in Galway I will make a note of it; though I don't think it at
all likely you will be wanted at the trial. They will most likely
proceed against him on the charge of shooting his officer and
deserting; for they will have no difficulty in proving that, as the
