"Mother," the scald said gravely, "when I work a spell with hammer
and nail, the footprint into which the nail is driven is of her who
cast the evil eye on me."

"Why, so it should be."

"Nay, but you drive it into your own," he said.

She looked, and then looked again. Then she stamped a new print
alongside the nailed one, and it was true. She had paid no heed to
the matter in her fury, and when she knew that she turned pale.

"Man," she cried, "help me out of this. I fear that I have even
nailed the evil overlooking fast to myself."

"Ay, so you have," said Harek; "but it is you who know little of
spells if you cannot tell what to do. Draw the nail out while
saying the spell backwards, and then put it into the right place
carefully. Then you will surely draw away also any ill that she has
already sent you, and fasten it to her."

"Then I think she will shrivel up," said the old witch, with much
content. "You are a great wizard, lord; and I thank you."

"Here is a true saying of a friend of mine," said Heregar, coming
up in time to hear this. "But what has come to you, king? have you
heard aught?"

Now when the old woman heard the thane name the king, before I
could answer she cried out and came and clung to my stirrup, taking
my hand and kissing it, and weeping over it till I was ashamed.

"What is this?" I said.

"O my lord the king!" she cried. "I thought that yon sad-faced man
in Denewulf's house was our king maybe, so wondrous proud are his
ways, and so strange things they hear him speak when he sleeps. But
now I am glad, for I have seen the king and kissed his hand, and,
lo, the sight of him is good. Ay, but glad will all the countryside
be to know that you live."

Then I knew not what to say; but Heregar beckoned to me, saying:

"Come, leave her her joy; it were cruel to spoil it, and maybe she
will never know her mistake."

So we rode on, and Heregar called Dudda, asking him if he knew
Denewulf's cottage; while in the track stood the witch, blessing
her king as eagerly as she had cursed her gossip just now.

"I know not the path, though I have heard of the cottage," Dudda
said; "but it will be strange if I cannot find a way to the place."

He took us carefully into the fen for some way until we passed
through a thicket and came to the edge of a mere, and there were
five men who bore fishing nets and eel spears, which had not been
used, as one might suppose, seeing that the ice was nigh a foot
thick after the thaw and heavy frost again.

And those two men who came first were Ethelnoth, the Somerset
ealdorman, and young Ethered of Mercia. It was strange to see those
nobles bearing such burdens; but we knew that we had found the
king.

They saw us, and halted; but Heregar waved his hand, and they came
on, for they knew him. It would be hard to say which party was the
more pleased to meet the other.

"Where is the king?" we asked.

"Come with us, and we will take you to him," Ethered said. "But
supperless you must be tonight. We have nought in the house, and
nothing can we catch."

Then I was surprised, and said:

"Is it so bad as that here? In our land, when the ice is at its
thickest we can take as much fish as we will easily."

"Save us from starvation, Ranald," said Ethered, laughing ruefully,
"and we will raise a big stone heap here in your honour."

"Kolgrim will show you," I said; "let me go to the king."

"I am a great ice fisherman," said Harek; "let me go also."

Then Heregar laughed in lightness of heart.

"Ay, wizard, go also. There will be charms of some sort needed
before Ethered sees so much as a scale."

Whereon they dismounted, and Kolgrim took his axe from his saddle
bow, asking where the river was, while he wondered that such a
simple matter as breaking a hole in the ice and dropping a line
among the hungry fish, who would swarm to the air, had not been
thought of. We had not yet learned that such a winter as this comes
but seldom to the west of England, and the thanes knew nothing of
our northern ways.

Then Ethelnoth led Heregar and me across twisting and almost unseen
paths, safer now because of the frost, though one knew that in some
places a step to right or left would plunge him through the crust
of hard snow into a bottomless peat bog. The alder thickets grew
everywhere round dark, ice-bound pools of peat-stained water, and
we could nowhere see more than a few yards before us; and it was
hard to say how far we had gone from the upland edge of the swamp
when the ground began to rise from the fen, and grew harder among
better timber. But for the great frost, one would have needed a
boat in many places.

Then we came to a clearing, in which stood a house that was hardly
more than a cottage, and round it were huts and cattle sheds. And
this was where the king was--the house of Denewulf the herdsman,
the king's own thrall. There was a rough-wattled stockade round the
place, and quick-set fences within which to pen the cattle and
swine outside that, and all around were the thickets. None could
have known that such an island was here, for not even the house
overtopped the low trees; and though all the higher ground was
cleared, there were barely two acres above the watery level--a
long, narrow patch of land that lay southeast and northwest, with
its southerly end close to the banks of the river Tone. Men call
the place Athelney now, since the king and his nobles lay there. It
had no name until he came, but I think that it will bear ever
hereafter that which it earned thus.

Two shaggy grey sheepdogs came out to meet us, changing their angry
bark for welcome when they saw Ethelnoth; and a man came to the
door to see what roused them, and he had a hunting spear in his
hand. I took him for some thane, as he spoke to us in courtly wise;
but he was only Denewulf the herdsman himself.

"How fares the king?" asked Ethelnoth.

"His dark hour came on him after you went," Denewulf answered; "and
then the pain passed, and he slept well, and now has just wakened
wonderfully cheerful. I have not seen him so bright since he came
here; and he is looking eagerly for your return, seeming to expect
some news."

"It may be that our coming has been foretold him beforehand," said
Heregar. "Our king has warnings given him in his dreams at times."

Then from out of the house Alfred's voice hailed us:

"Surely that is the voice of my standard bearer.

"Come in quickly, Heregar, for all men know that hope comes with
you."

We went in; and it was a poor place enough for a king's lodging,
though it was warm and neat. Alfred sat over the fire in the middle
of the larger room of the two which the house had, and a strew of
chips and shreds of feathers and the like was round him; for he was
arrow making--an art in which he was skilful, and he had all the
care and patience which it needs. When we came in he rose up,
shaking the litter from his dress into the fire; and we bent our
knees to him and kissed his hand.

"O my king," said Heregar, "why have you thus hidden yourself
from us? All the land is mourning for you."

Then Alfred looked sadly at him and wistfully, answering:

"First, because I must hide; lastly, because I would be hidden: but
between these two reasons is one of which I repent--because I
despaired."

"Nay," said Denewulf, "it was not despair; it was grief and
anxiousness and thought and waiting for hope. Never have you spoken
of despair, my king."

"But I have felt it," he answered, "and I was wrong. Hope should
not leave a man while he has life, and friends like these, and
counsellors like yourself. Now have I been rebuked, and hope is
given me afresh."

Then he smiled and turned to me.

"Why, Ranald my cousin, this is kindness indeed. I had not thought
that you would bide with a lost cause, nor should I have thought of
blame for you had you gone from this poor England; you are not
bound to her as are her sons."

"My king," I said truly, "there are things that bind more closely
even than birth."

I think he was pleased, for he smiled, and shook his head at me as
though to say that he could not take my saying to himself, as I
meant it. And then, before we could ask him more, he began to think
of our needs.

"Here we have been pressed for food, friends, for the last few
days, and I fear you must fast with us. The deer have fled from our
daily hunting, and the wild fowl have sought open water. Unless our
fishers have luck, which seems unlikely, we must do as well as we
can on oaten bread."

Then Ethelnoth said:

"There have been no fish caught today, my king."

"Why, then, we will wait till the others return; and meanwhile I
will hear all the news, for Ranald and Heregar will have much to
tell me."

So we told him all that we knew, and he asked many questions, until
darkness fell.

"Why are you here, lord king?" asked Heregar; "my hall is safe."

"Your hall and countryside are safe yet because I am not there,"
Alfred answered, fixing his bright eyes on the thane. "The Danes
are hunting for me, and were I in any known place, thither would
they come. Therefore I said that now I choose to bide hidden.
Moreover, in this quiet and loneliness there comes to me a plan
that I think will work out well; for this afternoon, as I slept, I
was bidden to look for a sign that out of hopelessness should come
help and victory."

Just then the dogs rose up and whined at the door, as if friends
came; and there were cheerful voices outside. The door opened, and
in stumbled Ethered, bearing a heavy basket of great fish, which he
cast on the floor--lean green and golden pike, and red-finned
roach, in a glittering, flapping heap.

"Here is supper!" he cried joyfully, "and more than supper, for
each of us is thus laden. Fish enough for an army could we have
taken had we not held our hands. I could not have thought it
possible."

Whereat Alfred rose up and stared, crossing himself.

"Deo gratias," he said under his breath, and then said aloud, "Lo,
this is the sign of which I spoke even now--that my fishers should
return laden with spoil, even for an army, although frost and snow
have prevented them from taking fish for many days, and today was
less likelihood of their doing so than ever."

"Ranald knew well how this would cheer you, King Alfred," said
Ethered, thinking that I had spoken of this as a proof that all was
not lost, in some way.

"Ranald said nought; but the sign came from above, thus," the king
said gravely. "In my dream the holy Saint Cuthberht stood by my
side, and reproved me sharply for my downheartedness and despair,
and for my doubt of help against the heathen; and when he knew that
I was sorry, he foretold to me that all would yet be well, and that
I should obtain the kingdom once more with even greater honour than
I have had--with many more wondrous promises. And then he gave me
this sign, as I have told you and, behold, it has come, and my
heart is full of thankfulness. Now I know that all will be well
with England."

Then said Denewulf, who it was plain took no mean place with the
king and thanes:

"Say how this miracle was wrought, I pray you, for it is surely
such."

"Hither came King Ranald and his two friends and bade us make holes
in the ice and fish through them. So we did, and this is what came
thereof," said Ethered.

"Therefore King Ranald and his coming are by the hand of God," said
Denewulf. "Therein lies the miracle."

Then I was feared, for all were silent in wonder at the coming to
pass of the sign; and it seemed to me that I was most truly under a
power stronger than that of the old gods, who never wrought the
like of this.

Then came Harek's voice outside, where he hung up fish to freeze
against the morrow; and he sang softly some old saga of the fishing
for the Midgard snake by Asa Thor. And that grated on me, though I
ever waited to hear what song the blithe scald had to fit what was
on hand, after his custom. Alfred heard too, and he glanced at me,
and I was fain to hang my head.

"Ranald, who brought to pass the sign, shall surely share in its
bodings of good," he said, quickly and kindly. "I think that he is
highly favoured."

Then in came my comrades, and they bent to the king, and he thanked
them; and after that was supper and much cheerfulness. Harek sang,
and Alfred, and after them Denewulf. Much I marvelled at the wisdom
of this strange man, but I never knew how he gained it. King Alfred
was ever wont to say that in him he had found his veriest
counsellor against despair in that dark time; and when in after
days he took him from the fen and made him a bishop, he filled the
place well and wisely, being ever the same humble-minded man that I
had known in Athelney {xiv}.



Chapter X. Athelney and Combwich.


In the morning King Alfred took us to the southern end of his
island, and there told us what his plans were. And as we listened
they seemed to us to be wiser than mortal mind could have made, so
simple and yet so sure were they, as most great plans will be. It
is no wonder that his people hold that he was taught them from
above.

He bade us look across the fens to the wooded heights of Selwood
Forest, to south and east, and to the bold spur of the Polden Hills
beyond the Parret that they call Edington. There was nought but fen
and river and marsh between them and us--"impassable by the Danes
who prowled there. Only at the place where the two rivers join was
a steep, rounded hill, that stood up strangely from the level--the
hill that they call the Stane, on Stanmoor; and there were other
islands like this on which we stood, unseen among the thickets, or
so low that one might not know of them until upon them.

"Now," he said, "sooner or later the Danes will know I am here,
