
'Those poets are always odd,' said the widow.  'But he is an interesting
man; what pretty verses he writes!  We improve very much in poetry: it
is impossible to read the old stuff now.'

'I declare I am of your opinion, returned the lady of the helmet.
'There is so much more force and energy in the modern school.'

The warrior sauntered up to the ladies.

'It reconciles me to peace,' said he, 'when I see such faces.'

'Oh!  you heroes are ever flatterers,' returned Fulvia, hastening to
appropriate the compliment specially to herself.

'By this chain, which I received from the emperor's own hand,' replied
the warrior, playing with a short chain which hung round the neck like a
collar, instead of descending to the breast, according to the fashion of
the peaceful--'By this chain, you wrong me!  I am a blunt man--a soldier
should be so.'

'How do you find the ladies of Pompeii generally?' said Julia.

'By Venus, most beautiful!  They favor me a little, it is true, and that
inclines my eyes to double their charms.'

'We love a warrior,' said the wife of Pansa.

'I see it: by Hercules! it is even disagreeable to be too celebrated in
these cities.  At Herculaneum they climb the roof of my atrium to catch
a glimpse of me through the compluvium; the admiration of one's citizens
is pleasant at first, but burthensome afterwards.'

'True, true, O Vespius!' cried the poet, joining the group: 'I find it
so myself.'

'You!' said the stately warrior, scanning the small form of the poet
with ineffable disdain.  'In what legion have you served?'

'You may see my spoils, my exuviae, in the forum itself,' returned the
poet, with a significant glance at the women.  'I have been among the
tent-companions, the contubernales, of the great Mantuan himself.'

'I know no general from Mantua, said the warrior, gravely.  'What
campaign have you served?'

'That of Helicon.'

'I never heard of it.'

'Nay, Vespius, he does but joke,' said Julia, laughing.

'Joke!  By Mars, am I a man to be joked!'

'Yes; Mars himself was in love with the mother of jokes,' said the poet,
a little alarmed.  'Know, then, O Vespius! that I am the poet Fulvius.
It is I who make warriors immortal!'

'The gods forbid!' whispered Sallust to Julia.  'If Vespius were made
immortal, what a specimen of tiresome braggadocio would be transmitted
to posterity!'

The soldier looked puzzled; when, to the infinite relief of himself and
his companions, the signal for the feast was given.

As we have already witnessed at the house of Glaucus the ordinary
routine of a Pompeian entertainment, the reader is spared any second
detail of the courses, and the manner in which they were introduced.

Diomed, who was rather ceremonious, had appointed a nomenclator, or
appointer of places to each guest.

The reader understands that the festive board was composed of three
tables; one at the centre, and one at each wing.  It was only at the
outer side of these tables that the guests reclined; the inner space was
left untenanted, for the greater convenience of the waiters or ministri.
The extreme corner of one of the wings was appropriated to Julia as the
lady of the feast; that next her, to Diomed.  At one corner of the
centre table was placed the aedile; at the opposite corner, the Roman
senator--these were the posts of honour.  The other guests were
arranged, so that the young (gentleman or lady) should sit next each
other, and the more advanced in years be similarly matched.  An
agreeable provision enough, but one which must often have offended those
who wished to be thought still young.

The chair of Ione was next to the couch of Glaucus.  The seats were
veneered with tortoiseshell, and covered with quilts stuffed with
feathers, and ornamented with costly embroideries.  The modern ornaments
of epergne or plateau were supplied by images of the gods, wrought in
bronze, ivory, and silver.  The sacred salt-cellar and the familiar
Lares were not forgotten. Over the table and the seats a rich canopy was
suspended from the ceiling. At each corner of the table were lofty
candelabra--for though it was early noon, the room was darkened--while
from tripods, placed in different parts of the room, distilled the odor
of myrrh and frankincense; and upon the abacus, or sideboard, large
vases and various ornaments of silver were ranged, much with the same
ostentation (but with more than the same taste) that we find displayed
at a modern feast.

The custom of grace was invariably supplied by that of libations to the
gods; and Vesta, as queen of the household gods, usually received first
that graceful homage.

This ceremony being performed, the slaves showered flowers upon the
couches and the floor, and crowned each guest with rosy garlands,
intricately woven with ribands, tied by the rind of the linden-tree, and
each intermingled with the ivy and the amethyst--supposed preventives
against the effect of wine; the wreaths of the women only were exempted
from these leaves, for it was not the fashion for them to drink wine in
public.  It was then that the president Diomed thought it advisable to
institute a basileus, or director of the feast--an important office,
sometimes chosen by lot; sometimes, as now, by the master of the
entertainment.

Diomed was not a little puzzled as to his election.  The invalid senator
was too grave and too infirm for the proper fulfilment of his duty; the
aedile Pansa was adequate enough to the task: but then, to choose the
next in official rank to the senator, was an affront to the senator
himself.  While deliberating between the merits of the others, he caught
the mirthful glance of Sallust, and, by a sudden inspiration, named the
jovial epicure to the rank of director, or arbiter bibendi.

Sallust received the appointment with becoming humility.

'I shall be a merciful king,' said he, 'to those who drink deep; to a
recusant, Minos himself shall be less inexorable.  Beware!'

The slaves handed round basins of perfumed water, by which lavation the
feast commenced: and now the table groaned under the initiatory course.

The conversation, at first desultory and scattered, allowed Ione and
Glaucus to carry on those sweet whispers, which are worth all the
eloquence in the world.  Julia watched them with flashing eyes.

'How soon shall her place be mine!' thought she.

But Clodius, who sat in the centre table, so as to observe well the
countenance of Julia, guessed her pique, and resolved to profit by it.
He addressed her across the table in set phrases of gallantry; and as he
was of high birth and of a showy person, the vain Julia was not so much
in love as to be insensible to his attentions.

The slaves, in the interim, were constantly kept upon the alert by the
vigilant Sallust, who chased one cup by another with a celerity which
seemed as if he were resolved upon exhausting those capacious cellars
which the reader may yet see beneath the house of Diomed. The worthy
merchant began to repent his choice, as amphora after amphora was
pierced and emptied.  The slaves, all under the age of manhood (the
youngest being about ten years old--it was they who filled the wine--the
eldest, some five years older, mingled it with water), seemed to share
in the zeal of Sallust; and the face of Diomed began to glow as he
watched the provoking complacency with which they seconded the exertions
of the king of the feast.

'Pardon me, O senator!' said Sallust; 'I see you flinch; your purple hem
cannot save you--drink!'

'By the gods,' said the senator, coughing, 'my lungs are already on
fire; you proceed with so miraculous a swiftness, that Phaeton himself
was nothing to you.  I am infirm, O pleasant Sallust: you must exonerate
me.'

'Not I, by Vesta!  I am an impartial monarch--drink.'

The poor senator, compelled by the laws of the table, was forced to
comply. Alas! every cup was bringing him nearer and nearer to the
Stygian pool.

'Gently! gently! my king,' groaned Diomed; 'we already begin to...'

'Treason!' interrupted Sallust; 'no stern Brutus here!--no interference
with royalty!'

'But our female guests...'

'Love a toper!  Did not Ariadne dote upon Bacchus?'

The feast proceeded; the guests grew more talkative and noisy; the
dessert or last course was already on the table; and the slaves bore
round water with myrrh and hyssop for the finishing lavation.  At the
same time, a small circular table that had been placed in the space
opposite the guests suddenly, and as by magic, seemed to open in the
centre, and cast up a fragrant shower, sprinkling the table and the
guests; while as it ceased the awning above them was drawn aside, and
the guests perceived that a rope had been stretched across the ceiling,
and that one of those nimble dancers for which Pompeii was so
celebrated, and whose descendants add so charming a grace to the
festivities of Astley's or Vauxhall, was now treading his airy measures
right over their heads.

This apparition, removed but by a cord from one's pericranium, and
indulging the most vehement leaps, apparently with the intention of
alighting upon that cerebral region, would probably be regarded with
some terror by a party in May Fair; but our Pompeian revellers seemed to
behold the spectacle with delighted curiosity, and applauded in
proportion as the dancer appeared with the most difficulty to miss
falling upon the head of whatever guest he particularly selected to
dance above.  He paid the senator, indeed, the peculiar compliment of
literally falling from the rope, and catching it again with his hand,
just as the whole party imagined the skull of the Roman was as much
fractured as ever that of the poet whom the eagle took for a tortoise.
At length, to the great relief of at least Ione, who had not much
accustomed herself to this entertainment, the dancer suddenly paused as
a strain of music was heard from without.  He danced again still more
wildly; the air changed, the dancer paused again; no, it could not
dissolve the charm which was supposed to possess him!  He represented
one who by a strange disorder is compelled to dance, and whom only a
certain air of music can cure.  At length the musician seemed to hit on
the right tune; the dancer gave one leap, swung himself down from the
rope, alighted on the floor, and vanished.

One art now yielded to another; and the musicians who were stationed
without on the terrace struck up a soft and mellow air, to which were
sung the following words, made almost indistinct by the barrier between
and the exceeding lowness of the minstrelsy:--

             FESTIVE MUSIC SHOULD BE LOW

                      I

     Hark! through these flowers our music sends its greeting
        To your loved halls, where Psilas shuns the day;
      When the young god his Cretan nymph was meeting
        He taught Pan's rustic pipe this gliding lay:
           Soft as the dews of wine
             Shed in this banquet hour,
           The rich libation of Sound's stream divine,
             O reverent harp, to Aphrodite pour!

                     II

     Wild rings the trump o'er ranks to glory marching;
        Music's sublimer bursts for war are meet;
      But sweet lips murmuring under wreaths o'er-arching,
        Find the low whispers like their own most sweet.
           Steal, my lull'd music, steal
             Like womans's half-heard tone,
           So that whoe'er shall hear, shall think to feel
             In thee the voice of lips that love his own.

At the end of that song Ione's cheek blushed more deeply than before,
and Glaucus had contrived, under cover of the table, to steal her hand.

'It is a pretty song,' said Fulvius, patronizingly.

'Ah! if you would oblige us!' murmured the wife of Pansa.

'Do you wish Fulvius to sing?' asked the king of the feast, who had just
called on the assembly to drink the health of the Roman senator, a cup
to each letter of his name.

'Can you ask?' said the matron, with a complimentary glance at the poet.

Sallust snapped his fingers, and whispering the slave who came to learn
his orders, the latter disappeared, and returned in a few moments with a
small harp in one hand, and a branch of myrtle in the other.  The slave
approached the poet, and with a low reverence presented to him the harp.

'Alas! I cannot play,' said the poet.

'Then you must sing to the myrtle.  It is a Greek fashion: Diomed loves
the Greeks--I love the Greeks--you love the Greeks--we all love the
Greeks--and between you and me this is not the only thing we have stolen
from them. However, I introduce this custom--I, the king: sing, subject,
sing!' The poet, with a bashful smile, took the myrtle in his hands, and
after a short prelude sang as follows, in a pleasant and well-tuned
voice:--

           THE CORONATION OF THE LOVES

                    I

           The merry Loves one holiday
              Were all at gambols madly;
            But Loves too long can seldom play
              Without behaving sadly.
           They laugh'd, they toy'd, they romp'd about,
           And then for change they all fell out.
           Fie, fie! how can they quarrel so?
              My Lesbia--ah, for shame, love
           Methinks 'tis scarce an hour ago
              When we did just the same, love.

                    II

        The Loves, 'tis thought, were free till then,
           They had no king or laws, dear;
         But gods, like men, should subject be,
           Say all the ancient saws, dear.
         And so our crew resolved, for quiet,
         To choose a king to curb their riot.
             A kiss: ah! what a grievous thing
              For both, methinks, 'twould be, child,
             If I should take some prudish king,
              And cease to be so free, child!


                    III

        Among their toys a Casque they found,
           It was the helm of Ares;
         With horrent plumes the crest was crown'd,
           It frightened all the Lares.
         So fine a king was never known--
        They placed the helmet on the throne.
         My girl, since Valor wins the world,
           They chose a mighty master;
         But thy sweet flag of smiles unfurled
           Would win the world much faster!

                    IV

      The Casque soon found the Loves too wild
         A troop for him to school them;
       For warriors know how one such child
         Has aye contrived to fool them.
       They plagued him so, that in despair
       He took a wife the plague to share.
           If kings themselves thus find the strife
              Of earth, unshared, severe, girl;
           Why just to halve the ills of life,
              Come, take your partner here, girl.

                    V

       Within that room the Bird of Love
          The whole affair had eyed then;
        The monarch hail'd the royal dove,
          And placed her by his side then:
        What mirth amidst the Loves was seen!
        'Long live,' they cried, 'our King and Queen.'
            Ah! Lesbia, would that thrones were mine,
              And crowns to deck that brow, love!
            And yet I know that heart of thine
              For me is throne enow, love!

                    VI

       The urchins hoped to tease the mate
          As they had teased the hero;
        But when the Dove in judgment sate
          They found her worse than Nero!
        Each look a frown, each word a law;
        The little subjects shook with awe.
        In thee I find the same deceit--
         Too late, alas! a learner!
        For where a mien more gently sweet?
          And where a tyrant sterner?

This song, which greatly suited the gay and lively fancy of the
Pompeians, was received with considerable applause, and the widow
insisted on crowning her namesake with the very branch of myrtle to
which he had sung.  It was easily twisted into a garland, and the
immortal Fulvius was crowned amidst the clapping of hands and shouts of
Io triumphe!  The song and the harp now circulated round the party, a
new myrtle branch being handed about, stopping at each person who could
be prevailed upon to sing.

The sun began now to decline, though the revellers, who had worn away
several hours, perceived it not in their darkened chamber; and the
senator, who was tired, and the warrior, who had to return to
Herculaneum, rising to depart, gave the signal for the general
dispersion.  'Tarry yet a moment, my friends,' said Diomed; 'if you will
go so soon, you must at least take a share in our concluding game.'

So saying, he motioned to one of the ministri, and whispering him, the
slave went out, and presently returned with a small bowl containing
various tablets carefully sealed, and, apparently, exactly similar.
Each guest was to purchase one of these at the nominal price of the
lowest piece of silver: and the sport of this lottery (which was the
favorite diversion of Augustus, who introduced it) consisted in the
inequality, and sometimes the incongruity, of the prizes, the nature and
amount of which were specified within the tablets.  For instance, the
poet, with a wry face, drew one of his own poems (no physician ever less
willingly swallowed his own draught); the warrior drew a case of
bodkins, which gave rise to certain novel witticisms relative to
Hercules and the distaff; the widow Fulvia obtained a large
drinking-cup; Julia, a gentleman's buckle; and Lepidus, a lady's
patch-box.  The most appropriate lot was drawn by the gambler Clodius,
who reddened with anger on being presented to a set of cogged dice.  A
certain damp was thrown upon the gaiety which these various lots created
by an accident that was considered ominous; Glaucus drew the most
valuable of all the prizes, a small marble statue of Fortune, of Grecian
workmanship: on handing it to him the slave suffered it to drop, and it
broke in pieces.

A shiver went round the assembly, and each voice cried spontaneously on
the gods to avert the omen.

Glaucus alone, though perhaps as superstitious as the rest, affected to
be unmoved.

'Sweet Neapolitan,' whispered he tenderly to Ione, who had turned pale
as the broken marble itself, 'I accept the omen.  It signifies that in
obtaining thee, Fortune can give no more--she breaks her image when she
blesses me with thine.'

In order to divert the impression which this incident had occasioned in
an assembly which, considering the civilization of the guests, would
seem miraculously superstitious, if at the present day in a country
party we did not often see a lady grow hypochondriacal on leaving a room
last of thirteen, Sallust now crowning his cup with flowers, gave the
health of their host.  This was followed by a similar compliment to the
emperor; and then, with a parting cup to Mercury to send them pleasant
slumbers, they concluded the entertainment by a last libation, and broke
up the party. Carriages and litters were little used in Pompeii, partly
owing to the extreme narrowness of the streets, partly to the convenient
smallness of the city.  Most of the guests replacing their sandals,
which they had put off in the banquet-room, and induing their cloaks,
left the house on foot attended by their slaves.

Meanwhile, having seen Ione depart, Glaucus turning to the staircase
which led down to the rooms of Julia, was conducted by a slave to an
apartment in which he found the merchant's daughter already seated.

'Glaucus!' said she, looking down, 'I see that you really love Ione--she
is indeed beautiful.'

'Julia is charming enough to be generous,' replied the Greek. 'Yes, I
love Ione; amidst all the youth who court you, may you have one
worshipper as sincere.'

'I pray the gods to grant it!  See, Glaucus, these pearls are the
present I destine to your bride: may Juno give her health to wear them!'

So saying, she placed a case in his hand, containing a row of pearls of
some size and price.  It was so much the custom for persons about to be
married to receive these gifts, that Glaucus could have little scruple
in accepting the necklace, though the gallant and proud Athenian inly
resolved to requite the gift by one of thrice its value. Julia then
stopping short his thanks, poured forth some wine into a small bowl.

'You have drunk many toasts with my father,' said she smiling--'one now
with me.  Health and fortune to your bride!'

She touched the cup with her lips and then presented it to Glaucus.  The
customary etiquette required that Glaucus should drain the whole
contents; he accordingly did so.  Julia, unknowing the deceit which
Nydia had practised upon her, watched him with sparkling eyes; although
the witch had told her that the effect might not be immediate, she yet
sanguinely trusted to an expeditious operation in favor of her charms.
She was disappointed when she found Glaucus coldly replace the cup, and
converse with her in the same unmoved but gentle tone as before.  And
though she detained him as long as she decorously could do, no change
took place in his manner.  'But to-morrow,' thought she, exultingly
recovering her disappointment--'to-morrow, alas for Glaucus!'

Alas for him, indeed!



Chapter IV

THE STORY HALTS FOR A MOMENT AT AN EPISODE.

RESTLESS and anxious, Apaecides consumed the day in wandering through
the most sequestered walks in the vicinity of the city.  The sun was
slowly setting as he paused beside a lonely part of the Sarnus, ere yet
it wound amidst the evidences of luxury and power. Only through openings
in the woods and vines were caught glimpses of the white and gleaming
city, in which was heard in the distance no din, no sound, nor 'busiest
hum of men'.  Amidst the green banks crept the lizard and the
grasshopper, and here and there in the brake some solitary bird burst
into sudden song, as suddenly stifled. There was deep calm around, but
not the calm of night; the air still breathed of the freshness and life
of day; the grass still moved to the stir of the insect horde; and on
the opposite bank the graceful and white capella passed browsing through
the herbage, and paused at the wave to drink.

As Apaecides stood musingly gazing upon the waters, he heard beside him
the low bark of a dog.

'Be still, poor friend,' said a voice at hand; 'the stranger's step
harms not thy master.' The convert recognized the voice, and, turning,
he beheld the old mysterious man whom he had seen in the congregation of
the Nazarenes.

The old man was sitting upon a fragment of stone covered with ancient
mosses; beside him were his staff and scrip; at his feet lay a small
shaggy dog, the companion in how many a pilgrimage perilous and strange.

The face of the old man was as balm to the excited spirit of the
neophyte: he approached, and craving his blessing, sat down beside him.

'Thou art provided as for a journey, father,' said he: 'wilt thou leave
us yet?'

'My son,' replied the old man, 'the days in store for me on earth are
few and scanty; I employ them as becomes me travelling from place to
place, comforting those whom God has gathered together in His name, and
proclaiming the glory of His Son, as testified to His servant.'

'Thou hast looked, they tell me, on the face of Christ?'

'And the face revived me from the dead.  Know, young proselyte to the
true faith, that I am he of whom thou readest in the scroll of the
Apostle.  In the far Judea, and in the city of Nain, there dwelt a
widow, humble of spirit and sad of heart; for of all the ties of life
one son alone was spared to her.  And she loved him with a melancholy
love, for he was the likeness of the lost.  And the son died.  The reed
on which she leaned was broken, the oil was dried up in the widow's
cruse.  They bore the dead upon his bier; and near the gate of the city,
where the crowd were gathered, there came a silence over the sounds of
woe, for the Son of God was passing by.  The mother, who followed the
bier, wept--not noisily, but all who looked upon her saw that her heart
was crushed.  And the Lord pitied her, and he touched the bier, and
said, "I SAY UNTO THEE, ARISE," And the dead man woke and looked upon
the face of the Lord.  Oh, that calm and solemn brow, that unutterable
smile, that careworn and sorrowful face, lighted up with a God's
benignity--it chased away the shadows of the grave!  I rose, I spoke, I
was living, and in my mother's arms--yes, I am the dead revived! The
people shouted, the funeral horns rung forth merrily: there was a cry,
"God has visited His people!" I heard them not--I felt--I saw--nothing
but the face of the Redeemer!'

The old man paused, deeply moved; and the youth felt his blood creep,
and his hair stir.  He was in the presence of one who had known the
Mystery of Death!

'Till that time,' renewed the widow's son, 'I had been as other men:
thoughtless, not abandoned; taking no heed, but of the things of love
and life; nay, I had inclined to the gloomy faith of the earthly
Sadducee!  But, raised from the dead, from awful and desert dreams that
these lips never dare reveal--recalled upon earth, to testify the powers
of Heaven--once more mortal, the witness of immortality; I drew a new
being from the grave.  O faded--O lost Jerusalem!--Him from whom came my
life, I beheld adjudged to the agonized and parching death!  Far in the
mighty crowd I saw the light rest and glimmer over the cross; I heard
the hooting mob, I cried aloud, I raved, I threatened--none heeded me--I
was lost in the whirl and the roar of thousands!  But even then, in my
agony and His own, methought the glazing eye of the Son of Man sought me
out--His lip smiled, as when it conquered death--it hushed me, and I
became calm.  He who had defied the grave for another--what was the
grave to him?  The sun shone aslant the pale and powerful features, and
then died away!  Darkness fell over the earth; how long it endured, I
know not.  A loud cry came through the gloom--a sharp and bitter
cry!--and all was silent.

'But who shall tell the terrors of the night?' I walked along the
city--the earth reeled to and fro, and the houses trembled to their
base--theliving had deserted the streets, but not the Dead: through the
gloom I saw them glide--the dim and ghastly shapes, in the cerements of
the grave--with horror, and woe, and warning on their unmoving lips and
lightless eyes!--they swept by me, as I passed--they glared upon me--I
had been their brother; and they bowed their heads in recognition; they
had risen to tell the living that the dead can rise!'

Again the old man paused, and, when he resumed, it was in a calmer tone.

'From that night I resigned all earthly thought but that of serving HIM.
A preacher and a pilgrim, I have traversed the remotest corners of the
earth, proclaiming His Divinity, and bringing new converts to His fold.
I come as the wind, and as the wind depart; sowing, as the wind sows,
the seeds that enrich the world.

'Son, on earth we shall meet no more.  Forget not this hour,--what are
the pleasures and the pomps of life?  As the lamp shines, so life
glitters for an hour; but the soul's light is the star that burns for
ever, in the heart of inimitable space.'

It was then that their conversation fell upon the general and sublime
doctrines of immortality; it soothed and elevated the young mind of the
convert, which yet clung to many of the damps and shadows of that cell
of faith which he had so lately left--it was the air of heaven breathing
on the prisoner released at last.  There was a strong and marked
distinction between the Christianity of the old man and that of
Olinthus; that of the first was more soft, more gentle, more divine.
The heroism of Olinthus had something in it fierce and intolerant--it
was necessary to the part he was destined to play--it had in it more of
the courage of the martyr than the charity of the saint.  It aroused, it
excited, it nerved, rather than subdued and softened.  But the whole
heart of that divine old man was bathed in love; the smile of the Deity
had burned away from it the leaven of earthlier and coarser passions,
and left to the energy of the hero all the meekness of the child.

'And now,' said he, rising at length, as the sun's last ray died in the
west; 'now, in the cool of twilight, I pursue my way towards the
Imperial Rome.  There yet dwell some holy men, who like me have beheld
the face of Christ; and them would I see before I die.'

'But the night is chill for thine age, my father, and the way is long,
and the robber haunts it; rest thee till to-morrow.'

'Kind son, what is there in this scrip to tempt the robber?  And the
Night and the Solitude!--these make the ladder round which angels
