him carelessly.

"Aye, truly, and gladly if they could pay well."

"Now I will tell you that I am Earl Wulfnoth's friend," I said,
"and you may know that pay is safe, therefore. I was at Pevensea
when Olaf the Thick, the viking, came there."

He took my word for my friendship with the earl, and then I
arranged for all things to be ready for us in a week's time. We had
some rough country to cross before we came to Bosham, and I would
not hurry over it. We wrangled over the price a little, as was
fitting, for I would not seem too eager; but at last he said that
he would depart on the morrow, and we shook hands and were
satisfied.

"Speak not of this matter, friend Bertric," I said, "or we may be
waylaid by Danes off the haven's mouth."

"Little fear of that, master," he laughed. "Our young Earl Godwine
has beaten one or two ships already."

Then I went back light hearted to my people, and when the queen
heard what I had done her mood changed, and she was most gracious,
and thanked me, saying that she feared that I had run into danger
for her in going into the town. So I felt myself repaid in full for
the little trouble, that had been without risk as it fell out.

Very fair was the great Andred's-weald in the late April weather,
but the forest tracts were rough and the way seemed long. Once we
beat off, easily enough, some cowardly outlaws, but there were no
Danes in Andred's-weald, and we came to Bosham in safety.

There Bertric's good ship was ready for us, and it happened that no
other vessels, save fishing craft, were in the haven. I had looked
to meet Godwine, my friend, but he and his ships were in Dorchester
water, and there were few to mark our coming into the quiet town,
or our going on board, which we did without delay.

We had no need of the stout housecarles, who had led the horses and
served us so well, so the queen, as I asked her, gave them the
horses as gifts in recompense for their journey, and so when they
had gone we were few indeed. But there was room for few passengers
in the buss. The queen and her ladies had the larger after cabin,
and Elfric and the athelings and the two priests had that under the
fore deck. I would remain on deck with Bertric and his crew of
twenty men, but there was no hardship in that.

That night on Bertric's ship was the first for three long weeks
that had sound sleep for me, for they hauled out into the middle of
the haven, and none could come near us unseen, and I was at last
free from care and watching.

But one thing troubled honest Bertric, and that was that he had
found a black kitten on board. None knew whence it came, and he
said it was an ill sign. And he dared do nought but treat it well,
since it had come.



Chapter 11: The Taking Of The Queen.


When the early sunlight woke me, we were almost at the haven mouth,
and slipping past Selsea, with its gray pile of buildings, on the
first of the ebb tide. The wind was in the northeast, with a
springtime coldness in it, but it was fair for Normandy, and there
was no sea running under the land. We were well out at sea,
therefore, ere Elfric, almost as worn out as I, came from his close
quarters forward and stood by me, looking over the blue water of
the Channel to where the Isle of Wight loomed to the westward.

"Now I think that all is well, Redwald," the abbot said, "and every
mile from the English shore takes us further from danger."

And so we stood and talked in the waist of the ship, and Eadward
came and joined us. The men ate their breakfast forward, and
brought us some, and the two churchmen came out with the little
atheling, and then Sister Sexberga, as I called her, came and
shivered in the cold breeze and spoke to Bertric, who was alone on
the after deck steering, and so went back to the cabin, where the
queen had all things needful for breaking her fast.

Then Bertric whistled sharply, and I looked up at him. He pointed
away to the eastward, and out to sea. There I saw far off on the
skyline the sails of two ships that grew larger as I watched them.

I went to the break of the after deck and climbed up beside him.

"Men say that two ships passed westwards tonight, master," he said.
"Here be two more heading over from the south."

"Can you tell what they are?" I asked him.

"Longships, as I think," he answered. "We shall know betimes."

The vessels hove up quickly, for our great brown sail bore us more
or less across their course.

"It is safer to hold on, master," he said, "for to up helm and fly
would be to bring them after us if they are vikings. They will see
that we are not laden with cargo, and will not pay heed to us
therefore."

It was but half an hour after that when we knew that the two ships
were Danish war vessels, and that they were laying a fresh course
to overhaul us. Nor was there any chance of our escaping them. They
were thrice as fast as we.

Then I feared greatly, for I knew not what would happen. It might
be that they would let our party go on, finding them to all seeming
nought but church folk; but one could not tell, and I feared. So
also did Elfric when I went to him and told him what these ships
were, and that they were bearing down on us.

"We cannot fight," he said. "We must let things be as the Lord
will."

"If any roughness is shown to the womenfolk," I said, "there will
be one man who will fight."

"And will lose his life for naught," he answered. "If the worst
comes to the worst we must even do as the queen has bidden us
before now. We must proclaim her, and then we shall be safe from
harm, if captives to Cnut. Tell me, have you heard that he is cruel
to those he takes?"

"Rather I have heard that he is not," I said. "Moreover, if Emma of
Normandy suffers aught at his hands he will have the duke to deal
with very shortly."

"Now are we in the Lord's hands," said Elfric, for a hoarse hail
came from the leading ship, which was to windward of us. She was a
splendid dragonship, bright with gold and colour.

"What will you have me do, master?" Bertric cried to me.

"They can do what they will with us whatever we try. We may fare
better by obeying," I said, for in truth there was nought else to
do.

Now the great ship ranged up alongside of us, and the tall warrior
at the helmsman's side hailed us again to heave to. And I saw a man
bend his bow, and an arrow flew down the wind and stuck in the deck
not far from me. Whereon Bertric raised his arm in answer and
called to his men, and luffed while they lowered the sail. The Dane
at the same time struck sail, and got out some oars in order to
come alongside of us. There was no sea running that would make this
dangerous.

Then I went to the low door of the after cabin, and spoke to the
queen.

"Here is a ship that will come alongside ours," I said. "Fear
nought, but wait for my word."

And then a glint of bright colour caught my eyes, and I looked more
closely into the dark place; and there sat the queen no longer as a
humble abbess, but in her own dress, for she had cast off the garb
she hated, and she answered me:

"Who dares to stay the Queen of England on her passage?"

"Oh, madam," I said, "for pity's sake don the convent robe again. I
fear that the Danes are on us."

Then she cowered back into the shadow and said nought, for the very
word terrified her when she knew her foes were so near. But Sister
Sexberga came to the door, and she was pale enough, though her face
lacked no courage.

"What shall we do, Redwald--thane?" she said quickly.

"Keep a brave heart, sister," I answered, "and let me manage all. I
will bide before the door, and you will hear all I say. Then, if I
say that we have the Queen of England, let our mistress come
forward and disclose herself. But I hope they will let us go free.
Pray that it may be so."

Then the two ships jarred together, and I saw that the Dane was
well manned with armed warriors, and I also saw that their leader
was Egil Thorarinsson, whom I had captured and again lost at
Leavenheath fight. I will say that I was glad to see him, for I
knew him as a free-spoken warrior who loved fair play, and I
thought that he owed me a life, for I did not slay him when I
might.

They leapt on board--a dozen armed Danes with Egil at their
head--and there before them stood Elfric the abbot with his cross
in his hand, facing them alone. His priests were forward under
cover, praying doubtless, with the athelings. The great ship
sheered off again, and bided within half arrow shot of us, all her
rail crowded with men looking on.

"Neither gold nor goods have we," Elfric cried. "We are peaceful
folk who cross the seas. It is the part of a good warrior and
viking to let such go unharmed."

"Aye, so it is," answered Egil; "but, as it happens, we are looking
for certain peaceful folk."

"You will not harm us," said Elfric, who knew nought of our queen's
foolishness. "It is but a party of church people who go to
Normandy."

"Put the holy man aside," said Egil to his men. "We are not
heathens, and we will not hurt you, father."

So the warriors laughed, and went to draw Elfric away; but when he
saw that I stood before the cabin door, he stepped aside by himself
and watched what should befall. I had no mail on, and at first they
did not notice me. It was the first day that I had not worn mail
since we left London; but Foe's Bane was loose in the scabbard, and
ready in case of need.

"Ho, skipper!" Egil cried, "whom have you on board?"

"Yon priest and some more of his sort," Bertric said.

"We have lit on a crow's nest," a man said, laughing. "Where are
they, then?"

"In the fore peak, and aft here, deadly sick," said Bertric.

Then Egil's eyes lit on me, and he stared for a minute.

"Ho!" he cried, "here is no crow, but a stout warrior enough. What
do you here, Olaf's right-hand man?"

"Helping the crows over seas," I said, trying to meet his words
lightly, though my heart was heavy enough.

"Why then, friend," he said, "I must see these charges of yours.
Stand aside, and let me go into that cabin."

"Nay, Egil; they are but nuns here."

The honest warrior looked puzzled, but some of his men began to
crowd aft, being tired of the parley, and one tried to push me
aside, saying:

"Let us fetch them out, and waste no more words."

Whereon I sent him reeling against the gunwale, hands to face, for
I dealt with him even as Godric served my warrior at Stamford.

Then I had my sword out, for it was time--and two men who drew
sword on me went down on the deck before me. Sword Foe's Bane smote
not amiss. Then was a ring of shouting Danes forming, and I felt
someone at my shoulder, and Egil cried out:

"Hold, men! the warrior is my man. Let me deal with him."

And there was Sister Sexberga beside me, with Bertric's sword, that
had hung over his berth, in her hand; and her eyes were flashing,
and it seemed to me that she had used a sword before this, or had
learnt its use. It was reddened now.

The men gave back, and Egil came before me and he was laughing.

"That is enough, Redwald of Bures," he said. "I owe you a life, and
you have it. If all your charges are like that maiden we had better
begone. Little nunnery training is there about her sword play."

Then the sister shrank back into the cabin, and the men stared
after her with a kind of awe, as at a Valkyrie of the old faith who
had come to my help. There was a man whom she had smitten who was
binding up a wound in his bare forearm. I believe that she stayed a
shrewd blow from me.

"Let us go, Egil," I said.

"Presently, maybe. But I seek someone, and must needs see your
people. No harm shall come to them."

Then I thought that all was well, and I turned to the door and
spoke:

"Lady abbess, you must needs come forward. I know this chief, and
you need fear nought."

I heard Sister Sexberga's voice speaking low and pleadingly for a
moment--and then all was lost.

"I am the Queen of England," said Emma in her proud, shrill voice.
"Begone, churls, and let me not."

And bright in crimson and ermine she came from the cabin and stood
swaying on the deck before Egil and his men, while round her train
played heedlessly the ill-omened black kitten; and that seemed
strange.

Egil bared his head and bowed before her.

"Are you truly the queen?" he said.

"Aye, knave. Who else should I be?" she answered. "Fetch me the old
priest."

"Nay, Redwald will tell me now," Egil said. "Does this lady speak
truth?"

"It is true," I answered. "Why should you hinder her going to the
duke, her brother, who will seek her at your hands?"

Now Emma had been still during these words, looking with hard and
scornful eyes at all before her, but now she spoke:

"Let the sail be set again that I may go on my way. You shall
surely answer for this hindrance."

But no one stirred, though even the Danes were silent, for there is
that in the tones of one who is wont to be obeyed which makes men
listen whether they will or not.

"Do you hear me?" she said, stamping her foot.

"Redwald, see that I am obeyed. Drive these knaves into the sea,
and let me be rid of them."

Then Egil answered her, saving me trouble thereby, for I had nought
to say:

"Queen, we will do your bidding and hoist the sail. But my men and
I must bide here."

"I care not, so that you do not hinder my folk," she said.

And with that she turned away, saying to the brave sister who yet
stood beside her:

"Let us seek shelter again--the wind is cold, and I am offended
with the sight of these men."

They went into the cabin and closed the door after them, and Egil
and I looked at one another. Egil grinned, but I could not. Outside
the door the kitten mewed restlessly in the cold wind to be taken
in.

"So," he said, "cheer up. This is not your fault; you almost won
through. Had the queen come forth as an abbess, I think that I had
left you for very shame. Priests and black cats are aye unlucky
passengers, however."

I think that I was never so angry as then. To lose all our pains
for the safety of the queen, and that by reason of her own
foolishness, was hard.

Egil left me and went to Bertric; and once more the sail was set,
and the ship headed backward for the English coast. We had almost
lost sight of it. The two longships ranged up on either side of us,
shortening sail to keep us company.

They took the two men whom I had slain and set them forward under
some covering. Neither Egil nor his warriors bore me any grudge for
their fall, which was in fair fight of their own making. After that
Egil's men made the crew bring them what food and ale they had, and
sat down below the fore deck quietly enough. They were courtmen of
Jarl Thorkel's, as I thought, being better than the wild warriors
who made the bulk of Cnut's great host.

Elfric came to me when all was quiet thus, and leant on the rail
beside me for some time without speaking. We were making a long
slant over to the English coast, and my heart was full of heavy
thoughts, for I could not help wondering if this mischance had come
about by my fault; and I was angry and sore that all the plans that
I had made so confidently had come to naught. Presently the abbot
said:

"The queen takes this matter very easily."

"The trouble is to come," I answered; "she thinks that she is yet
on her journey."

"It is no fault of ours that she is not," said he. "Maybe it is
best thus. I suppose that she will understand how things are when
we reach the shore. What will be done with us?"

"Let us ask Egil," I said. "I think we might have fallen into worse
hands than his. It is in my mind that he likes not his errand."

So we went aft to the chief, who stood beside Bertric. And when I
came to him he said, pointing westward:

"Here comes Earl Wulfnoth, as I think."

Then I saw three large ships beating up to us, and the sail of one
