knew what Monsieur Dessin's real name was, so that Colonel Holliday
did not know to whom to write in France."

"I wrote twice," the marquis said, "but I guessed that the letters
had never arrived. And the good gentleman your grandfather, he is
still alive and well?"

"As well as ever," Rupert said, "and will be delighted to hear of
you.

"Mademoiselle is well, I trust?"

"Quite well, and quite a belle at the court, I can assure you," the
marquis said. "But there are the gates of Louvain. You will, of
course, give me your parole not to try to escape, and then you can
come straight to my quarters with me, and I need not report you for
a day or so. We shall be in fearful confusion tonight, for half our
army is crowding in here, and every one must shift for himself.

"Peste! What a beating you have given us! That Marlborough of yours
is terrible.

"I know some people here," he said, turning to the officers. "They
will take us four in, and the men must picket their horses in the
courtyard and street, and lie down in their cloaks. Tomorrow we
will see what is to be done, and how many have escaped from the
terrible debacle."

The streets of Louvain were crowded with fugitives, some of them
had thrown themselves down by the sidewalks, utterly exhausted;
others mingled with the anxious townsmen, and related the incidents
of the disastrous day; while the horses stood, with drooping heads,
huddled together along the middle of the street. It was only by
making long detours that the Marquis de Pignerolles reached the
house of which he was in search. Late as was the hour the inmates
were up, for the excitement at Louvain was so great that no one had
thought of going to bed; and Monsieur Cardol, his wife and family,
did all in their power for their guests.

Supper was quickly laid for the four gentlemen; a barrel of wine
was broached for the troops, and what provisions were in the house
were handed over to them.

"Now let us look at you," the Marquis de Pignerolles said, as they
entered the brightly lighted room. "Ah, you are a man now; but your
face has little changed--scarcely at all."

"I am scarcely a man yet," Rupert said, laughing. "I am just twenty
now; it is rather more than four years since we parted, without
even saying goodbye."

"Yes, indeed, Rupert. I tried to do you a good turn in the matter
of the Brownlows. I hope it succeeded."

"It did indeed," Rupert said. "We are indeed indebted to you for
your intervention then. You saved my lady mother from a wretched
marriage, and you saved for me the lands of Windthorpe Chace."

"Ah, I am glad it came off well. But I am your debtor still, mind
that; and always shall be. And now to supper. First, though, I must
introduce you formally to my comrades, and to our host and hostess,
and their pretty daughters."

Very much surprised were the latter when they heard that the
handsome young officer was an Englishman and a prisoner.

"He does not look very terrible, does he, this curly-haired young
fellow, mademoiselles; but he is one of those terrible horse which
have broken the cavalry of the Maison du Roi today, and scattered
the chivalry of France. As to himself, he is a Rustium, a Bobadil,
if he has, as I doubt not, kept up his practice--" and he looked at
Rupert, who nodded smilingly; for he had indeed, during the four
years he had been in Flanders, not only practised assiduously in
the regimental fencing salles, but had attended all the schools
kept by the best Spanish, Italian, and German teachers, keeping
himself in practice, and acquiring a fresh pass here, an ingenious
defence there, and ever improving--"The first swordsman in France
would run a chance against this good-tempered-looking lad with his
blue eyes."

The French girls opened their eyes in astonishment, but they were
not quite sure whether the marquis was not making fun of them.

"Parbleu!" the two officers exclaimed. "You are not in earnest
surely, marquis?"

"I am, indeed, gentlemen; and I can claim some share of the merit,
for I taught him myself; and before he was sixteen he was a better
swordsman than I was; and as he loved the art, he will have gone on
improving, and must be miraculous.

"By the way," he said, suddenly, "there was a story went through
Flanders near four years back of the best swordsman in the German
army being killed by a mere boy in an English regiment, and I said
then, I think that this must be my pupil. Was it so?"

"It was," Rupert said. "It was a painful affair; but I was forced
into it."

"Make no excuse, I beg," the marquis said, laughing.

"Now, young ladies, let us to supper; but beware of this prisoner
of war, for if he is only half as formidable with his eyes as with
his wrist, it is all up with your poor hearts."

Then, with much merriment, the four officers sat down to table,
their host and hostess joining for company, and the young ladies
acting as attendants.

No one would have guessed that three of the party had formed part
of an army which that day had been utterly routed, or that the
other was their prisoner; but the temperament of the French enables
them to recover speedily from misfortune; and although they had
been dull and gloomy enough until Rupert so suddenly fell into
their hands, the happy accident of his being known to their
colonel, and the pleasure and excitement caused by the meeting,
sufficed to put them in high spirits again, especially as their own
corps had suffered but slightly in the action, having been in
reserve on the left, and never engaged except in a few charges to
cover the retreat.

When the battle was alluded to, the brows of the French officers
clouded, and they denounced in angry terms the fatal blunder of the
marshal of weakening his centre to strengthen the left against a
feigned attack. But the subject soon changed again, for, as the
marquis said, "It would be quite time to talk it over tomorrow,
when they would know who had fallen, and what were the losses;" for
from their position on the left, they had little idea of the
terrible havoc which had been made among the best blood in France.

Long after all the others had retired, the marquis and Rupert sat
together talking over old times. Rupert learned that even before he
had left the Chace the marquis had received news that the order of
banishment, which the king had passed against him because he had
ventured to speak in public in terms of indignation at the
wholesale persecution of the Protestants, had been rescinded; and
that the estates, which had also been confiscated, were restored.
The Protestant persecutions had become things of the past, the
greater portion of the French Protestants having fled the country;
and the powerful friends of De Pignerolles had never ceased to
interest themselves in his favour. The king, too, was in need of
experienced soldiers for the war which was about to break out; and
lastly, and by the tone in which his friend spoke Rupert saw that
the subject was rather a sore one, his Majesty wished to have Adele
near the court.

"Mademoiselle Dessin!" Rupert said, in astonishment.

"Well, not exactly Mademoiselle Dessin," the marquis said, smiling,
"but la Marquise Adele de Pignerolles, who is by her mother's
side--she was a Montmorency--one of the richest heiresses in
France, and as inheriting those lands, a royal ward, although I,
her father, am alive."

"But even so," Rupert said, "what can his Majesty wish to have her
at court for?"

"Because, as a very rich heiress, and as a very pretty one, her
hand is a valuable prize, and his Majesty may well intend it as a
reward to some courtier of high merit."

"Oh, Monsieur Dessin!" Rupert said, earnestly; "surely you do not
mean that!"

"I am sorry to say that I do, Master Rupert. The Grand Monarque is
not in the habit of considering such trifles as hearts or
inclinations in the bestowal of his royal wards; and although it is
a sort of treason to say so, I would rather be back in England, or
have Adele to myself, and be able to give her to some worthy man
whom she might love, than to see her hand held out as a prize of
the courtiers of Versailles. I have lived long enough in England to
have got some of your English notions, that a woman ought at least
to have the right of refusal."

Rupert said nothing, but he felt sorry and full of pity at the
thought of the young girl he remembered so well being bestowed as a
sort of royal gift upon some courtier, quite irrespective of the
dictates of her own heart. After sitting some time in silence, the
marquis changed the subject suddenly.

"I am afraid you will not be exchanged before next winter, Rupert.
There are, no doubt, plenty of prisoners in Marlborough's hands,
but the campaign is sure to be a stirring and rapid one after this
defeat. He will strike heavy blows, and we shall be doing our best
to avoid them. It will not be until the fighting is over that the
negotiations for the exchange of prisoners will begin."

The next morning the Marquis de Pignerolles went off early to the
headquarters of the commandant; and Rupert remained chatting with
the family of his host. Two hours later he returned.

"Things are worse than I even feared," he said; "the royal guards
are almost destroyed, and the destruction wrought in all our noble
families is terrible. It is impossible to estimate our total loss
at present, but it is put down at 20,000, including prisoners. In
fact, as an army it has almost ceased to exist; and your
Marlborough will be able to besiege the fortresses of Flanders as
he likes. There has been a council of all the general officers here
this morning. I am to carry some dispatches to Versailles--not
altogether a pleasant business, but some one must do it, and of
course he will have heard the main incidents direct from Villeroi.
I leave at noon, Rupert, and you will accompany me, unless indeed
you would prefer remaining here on the chance of getting an earlier
exchange."

Rupert naturally declared at once for the journey to Paris.
Officers on parole were in those days treated with great courtesy,
especially if they happened to have a powerful friend. He therefore
looked forward to a pleasant stay in Paris, and to a renewal of his
acquaintance with Adele, and to a sight of the glories of
Versailles, which, under Louis XIV, was the gayest, the most
intellectual, and the most distinguished court of Europe.

Louis XIV could not be termed a good man, but he was unquestionably
a great king. He did much for France, whose greatness and power he
strove to increase; and yet it was in no slight degree owing to his
policy that, seventy years later, a tempest was to burst out in
France, which was to sweep away the nobility and the crown itself;
which was to deluge the soil of France with its best blood, to
carry war through Europe, and to end at last by the prostration of
France beneath the feet of the nations to whom she had been a
scourge.

The tremendous efforts made by Louis XIV to maintain the Spanish
succession, which he had secured for France; the draining of the
land of men; and the impoverishing of the nobles, who hesitated at
no sacrifices and efforts to enable the country to make head
against its foes, exhausted the land; while the immense
extravagance of the splendid court in the midst of an impoverished
land, ruined not only by war, but by the destruction of its trade,
by the exile of the best and most industrious of its people on
account of their religion, caused a deep and widespread discontent
throughout the towns and country of France.

Three hours later, Rupert set out with the Marquis of Pignerolles
and two troopers. After two days ride through Belgium they reached
Valenciennes, where the uniform of Rupert, in the scarlet and
bright cuirass of the British dragoons, excited much attention, for
British prisoners were rare in France.

On the evening of the fifth day they reached Paris, where they rode
to the mansion of the marquis. Rupert was aware that he would not
see Adele, who was, her father had told him, at Versailles, under
the care of Madame de Soissons, one of the ladies of the court.
Rupert was told to consider himself at home; and then the marquis
rode on to Versailles.

"I saw his Majesty last night," he told Rupert when he returned
next morning, "and he was very gracious. I hear that even Brousac,
who brought the news of our defeat, was kindly received. I am told
that he feels the cutting up of his guards very much. A grand
entertainment, which was to have taken place this week, has been
postponed, and there will be no regular fetes this autumn. I told
his Majesty that I had brought you with me on parole, and the
manner of your capture. He charged me to make the time pass
pleasantly for you, and to bring you down to Versailles, and to
present you at the evening reception.

"We must get tailors to work at once, Rupert, for although you must
of course appear in uniform, that somewhat war-stained coat of
yours is scarcely fit for the most punctilious court in Europe.
However, as they will have this coat for a model, the tailors will
soon fashion you a suit which would pass muster as your uniform
before Marlborough himself.

"I saw Adele, and told her I had brought an English officer, who
had galloped in the darkness into our ranks, as a prisoner. I did
not mention your name. It will be amusing to see if she recognizes
you. She was quite indignant at my taking you prisoner, and said
that she thought soldiers ought not to take advantage of an
accident of that kind. In fact, although Adele, as I tell her, is
very French at heart, the five years she passed in Derby have left
a deep impression upon her. She was very happy at school. Every
one, as she says, was kind to her; and the result is, that although
she rejoices over our victories in Italy and Germany, she talks
very little about the Flanders campaign; about which, by the way,
were she even as French as possible, there would not be anything
very pleasant to say."

Rupert was at once furnished from the wardrobe of the marquis with clothes
of all kinds, and as they were about the same height--although Rupert was
somewhat broader and heavier--the things fitted well, and Rupert was able
to go about Paris, without being an object of observation and curiosity
by the people.

Rupert was somewhat disappointed in Paris. Its streets were
narrower than those of London, and although the public buildings
were fine, the Louvre especially being infinitely grander than the
Palace of Saint James, there was not anything like the bustle and
rush of business which had struck Rupert so much on his arrival in
London.

Upon arriving at Versailles, however, Rupert was struck with
wonder. Nothing that he had seen could compare with the stately
glories of Versailles, which was then the real capital of France. A
wing of the magnificent palace was set apart for the reception of
the nobles and military men whose business brought them for short
periods to the court, and here apartments had been assigned to the
marquis. The clothes had already been sent down by mounted lackeys,
and Rupert was soon in full uniform again, the cuirass alone being
laid aside. The laced scarlet coat, and the other items of attire,
were strictly in accordance with the somewhat lax regulations as to
the dress of an officer of dragoons; but the lace cravat falling in
front, and the dress lace ruffles of the wrists, were certainly
more ample than the Duke of Marlborough might have considered fit
for strict regimental attire. But indeed there was little rule as
to dress in those early days of a regular British army.

Rupert's knee breeches were of white satin, and his waistcoat of thick
brocaded silk of a delicate drab ground. Standing as he did some six
feet high, with broad shoulders, and a merry, good-tempered face, with
brown curls falling on his lace collar, the young lieutenant was as
fine a looking specimen of a well-grown Englishman as could be desired.

"Ma foi!" the marquis said, when he came in in full dress to see if
Rupert was ready, "we shall have the ladies of the court setting
their caps at you, and I must hasten to warn my countrymen of your
skill with the rapier, or you will be engaged in a dozen affairs of
honour before you have been here as many days.

"No," he said, laughing at Rupert's gestures of dislike to
duelling, "his gracious Majesty has strictly forbidden all
duelling, and--well, I will not say that there is none of it, but
it goes on behind the scenes, for exile from court is the least
punishment, and in some cases rigorous imprisonment when any
special protege of the king has been wounded.

"And now, Rupert, it is time to be off. The time for gathering in
the antechamber is at hand. By the way, I have said nothing to the
king of our former knowledge of each other. There were reasons why
it was better not to mention the fact."

Rupert nodded as he buckled on his sword and prepared to accompany
his friend.

Along stately corridors and broad galleries, whose magnificence
astonished and delighted Rupert, they made their way until they
reached the king's antechamber. Here were assembled a large number
of gentlemen, dressed in the extreme of fashion, some of whom
saluted the marquis, and begged particulars of him concerning the
late battles; for in those days news travelled slowly, newspapers
were scarcely in existence, special correspondents were a race of
men undreamed of.

To each of those who accosted him the marquis presented Rupert, who
was soon chatting as if at Saint James's instead of Versailles. In
Flanders he had found that all the better classes spoke French,
which was also used as the principal medium of communication
between the officers of that many-tongued body the allied army,
consequently he spoke it as fluently and well as he had done as a
lad. Presently the great door at the end of the antechamber was
thrown back, and the assembled courtiers fell back on either side.

Then one of the officers of the court entered, crying, "The king,
gentlemen, the king!"

And then Louis himself, followed by some of the highest officers of
state, entered.



Chapter 18: The Court of Versailles.

As the King of France entered the antechamber a dead hush fell upon
all there, and Rupert Holliday looked eagerly to see what sort of
man was the greatest sovereign in Europe.

Louis was under middle height, in spite of his high-heeled shoes,
but he had an air of dignity which fully redeemed his want of
stature. Although he was sixty-six years of age, he was still
handsome, and his eyes were bright, and his movements quick and
vivacious.

The courtiers all bent low as the king moved slowly down the line,
addressing a word here and there. The king's eye quickly caught
that of the young Englishman, who with his companion was taller
than the majority of those present.

Louis moved forward until he stopped before him.

"So, Sir Englishman," he said, "you are one of those who have been
maltreating our soldiers. Methinks I have more reason than you have
to complain of the fortune of war, but I trust that in your case
the misfortune will be a light one, and that your stay in our court
and capital will not be an unpleasant one."

"I have no reason, sire, to complain of the fortune of war," Rupert
said, "since to it I owe the honour of seeing your gracious
Majesty, and the most brilliant court in the world!"

"Spoken like a courtier," the king said with a slight smile. "Pray
consider yourself invited to all the fetes at court and to all our
entrees and receptions, and I hope that all will do their best to
make your stay here agreeable."

Then with a slight inclination of the head he passed on, saying in
an audible tone to the nobles who walked next, but a little behind
him, "This is not such a bear as are his island countrymen in
general!"

"In another hour, Rupert, is the evening reception, at which the
ladies of the court will be present; and although all set fetes
have been arrested owing to the news of the defeat in Flanders, yet
as the king chooses to put a good face upon it, everyone else will
do the same, therefore you may expect a brilliant assembly. Adele
will of course be there. Shall I introduce you, or leave it to
chance?"

"I would rather you left it to chance," Rupert said, "except, that
as you do not desire it to be known that we have met before, it
