five years, until, by the Peace of Ryswick, in Holland, 1697, Louis
XIV bound himself to recognize William as King of England, the
Princess Anne[1] as his successor, to withdraw all support from James,
and to place the chief fortresses of the Netherlands, or Low
Countries, in the hands of the Dutch garrisons.  The Peace of Ryswick
marked the end of the conspiracy between Louis and the Stuarts to turn
England into a Roman Catholic country dependent on France (SS477,
488).  When William went in solemn state to return thanks for the
conclusion of the war, it was to the new cathedral of St. Paul's,
which Wren had nearly completed (S474), and which was then first used
for public worship.

[1] The second (Protestant) daughter of James II.  See Genealogical
Table, p. 323.

503. The National Debt, 1693; the Bank of England, 1694.

William had now gained, at least temporarily, the object that he had
in view when he accepted the English crown.  He had succeeded in
drawing the English into a close defensive alliance against Lois
XIV,[2] who, as we have seen, was bent on destroying both the
political and the religious liberty of the Dutch as a Protestant
people (S476).

[2] Guizot's "History of Civilization," chap. xiii.

William's wars had compelled him to borrow large sums from the London
merchants.  Out of these loans sprang the permanent National Debt.
That debt was destined to grow from less than a million of pounds to
so many hundred millions that all thought of ever paying it has long
since been given up.  Furthermore, it became necessary to organize a
Banking Company, 1694, for the management of this collosal debt;
together the two were destined to become more widely known than any of
William's victories.

The building erected by that Company covers not far from four acres of
land in the very heart of London.  In the first room which one enters
stands a statue of the King, bearing this inscription: "To the memory
of the best of Princes, William of Orange, founder of the Bank of
England,"--the largest and most important financial institution in the
world.

504. William's Death.

King William hasd a brave soul in a feeble body.  All his life he was
an invalid, but he learned to conquer disease, or at least to hold it
in check, as he conquered his enemies.  He was worn out by overwork,
sickness, and the cares of office.  If he could have been assured of
the safety of his beloved Holland, death would have been welcome to
one who had so long been stretched "upon the hard rack of this tough
world."  He was never popular in England, and at one time was kept
from returning to his native country only through the earnest
protestation of the Lord Chancellor, who refused to stamp the King's
resignation with the Great Seal (S145).

There were plots to assassinate him, and many who pretended to be
friends were treacherous, and only wanted a good opportunity to go
over to the side of James II.  Others were eager to hear of his death,
and when it occurred, through the stumbling of his horse over a
molehill, they drank to "the little gentleman in black velvet," whose
work underground caused the fatal accident.

505. Summary.

William's reign was a prolonged struggle for the great Protestant
cause and for the maintenance of political liberty in both England and
Holland.  Invalid as he was, he was yet a man of indomitable
resolution as well as indomitable courage.

Though a foreigner by birth, and caring more for Holland than for any
other country in the world, yet, through his Irish and Continental
wars with James II and Louis XIV, he helped more than any other man of
the seventeenth century, Cromwell alone excepted, to make England
free.

ANNE--1702-1714

506. Accession and Character of Anne.

William (S504) left no children, and according to the provisions of
the Bill of Rights (S497)[1] the Princess Anne, younger sister of the
late Queen Mary, now came to the throne.  She was a negative
character, with kindly impulses and little intelligence.  "When in
good humor she was meekly stupid, and when in ill humor, sulkily
stupid."[2]  But if there was any person duller than her Majesty, that
person was her Majesty's husband, Prince George of Denmark.  Charles
II, who knew him well, said, "I have tried Prince George sober, and I
have tried him drunk, and drunk or sober, there is nothing in him."

[1] See the Bill of Rights (third paragraph) on page xxxi of the
Appendix.
[2] Macaulay's "England"; and compare Stanhope's "Reign of Anne."

Along with the amiable qualities which gained for the new ruler the
title of "Good Queen Anne" her Majesty inherited the obstinacy, the
prejudices, and the superstitions of the Stuart sovereigns.  Though a
most zealous Protestant and an ardent upholder of the Church of
England, she declared her faith in the Divine Right of Kings (SS419,
429), which had cost her grandfather, Charles I, his head, and she was
the last English sovereign who believed that the touch of the royal
hand could dispel disease.

The first theory she never openly proclaimed in any offensive way, but
the harmless delusion that she could relieve the sick was a favorite
notion with her; and we find in the London _Gazette_ (March 12, 1712)
an official announcement, stating that on certain days the Queen would
"touch" for the cure of "king's evil," or scrofula.

Among the multitudes who went to test her power was a poor Lichfield
bookseller.  He carried to her his little half-blind, sickly boy, who,
by virtue either of her Majesty's beneficent fingers or from some
other and better reason, grew up to be known as the famous author and
lexicographer, Dr. Samuel Johnson.[2]

[2] Johnson told Boswell, his biographer, that he remembered the
incident, and that "he had a confused, but somehow a sort of solemn
recollection of a lady in diamonds and a long black hood."--Boswell's
"Johnson."

507. Whig and Tory; High Church and Low.

Politically, the government of the country was divided between the two
great parties of the Whigs and the Tories (S479), since uscceeded by
the Liberals and Conservatives.  Though mutually hostile, each
believing that its rival's success meant national ruin, yet both were
sincerely opposed to despotism on the one hand, and to anarchy on the
other.  The Whigs (S479), setting Parliament above the throne, were
pledged to maintain the Act of Settlement (S497) and the Protestant
succession; while the Tories (S479), insisting on a strict, unbroken
line of hereditary sovereigns, were anxious to set aside that act and
restore the excluded Stuarts (S494).

The Church of England was likewise divided into two parties, known as
High Church and Low Church.  The first, who were generally Tories,
wished to exalt the power of the bishops and were opposed to the
toleration of Dissenters (S472); the second, who were Whigs as a rule,
believed it best to curtail the authority of the bishops, and to
secure to all Trinitarian Protestants entire liberty of worship and
all civil and political rights and privileges.  Thus to the bitterness
of heated political controversy there was added the still more acrid
bitterness of theological dispute.

Addison illustrates the feeling that then prevailed by an amusing
story of an earlier occurrence.  A boy who had lost his way in London
was called a "popish cur" by a Whig because he ventured to inquire for
Saint Anne's Lane, while he was cuffed for irreverence by a Tory when,
correcting himself, he asked bluntly for Anne's Lane.

The Queen, although she owed her crown mainly to the Whigs (S479),
sympathized with the Tories (S479) and the High Church, and did all in
her power to strengthen both.  As for the leaders of the two parties,
they seem to have looked out first for themselves, and afterwards--
often a long way afterwards--for their country.  During the whole
reign they were plotting and counterplotting, mining and undermining.
Their subtle schemes to secure office and destroy each other become as
incomprehensible and fathomless as those of the fallen angels in
Milton's vision of the bottomless pit.

508. The War of the Spanish Succession, 1702.

Anne had no sooner come to the throne than war broke out with France.
It had its origin in the previous reign.  William III had cared little
for England compared with his native Holland, whose interests always
had the first place in his heart.  He had spent his life battling to
preserve the independence of the Dutch republic and fighting Louis XIV
of France, who was determined, if possible, to annex the Netherlands,
including Holland, to his own dominions (S502).

During the latter part of William's reign the French King seemed
likely to be able to accomplish his purpose.  The King of Spain, who
had no children, was in feeble health, and at his death it was
probable that Louis XIV's grandson, Philip of Anjou, would receive the
crown.  If that happened, Louis XIV, who was then the most powerful
prince in Europe, would obtain the control of the Spanish dominions,
which, besides Spain, comprise a large part of the Netherlands,[1]
parts of Italy, and immense provinces in South America.  The
possession of such an empire would make Louis irresistible in Europe,
and the little, free Protestant states of Holland could not hope to
stand before him.

[1] The whole of the Netherlands at one time belonged to Spain, but
the northern part, or Holland, had succeeded in establishing its
independence, and was protected on the southern frontier by a line of
fortified towns.

Not long afterwards, the King of Spain died and bequeathed the crown
to Philip of Anjou.  When Philip left Paris for Madrid, Louis XIV
exultingly exclaimed, "The Pyrenees no longer exist."  That was simply
his short way of saying, Now France and Spain are made one, and
FRANCE is that one.[2]

[2] When Philip of Anjou went to Spain, Louis XIV, by letters patent,
conditionally reserved the succession to the Spanish throne to France,
thus virtually uniting the two countries, so that the Pyrenees
Mountains would no longer have any political meaning as a boundary
between the two countries.

Louis at once put French garrisons in the border towns of the Spanish
Netherlands, and he thus had a force ready at any moment to march
across the frontier into Holland.  Finally, on the death of the royal
refugee, James II (S9491), which occurred shortly before King
William's death, Louis XIV publicly acknowledged the exiled monarch's
son, James Edward, the so-called "Old Pretender" (SS490, 491), as
rightful sovereign of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

This effectually roused the English people; they were prepared for
hostilities when William's sudden death occurred (S504).  Immediately
after Anne came to the throne (1702) war with France was declared, and
since it had grown out of Louis's designs on the crown of Spain, it
was called the "War of the Spanish Succession."

The contest was begun by England, mainly to prevent the French King
from carrying out his threat of placing the so-called "Pretender," son
of the late James II, on the English throne and so overturning the
Bill of Rights (S497) and the Act of Settlement (S497), and thereby
restoring the country to the Roman Catholic Stuarts.  Later, the war
came to have two other important objects.  The first of these was to
defend Holland, now a most valuable ally; the second was to protect
the colonies of Virginia and New England against the power of France,
which threatened, through its own American colonies and through the
extensive Spanish possessions it expected to acquire, to get control
of the whole of the New World.[1]

[1] At this time England had twelve American colonies extending from
New England to South Carolina, inclusive, with part of Newfoundland.
France and Spain claimed all the rest of the continent.

Thus England had three objects at stake:
  (1) The maintenance of Protestant government at home.
  (2) The maintenance of the Protestant power of Holland.
  (3) The retention of a large part of the American continent.

For this reason the War of the Spanish Succession may be regarded as
the beginning of a second Hundred Years' War between England and
France (S237),[2] one destined to decide which was to build up the
great empire of the future in the western hemisphere.[3]

[2] During the next eighty years fighting was going on between England
and France, directly or indirectly, for a great part of the time.
[3] Seeley's "Expansion of England."

509. Marlborough; Blenheim, Gibraltar, and Other Victories
(1702-1709).

John Churchill, Duke of Marlborough (S491), commanded the English and
Dutch forces, and had for his ally Prince Eugene of Savoy, who led the
German armies.  The Duke, who was known in the enemy's camps by the
flattering name of "the handsome Englishman," had risen from
obscurity.  He owed the beginning of his success to his good looks and
a court intrigue.  In politics he sympathized chiefly with the Tories
(S479), but his interests in the war led him to support the Whigs
(S479).

He was avaricious, unscrupulous, and teacherous.  James II trusted
him, and he deceived him and went over to William (S491); William
trusted him, and he deceived him and opened a treasonable
correspondence with the dethroned James; Anne trusted him, and he
would undoubtedly have betrayed her if the so-called "Pretender"
(SS490, 491) had been able to bid high enough, or if he could have
shown him that his cause was likely to be successful.  In his greed
for money the Duke hesitated at nothing; he took bribes from army
contractors, and robbed his soldiers of their pay.[1]

[1] See Hallam, Macaulay; and Thackeray's "Henry Esmond."

As a soldier, Marlborough had no equal.  Voltaire says of him with
truth that "he never besieged a fortress which he did not take, nor
fought a battle which he did not win."  This man, at once so able and
so false, to whom war was a private speculation rather than a contest
for right or principle, now opened the campaign.  He captured those
fortresses in the Spanish Netherlands which Louis XIV had garrisoned
with French troops to menace Holland, but he could not induce the
enemy to rish a battle in the open field.

At length, Marlborough, by a brilliant movement (1704), changed the
scene of the war from the Netherlands to Bavaria in southern Germany.
There, at the little village of Blenheim,[2] he, with Prince Eugene,
gained a victory over the French which saved Germany from the power of
Louis XIV. (See map opposite.)  England, out of gratitude for the
humiliation of her powerful enemy, presented the Duke with the ancient
royal Park of Woodstock, near Oxford, and built for him the palace of
Blenheim, which the architect called "the biggest house for the
biggest man in England."  It is still occupied by descendants of the
Duke's family.  A few days before the battle of Blenheim, a powerful
English fleet had attacked and taken Gibraltar (1704).  England thus
gained and still holds the command of the great inland sea of the
Mediterranean.  In the course of the next five years Marlborough
fought three great battles,[3] by which he drove the French out of the
Netherlands once for all, and finally beat them on a hotly contested
field in northern France.  The power of Louis XIV was now so far
broken that England no longer felt any fear that he would overcome her
colonies in America (S508).

[2] Blenheim: The palace grounds are nearly twelve miles in
circumference.  The Marlborough family hold Blenheim on condition that
they present a flag every year (August 2) to the English sovereign at
Windsor Castle.
[3] Ramillies (1706); Oudenarde (1708); Malplaquet (1709).

510. The Powers behind the Throne; Jennings against Masham.

But if the Duke of Marlborough was remarkable, so too was his wife.
While the war was going on, the real power of the Crown, though it
stood in Anne's name, was practically in the hands of Sarah Jennings,
Duchess of Marlborough, who held the office of Mistress of the Robes.
She and the Queen had long been inseparable, and it was her influence
that cause Anne to desert her father (S491) and espouse the cause of
William of Orange.

The imperious temper of the Duchess carried all before it, and in her
department she won victories which might well be compared with those
the Duke, her husband, gained on the field of battle.  In time her
sway over her royal companion grew to be so absolute that she seemed
to decide everything, from questions of state to the cut of a gown or
the color of a ribbon.  Finally, it became a common saying that "Queen
Anne reigns, but Queen Sarah governs."[1]

[1] For years the Queen and the Duchess corresponded almost daily
under the names of "Mrs. Morley" (the Queen) and "Mrs. Freeman" (the
Duchess), the latter taking that name because, she said, it suited the
frank and bold character of her letters.

While the Duchess continued in power, she used her influence to urge
forward the war with France undertaken by England to check the designs
of Louis XIV on Spain and Holland, and also to punish him for his
recognition of the claim of the Pretender to the English crown
(S491).  Her object was to advance her husband, who, as commander in
chief of the English and Dutch forces on the Continent, had won fame
and fortune,--the first by his splendid ability, the second by his
unscrupulous greed (S509).

After a number of years, the Queen and the Duchess quarreled, and the
latter was superseded by her cousin, a Mrs. Masham (1711), who soon
got as complete control of Anne as the former favorite had possessed.
Mrs. Masham was as sly and supple as the Duchess had been dictatorial
and violent.  She was cousin to Robert Harley, a prominent Tory
politician (S479).  Through her influence Harley now became Prime
Minister in everything but name.  He succeeded in putting a stop to
further fighting, and Marlborough was ordered home in disgrace on a
charge of having robbed the government.  Thus it was, as Hallam
remarks, that "the fortunes of Europe were changed by the insolence of
one waiting woman and the cunning of another."[1]

511. Dr. Sacheverell (1710).

An incident occurred about this time which greatly helped the Tories
(S479) in their schemes.  Dr. Sacheverell, a violent Tory and High
Churchman (S507), began preaching a series of vehement sermons in
London condemning the Whig policy which called for the reopening of
the war.  He also endeavored to revive the exploding theory of the
Divine Right of Kings (S419, 429), and declared that no tyranny on the
part of a sovereign could by any possibility justify a subject in
resisting the royal will.  The Whig leaders brought the preacher to
trial for alleged treasonable utterances (1710).  He was suspended
from his office for three years, and his book of sermons was publicly
burned by the common hangman.

This created intense popular excitement; Sacheverell was regarded as a
political martyr by all who wished the war ended.  A reaction against
the Government set in; the Whigs (S479) were driven from power, and
the Tories passed two very harsh laws[2] against Dissenters (S472),
though they were repealed a few years later.  The Duchess of
Marlborough had to leave her apartments in the palace of St. James,
and in her spite broke down marble mantels and tore off the locks from
doors.  Mrs. Masham's friends, the Tories (S479), or peace party, who
had now triumphed, prepared to put a complete end to the fighting.

[2] These were the Occasional Conformity Act and the Schism Act
(S518).

512. The Peace of Utrecht, 1713.

Not long after this change a messenger was privately dispatched to
Louis XIV to ask if he wished for peace.  "It was," says the French
minister, "like asking a dying man whether he would wish to be
cured."[3]  Later, terms were secretly agreed upon between the Tories
(S479) and the French, and in 1713, in the quaint Dutch city of
Utrecht, the allies, together with France and Spain, signed the treaty
bearing that name.

[2] Morris's "The Age of Anne."

By it Louis XIV bound himself:
 (1) To acknowledge the right of England to limit the succession to
the crown to Protestant sovereigns (S497).
 (2) To compel Prince James Edward, the so-called "Pretender" (SS490,
491) to quit France.
 (3) To renounce the union of the crowns of France and Spain; but
Philip was to retain the Spanish throne (S508).
 (4) To cede to England all claims to Newfoundland, Acadia, or Nova
Scotia, and that vast region known as the Hudson Bay Company's
Possessions.

Next, Spain was to give up:
 (1) The Spanish Netherlands to Austria, an ally of Holland, and grant
to the Dutch a line of forts to defend their frontier against France.
 (2) England was to have the exclusive right for thirty-three years of
supplying the Spanish-American colonists with negro slaves.[1]

[1] This right (called the "Assiento," or Contract) had formerly
belonged to France.  By its transfer England got the privilege of
furnishing 4800 "sound, merchantable negroes "annually," "two thirds
to be males" between ten and forty years of age.

This trade had long been coveted by the English, and had been carried
on to some extent by them ever since Sir John Hawkins entered upon it
in Queen Elizabeth's reign.  Sir John grew very rich through his
traffic in human flesh, and he set up a coat of arms emblazoned with a
slave in fetters, so that all might see how he had won wealth and
distinction.

513. Union of England and Scotland, 1707.

Since the accession of James I (1603), England and Scotland had been
ruled by one sovereign, but each country retained its own Parliament
and its own forms of worship.  In 1707 the two countries were finally
united under the name of Great Britain.

The Established (Presbyterian) Church of Scotland and the Scottish
laws were to be preserved.  The independent Parliament of Scotland was
given up, and the Scotch were henceforth represented in the English
Parliament by sixteen peers chosen by members of the Scottish peerage
at the summoning of every Parliament; and by forty-five (now seventy-
two) members returned by Scotland to the House of Commons.

With the consummation of the union between the two countries Great
Britain adopted a new flag, the Union Jack, which was formed by the
junction of the red cross of St. George of England and the white cross
of St. Andrew of Scotland.[1]

[1] After Ireland was united to Great Britain (1800) the red cross of
St. Patrick was added to the flag (1801).  The first Union Jack was
the work of James I, whose usual signature was Jacques (hence "Jack"),
French for James.

514. Literature of the Period; the First Daily Paper.

The reign of Anne has been characterized as one of corruption in high
places and of brutality in low, but in literature it takes rank next
to that of Elizabeth (S393).  There was indeed no great central
luminary like Shakespeare, but a constellation of lesser ones,--such
as Addison, Defoe, and Pope.  They shone with a splendor of their
own.  The lurid brilliancy of the half-mad satirist Dean Swift was
beginning to command attention; on the other hand, the calm, clear
light of the philosopher John Locke was near its setting.

Aside from these great names in letters, it was an age generally of
contented dullness, well represented in the good-natured mediocrity of
Queen Anne herself.  During her reign the first daily newspaper
(SS422, 443) appeared in England,--the Daily Courant (1703); it was a
dingy, badly printed little sheet, not much bigger than a man's hand.
The publisher said he made it so small "to save the Publick at least
one half the Impertinences of Ordinary News-Papers."

Perhaps it was well this journal set up no greater pretensions, for it
had to compete with swarms of abusive political pamphlets, such as
Swift wrote for the Tories and Defoe for the Whigs (S479).  It had
also to compete with the gossip and scandal of the coffeehouses and
the clubs; for this reason the proprietor found it no easy matter
either to fill it or to sell it.

A few years later (1711) a periodical appeared, called the Spectator.
It was published daily, and Addison, its chief contributor, soon made
it famous.  Each number consisted of an essay hitting off the follies
and foibles of the age, and it was regularly served at the breakfast
tables of people of fashion along with their tea and toast.

One of the greatest merits of the Spectator was its happy way of
showing that wit and virtue are after all better friends than wit and
vice.  Neither this little magazine nor the newspapers of that time
dared to publish a single line of parliamentary debate.  But they
marked the humble beginning of that vast organized power, represented
by the daily press of London, which discusses everything of interest
throughout the world.

515. Death of the Queen.

The ingratitude of public men and the furious quarrels of politicians
so teased and vexed the Queen that she at last fell into a fatal
illness.  Her physician wrote to Dean Swift, "I believe sleep was
never more welcome to a weary traveler than death was to her."  When
she laid down the scepter (1714) she left no heir to the throne, and
so the power of the Stuarts (S415) came to an end.

According to the terms of the Act of Settlement (S497) the crown now
passed to George, Elector of Hanover, a Protestant descendant of James
I of England.  (See Table, p. 323.)  James Edward, son of James II,
believed to the last that his half-sister, Queen Anne, would name him
her successor;[1] instead of that it was she who first dubbed him the
"Pretender" (S491).

[1] Anne and the so-called "Pretender" were children of James II by
different mothers.

516. Summary.

The whole reign of Anne was taken up with the strife of political
parties at home, and the War of the Spanish Succession abroad.  The
Whigs (S479) were always intriguing through the Duchess of Marlborough
and other leaders to keep up the war and to keep out the so-called
"Pretender"; the Tories (S479), on the other hand, were just as busy
through Mrs. Masham and her coadjutors in endeavoring to establish
peace, and with it the Divine Right of Kings (SS419, 429).

The extreme Tories hoped for the restoration of the Roman Catholic
Stuarts in the person of James Edward, the so-called "Pretender."  The
War of the Spanish Succession resulted in the defeat of Louis XIV and
the confirmation of that Act of Settlement (S497) which secured the
English crown to a Protestant prince.

GENERAL REFERENCE SUMMARY OF THE STUART PERIOD

1603-1714 (Commonwealth, 1649-1660)

I. Government. II. Religion. III. Military Affairs. IV. Literature and
Learning. V. General Industry and Commerce.  Vi. Mode of Life,
Manners, and Customs

                        I. Government

517. The Divine Right of Kings; the Civil War; the "Glorious
Revolution" of 1688.

The period began with the attempt of James I to carry out his theory
that the King derives his right to rule directly from God, and in no
wise from the people.  Charles I adopted this disastrous theory, and
was supported in it by Manwaring and other clergymen, who declared
that the King represents God on earth, and that the subject who
resists his will, or refuses a tax or loan to him, does so at the
everlasting peril of his soul.

Charles I's arbitrary methods of government and levies of illegal
taxes, with the imprisonment of those who refused to pay them, led to
the meeting of the Long Parliament and the enactment in 1628 of the
statue of the Petition of Right, or second great charter of English
liberties.

The same Parliament abolished the despotic courts of Star Chamber and
High Commission, which had been used by Strafford and Laud to carry
out their tyrannical scheme called "Thorough."

Charles I's renewed acts of oppression and open violation of the laws,
with his levies of "ship money," led to the Grand Remonstrance, an
appeal to the nation to support Parliament in its struggle with the
King.  The attempt of the King to arrest five members who had taken a
prominent part in drawing up the Remonstrance brought on the Civil War
and the establishment of the Commonwealth.  The new republic was
utterly opposed to the doctrine of the Divine Right of Kings.  It
declared "the People are, under God, the origin of all just power."
Eventually Cromwell became Protector of the nation, and ruled by means
of a strong military force.

On the restoration of the Stuarts, Feudal Tenure and the Right of
Purveyance were abolished by Parliament (1660).  Charles II endeavored
to rule without Parliament by selling his influence to Louis XIV, by
the secret Treaty of Dover.  During his reign, the Habeas Corpus Act
was passed and feudalism was practically abolished.

James II endeavored to restore the Roman Catholic religion.  His
treatment of the University of Oxford, and imprisonment of the Seven
Bishops, with the birth of a son who would be educated as a Roman
Catholic, caused the Revolution of 1688, and placed William and Mary
on the throne.

Parliament now, 1689, passed the Bill of Rights, the third great
charter for the protection of the English people, and later confirmed
it, 1701, by the Act of Settlement, which secured the crown to a line
of Protestant sovereigns.  The Mutiny Bill, passed at the beginning of
William III's reign, made the army dependent on Parliament.  These
measures practically put the government in the hands of the House of
Commons, where it has ever since remained.  The Long Parliament had
passed a Triennial Act (1641) requiring a new Parliament to be
summoned within three years from the dissolution of the last
Parliament, which was to sit not longer than three years.  This law
was repealed in 1664 and reenacted under William III in 1694.
William's wars caused the beginning of the National Debt and the
establishment of the Bank of England.

In the reign of Anne, 1707, Scotland and England were united under the
name of Great Britain.  During her sovereignty the permanent Whig and
Tory parties, which came into existence in the time of Charles II,
became especially prominent.  They have since continued to divide the
parliamentary government between them,--the Whigs seeking to extend
the power of the people; the Tories, that of the Crown and the
Church.  After the passage of the Reform Bill in 1832 (S582) the Whigs
took the name of Liberals and the Tories that of Conservatives.  The
system of Cabinet Government, which now prevails, took its rise in
1721 under Robert Walpole, seven years after Anne's death (S534).

                        II. Religion

518. Religious Parties and Religious Legislation.

At the beginning of this period we find four religious parties in
England: (1) the Roman Catholics; (2) the Episcopalians, or supporters
of the National Church of England; (3) the Puritans, who wised to
remain members of that Church, but who sought to "purify" it from
certain Roman Catholic customs and modes of worship; (4) the
Independents, who were endeavoring to establish independent
congregational societies.  In Scotland the Puritans established their
religion in a Church governed by elders, or presbyters, instead of
bishops, which on that account got the name of Presbyterians.

James I persecuted all who dissented from the Church of England; and
after the Gunpowder Plot the Roman Catholics were practically deprived
of the protection of the law, and subject to terrible oppression.  In
James's reign Bartholomew Legate, a Unitarian, was burned at West
Smithfield Market, London (1612), for denying the doctrine of the
trinity.  He was the last English martyr.  Charles I greatly
exasperated the Puritans in the English Church by his Declaration of
Sports, which recommended games in the churchyards after service on
Sunday.  Clergymen who refused to read the Declaration to their
congregation were dismissed from their places.

During the period of the Civil War and the Commonwealth,
Presbyterianism was established as the national worship of England and
Scotland by the Solemn League and Covenant.  A great many Episcopal
clergymen were deprived of their parishes.  At the Restoration several
laws against the Scotch Covenanters and other Dissenters were
enforced, and retaliatory legislation drove two thousand clergymen
from their parishes to starve.  On the other hand, the pretended
Popish Plot caused the exclusion of Roman Catholics from both houses
of Parliament, and all persons holding office were obliged to partake
of the sacrament according to the Church of England.  James II's
futile attempt to restore Catholicism ended in the Revolution and the
passage of the Toleration Act, granting liberty of worship to all
Protestant Trinitarians.  Stringent laws were passed against Catholics
(1700), but they were not regularly enforced.  Under Anne the
Occasional Conformity Act (1711) and the Schism Act (1714) were aimed
at Dissenters.  The first of these laws punished officeholders who,
during their term of office, should attend any dissenting place of
worship; the second forbade any person's keeping a public or private
school unless he was a member of the Church of England.  Both laws
were repealed a few years later (1718).

                III. Military Affairs

519. Armor and Arms.

Armor still continued to be worn in some degree during this period,
but it consisted chiefly of the helmet with breastplates and
backplates.  Firearms of various kinds were in general use; also hand
grenades, or small bombs, and the bayonet.  The chief wars of the
period were the Civil War, the wars with the Dutch, William's war with
France, which extended to America, and the War of the Spanish
Succession.

                IV. Literature, Learning, and Art

520. Great Writers.

The most eminent prose writers of this period were Sir Walter Raleigh,
Lord Bacon, Sir Isaac Newton, John Bunyan, Bishop Hooker, Jeremy
Taylor, John Locke, Hobbes, Dean Swift, Defoe, and Addison; the chief
poets, Shakespeare and Jonson (mentioned under the preceding period),
Milton, Dryden, Pope, Butler, and Beaumont and Fletcher, with a class
of writers known as the "Comic Dramatists of the Restoration," whose
works, though not lacking in genius, exhibit many of the worst
features of the licentious age in which they were produced.  Three
other great writers were born in the latter part of this period,--
Fielding, the novelist, Hume, the historian, and Butler,[1] the ablest
thinker of his time in the English Church,--but their productions
belong to the time of the Georges.

[1] Bishop Butler, author of "The Analogy of Religion" (1736), a work
which gained for him the title of "The Bacon of Theology."

521. Progress in Science and Invention.

Sir Isaac Newton revolutionized natural philosophy by his discovery
and demonstration of the law of gravitation, and Dr. William Harvey
accomplished as great a change in physiological science by his
discovery of the circulation of the blood.  The most remarkable
invention of the age was a rude steam engine, patented in 1698 by
Captain Savery, and so far improved by Thomas Newcomen in 1712 that it
was used for pumping water in coal mines for many years.  Both were
destined to be superseded by James Watt's engine, which belongs to a
later period (1765).

522. Architecture.

The Gothic style of the preceding periods was followed by the Italian,
or classical, represented in the works of Inigo Jones and
Sir Christopher Wren.  It was a revival, in modified form, of the
ancient Greek and Roman architecture.  St. Paul's Cathedral, the
grandest church ever built in England for Protestant worship, is the
best example of this style.  Many beautiful manor houses were built in
the early part of this period, which, like the churches of the time,
were often ornamented with the exquisite wood carving of Grinling
Gibbons.  There were no great artists in England in this age, though
Charles I employed Rubens and other foreign painters to decorate the
palace of Whitehall and Windsor Castle.

523. Education.

The higher education of the period was confined almost wholly to the
study of Latin and Greek.  The discipline of all schools was extremely
harsh.  Nearly every lesson was emphasized by a liberal application of
the rod, and the highest recommendation a teacher could have was that
he was known as "a learned and lashing master."

                V. General Industry and Commerce

524. Manufactures.

Woolen goods continued to be a chief article of manufacture.  Silks
were also produced by thousands of Huguenot weavers, who fled from
France to England in order to escape the persecutions of Louis XIV.
Coal was now extensively mined, and iron and pottery works were giving
industrial importance to Birmingham and other growing towns in the
Midlands.

525. Commerce.

A permanent English colony was established in America in 1607, and by
1714 the number of such colonies had increased to twelve.  During a
great part of this period intense commercial rivalry existed between
England and Holland, each of which was anxious to get the monopoly of
the colonial import and export trade.  Parliament passed stringent
navigation laws, under Cromwell and later, to prevent the Dutch from
competing with English merchants and shippers.  The East India and
South Sea companies were means of greatly extending English commercial
enterprise, as was also the tobacco culture of Virginia.

