first touched at, is called Hayti; another province adjoining it, they
call Xamana;[295-5] and the next province is named Bohio,[295-6] where we
now are. These provinces are again subdivided, for they are of great
extent. Those who have seen the length of its coast, state that it is two
hundred leagues long, and I myself should judge it not to be less than a
hundred and fifty leagues: as to its breadth, nothing is hitherto known;
it is now forty days since a caravel left us with the view of
circumnavigating it,[296-1] and is not yet returned. The country is very
remarkable, and contains a vast number of large rivers, and extensive
chains of mountains, with broad open valleys, and the mountains are very
high; it does not appear that the grass is ever cut throughout the year.
I do not think they have any winter in this part, for at Christmas were
found many birds-nests, some containing the young birds, and others
containing eggs. No four-footed animal has ever been seen in this or any
of the other islands, except some dogs of various colors, as in our own
country, but in shape like large house-dogs;[296-2] and also some little
animals, in color and fur like a rabbit, and the size of a young rabbit,
with long tails, and feet like those of a rat; these animals climb up the
trees, and many who have tasted them, say they are very good to
eat:[296-3] there are not any wild beasts.

There are great numbers of small snakes, and some lizards, but not many;
for the Indians consider them as great a luxury as we do pheasants; they
are of the same size as ours, but different in shape. In a small adjacent
island[296-4] (close by a harbor called Monte Cristo, where we stayed
several days), our men saw an enormous kind of lizard, which they said
was as large round as a calf, with a tail as long as a lance, which they
often went out to kill: but bulky as it was, it got into the sea, so that
they could not catch it.[297-1] There are, both in this and the other
islands, an infinite number of birds like those in our own country, and
many others such as we had never seen. No kind of domestic fowl has been
seen here, with the exception of some ducks in the houses in Zuruquia;
these ducks were larger than those of Spain, though smaller than
geese,--very pretty, with flat crests on their heads, most of them as
white as snow, but some black.

We ran along the coast of this island nearly a hundred leagues,
concluding, that within this range we should find the spot where the
Admiral had left some of his men, and which we supposed to be about the
middle of the coast. As we passed by the province called Xamana, we sent
on shore one of the Indians, who had been taken in the previous voyage,
clothed, and carrying some trifles, which the Admiral had ordered to be
given him. On that day died one of our sailors, a Biscayan, who had been
wounded in the affray with the Caribbees, when they were captured, as I
have already described, through their want of caution. As we were
proceeding along the coast, an opportunity was afforded for a boat to go
on shore to bury him, the boat being accompanied by two caravels to
protect it. When they reached the shore, a great number of Indians came
out to the boat, some of them wearing necklaces and ear-rings of gold,
and expressed a wish to accompany the Spaniards to the ships; but our men
refused to take them, because they had not received permission from the
Admiral. When the Indians found that they would not take them, two of
them got into a small canoe, and went up to one of the caravels that had
put in to shore; they were received on board with great kindness, and
taken to the Admiral's ship, where, through the medium of an interpreter,
they related that a certain king had sent them to ascertain who we were,
and to invite us to land, adding that they had plenty of gold, and also
of provisions, to which we should be welcome. The Admiral desired that
shirts, and caps, and other trifles, should be given to each of them, and
said that as he was going to the place where Guacamari dwelt, he would
not stop then, but that another time there would be an opportunity of
seeing him, and with that they departed. We continued our route till we
came to an harbor called Monte Cristi, where we remained two days, in
order to observe the character of the land; for the Admiral had an
objection to the spot where his men had been left with the view of making
a settlement. We went on shore therefore to see the character of the
land: there was a large river of excellent water close by;[298-1] but the
ground was inundated, and very ill-calculated for habitation. As we went
on making our observations on the river and the land, some of our men
found two dead bodies by the river's side, one with a rope round his
neck, and the other with one round his foot; this was on the first day of
our landing. On the following day they found two other corpses farther
on, and one of these was observed to have a great quantity of beard; this
was regarded as a very suspicious circumstance by many of our people,
because, as I have already said, all the Indians are beardless. This
harbor is twelve leagues[298-2] from the place where the Spaniards had
been left under the protection of Guacamari,[298-3] the king of that
province, whom I suppose to be one of the chief men of the island. After
two days we set sail for that spot, but as it was late when we arrived
there,[298-4] and there were some shoals, where the Admiral's ship had
been lost, we did not venture to put in close to the shore, but remained
that night at a little less than a league from the coast, waiting until
the morning, when we might enter securely. On that evening, a canoe,
containing five or six Indians, came out at a considerable distance from
where we were, and approached us with great celerity. The Admiral
believing that he insured our safety by keeping the sails set, would not
wait for them; they, however, perseveringly rowed up to us within a
cannon shot[299-1] and then stopped to look at us; but when they saw that
we did not wait for them, they put back and went away. After we had
anchored that night at the spot in question,[299-2] the Admiral ordered
two cannons to be fired, to see if the Spaniards, who had remained with
Guacamari, would fire in return, for they also had cannons with them; but
when we received no reply, and could not perceive any fires, nor the
slightest symptom of habitations on the spot, the spirits of our people
became much depressed, and they began to entertain the suspicion which
the circumstances were naturally calculated to excite. While all were in
this desponding mood, and when four or five hours of the night had passed
away, the same canoe which we had seen in the evening, came up, and the
Indians with a loud voice addressed the captain of the caravel, which
they first approached, inquiring for the Admiral;[299-3] they were
conducted to the Admiral's vessel, but would not go on board till he had
spoken to them, and they had asked for a light, in order to assure
themselves that it was he who conversed with them. One of them was a
cousin of Guacamari, who had been sent by him once before: it appeared,
that after they had turned back the previous evening, they had been
charged by Guacamari with two masks of gold as a present; one for the
Admiral, the other for a captain who had accompanied him on the former
voyage. They remained on board for three hours, talking with the Admiral
in the presence of all of us, he showing much pleasure in their
conversation, and inquiring respecting the welfare of the Spaniards whom
he had left behind. Guacamari's cousin replied, that those who remained
were all well, but that some of them had died of disease, and others had
been killed in quarrels that had arisen amongst them; and that Guacamari
was at some distance, lying ill of a wound in his leg, which was the
occasion of his not appearing, but that he would come on the next day. He
said also that two kings named Caonabo and Mayreni, had come to fight
with him and that they had burned the village. The Indians then departed,
saying they would return on the following day with the said Guacamari,
and left us consoled for that night. On the morning of the next day, we
were expecting that Guacamari would come; and, in the meantime, some of
our men landed by command of the Admiral, and went to the spot where the
Spaniards had formerly been: they found the building which they had
inhabited, and which they had in some degree fortified with a palisade,
burnt and levelled with the ground; they found also some cloaks and
clothing which the Indians had brought to throw upon the house. They
observed too that the Indians who were seen near the spot, looked very
shy, and dared not approach, but, on the contrary, fled from them. This
appeared strange to us, for the Admiral had told us that in the former
voyage, when he arrived at this place, so many came in canoes to see us,
that there was no keeping them off; and as we now saw that they were
suspicious of us, it gave us a very unfavorable impression. We threw
trifles, such as hawk bells[300-1] and beads, towards them, in order to
conciliate them, but only four, a relation of Guacamari's and three
others, took courage to enter the boat, and were rowed on board. When
they were asked concerning the Spaniards, they replied that all of them
were dead; we had been told this already by one of the Indians whom we
had brought from Spain, and who had conversed with the two Indians that
on the former occasion came on board with their canoe, but we had not
believed it. Guacamari's kinsman was asked who had killed them; he
replied that the king of Caonabo and king Mayreni had made an attack upon
them, and burnt the buildings on the spot, that many were wounded in the
affray, and among them Guacamari, who had received a wound in his thigh,
and had retired to some distance. He also stated that he wished to go and
fetch him; upon which some trifles were given to him, and he took his
departure for the place of Guacamari's abode. All that day we remained in
expectation of them, and when we saw that they did not come, many
suspected that the Indians who had been on board the night before, had
been drowned; for they had had wine given them two or three times, and
they had come in a small canoe that might be easily upset. The next
morning the Admiral went on shore, taking some of us with him; we went to
the spot where the settlement had been, and found it utterly destroyed by
fire, and the clothes of the Spaniards lying about upon the grass, but on
that occasion we saw no dead body. There were many different opinions
amongst us; some suspecting that Guacamari himself was concerned in the
betrayal and death of the Christians; others thought not, because his own
residence was burnt: so that it remained a very doubtful question. The
Admiral ordered all the ground which had been occupied by the
fortifications of the Spaniards to be searched, for he had left orders
with them to bury all the gold that they might get. While this was being
done, the Admiral wished to examine a spot at about a league's distance,
which seemed to be suitable for building a town, for it was already time
to do so;--and some of us went thither with him, making our observations
of the land as we went along the coast, until we reached a village of
seven or eight houses, which the Indians forsook when they saw us
approach, carrying away what they could, and leaving the things which
they could not remove, hidden amongst the grass, around the houses. These
people are so like beasts that they have not even the sense to select a
fitting place to live in; those who dwell on the shore, build for
themselves the most miserable hovels that can be imagined, and all the
houses are so covered with grass and dampness, that I am amazed at the
way they live. In these houses we found many things belonging to the
Spaniards, which it could not be supposed they would have bartered; such
as a very handsome Moorish mantle which had not been unfolded since it
was brought from Spain, stockings and pieces of cloth, also an anchor
belonging to the ship which the Admiral had lost here on the previous
voyage; with other articles, which the more confirmed our suspicions. On
examining some things which had been put away to keep in a basket,
closely woven and very secure, we found a man's head kept with great
care; this we judged might be the head of a father, or mother, or of some
person whom they much regarded:[302-1] I have since heard that many were
found in the same state, which makes me believe that our first impression
was the true one. After this we returned. We went on the same day to the
site of the settlement; and when we arrived, we found many Indians, who
had regained their courage, bartering gold with our men: they had
bartered to the extent of a mark;[302-2] we also learned that they had
shown where the bodies of eleven of the dead Spaniards were laid, which
were already covered with the grass that had grown over them; and they
all with one voice asserted that Caonabo and Mayreni had killed them; but
notwithstanding all this, we began to hear complaints that one of the
Spaniards had taken three women to himself, and another four; from whence
we drew the inference that jealousy was the cause of the misfortune that
had occurred. On the next morning, as no spot in that vicinity appeared
suitable for our making a settlement, the Admiral ordered a caravel to go
in one direction to look for a convenient locality, while some of us went
with him another way. In the course of our explorations, we discovered a
harbor, of great security, and a very favorable situation for a
settlement; but as it was far from where we wanted to have the gold mine,
the Admiral decided to settle only in some spot which would give us
greater certainty of attaining that object, provided the position of the
land should prove equally convenient. On our return, we found the other
caravel arrived, in which Melchior[303-1] and four or five other
trustworthy men had been exploring with a similar object. They reported
that as they went along the coast, a canoe came out to them in which were
two Indians, one of whom was the brother of Guacamari, and was recognized
by a pilot who was in the caravel. When he asked them "who goes there,"
they replied that Guacamari sent to beg the Spaniards to come on shore,
as he had his settlement near, with nearly fifty houses. The chief men of
the party then went on shore in the boat, proceeded to the place where
Guacamari was, and found him stretched on his bed, complaining of a
severe wound. They conferred with him, and inquired respecting the
Spaniards; his reply was, in accordance with the account already given by
the others, viz.--that they had been killed by Caonabo and Mayreni, who
also had wounded him in the thigh; which he showed to them bandaged up:
on seeing which, they concluded that his statement was correct. At their
departure he gave to each of them a jewel of gold, according to his
estimation of their respective merits. The Indians beat the gold into
very thin plates, in order to make masks of it, and to be able to set it
in bitumen; if it were not so prepared it could not be mounted; other
ornaments they make of it, to wear on the head and to hang in the ears
and nostrils, for these also they require it to be thin; since they set
no store by it as wealth but only for adornment. Guacamari desired them
by signs and as well as he was able, to tell the Admiral that as he was
thus wounded, he prayed him to have the goodness to come to see him. The
sailors told this to the Admiral when he arrived. The next morning he
resolved to go thither, for the spot could be reached in three hours,
being scarcely three leagues distance from the place where we were; but
as it would be the dinner-hour when we arrived, we dined before we went
on shore. After dinner, the Admiral gave orders that all the captains
should come with their barges to proceed to the shore, for already on
that morning, previous to our departure, the aforesaid brother of
Guacamari had come to speak with the Admiral to urge him to come to the
place where Guacamari was. Then the Admiral went on shore accompanied by
all the principal officers, so richly dressed that they would have made a
fine appearance even in any of our chief cities. He took with him some
articles as presents, having already received from Guacamari a certain
quantity of gold, and it was reasonable that he should make a
commensurate response to his acts and expressions of good-will: Guacamari
had also provided himself with a present. When we arrived, we found him
stretched upon his bed, which was made of cotton network, and, according
to their custom, suspended.[304-1] He did not arise, but made from his
bed the best gesture of courtesy of which he was capable. He showed much
feeling with tears in his eyes for the death of the Spaniards, and began
speaking on the subject, with explaining to the best of his power, how
some died of disease, others had gone to Caonabo in search of the mine of
gold, and had there been killed, and that the rest had been attacked and
slain in their own town. According to the appearance of the dead bodies,
it was not two months since this had happened. Then he presented the
Admiral with eight marks and a half of gold and five or six belts worked
with stones[304-2] of various colors, and a cap of similar jewel-work,
which I think they must value very highly, because in it was a jewel,
which was presented to him with great reverence. It appears to me that
these people put more value upon copper than gold. The surgeon of the
fleet and myself being present, the Admiral told Guacamari that we were
skilled in the treatment of human disorders, and wished that he would
shew us his wound; he replied that he was willing; upon which I said it
would be necessary that he should, if possible, go out of the house,
because we could not see well on account of the place being darkened by
the crowd of people; to this he consented, I think more from timidity
than inclination, and left the house leaning on the arm of the Admiral.
After he was seated, the surgeon approached him and began to untie the
bandage; then he told the Admiral that the wound was made with a _ciba_,
by which he meant with a stone. When the wound was uncovered, we went up
to examine it: it is certain that there was no more wound on that leg
than on the other, although he cunningly pretended that it pained him
much. Ignorant as we were of the facts, it was impossible to come to a
definite conclusion. There were certainly many proofs of an invasion by a
hostile people, so that the Admiral was at a loss what to do; he with
many others thought, however, that for the present, and until they could
ascertain the truth, they ought to conceal their distrust; for after
ascertaining it, they would be able to claim whatever indemnity they
thought proper. That evening Guacamari accompanied the Admiral to the
ships, and when they showed him the horses and other objects of interest,
their novelty struck him with the greatest amazement;[305-1] he took
supper on board, and returned that evening to his house. The Admiral
told him that he wished to settle there and to build houses; to which he
assented but said that the place was not wholesome, because it was very
damp: and so it most certainly was.

All this passed through the interpretation of two of the Indians who had
gone to Spain in the last voyage, and who were the sole survivors of
seven who had embarked with us; five died on the voyage, and these but
narrowly escaped. The next day we anchored in that port: Guacamari sent
to know when the Admiral intended leaving, and was told that he would do
so on the morrow. The same day Guacamari's brother, and others with him,
came on board, bringing gold to barter: on the day of our departure also
they bartered a great quantity of gold. There were ten women on board, of
those who had been taken in the Caribbee islands, principally from
Boriquen, and it was observed that the brother of Guacamari spoke with
them; we think that he told them to make an effort to escape that night;
for certainly during our first sleep they dropped themselves quietly into
the water, and went on shore, so that by the time they were missed they
had reached such a distance that only four could be taken by the boats
which went in pursuit, and these were secured when just leaving the
water: they had to swim considerably more than half a league. The next
morning the Admiral sent to desire that Guacamari would cause search to
be made for the women who had escaped in the night, and that he would
send them back to the ships. When the messengers arrived they found the
place forsaken and not a soul there; this made many openly declare their
suspicions, but others said they might have removed to another village,
as was their custom. That day we remained quiet, because the weather was
unfavorable for our departure. On the next morning the Admiral resolved
that as the wind was adverse, it would be well to go with the boats to
inspect a harbor on the coast at two leagues distance further up,[306-1]
to see if the formation of the land was favorable for a settlement; and
we went thither with all the ship's boats, leaving the ships in the
harbor. As we moved along the coast the people manifested a sense of
insecurity, and when we reached the spot to which we were bound all the
natives had fled. While we were walking about this place we found an
Indian stretched on the hill-side, close by the houses, with a gaping
wound in his shoulder caused by a dart, so that he had been disabled from
fleeing any further. The natives of this island fight with sharp darts,
which they shoot with straps in the same manner as boys in Spain shoot
their little darts, and with these they shoot with considerable skill to
a great distance; and certainly upon an unarmed people these weapons are
calculated to do serious injury. The man told us that Caonabo and his
people had wounded him and burnt the houses of Guacamari. Thus we are
still kept in uncertainty respecting the death of our people, on account
of the paucity of information on which to form an opinion, and the
conflicting and equivocal character of the evidence we have obtained. We
did not find the position of the land in this port favorable for healthy
habitation, and the Admiral resolved upon returning along the upper coast
by which we had come from Spain, because we had had tidings of gold in
that direction. But the weather was so adverse that it cost more labor to
sail thirty leagues in a backward direction than the whole voyage from
Spain; so that, what with the contrary wind and the length of the
passage, three months had elapsed when we landed.[307-1] It pleased God,
however, that through the check upon our progress caused by contrary
winds, we succeeded in finding the best and most suitable spot that we
could have selected for a settlement, where there was an excellent
harbor[307-2] and abundance of fish, an article of which we stand in
great need from the scarcity of meat. The fish caught here are very
singular and more wholesome than those of Spain. The climate does not
allow the fish to be kept from one day to another, for it is hot and
moist, so that all animal food[308-1] spoils very quickly. The land is
very rich for all purposes; near the harbor there are two rivers: one
large,[308-2] and another of moderate breadth somewhat near it; the water
is of a very remarkable quality. On the bank of it is being built a city
called Marta,[308-3] one side of which is bounded by the water with a
ravine of cleft rock so that at that part there is no need of
fortification; the other half is girt with a plantation of trees so thick
that a rabbit could scarcely pass through it; and so green that fire will
never be able to burn it. A channel has been commenced for a branch of
the river, which the managers say they will lead through the middle of
the settlement, and will place on it grist-mills and saw-mills and mills
of other kinds requiring to be worked by water. Great quantities of
vegetables have been planted, which certainly attain a more luxuriant
growth here in eight days than they would in Spain in twenty. We are
frequently visited by numbers of Indians, among whom are some of their
_caciques_ or chiefs, and many women. They all come loaded with
_ages_,[308-4] which are like turnips, very excellent for food, which we
dressed in various ways. This food was so nutritious as to prove a great
support to all of us after the privations we endured when at sea, which
were more severe than ever were suffered by man; for as we could not tell
what weather it would please God to send us on our voyage, we were
obliged to limit ourselves most rigorously with regard to food, in order
that, at all events, we might at least have the means of supporting life.
This _age_ the Caribbees call _nabi_, and the Indians _hage_.[326-1] The
Indians barter gold, provisions, and everything they bring with them, for
tips of lacings, beads, and pins, and pieces of porringers and dishes.
They all, as I have said, go naked as they were born, except the women of
this island, who have their private parts covered, some with a covering
of cotton, which they bind round their hips, while others use grass and
leaves of trees.[326-2] When they wish to adorn themselves, both men and
women paint themselves, some black, others white, and various colors, in
so many devices that the effect is very laughable;[326-3] they shave some
parts of their heads, and in others wear long tufts of matted hair, which
have an indescribably ridiculous appearance: in short, whatever would be
looked upon in our country as characteristic of a madman, is here
regarded by the highest of the Indians as a mark of distinction.

In our present position, we are in the neighborhood of many mines of
gold, not one of which, we are told, is more than twenty or twenty-five
leagues off: the Indians say that some of them are in Niti, in the
possession of Caonabo, who killed the Christians; the others are in
another place called Cibao, which, if it please God, we shall see with
our eyes before many days are over; indeed we should go there at once,
but that we have so many things to provide that we are not equal to it at
present. One third of our people have fallen sick within the last four or
five days, which I think has principally arisen from the toil and
privations of the journey; another cause has been the variableness of the
climate; but I hope in our Lord that all will be restored to health. My
idea of this people is, that if we could converse with them, they would
all become converted, for they do whatever they see us do, making
genuflections before the altars at the _Ave Maria_ and the other parts of
the devotional service, and making the sign of the cross. They all say
that they wish to be Christians, although in truth they are idolaters,
for in their houses they have many kinds of figures; when asked what such
a figure was, they would reply it is a thing of _Turey_, by which they
meant "of Heaven." I made a pretence of throwing them on the fire, which
grieved them so that they began to weep: they believe that everything we
bring comes from Heaven, and therefore call it _Turey_, which, as I have
already said, means heaven in their language. The first day that I went
on shore to sleep, was the Lord's day. The little time that we have spent
on land, has been so much occupied in seeking for a fitting spot for the
settlement, and in providing necessaries, that we have had little
opportunity of becoming acquainted with the products of the soil, yet
although the time has been so short, many marvellous things have been
seen. We have met with trees bearing wool, of a sufficiently fine quality
(according to the opinion of those who are acquainted with the art) to be
woven into good cloth; there are so many of these trees that we might
load the caravels with wool, although it is troublesome to collect, for
the trees are very thorny,[310-1] but some means may be easily found of
overcoming this difficulty. There are also cotton trees, perennials, as
large as peach trees, which produce cotton in the greatest
abundance.[310-2] We found trees producing wax as good both in color and
smell as bees-wax and equally useful for burning; indeed there is no
great difference between them.[310-3] There are vast numbers of trees
which yield surprisingly fine turpentine; and there is also a great
abundance of tragacanth, also very good. We found other trees which I
think bear nutmegs, because the bark tastes and smells like that spice,
but at present there is no fruit on them; I saw one root of ginger, which
an Indian wore hanging round his neck. There are also aloes; not like
those which we have hitherto seen in Spain, but no doubt they are one of
the species used by us doctors.[311-1] A sort of cinnamon also has been
found; but, to tell the truth, it is not so fine as that with which we
are already acquainted in Spain. I do not know whether this arises from
ignorance of the proper season to gather it, or whether the soil does not
produce better. We have also seen some lemon-colored myrobolans; at this
season they are all lying under the trees, and have a bitter flavor,
arising, I think, from the rottenness occasioned by the moisture of the
ground; but the taste of such parts as have remained sound, is that of
the genuine myrobolan.[311-2] There is also very good mastic.[311-3] None
of the natives of these islands, as far as we have yet seen, possess any
iron; they have, however, many tools, such as axes and adzes, made of
stone, which are so handsome and well finished, that it is wonderful how
they contrive to make them without the use of iron. Their food consists
of bread, made of the roots of a vegetable which is between a tree and a
vegetable, and the _age_,[311-4] which I have already described as being
like the turnip, and very good food; they use, to season it, a spice
called _agi_,[311-5] which they also eat with fish, and such birds as
they can catch of the many kinds which abound in the island. They have,
besides, a kind of grain like hazel-nuts very good to eat. They eat all
the snakes, and lizards, and spiders, and worms, that they find upon the
ground;[312-1] so that, to my fancy, their bestiality is greater than
that of any beast upon the face of the earth. The Admiral had at one time
determined to leave the search for the mines until he had first
despatched the ships which were to return to Spain, on account of the
great sickness which had prevailed among the men,[312-2] but afterwards
he resolved upon sending two bands under the command of two captains, the
one to Cibao, and the other to Niti, where, as I have already said,
Caonabo lived. These parties went, one of them returning on the
twentieth, and the other on the twenty-first of January. The party that
went to Cibao saw gold in so many places as to seem almost incredible,
for in truth they found it in more than fifty streamlets and rivers, as
well as upon their banks; so that, the captain said they had only to seek
throughout that province, and they would find as much as they wished. He
brought specimens from the different parts, namely, from the sand of the
rivers and small springs. It is thought, that by digging, it will be
found in greater pieces, for the Indians neither know how to dig nor have
the means of digging more than a hand's depth. The other captain, who
went to Niti, returned also with news of a great quantity of gold in
three or four places; of which he likewise brought specimens.[313-1]

Thus, surely, their Highnesses the King and Queen may henceforth regard
themselves as the most prosperous and wealthy sovereigns in the world;
never yet, since the creation, has such a thing been seen or read of; for
on the return of the ships from their next voyage, they will be able to
carry back such a quantity of gold as will fill with amazement all who
hear of it. Here I think I shall do well to break off my narrative. I
think those who do not know me, who hear these things, may consider me
prolix, and a man who has exaggerated somewhat, but God is my witness,
that I have not exceeded, by one tittle, the bounds of truth.[313-2]

FOOTNOTES:

[283-1] There is a gap here in the text of the original which has been
filled by taking the corresponding words in Bernaldez's text.

[284-1] Major here translated _algun dia_ "one day." It should be "some
days." Bernaldez has _algunos dias_, and Coma says the tarry at Gomera
was nearly six days.

[284-2] _La nao Capitana_ means the flagship. The name of the flagship on
the second voyage was _Marigalante_. _Historie_ of Ferdinand Columbus,
cap. XLV. (London, ed. 1867), p. 137.

[284-3] October 27.

[285-1] The island of Dominica, which is so called from having been
discovered on a Sunday. _Historie_, p. 137.

[285-2] The island Marigalante, which was so called from the name of the
ship in which Columbus sailed. _Historie_, _ibid._

[285-3] Marigalante.

[286-1] One would infer from this that it was the fruit of the
_manzanillo_, which produces similar effects. (Navarrete.) On the
Manzanillo (Manchineel), see Oviedo, lib. IX., cap. XII. He says the
Caribs used it in making their arrow poisons.

[286-2] Guadeloupe.

[288-1] It was Diego Marquez, the inspector, who with eight other men
went on shore into the interior of the island, without permission from
the Admiral, who caused him to be sought for by parties of men with
trumpets, but without success. One of those who were sent out with this
object was Alonzo Ojeda, who took with him forty men, and on their return
they reported that they had found many aromatic plants, a variety of
birds, and some considerable rivers. The wanderers were not able to find
their way to the ships until the 8th of November. [Navarrete, condensed
from Las Casas, _Historia de las Indias_, II. 7-8.]

[288-2] Tayno was also the tribal name of these people, who
differentiated themselves from the Caribs. Peter Martyr reports the
assertions of the followers of Guacamari that they were Taynos not
Caribs: "Se Tainos, id est, nobiles esse, non Canibales, inclamitant."
_De Rebus Oceanicis_, Dec. I., lib. II., p. 25. (Cologne ed. of 1574.)

[289-1] Las Casas, _Historia de las Indias_, II. 8, remarks of these
bones, "They must have belonged to lords or persons whom they loved since
it is not probable that they belonged to those they ate, because if they
ate as many as some say, the cabins would not hold all the bones and
skulls, and it seems that after having eaten them there would be no
object in keeping the skulls and bones for relics unless they belonged to
some very notable enemies. The whole matter is a puzzle."

[289-2] The name _Caribe_ here obviously has begun to have the meaning
"cannibal," which is in origin the same word.

[289-3] This practice still survives among the Caribs. Im Thurn describes
it in almost the same words as Dr. Chanca. See _Among the Indians of
Guiana_, p. 192.

[290-1] These are the native names for Dominica (Ceyre) and Guadeloupe
(Turuqueira and Ayay), which consists of two islands separated by a
narrow channel.

[291-1] They left on Sunday, the 10th of November. Las Casas, _Historia_,
II. 9.

[291-2] The island Montserrat. Las Casas, _ibid._

[291-3] The island of St. Martin. Las Casas, _ibid._

[293-1] Dominica.

[293-2] Santa Cruz. November 14. Las Casas, _ibid._

[294-1] The Admiral named the largest of these islands St. Ursula, and
all the others The Eleven Thousand Virgins. Las Casas, _Historia_, II.
10.

[294-2] The island of Porto Rico, to which the Admiral "gave the name of
St. John the Baptist, which we now call Sant Juan and which the Indians
called Boriquen." Las Casas, II. 10.

[295-1] See note to Journal, September 29. Frigate-bird is the accepted
English name; a species of pelican.

[295-2] Porto Rico.

[295-3] On Friday, the 22d of November, the Admiral first caught sight of
the island of Espanola. Las Casas, II. 10.

[295-4] Cape Engano, in the island of Espanola. (Navarrete.)

[295-5] Preserved in the Bay of Samana.

[295-6] See Journal, October 21. and note.[TN-6]

[296-1] Of this voyage of exploration there seems to be no record. Our
natural sources, the _Historie_ and Las Casas, are silent. Columbus
suspended his writing in his Journal from December 11, 1493, till March
12, 1494. Antonio de Torres sailed for Spain February 2, 1494, when Dr.
Chanca sent off his letter. Probably this exploration was begun about
December 20.

[296-2] _Unos gosques grandes_. The French translation has _gros
carlins_, "large pug-dogs." Bernaldez calls these dogs, _gozcos
pequenos_, "small curs." "Cur" is the common meaning for _gozque_ or
_gosque_. See Oviedo, lib. XII., cap. V., for a description of these
native dogs which soon became extinct.

[296-3] Bernaldez, II. 34, supplies the native name, _Utia_. Oviedo, lib.
XII., cap. I., describes the _hutia_. When he wrote it had become so
scarce as to be seen only on rare occasions. It was extinct in Du
Tertre's time, a century later. Of the four allied species described by
Oviedo, the _hutia_, the _quemi_, the _mohuy_, and the _cori_ (agouti),
only the last has survived to the present day.

[296-4] Cabra, or Goat Island, between Puerto de Plata and Cas Rouge
Point. (Major.)

[297-1] Apparently the cayman or South American alligator.

[298-1] The river Yaque.

[298-2] It is only seven leagues. (Navarrete.)

[298-3] This chief's name is Guacanagari in Las Casas, _Historia de las
Indias_, and in the _Historie_ of Ferdinand Columbus, Goathanari in the
Syllacio-Coma letter, Guacanari in Bernaldez and Guaccanarillus in Peter
Martyr's _De Rebus Oceanicis_.

[298-4] The admiral anchored at the entrance of the harbor of Navidad, on
