the town of Fougeres being quite safe, began one of those desperate
struggles which denoted the character of Chouan warfare.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil now comprehended the presence of the masses
of men she had seen as she left the town, the meeting of the leaders at
d'Orgemont's house, and all the other events of the night, wondering
how she herself had escaped so many dangers. The attack, prompted
by desperation, interested her so keenly that she stood motionless,
watching the living pictures as they presented themselves to her sight.
Presently the struggle at the foot of the mountain had a deeper interest
for her. Seeing the Blues almost masters of the Chouans, the marquis and
his friends rushed into the valley of the Nancon to support their men.
The rocks were now covered with straggling groups of furious combatants
deciding the question of life or death on a ground and with weapons that
were more favorable to the Goatskins. Slowly this moving arena widened.
The Chouans, recovering themselves, gained the rocks, thanks to the
shrubs and bushes which grew here and there among them. For a moment
Mademoiselle de Verneuil felt alarmed as she saw, rather late, her
enemies swarming over the summit and defending the dangerous paths by
which alone she could descend. Every issue on the mountain was occupied
by one or other of the two parties; afraid of encountering them she left
the tree behind which she had been sheltering, and began to run in
the direction of the farm which d'Orgemont had mentioned to her. After
running some time on the slope of Saint-Sulpice which overlooks the
valley of Couesnon she saw a cow-shed in the distance, and thought it
must belong to the house of Galope-Chopine, who had doubtless left his
wife at home and alone during the fight. Mademoiselle de Verneuil hoped
to be able to pass a few hours in this retreat until it was possible for
her to return to Fougeres without danger. According to all appearance
Hulot was to triumph. The Chouans were retreating so rapidly that she
heard firing all about her, and the fear of being shot made her hasten
to the cottage, the chimney of which was her landmark. The path she was
following ended at a sort of shed covered with a furze-roof, supported
by four stout trees with the bark still on them. A mud wall formed the
back of this shed, under which were a cider-mill, a flail to thresh
buckwheat, and several agricultural implements. She stopped before one
of the posts, unwilling to cross the dirty bog which formed a sort of
courtyard to the house which, in her Parisian ignorance, she had taken
for a stable.

The cabin, protected from the north wind by an eminence towering above
the roof, which rested against it, was not without a poetry of its
own; for the tender shoots of elms, heather, and various rock-flowers
wreathed it with garlands. A rustic staircase, constructed between the
shed and the house, enabled the inhabitants to go to the top of the rock
and breathe a purer air. On the left, the eminence sloped abruptly down,
giving to view a series of fields, the first of which belonged no doubt
to this farm. These fields were like bowers, separated by banks which
were planted with trees. The road which led to them was barred by the
trunk of an old, half-rotten tree,--a Breton method of enclosure the
name of which may furnish, further on, a digression which will complete
the characterization of this region. Between the stairway cut in the
schist rock and the path closed by this old tree, in front of the marsh
and beneath the overhanging rock, several granite blocks roughly hewn,
and piled one upon the other, formed the four corners of the cottage and
held up the planks, cobblestones, and pitch amalgam of which the walls
were made. The fact that one half of the roof was covered with furze
instead of thatch, and the other with shingles or bits of board cut into
the form of slates, showed that the building was in two parts; one half,
with a broken hurdle for a door, served as a stable, the other half was
the dwelling of the owner. Though this hut owed to the neighborhood of
the town a few improvements which were wholly absent from such buildings
that were five or six miles further off, it showed plainly enough the
instability of domestic life and habits to which the wars and customs of
feudality had reduced the serf; even to this day many of the peasants of
those parts call a seignorial chateau, "The Dwelling."

While examining the place, with an astonishment we can readily conceive,
Mademoiselle de Verneuil noticed here and there in the filth of the
courtyard a few bits of granite so placed as to form stepping-stones
to the house. Hearing the sound of musketry that was evidently coming
nearer, she jumped from stone to stone, as if crossing a rivulet, to ask
shelter. The house was closed by a door opening in two parts; the lower
one of wood, heavy and massive, the upper one a shutter which served as
a window. In many of the smaller towns of France the shops have the
same type of door though far more decorated, the lower half possessing a
call-bell. The door in question opened with a wooden latch worthy of the
golden age, and the upper part was never closed except at night, for it
was the only opening through which daylight could enter the room. There
was, to be sure, a clumsy window, but the glass was thick like the
bottom of a bottle, and the lead which held the panes in place took so
much room that the opening seemed intended to intercept the light
rather than admit it. As soon as Mademoiselle de Verneuil had turned the
creaking hinges of the lower door she smelt an intolerable ammoniacal
odor, and saw that the beasts in the stable had kicked through the inner
partition which separated the stable from the dwelling. The interior of
the farmhouse, for such it was, did not belie its exterior.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil was asking herself how it was possible for
human beings to live in such habitual filth, when a ragged boy about
eight or nine years old suddenly presented his fresh and rosy face, with
a pair of fat cheeks, lively eyes, ivory teeth, and a mass of fair
hair, which fell in curls upon his half-naked shoulders. His limbs were
vigorous, and his attitude had the charm of that amazement and naive
curiosity which widens a child's eyes. The little fellow was a picture
of beauty.

"Where is your mother?" said Marie, in a gentle voice, stooping to kiss
him between the eyes.

After receiving her kiss the child slipped away like an eel, and
disappeared behind a muck-heap which was piled at the top of a mound
between the path and the house; for, like many Breton farmers who have
a system of agriculture that is all their own, Galope-Chopine put his
manure in an elevated spot, so that by the time it was wanted for use
the rains had deprived it of all its virtue. Alone for a few minutes,
Marie had time to make an inventory. The room in which she waited for
Barbette was the whole house. The most obvious and sumptuous object was
a vast fireplace with a _mantle_-shelf of blue granite. The etymology of
that word was shown by a strip of green serge, edged with a pale-green
ribbon, cut in scallops, which covered and overhung the whole shelf, on
which stood a colored plaster cast of the Holy Virgin. On the pedestal
of the statuette were two lines of a religious poem very popular in
Brittany:--

  "I am the mother of God,
  Protectress of the sod."

Behind the Virgin a hideous image, daubed with red and blue under
pretence of painting, represented Saint-Labre. A green serge bed of the
shape called "tomb," a clumsy cradle, a spinning-wheel, common chairs,
and a carved chest on which lay utensils, were about the whole of
Galope-Chopine's domestic possessions. In front of the window stood a
chestnut table flanked by two benches of the same wood, to which the
sombre light coming through the thick panes gave the tone of mahogany.
An immense cask of cider, under the bung of which Mademoiselle de
Verneuil noticed a pool of yellow mud, which had decomposed the
flooring, although it was made of scraps of granite conglomerated in
clay, proved that the master of the house had a right to his Chouan
name, and that the pints galloped down either his own throat or that of
his friends. Two enormous jugs full of cider stood on the table. Marie's
attention, caught at first by the innumerable spider's-webs which hung
from the roof, was fixing itself on these pitchers when the noise
of fighting, growing more and more distinct, impelled her to find a
hiding-place, without waiting for the woman of the house, who, however,
appeared at that moment.

"Good-morning, Becaniere," said Marie, restraining a smile at the
appearance of a person who bore some resemblance to the heads which
architects attach to window-casings.

"Ha! you come from d'Orgemont?" answered Barbette, in a tone that was
far from cordial.

"Yes, where can you hide me? for the Chouans are close by--"

"There," replied Barbette, as much amazed at the beauty as by the
strange apparel of a being she could hardly believe to be of her own
sex,--"there, in the priest's hiding-place."

She took her to the head of the bed, and was putting her behind it,
when they were both startled by the noise of a man springing into the
courtyard. Barbette had scarcely time to drop the curtain of the bed
and fold it about the girl before she was face to face with a fugitive
Chouan.

"Where can I hide, old woman? I am the Comte de Bauvan," said the
new-comer.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil quivered as she recognized the voice of the
belated guest, whose words, still a secret to her, brought about the
catastrophe of La Vivetiere.

"Alas! monseigneur, don't you see, I have no place? What I'd better do
is to keep outside and watch that no one gets in. If the Blues come,
I'll let you know. If I stay here, and they find me with you, they'll
burn my house down."

Barbette left the hut, feeling herself incapable of settling the
interests of two enemies who, in virtue of the double role her husband
was playing, had an equal right to her hiding-place.

"I've only two shots left," said the count, in despair. "It will be very
unlucky if those fellows turn back now and take a fancy to look under
this bed."

He placed his gun gently against the headboard behind which Marie was
standing among the folds of the green serge, and stooped to see if there
was room for him under the bed. He would infallibly have seen her
feet, but she, rendered desperate by her danger, seized his gun, jumped
quickly into the room, and threatened him. The count broke into a peal
of laughter when he caught sight of her, for, in order to hide herself,
Marie had taken off her broad-brimmed Chouan hat, and her hair was
escaping, in heavy curls, from the lace scarf which she had worn on
leaving home.

"Don't laugh, monsieur le comte; you are my prisoner. If you make the
least movement, you shall know what an offended woman is capable of
doing."

As the count and Marie stood looking at each other with differing
emotions, confused voices were heard without among the rocks, calling
out, "Save the Gars! spread out, spread out, save the Gars!"

Barbette's voice, calling to her boy, was heard above the tumult with
very different sensations by the two enemies, to whom Barbette was
really speaking instead of to her son.

"Don't you see the Blues?" she cried sharply. "Come here, you little
scamp, or I shall be after you. Do you want to be shot? Come, hide,
quick!"

While these things took place rapidly a Blue jumped into the marshy
courtyard.

"Beau-Pied!" exclaimed Mademoiselle de Verneuil.

Beau-Pied, hearing her voice, rushed into the cottage, and aimed at the
count.

"Aristocrat!" he cried, "don't stir, or I'll demolish you in a wink,
like the Bastille."

"Monsieur Beau-Pied," said Mademoiselle de Verneuil, in a persuasive
voice, "you will be answerable to me for this prisoner. Do as you like
with him now, but you must return him to me safe and sound at Fougeres."

"Enough, madame!"

"Is the road to Fougeres clear?"

"Yes, it's safe enough--unless the Chouans come to life."

Mademoiselle de Verneuil picked up the count's gun gaily, and smiled
satirically as she said to her prisoner, "Adieu, monsieur le comte, au
revoir!"

Then she darted down the path, having replaced the broad hat upon her
head.

"I have learned too late," said the count, "not to joke about the virtue
of a woman who has none."

"Aristocrat!" cried Beau-Pied, sternly, "if you don't want me to send
you to your _ci-devant_ paradise, you will not say a word against that
beautiful lady."

Mademoiselle de Verneuil returned to Fougeres by the paths which connect
the rocks of Saint-Sulpice with the Nid-aux-Crocs. When she reached the
latter height and had threaded the winding way cut in its rough granite,
she stopped to admire the pretty valley of the Nancon, lately so
turbulent and now so tranquil. Seen from that point, the vale was like
a street of verdure. Mademoiselle de Verneuil re-entered the town by the
Porte Saint-Leonard. The inhabitants, still uneasy about the fighting,
which, judging by the distant firing, was still going on, were waiting
the return of the National Guard, to judge of their losses. Seeing the
girl in her strange costume, her hair dishevelled, a gun in her hand,
her shawl and gown whitened against the walls, soiled with mud and wet
with dew, the curiosity of the people was keenly excited,--all the more
because the power, beauty, and singularity of this young Parisian had
been the subject of much discussion.

Francine, full of dreadful fears, had waited for her mistress throughout
the night, and when she saw her she began to speak; but Marie, with a
kindly gesture, silenced her.

"I am not dead, my child," she said. "Ah!" she added, after a pause, "I
wanted emotions when I left Paris, and I have had them!"

Francine asked if she should get her some food, observing that she must
be in great need of it.

"No, no; a bath, a bath!" cried Mademoiselle de Verneuil. "I must dress
at once."

Francine was not a little surprised when her mistress required her to
unpack the most elegant of the dresses she had brought with her. Having
bathed and breakfasted, Marie made her toilet with all the minute care
which a woman gives to that important act when she expects to meet the
eyes of her lover in a ball-room. Francine could not explain to herself
the mocking gaiety of her mistress. It was not the joy of love,--a
woman never mistakes that; it was rather an expression of concentrated
maliciousness, which to Francine's mind boded evil. Marie herself drew
the curtains of the window from which the glorious panorama could be
seen, then she moved the sofa to the chimney corner, turning it so that
the light would fall becomingly on her face; then she told Francine to
fetch flowers, that the room might have a festive air; and when they
came she herself directed their arrangement in a picturesque manner.
Giving a last glance of satisfaction at these various preparations she
sent Francine to the commandant with a request that he would bring her
prisoner to her; then she lay down luxuriously on a sofa, partly to
rest, and partly to throw herself into an attitude of graceful weakness,
the power of which is irresistible in certain women. A soft languor, the
seductive pose of her feet just seen below the drapery of her gown,
the plastic ease of her body, the curving of the throat,--all, even the
droop of her slender fingers as they hung from the pillow like the buds
of a bunch of jasmine, combined with her eyes to produce seduction. She
burned certain perfumes to fill the air with those subtle emanations
which affect men's fibres powerfully, and often prepare the way for
conquests which women seek to make without seeming to desire them.
Presently the heavy step of the old soldier resounded in the adjoining
room.

"Well, commandant, where is my captive?" she said.

"I have just ordered a picket of twelve men to shoot him, being taken
with arms in his hand."

"Why have you disposed of my prisoner?" she asked. "Listen to me,
commandant; surely, if I can trust your face, the death of a man _after_
a fight is no particular satisfaction to you. Well, then, give my Chouan
a reprieve, for which I will be responsible, and let me see him. I
assure you that aristocrat has become essential to me, and he can be
made to further the success of our plans. Besides, to shoot a mere
amateur in Chouannerie would be as absurd as to fire on a balloon when
a pinprick would disinflate it. For heaven's sake leave cruelty to the
aristocracy. Republicans ought to be generous. Wouldn't you and yours
have forgiven the victims of Quiberon? Come, send your twelve men to
patrol the town, and dine with me and bring the prisoner. There is only
an hour of daylight left, and don't you see," she added smiling, "that
if you are too late, my toilet will have lost its effect?"

"But, mademoiselle," said the commandant, amazed.

"Well, what? But I know what you mean. Don't be anxious; the count shall
not escape. Sooner or later that big butterfly will burn himself in your
fire."

The commandant shrugged his shoulders slightly, with the air of a man
who is forced to obey, whether he will or no, the commands of a pretty
woman; and he returned in about half an hour, followed by the Comte de
Bauvan.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil feigned surprise and seemed confused that the
count should see her in such a negligent attitude; then, after reading
in his eyes that her first effect was produced, she rose and busied
herself about her guests with well-bred courtesy. There was nothing
studied or forced in her motions, smiles, behavior, or voice, nothing
that betrayed premeditation or purpose. All was harmonious; no part was
over-acted; an observer could not have supposed that she affected the
manners of a society in which she had not lived. When the Royalist and
the Republic were seated she looked sternly at the count. He, on his
part, knew women sufficiently well to feel certain that the offence he
had committed against this woman was equivalent to a sentence of death.
But in spite of this conviction, and without seeming either gay or
gloomy, he had the air of a man who did not take such serious results
into consideration; in fact, he really thought it ridiculous to fear
death in presence of a pretty woman. Marie's stern manner roused ideas
in his mind.

"Who knows," thought he, "whether a count's coronet wouldn't please her
as well as that of her lost marquis? Montauran is as lean as a nail,
while I--" and he looked himself over with an air of satisfaction. "At
any rate I should save my head."

These diplomatic revelations were wasted. The passion the count proposed
to feign for Mademoiselle de Verneuil became a violent caprice, which
the dangerous creature did her best to heighten.

"Monsieur le comte," she said, "you are my prisoner, and I have the
right to dispose of you. Your execution cannot take place without
my consent, and I have too much curiosity to let them shoot you at
present."

"And suppose I am obstinate enough to keep silence?" he replied gaily.

"With an honest woman, perhaps, but with a woman of the town, no, no,
monsieur le comte, impossible!" These words, full of bitter sarcasm,
were hissed, as Sully says, in speaking of the Duchesse de Beaufort,
from so sharp a beak that the count, amazed, merely looked at his
antagonist. "But," she continued, with a scornful glance, "not to
contradict you, if I am a creature of that kind I will act like one.
Here is your gun," and she offered him his weapon with a mocking air.

"On the honor of a gentleman, mademoiselle--"

"Ah!" she said, interrupting him, "I have had enough of the honor of
gentlemen. It was on the faith of that that I went to La Vivetiere. Your
leader had sworn to me that I and my escort should be safe there."

"What an infamy!" cried Hulot, contracting his brows.

"The fault lies with monsieur le comte," said Marie, addressing Hulot.
"I have no doubt the Gars meant to keep his word, but this gentleman
told some calumny about me which confirmed those that Charette's
mistress had already invented--"

"Mademoiselle," said the count, much troubled, "with my head under the
axe I would swear that I said nothing but the truth."

"In saying what?"

"That you were the--"

"Say the word, mistress of--"

"The Marquis de Lenoncourt, the present duke, a friend of mine," replied
the count.

"Now I can let you go to execution," she said, without seeming at all
agitated by the outspoken reply of the count, who was amazed at the real
or pretended indifference with which she heard his statement. "However,"
she added, laughing, "you have not wronged me more than that friend of
whom you suppose me to have been the--Fie! monsieur le comte; surely you
used to visit my father, the Duc de Verneuil? Yes? well then--"

Evidently considering Hulot one too many for the confidence she was
about to make, Mademoiselle de Verneuil motioned the count to her
side, and said a few words in her ear. Monsieur de Bauvan gave a low
ejaculation of surprise and looked with bewilderment at Marie, who
completed the effect of her words by leaning against the chimney in the
artless and innocent attitude of a child.

"Mademoiselle," cried the count, "I entreat your forgiveness, unworthy
as I am of it."

"I have nothing to forgive," she replied. "You have no more ground for
repentance than you had for the insolent supposition you proclaimed
at La Vivetiere. But this is a matter beyond your comprehension. Only,
remember this, monsieur le comte, the daughter of the Duc de Verneuil
has too generous a spirit not to take a lively interest in your fate."

