done neither one thing nor the other. They have been loaded with
gifts, but forbidden to come here. Yet since they came, in spite of
orders, we have seemed as if we feared to meet them; and I blush at
the thought of the treacherous plan to destroy them, at Cholula.

"The gods had prophesied that they would find their grave there.
But the gods were wrong; and it may be that the God of the whites
is more powerful than ours. If not, how is it that they did not
avenge the indignities offered to them by the whites, at Cempoalla,
where their images were hurled down from their altars? And at
Cholula, where the most sacred of all the temples was attacked and
captured, and the emblem of the White God set up on its summit?

"You yourself, Roger Hawkshaw, warned us against these Spaniards.
You said that they were cruel masters to the people they had
conquered, and above all things cruel in the matter of religion,
forcing all who came under their sway to accept their God, under
pain of death; and that they would slay even you, a white man like
themselves, did they know that you did not belong to their people.
Tell us what is to be done. Why are these men in our capital? What
are their objects? Brave and strong as they are, they cannot hope
to overcome a nation, or to force all Anahuac to forsake their own
gods and to accept the God of the whites."

"I know not what are the designs of Cortez, the leader whom you
call Malinzin. I should say the Spaniards are here with several
motives. In the first place, there is the desire for wealth and
spoil; in the second, religious ardor--the desire to bring all
within the pale of their Church; in the third place, the love of
adventure; and, lastly, the honor they will receive, at the hands
of their sovereign, for opening so rich an empire to his arms."

"You do not think, then, they intend to conquer us?"

"Cortez cannot think of doing so, with the means at his disposal,
Cacama; but doubtless he has sent home reports of the richness of
the country, and forces many times more numerous than those under
his command may be sent out to his assistance."

"Does he know that you have come hither?" Cacama asked suddenly.

"He does," Roger replied. "I could not leave the palace without
permission, and Malinche told him of the kindness I had experienced
at your hands. He himself is uneasy at the position in which he
finds himself, uncertain of Montezuma's intentions, and fearful of
an assault; and he bade me try to find out, as far as might be,
what was the general opinion respecting the Spaniards."

"The opinion of the ignorant," Cacama said, with a contemptuous
wave of the hand, "is worth nothing. They go where they are led.
They believe what they are last told. They shout when they are told
to shout. They have no opinion of their own, upon aught but what
relates to themselves.

"Among the nobles, the priests, and the learned there is much
division of opinion. At present we wait; but frankly, at any moment
a storm may follow the calm. The priests, who of course are
bitterly hostile to the strangers, are without doubt working, and
they have great power with all. But I should say that, on the
whole, you are safer here with me than you would be across the
water there. I do not mean that there is any immediate danger, but
you must remember that Montezuma has been insulted and humiliated,
and made to appear small in the sight of the people. He is one of
the proudest of men, and although at present he feigns friendship
with the Spaniards, a moment will come when he will revolt against
being thus bearded in his capital; and he has but to wave his hand
for these invaders to be wiped out.

"However, let us talk of other matters, at present. Of course, you
are not thinking of returning tonight?"

"I intended to do so, and the canoe in which I came is waiting for
me."

"We cannot think of letting you go," Cacama said, decidedly. "I
will send an official back, with a message from you saying that you
think you can do more, here, than by returning; and that you crave
leave to stay for the present, but that you will come over, in the
morning, and report to him all that you have learned here. You can
leave here soon after daybreak, see your general, and be back again
before the full heat of the day."

As Roger was in no hurry to return, Cuitcatl went out to dispatch
an official with the message to Cortez; or rather to Malinche, as
the message would then be delivered privately to him; whereas if
Cortez were asked for, the man might be brought into his presence
when engaged with some of his officers. Roger did not know whether
the fact of his being away from the palace had been made public,
for Cortez might consider it would cause discontent among some of
his followers, were it known that their last-joined recruit was
permitted to leave the town, whereas no one else was allowed to
stir beyond the limits of their quarters.



Chapter 15: Again At Tezcuco.


Until a late hour in the night, Roger sat talking to Cacama and his
family. Although they had heard, from Bathalda, all that had
happened from the time of their leaving Tezcuco to their arrival at
Tlascala, he had to go over it again. Bathalda had told them that
Roger had found a former acquaintance in Malinche, who was all
powerful with the white leaders; and Amenche asked many questions
concerning her--how Roger had known her before, and for how long;
what she was like, and why he applied to her, instead of going
straight to the white general.

"You have heard me speak of her before," Roger said, in answer to
the first question. "I told you that I had learned your language
from a Mexican slave girl, who was one of my attendants during the
time I was at Tabasco. She was with me the whole time I was there,
and if it had not been for learning the language from her, and
conversing with her, I do not know how I should have got through
the time. I was sorry to leave her behind, and promised her that,
if ever I got rich enough here, I would send and purchase her
freedom."

"You seem to have taken a strange interest in a slave girl!"
Amenche said.

"It was natural that it should be so, Princess. I was little better
than a slave, myself. At any rate I was a prisoner, and naturally
took to the one person who was kind to me. We were companions and
friends, rather than master and attendant; and directly I heard
that she was with Cortez, and had gained great influence with him,
I naturally went to her."

"Is she very beautiful?"

"I used not to think her beautiful at all, when we were at Tabasco
together; but she has changed greatly during the months that have
passed since I saw her. Yes, I think she is certainly beautiful
now. But not so beautiful as others I have seen."

"But why did you go to her?" the girl again persisted.

"Because I cannot speak the language of the Spaniards; and it was
necessary, for my safety, for them to believe that I am one of
themselves, rescued from some Spanish ship cast, by a gale, on
their shores when I was a little lad. Had I gone to Cortez direct,
he would probably have guessed, from my dress and from my speaking
the language, that this was how I came to be here; but had I not
seen Malinche before I saw him, she would have recognized me, and
would no doubt have told Cortez that she had known me from the time
I was cast ashore, near Tabasco, somewhat over two years ago. He
would then have known that I could not be a Spaniard, for if so, I
could not in so short a time have lost my own language."

Cacama now interposed, and asked many questions about Tlascala and
its people.

"Some of the Tlascalan princes and caziques gave their daughters as
wives to the Spaniards, did they not?"

"Six of them did so," Roger replied. "The ladies were first
baptized into the Christian religion, and then married by the
priests to as many of the chief leaders of the Spaniards."

"And what did you think of that?" Cacama asked.

"I did not think much about it," Roger said; "for it was no
business of mine, but that of the ladies and their friends. It was
certainly a politic course, on the part both of Cortez and the
Tlascalans, and bound the alliance more closely together.

"But methinks that, upon such work as the Spaniards are engaged in,
a man were better without a wife, both for his sake and her own. A
man who goes into battle with no one but himself to think of may
take joy in the strife; for he knows that, if he falls, it makes no
very great matter to anyone. But if he has a wife hard by, who will
be left a widow if he is slain, it must be ever present to him
while he is fighting; and though he may not fight less stoutly, it
must cause him grievous anxiety, and take away the pleasure of
fighting."

"You have already told us that the white men are good husbands,"
the queen said.

"I do not know that they are in any way better, in that respect,
than your own people, Queen Maclutha. There are good and bad--men
who treat their wives well, and men who neglect them."

"But you told us that they only had one wife, each," she said; "and
that even kings are kept to this rule, as well as their humblest
subjects."

"That is so," Roger said. "One man one wife, whatever his rank.
There is no occasion for the palaces of our king to be as extensive
as those of Montezuma."

"And if these officers who have married here were to return home,
and leave their wives behind them, could they not marry again?"

"No," Roger said; "as the ladies have become Christians, and been
married according to the rites of the Church, they could not be
lawfully set aside."

"And you have no wife in England, Roger Hawkshaw?" Cacama asked.

Roger laughed merrily.

"Why, I was but a boy when I left home; and as far as marriage
goes, I am but a boy still. We consider it young enough, if we take
a wife at five and twenty; and I lack six years of that, yet."

"You are a man," Cacama said gravely. "You are a man in size and
strength, and a man in courage; as you well showed, the other day,
when you were attacked by numbers of our best soldiers. You are
thoughtful and prudent. Years go for nothing. You are a man, and
even in years you are not, according to our customs, too young to
marry.

"Now, tell me--we have heard much of that bad business at
Cholula--tell me, do you think that there was treachery on the part
of the people, or was it a mere pretext of the Spaniards to fall
upon the inhabitants, and sack the town?"

"I am sure that treachery was intended," Roger said. "We learned it
from three people, a lady and two priests; and the Cholula nobles,
themselves, when taxed by Cortez with their intention to fall upon
us, admitted that the accusation was true. Besides, the whole
people were under arms and ready to attack, and poured out under
their leaders to the assault, the moment the first gun told that
their intentions were discovered. No, there is no doubt, whatever,
that a general destruction of the white men was intended; and
although the punishment inflicted was terrible, I cannot say that
it was not justified, under the circumstances.

"Moreover, we knew that there was a Mexican army, lying but a short
distance away, in readiness to enter the town and join in the
attack against us."

"It was a terrible error, as well as a crime on the part of the
emperor, if it be true that he was concerned in it," Cacama said.
"If so, he took no one here into his counsel, but acted wholly on
the advice of the priests."

"That is where the general considers the danger lies. He would
trust the caziques, for men of rank in whatever country are
faithful to their word, and do not pretend friendship when they
mean hostility. Were Montezuma guided by them, there would be no
fear of treachery; but as he has given himself to the priests, and
they can, by means of the oracles, persuade him to almost anything,
Cortez feels that the danger is great."

"Well now, we had better to rest," Cacama said, rising. "You are to
start with the first streak of light, so as to be back before the
sun is high, and it is long past midnight now.

"Cuitcatl, it would, I think, be well for you to accompany our
friend. A rumor may have got abroad that he is again our guest, and
those who longed for his blood, before, may long for it again. I
would not that he should cross the lake unattended."

"I was about to propose doing so," the young noble said. "I know
the priests, and can guess that, at present, a white victim is what
they most of all desire. Therefore, I will certainly accompany him
to Mexico."

Roger and his Mexican friend were taken across the lake in a canoe,
rowed by four strong men. It was one of the private canoes of the
palace, without the royal insignia; used for the conveyance of
messengers, and built for speed. She took them across to the
capital in a very short time and, entering one of the canals,
landed them close to the palace occupied by the Spaniards.

The sentry at the gate was surprised at the height of the young
Aztec chief who approached, and did not recognize him until he
spoke. Even then he would not let him pass, until he called an
officer.

"I have been absent by the order of the general," Roger said.

"I have no doubt it is all right," the officer replied, "but I must
take you to him."

Cortez had only just risen, for the hour was still very early, and
the sun was but now showing himself over the mountains to the east.
He was taking a cup of chocolate.

"That is all right," he said to the officer, as soon as he saw
Roger. "Sancho has been absent upon my orders."

He then called Malinche from an adjoining room.

"You are back earlier than I expected," he said, as soon as the
interpreter entered. "Have you any serious news?"

"No, General. Cacama is himself friendly. He is unaware of any
treacherous designs on the part of the emperor, but admits that the
situation is a critical one, and that it is possible the influence
of the priests may again induce Montezuma to take a hostile
action."

"Do you think we could count upon him as an ally?"

"I think not, sir; although I have not as yet sounded him. Cacama
has been very badly treated by Montezuma, and he by no means
approves of the emperor's conduct throughout this matter, but I
think that his patriotism would overcome his sense of private
wrong. I can tell you more farther on. Cacama has invited me to
stay with him, for the present, and I think I might be of more use
to you there than here."

"I think so, too," Cortez said; "and indeed, you have not yet
entered my band regularly, like the rest. It is right that you
should have freedom of action, especially as you are the only man
among us who knows anything of the Mexicans; for even Marina knows
nothing of this side of the mountains."

"Don't you think that you will run great risk in staying there
alone?" Marina asked, on her own account.

"Some danger, no doubt, Malinche; but I shall be on my guard, and
Cacama will take precautions for my safety. Even the priests would
not venture to seize me in his palace, and the Tezcucans are far
less bigoted than the people of this city."

"I do not think he will be in much greater danger there than he
would be here," Cortez said, when these remarks were translated to
him. "We are all in danger. We are sitting on a mine that may
explode any minute. The young fellow is sharp witted, and with his
knowledge of the language and the people can be trusted to take
care of himself.

"Sancho, if anything should happen to us, and you should hear that
we have been destroyed, I charge you to carry the news to the
coast, and to order in my name that all shall embark on board ship
and sail to Cuba. It would be useless to try to maintain a foothold
here. Spain would avenge it, and with ampler means than mine carry
out the conquest of this country."

A few minutes later, Roger, having said goodbye to Juan and Pedro,
and told them that he might be absent for some time, started to
Tezcuco. They had scarcely left the town, when a canoe with six
rowers issued from one of the canals and followed in their wake.

"See, they are after us!" Cuitcatl said, looking back. "Doubtless
the Spanish quarters are closely watched, to see who enter and
leave them; and the news that a tall young noble had entered was
carried at once to the authorities, and the boat was got in
readiness to follow when you left, and see who you were and where
you were going. However, they will not overhaul us. I bade the
officer in charge of the canoes last night to pick me out four of
his best men, and in so light a boat we shall travel as fast as
that behind us, although they have two extra hands."

"Yes, and they have four sitters," Roger said, looking back.

"No doubt they had orders to arrest you, and bring you back. They
did not reckon on our speed. The two extra men destroy their
chances of coming up to us, altogether.

"Row hard, men. I don't want that boat to overtake us."

The paddlers redoubled their exertions, and the light boat almost
flew along over the water. For a few minutes those in the canoe
behind also did their utmost; but it was plain that they were
falling behind, rather than gaining. Then one of the officials
stood up, and shouted an order for them to stop. They were some
distance behind, but the words could be plainly heard.

The Tezcucans looked scared as they heard the words, "In the name
of the Emperor."

"Never mind them," Cuitcatl said. "We are acting under the orders
of our king. Besides, we are so far away that they cannot be sure
their words are heard. If they have any complaint to make they can
make it to Cacama, and he will answer them."

The boat was soon out of hearing of its pursuer, who fell farther
and farther behind, and was a good mile away when they landed at
Tezcuco.

"Run the boat up and lay her by the side of the others," Cuitcatl
said to the rowers. "Then go at once to your homes, and say naught
to anyone about the journey you have made. The officials will find
out what they want to know as to whom we are, and will care nothing
as to who were the individual boatmen who rowed us. Still, it is as
well to keep silent.

"Of course, Roger," for the lad had asked him to drop the second
part of his name, "it will soon be known that you have returned
here. With such numbers of persons in the palace, it cannot be
hidden; besides, you are well known, by sight, to most people in
the town."

"I quite see that, Cuitcatl, and perceive no good in trying in any
way to conceal myself. These long legs of mine cannot be got rid
of, and tell their story too plainly. However, it makes no
difference. I shall be safe in the palace, and shall only go abroad
in the daytime. They will not venture to try to carry off, openly,
one known to be under Cacama's protection."

Cacama, on their return, agreed with Roger that it was of no use to
try to conceal his identity; and the lad, after washing the stains
from his face and hands, took his accustomed place at the banquet,
and was greeted by many of his former acquaintances.

After the meal Cacama told him that, having heard from Bathalda of
the wonderful shooting he had made with his great bow, he was
desirous of seeing it; and that by his orders the forester, who had
been sent for the evening before by Cuitcatl, had been directing
some of the artisans to manufacture a weapon of similar strength.

"We will go and see how it is getting on," he said.

Proceeding to the workshops attached to the palace, they found that
the bow was finished. It was constructed of a very tough, but
elastic, wood. Three slips of this had been placed together and
bound with sinews. Bathalda ran forward when he saw Roger, and
taking his hand carried it to his forehead. Roger shook the stout
fellow's hand, heartily.

"He is a brave fellow," he said to Cuitcatl, who had accompanied
them, "and fought manfully and well. Had he not guarded my back
during the fight, I should not be here to tell the tale, now."

"We have made the bow according to our instructions," the head of
the artisans said respectfully to the king; "but it does not seem
to us possible that anyone can use it. Three of us have tried
together to string it, but in vain."

"It is a good bow," Roger said, examining it.

"Do they shoot with weapons like that, over there?" Cacama asked,
nodding in the direction of Mexico.

"No," Roger said, "for the most part they use crossbows, and their
bows are much smaller than this. The English are the only people
who use bows like this. They are our national weapons, and outside
our island there are few, indeed, who can even bend them. As to the
stringing, it is knack rather than strength. See here," and taking
the bow, which was just his own height, he placed his knee against
it, bent it and slipped the string into the notch, with ease. Then
holding it at arms length, he drew it till the string touched his
ear.

"It is a great deal stiffer than that I made before, Bathalda; and
is about the strength of those we use at home. Now for the arrows."

These had been made by another set of men, and were an inch or two
over a yard in length, with copper tips.

While he was examining them Cacama had taken up the bow, but though
a strong and vigorous man for his race, he could bend it but a very
short distance.

"It is a wonderful weapon," he said, "and I should not have thought
that mortal man, whatever his color, could have used it. Now, let
us go down into the practice yard.

"Cuitcatl, do you fetch the queen and her ladies, to look on."

"I am no great marksman, Prince," Roger said. "I am perhaps
somewhat better than an average shot, but I have seen marksmen who
could do feats that I would not even attempt."

They descended to the piece of ground, where many of the young
nobles were engaged in shooting, and in practice with arms. Roger
had often been there before, but had carefully abstained from
taking any part in the mimic contests; for he knew that men who are
beaten sometimes feel malice, and he was anxious to keep on the
best terms with all. Cuitcatl had often urged him to try a bout
with himself, or others, with the sword; but this, too, he had
always declined, and his friend had supposed that he was aware his
skill was by no means equal to his strength. But now the Spaniards
had proved to the Mexicans the fighting powers of white men, Roger
had no longer any reasons for hanging back.

As soon as he was seen approaching with Cacama, the Mexicans
abandoned their sport, and gathered round. The story of the defeat
of a band of Montezuma's soldiers by the white man had been
whispered abroad, and Cuitcatl had mentioned to his friends what he
had heard, from Bathalda, of the mighty bow Roger had used; but
when they saw the weapon with which he was now provided, their
wonder was to a large extent mingled with incredulity. They passed
it from hand to hand, tried but in vain to bend it, and murmured
among themselves that the thing was impossible.

"What will you have for your mark," Cacama asked.

"One of these targets will do well enough," he said, pointing to
those at which the Mexicans had been shooting.

These were boards about five feet six in height, and some fourteen
inches in width, presenting the size of a man. They were painted
white and supported by a leg hinged behind them. The distance at
which the Mexicans had been shooting was about forty yards.

Roger stepped a hundred from one of them, and made a mark upon the
ground.

"An English archer would laugh at a target like that," he said to
Cacama, "but it is nigh three years since I practiced. I have seen
men who could with certainty, at this distance, hit a bird the size
of a pigeon sitting on the top of that target, twenty times in
succession, and think it by no means extraordinary shooting."

The queen and some of her ladies now appeared upon a terrace
looking down into the courtyard. Roger took the bow, fitted an
arrow to the string, and drew it to his ear--a murmur of
astonishment rising from the Aztecs. There was a pause for a
moment, and then the arrow sped. There was a sharp tap as it struck
the target, and stood quivering in it just in the center line about
four feet from the ground.

"The bow is an excellent one," Roger said, and quickly discharged
two more arrows, both of which struck within two or three inches of
the first. As it was the power of the bow, rather than his own
shooting, that Roger wished to exhibit, he now had the target
removed a hundred yards farther back, and others placed one on each
side of it. At this distance he discharged three more arrows,
shooting more carefully than before. All three struck the boards,
although at varying heights; and a shout of surprise arose from the
lookers on.

"How far will it carry?" Cacama asked.

"It might carry another hundred yards, but the aim cannot be
depended upon at over two hundred yards, even by good shots," Roger
said. "Of course, the longer ranges are useful for firing at a body
of men. I should say that large tree would be about the extreme
range. If you will send two men down to it, I will see whether I
can shoot as far. We should not see the arrow from here. Will you
tell them to stand one on each side of the tree, but well away from
it? There is no saying where the arrow may go, at this distance."

When two of the attendants had taken their places, twenty or thirty
yards from the tree, Roger drew the bow to the fullest and, giving
to the arrow the elevation he had been taught, as most suitable for
an extreme range, unloosed the string. The arrow, which was of dark
