men so skillfully, although many of them had never been under fire
before, that the Indians were at length repulsed. One of Harrison's
orders, which probably saved his army, was to extinguish the campfires,
so that white and Indian fought in the darkness on equal terms. The
American loss was thirty-seven killed and 151 wounded, and that of the
Indians somewhat smaller. In effect Tippecanoe was a decisive victory for
the Americans, and broke the spell in which Tecumseh and the Prophet had
held the tribes.

                        *          *          *

The War of 1812 revived the hopes of the great Indian chieftain, and with
the rank of brigadier-general in the British army he set about to assist
General Isaac Brock, the Governor of Upper Canada, in the task of
wresting the Northwest from the Americans. General William Hull, an uncle
of Captain Isaac Hull, the commander of the Constitution, was Governor of
the Territory of Michigan, which had been organized in 1805 and now
contained about 5000 inhabitants. To General Hull was given the command
of the forces intended for defensive and offensive operations on the
Upper Lakes. A small garrison of United States troops was stationed at
Michilimacinac and one at Chicago, which were the outposts of
civilization. The English near Detroit appear to have been aware of the
declaration of war before the news reached General Hull, and while the
latter was moving with an extreme caution excusable only on the ground of
age, Brock swiftly laid out and as swiftly entered upon an aggressive
campaign. The American outposts were captured by the British and Indians,
and the garrison of Fort Dearborn--Chicago--was cruelly massacred. On
this occasion Mr. John Kinzie, the first settler at Chicago, who as a
trader was much liked by the Indians, did noble service, with his
excellent wife, in saving the lives of the soldiers' families. Mrs.
Heald, the wife of Captain Heald, was ransomed for ten bottles of whiskey
and a mule, just as an Indian was about to scalp her.

At this critical juncture General Hull was weakened, and the British
forces opposed to him were encouraged by the news that General Henry
Dearborn, commander of the American troops in the Northern Department,
instead of invading Canada from the Niagara frontier, in obedience to his
instructions, had agreed to a provisional armistice with Sir George
Prevost, the governor-general of Canada. The ground for the armistice was
that England had revoked the orders in council obnoxious to Americans,
five days after the declaration of war by the United States, and that
intended peace negotiations would therefore have in all probability a
happy result. As a matter of fact England had not yielded, and had no
intention, as it proved, of yielding on the question of impressment,
which was the principal American grievance. But even if England had
surrendered every point it was an outrageous assumption on the part of
General Dearborn to depart from the line of military instructions and
military duty upon any representation foreign to that duty. By his error
in this regard General Dearborn injured the American cause more than a
severe defeat would have done, leaving as he did General Hull and his
handful of men, who were not included in the armistice, to bear the brunt
of British hostility. The government at Washington disapproved General
Dearborn's course, and the armistice was cancelled, but not in time to
prevent the loss of Detroit.

General Hull had only eight hundred men in Detroit when General Brock
attacked the place by land and water, with a much more numerous force of
British and Indians, assisted by ships of war. It is often asserted that
General Hull surrendered the place without serious defence. This is not
true. In addition to the official statements of both sides, and General
Hull's own vindication, the journal of an Ohio soldier named Claypool who
was in the American ranks at the time, shows that the Americans returned
the British fire vigorously during August 15, and for several hours on
the following day, when General Hull, in view of the overwhelming force
opposed to him, capitulated. General Hull was afterward tried by
court-martial and sentenced to death, but the sentence was not carried
out, the United States escaping a stain like that which attaches to
England for the fate of Admiral Byng. Hull had proven during the
Revolution that he was no coward. Whatever may have been his errors of
judgment before the surrender, at the time of the surrender Detroit was
indefensible.

                        *          *          *

The English were now masters of Michigan Territory, and the western
forests were alive with Indians on the warpath. Fort Wayne was besieged,
and Captain Zachary Taylor bravely defended Fort Harrison. General
Harrison, appointed to the command of the Northwestern army, promptly
relieved both posts, and the government ordered that ten thousand men
should be raised to recover Detroit and invade Canada. General James
Winchester, in command of the advance corps of Harrison's forces,
imprudently engaged in conflict with a much more numerous body of British
at Frenchtown, on the River Raisin. Nearly all his troops, numbering
about eight hundred, were killed or captured, and some of the captives
were massacred. General Winchester himself was taken prisoner. Soon
afterward the British General Proctor issued a proclamation requiring the
citizens of Michigan to take the oath of allegiance to the British crown,
or leave the Territory. The American residents in Detroit, under the
terms of the capitulation, remained undisturbed in their homes, but their
hearts were continually wrung by the spectacle of cruelties practiced by
Indian allies of the British upon American captives. Many families parted
with all but necessary wearing apparel to redeem the sufferers, and
private houses were turned into hospitals for their relief. Mr. Kinzie,
of Chicago, who was now a paroled prisoner in Detroit, was foremost in
this work of patriotism and humanity.

The defeat at the River Raisin was a hard blow to General Harrison,
especially as the troops to make up his army of ten thousand men were
slow in arriving. He did not lose courage, however, and when General
Proctor sent an imperious demand for the surrender of Fort Meigs,
Harrison answered: "He will never have this post surrendered to him upon
any terms. Should it fall into his hands, it will be in a manner
calculated to do him more honor and to give him larger claims upon the
gratitude of his government than any capitulation could possibly do."
"There will be none of us left to kill" was the reply of Captain Crogan
at Fort Stephenson, when Proctor's messenger menaced him with Indian
vengeance, should he fail to surrender. Harrison, reinforced by General
Clay Green, from Kentucky, compelled the besiegers to withdraw, and the
heroic Crogan mowed down with one discharge of his single cannon more
than fifty of the assailants who were advancing to carry his fort by
storm. Hardly had the remainder fled when the Americans let down pails of
water from the wall of the fort for the relief of their wounded enemies.
The formation of an army for the invasion of Canada now went forward in
earnest, while the retreat of the British shook the confidence of
Tecumseh and his Indian followers in England's ability to protect them
against the Americans.

The Niagara frontier was the scene of desultory warfare, with varied
fortune for both sides. The battle of Queenstown, October 13, 1812,
although it resulted in the defeat and capture of the Americans engaged
and witnessed a pitiable exhibition of cowardice on the part of
militiamen who refused to cross the river to the aid of their countrymen,
was attended by a loss for the Canadians that more than counterbalanced
their victory, in the death of Major-General Isaac Brock, whose
well-deserved monument is a conspicuous feature of the Niagara landscape.
Among the Americans who surrendered on this occasion was Colonel Winfield
Scott, who, while himself a prisoner, took a resolute and memorable stand
against the British claim that certain Irishmen captured in the American
ranks should be sent to England to be tried for treason. The Irishmen,
twenty-three in number, were put in irons and deported to England, but in
the following May Colonel Scott, after the battle of Fort George,
selected twenty-three British prisoners, not of Irish birth, to be dealt
with as the British authorities should deal with the Irish-Americans. The
latter were finally released and returned to America, and the British
doctrine of perpetual allegiance was shattered without treaty or
diplomacy.




CHAPTER XXVI.

Battle of Lake Erie--Master-Commandant Oliver Hazard Perry--Building a
Fleet--Perry on the Lake--A Duel of Long Guns--Fearful Slaughter on the
Lawrence--"Can Any of the Wounded Pull a Rope?"--At Close Quarters--
Victory in Fifteen Minutes--"We Have Met the Enemy and They Are Ours"
--The Father of Chicago Sees the End of the Battle--The British
Evacuate Detroit--General Harrison's Victory at the Thames--Tecumseh
Slain--The Struggle in the Southwest--Andrew Jackson in Command--Battle
of Horseshoe Bend--The Essex in the Pacific--Defeat and Victory on the
Ocean--Captain Porter's Brave Defence--Burning of Newark--Massacre at
Fort Niagara--Chippewa and Lundy's Lane--Devastation by the British
Fleet--British Vandalism at Washington--Attempt on Baltimore--"The Star
Spangled Banner."


And now came the struggle for the control of Lake Erie--a struggle on
which depended whether England should succeed in preventing the western
growth of the United States, or be driven forever from the soil which
Americans claimed as their own. Master-Commandant Oliver Hazard Perry was
but twenty-six years of age when the Navy Department called him from his
pleasant home at Newport and sent him to command a navy summoned from the
primeval forests of the Northwest. Young as he was Perry had seen service
in the wars with France and Tripoli, and he had requested the Navy
Department at the commencement of the conflict with England to send him
where he could meet the enemies of his country. Perry arrived at Erie,
then known as Presque Isle, in March, 1813. Sailing Master Daniel Dobbins
and Noah Brown, a shipwright from New York, were busily at work on the
new fleet. Two brigs, the Niagara and the Lawrence, were built with white
and black oak and chestnut frames, the outside planking being of oak and
the decks of pine. Two gunboats were newly planked up, and work on a
schooner was just begun. The vessels had to be vigilantly guarded against
attack by the British, who were fully aware of the work being done. The
capture of Fort George left the Niagara River open, and several American
vessels which had been unable before to pass the Canadian batteries were
now, with great exertion, drawn into the lake. These were the brig
Caledonia, the schooners Somers, Tigress and Ohio, and the sloop Trippe.
An English squadron set out to intercept the new arrivals, but Perry
succeeded in gaining the harbor of Erie before the enemy made their
appearance.

The American ships were ready for sea on July 10, but officers and
sailors were lacking, and it was not until about the close of the month
that Perry had three hundred men to man his ten vessels. While the
British squadron, under Captain Robert Heriot Barclay maintained a
vigorous blockade, Perry found that his new brigs could not cross the bar
without landing their guns and being blocked up on scows. Commander
Barclay, thinking that Perry could not move, made a visit of ceremony
with his squadron to Port Dover, on the Canadian side. During Barclay's
absence Perry got the Lawrence and Niagara over the bar, and the British
commander was astonished, when he returned on the morning of August 5, to
see the American fleet riding at anchor, and ready for battle. Barclay
wished to delay the naval combat until after the completion at Malden of
a ten-gun ship called the Detroit, which was to be added to his force,
and he therefore put into that harbor.[1] Perry improved the delay to
exercise his crews, largely made up of soldiers, in seamanship.

      [1] Malden, on the Detroit River, eighteen miles below the city of
      Detroit, is now known as Amherstburg.

It was not until September 10 that the British squadron came out to give
battle. Master-Commandant Perry had nine vessels mounting fifty-four
guns, with 1536 pounds of metal. The British squadron consisted of six
vessels, mounting sixty-three guns, with a total weight of 852 pounds.
The American vessels were manned by 490 men and the British by 502 men
and boys. In discipline, training and physical condition, however, the
difference of crews was much more in favor of the British than the
numbers indicate. The brig Lawrence was Perry's flagship; Barclay's
pennant flew on the Detroit. As the American vessels stood out to sea
Perry hoisted a large blue flag with the words of the dying Lawrence in
white muslin--"Don't give up the ship!" He prepared for defeat as well as
for victory, by gathering all his important papers in a package weighted
and ready to be thrown overboard in the event of disaster. It may be said
that Perry fought the earlier part of the battle almost alone, a
slow-sailing brig, the Caledonia, being in line ahead of the Niagara, and
Perry, having given orders that the vessels should preserve their
stations.

In the duel of long guns the British had a decided advantage and their
fire being concentrated on the Lawrence that vessel soon became a wreck.
Of one hundred and three men fit for duty on board the American flagship,
eighty-three were killed or wounded. These figures sufficiently indicate
the carnage; but Perry fought on. "Can any of the wounded pull a rope?"
cried Perry, and mangled men crawled out to help in training the guns.
For nearly three hours the Lawrence with the schooners Ariel and
Scorpion, fought the British fleet. Then Master-Commandant Elliott, of
the Niagara, fearing Perry had been killed, undertook, notwithstanding
Perry's previous orders, to go out of line to the help of the Lawrence.
Perry then changed his flag to the Niagara, leaving orders with First
Lieutenant John J. Yarnall, of the Lawrence, to hold out to the last.
Perry at once sent Master-Commandant Elliott in a boat to bring up the
schooners, and meantime Lieutenant Yarnall, deciding that further
resistance would mean the destruction of all on board, lowered the flag
on the Lawrence. The English thought they were already victors, and gave
three cheers, but the Lawrence drifted out of range before they could
take possession of her, and the Stars and Stripes were raised again over
her blood-stained decks.

The battle had in truth only begun, but was soon to end. The remainder of
the American squadron closed in on the English vessels, raking them fore
and aft. The English officers and men were swept from their decks by the
hurricane of iron. It was the United States and the Macedonian on a
smaller scale. The American cannonade at close quarters was so fast and
furious that the British ships were soon in a condition that left no
choice save between sinking or surrender. In fifteen minutes after the
Americans closed in a British officer waved a white hand-kerchief. The
enemy had struck. Two of the English vessels, the Chippewa and the Little
Belt, sought to escape to Maiden, but were pursued and captured by the
sloop Trippe and the Scorpion.[2] Perry proceeded to the Lawrence, and on
the decks of his flagship, still slippery with blood, he received the
surrender of the English officers. Perry wrote with a pencil on the back
of an old letter his famous dispatch: "We have met the enemy, and they
are ours--two ships, two brigs, one schooner and one sloop." The
Americans lost in the battle twenty-seven killed and ninety-six wounded,
of whom twenty-two were killed and sixty-one wounded on board the
Lawrence. Twelve of the American quarter-deck officers were killed. The
British lost forty-one killed and ninety-four wounded, making a total of
one hundred and thirty-five. Commander Barclay, one of Nelson's veterans,
had lost an arm in a previous naval engagement. He gave his men an
admirable example of courage, being twice wounded, once in the thigh and
once in the shoulder, thus being deprived of the use of his remaining
arm. Captain Finnis, of the Queen Charlotte, was mortally wounded, and
died on the same evening.

      [2] "At half past two, the wind springing up, Captain Elliott was
      enabled to bring his vessel, the Niagara, into close action. I
      immediately went on board of her, when he anticipated my wish by
      volunteering to bring the schooners, which had been kept astern by
      the lightness of the wind, into close action. At forty-five minutes
      past two the signal was made for close action. The Niagara being
      very little injured I determined to pass through the enemy's line,
      bore up and passed ahead of their two ships and a brig, large
      schooner and sloop from the larboard side, at half pistol shot
      distance. The smaller vessels at this time having gotten within
      grape and canister distance, under the direction of Captain Elliott,
      and keeping up a well-directed fire, the two ships, a brig and a
      schooner, surrendered, a schooner and a sloop making a vain attempt
      to escape."--_Perry's account of the battle._

Thousands on the American and British shores witnessed or listened to the
conflict, conscious that upon the result depended the future of the
Northwest. None listened with more patriotic eagerness than John Kinzie,
already mentioned as the first resident of Chicago, then a prisoner at
Maiden, having been removed from Detroit on suspicion that he was in
correspondence with General Harrison. Kinzie was taking a promenade under
guard, when he heard the guns on Lake Erie. The time allotted to the
prisoner for his daily walk expired, but neither he nor his guard
observed the fact, so anxiously were they catching every sound from what
they now felt sure was an engagement between ships of war. At length Mr.
Kinzie was reminded that the hour for his return to confinement had
arrived. He pleaded for another half hour.

"Let me stay," said he, "till we can learn how the battle has gone."

Very soon a sloop appeared under press of sail, rounding the point, and
presently two vessels in chase of her.

"She is running--she bears the British colors," cried Kinzie--"yes, yes,
they are lowering--they are striking her flag! Now"--turning to the
soldiers, "I will go back to prison contented. I know how the battle has
gone."

The sloop was the Little Belt, the last of the British fleet to
surrender, after a vain attempt to escape. The Father of Chicago had seen
the end of the battle which made possible the Chicago of to-day.[3]

      [3] John Kinzie was born at Quebec in 1763. After the war he went
      back to Chicago, and died January 6, 1828, aged 65 years.

Perry's victory compelled the enemy to evacuate Detroit, and all their
posts in American territory except Michilimacinac, which place remained
in the possession of the British until the close of the war. Soon after
the battle of Lake Erie, General Harrison crossed to the Canadian shore,
entered Maiden, and then passed on in pursuit of Proctor and Tecumseh,
who were in full retreat up the valley of the Thames. In the battle of
the Thames, which followed, the British were completely routed, and
Tecumseh was slain. The Northwest was now secure. The British had been
driven back and their Indian ally, Tecumseh, with his great scheme of an
independent Indian power, had passed away.

                        *          *          *

In the Southwest, however, the struggle between whites and Indians
continued to rage, the latter being led by a half-breed Creek named
Weathersford. The massacre of more than four hundred men, women and
children by the Creeks at Fort Mimms, in what is now Alabama, aroused the
frontiers to fury, and Andrew Jackson, already known as "Old Hickory,"
the idol of his troops and the terror of the feeble War Department, took
the field at the head of twenty-five hundred men. He showed himself a
master of forest warfare, and in the bloody battle of Horseshoe Bend he
broke the strength of the Creeks forever. Weathersford sought the tent of
his conqueror, and asked for mercy for his people--not for himself.
Jackson, who could respect in others the courage with which he was so
eminently endowed, granted generous terms to the vanquished, and
Weathersford lived thereafter in harmony with the whites. The autumn of
1813 witnessed the subjection of the hostile Indian tribes from the Lakes
to the Gulf.

