One day intervenes between this, and the first day of the week, the day
on which the Christians as you may perhaps know assemble for their
worship. In the meantime it will be determined what course shall be
pursued.

       *       *       *       *       *

Those days have passed, Fausta, and before I seal my letter I will add
to it an account of them.

Immediately upon the publication of the Emperor's decrees, the
Christians throughout the city communicated with each other, and
resolved, their places of worship being all closed and guarded, to
assemble secretly, in some spot to be selected, both for worship and to
determine what was to be done, if anything, to shield themselves from
the greater evils which threatened. The place selected was the old ruins
where the house of Macer stands. 'There still remains,' so Macer urged,
'a vast circular apartment partly below and partly above the surface of
the ground, of massy walls, without windows, remote from the streets,
and so surrounded by fallen walls and columns as to be wholly buried
from the sight. The entrance to it was through his dwelling, and the
rooms beyond. Resorting thither when it should be dark, and seeking his
house singly and by different avenues among the ruins, there would be
little chance of observation and disturbance.' Macer's counsel was
accepted.

On the evening of the first day of the week--a day which since I had
returned from the East to Rome had ever come to me laden with both
pleasure and profit--I took my way under cover of a night without star
or moon, and doubly dark by reason of clouds that hung black and low, to
the appointed place of assembly. The cold winds of autumn were driving
in fitful blasts through the streets, striking a chill into the soul as
well as the body. They seemed ominous of that black and bitter storm
that was even now beginning to break in sorrow and death upon the
followers of Christ. Before I reached the ruins the rain fell in heavy
drops, and the wind was rising and swelling into a tempest. It seemed to
me, in the frame I was then in, better than a calm. It was moreover a
wall of defence against such as might be disposed to track and betray
us.

Entering by the door of Macer's cell, I passed through many dark and
narrow apartments, following the noise of the steps of some who were
going before me, till at length I emerged into the vaulted hall spoken
of by Macer. It was lofty and spacious, and already filled with figures
of men and women, whom the dim light of a few lamps, placed upon the
fragments of the fallen architecture, just enabled me to discern and
distinguish from the masses of marble and broken columns which strewed
the interior, which, when they afforded a secure footing, were covered
with the assembled worshippers. The footsteps of those who were the last
to enter soon died away upon the ear, and deep silence ensued, unbroken
by any sound save that of the sighs and weeping of such as could not
restrain their feelings.

It was interrupted by the voice of one who said,

'That the Christians of Rome were assembled here by agreement to consult
together concerning their affairs, which now, by reason of the sudden
hostility of Aurelian, set on by the Pagan priesthood, had assumed a
dark and threatening aspect. It was needful so to consult; that it might
be well ascertained whether no steps could be taken to ward off the
impending evil, and if not, in what manner and to what extent we might
be able to protect ourselves. But before this be done,' he continued,
'let us all first with one heart seek the blessing of God. To-day,
Christians, for the first time within the memory of the younger portion
of this assembly, have we by the wicked power of the state been shut out
of those temples where we have been wont to offer up our seventh day
worship. Here, in this deep cavern, there is none to alarm or
interrupt. Let us give our first hour to God. So shall the day not be
lost, nor the enemy wholly prevail.'

'That is right,' said another. 'It is what we all wish. Let Probus speak
to us and pray for us.'

'Felix! Felix!' cried other voices in different parts of the room.

'Not so, but Probus! Probus!' shouted a far greater number.

'Who does not know,' cried a shrill voice elevated to its utmost pitch,
'that Probus is a follower of Paul of Samosata?'

'And who does not know,' responded he who had first spoken, 'that Felix
follows after Plato and Plotinus? Pagans both!'

'And what,' said the sharp voice of Macer, 'what if both be true? who
dare say that Felix is not a Christian?--who dare say that Probus is not
a Christian? and if they are Christians, who shall dare to say they may
not speak to Christians? Probus was first asked, and let Probus stand
forth.'

The name of Probus was then uttered as it were by the whole assembly.

As he moved toward a more central and elevated spot, the same mean and
shrill voice that had first charged him, again was heard, advising that
no hymn nor chant be sung; 'the Roman watch is now abroad, and despite
the raging of the storm their ears may catch the sound and the guard be
upon us.'

'Let them come then!' shouted Macer. 'Let them come! Shall any fear of
man or of death frighten us away from the worship of God? What death
more glorious than if this moment those doors gave way and the legions
of Aurelian poured in? Praise God and Christ, Christians, in the highest
note you can raise, and let no cowardice seal your lips nor abate your
breath.'

The voice of Probus, now heard in prayer, brought a deep silence upon
the assembly, and I would fain believe, harmony and peace also into the
spirits of all who were there. It was a service deeply moving and
greatly comforting. Whatever any who were present might have thought of
the principles of Probus, all must have been penetrated and healed by
that devout and benevolent temper that was so manifest in the sentiments
he uttered, and in the very tones of his voice.

No sooner had he ended his prayer than the voice of Macer broke forth,
commencing a chant commonly heard in the churches and with which all
were familiar. His voice, louder than that of the storm and shriller
than the blast of a war-trumpet, rang through the vast apartment, and
inspiring all who were there with the same courage that possessed
himself, their voices were instinctively soon joined with his, and the
hymn swelled upward with a burst of harmony that seemed as if it might
reach Heaven itself. Rome and its legions were then as if they did not
exist. God only was present to the mind, and the thoughts with which
that hymn filled it. Its burden was like this:

'O God almighty, God of Christ our Lord, arise and defend thy people.
The terrors of death are around us the enemies of truth and thy Son
assail us, and we faint and are afraid. Their hosts are encamped against
us; they are ready to devour us. Our hope is in thee: Strengthen and
deliver us. Arise, O God, and visit us with thy salvation.'

These, and words like them, repeated with importunity and dwelt upon,
the whole soul pouring itself out with the notes, while tears ran down
the cheeks of those who sang--the sign not of weakness but of the
strength of those affections which bound their hearts to God, to Christ,
and to one another--it seemed as if such words and so uttered could not
but draw a blessing down. As the hymn drew to a close and the sounds
died away, deep silence again fell upon the assembly. The heart had been
relieved by the service; the soul had been rapt and borne quite away;
and by a common feeling an interval of rest ensued, which by each seemed
to be devoted to meditation and prayer. This, when it had lasted till
the wants of each had been satisfied, was broken by the voice of Probus.

What he said was wonderfully adapted to infuse fresh courage into every
heart, and especially to cheer and support the desponding and the timid.
He held up before them the great examples of those who, in the earlier
ages of the church, had offered themselves as sacrifices upon the same
altar upon which the great head of the Christians had laid down his
life. He made it apparent how it had ever been through suffering of some
kind on the part of some, that great benefits had been conferred upon
mankind; that they who would be benefactors of their race must be
willing cheerfully to bear the evil and suffering that in so great part
constitutes that office; and was it not a small thing to suffer, and
that in the body only, and but for a moment, if by such means great and
permanent blessings to the souls of men might be secured, and remotest
ages of the world made to rejoice and flourish through the effects of
their labors? Every day of their worship they were accustomed to hear
sung or recited the praises of those who had died for Christ and truth;
men of whom the world was not worthy, and who, beautiful with the crown
of martyrdom, were now of that glorious company who, in the presence of
God, were chanting the praises of God and the Lamb. Who was not ready to
die, if it were so ordained, if by such death truth could be transmitted
to other ages? What was it to die to-day rather than to-morrow--for that
was all--or this year rather than the next, if one's death could be made
subservient to the great cause of Christ and his gospel? What was it to
die by the sword of a Roman executioner, or even to be torn by wild
beasts, if by suffering so the soul became allied to reformers and
benefactors of all ages? And besides, what evil after all was it in the
power of their enemies to inflict? They could do no more than torment
and destroy the body. They could not touch nor harm the soul. By the
infliction of death itself they did but hasten the moment when they
should stand clothed in shining garments in the presence of the Father.
'The time has come, Christians,' he then said, 'when, in the providence
of God, you are called upon to be witnesses of the faith which you
profess in Christ. After many years of calm, a storm has arisen, which
begins already to be felt in the violence with which it beats upon our
heads. Almost ever since the reign of Decius have we possessed our
borders in quietness. Especially under Gallienus and Claudius, and
during these nearly four years of Aurelian, have we enjoyed our faith
and our worship with none to alarm or oppress us. The laws of the empire
have been as a wall of defence between us and this fierce and bloody
spirit of Pagan superstition. They who would have willingly assailed and
destroyed us have been forcibly restrained by wise and merciful
enactments. During this season of repose our numbers have increased, we
have been prosperous and happy. Our churches have multiplied, and all
the signs of an outward prosperity have been visible in all parts of
this vast empire. Would to God I could say that while numbers and wealth
have been added to the church, it had grown in grace and in the practice
of the virtues of the gospel in the same proportion! But I cannot. The
simplicity and purity of the first ages are no longer to be seen among
us. We no longer emulate the early apostles and make them our patterns.
We rather turn to the Pagan and Jewish priesthood, and in all that
pertains to the forms of our worship mould ourselves upon them; and in
all that pertains to opinion and doctrine we turn to the philosophers,
and engraft, whatever of their mysteries and subtleties we can, upon the
plain and simple truth of Jesus. We have departed far, very far, from
the gospel standard, both in practice and in faith. We need, Christians,
to be brought back. We have gone astray--we have almost worshipped other
gods,--it is needful that we return in season to our true allegiance. I
dare not say, Christians, that the calamity which now impends is a
judgment of God upon our corruptions; we know not what events are of a
judicial character, they have upon them no signature which marks them as
such; but this we may say, that it will he no calamity, but a benefit
and a blessing rather, if it have the effect to show us our errors, and
cause us to retrace our steps. Aurelian, enemy though we call him, may
prove our benefactor; he may scourge us, but the sufferings he inflicts
may bring healing along with them, being that very medicine which the
sick soul needs. Let us meet then this new and heavy trial as a part of
the providence of God, as a part of that mysterious plan--the lines of
which are in so great part hidden from our eyes--by which he educates
his children, and at the same time, and by the same means, prepares and
transmits to future generations the richest blessings. If we,
Christians, suffer for the cause of truth, if our blood is poured out
like water, let us remember that it serves to fertilize that soil out of
which divine nutriment shall grow for generations yet unborn, whom it
shall nourish up unto a better life. Let your hearts then be strong
within you; faint not, nor fear; God will be with you and his Spirit
comfort you.

'But why do I say these things? Why do I exhort you to courage? For when
was it known that the followers of Christ shrunk from the path of duty,
though it were evidently the path of death? When and in what age have
those been wanting who should bear witness to the truth, and seal it
with their blood? There have been those who in time of persecution have
fallen away--but for one apostate there have been a thousand martyrs. We
have been, I may rather affirm, too prodigal of life--too lavish of our
blood. There has been, in former ages, not only a willingness, a
readiness to die for Christ, but an eagerness. Christians have not
waited to be searched for and found by the ministers of Roman power;
they have thrust themselves forward; they have gone up of their own
accord to the tribunal and proclaimed their faith, and invited the death
at which nature trembles and revolts. But shall we blame this divine
ardor? this more than human contempt of suffering and death? this
burning zeal for the great cause of our Master? Let us rather honor and
revere it as a temper truly divine and of more than mortal force. But
let us be just to all. While we honor the courage and self-sacrificing
love of so many, let us not require that all should be such, nor cast
suspicion upon those who--loving Christ not less in their hearts--shrink
from the sufferings in which others glory. Ye need not, Christian men
and women, yourselves rush to the tribunal of Varus, ere you can feel
that you are Christ's indeed. It is not needful that to be a Christian
you must also be a martyr. Ye need not, ye ought not, impatiently seek
for the rack and the cross. It is enough if, when sought and found and
arraigned, you be found faithful; if then you deny not nor renounce your
Lord, but glory in your name, and with your dying breath shout it forth
as that for which you gladly encounter torture and death. Go not forth
then seeking the martyr's crown! Wait till you are called. God knoweth,
and he alone, whom he would have to glorify him by that death which is
so much more to be coveted than life. Leave all in the hand of
Providence. You that are not chosen, fear not that, though later, the
gates of Heaven shall not be thrown open for you. Many are the paths
that lead to those gates. Besides, shall all rush upon certain death?
Were all martyrs, where then were the seed of the church? They who live,
and by their life, consecrate to holiness and God, show that they are
his, do no less for their Master and his cause than do they who die for
that cause. Nay, 'tis easier to die well than to live well. The cross
which we bear through a long life of faithful service, is a heavier one
than that which we bear as we go up our Calvary. Leave all then,
Christian men and women, in the hands of God. Seek not death nor life.
Shun not life nor death. Say each, "Here, Lord, is thy servant, do with
him as shall seem to thee good."

'And now, Christians, how shall we receive the edict of Aurelian? It
silences our preachers, it closes our churches. What now is the duty of
the Christians of Rome?'

Soon as this question was proposed by Probus, many voices from various
parts of the room gave in their judgments. At first, the opinions
expressed differed on many points: but as the discussion was prolonged
the difference grew less and less, till unanimity seemed to be attained.
It was agreed at length, that it was right to conform to the edict so
far as this: 'That they would not preach openly in the streets nor
elsewhere; they would, at first, and scrupulously, conform to the edict
in its letter and spirit--until they had seen what could be done by
appeals both to the Emperor and the senate; but, maintaining at the same
time, that if their appeals were vain, if their churches were not
restored to them with liberty to assemble in them as formerly and for
the same purposes--then they would take the freedom that was not
granted, and use it as before, and abide by the issue; no power of man
should close their mouths as ambassadors of God, as followers of Christ
and through him reformers of the world; they would speak--they would
preach and pray, though death were the immediate reward.'

In this determination I heartily agreed as both moderate and yet firm;
as showing respect for the powers that are over us, and at the same time
asserting our own rights, and declaring our purpose to stand by them.
But so thought not all. For no sooner was the opinion of the assembly
declared than Macer broke forth:

'I have heard,' said he, 'the judgment which has been pronounced. But I
like it not--I agree not to it. Shall the minister of Christ, the
ambassador of God, a messenger from Heaven to earth, hold his peace at
the behest of a man, though he be an emperor, or of ten thousand men,
were all emperors? Not though every Christian in Rome subscribed to this
judgment, not though every Christian in the world assented to it, would
I. Is Christ to receive laws of Aurelian? Is the cause of God and truth
to be postponed to that of the empire? and posterity to die of hunger
because we refuse to till the earth? We are God's spiritual
husbandmen--the heart of Rome is our field of labor--it is already the
eleventh hour--the last days are at hand--and shall we forbear our toil?
shall we withdraw our hand from the plough? shall we cease to proclaim
the glad tidings of salvation because the doors of our churches are
closed? Not so, Christians, by the blessing of God, shall it be with me.
While the streets of Rome and her door-stones will serve me for church
and pulpit, and while my tongue is left unwrenched from my mouth, will I
not cease to declare Jesus Christ and him crucified! Think you Aurelian
will abate his wrath or change his purposes of death, for all your
humble sueing? that cringing and fawning will turn aside the messengers
of death? Believe it not. Ye know not Aurelian. More would ye gain with
him, did the faith of the peace-loving Jesus allow it, if ye went forth
in battle array and disputed this great question in the streets of Rome
sword in hand! More would ye gain now, if ye sent a word of
defiance--denying his right to interpose between God and his
people--between Christ and his church--and daring him to do his worst,
than by this tame surrender of your rights--this almost base denial of
your Master. No sooner shall tomorrow's sun have risen, than on the very
steps of the capitol will I preach Christ, and hurl the damnation of God
upon this bloody Emperor and his bloody people.'

'O, Macer, Macer! cease, cease!' cried a woman's voice from the crowd.
'You know not what you say! Already have your harsh words put new
bitterness into Aurelian's heart. Forbear, as you love Christ and us.'

'Woman--' replied Macer, 'for such your voice declares you to be--I do
love both Christ and you, and it is because I love you that I aim to set
aside this faithless judgment of the Roman Christians. But when I say I
love you and the believers in Rome, I mean your souls, not your bodies.
I love not your safety, nor your peace, nor your outward comforts; your
houses, nor your wealth, nor your children, nor your lives, nor anything
that is yours which the eye can see or the hands handle. I love your
souls, and, beside them, nothing. And while it is them I love, and for
them am bound in the spirit as a minister of Christ, I may not hold my
peace, nor hide myself, for that there is a lion in the path! As a
soldier of the cross I will never flee. Though at the last day I hear no
other word of praise from Him the judge--and no other shall I hear, for
my Pagan sins weigh me down--down--help, Lord! or I perish!--' Macer's
voice here took the tone of deepest agony; he seemed for a time wholly
lost, standing still, with outstretched arms and uplifted eye. After a
long pause he suddenly resumed. 'What did I say?--It was this: though I
hear no other word of praise from my judge as I stand at his
judgment-seat, I trust I shall hear this, that I did not flee nor hide
myself, that I was no coward, but a bold and fearless soldier of the
cross, ready at any time and at all times to suffer for the souls of my
brethren.'

'Think not, Macer,' said Probus, 'that we shrink at the prospect of
danger. But we would be not only bold and unshrinking, but wise and
prudent. There is more than one virtue goes to make the Christian man.
We think it right and wise first to appeal to the Emperor's love of
justice. We think it might redound greatly to our advantage if we could
obtain a public hearing before Aurelian, so that from one of our own
side he, with all the nobility of Rome, might hear the truth in Christ,
and then judge whether to believe so was hurtful to the state, or
deserving of torture and death.'

'As well, Probus,' replied Macer, 'might you preach the faith of Christ
in the ear of the adder! to the very stones of the highways! Aurelian
turn from a settled purpose! ha! ha! you have not served, Probus, under
him in Gaul and Asia as others have. Never did the arguments of his
legions and his great officers on the other side, serve but to intrench
him the more impregnably in his own. He knows not what the word change
means. But were this possible, and of good hope, it shows not that plain
and straight path to which my spirit points, and which therefore I must
travel. Is it right to hearken to man rather than God? That to me is
the only question. Shall Aurelian silence the ambassador of God and
Christ? Shall man wrestle and dispute it with the Almighty? God, or
Aurelian, which shall it be? To me, Christians, it would be a crime of
deeper dye than the errors of my Pagan youth, did I chain my tongue,
were it but for an hour, at the command of Aurelian. I have a light
within, and it is that I must obey. I reason not--I weigh not
probabilities--I balance not argument against argument--I feel! and that
I take to be the instinct of God--the inspiration of his holy
Spirit--and as I feel so am I bound to act.'

It was felt to be useless to reason with this impetuous and self-willed
man. He must be left to work out his own path through the surrounding
perils, and bear whatever evil his violent rashness might draw upon his
head. Yet his are those extreme and violent opinions and feelings which
are so apt to carry away the multitude, and it was easy to see that a
large proportion of the assembly went with him. Another occasion was
given for their expression.

When it had been determined that the edicts should be observed so far as
to refrain from all public preaching and all assembling together, till
the Emperor had been first appealed to, it then became a question in
what manner he should be approached, and by whom, in behalf of the whole
body. And no sooner had Macer ceased, than the same voice which had
first brought those charges against Probus was again heard--the voice as
I have since learned of a friend of Felix, and an exorcist.

'If it be now determined,' said the voice, 'that we appeal to the
clemency of the Emperor in order to avert from our heads the evil that
seems to be more than threatened, let it be done by some one who in his
faith may nay represent the great body of Christ's followers. Whether
the Emperor shall feel well inclined toward us or not, will it not
greatly depend upon the manner in which the truth in Christ shall be set
forth, and whether by means of the principles and doctrines that shall
be shown to belong to it and constitute it, it shall be judged by him to
be of hurtful or beneficial tendency? Now it is well known to all how
variously Christ is received and interpreted in Rome. As received by
some, his gospel is one thing; as received by others, it is another and
quite a different thing. Who can doubt that our prospect of a favorable
hearing with Aurelian will be an encouraging one in the proportion that
he shall perceive our opinions to agree with those which have already
been advanced in the schools of philosophy--especially in that of the
divine Plato. This agreement and almost identity has, ever since the
time of Justin, been pointed out and learnedly defended. They who
perceive this agreement, and rest in it as their faith, now constitute
the greater part of the Christian world. Let him then who is to bespeak
for us the Emperor's good-will be, as in good sooth he ought to be, of
these opinions. As to the declaration that has been made that one is as
much a Christian as another, whatever the difference of faith may be, I
cannot receive it; and he who made the declaration, I doubt would scarce
abide by it, since as I learn he is a worshipper and follower of that
false-hearted interloper Novatian. The puritans least of all are apt to
regard with favor those who hold not with them. Let Felix then, who, if
any now living in Rome may stand forward as a specimen of what Christ's
religion is in both its doctrine and its life--let Felix plead our cause
with Aurelian.'

The same difference of feeling and opinion manifested itself as before.
Many voices immediately cried out, 'Yes, yes, Felix, let Felix speak for
us.' While others from every part of the room were heard shouting out,
'Probus, Probus, let Probus be our advocate!'

At length the confusion subsided as a single voice made itself heard
above the others and caught their attention, saying,

'If Felix, O Christians, as has just been affirmed, represents the
opinions which are now most popular in the Christian world, at least
here in Rome, Probus represents those which are more ancient--' He was
instantly interrupted.

'How long ago,' cried another, 'lived Paul of Samosata?'

'When died the heretic Sabellius?' added still another.

'Or Praxeas?' said a third, 'or Theodotos? or Artemon?'

'These,' replied the first, soon as he could find room for
utterance--'these are indeed not of the earliest age, but they from whom
they learned their faith are of that age, namely, the apostles and the
great master of all.'

'Heresy,' cried out one who had spoken before, 'always dates from the
oldest; it never has less age nor authority than that of Christ.'

'Christians! Christians!' Macer's stentorian voice was now heard
towering above the tumult, 'what is it ye would have? What are these
distinctions about which ye dispute? What have they to do with the
matter now in hand? How would one doctrine or the other in such matters
weigh with Aurelian more than straws or feathers? But if these are stark
naught, and less than naught, there are other questions pertinent to the
time, nay, which the time forces upon us, and about which we should be
well agreed. A new age of persecution has arisen, and the church is
about to be sifted, and the wheat separated from the chaff--the first to
be gathered into the garners of God, the last to be burnt up in fire
unquenchable. Now is it to be proved who are Christ's, and who are
not--who will follow him bearing their cross to some new Calvary, and
who, saving their lives, shall yet lose them. Who knows not the evil
that, in the time of Decius, yes, and before and since too, fell upon
the church from the so easy reception and restoration of those who, in
an hour of weakness and fear, denied their master and his faith, and
bowed the knee to the gods of Rome? Here is the danger against which we
are to guard; from this quarter--not from any other of vain jargon
concerning natures, essences, and modes of being--are we to look for
those fatal inroads to be made upon the purity of the gospel, that
cannot but draw along with them corruption and ruin. Of what stuff will
the church then be made, when they who are its ministers, deacons and
bishops, shall be such as, when danger showed itself, relapsed into
idolatry, and, soon as the clouds had drifted by, and the winds blew
soft, came forth again into the calm sunshine, renounced their idolatry,
and again professing Christ, were received to the arms of the church,
and even to the communion of the body and blood of our Lord?
Christians, the great Novatian is he to whom we owe what purity the
church yet retains, and it is in allegiance to him--'

'The great Novatian!' exclaimed a priest of the Roman church, 'great
only in his infamy! Himself an apostate once, he sought afterwards,
having been received himself back again to the church upon his
repentance, to bury his shame under a show of zeal against such as were
guilty of the same offence. His own weakness or sin, instead of teaching
him compassion, served but to harden his heart. Is this the man to whose
principles we are to pledge ourselves? Were his principles sound in
themselves, we could hardly take them from such a source. But they are
false. They are in the face of the spirit and letter of the gospel. What
is the character of the religion of Christ, if it be not mercy? Yet this
great Novatian, to those who like Peter have fallen--Peter whom his
master received and forgave--denies all mercy! and for one offence,
however penitence may wring the soul, cuts them off forever like a
