    Such as thou seest, after ten thousand woes
    Which I have borne, I visit once again
    My native country in the twentieth year.
    This wonder Athenaean Pallas wrought,
    She cloath'd me even with what form she would,
    For so she can. Now poor I seem and old,                         250
    Now young again, and clad in fresh attire.
    The Gods who dwell in yonder heav'n, with ease
    Dignify or debase a mortal man.
      So saying, he sat. Then threw Telemachus
    His arms around his father's neck, and wept.
    Desire intense of lamentation seized
    On both; soft murmurs utt'ring, each indulged
    His grief, more frequent wailing than the bird,
    (Eagle, or hook-nail'd vulture) from whose nest
    Some swain hath stol'n her yet unfeather'd young.                260
    So from their eyelids they big drops distill'd
    Of tend'rest grief, nor had the setting sun
    Cessation of their weeping seen, had not
    Telemachus his father thus address'd.
      What ship convey'd thee to thy native shore,
    My father! and what country boast the crew?
    For, that on foot thou not arriv'dst, is sure.
      Then thus divine Ulysses toil-inured.
    My son! I will explicit all relate.
    Conducted by Phaeacia's maritime sons                             270
    I came, a race accustom'd to convey
    Strangers who visit them across the Deep.
    Me, o'er the billows in a rapid bark
    Borne sleeping, on the shores of Ithaca
    They lay'd; rich gifts they gave me also, brass,
    Gold in full bags, and beautiful attire,
    Which, warn'd from heav'n, I have in caves conceal'd.
    By Pallas prompted, hither I repair'd
    That we might plan the slaughter of our foes,
    Whose numbers tell me now, that I may know                       280
    How pow'rful, certainly, and who they are,
    And consultation with my dauntless heart
    May hold, if we be able to contend
    Ourselves with all, or must have aid beside.
      Then, answer thus his son, discrete, return'd.
    My father! thy renown hath ever rung
    In thy son's ears, and by report thy force
    In arms, and wisdom I have oft been told.
    But terribly thou speak'st; amazement-fixt
    I hear; can two a multitude oppose,                              290
    And valiant warriors all? for neither ten
    Are they, nor twenty, but more num'rous far.
    Learn, now, their numbers. Fifty youths and two
    Came from Dulichium; they are chosen men,
    And six attendants follow in their train;
    From Samos twenty youths and four arrive,
    Zacynthus also of Achaia's sons
    Sends twenty more, and our own island adds,
    Herself, her twelve chief rulers; Medon, too,
    Is there the herald, and the bard divine,                        300
    With other two, intendants of the board.
    Should we within the palace, we alone,
    Assail them all, I fear lest thy revenge
    Unpleasant to thyself and deadly prove,
    Frustrating thy return. But recollect--
    Think, if thou canst, on whose confed'rate arm
    Strenuous on our behalf we may rely.
      To him replied his patient father bold.
    I will inform thee. Mark. Weigh well my words.
    Will Pallas and the everlasting Sire                             310
    Alone suffice? or need we other aids?
      Then answer thus Telemachus return'd.
    Good friends indeed are they whom thou hast named,
    Though throned above the clouds; for their controul
    Is universal both in earth and heav'n.
      To whom Ulysses, toil-worn Chief renown'd.
    Not long will they from battle stand aloof,
    When once, within my palace, in the strength
    Of Mars, to sharp decision we shall urge
    The suitors. But thyself at early dawn                           320
    Our mansion seek, that thou may'st mingle there
    With that imperious throng; me in due time
    Eumaeus to the city shall conduct,
    In form a miserable beggar old.
    But should they with dishonourable scorn
    Insult me, thou unmov'd my wrongs endure,
    And should they even drag me by the feet
    Abroad, or smite me with the spear, thy wrath
    Refraining, gently counsel them to cease
    From such extravagance; but well I know                          330
    That cease they will not, for their hour is come.
    And mark me well; treasure what now I say
    Deep in thy soul. When Pallas shall, herself,
    Suggest the measure, then, shaking my brows,
    I will admonish thee; thou, at the sign,
    Remove what arms soever in the hall
    Remain, and in the upper palace safe
    Dispose them; should the suitors, missing them,
    Perchance interrogate thee, then reply
    Gently--I have removed them from the smoke;                      340
    For they appear no more the arms which erst
    Ulysses, going hence to Ilium, left,
    But smirch'd and sullied by the breath of fire.
    This weightier reason (thou shalt also say)
    Jove taught me; lest, intoxicate with wine,
    Ye should assault each other in your brawls,
    Shaming both feast and courtship; for the view
    Itself of arms incites to their abuse.
    Yet leave two faulchions for ourselves alone,
    Two spears, two bucklers, which with sudden force                350
    Impetuous we will seize, and Jove all-wise
    Their valour shall, and Pallas, steal away.
    This word store also in remembrance deep--
    If mine in truth thou art, and of my blood,
    Then, of Ulysses to his home returned
    Let none hear news from thee, no, not my sire
    Laertes, nor Eumaeus, nor of all
    The menials any, or ev'n Penelope,
    That thou and I, alone, may search the drift
    Of our domestic women, and may prove                             360
    Our serving-men, who honours and reveres
    And who contemns us both, but chiefly thee
    So gracious and so worthy to be loved.
      Him then thus answer'd his illustrious son.
    Trust me, my father! thou shalt soon be taught
    That I am not of drowsy mind obtuse.
    But this I think not likely to avail
    Or thee or me; ponder it yet again;
    For tedious were the task, farm after farm
    To visit of those servants, proving each,                        370
    And the proud suitors merciless devour
    Meantime thy substance, nor abstain from aught.
    Learn, if thou wilt, (and I that course myself
    Advise) who slights thee of the female train,
    And who is guiltless; but I would not try
    From house to house the men, far better proved
    Hereafter, if in truth by signs from heav'n
    Inform'd, thou hast been taught the will of Jove.
      Thus they conferr'd. The gallant bark, meantime,
    Reach'd Ithaca, which from the Pylian shore                      380
    Had brought Telemachus with all his band.
    Within the many-fathom'd port arrived
    His lusty followers haled her far aground,
    Then carried thence their arms, but to the house
    Of Clytius the illustrious gifts convey'd.
    Next to the royal mansion they dispatch'd
    An herald charg'd with tidings to the Queen,
    That her Telemachus had reach'd the cot
    Of good Eumaeus, and the bark had sent
    Home to the city; lest the matchless dame                        390
    Should still deplore the absence of her son.
    They, then, the herald and the swine-herd, each
    Bearing like message to his mistress, met,
    And at the palace of the godlike Chief
    Arriving, compass'd by the female throng
    Inquisitive, the herald thus began.
      Thy son, O Queen! is safe; ev'n now return'd.
    Then, drawing nigh to her, Eumaeus told
    His message also from her son received,
    And, his commission punctually discharged,                       400
    Leaving the palace, sought his home again.
      Grief seized and anguish, at those tidings, all
    The suitors; issuing forth, on the outside
    Of the high wall they sat, before the gate,
    When Polybus' son, Eurymachus, began.
      My friends! his arduous task, this voyage, deem'd
    By us impossible, in our despight
    Telemachus hath atchieved. Haste! launch we forth
    A sable bark, our best, which let us man
    With mariners expert, who, rowing forth                          410
    Swiftly, shall summon our companions home.
      Scarce had he said, when turning where he sat,
    Amphinomus beheld a bark arrived
    Just then in port; he saw them furling sail,
    And seated with their oars in hand; he laugh'd
    Through pleasure at that sight, and thus he spake.
      Our message may be spared. Lo! they arrive.
    Either some God inform'd them, or they saw,
    Themselves, the vessel of Telemachus
    Too swiftly passing to be reach'd by theirs.                     420
      He spake; they, rising, hasted to the shore.
    Alert they drew the sable bark aground,
    And by his servant each his arms dispatch'd
    To his own home. Then, all, to council those
    Assembling, neither elder of the land
    Nor youth allow'd to join them, and the rest
    Eupithes' son, Antinoues, thus bespake.
      Ah! how the Gods have rescued him! all day
    Perch'd on the airy mountain-top, our spies
    Successive watch'd; and, when the sun declined,                  430
    We never slept on shore, but all night long
    Till sacred dawn arose, plow'd the abyss,
    Hoping Telemachus, that we might seize
    And slay him, whom some Deity hath led,
    In our despight, safe to his home again.
    But frame we yet again means to destroy
    Telemachus; ah--let not Him escape!
    For end of this our task, while he survives,
    None shall be found, such prudence he displays
    And wisdom, neither are the people now                           440
    Unanimous our friends as heretofore.
    Come, then--prevent him, ere he call the Greeks
    To council; for he will not long delay,
    But will be angry, doubtless, and will tell
    Amid them all, how we in vain devised
    His death, a deed which they will scarce applaud,
    But will, perhaps, punish and drive us forth
    From our own country to a distant land.--
    Prevent him, therefore, quickly; in the field
    Slay him, or on the road; so shall his wealth                    450
    And his possessions on ourselves devolve
    Which we will share equally, but his house
    Shall be the Queen's, and his whom she shall wed.
    Yet, if not so inclined, ye rather chuse
    That he should live and occupy entire
    His patrimony, then, no longer, here
    Assembled, let us revel at his cost,
    But let us all with spousal gifts produced
    From our respective treasures, woo the Queen,
    Leaving her in full freedom to espouse                           460
    Who proffers most, and whom the fates ordain.
      He ceased; the assembly silent sat and mute.
    Then rose Amphinomus amid them all,
    Offspring renown'd of Nisus, son, himself,
    Of King Aretias. He had thither led
    The suitor train who from the pleasant isle
    Corn-clad of green Dulichium had arrived,
    And by his speech pleased far beyond them all
    Penelope, for he was just and wise,
    And thus, well-counselling the rest, began.                      470
      Not I, my friends! far be the thought from me
    To slay Telemachus! it were a deed
    Momentous, terrible, to slay a prince.
    First, therefore, let us counsel ask of heav'n,
    And if Jove's oracle that course approve,
    I will encourage you, and will myself
    Be active in his death; but if the Gods
    Forbid it, then, by my advice, forbear.
      So spake Amphinomus, whom all approved.
    Arising then, into Ulysses' house                                480
    They went, where each his splendid seat resumed.
      A novel purpose occupied, meantime,
    Penelope; she purposed to appear
    Before her suitors, whose design to slay
    Telemachus she had from Medon learn'd,
    The herald, for his ear had caught the sound.
    Toward the hall with her attendant train
    She moved, and when, most graceful of her sex,
    Where sat the suitors she arrived, between
    The columns standing of the stately dome,                        490
    And covering with her white veil's lucid folds
    Her features, to Antinoues thus she spake.
      Antinoues, proud, contentious, evermore
    To mischief prone! the people deem thee wise
    Past thy compeers, and in all grace of speech
    Pre-eminent, but such wast never thou.
    Inhuman! why is it thy dark design
    To slay Telemachus? and why with scorn
    Rejectest thou the suppliant's pray'r,[72] which Jove
    Himself hath witness'd? Plots please not the Gods.               500
    Know'st not that thy own father refuge found
    Here, when he fled before the people's wrath
    Whom he had irritated by a wrong
    Which, with a band of Taphian robbers joined,
    He offer'd to the Thesprots, our allies?
    They would have torn his heart, and would have laid
    All his delights and his possessions waste,
    But my Ulysses slaked the furious heat
    Of their revenge, whom thou requitest now
    Wasting his goods, soliciting his wife,                          510
    Slaying his son, and filling me with woe.
    But cease, I charge thee, and bid cease the rest.
      To whom the son of Polybus replied,
    Eurymachus.--Icarius' daughter wise!
    Take courage, fair Penelope, and chace
    These fears unreasonable from thy mind!
    The man lives not, nor shall, who while I live,
    And faculty of sight retain, shall harm
    Telemachus, thy son. For thus I say,
    And thus will I perform; his blood shall stream                  520
    A sable current from my lance's point
    That moment; for the city-waster Chief
    Ulysses, oft, me placing on his knees,
    Hath fill'd my infant grasp with sav'ry food,
    And giv'n me ruddy wine. I, therefore, hold
    Telemachus of all men most my friend,
    Nor hath he death to fear from hand of ours.
    Yet, if the Gods shall doom him, die he must.
      So he encouraged her, who yet, himself,
    Plotted his death. She, re-ascending, sought                     530
    Her stately chamber, and, arriving there,
    Deplored with tears her long-regretted Lord
    Till Athenaean Pallas azure-eyed
    Dews of soft slumber o'er her lids diffused.
      And now, at even-tide, Eumaeus reach'd
    Ulysses and his son. A yearling swine
    Just slain they skilfully for food prepared,
    When Pallas, drawing nigh, smote with her wand
    Ulysses, at the stroke rend'ring him old,
    And his apparel sordid as before,                                540
    Lest, knowing him, the swain at once should seek
    Penelope, and let the secret forth.
      Then foremost him Telemachus address'd.
    Noble Eumaeus! thou art come; what news
    Bring'st from the city? Have the warrior band
    Of suitors, hopeless of their ambush, reach'd
    The port again, or wait they still for me?
      To whom Eumaeus, thou didst thus reply.
    No time for such enquiry, nor to range,
    Curious, the streets had I, but anxious wish'd                   550
    To make my message known, and to return.
    But, as it chanced, a nimble herald sent
    From thy companions, met me on the way,
    Who reach'd thy mother first. Yet this I know,
    For this I saw. Passing above the town
    Where they have piled a way-side hill of stones
    To Mercury, I beheld a gallant bark
    Ent'ring the port; a bark she was of ours,
    The crew were num'rous, and I mark'd her deep-
    Laden with shields and spears of double edge.                    560
    Theirs I conjectured her, and could no more.
      He spake, and by Eumaeus unperceived,
    Telemachus his father eyed and smiled.
    Their task accomplish'd, and the table spread,
    They ate, nor any his due portion miss'd,
    And hunger, now, and thirst both sated, all
    To rest repair'd, and took the gift of sleep.


FOOTNOTES:

[72] Alluding probably to entreaties made to him at some former time by
herself and Telemachus, that he would not harm them. Clarke.




BOOK XVII

ARGUMENT

Telemachus returns to the city, and relates to his mother the principal
passages of his voyage; Ulysses, conducted by Eumaeus, arrives there also,
and enters among the suitors, having been known only by his old dog
Argus, who dies at his feet. The curiosity of Penelope being excited by
the account which Eumaeus gives her of Ulysses, she orders him immediately
into her presence, but Ulysses postpones the interview till evening, when
the suitors having left the palace, there shall be no danger of
interruption. Eumaeus returns to his cottage.


    Now look'd Aurora from the East abroad,
    When the illustrious offspring of divine
    Ulysses bound his sandals to his feet;
    He seiz'd his sturdy spear match'd to his gripe,
    And to the city meditating quick
    Departure now, the swine-herd thus bespake.
      Father! I seek the city, to convince
    My mother of my safe return, whose tears,
    I judge, and lamentation shall not cease
    Till her own eyes behold me. But I lay                            10
    On thee this charge. Into the city lead,
    Thyself, this hapless guest, that he may beg
    Provision there, a morsel and a drop
    From such as may, perchance, vouchsafe the boon.
    I cannot, vext and harass'd as I am,
    Feed all, and should the stranger take offence,
    The worse for him. Plain truth is my delight.
      To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied.
    Nor is it my desire to be detained.
    Better the mendicant in cities seeks                              20
    His dole, vouchsafe it whosoever may,
    Than in the villages. I am not young,
    Nor longer of an age that well accords
    With rural tasks, nor could I all perform
    That it might please a master to command.
    Go then, and when I shall have warm'd my limbs
    Before the hearth, and when the risen sun
    Shall somewhat chase the cold, thy servant's task
    Shall be to guide me thither, as thou bidd'st,
    For this is a vile garb; the frosty air                           30
    Of morning would benumb me thus attired,
    And, as ye say, the city is remote.
      He ended, and Telemachus in haste
    Set forth, his thoughts all teeming as he went
    With dire revenge. Soon in the palace-courts
    Arriving, he reclined his spear against
    A column, and proceeded to the hall.
    Him Euryclea, first, his nurse, perceived,
    While on the variegated seats she spread
    Their fleecy cov'ring; swift with tearful eyes                    40
    She flew to him, and the whole female train
    Of brave Ulysses swarm'd around his son,
    Clasping him, and his forehead and his neck
    Kissing affectionate; then came, herself,
    As golden Venus or Diana fair,
    Forth from her chamber to her son's embrace,
    The chaste Penelope; with tears she threw
    Her arms around him, his bright-beaming eyes
    And forehead kiss'd, and with a murmur'd plaint
    Maternal, in wing'd accents thus began.                           50
      Thou hast return'd, light of my eyes! my son!
    My lov'd Telemachus! I had no hope
    To see thee more when once thou hadst embark'd
    For Pylus, privily, and with no consent
    From me obtain'd, news seeking of thy sire.
    But haste; unfold. Declare what thou hast seen.
      To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied.
    Ah mother! let my sorrows rest, nor me
    From death so lately 'scaped afflict anew,
    But, bathed and habited in fresh attire,                          60
    With all the maidens of thy train ascend
    To thy superior chamber, there to vow
    A perfect hecatomb to all the Gods,
    When Jove shall have avenged our num'rous wrongs.
    I seek the forum, there to introduce
    A guest, my follower from the Pylian shore,
    Whom sending forward with my noble band,
    I bade Piraeus to his own abode
    Lead him, and with all kindness entertain
    The stranger, till I should myself arrive.                        70
      He spake, nor flew his words useless away.
    She, bathed and habited in fresh attire,
    Vow'd a full hecatomb to all the Gods,
    Would Jove but recompense her num'rous wrongs.
    Then, spear in hand, went forth her son, two dogs
    Fleet-footed following him. O'er all his form
    Pallas diffused a dignity divine,
    And ev'ry eye gazed on him as he pass'd.
    The suitors throng'd him round, joy on their lips
    And welcome, but deep mischief in their hearts.                   80
    He, shunning all that crowd, chose to himself
    A seat, where Mentor sat, and Antiphus,
    And Halytherses, long his father's friends
    Sincere, who of his voyage much enquired.
    Then drew Piraeus nigh, leading his guest
    Toward the forum; nor Telemachus
    Stood long aloof, but greeted his approach,
    And was accosted by Piraeus thus.
      Sir! send thy menial women to bring home
    The precious charge committed to my care,                         90
    Thy gifts at Menelaus' hands received.
      To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied.
    Piraeus! wait; for I not yet foresee
    The upshot. Should these haughty ones effect
    My death, clandestine, under my own roof,
    And parcel my inheritance by lot,
    I rather wish those treasures thine, than theirs.
    But should I with success plan for them all
    A bloody death, then, wing'd with joy, thyself
    Bring home those presents to thy joyful friend.                  100
      So saying, he led the anxious stranger thence
    Into the royal mansion, where arrived,
    Each cast his mantle on a couch or throne,
    And plung'd his feet into a polish'd bath.
    There wash'd and lubricated with smooth oils,
    From the attendant maidens each received
    Tunic and shaggy mantle. Thus attired,
    Forth from the baths they stepp'd, and sat again.
    A maiden, next, with golden ewer charged,
    And silver bowl, pour'd water on their hands,                    110
    And spread the polish'd table, which with food
    Of all kinds, remnants of the last regale,
    The mistress of the household charge supplied.
    Meantime, beside a column of the dome
    His mother, on a couch reclining, twirl'd
    Her slender threads. They to the furnish'd board
    Stretch'd forth their hands, and, hunger now and thirst
    Both satisfied, Penelope began.
      Telemachus! I will ascend again,
    And will repose me on my woeful bed;                             120
    For such it hath been, and with tears of mine
    Ceaseless bedew'd, e'er since Ulysses went
    With Atreus' sons to Troy. For not a word
    Thou would'st vouchsafe me till our haughty guests
    Had occupied the house again, of all
    That thou hast heard (if aught indeed thou hast)
    Of thy long-absent father's wish'd return.
      Her answer'd then Telemachus discrete.
    Mother, at thy request I will with truth
    Relate the whole. At Pylus shore arrived                         130
    We Nestor found, Chief of the Pylian race.
    Receiving me in his august abode,
    He entertain'd me with such welcome kind
    As a glad father shews to his own son
    Long-lost and newly found; so Nestor me,
    And his illustrious offspring, entertain'd,
    But yet assured me that he nought had heard
    From mortal lips of my magnanimous sire,
    Whether alive or dead; with his own steeds
    He sent me, and with splendid chariot thence                     140
    To spear-famed Menelaus, Atreus' son.
    There saw I Helen, by the Gods' decree
    Auth'ress of trouble both to Greece and Troy.
    The Hero Menelaus then enquired
    What cause had urged me to the pleasant vale
    Of Lacedaemon; plainly I rehearsed
    The occasion, and the Hero thus replied.
      Ye Gods! they are ambitious of the bed
    Of a brave man, however base themselves.
    But, as it chances when the hart hath laid                       150
    Her fawns new-yean'd and sucklings yet, to rest
    In some resistless lion's den, she roams,
    Meantime, the hills, and in the grassy vales
    Feeds heedless, but the lion to his lair
    Returning soon, both her and hers destroys,
    So shall thy father, brave Ulysses, them.
    Jove! Pallas! and Apollo! oh that such
    As erst in well-built Lesbos, where he strove
    With Philomelides, whom wrestling, flat
    He threw, when all Achaia's sons rejoiced,                       160
    Ulysses, now, might mingle with his foes!
    Short life and bitter nuptials should be theirs,
    But thy enquiries neither indirect
    Will I evade, nor give thee false reply,
    But all that from the Ancient of the Deep[73]
    I have received will utter, hiding nought.
    The God declared that he had seen thy sire
    In a lone island, sorrowing, and detain'd
    An inmate in the grotto of the nymph
    Calypso, wanting also means by which                             170
    To reach the country of his birth again,
    For neither gallant barks nor friends had he
    To speed his passage o'er the boundless waves.
      So Menelaus spake, the spear-renown'd.
    My errand thus accomplish'd, I return'd--
    And by the Gods with gales propitious blest,
    Was wafted swiftly to my native shore.
      He spake, and tumult in his mother's heart
    So speaking, raised. Consolatory, next,
    The godlike Theoclymenus began.                                  180
      Consort revered of Laertiades!
    Little the Spartan knew, but list to me,
    For I will plainly prophesy and sure.
    Be Jove of all in heav'n my witness first,
    Then this thy hospitable board, and, last,
    The household Gods of the illustrious Chief
    Ulysses, at whose hearth I have arrived,[74]
    That, even now, within his native isle
    Ulysses somewhere sits, or creeps obscure,
    Witness of these enormities, and seeds                           190
    Sowing of dire destruction for his foes;
    So sure an augury, while on the deck
    Reclining of the gallant bark, I saw,
    And with loud voice proclaim'd it to thy son.
      Him answer'd then Penelope discrete.
    Grant heav'n, my guest, that this good word of thine
    Fail not! then shalt thou soon such bounty share
    And friendship at my hands, that at first sight
    Whoe'er shall meet thee shall pronounce thee blest.
      Thus they conferr'd. Meantime the suitors hurl'd               200
    The quoit and lance on the smooth area spread
    Before Ulysses' gate, the custom'd scene
    Of their contentions, sports, and clamours rude.
    But when the hour of supper now approach'd,
    And from the pastures on all sides the sheep
    Came with their wonted drivers, Medon then
    (For he of all the heralds pleas'd them most,
    And waited at the board) them thus address'd.
      Enough of play, young princes! ent'ring now
    The house, prepare we sedulous our feast,                        210
    Since in well-timed refreshment harm is none.
      He spake, whose admonition pleas'd. At once
    All, rising, sought the palace; there arrived,
    Each cast his mantle off, which on his throne
    Or couch he spread, then, brisk, to slaughter fell
    Of many a victim; sheep and goats and brawns
    They slew, all fatted, and a pastur'd ox,
    Hast'ning the banquet; nor with less dispatch
    Ulysses and Eumaeus now prepared
    To seek the town, when thus the swain began.                     220
      My guest! since thy fixt purpose is to seek
    This day the city as my master bade,
    Though I, in truth, much rather wish thee here
    A keeper of our herds, yet, through respect
    And rev'rence of his orders, whose reproof
    I dread, for masters seldom gently chide,
    I would be gone. Arise, let us depart,
    For day already is far-spent, and soon
    The air of even-tide will chill thee more.
