warning. Here he is.--Walk forrard, sir. They war playing up queerly,
but I think I've quietened 'em."

Another person, it was now audible, entered. Joe Scott proceeded with
his rebukes.

"What d'ye mean by being all i' darkness? Sarah, thou quean, canst t'
not light a candle? It war sundown an hour syne. He'll brak his shins
agean some o' yer pots, and tables, and stuff.--Tak tent o' this
baking-bowl, sir; they've set it i' yer way, fair as if they did it i'
malice."

To Joe's observations succeeded a confused sort of pause, which
Caroline, though she was listening with both her ears, could not
understand. It was very brief. A cry broke it--a sound of surprise,
followed by the sound of a kiss; ejaculations, but half articulate,
succeeded.

"Mon Dieu! mon Dieu! Est-ce que je m'y attendais?" were the words
chiefly to be distinguished.

"Et tu te portes toujours bien, bonne soeur?" inquired another
voice--Robert's, certainly.

Caroline was puzzled. Obeying an impulse the wisdom of which she had not
time to question, she escaped from the little parlour, by way of leaving
the coast clear, and running upstairs took up a position at the head of
the banisters, whence she could make further observations ere presenting
herself. It was considerably past sunset now; dusk filled the passage,
yet not such deep dusk but that she could presently see Robert and
Hortense traverse it.

"Caroline! Caroline!" called Hortense, a moment afterwards, "venez voir
mon frere!"

"Strange," commented Miss Helstone, "passing strange! What does this
unwonted excitement about such an every-day occurrence as a return from
market portend? She has not lost her senses, has she? Surely the burnt
treacle has not crazed her?"

She descended in a subdued flutter. Yet more was she fluttered when
Hortense seized her hand at the parlour door, and leading her to Robert,
who stood in bodily presence, tall and dark against the one window,
presented her with a mixture of agitation and formality, as though they
had been utter strangers, and this was their first mutual introduction.

Increasing puzzle! He bowed rather awkwardly, and turning from her with
a stranger's embarrassment, he met the doubtful light from the window.
It fell on his face, and the enigma of the dream (a dream it seemed)
was at its height. She saw a visage like and unlike--Robert, and no
Robert.

"What is the matter?" said Caroline. "Is my sight wrong? Is it my
cousin?"

"Certainly it is your cousin," asserted Hortense.

Then who was this now coming through the passage--now entering the room?
Caroline, looking round, met a new Robert--the real Robert, as she felt
at once.

"Well," said he, smiling at her questioning, astonished face, "which is
which?"

"Ah, this is _you_!" was the answer.

He laughed. "I believe it is _me_. And do you know who _he_ is? You
never saw him before, but you have heard of him."

She had gathered her senses now.

"It _can_ be only one person--your brother, since it is so like you; my
other cousin, Louis."

"Clever little Oedipus! you would have baffled the Sphinx! But now, see
us together.--Change places; change again, to confuse her, Louis.--Which
is the old love now, Lina?"

"As if it were possible to make a mistake when you speak! You should
have told Hortense to ask. But you are not so much alike. It is only
your height, your figure, and complexion that are so similar."

"And I am Robert, am I not?" asked the newcomer, making a first effort
to overcome what seemed his natural shyness.

Caroline shook her head gently. A soft, expressive ray from her eye
beamed on the real Robert. It said much.

She was not permitted to quit her cousins soon. Robert himself was
peremptory in obliging her to remain. Glad, simple, and affable in her
demeanour (glad for this night, at least), in light, bright spirits for
the time, she was too pleasant an addition to the cottage circle to be
willingly parted with by any of them. Louis seemed naturally rather a
grave, still, retiring man; but the Caroline of this evening, which was
not (as you know, reader) the Caroline of every day, thawed his reserve,
and cheered his gravity soon. He sat near her and talked to her. She
already knew his vocation was that of tuition. She learned now he had
for some years been the tutor of Mr. Sympson's son; that he had been
travelling with him, and had accompanied him to the north. She inquired
if he liked his post, but got a look in reply which did not invite or
license further question. The look woke Caroline's ready sympathy. She
thought it a very sad expression to pass over so sensible a face as
Louis's; for he _had_ a sensible face, though not handsome, she
considered, when seen near Robert's. She turned to make the comparison.
Robert was leaning against the wall, a little behind her, turning over
the leaves of a book of engravings, and probably listening, at the same
time, to the dialogue between her and Louis.

"How could I think them alike?" she asked herself. "I see now it is
Hortense Louis resembles, not Robert."

And this was in part true. He had the shorter nose and longer upper lip
of his sister rather than the fine traits of his brother. He had her
mould of mouth and chin--all less decisive, accurate, and clear than
those of the young mill-owner. His air, though deliberate and
reflective, could scarcely be called prompt and acute. You felt, in
sitting near and looking up at him, that a slower and probably a more
benignant nature than that of the elder Moore shed calm on your
impressions.

Robert--perhaps aware that Caroline's glance had wandered towards and
dwelt upon him, though he had neither met nor answered it--put down the
book of engravings, and approaching, took a seat at her side. She
resumed her conversation with Louis, but while she talked to him her
thoughts were elsewhere. Her heart beat on the side from which her face
was half averted. She acknowledged a steady, manly, kindly air in Louis;
but she bent before the secret power of Robert. To be so near
him--though he was silent, though he did not touch so much as her
scarf-fringe or the white hem of her dress--affected her like a spell.
Had she been obliged to speak to him _only_, it would have quelled, but,
at liberty to address another, it excited her. Her discourse flowed
freely; it was gay, playful, eloquent. The indulgent look and placid
manner of her auditor encouraged her to ease; the sober pleasure
expressed by his smile drew out all that was brilliant in her nature.
She felt that this evening she appeared to advantage, and as Robert was
a spectator, the consciousness contented her. Had he been called away,
collapse would at once have succeeded stimulus.

But her enjoyment was not long to shine full-orbed; a cloud soon crossed
it.

Hortense, who for some time had been on the move ordering supper, and
was now clearing the little table of some books, etc., to make room for
the tray, called Robert's attention to the glass of flowers, the carmine
and snow and gold of whose petals looked radiant indeed by candlelight.

"They came from Fieldhead," she said, "intended as a gift to you, no
doubt. We know who is the favourite there; not I, I'm sure."

It was a wonder to hear Hortense jest--a sign that her spirits were at
high-water mark indeed.

"We are to understand, then, that Robert is the favourite?" observed
Louis.

"Mon cher," replied Hortense, "Robert--c'est tout ce qu'il y a de plus
precieux au monde; a cote de lui le reste du genre humain n'est que du
rebut.--N'ai-je pas raison, mon enfant?" she added, appealing to
Caroline.

Caroline was obliged to reply, "Yes," and her beacon was quenched. Her
star withdrew as she spoke.

"Et toi, Robert?" inquired Louis.

"When you shall have an opportunity, ask herself," was the quiet answer.
Whether he reddened or paled Caroline did not examine. She discovered
that it was late, and she must go home. Home she would go; not even
Robert could detain her now.




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH.


The future sometimes seems to sob a low warning of the events it is
bringing us, like some gathering though yet remote storm, which, in
tones of the wind, in flushings of the firmament, in clouds strangely
torn, announces a blast strong to strew the sea with wrecks; or
commissioned to bring in fog the yellow taint of pestilence covering
white Western isles with the poisoned exhalations of the East, dimming
the lattices of English homes with the breath of Indian plague. At other
times this future bursts suddenly, as if a rock had rent, and in it a
grave had opened, whence issues the body of one that slept. Ere you are
aware you stand face to face with a shrouded and unthought-of
calamity--a new Lazarus.

Caroline Helstone went home from Hollow's Cottage in good health, as she
imagined. On waking the next morning she felt oppressed with unwonted
languor. At breakfast, at each meal of the following day, she missed all
sense of appetite. Palatable food was as ashes and sawdust to her.

"Am I ill?" she asked, and looked at herself in the glass. Her eyes were
bright, their pupils dilated, her cheeks seemed rosier, and fuller than
usual. "I look well; why can I not eat?"

She felt a pulse beat fast in her temples; she felt, too, her brain in
strange activity. Her spirits were raised; hundreds of busy and broken
but brilliant thoughts engaged her mind. A glow rested on them, such as
tinged her complexion.

Now followed a hot, parched, thirsty, restless night. Towards morning
one terrible dream seized her like a tiger; when she woke, she felt and
knew she was ill.

How she had caught the fever (fever it was) she could not tell. Probably
in her late walk home, some sweet, poisoned breeze, redolent of
honey-dew and miasma, had passed into her lungs and veins, and finding
there already a fever of mental excitement, and a languor of long
conflict and habitual sadness, had fanned the spark to flame, and left a
well-lit fire behind it.

It seemed, however, but a gentle fire. After two hot days and worried
nights, there was no violence in the symptoms, and neither her uncle,
nor Fanny, nor the doctor, nor Miss Keeldar, when she called, had any
fear for her. A few days would restore her, every one believed.

The few days passed, and--though it was still thought it could not long
delay--the revival had not begun. Mrs. Pryor, who had visited her
daily--being present in her chamber one morning when she had been ill a
fortnight--watched her very narrowly for some minutes. She took her hand
and placed her finger on her wrist; then, quietly leaving the chamber,
she went to Mr. Helstone's study. With him she remained closeted a long
time--half the morning. On returning to her sick young friend, she laid
aside shawl and bonnet. She stood awhile at the bedside, one hand placed
in the other, gently rocking herself to and fro, in an attitude and with
a movement habitual to her. At last she said, "I have sent Fanny to
Fieldhead to fetch a few things for me, such as I shall want during a
short stay here. It is my wish to remain with you till you are better.
Your uncle kindly permits my attendance. Will it to yourself be
acceptable, Caroline?"

"I am sorry you should take such needless trouble. I do not feel very
ill, but I cannot refuse resolutely. It will be such comfort to know you
are in the house, to see you sometimes in the room; but don't confine
yourself on my account, dear Mrs. Pryor. Fanny nurses me very well."

Mrs. Pryor, bending over the pale little sufferer, was now smoothing the
hair under her cap, and gently raising her pillow. As she performed
these offices, Caroline, smiling, lifted her face to kiss her.

"Are you free from pain? Are you tolerably at ease?" was inquired in a
low, earnest voice, as the self-elected nurse yielded to the caress.

"I think I am almost happy."

"You wish to drink? Your lips are parched."

She held a glass filled with some cooling beverage to her mouth.

"Have you eaten anything to-day, Caroline?"

"I cannot eat."

"But soon your appetite will return; it _must_ return--that is, I pray
God it may."

In laying her again on the couch, she encircled her in her arms; and
while so doing, by a movement which seemed scarcely voluntary, she drew
her to her heart, and held her close gathered an instant.

"I shall hardly wish to get well, that I may keep you always," said
Caroline.

Mrs. Pryor did not smile at this speech. Over her features ran a tremor,
which for some minutes she was absorbed in repressing.

"You are more used to Fanny than to me," she remarked ere long. "I
should think my attendance must seem strange, officious?"

"No; quite natural, and very soothing. You must have been accustomed to
wait on sick people, ma'am. You move about the room so softly, and you
speak so quietly, and touch me so gently."

"I am dexterous in nothing, my dear. You will often find me awkward, but
never negligent."

Negligent, indeed, she was not. From that hour Fanny and Eliza became
ciphers in the sick-room. Mrs. Pryor made it her domain; she performed
all its duties; she lived in it day and night. The patient
remonstrated--faintly, however, from the first, and not at all ere long.
Loneliness and gloom were now banished from her bedside; protection and
solace sat there instead. She and her nurse coalesced in wondrous union.
Caroline was usually pained to require or receive much attendance. Mrs.
Pryor, under ordinary circumstances, had neither the habit nor the art
of performing little offices of service; but all now passed with such
ease, so naturally, that the patient was as willing to be cherished as
the nurse was bent on cherishing; no sign of weariness in the latter
ever reminded the former that she ought to be anxious. There was, in
fact, no very hard duty to perform; but a hireling might have found it
hard.

With all this care it seemed strange the sick girl did not get well; yet
such was the case. She wasted like any snow-wreath in thaw; she faded
like any flower in drought. Miss Keeldar, on whose thoughts danger or
death seldom intruded, had at first entertained no fears at all for her
friend; but seeing her change and sink from time to time when she paid
her visits, alarm clutched her heart. She went to Mr. Helstone and
expressed herself with so much energy that that gentleman was at last
obliged, however unwillingly, to admit the idea that his niece was ill
of something more than a migraine; and when Mrs. Pryor came and quietly
demanded a physician, he said she might send for two if she liked. One
came, but that one was an oracle. He delivered a dark saying of which
the future was to solve the mystery, wrote some prescriptions, gave some
directions--the whole with an air of crushing authority--pocketed his
fee, and went. Probably he knew well enough he could do no good, but
didn't like to say so.

Still, no rumour of serious illness got wind in the neighbourhood. At
Hollow's Cottage it was thought that Caroline had only a severe cold,
she having written a note to Hortense to that effect; and mademoiselle
contented herself with sending two pots of currant jam, a recipe for a
tisane, and a note of advice.

Mrs. Yorke being told that a physician had been summoned, sneered at the
hypochondriac fancies of the rich and idle, who, she said, having
nothing but themselves to think about, must needs send for a doctor if
only so much as their little finger ached.

The "rich and idle," represented in the person of Caroline, were
meantime falling fast into a condition of prostration, whose quickly
consummated debility puzzled all who witnessed it except one; for that
one alone reflected how liable is the undermined structure to sink in
sudden ruin.

Sick people often have fancies inscrutable to ordinary attendants, and
Caroline had one which even her tender nurse could not at first explain.
On a certain day in the week, at a certain hour, she would--whether
worse or better--entreat to be taken up and dressed, and suffered to sit
in her chair near the window. This station she would retain till noon
was past. Whatever degree of exhaustion or debility her wan aspect
betrayed, she still softly put off all persuasion to seek repose until
the church clock had duly tolled midday. The twelve strokes sounded, she
grew docile, and would meekly lie down. Returned to the couch, she
usually buried her face deep in the pillow, and drew the coverlets close
round her, as if to shut out the world and sun, of which she was tired.
More than once, as she thus lay, a slight convulsion shook the sick-bed,
and a faint sob broke the silence round it. These things were not
unnoted by Mrs. Pryor.

One Tuesday morning, as usual, she had asked leave to rise, and now she
sat wrapped in her white dressing-gown, leaning forward in the
easy-chair, gazing steadily and patiently from the lattice. Mrs. Pryor
was seated a little behind, knitting as it seemed, but, in truth,
watching her. A change crossed her pale, mournful brow, animating its
languor; a light shot into her faded eyes, reviving their lustre; she
half rose and looked earnestly out. Mrs. Pryor, drawing softly near,
glanced over her shoulder. From this window was visible the churchyard,
beyond it the road; and there, riding sharply by, appeared a horseman.
The figure was not yet too remote for recognition. Mrs. Pryor had long
sight; she knew Mr. Moore. Just as an intercepting rising ground
concealed him from view, the clock struck twelve.

"May I lie down again?" asked Caroline.

Her nurse assisted her to bed. Having laid her down and drawn the
curtain, she stood listening near. The little couch trembled, the
suppressed sob stirred the air. A contraction as of anguish altered Mrs.
Pryor's features; she wrung her hands; half a groan escaped her lips.
She now remembered that Tuesday was Whinbury market day. Mr. Moore must
always pass the rectory on his way thither, just ere noon of that day.

Caroline wore continually round her neck a slender braid of silk,
attached to which was some trinket. Mrs. Pryor had seen the bit of gold
glisten, but had not yet obtained a fair view of it. Her patient never
parted with it. When dressed it was hidden in her bosom; as she lay in
bed she always held it in her hand. That Tuesday afternoon the transient
doze--more like lethargy than sleep--which sometimes abridged the long
days, had stolen over her. The weather was hot. While turning in febrile
restlessness, she had pushed the coverlets a little aside. Mrs. Pryor
bent to replace them. The small, wasted hand, lying nerveless on the
sick girl's breast, clasped as usual her jealously-guarded treasure.
Those fingers whose attenuation it gave pain to see were now relaxed in
sleep. Mrs. Pryor gently disengaged the braid, drawing out a tiny
locket--a slight thing it was, such as it suited her small purse to
purchase. Under its crystal face appeared a curl of black hair, too
short and crisp to have been severed from a female head.

Some agitated movement occasioned a twitch of the silken chain. The
sleeper started and woke. Her thoughts were usually now somewhat
scattered on waking, her look generally wandering. Half rising, as if
in terror, she exclaimed, "Don't take it from me, Robert! Don't! It is
my last comfort; let me keep it. I never tell any one whose hair it is;
I never show it."

Mrs. Pryor had already disappeared behind the curtain. Reclining far
back in a deep arm-chair by the bedside, she was withdrawn from view.
Caroline looked abroad into the chamber; she thought it empty. As her
stray ideas returned slowly, each folding its weak wings on the mind's
sad shore, like birds exhausted, beholding void, and perceiving silence
round her, she believed herself alone. Collected she was not yet;
perhaps healthy self-possession and self-control were to be hers no
more; perhaps that world the strong and prosperous live in had already
rolled from beneath her feet for ever. So, at least, it often seemed to
herself. In health she had never been accustomed to think aloud, but now
words escaped her lips unawares.

"Oh, I _should_ see him once more before all is over! Heaven _might_
favour me thus far!" she cried. "God grant me a little comfort before I
die!" was her humble petition.

"But he will not know I am ill till I am gone, and he will come when
they have laid me out, and I am senseless, cold, and stiff.

"What can my departed soul feel then? Can it see or know what happens to
the clay? Can spirits, through any medium, communicate with living
flesh? Can the dead at all revisit those they leave? Can they come in
the elements? Will wind, water, fire, lend me a path to Moore?

"Is it for nothing the wind sounds almost articulately sometimes--sings
as I have lately heard it sing at night--or passes the casement sobbing,
as if for sorrow to come? Does nothing, then, haunt it, nothing inspire
it?

"Why, it suggested to me words one night; it poured a strain which I
could have written down, only I was appalled, and dared not rise to seek
pencil and paper by the dim watch-light.

"What is that electricity they speak of, whose changes make us well or
ill, whose lack or excess blasts, whose even balance revives? What are
all those influences that are about us in the atmosphere, that keep
playing over our nerves like fingers on stringed instruments, and call
forth now a sweet note, and now a wail--now an exultant swell, and anon
the saddest cadence?

"_Where is_ the other world? In _what_ will another life consist? Why do
I ask? Have I not cause to think that the hour is hasting but too fast
when the veil must be rent for me? Do I not know the Grand Mystery is
likely to burst prematurely on me? Great Spirit, in whose goodness I
confide, whom, as my Father, I have petitioned night and morning from
early infancy, help the weak creation of Thy hands! Sustain me through
the ordeal I dread and must undergo! Give me strength! Give me patience!
Give me--oh, _give me_ FAITH!"

She fell back on her pillow. Mrs. Pryor found means to steal quietly
from the room. She re-entered it soon after, apparently as composed as
if she had really not overheard this strange soliloquy.

The next day several callers came. It had become known that Miss
Helstone was worse. Mr. Hall and his sister Margaret arrived. Both,
after they had been in the sickroom, quitted it in tears; they had found
the patient more altered than they expected. Hortense Moore came.
Caroline seemed stimulated by her presence. She assured her, smiling,
she was not dangerously ill; she talked to her in a low voice, but
cheerfully. During her stay, excitement kept up the flush of her
complexion; she looked better.

"How is Mr. Robert?" asked Mrs. Pryor, as Hortense was preparing to take
leave.

"He was very well when he left."

"Left! Is he gone from home?"

It was then explained that some police intelligence about the rioters of
whom he was in pursuit had, that morning, called him away to Birmingham,
and probably a fortnight might elapse ere he returned.

"He is not aware that Miss Helstone is very ill?"

"Oh no! He thought, like me, that she had only a bad cold."

After this visit, Mrs. Pryor took care not to approach Caroline's couch
for above an hour. She heard her weep, and dared not look on her tears.

As evening closed in, she brought her some tea. Caroline, opening her
eyes from a moment's slumber, viewed her nurse with an unrecognizing
glance.

"I smelt the honeysuckles in the glen this summer morning," she said,
"as I stood at the counting-house window."

Strange words like these from pallid lips pierce a loving listener's
heart more poignantly than steel. They sound romantic, perhaps, in
books; in real life they are harrowing.

"My darling, do you know me?" said Mrs. Pryor.

"I went in to call Robert to breakfast. I have been with him in the
garden. He asked me to go. A heavy dew has refreshed the flowers. The
peaches are ripening."

"My darling! my darling!" again and again repeated the nurse.

"I thought it was daylight--long after sunrise. It looks dark. Is the
moon now set?"

That moon, lately risen, was gazing full and mild upon her. Floating in
deep blue space, it watched her unclouded.

"Then it is not morning? I am not at the cottage? Who is this? I see a
shape at my bedside."

"It is myself--it is your friend--your nurse--your---- Lean your head on
my shoulder. Collect yourself." In a lower tone--"O God, take pity! Give
_her_ life, and _me_ strength! Send me courage! Teach me words!"

Some minutes passed in silence. The patient lay mute and passive in the
trembling arms, on the throbbing bosom of the nurse.

"I am better now," whispered Caroline at last, "much better. I feel
where I am. This is Mrs. Pryor near me. I was dreaming. I talk when I
wake up from dreams; people often do in illness. How fast your heart
beats, ma'am! Do not be afraid."

"It is not fear, child--only a little anxiety, which will pass. I have
brought you some tea, Cary. Your uncle made it himself. You know he says
he can make a better cup of tea than any housewife can. Taste it. He is
concerned to hear that you eat so little; he would be glad if you had a
better appetite."

"I am thirsty. Let me drink."

She drank eagerly.

"What o'clock is it, ma'am?" she asked.

"Past nine."

"Not later? Oh! I have yet a long night before me. But the tea has made
me strong. I will sit up."

Mrs. Pryor raised her, and arranged her pillows.

"Thank Heaven! I am not always equally miserable, and ill, and hopeless.
The afternoon has been bad since Hortense went; perhaps the evening may
be better. It is a fine night, I think? The moon shines clear."

"Very fine--a perfect summer night. The old church-tower gleams white
almost as silver."

"And does the churchyard look peaceful?"

"Yes, and the garden also. Dew glistens on the foliage."

"Can you see many long weeds and nettles amongst the graves? or do they
look turfy and flowery?"

"I see closed daisy-heads gleaming like pearls on some mounds. Thomas
has mown down the dock-leaves and rank grass, and cleared all away."

"I always like that to be done; it soothes one's mind to see the place
in order. And, I dare say, within the church just now that moonlight
shines as softly as in my room. It will fall through the east window
full on the Helstone monument. When I close my eyes I seem to see poor
papa's epitaph in black letters on the white marble. There is plenty of
room for other inscriptions underneath."

"William Farren came to look after your flowers this morning. He was
afraid, now you cannot tend them yourself, they would be neglected. He
has taken two of your favourite plants home to nurse for you."

"If I were to make a will, I would leave William all my plants; Shirley
my trinkets--except one, which must not be taken off my neck; and you,
ma'am, my books." After a pause--"Mrs. Pryor, I feel a longing wish for
something."

"For what, Caroline?"

"You know I always delight to hear you sing. Sing me a hymn just now.
Sing that hymn which begins,--

    'Our God, our help in ages past,
       Our hope for years to come,
     Our shelter from the stormy blast,
       Our refuge, haven, home!'"

Mrs. Pryor at once complied.

No wonder Caroline liked to hear her sing. Her voice, even in speaking,
was sweet and silver clear; in song it was almost divine. Neither flute
nor dulcimer has tones so pure. But the tone was secondary, compared to
the expression which trembled through--a tender vibration from a feeling
heart.

The servants in the kitchen, hearing the strain, stole to the stair-foot
to listen. Even old Helstone, as he walked in the garden, pondering over
the unaccountable and feeble nature of women, stood still amongst his
borders to catch the mournful melody more distinctly. Why it reminded
him of his forgotten dead wife, he could not tell; nor why it made him
more concerned than he had hitherto been for Caroline's fading girlhood.
He was glad to recollect that he had promised to pay Wynne, the
magistrate, a visit that evening. Low spirits and gloomy thoughts were
very much his aversion. When they attacked him he usually found means to
make them march in double-quick time. The hymn followed him faintly as
he crossed the fields. He hastened his customary sharp pace, that he
might get beyond its reach.

    "Thy word commands our flesh to dust,--
       'Return, ye sons of men;'
     All nations rose from earth at first,
       And turn to earth again.

    "A thousand ages in Thy sight
       Are like an evening gone--
     Short as the watch that ends the night
       Before the rising sun.

    "Time, like an ever-rolling stream,
       Bears all its sons away;
     They fly, forgotten, as a dream
       Dies at the opening day.

    "Like flowery fields, the nations stand,
       Fresh in the morning light;
     The flowers beneath the mower's hand
       Lie withering ere 'tis night.

    "Our God, our help in ages past,
       Our hope for years to come,
     Be Thou our guard while troubles last--
       O Father, be our home!"

"Now sing a song--a Scottish song," suggested Caroline, when the hymn
was over--"'Ye banks and braes o' bonnie Doon.'"

Again Mrs. Pryor obeyed, or essayed to obey. At the close of the first
stanza she stopped. She could get no further. Her full heart flowed
over.

"You are weeping at the pathos of the air. Come here, and I will comfort
you," said Caroline, in a pitying accent. Mrs. Pryor came. She sat down
on the edge of her patient's bed, and allowed the wasted arms to
encircle her.

"You often soothe me; let me soothe you," murmured the young girl,
kissing her cheek. "I hope," she added, "it is not for me you weep?"

No answer followed.

"Do you think I shall not get better? I do not feel _very_ ill--only
weak."

"But your mind, Caroline--your mind is crushed. Your heart is almost
broken; you have been so neglected, so repulsed, left so desolate."

"I believe grief is, and always has been, my worst ailment. I sometimes
think if an abundant gush of happiness came on me I could revive yet."

"Do you wish to live?"

"I have no object in life."

"You love me, Caroline?"

"Very much--very truly--inexpressibly sometimes. Just now I feel as if I
could almost grow to your heart."

"I will return directly, dear," remarked Mrs. Pryor, as she laid
Caroline down.

Quitting her, she glided to the door, softly turned the key in the lock,
ascertained that it was fast, and came back. She bent over her. She
threw back the curtain to admit the moonlight more freely. She gazed
intently on her face.

"Then, if you love me," said she, speaking quickly, with an altered
voice; "if you feel as if, to use your own words, you could 'grow to my
heart,' it will be neither shock nor pain for you to know that _that_
heart is the source whence yours was filled; that from _my_ veins issued
the tide which flows in _yours_; that you are _mine_--my daughter--my
own child."

"Mrs. Pryor----"

"My own child!"

"That is--that means--you have adopted me?"

"It means that, if I have given you nothing else, I at least gave you
life; that I bore you, nursed you; that I am your true mother. No other
woman can claim the title; it is _mine_."

"But Mrs. James Helstone--but my father's wife, whom I do not remember
ever to have seen, she is my mother?"

"She _is_ your mother. James Helstone was _my_ husband. I say you are
_mine_. I have proved it. I thought perhaps you were all his, which
would have been a cruel dispensation for me. I find it is _not_ so. God
permitted me to be the parent of my child's mind. It belongs to me; it
is my property--my _right_. These features are James's own. He had a
fine face when he was young, and not altered by error. Papa, my darling,
gave you your blue eyes and soft brown hair; he gave you the oval of
your face and the regularity of your lineaments--the outside _he_
conferred; but the heart and the brain are _mine_. The germs are from
_me_, and they are improved, they are developed to excellence. I esteem
and approve my child as highly as I do most fondly love her."

"Is what I hear true? Is it no dream?"

"I wish it were as true that the substance and colour of health were
restored to your cheek."

"My own mother! is she one I can be so fond of as I can of you? People
generally did not like her--so I have been given to understand."

"They told you that? Well, your mother now tells you that, not having
the gift to please people generally, for their approbation she does not
care. Her thoughts are centred in her child. Does that child welcome or
reject her?"

"But if you _are_ my mother, the world is all changed to me. Surely I
can live. I should like to recover----"

"You _must_ recover. You drew life and strength from my breast when you
were a tiny, fair infant, over whose blue eyes I used to weep, fearing I
beheld in your very beauty the sign of qualities that had entered my
heart like iron, and pierced through my soul like a sword. Daughter! we
have been long parted; I return now to cherish you again."

She held her to her bosom; she cradled her in her arms; she rocked her
softly, as if lulling a young child to sleep.

"My mother--my own mother!"

The offspring nestled to the parent; that parent, feeling the endearment
and hearing the appeal, gathered her closer still. She covered her with
noiseless kisses; she murmured love over her, like a cushat fostering
its young.

There was silence in the room for a long while.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Does my uncle know?"

"Your uncle knows. I told him when I first came to stay with you here."

"Did you recognize me when we first met at Fieldhead?"

"How could it be otherwise? Mr. and Miss Helstone being announced, I was
prepared to see my child."

"It was that, then, which moved you. I saw you disturbed."

"You saw nothing, Caroline; I can cover my feelings. You can never tell
what an age of strange sensation I lived, during the two minutes that
elapsed between the report of your name and your entrance. You can never
tell how your look, mien, carriage, shook me."

"Why? Were you disappointed?"

"What will she be like? I had asked myself; and when I saw what you were
like, I could have dropped."

"Mamma, why?"

"I trembled in your presence. I said, I will never own her; she shall
never know me."

"But I said and did nothing remarkable. I felt a little diffident at the
thought of an introduction to strangers--that was all."

"I soon saw you were diffident. That was the first thing which reassured
me. Had you been rustic, clownish, awkward, I should have been content."

"You puzzle me."

"I had reason to dread a fair outside, to mistrust a popular bearing, to
shudder before distinction, grace, and courtesy. Beauty and affability
had come in my way when I was recluse, desolate, young, and ignorant--a
toil-worn governess perishing of uncheered labour, breaking down before
her time. These, Caroline, when they smiled on me, I mistook for angels.
I followed them home; and when into their hands I had given without
reserve my whole chance of future happiness, it was my lot to witness a
transfiguration on the domestic hearth--to see the white mask lifted,
the bright disguise put away, and opposite me sat down---- O God, I
_have_ suffered!"

She sank on the pillow.

"I _have_ suffered! None saw--none knew. There was no sympathy, no
redemption, no redress!"

"Take comfort, mother. It is over now."

"It is over, and not fruitlessly. I tried to keep the word of His
patience. He kept me in the days of my anguish. I was afraid with
terror--I was troubled. Through great tribulation He brought me through
to a salvation revealed in this last time. My fear had torment; He has
cast it out. He has given me in its stead perfect love. But,
Caroline----"

Thus she invoked her daughter after a pause.

"Mother!"

"I charge you, when you next look on your father's monument, to respect
the name chiselled there. To you he did only good. On you he conferred
his whole treasure of beauties, nor added to them one dark defect. All
_you_ derived from him is excellent. You owe him gratitude. Leave,
between him and me, the settlement of our mutual account. Meddle not.
God is the arbiter. This world's laws never came near us--never! They
were powerless as a rotten bulrush to protect me--impotent as idiot
babblings to restrain him! As you said, it is all over now; the grave
lies between us. There he sleeps, in that church. To his dust I say this
night, what I have never said before, 'James, slumber peacefully! See!
your terrible debt is cancelled! Look! I wipe out the long, black
account with my own hand! James, your child atones. This living likeness
of you--this thing with your perfect features--this one good gift you
gave me has nestled affectionately to my heart, and tenderly called me
"mother." Husband, rest forgiven!'"

"Dearest mother, that is right! Can papa's spirit hear us? Is he
comforted to know that we still love him?"

"I said nothing of love. I spoke of forgiveness. Mind the truth, child;
I said nothing of love! On the threshold of eternity, should he be there
to see me enter, will I maintain that."

"O mother, you must have suffered!"

"O child, the human heart _can_ suffer! It can hold more tears than the
ocean holds waters. We never know how deep, how wide it is, till misery
begins to unbind her clouds, and fill it with rushing blackness."

"Mother, forget."

"Forget!" she said, with the strangest spectre of a laugh. "The north
pole will rush to the south, and the headlands of Europe be locked into
the bays of Australia ere I forget."

"Hush, mother! Rest! Be at peace!"

And the child lulled the parent, as the parent had erst lulled the
child. At last Mrs. Pryor wept. She then grew calmer. She resumed those
tender cares agitation had for a moment suspended. Replacing her
daughter on the couch, she smoothed the pillow and spread the sheet. The
soft hair whose locks were loosened she rearranged, the damp brow she
refreshed with a cool, fragrant essence.

"Mamma, let them bring a candle, that I may see you; and tell my uncle
to come into this room by-and-by. I want to hear him say that I am your
daughter. And, mamma, take your supper here. Don't leave me for one
minute to-night."

"O Caroline, it is well you are gentle! You will say to me, Go, and I
shall go; Come, and I shall come; Do this, and I shall do it. You
inherit a certain manner as well as certain features. It will always be
'mamma' prefacing a mandate--softly spoken, though, from you, thank God!
Well," she added, under her breath, "he spoke softly too, once, like a
flute breathing tenderness; and then, when the world was not by to
listen, discords that split the nerves and curdled the blood--sounds to
inspire insanity."

"It seems so natural, mamma, to ask you for this and that. I shall want
nobody but you to be near me, or to do anything for me. But do not let
me be troublesome. Check me if I encroach."

"You must not depend on me to check you; you must keep guard over
yourself. I have little moral courage; the want of it is my bane. It is
that which has made me an unnatural parent--which has kept me apart from
my child during the ten years which have elapsed since my husband's
death left me at liberty to claim her. It was that which first unnerved
my arms and permitted the infant I might have retained a while longer to
be snatched prematurely from their embrace."

"How, mamma?"

"I let you go as a babe, because you were pretty, and I feared your
loveliness, deeming it the stamp of perversity. They sent me your
