
(ll. 182-189) With such words they spoke together, the son of Zeus who
holds the aegis, and the lady Maia. Now Eros the early born was rising
from deep-flowing Ocean, bringing light to men, when Apollo, as he went,
came to Onchestus, the lovely grove and sacred place of the loud-roaring
Holder of the Earth. There he found an old man grazing his beast along
the pathway from his court-yard fence, and the all-glorious Son of Leto
began and said to him.

(ll. 190-200) 'Old man, weeder [2520] of grassy Onchestus, I am come
here from Pieria seeking cattle, cows all of them, all with curving
horns, from my herd. The black bull was grazing alone away from the
rest, but fierce-eyed hounds followed the cows, four of them, all of one
mind, like men. These were left behind, the dogs and the bull--which is
great marvel; but the cows strayed out of the soft meadow, away from the
pasture when the sun was just going down. Now tell me this, old man born
long ago: have you seen one passing along behind those cows?'

(ll. 201-211) Then the old man answered him and said: 'My son, it is
hard to tell all that one's eyes see; for many wayfarers pass to and fro
this way, some bent on much evil, and some on good: it is difficult to
know each one. However, I was digging about my plot of vineyard all day
long until the sun went down, and I thought, good sir, but I do not know
for certain, that I marked a child, whoever the child was, that followed
long-horned cattle--an infant who had a staff and kept walking from
side to side: he was driving them backwards way, with their heads toward
him.'

(ll. 212-218) So said the old man. And when Apollo heard this report,
he went yet more quickly on his way, and presently, seeing a long-winged
bird, he knew at once by that omen that thief was the child of Zeus the
son of Cronos. So the lord Apollo, son of Zeus, hurried on to goodly
Pylos seeking his shambling oxen, and he had his broad shoulders covered
with a dark cloud. But when the Far-Shooter perceived the tracks, he
cried:

(ll. 219-226) 'Oh, oh! Truly this is a great marvel that my eyes behold!
These are indeed the tracks of straight-horned oxen, but they are turned
backwards towards the flowery meadow. But these others are not the
footprints of man or woman or grey wolves or bears or lions, nor do I
think they are the tracks of a rough-maned Centaur--whoever it be that
with swift feet makes such monstrous footprints; wonderful are the
tracks on this side of the way, but yet more wonderfully are those on
that.'

(ll. 227-234) When he had so said, the lord Apollo, the Son of Zeus
hastened on and came to the forest-clad mountain of Cyllene and the
deep-shadowed cave in the rock where the divine nymph brought forth the
child of Zeus who is the son of Cronos. A sweet odour spread over the
lovely hill, and many thin-shanked sheep were grazing on the grass.
Then far-shooting Apollo himself stepped down in haste over the stone
threshold into the dusky cave.

(ll. 235-253) Now when the Son of Zeus and Maia saw Apollo in a rage
about his cattle, he snuggled down in his fragrant swaddling-clothes;
and as wood-ash covers over the deep embers of tree-stumps, so Hermes
cuddled himself up when he saw the Far-Shooter. He squeezed head and
hands and feet together in a small space, like a new born child seeking
sweet sleep, though in truth he was wide awake, and he kept his lyre
under his armpit. But the Son of Leto was aware and failed not to
perceive the beautiful mountain-nymph and her dear son, albeit a little
child and swathed so craftily. He peered in every corner of the great
dwelling and, taking a bright key, he opened three closets full of
nectar and lovely ambrosia. And much gold and silver was stored in them,
and many garments of the nymph, some purple and some silvery white, such
as are kept in the sacred houses of the blessed gods. Then, after the
Son of Leto had searched out the recesses of the great house, he spake
to glorious Hermes:

(ll. 254-259) 'Child, lying in the cradle, make haste and tell me of my
cattle, or we two will soon fall out angrily. For I will take and cast
you into dusty Tartarus and awful hopeless darkness, and neither your
mother nor your father shall free you or bring you up again to the
light, but you will wander under the earth and be the leader amongst
little folk.' [2521]

(ll. 260-277) Then Hermes answered him with crafty words: 'Son of Leto,
what harsh words are these you have spoken? And is it cattle of the
field you are come here to seek? I have not seen them: I have not heard
of them: no one has told me of them. I cannot give news of them, nor win
the reward for news. Am I like a cattle-lifter, a stalwart person? This
is no task for me: rather I care for other things: I care for sleep, and
milk of my mother's breast, and wrappings round my shoulders, and warm
baths. Let no one hear the cause of this dispute; for this would be a
great marvel indeed among the deathless gods, that a child newly born
should pass in through the forepart of the house with cattle of the
field: herein you speak extravagantly. I was born yesterday, and my feet
are soft and the ground beneath is rough; nevertheless, if you will
have it so, I will swear a great oath by my father's head and vow that
neither am I guilty myself, neither have I seen any other who stole your
cows--whatever cows may be; for I know them only by hearsay.'

(ll. 278-280) So, then, said Hermes, shooting quick glances from his
eyes: and he kept raising his brows and looking this way and that,
whistling long and listening to Apollo's story as to an idle tale.

(ll. 281-292) But far-working Apollo laughed softly and said to him:
'O rogue, deceiver, crafty in heart, you talk so innocently that I most
surely believe that you have broken into many a well-built house and
stripped more than one poor wretch bare this night [2522], gathering his
goods together all over the house without noise. You will plague many
a lonely herdsman in mountain glades, when you come on herds and
thick-fleeced sheep, and have a hankering after flesh. But come now, if
you would not sleep your last and latest sleep, get out of your cradle,
you comrade of dark night. Surely hereafter this shall be your
title amongst the deathless gods, to be called the prince of robbers
continually.'

(ll. 293-300) So said Phoebus Apollo, and took the child and began to
carry him. But at that moment the strong Slayer of Argus had his
plan, and, while Apollo held him in his hands, sent forth an omen, a
hard-worked belly-serf, a rude messenger, and sneezed directly after.
And when Apollo heard it, he dropped glorious Hermes out of his hands on
the ground: then sitting down before him, though he was eager to go on
his way, he spoke mockingly to Hermes:

(ll. 301-303) 'Fear not, little swaddling baby, son of Zeus and Maia.
I shall find the strong cattle presently by these omens, and you shall
lead the way.'

(ll. 304-306) When Apollo had so said, Cyllenian Hermes sprang up
quickly, starting in haste. With both hands he pushed up to his ears the
covering that he had wrapped about his shoulders, and said:

(ll. 307-312) 'Where are you carrying me, Far-Worker, hastiest of all
the gods? Is it because of your cattle that you are so angry and harass
me? O dear, would that all the sort of oxen might perish; for it is not
I who stole your cows, nor did I see another steal them--whatever cows
may be, and of that I have only heard report. Nay, give right and take
it before Zeus, the Son of Cronos.'

(ll. 313-326) So Hermes the shepherd and Leto's glorious son kept
stubbornly disputing each article of their quarrel: Apollo, speaking
truly.... ((LACUNA)) ....not fairly sought to seize glorious Hermes
because of the cows; but he, the Cyllenian, tried to deceive the God of
the Silver Bow with tricks and cunning words. But when, though he had
many wiles, he found the other had as many shifts, he began to walk
across the sand, himself in front, while the Son of Zeus and Leto came
behind. Soon they came, these lovely children of Zeus, to the top of
fragrant Olympus, to their father, the Son of Cronos; for there were the
scales of judgement set for them both.

There was an assembly on snowy Olympus, and the immortals who perish not
were gathering after the hour of gold-throned Dawn.

(ll. 327-329) Then Hermes and Apollo of the Silver Bow stood at the
knees of Zeus: and Zeus who thunders on high spoke to his glorious son
and asked him:

(ll. 330-332) 'Phoebus, whence come you driving this great spoil, a
child new born that has the look of a herald? This is a weighty matter
that is come before the council of the gods.'

(ll. 333-364) Then the lord, far-working Apollo, answered him: 'O my
father, you shall soon hear no trifling tale though you reproach me that
I alone am fond of spoil. Here is a child, a burgling robber, whom I
found after a long journey in the hills of Cyllene: for my part I have
never seen one so pert either among the gods or all men that catch folk
unawares throughout the world. He stole away my cows from their meadow
and drove them off in the evening along the shore of the loud-roaring
sea, making straight for Pylos. There were double tracks, and wonderful
they were, such as one might marvel at, the doing of a clever sprite;
for as for the cows, the dark dust kept and showed their footprints
leading towards the flowery meadow; but he himself--bewildering
creature--crossed the sandy ground outside the path, not on his feet nor
yet on his hands; but, furnished with some other means he trudged his
way--wonder of wonders!--as though one walked on slender oak-trees. Now
while he followed the cattle across sandy ground, all the tracks showed
quite clearly in the dust; but when he had finished the long way across
the sand, presently the cows' track and his own could not be traced
over the hard ground. But a mortal man noticed him as he drove the
wide-browed kine straight towards Pylos. And as soon as he had shut them
up quietly, and had gone home by crafty turns and twists, he lay down in
his cradle in the gloom of a dim cave, as still as dark night, so that
not even an eagle keenly gazing would have spied him. Much he rubbed his
eyes with his hands as he prepared falsehood, and himself straightway
said roundly: "I have not seen them: I have not heard of them: no man
has told me of them. I could not tell you of them, nor win the reward of
telling."'

(ll. 365-367) When he had so spoken, Phoebus Apollo sat down. But Hermes
on his part answered and said, pointing at the Son of Cronos, the lord
of all the gods:

(ll. 368-386) 'Zeus, my father, indeed I will speak truth to you; for I
am truthful and I cannot tell a lie. He came to our house to-day looking
for his shambling cows, as the sun was newly rising. He brought no
witnesses with him nor any of the blessed gods who had seen the theft,
but with great violence ordered me to confess, threatening much to throw
me into wide Tartarus. For he has the rich bloom of glorious youth,
while I was born but yesterday--as he too knows--nor am I like a
cattle-lifter, a sturdy fellow. Believe my tale (for you claim to be
my own father), that I did not drive his cows to my house--so may I
prosper--nor crossed the threshold: this I say truly. I reverence Helios
greatly and the other gods, and you I love and him I dread. You yourself
know that I am not guilty: and I will swear a great oath upon it:--No!
by these rich-decked porticoes of the gods. And some day I will punish
him, strong as he is, for this pitiless inquisition; but now do you help
the younger.'

(ll. 387-396) So spake the Cyllenian, the Slayer of Argus, while he kept
shooting sidelong glances and kept his swaddling-clothes upon his
arm, and did not cast them away. But Zeus laughed out loud to see his
evil-plotting child well and cunningly denying guilt about the cattle.
And he bade them both to be of one mind and search for the cattle, and
guiding Hermes to lead the way and, without mischievousness of heart, to
show the place where now he had hidden the strong cattle. Then the Son
of Cronos bowed his head: and goodly Hermes obeyed him; for the will of
Zeus who holds the aegis easily prevailed with him.

(ll. 397-404) Then the two all-glorious children of Zeus hastened both
to sandy Pylos, and reached the ford of Alpheus, and came to the fields
and the high-roofed byre where the beasts were cherished at night-time.
Now while Hermes went to the cave in the rock and began to drive out the
strong cattle, the son of Leto, looking aside, saw the cowhides on the
sheer rock. And he asked glorious Hermes at once:

(ll. 405-408) 'How were you able, you crafty rogue, to flay two cows,
new-born and babyish as you are? For my part, I dread the strength that
will be yours: there is no need you should keep growing long, Cyllenian,
son of Maia!'

(ll. 409-414) So saying, Apollo twisted strong withes with his hands
meaning to bind Hermes with firm bands; but the bands would not hold
him, and the withes of osier fell far from him and began to grow at once
from the ground beneath their feet in that very place. And intertwining
with one another, they quickly grew and covered all the wild-roving
cattle by the will of thievish Hermes, so that Apollo was astonished as
he gazed.

(ll. 414-435) Then the strong slayer of Argus looked furtively upon
the ground with eyes flashing fire.... desiring to hide.... ((LACUNA))
....Very easily he softened the son of all-glorious Leto as he would,
stern though the Far-shooter was. He took the lyre upon his left arm and
tried each string in turn with the key, so that it sounded awesomely at
his touch. And Phoebus Apollo laughed for joy; for the sweet throb of
the marvellous music went to his heart, and a soft longing took hold on
his soul as he listened. Then the son of Maia, harping sweetly upon his
lyre, took courage and stood at the left hand of Phoebus Apollo; and
soon, while he played shrilly on his lyre, he lifted up his voice and
sang, and lovely was the sound of his voice that followed. He sang the
story of the deathless gods and of the dark earth, how at the first they
came to be, and how each one received his portion. First among the gods
he honoured Mnemosyne, mother of the Muses, in his song; for the son of
Maia was of her following. And next the goodly son of Zeus hymned the
rest of the immortals according to their order in age, and told how each
was born, mentioning all in order as he struck the lyre upon his arm.
But Apollo was seized with a longing not to be allayed, and he opened
his mouth and spoke winged words to Hermes:

(ll. 436-462) 'Slayer of oxen, trickster, busy one, comrade of the
feast, this song of yours is worth fifty cows, and I believe that
presently we shall settle our quarrel peacefully. But come now, tell me
this, resourceful son of Maia: has this marvellous thing been with you
from your birth, or did some god or mortal man give it you--a noble
gift--and teach you heavenly song? For wonderful is this new-uttered
sound I hear, the like of which I vow that no man nor god dwelling on
Olympus ever yet has known but you, O thievish son of Maia. What skill
is this? What song for desperate cares? What way of song? For verily
here are three things to hand all at once from which to choose,--mirth,
and love, and sweet sleep. And though I am a follower of the Olympian
Muses who love dances and the bright path of song--the full-toned chant
and ravishing thrill of flutes--yet I never cared for any of those feats
of skill at young men's revels, as I do now for this: I am filled with
wonder, O son of Zeus, at your sweet playing. But now, since you, though
little, have such glorious skill, sit down, dear boy, and respect the
words of your elders. For now you shall have renown among the deathless
gods, you and your mother also. This I will declare to you exactly: by
this shaft of cornel wood I will surely make you a leader renowned among
the deathless gods, and fortunate, and will give you glorious gifts and
will not deceive you from first to last.'

(ll. 463-495) Then Hermes answered him with artful words: 'You question
me carefully, O Far-worker; yet I am not jealous that you should enter
upon my art: this day you shall know it. For I seek to be friendly
with you both in thought and word. Now you well know all things in your
heart, since you sit foremost among the deathless gods, O son of Zeus,
and are goodly and strong. And wise Zeus loves you as all right is, and
has given you splendid gifts. And they say that from the utterance of
Zeus you have learned both the honours due to the gods, O Far-worker,
and oracles from Zeus, even all his ordinances. Of all these I myself
have already learned that you have great wealth. Now, you are free to
learn whatever you please; but since, as it seems, your heart is so
strongly set on playing the lyre, chant, and play upon it, and give
yourself to merriment, taking this as a gift from me, and do you, my
friend, bestow glory on me. Sing well with this clear-voiced companion
in your hands; for you are skilled in good, well-ordered utterance.
From now on bring it confidently to the rich feast and lovely dance and
glorious revel, a joy by night and by day. Whoso with wit and wisdom
enquires of it cunningly, him it teaches through its sound all manner
of things that delight the mind, being easily played with gentle
familiarities, for it abhors toilsome drudgery; but whoso in
ignorance enquires of it violently, to him it chatters mere vanity and
foolishness. But you are able to learn whatever you please. So then, I
will give you this lyre, glorious son of Zeus, while I for my part
will graze down with wild-roving cattle the pastures on hill and
horse-feeding plain: so shall the cows covered by the bulls calve
abundantly both males and females. And now there is no need for you,
bargainer though you are, to be furiously angry.'

(ll. 496-502) When Hermes had said this, he held out the lyre: and
Phoebus Apollo took it, and readily put his shining whip in Hermes'
hand, and ordained him keeper of herds. The son of Maia received it
joyfully, while the glorious son of Leto, the lord far-working Apollo,
took the lyre upon his left arm and tried each string with the key.
Awesomely it sounded at the touch of the god, while he sang sweetly to
its note.

(ll. 503-512) Afterwards they two, the all-glorious sons of Zeus turned
the cows back towards the sacred meadow, but themselves hastened back to
snowy Olympus, delighting in the lyre. Then wise Zeus was glad and made
them both friends. And Hermes loved the son of Leto continually, even as
he does now, when he had given the lyre as token to the Far-shooter,
who played it skilfully, holding it upon his arm. But for himself Hermes
found out another cunning art and made himself the pipes whose sound is
heard afar.

(ll. 513-520) Then the son of Leto said to Hermes: 'Son of Maia, guide
and cunning one, I fear you may steal form me the lyre and my curved bow
together; for you have an office from Zeus, to establish deeds of barter
amongst men throughout the fruitful earth. Now if you would only swear
me the great oath of the gods, either by nodding your head, or by the
potent water of Styx, you would do all that can please and ease my
heart.'

(ll. 521-549) Then Maia's son nodded his head and promised that he would
never steal anything of all the Far-shooter possessed, and would never
go near his strong house; but Apollo, son of Leto, swore to be fellow
and friend to Hermes, vowing that he would love no other among the
immortals, neither god nor man sprung from Zeus, better than Hermes: and
the Father sent forth an eagle in confirmation. And Apollo sware also:
'Verily I will make you only to be an omen for the immortals and all
alike, trusted and honoured by my heart. Moreover, I will give you a
splendid staff of riches and wealth: it is of gold, with three branches,
and will keep you scatheless, accomplishing every task, whether of words
or deeds that are good, which I claim to know through the utterance of
Zeus. But as for sooth-saying, noble, heaven-born child, of which you
ask, it is not lawful for you to learn it, nor for any other of the
deathless gods: only the mind of Zeus knows that. I am pledged and have
vowed and sworn a strong oath that no other of the eternal gods save
I should know the wise-hearted counsel of Zeus. And do not you, my
brother, bearer of the golden wand, bid me tell those decrees which
all-seeing Zeus intends. As for men, I will harm one and profit another,
sorely perplexing the tribes of unenviable men. Whosoever shall come
guided by the call and flight of birds of sure omen, that man shall have
advantage through my voice, and I will not deceive him. But whoso shall
trust to idly-chattering birds and shall seek to invoke my prophetic
art contrary to my will, and to understand more than the eternal gods,
