made the attempt in the teeth of a blinding snow storm.  Arnold
led the assault on one side of the town, Montgomery on the other.
With tremendous dash and bravery the colonists carried the first
barricades, and forced their way into the town.  But almost at the
outset Montgomery was killed.  A little later Arnold was sorely
wounded, and had to be carried back to the camp.  Both leaders gone,
the heart went out of the men, and they retreated, leaving many
prisoners at the hands of the British.

The great assault had failed, but sick and wounded though he was,
Arnold did not lose heart.  He still kept up a show of besieging
Quebec. "I have no thought of leaving this proud town, " he said,
"until I first enter it in triumph.  I am in the way of my duty and
know no fear." But the only chance of taking Quebec was to take
it in the winter, while the St.  Lawrence was closed with ice, so
that the British ships could not reach it with reinforcements and
supplies.  Arnold therefore sent to Washington begging for five
thousand troops.  Such a number it was impossible for Washington
to spare from his little army, and only a few reinforcements were
sent, most of whom reached Arnold utterly exhausted with their long
tramp through the pathless wilderness.  Smallpox, too, became rife
in the camp, so although there at length two thousand men before
Quebec not more that a thousand were fit for duty.  Yet what mere
men could do they did.

But winter passed and Quebec remained untaken.  Then on April morning
Captain Charles Douglas arrived off the mouth of the St.  Lawrence
with a fleet of British ships.  He found the river still packed with
ice.  But Quebec he knew must be in sore straits.  It was no time for
caution, so by way of experiment he ran his flag ship full speed
against a mass of ice.  The ice was shivered to pieces, and the good
ship sailed unharmed.  For nine days the gallant vessel ploughed
on through fields of ice, but suffering no serious damage, her
stout-hearted captain having no thought but to reach and relieve
the beleaguered city.

His boldness was rewarded.  Other vessels followed in his track,
and at their coming the colonists gave up their attempt to conquer
Canada, and marched away.

The attack on Canada had been an utter failure, but Arnold still
clung to the hope of commanding the great waterway from the St.
Lawrence to the Hudson.  At Crown Point he began to build ships,
and by the end of September had a little fleet of nine.  The British
also busied themselves building ships, and on the 11th of October
a fight between the two fleets took place on Lake Champlain, between
the island of Valcour and the mainland.

The British ships were far larger and more numerous than the
American, indeed in comparison with the British the American boats
were mere cockle shells, but the colonists put up a gallant fight
which lasted five hours, and the sun went down leaving them sadly
shattered but still unbeaten.

The British commander, however, felt sure of finishing them off in
the morning.  So he anchored his ships in a line across the southern
end of the channel, between the island and the mainland, thus
cutting off all retreat.  But Arnold knew his danger, and determined
to make a dash for freedom.  The night was dark and foggy.  The British
were so sure of their prey that they kept no watch.  So while they
slept one by one the American ships crept silently through their
lines and sped away.

When day dawned the British with wrath and disgust saw an empty
lake where they had expected to see a stricken foe.  They immediately
gave chase and the following day they again came up with the little
American fleet, for many of the ships were so crippled that they
could move but slowly.  Again a five hours' battle was fought.  One
ship, the Washington, struck her flag.  But Arnold in his little
Congress fought doggedly on.  Then seeing he could resist no more
he drove the Congress and four other small boats ashore in a creek
too narrow for any but the smallest one of the British ships to
follow.  Here he set them on fire, and bade his men leap for the
shore, he himself being the last to leave the burning decks.  On
land he waited until he was certain that the ships were safe from
capture, and that they would go down with their flags flying.  Then he
marched off with his men, and brought them all safely to Ticonderoga.

The attack on Canada had been an utter failure, the little American
fleet had been shattered, save for Ticonderoga the coveted waterway
was in the hands of the British.  Had the British commander known it
too he might have attacked Ticonderoga then and there, and taken
it with ease.  But Arnold was there, and Arnold had made such a
name for himself by his dash and courage that Carleton did not dare
attack the fort.  And contenting himself for the moment with having
gained control of Lake Champlain he turned to attack Canada.  Arnold
had failed to take Quebec, and he has lost his little fleet.  But
against his failure to take Quebec his countrymen put his wonderful
march through pathless forest; against the loss of the fleet the
fact that but for Arnold it would never have been built at all.  So
the people cheered him as a hero, and Washington looked upon him
as one of his best officers.

But Arnold's temper was hot if his head was cool, he was ambitious
and somewhat arrogant.  And while he had been fighting so bravely
he had quarreled with his brother officers, and made enemies of
many.  They declared that he fought not for his country's honour
but for the glory of Benedict Arnold.  So it came about that he did
not receive the reward of promotion which he felt himself entitled
to.  When Congress appointed several new Major Generals he was
passed over, and once again, as after the taking of Ticonderoga,
bitterness filled his heart.

__________





Chapter 55 - The Birth of A Great Nation




While these things were happening in the north the British had been
forced to march away from Boston.

At first Washington could do little but keep his army before the
town, for he had no siege guns with which to bombard it.  Nor had
he any desire to destroy the town." Burn it," said some, "if that
is the only way of driving out the British." Even John Hancock to
whom a great part of Boston belonged advised this. "Burn Boston,"
he said," and make John Hancock a beggar, if the public good requires
it." But Washington did not attempt to burn it.

After the taking of Ticonderoga and Crown Point however he got guns.
For many of the cannon taken at these forts were put on sledges
and dragged over the snow to Boston.  It was Colonel Henry Knox
who carried out this feat.  He was a stout young man with a lovely
smile and jolly fat laugh, who greatly enjoyed a joke.  He had been
a bookseller before the war turned him into a soldier.  And now as
he felled trees, and made sledges, and encouraged his men over the
long rough way he hugely enjoyed the joke of bringing British guns
to bombard the British out of Boston.

When Washington got these guns he quietly one night took possession
of Dorchester Heights, which commanded both Boston town and harbour.
So quick had been his action that it seemed to General Howe, the
British commander, as if the fortifications on Dorchester Heights
had been the work of magic.  But magic or no magic they were, he
saw, a real and formidable danger.  With siege guns frowning above
both town and harbour it was no longer possible to hold Boston.  So
hastily embarking his troops General Howe sailed away to Halifax
in Nova Scotia, and Boston was left in peace for the rest of the
war.

By this time there had been fighting in the south as well as in New
England.  For King George had taken it into his stubborn head that
it would be a good plan to attack the southern colonies in spite of
the fact that the war in the north was already more that he could
manage.  Sir Peter Parker, therefore, was sent out from England with
a fleet of about fifty ships, and Lord Cornwallis with two thousand
men, to attack Charleston in South Carolina.  Howe was also ordered
to send some soldiers southward, and although he could ill spare
them from Boston he sent General Sir Henry Clinton with a small
detachment.

According to arrangement the troops from Boston and England were
to attack together with the loyalists of the south and the friendly
Indians.  But everything was bungled.  The fleet, the land force,
the loyalists and the Indians all seemed to be pulling different
ways, and attacked at different times.  The assault on Charleston
was a miserable failure, and to the delight of the colonists the
whole British force sailed away to join Howe in the north, and for
more than two years there was no fighting in the southern colonies.

The commander of the colonists in Charleston was General Charles
Lee.  He was not really an American at all, but an Englishman, a
soldier of fortune and adventure.  He had wandered about the world,
fighting in many lands, and had been in Braddock's army when it
was defeated.  He never became an American at heart like some other
Englishmen who fought on their side.  He cared little for them, he
cared as little for the cause in which they were fighting, merely
seeing in it a chance of making himself famous, and he had a very
poor opinion of their fighting qualities.  He was a tall, spare man
with a hollow-cheeked, ugly face, and a disagreeable manner.  He
had a great opinion of himself, and boasted to such purpose that
the Americans believed him to be a military genius.  And in this
first tussle with the British in the south he did so well that
their belief in him seemed justified.  He seemed to the people a hero
and a genius rolled in one.  In all the war after he did nothing to
uphold the fame he gained at Charleston.

South as well as north had now had a taste of war.  South as well as
north had seen the British sail away, foiled.  Every royal governor
had by this time been driven from his post, and for six months
and more the colonies had practically ruled themselves.  What then,
said many, was the use of talking any more about allegiance to the
mother country? It was time, they said, to announce to all the world
that the colonies of America were a free and independent nation.

There was much grave discussion in Congress and throughout the
country.  Some patriots, even those who longed most ardently to see
America a free country, thought that it was too soon to make the
claim.  Among those was Patrick Henry who had already ranged himself
so passionately on the side of freedom." The struggle is only
beginning," he said," and we are not yet united.  Wait till we are
united.  Wait until we have won our freedom, then let us proclaim
it."

But by degrees all those who hesitated were won over, and on the
4th of July, 1776, the colonies declared themselves to be free.

Many meetings were held in what has since been called Independence
Hall at Philadelphia.  Much discussion there was, but at length the
solemn declaration was drawn up. "We, the Representatives of the
United States of America," so it ran," in General Congress assembled,
appealing to the supreme judge of the world for the rectitude of
our intention, do, in the name, and by the authority of the good
people of these colonies, solemnly publish and declare, that these
united colonies are, and of right ought to be, Free and Independent
States." These are but a few words of the long, gravely worded
declaration which was drawn up by Thomas Jefferson, and which is
familiar to every American to this day.

John Hancock was President of Congress at this time, and he was
the first to sign the declaration.  Large, and clear, and all across
the page the signature runs, showing, as it were, the calm mind and
firm judgment which guided the hand that wrote.  It was not until
a few days later that it was signed by the other members.

It was on the 4th of July that Congress agreed to the declaration,
and so that day has ever since been kept as a national holiday.  It
was the birthday of the United States as a Nation.  But it was not
until a few days later that the Declaration was read to the people
of Philadelphia from Independence Hall.  It was greeted with cheers
and shouts of delight.  The old bell upon the tower pealed joyfully,
and swift riders mounted and rode to bear the news in all directions.
The next day it was read at the head of each brigade of the army,
and was greeted with loud cheers.

This Declaration of Independence was a bold deed, it might almost
seem a rash one.  For the British army was still in the land, and
the Americans by no means always victorious.  But the very fact of
the boldness of the deed made them feel that they must be brave
and steadfast, and that having claimed freedom they must win it.
The Declaration drew the colonies together as nothing else had done,
and even those who had thought the deed too rash came to see that
it had been wise.


__________





Chapter 56 - The Darkest Hour - Trenton and Princeton




In many places the news of the Declaration of Independence and the
news of the victory at Charleston came at the same time, and gave
a double cause for rejoicing.  It was the last good news which was
to come for many a long day.  Indeed for months misfortune followed
misfortune, until it almost seemed as if the Declaration of
Independence had been the rash and useless action some had held it
to be.

By the end of June General Howe sailed southward from Halifax, and
landed on Staten Island southwest of New York, to await the arrival
from England of his brother, Admiral Howe.  On July 12th, just eight
days after the declaration of independence, Admiral Howe arrived
with strong reinforcements of ships and men.  But before he began
to fight he tried to come to terms with the rebel colonies, and
for a second time free pardon was offered to all who would submit
and own British rule once more.  But the Americans were in no mood
to submit, and had no wish for "pardon."

"No doubt," said one, "we all need pardon from heaven, but the
American who needs pardon from his Britannic Majesty is yet to be
found."

So instead of submitting they made ready to fight.  The British
also prepared to fight, and the force of the next blow fell upon
New York.  There were now more than thirty thousand British troops
gathered here.  It was the largest army which had ever been sent
out of England, and King George had never a doubt that this great
force, backed by his unconquerable navy, would soon bring the ten
or twenty thousand ragged, half starved rebels to their knees.

He little knew the men or the man which who he had to deal.  The
army was indeed ragged and undisciplined.  But as the great Napoleon
said later, "In war the man is everything." And Washington was
soon to show the world what could be done by brave undisciplined
men whose hearts were behind their muskets.

As soon as Washington had gained possession of Boston he left an
old general with a small force to guard it, and transported the
main body of his army to New York, feeling sure that the next attack
would be made there.

Brooklyn Heights on Long Island commanded New York, very much in
the same way as Bunker Hill and Dorchester Heights commanded Boston,
and Washington knew he must keep possession of those heights, if
New York was not to be given up without a blow being struck.  He
did not want to give it up without striking a blow, for he feared
the effect on the spirits of the country.  So he send General Putnam
with about eight thousand men to occupy the Heights.

In doing this Washington placed his army in a very dangerous position,
for the East River was large enough to allow British war ships to
sail up it and thus cut his army in two.  But he could do nothing
else, for if the enemy got possession of the Heights the town was
at his mercy.

Howe was not slow to see this, and, having carefully and secretly
made his plans, he attacked the forces on Brooklyn Heights in the
early morning of August 27th in front, and flank, and rear, all at
once.

One division of the Americans was nearly wiped out, many being killed
and the rest being taken prisoner.  A little band of Marylanders
put up a fine but hopeless fight for nearly four hours, the remnant
of them at length taking refuge in the fortifications.  To make the
defeat a disaster for the colonists Howe had but to storm these
fortifications.  But he refused to do so.  Enough had been done for
one day, he said.  Bunker Hill had taught the British to beware of
storming heights.  A siege would be less costly, thought Howe.

Within the fortifications the colonists were in a miserable plight.
They had little shelter, the rain fell in torrents, and a cold
northeast wind chilled them to the bone.  They had nothing to eat
except dry biscuit and raw pork.  They were hungry and weary, wet
and cold.  Yet one of their miseries was a blessing.  For as long as
the northeast wind blew Howe could not bring his ships up the East
River and cut communications between Long Island and New York.  For
in those days, it must be remembered, there were no steamers, and
sailing vessels had to depend on wind and tide.

Washington, however, knew his danger.  He knew that he must withdraw
from Long Island.  So secretly he gave orders that everything which
could be found in the shape of a boat was to be brought to Brooklyn
Ferry.  They were soon gathered, and at eight o'clock in the evening,
two days after the battle of Long Island, quickly and quietly the
army was ferried across the wide river to the New York side.  All
night the rowers laboured, but the work was by no means finished
when day dawned.  The weather, however, still helped the colonists,
for a thick fog settled over the river and hid what was going on
from the British.  Wounded, prisoners, cannon, stores, horses, were
all ferried over, and when later in the day the British marched
into the deserted camp they found not so much as a crust of bread.

It was about six in the morning when the last boat put off, and in
it was Washington, the last man to leave.  For forty hours he had
hardly been off his horse, and had never for a minute lain down
to rest.  He was unwearyingly watchful, and left nothing to chance,
and this retreat is looked upon as one of the most masterly in all
military history.

Having abandoned Brooklyn Washington knew that he could not hope
to hold New York against an attack.  But for a fortnight neither
Admiral nor General Howe made any attack.  Instead they talked once
more of peace.  It almost seemed as if Lord Howe were on the side
of the Americans, as indeed he had always said he was, until he
was ordered out to fight against them. "He is either a very slow
officer, or else he is our very good friend," said one of them.

The fortnight which he now wasted gave Washington time to decide
what it was best to do, and when at last the British began the
attack on New York nearly all the stores and cannon had already
been removed to Harlem Heights, about ten miles away at the north
of Manhattan Island.  All the troops, too, had gone except about
four thousand under General Putnam, who stayed to keep order, and
look after the removal of the last of the stores.  When the attack
came these were very nearly caught.  For the regiment who ought
to have guarded the landing place, and have kept the enemy from
advancing until Putnam could retire, ran away as soon as they saw
the red coats.

In vain their officers tried to rally them; panic had seized them,
and they fled like frightened sheep.  In the confusion Washington
rode up.  He was a man of fiery temper, and now when he saw his men
show such a lack of courage in the face of the enemy he lost all
control.  Dashing his had upon the ground, and, drawing his sword,
he bade them cease their cowardly retreat.  But even Washington
could not rally the fleeing men.  Then his wrath and despair knew no
bounds, and spurring his horse, he rode alone towards the enemy.
Death, he felt, was better than such shame.  But one of his officers,
dashing after him, seized his bridle and turned him back to safety.

Meanwhile Putnam was making frantic efforts to gather his men and
march them off to Harlem Heights.  It was a day of violent heat,
and as the men struggled on, laden with their baggage, their breath
came short, and the perspiration trickled down their faces.  Every
moment they expected to be attacked in the rear.

But the attack did not come.  For as Howe and his officers were
passing the pleasant country house of Mrs.  Robert Murray a servant
came out to ask them to lunch.  It was a tempting invitation on a
hot day, --too tempting to be refused.  So a halt was called, and
while Howe and his officers enjoyed a pleasant meal, and listened
to the talk of a clever, handsome lady, Putnam marched his panting
men to safety.

Washington was greatly cast down at what he called the "disgraceful
and dastardly" conduct of some of his troops that day.  He knew
that an attack on Harlem Heights must come, and come soon.  But what
would be the result? Would his men run away, or would they fight?
"Experience, to my extreme affliction," he wrote sadly, "has
convinced me that this is rather to be wished for than expected.
However, I trust there are many who will act like men, and show
themselves worthy of the blessings of freedom."

Washington had no real cause for fear.  Next day the test came,
and the Americans wiped out the memory of the day before.  In wave
after wave the British attacked, but again and again the colonists
met them, and at last drove them to their trenches; and there was
joy in the patriot camp.

Howe still pursued the war very slowly.  After the battle of
Harlem Heights he left Washington along for nearly a month, during
which time the colonist fortified their camp strongly.  But the
commander-in-chief soon became convinced that the place was little
better than a trap, in which Howe might surround him, and force
him to surrender with all his army.  So he retreated northward to
White Plains, and the British settled down in New York, which they
held till the end of the war.

And now misfortunes fell thick and fast upon the patriots.  They
still held Fort Washington on Manhattan Island, and Fort Lee on the
opposite side of the Hudson, the garrisons of which were under the
command of General Greene.  Washington now advised him to abandon
the forts, but did not give him absolute orders to do so.  It is
probably that he would have taken his commander's advice had not
Congress interfered and sent orders that Fort Washington was not
to be given up, except as a last necessity.  Greene, believing that
it was possible to hold it, tried to obey Congress.  But on the
16th of November, after a fierce fight against tremendous odds, the
fort was surrounded, and all the defenders to the number of about
three thousand were taken prisoner.

The loss was a bitter blow to Washington, for the men taken prisoners
were some of his best soldiers.  Four days later Fort Lee was also
taken, and although the garrison escaped they left behind them
large stores of food, ammunition, baggage of all sorts, as well as
cannon, which they could ill spare.

Washington now resolved on a retreat towards Philadelphia, and gloom
settled on the ragged little army of patriots.  They were weary of
retreats and defeats, and felt that their cause was already lost.
Winter was fast coming on and many shouldered their arms and marched
homeward.  And so the once buoyant enthusiastic army melted away to
a hungry and dispirited troop of little more than four thousand.

General Lee had at this time but lately returned from his triumphs
in South Carolina, and he was more boastful and arrogant than ever.
After Washington he was second in command, but he had no doubt
in his own mind that he ought to be first.  Now he was not slow to
let others know what he thought.  And while Washington, noble and
upright gentleman as he was, trusted Lee as a friend, and believed
in him as a soldier, Lee schemed to supplant him.

Washington had left Lee at North Castle with seven thousand men.
Now he sent him orders to join him at once, so that if he should
have to fight a battle he could have at least some sort of army
to fight with.  But Lee pretended to misunderstand.  He made excuses
for delay, he argued, and lied, and stayed where he was.  Perhaps
he thought that it would be no bad thing if Washington should be
defeated and captured.  Then he would be commander-in-chief.

But it was Lee who was captured, not Washington.  He had in a
leisurely fashion at last begun to move, and on the march he spent
a night at a wayside inn.  The British, hearing of his whereabouts,
surrounded the inn and took him prisoner.  For more than a year he
remained in their hands, a very comfortable captive, and his army,
under General John Sullivan, marched to join Washington, who was
still retreating southward through New Jersey before the overwhelming
force of the British.

It was weary work retreating.  But with masterly generalship, and
untiring watchfulness, Washington avoided a battle, and slipped
through the toils.  As the pursued and pursuers neared Philadelphia
something like panic laid hold of the city.  All day long the rumble
of wagons might be heard carrying women and children to places of
safety.  Congress was hurriedly removed to Baltimore; but hundreds
of men seized their rifles and marched to join the army to fight
for their country in its darkest hour.

But already the worst was over.  Washington's army was now well
reinforced.  He had the recruits from Philadelphia, he had Lee's
army, and he also had two thousand men sent him by Schuyler from the
north.  So he resolved to make a bold bid for fortune.  He resolved
to do or die.  He gave as the password, "Victory or death," and
in the dark of Christmas night, 1771, he and his men crossed the
Delaware River above the town of Trenton, where the British lay,
together with a large company of the Hessian troops who had been
hired to fight the Americans.  The river was full of floating ice,
which made the crossing dangerous and slow.  But through the darkness
the men toiled on, fending off the ice blocks as best they could
as they steered their boats through the drifting mass.  At length,
after ten hours' labour, they reached the other side without the
loss of one man.

It was four o'clock when the troops started off on their seven-mile
march to Trenton over the snowy ground, the icy wind driving the
sleet and snow in their faces.  But by eight o'clock they had reached
Trenton.  The British were utterly taken by surprise, and almost at
once the Hessians surrendered.

Having sent his prisoners, to the number of nearly a thousand,
to the other side of the river, Washington took possession of the
town.  But he was not long allowed to remain there.  For the British
commander, Lord Cornwallis, marched to dislodge him with an army
of eight thousand men.

Washington let him come, and on the 2nd of January, Cornwallis
encamped before Trenton, determined next morning to give battle.
He was sure of victory, and in great spirits. "At last we have run
down the old fox, and we will bag him in the morning," he said.

But Washington was not to be so easily caught.  The two armies were
so near that the watchfires of the one could be plainly seen by
the other.  All night the American watchfires blazed, all night men
could be heard working at the fortifications.  But that was only
a blind.  In the darkness Washington and his army quietly slipped
away to Princeton.  There he fell upon the British reinforcements,
who were marching to join Cornwallis at Trenton, and put them to
flight.

When day came Cornwallis was astonished to find the American camp
empty.  And when he heard the firing in the distance he knew what
had happened, and hastily retreated to New York, while Washington
drew off his victorious but weary men to Morristown in New Jersey.
Here for the next few months they remained, resting after their
labours, unmolested by the foe.


__________





Chapter 57 - Burgoyne's Campaign - Bennington and Oriskany




As many of the Americans had foreseen, the British had from the
first formed the design of cutting the colonies in two by taking
possession of the great waterway from the Hudson to the St.  Lawrence.
Their plans had been long delayed, but in the spring of 1777, they
determined to carry them out.

General Burgoyne was now in command of the Canadian troops.  He was
a genial man of fashion, a writer of plays, and a great gambler.
But he was a brave soldier, too, and his men adored him.  For in days
when it was common to treat the rank and file as a little better
than dogs, Burgoyne treated them like reasoning beings.

It was arranged that Burgoyne should move southward with his main
force, by way of Lake Champlain to Ticonderoga, and that a smaller
force should go by Lake Ontario and seize Fort Stanwix.  Howe, at
the same time, was in Albany, having, it was to be supposed, swept
the whole country free of "rebels."

It was a very fine plan, but it was not carried out as intended -
because, although Burgoyne received his orders, Howe did not receive
his.  For the British minister, who ought to have sent them, went off
on a holiday and forgot all about the matter for several weeks.
When at length he remembered, and sent the order, Howe was far
away from the Hudson, at his old game of trying to run Washington
to earth.

Burgoyne, however, knew nothing of this and cheerfully set out from
Canada with a well drilled, well equipped, and well fed army of
about eight thousand men, and on the 1st of July reached Ticonderoga.

Since this fort had been taken by Ethan Allen it had been greatly
strengthened, and the Americans believed that now it could withstand
any assault, however vigorous.  But while strengthening the fort
itself they failed to fortify a little hill near.  They had already
much experience of the danger of heights commanding a town or
fort.  But they thought that this hill was too steep and rugged to
be a danger.  No cannon, it was said, could ever be dragged up to the
top of it.  When the British came, however, they thought otherwise.
They at once saw the value of the hill, and determined that guns
should be dragged up it.  For forty-eight hours they worked furiously,
and when day dawned on the 5th of August both men and guns were on
the summit.

The American commander, St.  Clair, saw them with despair in his
heart.  Every corner of the fort was commanded by the guns, and the
garrison utterly at the mercy of the enemy.  To remain, he knew,
would mean the loss of his whole force.  So he resolved to abandon
the fort, and as soon as the sun set the work was begun.  Guns and
stores were laden on boats, cannon too heavy to be removed were
spiked, and nearly all the garrison had left when a fire broke out
in the officers' quarters.

The light of the flames showed the British sentinels what was going
on.  The alarm was given.  The British made a dash for the fort, and
as day dawned on July 6, 1777, the Union Jack was once more planted
upon its ramparts.

Then a hot pursuit began.  At the village of Hubbardton the Americans
made a valiant stand, but they were worsted and fled, and five days
later St.  Clair brought the remnant of his force into Fort Edward,
where the main army under Schuyler was stationed.

Burgoyne had begun well, and when King George heard the news he
clapped his hands with joy. "I have beat them," he cried, dashing
into the queen's rooms, "I have beat all the Americans." But over
America the loss cast a gloom.  St.  Clair and Schuyler were severely
blamed and court-martialled.  But both were honourably acquitted.
Nothing could have saved the garrison from being utterly wiped out;
and when men came to judge the matter calmly they admitted that
it was better to lose the fort than to lose the fort and garrison
also.  Meanwhile Burgoyne was chasing hot-foot after the fugitives.
As he approached, Schuyler abandoned Fort Edward, for it was a mere
shell and impossible of defence for a single day.  But as he fell
back, he broke up the roads behind him.  Trees were felled and laid
across them every two or three yards, bridges were burned, fords
destroyed.  So thoroughly was the work done that Burgoyne, in
pursuit, could only march about a mile a day, and had to build no
fewer than forty bridges in a distance of little more than twenty-four
miles.

Besides destroying the roads Schuyler also made the country a desert.
He carried away and destroyed the crops, drove off the sheep and
cattle, sweeping the country so bare that the hostile army could
find no food, and were forced to depend altogether on their own
supplies.  Before long these gave out, and the British began to
suffer from hunger.

Burgoyne now learned that at the village of Bennington the patriots
had a depot containing large stores of food and ammunition.  These
he determined to have for his own army, and he sent a force of six
hundred men, mostly Germans and Indians, to make the capture.

This old trapper, Captain John Stark, was in command of the American
force at Bennington.  He had fought in many battles from Bunker Hill
to Princeton.  But, finding himself passed over, when others were
promoted, he had gone off homeward in dudgeon.  But now in his country's
hour of need he forgot his grievances and once more girded on his
sword.  He led his men with splendid dash and the enemy was utterly
defeated, and Stark was made a brigadier general as a reward.  It
was a disaster for Burgoyne, and on the heels of this defeat came
the news that the second force marching by way of Lake Ontario had
also met with disaster at Oriskany near Fort Stanwix.

This force had surrounded Fort Stanwix, and General Nicholas Herkimer
had marched to its relief.

General Herkimer was an old German of over sixty, and although
he had lived all his life in America, and loved the country with
his whole heart, he spoke English very badly, and wrote it worse.
It must have sadly puzzled his officers sometimes to make out his
dispatches and orders.  One is said to have run as follows: "Ser,
yu will orter yur bodellyen to merchs Immetdielich do ford edward
weid for das broflesen and amenieschen fied for en betell.  Dis yu
will desben at yur berrel." This being translated means:" Sir, you
will order your battalion to march immediately to Fort Edward with
four days' provisions, and ammunition for one battle.  This you will
disobey at your peril."

As this doughty old German marched to the relief of Fort Stanwix
he fell into an ambush prepared for him by the famous Indian chief,
Joseph Brant, who, with his braves, was fighting on the side of
the British.  A terrible hand to hand struggle followed.  The air
was filled with wild yells and still wilder curses as the two foes
grappled.  It was war in all its savagery.  Tomahawks and knives were
used as freely as rifles.  Stabbing, shooting, wrestling, the men
fought each other more like wildcats than human beings.  A fearful
thunderstorm burst forth, too.  Rain fell in torrents, a raging
wind tore through the tree tops, thunder and lightning added their
terrors to the scene.

For five hours the savage warfare lasted.  Almost at the beginning
a ball shattered Herkimer's leg and killed his horse.  But the stout
old warrior refused to leave the field.  He bade his men take the
saddle from his horse and place it at the root of a great beech
tree.  Sitting there he directed the battle, shouting his orders in
his quaint guttural English, and calmly smoking a pipe the while.
They were the last orders he was to give.  For, ten days after
the battle he died from his wound, serenely smoking his pipe, and
reading his old German Bible almost to the last.

Soon the noise of the battle was heard at Fort Stanwix, and the
garrison, led by Colonel Marinus Willett, sallied forth to the
aid of their comrades, put a detachment of the enemy to flight,
and captured their stores of food and ammunition, together with
five flags.  And now for the first time the Stars and Stripes were
unfurled.
