money." "That I know by experience," said he, "for I myself take a trip
to Bath or Tunbridge every season; and one must pay sauce for what he
has on the road, as well in other countries as in this. That's a pretty
stone in your ring--give me leave, sir--the French have attained to
a wonderful skill in making compositions of this kind. Why, now, this
looks almost as well as a diamond." "Almost as well, Sir!" said I, "Why
not altogether? I am sure if you understand anything of jewels, you must
perceive, at first sight, that this stone is a real diamond, and that of
a very fine water. Take it in your hand and examine it." He did so with
some confusion, and returned it, saying, "I ask your pardon; I see it
is a true brilliant of immense value." I imagined his respect to me
increased after this inquiry; therefore to captivate his esteem the
more, I told him, I would show him a seal of composition, engraved after
a very valuable antique; upon which I pulled out my watch with a rich
gold chain, adorned with three seals set in gold, and an opal ring. He
viewed each of them with great eagerness, handled the chain, admired the
chased case, and observed that the whole must have cost me a vast sum of
money. I affected indifference, and replied in a careless manner, "Some
trifle of sixty or seventy guineas." He stared in my face for some time,
and then asked if I was an Englishman? I answered in the negative. "You
are from Ireland then, Sir, I presume," said he. I made the same reply.
"Oh! perhaps," said he "you were born in one of our settlements abroad."
I still answered No. He seemed very much surprised, and said, he was
sure I was not a foreigner. I made no reply, but left him upon the
tenter-hooks of impatient uncertainty. He could not contain his anxiety,
but asked pardon for the liberties he had taken and, to encourage me
the more to disclose my situation, displayed his own without reserve.
"I am," said he, "a single man, have a considerable annuity, on which
I live according to my inclination, and make the ends of the year meet
very comfortably. As I have no estate to leave behind, I am not troubled
with the importunate officiousness of relations or legacy hunters, and I
consider the world as made for me, not me for the world. It is my maxim,
therefore, to enjoy it while I can, and let futurity shift for itself."

While he thus indulged his own talkative vein, and at the same time,
no doubt, expected retaliation from me, a young man entered, dressed
in black velvet and an enormous tie-wig, with an air in which natural
levity and affected solemnity were so jumbled together, that on the
whole he appeared a burlesque on all decorum. This ridiculous oddity
danced up to the table at which we sat, and, after a thousand grimaces,
asked my friend by the name of Mr. Medlar, if we were not engaged upon
business. My companion put on a surly countenance, and replied "No great
business, doctor--but however--" "Oh! then," cried the physician; "I
must beg your indulgence a little; pray pardon me, gentlemen." "Sir,"
said he, addressing himself to me, "your most humble servant. I hope
you will forgive me, sir--I must beg the favour to sit--sir--sir--I have
something of consequence to impart to my friend Mr. Medlar--sir, I hope
you will excuse my freedom in whispering, sir," Before I had time to
give this complaisant person my permission, Mr. Medlar cried, "I'll have
no whispering--if you have anything to say to me, speak with an audible
voice." The doctor seemed a little disconcerted at this exclamation,
and, turning again to me, made a thousand apologies for pretending to
make a mystery of anything, a piece of caution which he said was owing
to his ignorance of my connection with Mr. Medlar; but now he understood
I was a friend, and would communicate what he had to say in my hearing.
He then began, after two or three hems, in this manner: "You must know,
sir, I am just come from dinner at my Lady Flareit's (then addressing
himself to me), a lady of quality, sir, at whose table I have the honour
of dining sometimes. There was Lady Stately and my Lady Larum, and Mrs.
Dainty, and Miss Biddy Giggler, upon my word, a very good-natured young
lady, with a very pretty fortune sir. There was also my Lord Straddle.
Sir John Shrug, and Master Billy Chatter, who is actually a very
facetious young gentleman. So, sir, her ladyship seeing me excessively
fatigued, for she was the last of fifteen patients (people of
distinction, sir) whom I had visited this forenoon, insisted upon
my staying dinner, though upon my word I protest I had no appetite;
however, in compliance with her ladyship's request, sir, I sat down, and
the conversation turning on different subjects, among other things, Mr
Chatter asked very earnestly when I saw Mr. Medlar. I told him I had not
had the pleasure of seeing you these nineteen hours and a half; for you
may remember, sir, it was nearly about that time; I won't be positive as
to a minute." "No," says he, "then I desire you will go to his lodgings
immediately after dinner, and see what's the matter with him, for he
must certainly be very bad from having eaten last night such a vast
quantity of raw oysters." The crusty gentleman, who, from the solemnity
of his delivery, expected something extraordinary, no sooner heard his
conclusion, than he started up in a testy humour, crying, "Pshaw, pshaw!
D--n your oysters!" and walked away, after a short compliment of, "Your
servant sir," to me. The doctor got up also, saying, "I vow and protest,
upon my word, I am actually amazed;" and followed Mr. Medlar to the
bar, which was hard by, where he was paying for his coffee: there he
whispered so loud that I could overhear, "Pray who is this gentleman?"
His friend replied hastily, "I might have known that before now, if it
had not been for your impertinent intrusion,"--and walked off very much
disappointed. The ceremonious physician returned immediately and sat
down by me, asking a thousand pardons for leaving me alone: and giving
me to understand that what he had communicated to Mr. Medlar at the bar,
was an affair of the last importance, that would admit of no delay. He
then called for some coffee, and launched out into the virtues of that
berry, which, he said, in cold phlegmatic constitutions, like his, dried
up the superfluous moisture, and braced the relaxed nerves. He told me
it was utterly unknown to the ancients; and derived its name from
an Arabian word, which I might easily perceive by the sound and
termination. From this topic he transferred his disquisitions to the
verb drink, which he affirmed was improperly applied to the taking of
coffee, inasmuch as people did not drink, but sip or sipple that liquor;
that the genuine meaning of drinking is to quench one's thirst, or
commit a debauch by swallowing wine; that the Latin word, which conveyed
the same idea, was bibere or potare, and that of the Greeks pinein or
poteein, though he was apt to believe they were differently used on
different occasions: for example--to drink a vast quantity, or, as the
vulgar express it, to drink an ocean of liquor, was in Latin potare,
and in Greek poteein; and, on the other hand, to use it moderately,
was bibere and pinein;--that this was only a conjecture of his,
which, however, seemed to be supported by the word bibulous, which is
particularly applied to the pores of the skin, and can only drink a very
small quantity of the circumambient moisture, by reason of the smallness
of their diameters;--whereas, from the verb poteein is derived the
substantive potamos, which signifies a river, or vast quantity
of liquor. I could not help smiling at this learned and important
investigation; and, to recommend myself the more to my new acquaintance,
whose disposition I was by this time well informed of, I observed that,
what he alleged, did not, to the best of my remembrance, appear in
the writings of the ancients; for Horace uses the words poto and bibo
indifferently for the same purpose, as in the twentieth Ode of his first
Book.


"Vile potabis modicis sabinum cantharis-- --Et praelo domitam caleno tu
bibes uvam."

That I had never heard of the verb poteein, but that potamos, potema,
and potos, were derived from pino, poso, pepoka, in consequence of
which, the Greek poets never use any other word for festal drinking.
Homer describes Nestor at his cups in these words,


"Nestora d'ouk elathen iache pinonta perempes."

And Anacreon mentions it on the same occasion always in every page.


"Pinonti de oinon hedun. Otan pino ton oinon. Opliz' ego de pino."

And in a thousand other places. The doctor who doubtless intended by
his criticism to give me a high idea of his erudition, was infinitely
surprised to find himself schooled by one of my appearance; and after
a considerable pause cried, "Upon my word, you are in the right, sir--I
find I have not considered this affair with my usual accuracy." Then,
accosting me in Latin, which he spoke very well, the conversation was
maintained full two hours, on a variety of subjects, in that
language; and indeed he spoke so judiciously, that I was convinced,
notwithstanding his whimsical appearance and attention to trifles, that
he was a man of extensive knowledge, especially in books; he looked
upon me, as I afterwards understood from Mr. Medlar, as a prodigy
in learning, and proposed that very night, if I were not engaged, to
introduce me to several young gentlemen of fortune and fashion, with
whom I had an appointment at the Bedford coffee house.






CHAPTER XLVI

Wagtail introduces me to set of fine Gentlemen with whom I spend
the Evening at a Tavern--our Conversation--the Characters of my new
Companions--the Doctor is roasted--our Issue of our Debauch

I accepted his offer with pleasure, and we went thither in a hackney
coach where I saw a great number of gay figures fluttering about, most
of whom spoke to the doctor with great familiarity. Among the rest stood
a group of them round the fire whom I immediately knew to be the
very persons who had the night before, by their laughing, alarmed my
suspicion of the lady who had put herself under my protection. They no
sooner perceived me enter with Dr. Wagtail (for that was my companion's
name) than they tittered and whispered one to another, and I was not
a little surprised to find that they were the gentlemen to whose
acquaintance he designed to recommend me; for, when he observed them
together, he to told me who they were, and desired to know by what
name he should introduce me. I satisfied him in that particular, and
he advanced with great gravity, saying, "Gentlemen, your most obedient
servant:--give me leave to introduce my friend Mr. Random to your
society." Then, turning to me, "Mr. Random, this is Mr. Bragwell--Mr.
Banter, sir--Mr. Chatter--my friend Mr. Slyboot, and Mr. Ranter sir."
I saluted each of then in order, and when I came to take Mr. Slyboot
by the hand, I perceived him thrust his tongue in his cheek, to the no
small entertainment of the company; but I did not think proper to take
any notice of it on this occasion. Mr. Ranter too (who I afterwards
learned was a player) displayed his talents, by mimicking my air,
features, and voice, while he returned my compliment: this feat I should
not have been so sensible of, had I not seen him behave in the same
manner to my friend Wagtail, when he made up to them at first. But for
once I let him enjoy the fruits of his dexterity without question or
control, resolved however to chastise his insolence at a more convenient
opportunity. Mr. Slyboot, guessing I was a stranger, asked if I had been
lately in France? and when I answered in the affirmative, inquired if
I had seen the Luxembourg Gallery? I told him I had considered it more
than once with great attention: upon this a conversion ensued, in which
I discovered him to be a painter.

While we were discoursing upon the particulars of this famous
performance, I overheard Banter ask Dr. Wagtail, where he had picked
up this Mr. Random. To which question the physician answered, "Upon my
word, a mighty pretty sort of a gentleman--a man of fortune, sir--he has
made the grand tour, and seen the best company in Europe, air." "What,
he told you so, I suppose?" said the other: "I take him to be neither
more nor less than a French valet-de-chambre." "O barbarous, barbarous!"
cried the doctor; "this is actually, upon my word, altogether
unaccountable. I know all his family perfectly well, sir; he is of the
Randoms of the north--a very ancient house sir, and a distant relation
of mine." I was extremely nettled at the conjecture of Mr. Banter, and
began to entertain a very indifferent opinion of my company in general;
but, as I might possibly by their means acquire a more extensive and
agreeable acquaintance, I determined to bear these little mortifications
as long as I could without injuring the dignity of my character. After
having talked for some time on the weather, plays, politics, and other
coffee-house subjects, it was proposed that we should spend the evening
at a noted tavern in the neighbourhood, whither we repaired in a body.

Having taken possession of a room, called for French wine, and bespoke
supper, the glass went about pretty freely, and the characters of my
associates opened upon me more and more. It soon appeared that the
doctor was entertained as butt for the painter and player to exercise
their wit upon, for the diversion of the company. Mr. Ranter began the
game by asking him what was good for a hoarseness, lowness of spirits,
and in digestion, for he was troubled with all these complaints to a
very great degree. Wagtail immediately undertook to explain the nature
of his case, and in a very prolix manner harangued upon prognostics,
diagnostics, symptomatics, therapeutics, inanition, and repletion;
then calculated the force of the stomach and lungs in their respective
operations; ascribed the player's malady to a disorder in these organs,
proceeding from hard drinkings and vociferations, and prescribed a
course of stomachics, with abstinence from venery, wine, loud speaking,
laughing, singing, coughing, sneezing, or hallooing. "Pah, pah!" cried
Ranter, interrupting him, "the remedy is worse than the disease--I
wish I knew where to find some tinder water." "Tinder water!" said
the doctor; "Upon my word, I don't apprehend you, Mr. Ranter." "Water
extracted from tinder," replied the other, "a universal specific for all
distempers incident to man. It was invented by a learned German monk,
who, for a valuable consideration, imparted the secret to Paracelsus."
"Pardon me," cried the painter, "it was first used by Solomon, as
appears by a Greek manuscript in his civil handwriting, lately found at
the foot of Mount Lebanon, by a peasant who was digging for potatoes--"
"Well," said Wagtail, "in all my vast reading, I never met with such
a preparation! neither did I know till this minute, that Solomon
understood Greek, or that potatoes grew in Palestine."

Here Banter interposed, saying, he was surprised that Dr. Wagtail
should make the least doubt of Solomon's understanding Greek, when he is
represented to us as the wisest and best-educated prince in the world;
and as for potatoes, they were transplanted thither from Ireland, in the
time of the Crusade, by some knights of that country. "I profess," said
the doctor, "there is nothing more likely. I would actually give a vast
sum for a sight of that manuscript, which must be inestimable; and, if
I understood the process, would set about it immediately." The
player assured him the process was very simple--that he must cram a
hundred-weight of dry tinder into a glass retort, and, distilling it
by the force of animal heat, it would yield half a scruple of insipid
water, one drop of which is a full dose. "Upon my integrity!" exclaimed
the incredulous doctor, "this is very amazing and extraordinary! that
a caput mortuum should yield any water at all. I must own I have always
been an enemy to specifics which I thought inconsistent with the nature
of the animal economy; but certainly the authority of Solomon is not to
be questioned. I wonder where I shall find a glass retort large enough
to contain such a vast quantity of tinder, the consumption of which
must, undoubtedly, raise the price of paper, or where shall I find
animal heat sufficient even to warm such a mass?" Slyboot informed him,
that he might have a retort blown for him as big as a church: and, that
the easiest method of raising the vapour by animal heat, would be to
place it in the middle of an infirmary for feverish patients, who might
be upon mattresses around and in contact with it. He had he sooner
pronounced these words, than Wagtail exclaimed in a rapture, "An
admirable expedient, as I hope to be saved! I will positively put it in
practice."

This simplicity of the physician furnished excellent diversion for the
company, who, in their turns, sneered at him in ironical compliments,
which his vanity swallowed as the genuine sentiments of their hearts.
Mr. Chatter, impatient of so long a silence, now broke out and
entertained us with a catalogue of all the people who danced at the last
Hampstead assembly, with a most circumstantial account of the dress and
ornaments of each, from the lappets of the ladies to the shoe-buckles of
the men; concluding with telling Bragwell, that his mistress Melinda was
there, and seemed to miss him: and soliciting his company at the next
occasion of that kind.

"No, d--mm," said Bragwell, "I have something else to mind than dangling
after a parcel of giddy-headed girls; besides, you know my temper is
so unruly, that I am apt to involve myself in scrapes when a woman is
concerned. The last time I was there, I had an affair with Tom Trippit."
"Oh! I remember that!" cried Banter; "You lugged out before the ladies;
and I commend you for so doing, because you had an opportunity of
showing your manhood without running any risk." "Risk!" said the other
with a fierce countenance, "d--n my blood! I fear no risks. I an't
afraid of lugging out against any man that wears a head, d-me! 'Tis well
known that I have drawn blood more than once, and lost some too; but
what does that signify?" The player begged this champion to employ him
as his second the next time he intended to kill, for he wanted to see
a man die of a stab, that he might know how to act such an art the more
naturally on the stage. "Die!" replied the hero: "No, by G--! I know
better things than to incur the verdict of a Middlesex jury--I should
look upon my fencing-master to be an ignorant son of a b--h, if he had
not taught me to prick any of my antagonist's body that I please to
disable." "Oho!" cried Slyboot, "if that be the case, I have a favour to
ask. You must know I am employed to paint a Jesus on the cross; and
my purpose is to represent him at that point of time when the spear is
thrust into his side. Now I should be glad if you would, in my presence,
pink some impertinent fellow into convulsions, without endangering his
life, that I may have an opportunity of taking a good clever agony from
nature: the doctor will direct you where to enter and how far to go,
but pray let it be as near the left side as possible." Wagtail, who took
this proposal seriously, observed, that it would be a very difficult
matter to penetrate into the left side of the thorax without hurting the
heart, and in consequence killing the patient; but he believed it was
possible for a man of a very nice hand and exact knowledge of anatomy,
to wound the diaphragma somewhere about the skirts, which might induce
a singultus, without being attended with death: that he was ready to
demonstrate the insertion of that muscle to Mr. Bragwell; but desired to
have no concern with the experiment, which might essentially prejudice
his reputation, in case of a miscarriage. Bragwell was as much imposed
upon by the painter's waggery as the doctor, and declined engaging in
the affair, saying he held a very great regard for Mr. Slyboot, but
had laid it down as a maxim, never to fight except when his honour
was engaged. A thousand jokes of this kind were uttered; the wine
circulated, supper was served in, we ate heartily, returned to the
bottle, Bragwell became noisy and troublesome, Banter grew more and more
severe, Ranter rehearsed, Slyboot made faces at the whole company, I
sang French catches, and Chatter kissed me with great affection; while
the doctor, with a wofull countenance, sat silent like a disciple of
Pythagoras. At length, it was proposed by Bragwell, that we should scour
the hundreds, sweat the constable, maul the watch, and then reel soberly
to bed.

While we deliberated upon this expedition, the waiter came into the
room, and asked for Doctor Wagtail: when he understood he was present,
he told him there was a lady below to inquire for him, at which message
the physician started from his melancholy contemplation, and, with a
look of extreme confusion, assured the company he could not possibly be
the person wanted, for he had no connection with any lady whatever, and
bade the drawer tell her so. "For shame!" cried Banter; "would you be
so impolite as to refuse a lady a hearing? perhaps she comes for a
consultation. It must be some extraordinary affair that brings a lady
to a tavern at this time of night. Mr. Ranter, pray do the doctor's
base-mains to the lady, and squire her hither." The player immediately
staggered out, and returned, leading in with much ceremony, a tall
strapping wench, whose appearance proclaimed her occupation. We received
her with the utmost solemnity, and with a good deal of entreaty she was
persuaded to sit, when a profound silence ensued, during which she fixed
her eyes, with a disconsolate look, upon the doctor, who was utterly
confounded at her behaviour, and returned her melancholy fourfold;
at length, after a good many piteous sighs, she wiped her eyes, and
accosted him thus: "What! not one word of comfort? Will nothing soften
that stony heart of thine? Not all my tears! not all my affliction! not
the inevitable ruin thou hast brought upon me! Where are thy vows, thou
faithless, perjured man? Hast thou no honour--no conscience--no remorse
for thy perfidious conduct towards me? Answer me, wilt thou at last do
me justice, or must I have recourse to heaven or hell for my revenge?"
If poor Wagtail was amazed before she spoke, what must his confusion
be on hearing this address! His natural paleness changed into a ghastly
clay colour, his eyes rolled, his lip trembled, and he answered in an
accent not to be described, "Upon my word, honour, and salvation,
madam, you are actually mistaken in my person. I have a most particular
veneration for your sex, and, am actually incapable of injuring any
lady in the smallest degree, madam; besides, madam, to the best of my
recollection, I never had the honour of seeing you before, as I hope to
be saved, madam!" "How, traitor!" cried she, "dost thou disown me then?
Mistaken! no, too well I know that fair bewitching face! too well I know
that false enchanting tongue! Alas! gentlemen, since the villain compels
me by his unkindness, to expose myself and him, know that this betrayer,
under the specious pretence of honourable addresses, won my heart, and
taking advantage of his conquest, robbed me of my virgin treasure, and
afterwards abandoned me to my fate! I am now four months gone with child
by him, turned out of doors by my relations, and left a prey to misery
and want! Yes, thou barbarian," said she, turning to Wagtail, "thou
tiger, thou succubus! too well thou knowest my situation. But I
will tear out thy faithless heart, and deliver the world from such
a monster." So saying, she sprang forward at the doctor, who with
incredible agility, jumped over the table, and ran behind Bragwell,
while the rest of us endeavoured to appease the furious heroine.
Although everybody in the company affected the utmost surprise, I
could easily perceive it was a scheme concerted among them to produce
diversion at the doctor's expense, and being under no concern about the
consequence, I entered into the confederacy, and enjoyed the distress
of Wagtail, who with tears in his eyes begged the protection of the
company, declaring himself as innocent of the crime laid to his charge
as the foetus in utero; and hinting at the same time, that nature had
not put it in his power to be guilty of such a trespass. "Nature!" cried
the lady, "there was no nature in the case; he abused me by the help
of charms and spells; else how is it possible that any woman could have
listened to the addresses of such a scarecrow? Were these owlish eyes
made for ogling; that carrion complexion to be admired; or that mouth,
like a horse-shoe, to be kissed? No, no, you owe your success to your
philtres, to your drugs and incantations; and not to your natural
talents, which are, in every respect, mean and contemptible."

The doctor thought he had got an opportunity of vindicating himself
effectually; and desired the complainant to compose herself but for
half-an-hour, in which he undertook to prove the absurdity of believing
in the power of incantations, which were only idle dreams of ignorance
and superstition. He accordingly pronounced a very learned discourse
upon the nature of ideas, the power and independence of the mind, the
properties of stimulating medicines, the difference between a proneness
to venery, which many simples would create, and a passion limited to
one object, which can only be the result of sense and reflection; and
concluded with a pathetic remonstrance, setting forth his unhappiness
in being persecuted with the resentment of a lady whom he had never
injured, nor even seen before that occasion, and whose faculties were,
in all likelihood, so much impaired by her misfortunes that an innocent
person was in danger of being ruined by her disorder. He had no
sooner finished his harangue, than the forlorn princess renewed her
lamentations, and cautioned the company against his eloquence, which,
she said, was able to bias the most impartial bench in Christendom.
Ranter advised him to espouse her immediately, as the only means to
save his reputation, and offered to accompany him to the Fleet for that
purpose; but Slyboot proposed that a father should be purchased for the
child, and a comfortable alimony settled on the mother. Ranter promised
to adopt the infant gratis. Wagtail was ready to worship him for his
generosity, and, though he persisted in protesting his innocence,
condescended to everything rather than his unblemished character should
be called into question. The lady rejected the proposal, and insisted on
matrimony. Bragwell took up the cudgels for the doctor, and undertook to
rid him of her importunity for half-a-guinea; upon which Wagtail, with
great eagerness, pulled out his purse, and put it into the hand of his
friend, who, taking half a piece out of it, gave it to the plaintiff,
and bade her thank God for her good fortune. When she had received
this bounty, she affected to weep, and begged, since the physician had
renounced her, he would at least vouchsafe her a parting kiss; this he
was prevailed upon to grant with great reluctance, and went up with his
usual solemnity to salute her, when she laid hold of his cheek with her
teeth, and held fast, while he roared with anguish, to the unspeakable
diversion of all present. When she thought proper to release him, she
dropped a low courtesy to the company, and quitted the room, leaving the
doctor in the utmost horror, not so much on account of the pain, as the
apprehension of the consequence of the bite; for, by this time, he was
convinced of her being mad. Banter prescribed the actual cautery, and
put the poker in the fire to be heated, in order to sear the place. The
player was of opinion that Bragwell should scoop out the part affected
with the point of his sword; but the painter prevented both these
dreadful operations by recommending a balsam he had in his pocket, which
never failed to cure the bite of a mad dog; so saying, he pulled out a
small bladder of black paint, with which he instantly anointed not only
the sore, but the greatest part of the patient's face, and left it in
a frightful condition. In short, the poor creature was so harassed with
fear and vexation, that I pitied him extremely, and sent him home in a
chair, contrary to the inclination of everybody present.

This freedom of mine gave umbrage to Bragwell, who testified his
displeasure by swearing a few threats, without making any application;
which, being perceived by Slyboot, who sat by me, he, with a view of
promoting a quarrel, whispered to me, that he thought Bragwell used
me very ill, but every man was the best judge of his own affairs. I
answered aloud, that I would neither suffer Mr. Bragwell nor him to
use me ill with impunity; and that I stood in no need of his counsel
in regard to the regulation of my conduct. He thought proper to ask
a thousand pardons, and assure me he meant no offence; while Bragwell
feigned himself asleep, that he might not be obliged to take notice
of what passed. But the player, who had more animal spirits and less
discretion than Slyboot, unwilling to let the affair rest where he had
dropped it, jogged Mr. Bragwell and told him softly that I had called
him names, and threatened to cudgel him. This particular I understood
by his starting, up and crying, "Blood and wounds, you lie! No man
durst treat me so ignominiously. Mr. Random, did you call me names, and
threaten to drub me?" I denied the imputation, and proposed to punish
the scoundrel who endeavoured to foment disturbance in the company.
Bragwell signified his approbation, and drew his sword; I did the same,
and accosted the actor in these words: "Lookee, Mr. Ranter; I know you
possess all the mimicry and mischievous qualities of an ape, because I
have observed you put them all in practice more than once to-night, on
me and others; now I want to see if you resemble one in nimbleness also;
therefore, I desire you leap over this sword without hesitation." So
saying, I held it parallel to the horizon, at the distance of about
three feet from the floor, and called, "Once-twice-thrice--and away!"
but, instead of complying with my demand, he snatched his hat and
hanger, and, assuming the looks, swagger, and phrase of Pistol, burst
out into the following exclamation, "Ha! must I then perform inglorious
prank of sylvan ape in mountain forest caught! Death rock me asleep,
abridge my doleful days, and lay my head in fury's lap--Have we not
Hiren here?" This buffoonery did not answer his expectation, for, by
this time, the company was bent on seeing him in a new character. Mr.
Banter desired me to hold my sword a foot or two higher, that he might
have the better opportunity of exerting himself. The painter told
him, if he performed well, he would recommend him as a vaulter to the
proprietors of Sadler's Wells; and Bragwell crying, "Leap for the King!"
applied the point of his sword to the player's posteriors with
such success, that he sprang over in a trice, and, finding the door
unguarded, vanished in a twinkling; glad, no doubt, of having paid his
share of the reckoning so easily.

It being now near two o'clock in the morning, we discharged the bill,
and sallied out into the street. The painter slunk away without taking
his leave. Billy Chatter, being unable to speak or stand, was sent to
a bagnio; and Banter and I accompanied Bragwell to Moll King's
coffee-house, where after he had kicked half a dozen hungry whores,
we left him asleep on a bench, and directed our course towards
Charing-cross, near which place both he and I lodged.

The natural dryness of my companion being overcome by liquor, he
honoured me by the way with many compliments and professions, of
friendship, for which I made suitable acknowledgments, and told him
I thought myself happy in having, by my behaviour, removed the
unfavourable opinion he entertained of me at first sight. He was
surprised at this declaration, and begged me to explain myself; upon
which I mentioned what I had overheard him say of me to Wagtail in the
coffee-house. He laughed, and made an apology for his freedom, assuring
me, that my appearance had very much prepossessed him in my favour; and
what he said was only intended as a joke on the doctor's solemnity. I
was highly pleased at being undeceived in this particular, and not a
little proud of the good opinion of this wit, who shook me by the hand
at parting, and promised to meet me the next day at the ordinary.






CHAPTER XLVII

Strap communicates to me a conquest he had made of a Chandler's
Widow--finds himself miserably mistaken--I go to the Opera--admire
Melinda--am cautioned by Banter--go to the Assembly at Hampstead--dance
with that young lady--receive an insolent message from Bragwell, whose
mettle is soon cooled--am in favour with my Mistress, whom I visit next
day, and am bubbled out of eighteen guineas at cards--Strap triumphs at
my success, but is astonished at my expense--Banter comes to my lodging,
is very sarcastic at my expense, and borrows five guineas from me, as a
proof of his friendship

In the morning, before I got up, Strap came into my chamber, and,
finding me awake, hemmed several times, scratched his head, cast his
eyes upon the ground, and, with a very foolish kind of simper upon his
face gave me to understand he had something to communicate. "By your
countenance," said I, "I expect to hear good tidings." "Indifferently,"
replied he, tittering, "that is, hereafter as it shall be. You must
know, I have some thoughts of altering my condition." "What!" cried I,
astonished, "a matrimonial scheme? O rare Strap! thou hast got the heels
of me at last." "N--no less, I assure you," said he, bursting into a
laugh of self-approbation: "a tallow chandler's widow that lives
hard by, has taken a liking to me, a fine jolly dame, as plump as a
partridge. She has a well-furnished house, a brisk trade, and a good
deal of the ready. I may have her for the asking. She told a friend of
mine, a brother footman, that she would take me out of a stinking clout.
But I refused to give my final answer, till I knew your opinion of the
matter." I congratulated Monsieur d'Estrapes upon his conquest,
and approved of the scheme, provided he could be assured of those
circumstances of her fortune; but advised him to do nothing rashly,
and give me an opportunity of seeing the lady before matters should be
brought to a conclusion. He assured me he would do nothing without
my consent and approbation, and that very morning, while I was at
breakfast, introduce his inamorata to my acquaintance. She was a
short thick woman, about the age of thirty-six, and had a particular
prominence of belly, which I perceived at first sight, not without some
suspicion of foul play. I desired her, however, to sit, and treated
her with a dish of tea; the discourse turning on the good qualities of
Strap, whom I represented as a prodigy of sobriety, industry and virtue.
When she took her leave, he followed her to the door, and returned
licking his lips, and asking if I did not think she was a luscious
creature. I made no mystery of my apprehension, but declared my
sentiments of her without reserve; at which he was not surprised,
telling me he had observed the same symptom, but was informed by his
friend that she was only livergrown and would in few months be as small
in the waist as ever. "Yes," said I, "a few weeks, I believe, will
do the business. In short, Strap, it is my opinion, that you are
egregiously imposed upon; and that this friend is no other than a rascal
who wants to palm his trull upon you for a wife, that he may at once
deliver himself from the importunities of the mother and the expense of
her bantling; for which reason I would not have you trust implicitly
to the report he makes of her wealth, which is inconsistent with his
behaviour, nor run your head precipitately into a noose, that you
may afterwards wish exchanged for the hangman's." He seemed very much
startled at my insinuation, and promised to look twice before he leaped;
saying, with some heat, "Odds, if I find his intention is to betray me,
we shall see which of us is the better man." My prediction was verified
in less than a fortnight, her great belly producing an infant, to the
unspeakable amazement of Strap, who was before this happened, inclinable
to believe I had refined a little too much in my penetration. His false
friend disappeared; and a few days after an execution was issued against
her goods and household furniture, which were seized by the creditors.

Meanwhile I met my friend Banter at the ordinary, and in the evening
went to the Opera with him and Mr Chatter, who pointed out Melinda in
one of the boxes, and offered to introduce me to her, observing at the
same time, that she was a reigning toast worth ten thousand pounds.
This piece of information made my heart bound with joy, and I discovered
great eagerness to accept the proposal; upon which he assured me I
should dance with her at the next assembly, if he had any influence in
that quarter: so saying, he went round, spoke to her some minutes,
and, as I imagined, pointed at me; then returning, told me, to my
inexpressible pleasure, that I might depend upon what he had promised,
