the straight sides of red rock, the five ridges upon the eastern slope
fashioned like the thumb and fingers of the hand of a man. Yes, and
there between the thumb and first finger a river runs."

"I told you that it was so from the beginning, Swallow, for in all the
country there is no other such hill as this, and because of the aspect
of those ridges when seen from a distance it is named the Mountain of
the Great Hand."

Before the words had left her lips another voice spoke, at the sound of
which Suzanne nearly fell to the earth.

"Good day to you, Suzanne," it said in Dutch and was silent.

"Sihamba, did you hear, Sihamba?" she gasped. "Do I dream, or did Piet
Van Vooren speak to me?"

"You did not dream," answered Sihamba, "for that voice was the voice of
Swart Piet and no other, and he is hidden somewhere among the rocks
of yonder cliff wall. Quick, Swallow, kneel behind this stone lest he
should shoot."

She obeyed, and at that moment the voice spoke again out of the shadows
of the cliff that bordered the pass twenty or thirty paces from them.

"What, Suzanne," it said, "is that little witch-doctoress telling you
that I shall fire on you? Had I wished I could have shot you three times
over while you were standing upon that rock. But why should I desire to
kill one who will be my lover? Sihamba I wished to shoot indeed, but her
familiar set her so that the bullet must pass through you to reach her
heart. Suzanne, you are going to hide yourself among the people of the
Umpondwana. Oh! yes, I know your plan. Well, when once you are behind
the walls of that mountain it may be difficult to speak to you for a
while, so listen to me. You thought that you had left me far away, did
you not? but I have followed you step by step and twice I have been
very near to you, although I could never find a chance to carry you off
safely. Well, I wish to tell you that sooner or later I shall find that
chance; sooner or later you will come out of the mountain or I shall get
into it, and then it will be my turn; so, love, till that hour fare you
well. Stay, I forgot, I have news for you; your husband, the English
castaway, is dead."

At this tidings a low moan of pain broke from Suzanne's lips.

"Be silent and take no heed," whispered Sihamba, who was kneeling at her
side behind the shelter of the stone, "he does but lie to torment you."

"The bullet and the water together were too much for him," went on Swart
Piet, "and he died on the second night after he reached the stead. Your
father came to seek me in the place you know, and was carried home badly
wounded for his pains, but whether he lived or died I cannot tell you,
but I heard that your mother, the good Vrouw Botmar, is very sick, for
things have so fallen out lately that her mind is troubled, and she
flies to drink to comfort it."

Now when she heard this, Sihamba could keep silence no longer, but cried
in a mocking voice:

"Get you gone, Bull-Head, and take lessons in lying from your friends
of my trade, the Kaffir witch-doctors, for never before did I hear a man
bear false witness so clumsily. On the third night of his illness the
husband of Swallow was alive and doing well; the Heer Jan Botmar was not
wounded at all, and as for the Vrouw Botmar, never in her life did she
drink anything stronger than coffee, for the white man's firewater is
poison to her. Get you gone, you silly half-breed, who seek to deceive
the ears of Sihamba, and I counsel you, hold fast to your business of
theft and murder and give up that of lying, in which you will never
succeed. Now be off, you stink-cat of the rocks, lest I send some to
hunt you from your hole who this time will use the points and not the
shafts of their assegais. Come, Swallow, let us be going."

So they went, keeping under cover all the way to the camp, which,
indeed, was quite close to them, and if Swart Piet made any answer they
did not hear it. So soon as they reached it Sihamba told Sigwe what had
passed and he sent men to scour the cliff and the bush behind it, but of
Van Vooren they could find no trace, no, not even the spot where he had
been hidden, so that Sigwe came to believe that they had been fooled by
echoes and had never heard him at all.

But both Suzanne and Sihamba knew that this was not so; indeed, this
hearing of the voice of Swart Piet filled Suzanne with fear, since where
the voice was, there was the man, her hateful enemy, who had given his
life to her ruin and to that of those she loved. Whatever lies he might
have spoken--and her heart told her that all his ill tidings were but a
cruel falsehood--this at least was true, that he had dogged her step by
step through the vast wilderness, and so craftily that none guessed his
presence. What might not be feared from such a foe as this, half mad and
all wicked, armed with terrible cunning and untiring patience? If the
Umpondwana would not receive her she must fall into his hands at once,
and if they did receive her she would never dare to leave their kraal,
for always, always he would be watching and waiting for her. Little
wonder then that she felt afraid, though, just as the sun shines ever
behind the blackest cloud, still in her heart shone the sure comfort of
her hope, and more than hope that in the end God would give her back
her husband and her to him unharmed. Yet, which ever way she looked the
cloud was very black, and through it she could see no ray of light.



When the mists had vanished and the air was warm with the sun, the army
of Sigwe marched from the pass heading for the great mountain. As they
drew near they saw that the Umpondwana were much terrified at the sight
of them, for from all the kraals, of which there were many on the slopes
of the mountain, they ran hither and thither like ants about a broken
nest, carrying their goods and children upon their shoulders, and
driving herds of cattle in towards the central stronghold. Noting this,
Sigwe halted and sent heralds forward to say that he came in peace and
not in war, and he desired to speak with their chief. In less than two
hours the heralds returned, bringing with them some of the headmen of
the Umpondwana, who stared round with frightened eyes, for they did not
believe that any general would come upon a message of peace with so many
regiments. When the _indaba_ was set Sigwe told them his name and
tribe, of both of which they had heard, and then, before speaking of his
business, asked which of them was the chief of the Umpondwana.

"Alas!" answered an old man, "we are in sore trouble here, and wander in
the darkness, for our chief, who was named Koraanu, died two days ago
of the small-pox which has raged among us for many months, leaving no
children behind him, for the sickness killed them also. Moreover, we are
suffering from a great drought, for as you may see, the veldt is still
brown, and there is no green upon the cornfields, and if rain does not
fall soon famine will follow the sickness, and then it will only need
that the Zulus should follow the famine to make an end of us once and
for all."

"It seems that your tribe must have sinned deeply and brought down upon
itself the curse of the spirits of its ancestors," said Sigwe, when
they had done their melancholy tale, "that so many misfortunes should
overtake you. Tell me now, who by right is ruler of the Umpondwana?"

"We do not know, chief," they answered, "or rather, we cannot tell if
our ruler is alive or dead, and if she is dead then none are left of the
true blood. She was a small woman, but very pretty and full of wisdom as
a mealie-cob with grains of corn, for in all this country there was no
doctoress or diviner like to her. Her name was Sihamba Ngenyanga, the
Wanderer-by-Moonlight, which name was given her when she was little,
because of her habit of walking in the dark alone, and she was the only
child of our late chief's _inkosikaas_, a princess of the Swazis, the
father of that lord, Koraanu, who lies dead of the small-pox. But when
this chief died and Sihamba was called upon to rule our tribe, quarrels
arose between her and the _indunas_ of the tribe, for she was a very
headstrong woman.

"We, the _indunas_, wished her to marry, but for her own reasons she
would not marry; also we wished to swear allegiance to Chaka, but she
was against it, saying that as well might a lamb swear allegiance to a
wolf as the Umpondwana to the Zulus. The end of it was that in a temper
she took a bowl of water, and before us all washed her hands of us, and
that same night she vanished away we know not where, though rumours have
reached us that she went south. From the day of her departure, however,
things have gone ill with us; the Zulus with whom we made peace threaten
us continually; her half-brother, Koraanu, the slave-born, was not a
good chief, and now he is dead of the sickness. So our heart is heavy
and our head is in the dust, and when we saw your impi we thought that
Dingaan, who now rules over the Zulus, had sent it to eat us up and to
take the cattle that still remain to us.

"But you say that you come in peace, so tell us, chief, what it is you
desire, and I trust that it may be little, for here we have nothing to
give, unless," he added with meaning, "it be the small-pox, although we
are ready to fight to the death for what is left to us, our liberty and
our cattle; and, chief, even a larger army than yours might fail to take
that stronghold which has but one gate."

When the councillor had finished speaking, Sigwe called aloud:

"Lady Sihamba, I pray you come hither, and with you the lady Swallow,
your companion."

Then Sihamba, who was prepared for this event, for her hair was freshly
dressed and powdered with blue mica, wearing her little cape of fur and
the necklace of large blue beads, stepped from the screen of bush behind
which she had hidden. With her, and holding her hand, came Suzanne,
who covered the raggedness of her clothes beneath a splendid kaross
of leopards' skins that Sigwe had given her, down which her dark hair
flowed almost to her knee. A strange pair they made, the tall Suzanne in
the first bloom of her white beauty which had suffered nothing in their
journeying, and the small, quick-eyed, delicate-featured Kaffir woman.

"Who are these?" asked Sigwe of the council.

The old man looked at them and answered:

"Of the white lady we can say nothing except that she is very beautiful;
but, unless our eyes deceive us, she whom she holds by the hand is
Sihamba Ngenyanga, who was our chieftainess, and who left us because she
was angry."

"She is Sihamba and no one else," said Sigwe. "Sihamba come back to rule
you in the hour of need, and with her own tongue she shall tell you her
story and the story of the White Swallow who holds her by the hand."

So Sihamba began, and for an hour or more she spoke to them, for when
she chose this little woman had the gift of words, telling them all
about herself, and telling them also the story of the Swallow, and of
how she had brought good luck to the army of Sigwe, and how she was
destined to bring good luck wherever she made her home. At the end of
her speech she said:

"Now, my people, although I have wandered from you, yet my eyes, which
are far-seeing, have not been blind to your griefs, and in the hour of
your need I return to you, bringing with me the White Swallow to sojourn
among you for a while. Receive us if you will and be prosperous, or
reject us and be destroyed; to us it matters nothing, it is for you to
choose. But if we come, we come not as servants but as princes whose
word cannot be questioned, and should you accept us and deal ill with us
in any way, then your fate is sure. Ask the chief Sigwe here whether or
no the flight of the Swallow is fortunate, and whether or no there is
wisdom in the mouth of Sihamba, who is not ashamed to serve her."

Then Sigwe told them of all the good fortune that had come to him
through Suzanne, and of how wise had been the words of Sihamba, and told
them, moreover, that if they dealt ill by either of them he would return
from his own country and stamp them flat.



Thus it came about that the _indunas_ of the Umpondwana took back
Sihamba to be their chieftainess with all powers, and with her Suzanne
as her equal in rule, and this their act was confirmed that same day by
a great council of the tribe. So that evening Suzanne, mounted on the
_schimmel_, rode down the ranks of the Red Kaffirs, while they shouted
their farewells to her. Then having parted with Sigwe, who almost wept
at her going, she passed with Sihamba, the lad Zinti, and a great herd
of cattle--her tithe of the spoil--to the mountain Umpondwana, where all
the tribe were waiting to receive them. They rode up to the flanks of
the mountain, and through the narrow pass and the red wall of rock
to the tableland upon its top, where stood the chief's huts and the
cattle-kraal, and here they found the people gathered.

"Give us a blessing," these cried. "Grant to us that rain may fall."

Sihamba spoke with Suzanne and answered:

"My people, I have entreated of the White Swallow, and for your sake she
will pray that rain may fall ere long."

Now Sihamba knew the signs of the water, and as it happened rain began
to fall that night in torrents, and fell for three days almost without
ceasing, washing the sickness away with it. So the Umpondwana blessed
the name of Sihamba and the White Swallow, and these two ruled over them
without question, life and death hanging upon their words.

And there, a chieftainess among savages, Suzanne was fated to dwell for
more than two long years.



CHAPTER XXIV

THE MADNESS OF RALPH KENZIE

Now my story goes back to that night at the stead when I, Suzanne Botmar
and my husband, Jan Botmar, were awakened from our sleep to learn that
our daughter had been carried off by that mad villain, Piet Van Vooren,
and that her husband Ralph lay senseless and wounded in the waggon
at the door. We carried him in, groaning in our bitter grief, and
despatched messengers to arouse all the Kaffirs on and about the place
whom we could trust and to a party of Boers, six men in all, who chanced
to have outspanned that night upon the borders of our farm to shoot
vildebeest and blesbok. Also we sent another messenger mounted on a
good horse to the house of that neighbour who was being attended by the
doctor from the dorp, praying that he would come with all speed to visit
Ralph, which indeed he did, for he was with us by half-past eight in the
morning.

Within an hour of the despatch of the messengers the Boers rode up from
their waggons, and to them, as well as to ourselves and to the Kaffirs
who had gathered, the driver and voorlooper told all they knew of the
terrible crime that had been done upon the persons of Ralph Kenzie and
his wife by Piet Van Vooren and his band. Also they repeated all that
Zinti had taught them of the road to the secret krantz whither it was
believed that he had carried off Suzanne. Then Jan asked those present
if they would help him in this trouble, and being true men, one and
all, they answered yes, so by seven in the morning the little commando,
numbering twenty-one guns--eight white men and thirteen Kaffirs--started
to seek for Swart Piet's hiding-place, and to rescue Suzanne if they
might.

"Alas!" I said to Jan as he bade me farewell, "at the best I fear that
you will be too late."

"We must trust in God," he answered heavily.

"Never had we more need of trust, husband, but I think that God turns
His face from us because of the lies we told to the Englishmen, for now
the punishment which you foresaw has fallen."

"Then, wife, it were more just that it should have fallen on us who were
guilty, and not on those two who are innocent. But still I say I trust
in God--and in Sihamba"--he added by an afterthought, "for she is brave
and clever, and can run upon a path which others cannot even see."

Then they went, and were away five days, or it may have been six. They
started early on Tuesday, and upon the Thursday morning, after much
trouble, by the help of a native whom they captured, they found Swart
Piet's kraal, but of Swart Piet or Suzanne or the hidden krantz they
could see nothing. Indeed, it was not until they had gathered together
every man they could find in the kraal and tied them to trees, saying
that they would shoot them, that a woman, the wife of one of the men,
led them to a rock wall and showed the secret of the kloof. They entered
and found the big hut with the body of the man whom Sihamba had killed
still lying in it, and also the knife with which Suzanne had intended to
destroy herself, and which her father knew again.

Then by degrees they discovered the whole story, for the woman pointed
out to them the man who had guarded the entrance to the kloof, at whom
Zinti had fired, and under fear of death this man confessed all he knew,
which was that Suzanne, Sihamba and Zinti had escaped northward upon
their horses, followed by Swart Piet and his band.

Accordingly northwards they rode, but they never found any traces of
them, for rain had fallen, washing out their spoor, and as might be
expected in that vast veldt they headed in the wrong direction. So
at last worn out, they returned to the stead, hoping that Suzanne and
Sihamba would have found their way back there, but hoping in vain.

After that for days and weeks they searched and hunted, but quite
without result, for as it chanced the Kaffirs who lived between the
territory of Sigwe and the stead rose in arms just then, and began to
raid the Boer farms, stealing the cattle, including some of our own, so
that it was impossible to travel in their country, and therefore nobody
ever reached the town of Sigwe to make inquiries there.

The end of it was that, exhausted by search and sorrow, Jan sat down at
home and abandoned hope; nor could the prayers and urgings of Ralph, who
all this while was unable even to mount a horse, persuade him to go out
again upon so fruitless an errand.

"No, son," he answered, "long before this the girl is either dead or
she is safe far away, and in either event it is useless to look for her
about here, since Van Vooren's kraal is watched, and we know that she is
not in it." To which Ralph would answer:

"She is not dead, I know that she is not dead," and we understood that
he spoke of the vision which had come to him, for I had told the tale of
it to Jan. But in his heart Jan put no faith in the vision, and believed
that Suzanne, our beloved child, had been dead for many days, for he was
certain that she would die rather than fall again into the hands of Van
Vooren, as I was also, and indeed of this we were glad to be sure.

To Ralph, however, that we might comfort him in his sorrow, which was
even more terrible than our own, we made pretence that we believed
Suzanne to be hiding far away, but unable to communicate with us, as in
fact she was.

Oh! our lives were sad during those bitter months. Yes, the light
had gone out of our lives, and often we wished, the three of us, that
already we were resting in the grave. As he recovered from his wounds
and the strength of his body came back to him, a kind of gentle
madness took hold of Ralph which it wrung our hearts to see. For hours,
sometimes for days indeed, he would sit about the place brooding and
saying no word. At other times he would mount his horse and ride away
none knew whither, perhaps not to return that night or the next, or the
next, till we were terrified by the thought that he too might never
come back again. It was useless to be angry with him, for he would only
answer with a little smile:

"You forget; I must be seeking my wife, who is waiting for me upon the
Mountain of the Hand," and then we learned that he had ridden to a far
off hill to examine it, or to see some travellers or natives and ask of
them if they knew or had heard of such a mountain, with ridges upon its
eastern slopes fashioned like the thumb and fingers of a man's hand.
Indeed, in all that countryside, among both Boers and natives, Ralph
won the by-name of the "Man of the Mountain" because he rarely spoke
of aught else. But still folk, black and white, knew the reason of his
madness and bore with him, pitying his grief.

It was, I remember, in the season after Suzanne had vanished that the
Kaffirs became so angry and dangerous. For my part I believe that those
