give colour for taking my life, ay, and Babington's and Curll's, and
many more.  I trusted to have burnt them, but in this summer time there
is no coming by fire or candle without suspicion, and if I tore them
they might be pieced together, nay, and with addition.  They must be
carried forth and made away with beyond the ken of Paulett and his
spies.  Now, this lad hath some bowels of compassion and generous
indignation.  Thou wilt see him again, alone and unsuspected, ere he
departs.  Thou must deal with him to bear this packet away, and when he
is far out of reach to drop it into the most glowing fire, or the
deepest pool he can find. Tell him it may concern thy life and liberty,
and he will do it, but be not simple enough to say ought of Babington."

"He would be as like to do it for Babington as for any other," said Cis.

The Queen smiled and said, "Nineteen years old, and know thus little of
men."

"I know Humfrey at least," said Cis.

"Then deal with him after thy best knowledge, to make him convey away
this perilous matter ere a search come upon us.  Do it we must, maiden,
not for thy poor mother's sake alone, but for that of many a faithful
spirit outside, and above all of poor Curll.  Think of our Barbara!
Would that I could have sent her out of reach of our alarms and shocks,
but Paulett is bent on penning us together like silly birds in the net.
Still proofs will be wanting if thou canst get this youth to destroy
this packet unseen.  Tell him that I know his parents' son too well to
offer him any meed save the prayers and blessings of a poor captive, or
to fear that he would yield it for the largest reward Elizabeth's
coffers could yield."

"It shall be done, madam," said Cicely.  But there was a strong purpose
in her mind that Humfrey should not be implicated in the matter.

When after dinner Sir Amias Paulett made his daily visit of inspection
to the Queen, she begged that the young Talbots might be permitted
another walk in the garden; and when he replied that he did not approve
of worldly pastime on the Sabbath, she pleaded the celebrated example
of John Knox finding Calvin playing at bowls on a Sunday afternoon at
Geneva, and thus absolutely prevailed on him to let them take a short
walk together in brotherly love, while the rest of the household was
collected in the hall to be catechised by the chaplain.

So out they went together, but to Humfrey's surprise, Cicely walked on
hardly speaking to him, so that he fancied at first that she must have
had a lecture on her demeanour to him.  She took him along the broad
terrace beside the bowling-green, through some yew-tree walks to a
stone wall, and a gate which proved to be locked.  She looked much
disappointed, but scanning the wall with her eye, said, "We have scaled
walls together before now, and higher than this.  Humfrey, I cannot
tell you why, but I must go over here."

The wall was overgrown with stout branches of ivy, and though the
Sunday farthingale was not very appropriate for climbing, Cicely's
active feet and Humfrey's strong arm carried her safely to where she
could jump down on the other side, into a sort of wilderness where
thorn and apple trees grew among green mounds, heaps of stones and
broken walls, the ruins of some old outbuilding of the former castle.
There was only a certain trembling eagerness about her, none of the
mirthful exultation that the recurrence of such an escapade with her
old companion would naturally have excited, and all she said was,
"Stand here, Humfrey; an you love me, follow me not.  I will return
anon."

With stealthy stop she disappeared behind a mound covered by a thicket
of brambles, but Humfrey was much too anxious for her safety not to
move quietly onwards.  He saw her kneeling by one of those black
yawning holes, often to be found in ruins, intent upon fastening a
small packet to a stone; he understood all in a moment, and drew back
far enough to secure that no one molested her.  There was something in
this reticence of hers that touched him greatly; it showed so entirely
that she had learnt the lesson of loyalty which his father's influence
had impressed, and likewise one of self-dependence.  What was right for
her to do for her mother and Queen might not be right for him, as an
Englishman, to aid and abet; and small as the deed seemed in itself,
her thus silently taking it on herself rather than perplex him with it,
added a certain esteem and respect to the affection he had always had
for her.

She came back to him with bounding steps, as if with a lightened heart,
and as he asked her what this strange place was, she explained that
here were said to be the ruins of the former castle, and that beyond
lay the ground where sometimes the party shot at the butts.  A little
dog of Mary Seaton's had been lost the last time of their archery, and
it was feared that he had fallen down the old well to which Cis now
conducted Humfrey.  There was a sound--long, hollow, reverberating,
when Humfrey threw a stone down, and when Cecily asked him, in an
awestruck voice, whether he thought anything thrown there would ever be
heard of more, he could well say that he believed not.

She breathed freely, but they were out of bounds, and had to scramble
back, which they did undetected, and with much more mirth than the
first time.  Cicely was young enough to be glad to throw off her
anxieties and forget them.  She did not want to talk over the plots she
only guessed at; which were not to her exciting mysteries, but gloomy
terrors into which she feared to look.  Nor was she free to say much to
Humfrey of what she knew.  Indeed the rebound, and the satisfaction of
having fulfilled her commission, had raised Cicely's spirits, so that
she was altogether the bright childish companion Humfrey had known her
before he went to sea, or royalty had revealed itself to her; and Sir
Amias Paulett would hardly have thought them solemn and serious enough
for an edifying Sunday talk could he have heard them laughing over
Humfrey's adventures on board ship, or her troubles in learning to
dance in a high and disposed manner.  She came in so glowing and happy
that the Queen smiled and sighed, and called her her little milkmaid,
commending her highly, however, for having disposed of the dangerous
parcel unknown (as she believed) to her companion.  "The fewer who have
to keep counsel, the sickerer it is," she said.

Humfrey meantime joined the rest of the household, and comported
himself at the evening sermon with such exemplary discretion as
entirely to win the heart of Sir Amias Paulett, who thought him
listening to Mr. Blunden's oft-divided headings, while he was in fact
revolving on what pretext he could remain to protect Cicely.  The
Knight gave him that pretext, when he spoke of departing early on
Monday morning, offering him, or rather praying him to accept, the
command of the guards, whose former captain had been dismissed as
untrustworthy.  Sir Amias undertook that a special messenger should be
sent to take a letter to Bridgefield, explaining Humfrey's delay, and
asking permission from his parents to undertake the charge, since it
was at this very crisis that he was especially in need of God-fearing
men of full integrity.  Then moved to confidence, the old gentleman
disclosed that not only was he in fear of an attack on the house from
the Roman Catholic gentry in the neighbourhood, which was to take place
as soon as Parma's ships were seen on the coast, but that he dreaded
his own servants being tampered with by some whom he would not mention
to take the life of the prisoner secretly.

"It hath been mooted to me," he said, lowering his voice to a whisper,
"that to take such a deed on me would be good service to the Queen and
to religion, but I cast the thought from me.  It can be nought but a
deadly sin--accursed of God--and were I to consent, I should be the
first to be accused."

"It would be no better than the King of Spain himself," exclaimed
Humfrey.

"Even so, young man, and right glad am I to find one who thinks with
me.  For the other practices, they are none of mine, and is it not
written 'In the same pit which they laid privily is their foot taken'?"

"Then there are other practices?"

"Ask me no questions, Mr. Talbot.  All will be known soon enough.  Be
content that I will lay nothing on you inconsistent with the honour of
a Christian man, knowing that you will serve the Queen faithfully."

Humfrey gave his word, resolving that he would warn Cicely to reckon
henceforth on nothing on his part that did not befit a man in charge.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

HUNTING DOWN THE DEER


Humfrey had been sworn in of the service of the Queen, and had been put
in charge of the guard mustered at Chartley for about ten days, during
which he seldom saw Cicely, and wondered much not to have heard from
home: when a stag-hunt was arranged to take place at the neighbouring
park of Tickhill or Tixall, belonging to Sir Walter Ashton.

The chase always invigorated Queen Mary, and she came down in cheerful
spirits, with Cicely and Mary Seaton as her attendants, and with the
two secretaries, Nau and Curll, heading the other attendants.

"Now," she said to Cicely, "shall I see this swain, or this brother of
thine, who hath done us such good service, and I promise you there will
be more in my greeting than will meet Sir Amias's ear."

But to Cicely's disappointment Humfrey was not among the horsemen
mustered at the door to attend and guard the Queen.

"My little maid's eye is seeking for her brother," said Mary, as Sir
Amias advanced to assist her to her horse.

"He hath another charge which will keep him at home," replied Paulett,
somewhat gruffly, and they rode on.

It was a beautiful day in early August, the trees in full foliage, the
fields seen here and there through them assuming their amber harvest
tints, the twin spires of Lichfield rising in the distance, the park
and forest ground through which the little hunting-party rode rich with
purple heather, illuminated here and there with a bright yellow spike
or star, and the rapid motion of her brisk palfrey animated the Queen.
She began to hope that Humfrey had after all brought a false alarm, and
that either he had been mistaken or that Langston was deceiving the
Council itself, and though Sir Amias Paulett's close proximity held her
silent, those who knew her best saw that her indomitably buoyant
spirits were rising, and she hummed to herself the refrain of a gay
French hunting-song, with the more zest perhaps that her warder held
himself trebly upright, stiff and solemn under it, as one who thought
such lively times equally unbefitting a lady, a queen, and a captive.
So at least Cis imagined as she watched them, little guessing that
there might be deeper reasons of compassion and something like
compunction to add to the gravity of the old knight's face.

As they came in sight of the gate of Tickhill Park, they became aware
of a company whose steel caps and shouldered arquebuses did not look
like those of huntsmen.  Mary bounded in her saddle, she looked round
at her little suite with a glance of exultation in her eye, which said
as plainly as words, "My brave friends, the hour has come!" and she
quickened her steed, expecting, no doubt, that she might have to
outride Sir Amias in order to join them.

One gentleman came forward from the rest.  He held a parchment in his
hand, and as soon as he was alongside of the Queen thus read:--

"Mary, late Queen of Scots and Queen Dowager of France, I, Thomas
Gorges, attaint thee of high treason and of compassing the life of our
most Gracious Majesty Queen Elizabeth, in company with Antony
Babington, John Ballard, Chidiock Tichborne, Robert Barnwell, and
others."

Mary held up her hands, and raised her eyes to Heaven, and a protest
was on her lips, but Gorges cut it short with, "It skills not denying
it, madam.  The proofs are in our hands.  I have orders to conduct you
to Tickhill, while seals are put on your effects."

"That there may be proofs of your own making," said the Queen, with
dignity.  "I have experience of that mode of judgment.  So, Sir Amias
Paulett, the chase you lured me to was truly of a poor hunted doe whom
you think you have run down at last.  A worthy chase indeed, and of
long continuance!"

"I do but obey my orders, madam," said Paulett, gloomily.

"Oh ay, and so does the sleuth-hound," said Mary.

"Your Grace must be pleased to ride on with me," said Mr. Gorges,
laying his hand on her bridle.

"What are you doing with those gentlemen?" cried Mary, sharply reining
in her horse, as she saw Nau and Curll surrounded by the armed men.

"They will be dealt with after her Majesty's pleasure," returned
Paulett.

Mary dropped her rein and threw up her hands with a gesture of despair,
but as Gorges was leading her away, she turned on her saddle, and
raised her voice to call out, "Farewell, my true and faithful servants!
Betide what may, your mistress will remember you in her prayers.
Curll, we will take care of your wife."

And she waved her hand to them as they were made, with a strong guard,
to ride off in the direction of Lichfield.  All the way to Tickhill,
whither she was conducted with Gorges and Paulett on either side of her
horse, Cis could hear her pleading for consideration for poor Barbara
Curll, for whose sake she forgot her own dignity and became a suppliant.

Sir Walter Ashton, a dull heavy-looking country gentleman of burly form
and ruddy countenance, stood at his door, and somewhat clownishly
offered his services to hand her from her horse.

She submitted passively till she had reached the upper chamber which
had been prepared for her, and there, turning on the three gentlemen,
demanded the meaning of this treatment.

"You will soon know, madam," said Paulett.  "I am sorry that thus it
should be."

"Thus!" repeated Mary, scornfully.  "What means this?"

"It means, madam," said Gorges, a ruder man of less feeling even than
Paulett, "that your practices with recusants and seminary priests have
been detected.  The traitors are in the Counter, and will shortly be
brought to judgment for the evil purposes which have been frustrated by
the mercy of Heaven."

"It is well if treason against my good sister's person have been
detected and frustrated," said Mary; "but how doth that concern me?"

"That, madam, the papers at Chartley will show," returned Gorges.
"Meantime you will remain here, till her Majesty's pleasure be known."

"Where, then, are my women and my servants?" inquired the Queen.

"Your Grace will be attended by the servants of Sir Walter Ashton."

"Gentlemen, this is not seemly," said Mary, the colour coming hotly
into her face.  "I know it is not the will of my cousin, the Queen of
England, that I should remain here without any woman to attend me, nor
any change of garments.  You are exceeding your commission, and she
shall hear of it."

Sir Amias Paulett here laid his hand on Gorges' arm, and after
exchanging a few words with him, said--

"Madam, this young lady, Mistress Talbot, being simple, and of a loyal
house, may remain with you for the present.  For the rest, seals are
put on all your effects at Chartley, and nothing can be removed from
thence, but what is needful will be supplied by my Lady Ashton.  I bid
your Grace farewell, craving your pardon for what may have been hasty
in this."

Mary stood in the centre of the floor, full of her own peculiar injured
dignity, not answering, but making a low ironical reverence. Mary
Seaton fell on her knees, clung to the Queen's dress, and declared that
while she lived, she would not leave her mistress.

"Endure this also, ma mie," said the Queen, in French.  "Give them no
excuse for using violence.  They would not scruple--" and as a
demonstration to hinder French-speaking was made by the gentlemen,
"Fear not for me, I shall not be alone."

"I understand your Grace and obey," said Mary Seaton, rising, with a
certain bitterness in her tone, which made Mary say-- "Ah! why must
jealousy mar the fondest affection?  Remember, it is their choice, not
mine, my Seaton, friend of my youth.  Bear my loving greetings to all.
And take care of poor Barbara!"

"Madam, there must be no private messages," said Paulett.

"I send no messages save what you yourself may hear, sir," replied the
Queen.  "My greetings to my faithful servants, and my entreaty that all
care and tenderness may be shown to Mrs. Curll."

"I will bear them, madam," said the knight, "and so I commend you to
God's keeping, praying that He may send you repentance.  Believe me,
madam, I am sorry that this has been put upon me."

To this Mary only replied by a gesture of dismissal.  The three
gentlemen drew back, a key grated in the lock, and the mother and
daughter were left alone.

To Cicely it was a terrible hopeless sound, and even to her mother it
was a lower depth of wretchedness.  She had been practically a captive
for nearly twenty years.  She had been insulted, watched, guarded,
coerced, but never in this manner locked up before.

She clasped her hands together, dropped on her knees at the table that
stood by her, and hid her face.  So she continued till she was roused
by the sound of Cicely's sobs.  Frightened and oppressed, and new to
all terror and sorrow, the girl had followed her example in kneeling,
but the very attempt to pray brought on a fit of weeping, and the
endeavour to restrain what might disturb the Queen only rendered the
sobs more choking and strangling, till at last Mary heard, and coming
towards her, sat down on the floor, gathered her into her arms, and
kissing her forehead, said, "Poor bairnie, and did she weep for her
mother?  Have the sorrows of her house come on her?"

"O mother, I could not help it!  I meant to have comforted you," said
Cicely, between her sobs.

"And so thou dost, my child.  Unwittingly they have left me that which
was most precious to me."

There was consolation in the fondness of the loving embrace, at least
to such sorrows as those of the maiden; and Queen Mary had an
inalienable power of charming the will and affections of those in
contact with her, so that insensibly there came into Cicely's heart a
sense that, so far from weeping, she should rejoice at being the one
creature left to console her mother.

"And," she said by and by, looking up with a smile, "they must go to
the bottom of the old well to find anything."

"Hush, lassie.  Never speak above thy breath in a prison till thou
know'st whether walls have ears.  And, apropos, let us examine what
sort of a prison they have given us this time."

So saying Mary rose, and leaning on her daughter's arm, proceeded to
explore her new abode.  Like her apartment at the Lodge, it was at the
top of the house, a fashion not uncommon when it was desirable to make
the lower regions defensible; but, whereas she had always hitherto been
placed in the castles of the highest nobility, she was now in that of a
country knight of no great wealth or refinement, and, moreover, taken
by surprise.

So the plenishing was of the simplest.  The walls were covered with
tapestry so faded that the pattern could hardly be detected.  The
hearth yawned dark and dull, and by it stood one chair with a
moth-eaten cushion.  A heavy oaken table and two forms were in the
middle of the room, and there was the dreary, fusty smell of want of
habitation.  The Queen, whose instincts for fresh air were always a
distress to her ladies, sprang to the mullioned window, but the heavy
lattice defied all her efforts.

"Let us see the rest of our dominions," she said, turning to a door,
which led to a still more gloomy bedroom, where the only articles of
furniture were a great carved bed, with curtains of some undefined dark
colour, and an oaken chest.  The window was a mere slit, and even more
impracticable than that of the outer room.  However, this did not seem
to horrify Mary so much as it did her daughter.  "They cannot mean to
keep us here long," she said; "perhaps only for the day, while they
make their search--their unsuccessful search--thanks to--we know whom,
little one."

"I hope so!  How could we sleep there?" said Cicely, looking with a
shudder at the bed.

"Tush!  I have seen worse in Scotland, mignonne, ay and when I was
welcomed as liege lady, not as a captive.  I have slept in a box like a
coffin with one side open, and I have likewise slept on a plaidie on
the braw purple blossoms of freshly pulled heather!  Nay, the very
thought makes this chamber doubly mouldy and stifling!  Let the old
knight beware.  If he open not his window I shall break it!  Soft. Here
he comes."

Sir Walter Ashton appeared, louting low, looking half-dogged,
half-sheepish, and escorting two heavy-footed, blue-coated serving-men,
who proceeded to lay the cloth, which at least had the merit of being
perfectly clean and white.  Two more brought in covered silver dishes,
one of which contained a Yorkshire pudding, the other a piece of
roast-beef, apparently calculated to satisfy five hungry men.  A flagon
of sack, a tankard of ale, a dish of apples, and a large loaf of bread,
completed the meal; at which the Queen and Cicely, accustomed daily to
a first table of sixteen dishes and a second of nine, compounded by her
Grace's own French cooks and pantlers, looked with a certain amused
dismay, as Sir Walter, standing by the table, produced a dagger from a
sheath at his belt, and took up with it first a mouthful of the
pudding, then cut off a corner of the beef, finished off some of the
bread, and having swallowed these, as well as a draught of each of the
liquors, said, "Good and sound meats, not tampered with, as I hereby
testify.  You take us suddenly, madam; but I thank Heaven, none ever
found us unprovided.  Will it please you to fall to?  Your woman can
eat after you."

Mary's courtesy was unfailing, and though she felt all a Frenchwoman's
disgust at the roast-beef of old England, she said, "We are too close
companions not to eat together, and I fear she will be the best
trencher comrade, for, sir, I am a woman sick and sorrowful, and have
little stomach for meat."

As Sir Walter carved a huge red piece from the ribs, she could not help
shrinking back from it, so that he said with some affront, "You need
not be queasy, madam, it was cut from a home-fed bullock, only killed
three days since, and as prime a beast as any in Stafford."

"Ah! yea, sir.  It is not the fault of the beef, but of my feebleness.
Mistress Talbot will do it reason.  But I, methinks I could eat better
were the windows opened."

But Sir Walter replied that these windows were not of the new-fangled
sort, made to open, that honest men might get rheums, and foolish maids
prate therefrom.  So there was no hope in that direction.  He really
seemed to be less ungracious than utterly clownish, dull, and untaught,
and extremely shy and embarrassed with his prisoner.

Cicely poured out some wine, and persuaded her to dip some bread in,
which, with an apple, was all she could taste.  However, the fare,
though less nicely served than by good Mrs. Susan, was not so alien to
Cicely, and she was of an age and constitution to be made hungry by
anxiety and trouble, so that--encouraged by the Queen whenever she
would have desisted--she ended by demolishing a reasonable amount.

Sir Walter stood all the time, looking on moodily and stolidly, with
his cap in his hand.  The Queen tried to talk to him, and make
inquiries of him, but he had probably steeled himself to her
blandishments, for nothing but gruff monosyllables could be extracted
from him, except when he finally asked what she would be pleased to
have for supper.

"Mine own cook and pantler have hitherto provided for me.  They would
save your household the charge, sir," said Mary, "and I would be at
charges for them."

"Madam, I can bear the charge in the Queen's service.  Your black guard
are under ward.  And if not, no French jackanapes shall ever brew his
messes in my kitchen!   Command honest English fare, madam, and if it
be within my compass, you shall have it.  No one shall be stinted in
Walter Ashton's house; but I'll not away with any of your outlandish
kickshaws.  Come, what say you to eggs and bacon, madam?"

"As you will, sir," replied Mary, listlessly.  And Sir Walter, opening
the door, shouted to his serving-man, who speedily removed the meal, he
going last and making his clumsy reverence at the door, which he locked
behind him.

"So," said Mary, "I descend!  I have had the statesman, the earl, the
courtly knight, the pedantic Huguenot, for my warders.  Now am I come
to the clown.  Soon will it be the dungeon and the headsman."

"O dear madam mother, speak not thus," cried Cicely.  "Remember they
can find nothing against you."

"They can make what they cannot find, my poor child.  If they thirst
for my blood, it will cost them little to forge a plea.  Ah, lassie!
there have been times when nothing but my cousin Elizabeth's
conscience, or her pity, stood between me and doom.  If she be brought
to think that I have compassed her death, why then there is naught for
it but to lay my head on the same pillow as Norfolk and More and holy
Fisher, and many another beside.  Well, be it so!  I shall die a martyr
for the Holy Church, and thus may I atone by God's mercy for my many
sins!  Yea, I offer myself a sacrifice," she said, folding her hands
and looking upward with a light on her face.  "O do Thou accept it, and
let my sufferings purge away my many misdeeds, and render it a pure and
acceptable offering unto Thee.  Child, child," she added, turning to
Cicely, "would that thou wert of my faith, then couldst thou pray for
me."

"O mother, mother, I can do that.  I do pray for thee."

And hand in hand with tears often rising, they knelt while Mary
repeated in broken voice the Miserere.




CHAPTER XXIX.

THE SEARCH.


Humfrey had been much disappointed, when, instead of joining the hunt,
Sir Amias Paulett bade him undertake the instruction of half a dozen
extremely awkward peasants, who had been called in to increase the
guard, but who did not know how to shoulder, load, or fire an arquebus,
had no command of their own limbs, and, if put to stand sentry, would
quite innocently loll in the nearest corner, and go to sleep.  However,
he reflected that if he were resident in the same house as Cicely he
could not expect opportunities to be daily made for their meeting, and
he addressed himself with all his might to the endeavour to teach his
awkward squad to stand upright for five minutes together.  Sturdy
fellows as they were, he had not been able to hinder them from lopping
over in all directions, when horses were heard approaching.  Every man
of them, regardless of discipline, lumbered off to stare, and Humfrey,
after shouting at them in vain, and wishing he had them all on board
ship, gave up the endeavour to recall them, and followed their example,
repairing to the hall-door, when he found Sir Amias Paulett
dismounting, together with a clerkly-looking personage, attended by
Will Cavendish.  Mary Seaton was being assisted from her horse,
evidently in great grief; and others of the personal attendants of Mary
were there, but neither herself, Cicely, nor the Secretaries.

Before he had time to ask questions, his old companion came up to him.
"You here still, Humfrey?  Well.  You have come in for the outburst of
the train you scented out when you were with us in London, though I
could not then speak explicitly."

"What mean you?  Where is Cicely?  Where is the Queen of Scots?" asked
Humfrey anxiously.

Sir Amias Paulett heard him, and replied, "Your sister is safe, Master
Talbot, and with the Queen of Scots at Tixall Castle.  We permitted her
attendance, as being young, simple, and loyal; she is less like to
serve for plots than her elders in that lady's service."

Sir Annas strode on, conducting with him his guest, whom Cavendish
explained to be Mr. Wade, sworn by her Majesty's Council to take
possession of Queen Mary's effects, and there make search for evidence
of the conspiracy.  Cavendish followed, and Humfrey took leave to do
the same.

The doors of the Queen's apartment were opened at the summons of Sir
Amias Paulett, and Sir Andrew Melville, Mistress Kennedy, Marie de
Courcelles, and the rest, stood anxiously demanding what was become of
their Queen.  They were briefly and harshly told that her foul and
abominable plots and conspiracies against the life of the Queen, and
the peace of the Kingdom, had been brought to light, and that she was
under secure ward.

Jean Kennedy demanded to be taken to her at once, but Paulett replied,
"That must not be, madam.  We have strict commands to keep her secluded
from all."

Marie de Courcelles screamed aloud and wrung her hands, crying, "If ye
have slain her, only tell us quickly!"  Sir Andrew Melville gravely
protested against such a barbarous insult to a Queen of Scotland and
France, and was answered, "No queen, sir, but a State criminal, as we
shall presently show."

Here Barbara Curll pressed forward, asking wildly for her husband; and
Wade replying, with brutal brevity, that he was taken to London to be
examined for his practices before the Council, the poor lady, well
knowing that examination often meant torture, fell back in a swoon.

"We shall do nothing with all these women crying and standing about,"
said Wade impatiently; "have them all away, while we put seals on the
effects."

"Nay, sirs," said Jean Kennedy.  "Suffer me first to send her Grace
some changes of garments."

"I tell thee, woman," said Wade, "our orders are precise!  Not so much
as a kerchief is to be taken from these chambers till search hath been
made.  We know what practices may lurk in the smallest rag."

"It is barbarous!  It is atrocious!  The King of France shall hear of
it," shrieked Marie de Courcelles.

"The King of France has enough to do to take care of himself, my good
lady," returned Wade, with a sneer.

"Sir," said Jean Kennedy, with more dignity, turning to Sir Amias
Paulett, "I cannot believe that it can be by the orders of the Queen of
England, herself a woman, that my mistress, her cousin, should be
deprived of all attendance, and even of a change of linen.  Such
unseemly commands can never have been issued from herself."

"She is not without attendance," replied the knight, "the little Talbot
wench is with her, and for the rest, Sir Walter and Lady Ashton have
orders to supply her needs during her stay among them. She is treated
with all honour, and is lodged in the best chambers," he added,
consolingly.

"We must dally no longer," called out Wade.  "Have away all this throng
into ward, Sir Amias.  We can do nothing with them here."

There was no help for it.  Sir Andrew Melville did indeed pause to
enter his protest, but that, of course, went for nothing with the
Commissioners, and Humfrey was ordered to conduct them to the upper
gallery, there to await further orders.  It was a long passage, in the
highly pointed roof, with small chambers on either side which could be
used when there was a press of guests.  There was a steep stair, as the
only access, and it could be easily guarded, so Sir Amias directed
Humfrey to post a couple of men at the foot, and to visit and relieve
them from time to time.

It was a sad procession that climbed up those narrow stairs, of those
faithful followers who were separated from their Queen for the first
time.  The servants of lower rank were merely watched in their kitchen,
and not allowed to go beyond its courtyard, but were permitted to cook
for and wait on the others, and bring them such needful furniture as
was required.
