would have been the last obstacle on which he would have
calculated, even had the union been less eligible.

Influenced by these feelings, the Chief now led Waverley in quest
of Miss Mac-Ivor, not without the hope that the present agitation
of his guest's spirits might give him courage to cut short what
Fergus termed the romance of the courtship. They found Flora, with
her faithful attendants, Una and Cathleen, busied in preparing
what appeared to Waverley to be white bridal favours. Disguising
as well as he could the agitation of his mind, Waverley asked for
what joyful occasion Miss Mac-Ivor made such ample preparation.

'It is for Fergus's bridal,' she said, smiling.

'Indeed!' said Edward; 'he has kept his secret well. I hope he
will allow me to be his bride's-man.'

'That is a man's office, but not yours, as Beatrice says,'
retorted Flora.

'And who is the fair lady, may I be permitted to ask, Miss Mac-
Ivor?'

'Did not I tell you long since that Fergus wooed no bride but
Honour?' answered Flora.

'And am I then incapable of being his assistant and counsellor in
the pursuit of honour?' said our hero, colouring deeply. 'Do I
rank so low in your opinion?'

'Far from it, Captain Waverley. I would to God you were of our
determination! and made use of the expression which displeased
you, solely

    Because you are not of our quality,
    But stand against us as an enemy.'

'That time is past, sister,' said Fergus; 'and you may wish
Edward Waverley (no longer captain) joy of being freed from the
slavery to an usurper, implied in that sable and ill-omened
emblem.'

'Yes,' said Waverley, undoing the cockade from his hat, 'it has
pleased the king who bestowed this badge upon me to resume it in a
manner which leaves me little reason to regret his service.'

'Thank God for that!' cried the enthusiast; 'and O that they may
be blind enough to treat every man of honour who serves them with
the same indignity, that I may have less to sigh for when the
struggle approaches!'

'And now, sister,' said the Chieftain, 'replace his cockade with
one of a more lively colour. I think it was the fashion of the
ladies of yore to arm and send forth their knights to high
achievement.'

'Not,' replied the lady, 'till the knight adventurer had well
weighed the justice and the danger of the cause, Fergus. Mr.
Waverley is just now too much agitated by feelings of recent
emotion for me to press upon him a resolution of consequence.'

Waverley felt half alarmed at the thought of adopting the badge of
what was by the majority of the kingdom esteemed rebellion, yet he
could not disguise his chagrin at the coldness with which Flora
parried her brother's hint. 'Miss Mac-Ivor, I perceive, thinks the
knight unworthy of her encouragement and favour,' said he,
somewhat bitterly.

'Not so, Mr. Waverley,' she replied, with great sweetness. 'Why
should I refuse my brother's valued friend a boon which I am
distributing to his whole clan? Most willingly would I enlist
every man of honour in the cause to which my brother has devoted
himself. But Fergus has taken his measures with his eyes open. His
life has been devoted to this cause from his cradle; with him its
call is sacred, were it even a summons to the tomb. But how can I
wish you, Mr. Waverley, so new to the world, so far from every
friend who might advise and ought to influence you,--in a moment,
too, of sudden pique and indignation,--how can I wish you to
plunge yourself at once into so desperate an enterprise?'

Fergus, who did not understand these delicacies, strode through
the apartment biting his lip, and then, with a constrained smile,
said, 'Well, sister, I leave you to act your new character of
mediator between the Elector of Hanover and the subjects of your
lawful sovereign and benefactor,' and left the room.

There was a painful pause, which was at length broken by Miss Mac-
Ivor. 'My brother is unjust,' she said, 'because he can bear no
interruption that seems to thwart his loyal zeal.'

'And do you not share his ardour?' asked Waverley,

'Do I not?' answered Flora. 'God knows mine exceeds his, if that
be possible. But I am not, like him, rapt by the bustle of
military preparation, and the infinite detail necessary to the
present undertaking, beyond consideration of the grand principles
of justice and truth, on which our enterprise is grounded; and
these, I am certain, can only be furthered by measures in
themselves true and just. To operate upon your present feelings,
my dear Mr. Waverley, to induce you to an irretrievable step, of
which you have not considered either the justice or the danger,
is, in my poor judgment, neither the one nor the other.'

'Incomparable Flora!' said Edward, taking her hand, 'how much do I
need such a monitor!'

'A better one by far,' said Flora, gently withdrawing her hand,
'Mr. Waverley will always find in his own bosom, when he will give
its small still voice leisure to be heard.'

'No, Miss Mac-Ivor, I dare not hope it; a thousand circumstances
of fatal self-indulgence have made me the creature rather of
imagination than reason. Durst I but hope--could I but think--that
you would deign to be to me that affectionate, that condescending
friend, who would strengthen me to redeem my errors, my future
life--'

'Hush, my dear sir! now you carry your joy at escaping the hands
of a Jacobite recruiting officer to an unparalleled excess of
gratitude.'

'Nay, dear Flora, trifle with me no longer; you cannot mistake the
meaning of those feelings which I have almost involuntarily
expressed; and since I have broken the barrier of silence, let me
profit by my audacity. Or may I, with your permission, mention to
your brother--'

'Not for the world, Mr. Waverley!'

'What am I to understand?' said Edward. 'Is there any fatal bar--
has any prepossession--'

'None, sir,' answered Flora. 'I owe it to myself to say that I
never yet saw the person on whom I thought with reference to the
present subject.'

'The shortness of our acquaintance, perhaps--If Miss Mac-Ivor will
deign to give me time--'

'I have not even that excuse. Captain Waverley's character is so
open--is, in short, of that nature that it cannot be misconstrued,
either in its strength or its weakness.'

'And for that weakness you despise me?' said Edward.

'Forgive me, Mr. Waverley--and remember it is but within this half
hour that there existed between us a barrier of a nature to me
insurmountable, since I never could think of an officer in the
service of the Elector of Hanover in any other light than as a
casual acquaintance. Permit me then to arrange my ideas upon so
unexpected a topic, and in less than an hour I will be ready to
give you such reasons for the resolution I shall express as may be
satisfactory at least, if not pleasing to you.' So saying Flora
withdrew, leaving Waverley to meditate upon the manner in which
she had received his addresses.

Ere he could make up his mind whether to believe his suit had been
acceptable or no, Fergus re-entered the apartment. 'What, a la
mort, Waverley?' he cried. 'Come down with me to the court, and
you shall see a sight worth all the tirades of your romances. An
hundred firelocks, my friend, and as many broadswords, just
arrived from good friends; and two or three hundred stout fellows
almost fighting which shall first possess them. But let me look at
you closer. Why, a true Highlander would say you had been blighted
by an evil eye. Or can it be this silly girl that has thus blanked
your spirit. Never mind her, dear Edward; the wisest of her sex
are fools in what regards the business of life.'

'Indeed, my good friend,' answered Waverley, 'all that I can
charge against your sister is, that she is too sensible, too
reasonable.'

'If that be all, I ensure you for a louis-d'or against the mood
lasting four-and-twenty hours. No woman was ever steadily sensible
for that period; and I will engage, if that will please you, Flora
shall be as unreasonable to-morrow as any of her sex. You must
learn, my dear Edward, to consider women en mousquetaire.' So
saying, he seized Waverley's arm and dragged him off to review his
military preparations.





CHAPTER XXVII

UPON THE SAME SUBJECT


Fergus Mac-Ivor had too much tact and delicacy to renew the
subject which he had interrupted. His head was, or appeared to be,
so full of guns, broadswords, bonnets, canteens, and tartan hose
that Waverley could not for some time draw his attention to any
other topic.

'Are you to take the field so soon, Fergus,' he asked, 'that you
are making all these martial preparations?'

'When we have settled that you go with me, you shall know all; but
otherwise, the knowledge might rather be prejudicial to you.'

'But are you serious in your purpose, with such inferior forces,
to rise against an established government? It is mere frenzy.'

'Laissez faire a Don Antoine; I shall take good care of myself. We
shall at least use the compliment of Conan, who never got a stroke
but he gave one. I would not, however,' continued the Chieftain,
'have you think me mad enough to stir till a favourable
opportunity: I will not slip my dog before the game's afoot. But,
once more, will you join with us, and you shall know all?'

'How can I?' said Waverley; 'I, who have so lately held that
commission which is now posting back to those that gave it? My
accepting it implied a promise of fidelity, and an acknowledgment
of the legality of the government.'

'A rash promise,' answered Fergus, 'is not a steel handcuff, it
may be shaken off, especially when it was given under deception,
and has been repaid by insult. But if you cannot immediately make
up your mind to a glorious revenge, go to England, and ere you
cross the Tweed you will hear tidings that will make the world
ring; and if Sir Everard be the gallant old cavalier I have heard
him described by some of our HONEST gentlemen of the year one
thousand seven hundred and fifteen, he will find you a better
horse-troop and a better cause than you have lost.'

'But your sister, Fergus?'

'Out, hyperbolical fiend!' replied the Chief, laughing; 'how
vexest thou this man! Speak'st thou of nothing but of ladies?'

'Nay, be serious, my dear friend,' said Waverley; 'I feel that the
happiness of my future life must depend upon the answer which Miss
Mac-Ivor shall make to what I ventured to tell her this morning.'

'And is this your very sober earnest,' said Fergus, more gravely,
'or are we in the land of romance and fiction?'

'My earnest, undoubtedly. How could you suppose me jesting on such
a subject?'

'Then, in very sober earnest,' answered his friend, 'I am very
glad to hear it; and so highly do I think of Flora, that you are
the only man in England for whom I would say so much. But before
you shake my hand so warmly, there is more to be considered. Your
own family--will they approve your connecting yourself with the
sister of a high-born Highland beggar?'

'My uncle's situation,' said Waverley, 'his general opinions, and
his uniform indulgence, entitle me to say, that birth and personal
qualities are all he would look to in such a connection. And where
can I find both united in such excellence as in your sister?'

'O nowhere! cela va sans dire,' replied Fergus, with a smile. 'But
your father will expect a father's prerogative in being
consulted.'

'Surely; but his late breach with the ruling powers removes all
apprehension of objection on his part, especially as I am
convinced that my uncle will be warm in my cause.'

'Religion perhaps,' said Fergus, 'may make obstacles, though we
are not bigotted Catholics.'

'My grandmother was of the Church of Rome, and her religion was
never objected to by my family. Do not think of MY friends, dear
Fergus; let me rather have your influence where it may be more
necessary to remove obstacles--I mean with your lovely sister.'

'My lovely sister,' replied Fergus, 'like her loving brother, is
very apt to have a pretty decisive will of her own, by which, in
this case, you must be ruled; but you shall not want my interest,
nor my counsel. And, in the first place, I will give you one hint
--Loyalty is her ruling passion; and since she could spell an
English book she has been in love with the memory of the gallant
Captain Wogan, who renounced the service of the usurper Cromwell
to join the standard of Charles II, marched a handful of cavalry
from London to the Highlands to join Middleton, then in arms for
the king, and at length died gloriously in the royal cause. Ask
her to show you some verses she made on his history and fate; they
have been much admired, I assure you. The next point is--I think
I saw Flora go up towards the waterfall a short time since;
follow, man, follow! don't allow the garrison time to strengthen
its purposes of resistance. Alerte a la muraille! Seek Flora out,
and learn her decision as soon as you can, and Cupid go with you,
while I go to look over belts and cartouch-boxes.'

Waverley ascended the glen with an anxious and throbbing heart.
Love, with all its romantic train of hopes, fears, and wishes, was
mingled with other feelings of a nature less easily defined. He
could not but remember how much this morning had changed his fate,
and into what a complication of perplexity it was likely to plunge
him. Sunrise had seen him possessed of an esteemed rank in the
honourable profession of arms, his father to all appearance
rapidly rising in the favour of his sovereign. All this had passed
away like a dream: he himself was dishonoured, his father
disgraced, and he had become involuntarily the confidant at least,
if not the accomplice, of plans, dark, deep, and dangerous, which
must infer either the subversion of the government he had so
lately served or the destruction of all who had participated in
them. Should Flora even listen to his suit favourably, what
prospect was there of its being brought to a happy termination
amid the tumult of an impending insurrection? Or how could he make
the selfish request that she should leave Fergus, to whom she was
so much attached, and, retiring with him to England, wait, as a
distant spectator, the success of her brother's undertaking, or
the ruin of all his hopes and fortunes? Or, on the other hand, to
engage himself, with no other aid than his single arm, in the
dangerous and precipitate counsels of the Chieftain, to be whirled
along by him, the partaker of all his desperate and impetuous
motions, renouncing almost the power of judging, or deciding upon
the rectitude or prudence of his actions, this was no pleasing
prospect for the secret pride of Waverley to stoop to. And yet
what other conclusion remained, saving the rejection of his
addresses by Flora, an alternative not to be thought of in the
present high-wrought state of his feelings with anything short of
mental agony. Pondering the doubtful and dangerous prospect before
him, he at length arrived near the cascade, where, as Fergus had
augured, he found Flora seated.

She was quite alone, and as soon as she observed his approach she
rose and came to meet him. Edward attempted to say something
within the verge of ordinary compliment and conversation, but
found himself unequal to the task. Flora seemed at first equally
embarrassed, but recovered herself more speedily, and (an
unfavourable augury for Waverley's suit) was the first to enter
upon the subject of their last interview. 'It is too important, in
every point of view, Mr. Waverley, to permit me to leave you in
doubt on my sentiments.'

'Do not speak them speedily,' said Waverley, much agitated,
'unless they are such as I fear, from your manner, I must not dare
to anticipate. Let time--let my future conduct--let your brother's
influence--'

'Forgive me, Mr. Waverley,' said Flora, her complexion a little
heightened, but her voice firm and composed. 'I should incur my
own heavy censure did I delay expressing my sincere conviction
that I can never regard you otherwise than as a valued friend. I
should do you the highest injustice did I conceal my sentiments
for a moment. I see I distress you, and I grieve for it, but
better now than later; and O, better a thousand times, Mr.
Waverley, that you should feel a present momentary disappointment
than the long and heart-sickening griefs which attend a rash and
ill-assorted marriage!'

'Good God!' exclaimed Waverley, 'why should you anticipate such
consequences from a union where birth is equal, where fortune is
favourable, where, if I may venture to say so, the tastes are
similar, where you allege no preference for another, where you
even express a favourable opinion of him whom you reject?'

'Mr. Waverley, I HAVE that favourable opinion,' answered Flora;
'and so strongly that, though I would rather have been silent on
the grounds of my resolution, you shall command them, if you exact
such a mark of my esteem and confidence.'

She sat down upon a fragment of rock, and Waverley, placing
himself near her, anxiously pressed for the explanation she
offered.

'I dare hardly,' she said, 'tell you the situation of my feelings,
they are so different from those usually ascribed to young women
at my period of life; and I dare hardly touch upon what I
conjecture to be the nature of yours, lest I should give offence
where I would willingly administer consolation. For myself, from
my infancy till this day I have had but one wish--the restoration
of my royal benefactors to their rightful throne. It is impossible
to express to you the devotion of my feelings to this single
subject; and I will frankly confess that it has so occupied my
mind as to exclude every thought respecting what is called my own
settlement in life. Let me but live to see the day of that happy
restoration, and a Highland cottage, a French convent, or an
English palace will be alike indifferent to me.'

'But, dearest Flora, how is your enthusiastic zeal for the exiled
family inconsistent with my happiness?'

'Because you seek, or ought to seek, in the object of your
attachment a heart whose principal delight should be in augmenting
your domestic felicity and returning your affection, even to the
height of romance. To a man of less keen sensibility, and less
enthusiastic tenderness of disposition, Flora Mac-Ivor might give
content, if not happiness; for, were the irrevocable words spoken,
never would she be deficient in the duties which she vowed.'

'And why,--why, Miss Mac-Ivor, should you think yourself a more
valuable treasure to one who is less capable of loving, of
admiring you, than to me?'

'Simply because the tone of our affections would be more in
unison, and because his more blunted sensibility would not require
the return of enthusiasm which I have not to bestow. But you, Mr.
Waverley, would for ever refer to the idea of domestic happiness
which your imagination is capable of painting, and whatever fell
short of that ideal representation would be construed into
coolness and indifference, while you might consider the enthusiasm
with which I regarded the success of the royal family as
defrauding your affection of its due return.'

'In other words, Miss Mac-Ivor, you cannot love me?' said her
suitor dejectedly.

'I could esteem you, Mr. Waverley, as much, perhaps more, than any
man I have ever seen; but I cannot love you as you ought to be
loved. O! do not, for your own sake, desire so hazardous an
experiment! The woman whom you marry ought to have affections and
opinions moulded upon yours. Her studies ought to be your studies;
her wishes, her feelings, her hopes, her fears, should all mingle
with yours. She should enhance your pleasures, share your sorrows,
and cheer your melancholy.'

'And why will not you, Miss Mac-Ivor, who can so well describe a
happy union, why will not you be yourself the person you
describe?'

'Is it possible you do not yet comprehend me?' answered Flora.
'Have I not told you that every keener sensation of my mind is
bent exclusively towards an event upon which, indeed, I have no
power but those of my earnest prayers?'

'And might not the granting the suit I solicit,' said Waverley,
too earnest on his purpose to consider what he was about to say,
'even advance the interest to which you have devoted yourself? My
family is wealthy and powerful, inclined in principles to the
Stuart race, and should a favourable opportunity--'

'A favourable opportunity!' said Flora--somewhat scornfully.
'Inclined in principles! Can such lukewarm adherence be honourable
to yourselves, or gratifying to your lawful sovereign? Think, from
my present feelings, what I should suffer when I held the place of
member in a family where the rights which I hold most sacred are
subjected to cold discussion, and only deemed worthy of support
when they shall appear on the point of triumphing without it!'

'Your doubts,' quickly replied Waverley, 'are unjust as far as
concerns myself. The cause that I shall assert, I dare support
through every danger, as undauntedly as the boldest who draws
sword in its behalf.'

'Of that,' answered Flora, 'I cannot doubt for a moment. But
consult your own good sense and reason rather than a prepossession
hastily adopted, probably only because you have met a young woman
possessed of the usual accomplishments in a sequestered and
romantic situation. Let your part in this great and perilous drama
