frigidarium, but there the most delicious coolness greeted her. Here,
too, however, she could allow herself no rest, for the boys in the top
of the beech, and some neighbouring trees, were already shouting their
clear voices hoarse and waving caps and branches.

With trembling knees she forced herself to climb one after another of
the blocks that formed the staircase. When a slight faintness attacked
her, a stalactite afforded her support, and it passed as quickly as it
came. Now she had reached her goal. The rock on which she stood gave her
feet sufficient support, as it had done many times before.

Barbara needed a few minutes in this wonderfully cool atmosphere to
recover complete self-control. Only the wild pulsation of her heart
still caused a painful feeling; but if she was permitted to see the
object of her love once more, the world might go to ruin and she with
it.

Now she gazed from the lofty window over the open country.

She had come just at the right time. Imperial halberdiers and horse
guards, galloping up and down, kept the centre of the road free. On the
opposite side of the highway which she overlooked was a dense, countless
multitude of citizens, peasants, soldiers, monks, women, and children,
who with difficulty resisted the pressure of those who stood behind
them, shoulder to shoulder, head to head. Barbara from her lofty station
saw hats, barets, caps, helmets, women's caps and coifs, fair and
red hair on uncovered heads and, in the centre of many, the priestly
tonsure.

Then a column of dust advanced along the road from which the fanfare
resounded like the scream of the hawk from the gray fog. A few minutes
later, the cloud vanished; but the shouts of the multitude increased
to loud cheers when the heralds who rode at the head of the procession
appeared and raised their long, glittering trumpets to their lips.
Behind them, on spirited stallions, rode the wedding marshals, members
of royal families, in superb costumes with bouquets of flowers on their
shoulders.

Now the tumult died away for a few minutes, and Barbara felt as though
her heart stood still, for the two stately men on splendid chargers
who now, after a considerable interval, followed them, were the royal
brothers, the Emperor Charles and King Ferdinand.

The man for whom Barbara's soul longed, as well as her eyes, rode on the
side toward her.

He was still half concealed by dust, but it could be no one else, for
now the outburst of enthusiasm, joy, and reverence from the populace
reached its climax. It seemed as though the very trees by the wayside
joined in the limitless jubilation. The greatness of the sovereign, the
general, and the happy head of the family, made the Protestants around
him forget with what perils this monarch threatened their faith and
thereby themselves; and he, too, the defender and loyal son of the
Church, appeared to thrust aside the thought that the people who greeted
him with such impetuous delight, and shared the two-fold festival of his
family with such warm devotion, were heretics who deserved punishment.
At least he saluted with gracious friendliness the throng that lined
both sides of the road, and as he passed by the garden of the little
castle he even smiled, and glanced toward the building as though a
pleasant memory had been awakened in his mind. At this moment Barbara
gazed into the Emperor's face.

Those were the features which had worn so tender an expression when, for
the first time, he had uttered the never-to-be-forgotten "Because I long
for love," and her yearning heart throbbed no less quickly now than on
that night. The wrong and suffering which he had inflicted upon her were
forgotten. She remembered nothing save that she loved him, that he was
the greatest and, to her, the dearest of all men.

It was perfectly impossible for him to see her, but she did not think
of that; and when he looked toward her with such joyous emotion, and the
cheers of the populace, like a blazing fire which a gust of wind fans
still higher, outstripped, as it were, themselves, she could not have
helped joining in the huzzas and shouts and acclamations around her
though she had been punished with imprisonment and death.

And clinging more firmly to the stalactite, Barbara rose on tiptoe and
mingled her voice with the joyous cheers of the multitude.

In the act her breath failed, and she felt a sharp pain in her chest,
but she heeded the suffering as little as she did the weakness of her
limbs. The physical part of her being seemed asleep or dead. Nothing was
awake or living except her soul. Nothing stirred within her breast save
the rapture of seeing him again, the indescribable pleasure of showing
that she loved him.

Already she could no longer see his face, already the dust had concealed
him and his charger from her eyes, yet still, filled with peerless
happiness, she shouted "Charles!" and again and again "Charles!" It
seemed to her as though the air or some good spirit insist bear the cry
to him and assure him of her ardent, inextinguishable love.

The charming royal brides, radiant in their jewels, their betrothed
husbands, and the lords and ladies of their magnificent train passed
Barbara like shadows. The procession of German, Spanish, Hungarian,
Bohemian, and Italian dignitaries swam in a confused medley before her
eyes. The glittering armour of the princes, counts, and barons, the gems
on the heads, the robes, and the horses' trappings of the ladies and the
Magyar magnates flashed brightly before her, the red hats and robes of
the cardinals gleamed out, but usually everything that her eyes beheld
mingled in a single motley, shining, moving, many-limbed body.

The end of the procession was now approaching, and physical weakness
suddenly asserted itself most painfully.

Barbara felt only too plainly that it was time to leave her post of
observation; her feet would scarcely carry her and, besides, she was
freezing.

She had entered the damp cave chamber in a thin summer gown, and it now
seemed to be continually growing colder and colder.

Climbing down the high steps taxed her like a difficult, almost
impossible task, and perhaps she might not have succeeded in
accomplishing it unaided; but she had scarcely commenced the descent
when she heard her name called, and soon after Sister Hyacinthe entered
the frigidarium and, amid no lack of kindly reproaches, helped her to
reach the open air.

When even in the warm sunshine the chill did not pass away, Barbara saw
that the sister was right, yet she was far from feeling repentant.

During the night a violent attack of fever seized her, and her inflamed
throat was extremely painful.

When Dr. Mathys came to her bedside he already knew from the nun the
cause of this unfortunate relapse, and he understood only too well what
had induced Barbara to commit the grave imprudence. Reproof and warnings
were useless here; the only thing he could do was to act, and renew the
conflict with the scarcely subdued illness. Thanks to his indefatigable
zeal, to the girl's strong constitution, and to the watchful care of the
nurse, he won the victory a second time. Yet he could not rejoice in a
complete triumph, for the severe inflammation of the bronchial tubes had
caused a hoarseness which would yield to none of his remedies. It might
last a long time, and the thought that the purity of his patient's voice
was perhaps forever destroyed occasioned sincere regret.

True, he opposed the girl when she expressed this fear; but as July drew
to its close, and her voice still remained husky, he scarcely hoped to
be able to restore the old melody. In other respects he might consider
Barbara cured, and intrust her entire convalescence to her own patience
and caution.

Perhaps the ardent desire to regain the divine gift of song would
protect her from perilous ventures like this last one, and even more
certainly the hope which she had confided to the nun and then to
him also. The physician noticed, with warm sympathy, how deeply this
mysterious expectation had influenced her excitable nature, ever torn by
varying emotions, and the excellent man was ready to aid her as a friend
and intercessor.

Unfortunately, just at this time the pressure of business allowed the
Emperor little leisure to listen to the voice of the heart.

The day before yesterday the Elector John Frederick of Saxony and the
Landgrave Philip of Hesse had been banned, and with this the war began.

Already twelve troops of Spaniards who had served in Hungary, and other
bands of soldiers had entered Ratisbon; cannon came up the Danube from
Austria, and the city, had gained a warlike aspect. To disturb the
Emperor in his work as a general at such a time, with a matter which
must agitate him so deeply, was hazardous, and few would have been bold
enough to bring it before the overburdened monarch; but the leech's
interest in Barbara was so warm and sincere that he allowed himself
to be persuaded to act the mediator between her and the man who had
interfered so deeply in the destiny of her life. For the first time he
saw her weep, and her winning manner seemed to him equally touching,
whether she yielded to anxious distress of mind or to joyous hopes.

His intercession in her behalf would permit no delay, for the Emperor's
departure to join the troops was close at hand.

Firmly resolved to plead the cause of the unfortunate girl, whose
preservation, he might say, was his work, yet with slight hope of
success, he crossed the threshold of the imperial apartments.

When the physician informed the sovereign that Barbara might be
considered saved for the second time, the latter expressed his pleasure
by a warm "We are indebted to you for it again "; but when Mathys asked
if he did not intend to hasten Barbara's recovery by paying her a
visit, though only for a few moments, the Emperor looked into the
grave countenance of the physician, in whom he noticed an embarrassment
usually foreign to him, and said firmly, "Unfortunately, my dear Mathys,
I must deny myself this pleasure."

The other bowed with a sorrowful face, for Barbara's dearest wish had
been refused. But the Emperor saw what was passing in the mind of
the man whom he esteemed, and in a lighter tone added: "So even your
invulnerable dragon hide was not proof against the shafts--you know! If
I see aright, something else lies near your heart. My refusal--that is
easily seen--annoys you; but, much as I value your good opinion, Mathys,
it is firm. The more difficult I found it to regain my peace of mind,
the more foolish it would be to expose it to fresh peril. Now, if ever,
I must shun every source of agitation. Think! With the banning, the
general's work begins. How you look at me! Well, yes! You, too, know how
easy it is for the man who has most to do to spare a leisure hour
which the person without occupation does not find, and neither of us is
accustomed to deceive the other. Besides, it would be of little avail.
So, to cut the matter short, I am unwilling to see Barbara again and
awaken false hopes in her mind! But even these plain words do not seem
to satisfy you."

"By your Majesty's permission," replied the leech, "deeply as I regret
it for the invalid's sake, I believe, on the contrary, that you are
choosing the right course. But I have only discharged the first part of
my patient's commission. Though I have no pleasant tidings to take back
to her, I am still permitted to tell her the truth. But your Majesty,
by avoiding an interview with the poor girl, will spare yourself a sad,
nay, perhaps a painful hour."

"Did the disease so cruelly mar this masterpiece of the Creator?" asked
the Emperor. "With so violent a fever it was only too natural," replied
the physician. "Time and what our feeble skill can do will improve
her condition, I hope, but--and this causes the poor girl the keenest
suffering--the unfortunate inflammation of the bronchial tubes most
seriously injures the tone of her clear voice."

"Ah!" exclaimed the startled Emperor with sincere compassion. "Do
everything in your power, Mathys, to purify this troubled spring of
melody. I will repay you with my warmest gratitude, for, though the
Romans said that Cupid conquered through the eyes, yet Barbara's singing
exerted a far more powerful influence over my heart than even her
wonderful golden hair. Restore the melting tones of her voice and,
though the bond of love which rendered this month of May so exquisitely
beautiful to us must remain severed, I will not fail to remember it with
all graciousness."

"That, your Majesty, can scarcely be avoided," the physician here
remarked with an embarrassment which was new in him to Charles, "for the
continuance of the memory of the spring days which your Majesty recalls
with such vivid pleasure seems to be assured. Yet, if it pleases Heaven,
as I have learned to-day for the first time, to call a living being into
existence for this purpose----"

"If I understand you correctly," cried the Emperor, starting up, "I am
to believe in hopes----"

"In hopes," interrupted the physician with complete firmness, "which
must not alarm your Majesty, but render you happy. This new branch of
the illustrious trunk of your royal race I, who am only 30 a plain man,
hail with proud joy, and half the world, I know, will do so with me."

Charles, with brows contracted in a gloomy frown, gazed for a long time
into vacancy.

The leech perceived how mighty a conflict between contradictory emotions
would be waged in his breast, and silently gave him time to collect his
thoughts.

At last, rising from his arm-chair, the Emperor struck the table with
his open hand, and said: "Whether the Lord our God awoke this new life
for our punishment or our pleasure the future will teach. What more must
be done in this matter? You know my custom in regard to such important
affairs. They are slept upon and maturely considered. Only there is one
point," and as he uttered the words his voice assumed an imperious tone,
"which is already irrevocably decided. The world must not suspect what
hope offers itself to me and another. Tell her, Mathys, we wish her
happiness; but if her maternal heart expects that I will do her child
the honour of calling it mine, I must require her to keep silence, and
intrust the newborn infant's destiny, from the first hour of its birth,
to my charge."

Here he hesitated, and, after looking the physician in the face,
went on: "You again think that harsh, Mathys--I see it in your
expression--but, as my friend, you yourself can scarcely desire the
world to see the Emperor Charles performing the same task with a Barbara
Blomberg. She is free to choose. Either I will rear the child, whether
it is a boy or a girl, as my own, as I did my daughter, Duchess Margaret
of Parma, or she will refuse to give me the child from its birth and I
must deny it recognition. I have already shared far too much with
that tempting creature; I can not permit even this new dispensation to
restore my severed relationship with the singer. If Barbara's maternal
love is unselfish, the choice can not be difficult for her. That the
charge of providing for this new life will fall upon me is a matter of
course. Tell her this, Mathys, and if in future--But no. We will confide
this matter to Quijada."

As the door closed behind the physician, Charles stood motionless. Deep
earnestness furrowed his brow, but suddenly an expression of triumphant
joy flashed over his face, and then yielded to a look of grateful
satisfaction. Soon, however, his lofty brow clouded again, and his lower
lip protruded. Some idea which excited his indignation must have entered
his mind. He had just been thinking with the warmest joy of the gift
of Fate of which the physician had told him, but now the reasons which
forbade his offering it a sincere welcome crowded upon the thinker.

If Heaven bestowed a son upon him, would not only the Church, but also
the law, which he knew so well, refuse to recognise his rights? A child
whose mother had offended him, whose grandfather was a ridiculous,
impoverished old soldier, whose cousins----

Yet for what did he possess the highest power on earth if he would not
use it to place his own child, in spite of every obstacle, at the height
of earthly grandeur?

What need he care for the opinion of the world? And yet, yet----

Then there was a great bustle below. The loud tramping of horses' hoofs
was heard. A troop of Lombardy cavalry in full armour appeared on the
Haidplatz--fresh re-enforcements for the war just commencing. The erect
figure of the Duke of Alba, a man of middle height, followed by several
colonels, trotted toward it. The standard-bearer of the Lombards lowered
the banner with the picture of the Madonna before the duke, and the
Emperor involuntarily glanced back into the room at the lovely Madonna
and Child by the master hand of Giovanni Bellini which his royal sister
had hung above his writing table.

How grave and lovely, yet how full of majesty, the Christ-child looked,
how touching a grace surrounded the band of angels playing on violins
above the purest of mothers!

Then the necessity of appealing to her in prayer seized upon him,
and with fervent warmth he besought her to surround with her gracious
protection the young life which owed its existence to him.

He did not think of the child's mother. Was he still angry with her?

Did she seem to him unworthy of being commended to the protection of the
Queen of Heaven? Barbara was now no more to him than a cracked bell,
and the child which she expected to give him, no matter to what high'
honours he raised it, would bear a stain that nothing could efface, and
this stain would be called "his mother."

No deviation from the resolve which he had expressed to the physician
was possible. The child could not be permitted to grow up amid Barbara's
surroundings. To prevent this she must submit to part from her son or
her daughter, and to take the veil. In the convent she could remember
the happiness which had once raised her to its loftiest height. She
could and must atone for her sin and his by prayers and pious exercises.
To return to the low estate whence he had raised her must appear
disgraceful to herself. How could one who had once dined at the table
of the gods still relish the fare of mortals? Even now it seemed
inconceivable to him that she could oppose his will. Yet if she did,
he would withdraw his aid. He no longer loved her. In this hour she was
little more to him than the modest casket to which was confided a jewel
of inestimable value, an object of anxiety and care. The determination
which he had confided to his physician was as immovable as everything
which he had maturely considered. Don Luis Quijada should provide for
its execution.




CHAPTER IV.

Dr. Mathys had himself carried in the litter from the Golden Cross to
Barbara.

This errand was a disagreeable one, for, though the Emperor's remark
that he had yielded to the rare charm of this woman was not true, his
kindly heart had become warmly attached to Barbara. For the first
time he saw in her the suffering which often causes a metamorphosis in
certain traits in a sick person's character extend their transforming
power to the entire nature. Passionate love for her art gave her the
ability to maintain with punctilious exactness the silence which he had
been compelled to impose upon her, and the once impetuous, obstinate
creature obeyed his directions and wishes with the patience of a docile
child.

The manner in which, after he permitted her to speak, she had disclosed
in a low whisper her happy yet disquieting secret, hovered before him
now as one of the most pathetic incidents in a life full of varied
experiences.

How touchingly deep misery and the greatest rapture, gloomy anxiety
and radiant joy, bitter dread and sweet anticipation, despairing
helplessness and firm confidence had looked forth at him from the
beautiful face whose noble outlines were made still more delicate by the
illness through which she had passed! He could not have refused even a
more difficult task to this petitioner.

Now he was returning from the Emperor, and he felt like a vanquished
general.

In what form was he to clothe the bad news which he was bringing to the
convalescent girl? Poor child! How heavily she had to atone for her sin,
and how slight was his own and every other influence upon the man, great
even in his selfishness, who had had the power to render him a messenger
of joy!

While the physician was approaching the little castle, she of whom he
was so eagerly thinking awaited his return with feverish suspense. Yet
she was obliged at this very time to devote herself to a visitor. True,
he was the only person whom she would not have refused to see at this
hour.

Wolf Hartschwert was with her.

His first errand after the period of severe suffering through which he
had passed was to Barbara, earnestly as old Ursel had endeavoured to
prevent him.

He had found her under a linden tree in the garden.

How they had met again!

Wolf, pale and emaciated, advanced toward her, leaning on a cane, while
Barbara, with slightly flushed cheeks, reclined upon the pillows which
Sister Hyacinthe had just arranged for her.

Her head seemed smaller, her features had become more delicate and, in
spite of the straw hat which protected her from the dazzling sunshine,
he perceived that her severe illness had cost her her magnificent
golden hair. Still wavy, it now fell only to her neck, and gave her the
appearance of a wonderfully handsome boy.

The hand she extended to him was transparently thin, and when he
clasped it in his, which was only a little larger, and did not seem much
stronger, and she had hoarsely whispered a friendly greeting, his eyes
filled with tears. For a time both were silent. Barbara was the first
to find words and, raising her large eyes beseechingly to his, said: "If
you come to reproach me--But no! You look pale, as though you had only
partially recovered yourself, yet kind and friendly. Perhaps you do not
know that it was through my fault that all these terrible things have
befallen you."

Here a significant smile told her that he was much better informed than
she supposed, and, lowering her eyes in timid embarrassment, she asked,

"Then you know who it was for whom this foolish heart----"

Here her breath failed, and while she pressed her hand upon her bosom,
Wolf said softly: "If you had only trusted me before! Many things would
not have happened, and much suffering might have been spared. You did
wrong, Wawerl, certainly, but my guilt is the greater, and we were both
punished--oh, how sorely!"

Barbara, amid low sobbing, nodded assent, but he eagerly continued:
"Quijada confided everything to me, and if he--you know--now forgets all
other matters in the war and the anxieties of the general, and, you
need my counsel and aid, we will let what came between us he buried, and
think that we are brother and sister."

The girl held out her hand to him, saying: "How long you have been a
brother to me! But, as for your advice--Holy Virgin!--I know now less
than ever how I am to fare; but I shall soon learn. I can say no more.
It must be a severe trial to listen to me. Such a raven's croak from
the throat which usually gave you pleasure, and to which you gladly
listened! Shall I myself ever grow accustomed to this discord? And you?
Answer honestly--I should like to know whether it is very, very terrible
to hear."

"You are still hoarse," was the reply. "Such things pass away in a few
weeks, and it will again be a pleasure to hear you sing."

"Do you really think so?" she cried with sparkling, eyes.

"Firmly and positively," answered the young knight in a tone of most
honest conviction; but she repeated in joyous excitement, "Firmly and
positively," and then eagerly continued: "Oh, if you should be right,
Wolf, how happy and grateful I would be, in spite of everything! But I
can talk no longer now. Come again to-morrow, and then the oftener the
better."

"Unfortunately, that can not be, gladly as I would do so," he answered
sadly, extending his hand in farewell. "In a few days I shall return to
Brussels."

"To remain with the regent?" asked Barbara eagerly.

"No," he answered firmly. "After a short stay with her Majesty, I shall
enter the service of Don Luis Quijada, or rather of his wife."

"O-o-oh!" she murmured slowly. "The world seems wholly strange to me
after my long illness. I must first collect my thoughts, and that is now
utterly impossible. To-morrow, Wolf! Won't you come to-morrow? Then
I shall know better what is before me. Thanks, cordial thanks, and if
tomorrow I deny myself to every one else, I will admit you."

After Wolf had gone, Barbara gazed fixedly into vacancy. What did the
aspiring young musician seek with a nobleman's wife in a lonely Spanish
castle? Were his wings broken, too, and did he desire only seclusion and
quiet?

But the anxiety which dominated her mind prevented her pursuing the same
thought longer. Dr. Mathys had promised to tell her the result of his
conversation with the Emperor as soon as possible, and yet he had not
returned.

Fool that she was!

Even on a swift steed he could not have traversed the road back to the
castle if he had been detained only half an hour in the Golden Cross.
It was impatience which made the minutes become quarters of an hour. She
would have liked to go to the cool frigidarium again to watch for the
physician's litter; but she was warned, and had accustomed herself
to follow the doctor's directions as obediently as a dutiful child.
Besides, Sister Hyacinthe no longer left her alone out of doors, and
possessed a reliable representative, who had won Barbara's confidence
and affection, in Frau Lamperi, the garde-robiere, whom the Queen of
Hungary had not yet summoned.

So she remained under the linden, and Dr. Mathys did not put her newly
won virtue of patience, which he prized so highly, to too severe a
trial.

Fran Lamperi had watched for him, and hastily announced that his litter
had already passed the Reichart pottery.

Now Barbara did not turn her eyes from the garden door through which the
man she ardently longed to see usually came, and when it opened and the
stout, broad-shouldered leech, with his peaked doctor's hat, long staff,
and fine linen kerchief in his right hand advanced toward her, she
motioned to the nun and the maid to leave them, and pressed her left
hand upon her heart, for her emotion at the sight of him resembled
the feeling of the prisoner who expects the paper with which the judge
enters his cell to contain his death-warrant.

She thought she perceived her own in the physician's slow, almost
lagging step. His gait was always measured; but if he had had good news
to bring, he would have approached more rapidly. A sign, a gesture, a
shout would have informed her that he was bearing something cheering.

But there was nothing of this kind.

He did not raise his hat until he stood directly in front of her,
and while mopping his broad, clamp brow and plump cheeks with his
handkerchief, she read in his features the confirmation of her worst
fears.

Now in his grave voice, which sounded still deeper than usual, he
uttered a curt "Well, it can't be helped," and shrugged his shoulders
sorrowfully.

This gesture destroyed her last hope. Unable to control herself longer,
she cried out in the husky voice whose hoarse tone was increased by her
intense agitation: "I see it in your face, Doctor; I must be prepared
for the worst."

"Would to Heaven I could deny it!" he answered in a hollow tone; but
Barbara urged him to speak and conceal nothing from her, not even the
harshest news.

The leech obeyed.

With sincere compassion he saw how her face blanched at his information
that, owing to the pressure of duties which the commencement of the war
imposed upon him, his Majesty would be unable to visit her here. But
when, to sweeten the bitter potion, he had added that when her throat
was well again, and her voice had regained its former melody, the
monarch would once more gladly listen to her, he was startled; for,
instead of answering, she merely shrugged her shoulders contemptuously,
while her face grew corpselike in its pallor. He would have been
best pleased to end his report here, but she could not be spared the
suffering to which she was doomed, and pity demanded that the torture
should be ended as quickly as possible. So, to raise her courage,
he began with the Emperor's congratulations, and while her eyes were
sparkling brightly and her pale cheeks were crimsoned by a fleeting
flush, he went on, as considerately as he could, to inform her of the
Emperor's resolution, not neglecting while he did so to place it in a
milder light by many a palliating remark.

Barbara, panting for breath, listened to his report without interrupting
him; but as the physician thought he perceived in the varying expression
of her features and the wandering glance with which she listened tokens
that she did not fully understand what the Emperor required of her, he
summed up his communications once more.

"His Majesty," he concluded, "was ready to recognise as his own the
young life to be expected, if she would keep the secret, and decide to
commit it to his sole charge from its arrival in the world; but, on the
other hand, he would refuse this to her and to the child if she did not
agree to impose upon herself sacrifice and silence."

At this brief, plain statement Barbara had pressed her hands upon her
temples and stretched her head far forward toward the physician. Now she
lowered her right hand, and with the question, "So this is what I must
understand?" impetuously struck herself a blow on the forehead.

The patient man again raised his voice to make the expression of the
monarch's will still plainer, but she interrupted him after the first
few words with the exclamation: "You can spare yourself this trouble,
for the meaning of the man whose message you bear is certainly evident
enough. What my poor intellect fails to comprehend is only--do you
hear?--is only where the faithless traitor gains the courage to make me
so unprecedented a demand. Hitherto I was only not wicked enough to know
that there--there was such an abyss of abominable hard-heartedness, such
fiendish baseness, such----"

Here an uncontrollable fit of coughing interrupted her, but Dr. Mathys
would have stopped her in any case; it was unendurable to him to
listen longer while the great man who was the Emperor, and whom he also
honoured as a man, was reviled with such savage recklessness.

As in so many instances, Charles's penetration had been superior to his;
for he had not failed to notice to what tremendous extremes this girl's
hasty temper could carry her. What burning, almost evil passion had
flamed in her eyes while uttering these insults! How perfectly right
his Majesty was to withdraw from all association with a woman of so
irresponsible a nature!

He repressed with difficulty the indignation which had overpowered him
until her coughing ceased, then, in a tone of stern reproof, he declared
that he could not and ought not to listen to such words. She whom the
Emperor Charles had honoured with his love would perhaps in the future
learn to recognise his decision as wise, though it might offend her now.
When she had conquered the boundless impetuosity which so ill beseemed
her, she herself would probably perceive how immeasurably deep and wide
was the gulf which separated her from the sacred person of the man who,
next to God, was the highest power on earth. Not only justice but duty
would command the head of the most illustrious family in the world to
claim the sole charge of his child, that it might be possible to train
it unimpeded to the lofty position of the father, instead of the humble
one of the mother.

Hitherto Barbara had remained silent, but her breath had come more
and more quickly, the tremor of the nostrils had increased; but at the
physician's last remark she could control herself no longer, and burst
forth like a madwoman: "And you pretend to be my friend, pretend to be
a fairminded man? You are the tool, the obedient echo of the infamous
wretch who now stretches his robber hand toward my most precious
possession! Ay, look at me as though my frank speech was rousing the
greatest wrath in your cowardly soul! Where was the ocean-deep gulf when
the perjured betrayer clasped me in his arms, uttered vows of love, and
called himself happy because his possession of me would beautify the
evening of his life? Now my voice has lost its melting music, and he
sends his accomplice to leave the mute 'nightingale'--how often he has
called me so!--to her fate."

Here she faltered, and her cheeks glowed with excitement as, with her
clinched hand on her brow, she continued: "Must everything be changed
and overturned because this traitor is the Emperor, and the betrayed
only the child of a man who, though plain, is worthy of all honour, and
who, besides, was not found on the highway, but belongs to the class of
knights, from whom even the proudest races of sovereigns descend?
You trample my father and me underfoot, to exalt the grandeur of your
master. You make him the idol, to humble me to a worm; and what you
grant the she-wolf--the right of defence when men undertake to rob her
of her young--you deny me, and, because I insist upon it, I must be a
deluded, unbridled creature."

Here she sobbed aloud and covered her face with her hands; but Dr.
Mathys had been obliged to do violence to his feelings in order not to
put a speedy end to the fierce attack. Her glance had been like that
of an infuriated wild beast as the rage in her soul burst forth with
elementary power, and the sharpness of her hoarse voice still pierced
him to the heart.

Probably the man of honour whom she had so deeply-insulted felt
justified in paying her in the same coin, but the mature and experienced
physician knew how much he must place to the account of the physical
condition of this unfortunate girl, and did not conceal from himself
that her charges were not wholly unjustifiable. So he restrained
himself, and when she had gained control over the convulsive sobbing
which shook her bosom, he told her his intention of leaving her and not
returning until he could expect a less hostile reception. Meanwhile
she might consider whether the Emperor's decision was not worthy
of different treatment. He would show his good will to her anew by
concealing from his Majesty what he had just heard, and what she, at no
distant day, would repent as unjust and unworthy of her.

Then Barbara angrily burst forth afresh: "Never, never, never will that
happen! Neither years nor decades would efface the wrong inflicted upon
me to-day. But oh, how I hate him who makes this shameful demand--yes,
though you devour me with your eyes--hate him, hate him! I do so even
more ardently than I loved him! And you? Why should you conceal it? From
kindness to me? Perhaps so! Yet no, no, no! Speak freely! Yes, you must,
must tell him so to his face! Do it in my name, abused, ill-treated as I
am, and tell him----"

Here the friendly man's patience gave out, and, drawing his little broad
figure stiffly up, he said repellently: "You are mistaken in me, my
dear. If you need a messenger, you must seek some one else. You have
taken care to make me sincerely regret having discharged this office for
your sake. Besides, your recovery will progress without my professional
aid; and, moreover, I shall leave Ratisbon with my illustrious master in
a few days."

He turned his back upon her as he spoke. When toward evening the
Emperor asked him how Barbara had received his decision, he shrugged
his shoulders and answered: "As was to be expected. She thinks herself
ill-used, and will not give up the child."

"She will have a different view in the convent," replied the Emperor.
"Quijada shall talk with her to-morrow, and De Soto and the pious
nuns here will show her where she belongs. The child--that matter is
settled--will be taken from her."

The execution of the imperial will began on the very next morning. First
the confessor De Soto appeared, and with convincing eloquence showed
Barbara how happily she could shape her shadowed life within the sacred
quiet of the convent. Besides, the helpless creature whose coming
she was expecting with maternal love could rely upon the father's
recognition and aid only on condition that she yielded to his Majesty's
expressed will.

Barbara, though with no little difficulty, succeeded in maintaining her
composure during these counsels and the declaration of the servant of
the Holy Church. Faithful to the determination formed during the night,
she imposed silence upon herself, and when De Soto asked for a positive
answer, she begged him to grant her time for consideration.

Soon after Don Luis Quijada was announced. This time he did not appear
in the dark Spanish court costume, but in the brilliant armour of the
Lombard regiment whose command had been entrusted to him.

When he saw Barbara, for the first time after many weeks, he was
startled.

Only yesterday she had seemed to Wolf Hartschwert peerlessly beautiful,
but the few hours which had elapsed between the visit of the physician
and the major-domo had sadly changed her. Her large, bright eyes were
reddened by weeping, and the slight lines about the corners of the mouth
had deepened and lent her a severe expression.

A hundred considerations had doubtless crowded upon her during the
night, yet she by no means repented having showed the leech what she
thought of the betrayer in purple and the demand which he made upon her.
De Soto's attempt at persuasion had only increased her defiance. Instead
of reflecting and thinking of her own welfare and of the future of the
beloved being whose coming she dreaded, yet who seemed to her the most
precious gift of Heaven, she strengthened herself more and more in the
belief that it was due to her own dignity to resist the Emperor's cruel
encroachments upon her liberty. She knew that she owed Dr. Mathys a debt
of gratitude, but she thought herself freed from that duty since he had
made himself the blind tool of his master.

Now the Spaniard, who had never been her friend, also came to urge
the Emperor's will upon her. Toward him she need not force herself to
maintain the reserve which she had exercised in her conversation with
the confessor.

On the contrary!

He should hear, with the utmost plainness, what she thought of the
Emperor's instructions. If he, his confidant, then showed him that there
was one person at least who did not bow before his pitiless power, and
