l'Abbe,' she said, 'I pray you to be silent, I am no saint, but a
friend, if Madame will allow me so to call myself, who has come to see
her home. But Oh! Monsieur,' she added, with the wonderful dignity that
surrounded her, 'forget not, I pray you, that what is invisible is the
more real, and that the vows and resolution you have addressed to me in
error are none the less registered in Heaven.'

Mocker as the Coadjutor habitually was, he stood impressed, and uttered
no word to mar the effect, simply saying: 'Madame, we thank you for the
lesson you have given us! And now, I think, these ladies will be glad to
close this painful scene.'

Meg, who with Madame Darpent, had satisfied herself that the wretch
d'Aubepine had not hurt himself anything like as much as he deserved,
declared herself ready and thankful to go away. The Abbe and Lamont both
entreated that she would take some refreshment before returning home,
but she shuddered, and said she could taste nothing there, and holding
tight by my arm, she moved away, though we paused while Madame Darpent
was kneeling down and asking the Archbishop to bless her. He did so, and
her spirit seemed to have touched his lighter and gayer one, and to
have made him feel what he was, for he gave the benediction with real
solemnity and unaffected reverence for the old lady.

He himself handed her into the carriage, and he must greatly have
respected her, for though he whispered something to her son about the
grand deliverance of the victim through St. Margaret and the Dragon (an
irresistible pun on the dragoon), yet excellent story as could have been
made of the free-thinking Abbe on his knees to the old Frondeur's widow,
he never did make it public property. I believe that it is quite true,
as my sister's clever friend Madame de Sevigne declares, that there
was always more good in Cardinal de Retz, as he now is called, than was
supposed.

Poor Meg had kept up gallantly through all her terrible struggle of many
hours, but when we had her safely in the carriage in the dark, she sank
back like one exhausted, and only held my hand and Madame Darpent's to
her lips by turns. I wanted to ask whether she felt ill or hurt in any
way, but after she had gently answered, 'Oh, no, only so thankful, so
worn out,' Madame Darpent advised me not to agitate her by talking to
her, but to let her rest. Only the kind, motherly woman wanted to know
how long it was since she had eaten, and seeing the light of a little
CABARET on the road, she stopped the carriage and sent her son to fetch
some bread and a cup of wine.

For I should have said that M. Darpent had been obliged to return in the
same carriage with us, since he could not accompany the Coadjutor on
his way back. He wished to have gone outside, lest his presence should
incommode our poor Meg; but it had begun to rain, and we could not
consent. Nor was Meg like a Frenchwoman, to want to break out in fits
the moment the strain was over.

He brought us out some galettes, as they call them, and each of us
sisters had a draught of wine, which did us a great deal of good.
Then we drove on in the dark as fast as we could, for the Coadjutor's
carriage had passed us while we were halting, and we wanted to enter the
gates at the same time with him.

I sat beside my sister, holding her hand, as it seemed to give her a
sense of safety; Madame Darpent was on her other side, Clement opposite.
We kept silence, for Madame Darpent declared that no questions ought to
be asked of Madame de Bellaise till the next morning.

Presently we heard an unmistakable snoring from the old lady's corner,
and soon after I felt my sister's fingers relax and drop mine, so that
I knew she slept. Then I could not but begin to tell, in the quiet and
stillness, how my dear brother would thank and bless him for what he had
done for us.

I am an old woman now, but I have only to shut my eyes and it all comes
back on me--the dark carriage, the raindrops against the window glancing
in the light of the flambeaux, the crashing of the wheels, and the
steady breathing of the sleepers, while we two softly talked on, and our
hearts went out to one another, so that we knew our own feelings for one
another.

I think it came of talking of Eustace and his not being able to keep
back, that, though Eustace was in some sort the guiding star of his
life, yet what he had done for us was not merely for my brother's sake,
but for another much more unworthy, had he only known it.

Then he found he had betrayed himself, and asked my pardon, declaring
that he had only meant to watch me at a distance (poor me), knowing well
the vast gulf between our stations. What could I answer but that
this was only French nonsense; that we knew better in England what a
gentleman meant, and that I was sure that my brother would freely and
joyfully give me to him, poor, broken, ruined cavalier exile as I was?
And then we got hold of each other's hands, and he called me all sorts
of pretty names in French and in English; and I felt myself the proudest
and happiest maiden in France, or England to boot, for was not mine the
very noblest, most upright and disinterested of hearts?

Only we agreed that it would be better to let no one at Paris know what
was between us until my brother should return. We knew that he would
be the most likely person to obtain my mother's consent, and he really
stood in the place of a father to me; while if we disclosed it at once
there was no knowing what my mother might not attempt in his absence,
and his mother would never permit us to be in opposition to mine. She
would not understand that, though I might not disobey my mother, it was
quite impossible that my feelings and opinions should be guided by one
of different religion, nation, and principles altogether.

However, we agreed to write to my brother in Holland as soon as we could
find a safe conveyance, and when there were signs of waking on the
part of our companions we unlocked the hands that had been clasping one
another so tightly.


(Finished by Margaret.)


So you thought I was asleep, did you, Mistress Nan? I suppose after all
these years you will not be ready to box my ears for having heard? It
was no feigning; I really was so worn and wearied out that I lay back on
the cushions they had arranged for me in a sort of assoupissement, only
at first able to feel that I was safe, and that Annora was with me.
She says that I dropped her hand. Well, perhaps I may have dozed for a
moment, but it seems to me that I never lost the knowledge of the sound
of the wheels, nor of the murmuring voices, though I could not stir,
nor move hand nor foot, and though I heard it all, it was not till I
was lying in bed the next morning that I recollected any part of it, and
then it was more as if I had dreamt it than as a reality.

Moreover, Annora was hovering over me, looking perfectly innocent, and
intent on making me rest, and feeding me upon possets, and burning to
hear my story. Then came my mother from St. Germain, having received a
courier who had been dispatched at dawn. She embraced me and wept over
me, and yet--and yet I think there mingled with her feeling something of
vexation and annoyance. If I were to be carried off at all by a man of
rank and station, it would have been almost better if he had succeeded
in marrying me than that the affair should be a mere matter of gossip.
Certainly, that my rescue should be owing to one of the factious
lawyers, and to that mischievous party leader the Coadjutor, was an
unmixed grievance. After all my follies at Nid de Merle, I was quite
sufficiently in ill odour with the Court to make it needful to be very
careful. If I had only waited till morning, the Queen would have taken
care to deliver me without my having given a triumph which the Frondeurs
would not fail to make the most of.

'Where should I have been in the morning?' I said. 'Did she not know
that the horrible wager related to midnight?'

She supposed any woman could take care of herself. At any rate I had
contrived to offend everybody. The Prince was paramount at Court, and
carried all before him. Mademoiselle, in her devotion to him, and the
Queen-Regent would never forgive my trafficking with the Frondeurs.
On the whole, my mother really thought that the best way to regain my
favour or even toleration, would be to accept M. de Lamont with a good
grace, since he was certainly distractedly in love with me, and if I
fell into disgrace with the authorities, I might have my son and the
administration of his property taken away from me in a still more
distressing manner, whereas it would only depend on myself to rule M. de
Lamont.

'I have only to say,' observed Annora, 'that if she were to do such a
thing I should never speak to her again.'

Whereupon my mother severely reproved my sister, declaring that it was
all her fault, and that she had gone beyond all bounds when left to
herself, and would be a disgrace to the family.

Annora coloured furiously, and said she did not know what might be
esteemed a disgrace in France, but she should certainly do nothing that
would disgrace her English name. Then it flashed on me that what had
passed in the carriage had been a reality, and I saw what she meant.

Of course, however, I did not betray my perception. Disputes between my
mother and sister were what we all chiefly dreaded; it was so impossible
to make them see anything from the same point of view, so I thought it
best to turn the conversation back to my own affairs, by saying that I
thought that to marry M. de Lamont would only make matters worse, and
that no loss of favour or any other misfortune could be equal to that of
being bound to such a husband as he had shown himself.

I had them all against me except my sister and my English friends, and
my saintly guide, Father Vincent de Paul, who assured me that I was by
no means bound to accept a man like that; and as for silencing scandal,
it was much better to live it down. That devout widow, Madame de
Miramion, had endured such an abduction as mine at hands of Bussy
Rabutin, and had been rescued by her mother-in-law, who had raised the
country-people. No one thought a bit the worse of her for it, and she
was one of the foremost in her works of charity.

This gave me the comfort of knowing that I was right, and I knew besides
that such a marriage would be a sore grief to my brother, so I resolved
to hold out against all persuasions; but it was a wretched time that now
began, for Lamont would not desist from persecuting me with his suit,
and I had no remission from him either at Court or in my own house, for
if I excluded him my mother admitted him. My mother dragged me to Court
as a matter of form, but I was unwelcome there, and was plainly shown
that it was so.

The Queen could not forgive me for being rescued by the Frondeurs;
Mademoiselle was in the Prince's interest; the Prince was dominant, and
all his satellites made it a point of honour that none of them should
fail in carrying any point. Even Cecile d'Aubepine followed the stream.
Her husband was very angry with her, and said I had put on grand airs,
and made myself ridiculous; and the foolish little thing not only obeyed
but believed him, though he neglected her as much as ever. I never dared
to drive, scarcely ever to walk out, without escort enough to prevent
any fresh attempt at abduction; and even my poor Gaspard was in
disgrace, because he was not courtier enough to bear in silence taunts
about his mother.

I had only one thing to look forward to, and that was the return of my
brother. The new King of England had arrived, and we trusted that he
would appear with him; but alas! no, he was detained on the King's
business in Jersey, and could not come.

Meantime Annora kept her own counsel, and though she was my only
supporter, except of course of Ommaneys, in my resistance, the want of
confidence made a certain separation between us. I do not think she had
any secret communication with Clement Darpent--they were too honourable
for that--but she drew more to old Lady Ommaney than to me during this
time.

Reports began to circulate that the Prince's insolence had gone too
far, and that the Cardinal had been holding secret conferences with the
Coadjutor, to see whether his help and that of Paris could be relied
on for the overthrow of the Prince. I remember that Annora was in high
spirits, and declared that now was the time for honest men if they only
knew how to profit by it.




CHAPTER XXIII. -- THE LION AND THE MOUSE



We were greatly amazed when late one January evening Cecile rushed into
my room like one distracted, crying:

'The monsters, they have arrested him!'

We knew there was only on of the nobler sex in the eyes of my poor
Cecile, and my first question was:

'What has he done?' expecting to hear that he had been fighting a duel,
or committing some folly. My surprise was greater when I heard her
answer:

'He was going to carry off the Cardinal's nieces.'

'He seems to have a turn for such exploits,' Annora said. 'Who wanted to
marry them?'

'It was for no such thing!' Cecile said, with as much heat as she could
show; 'it was to take them as hostages.'

'As hostages!'

'Oh, yes! Do not you know? For the Prince.'

Our astonishment was redoubled.

'Eh, quoi! Messieus les Prince de Conde and Conty, and the Duke of
Longueville, are all arrested, coming from the council, by the treason
of the Cardinal. They are sent off no one knows where, but my husband,
you understand, was with M. de Boutteville and a hundred other brave
officers in the garden of the Hotel de Conte when the news came. M.
de Boutteville immediately proposed to gallop to Val de Grace and
then seize on the Demoiselles Mazarin and Mancini as the best means
of bringing the Cardinal to reason, and instantly it is done; but the
cunning Cardinal had foreseen everything; the young ladies had been
seized and carried off, I know not where,' and she burst into a flood of
tears.

With some difficulty we elicited from her that she had learned the
tidings from a sergeant who had been in attendance on the Count, and had
fled when he was taken. At the same time horrible noises and shouts were
heard all over the city.

'Treason! Treason! Down with the Cardinal! Beaufort is taken! The
Coadjutor! Vengeance! Vengeance!'

Sir Francis hurried out to learn the truth, and then my mother in her
fright cried out:

'Will no one come and protect us? Oh! where is M. Darpent?' while Annora
called to me to take our cloaks and come up to the roof of the house to
see what was going on. She was in high spirits, no doubt laughing within
herself to see how every danger made my mother invoke M. Darpent, and
finding in a tumult a sure means of meeting him, for she could trust to
him to come and offer his protection.

I SAW that she heard his voice on the stairs before he actually made his
appearance, telling my mother that he had hastened to assure her that we
were in no danger. The rising was due to M. de Boutteville, who, being
disappointed in his plan of seizing the Cardinal's nieces as hostages,
had gone galloping up and down Paris with his sword drawn, shouting that
the two darlings of the people, M. de Beaufort and the Coadjutor, had
been seized. He wildly hoped that the uproar this was sure to excite
would frighten the Queen-Regent into releasing the Princes as she had
before released Broussel.

But the Coadjutor had come out with torches carried before him, and had
discovered the name of the true prisoners, whose arrogance had so deeply
offended the populace. He had summoned the Duke of Beaufort--the King of
the Markets, as he was called--and he was riding about the streets with
a splendid suite, whose gilded trappings glistened in the torchlight.

So deeply had the Prince's arrogance offended all Paris that the whole
city passed from rage into a transport of joy, and the servants came
and called us up to the top of the house to see the strange sight of the
whole city illuminated. It was wonderful to behold, every street and all
the gates marked out by bright lights in the windows, and in the open
spaces and crossings of the street bonfires, with dark figures dancing
wildly round them in perfect ecstasies of frantic delight; while guns
were fired out, and the chorus of songs came up to us; horrid, savage,
abusive songs, Sir Francis said they were, when he had plodded his way
up to us on the roof, after having again reassured my mother, who had
remained below trying to comfort the weeping Cecile.

Sir Francis said he had asked a tradesman with whom he dealt, ordinarily
a very reasonable and respectable man, what good they expected from
this arrest that it should cause such mad delirium of joy. The man was
utterly at a loss to tell him anything but that the enemies of Paris
were fallen. And then he began shouting and dancing as frantically as
ever.

It was to his wife and me that the English knight told his adventures;
Annora and M. Darpent had drawn apart on the opposite side of the
paraget. If to Madame d'Aubepine this great stroke of policy meant
nothing but that her husband was in prison, to my sister a popular
disturbance signified chiefly a chance of meeting Clement Darpent; and
Lady Ommaney and I exchanged glances and would not look that way. Nay,
we stayed as long as we could bear the cold of that January night to
give them a little more time. For, as I cannot too often remind you, my
grand-daughters, we treated an English maiden, and especially one who
had had so many experiences as my sister, very differently from a simple
child fresh from her convent.

Nicolas at last came up with a message from Madame la Baronne to beg
that we would come down. We found that the Intendante Corquelebois (erst
Gringrimeau) had brought the children in a panic, lest the houses of the
partisans of the Princes should be attacked. She had put on a cloak and
hood, made them look as like children of the people as she could, and
brought them on foot through the streets; and there stood the poor
little things, trembling and crying, and very glad to find their mother
and cling to her. She had never thought of this danger, and was shocked
at herself for deserting them. And it was a vain alarm; for, as M.
Darpent assured her, M. d'Aubepine was not conspicuous enough to have
become a mark for public hatred.

She was a little affronted by the assurance, but we appeased her, and
as the tumult was beginning to die away, M. Darpent took his leave,
promising my mother to let her know of any measure taken on the morrow.
He offered to protect Madame d'Aubepine and her children back to their
own hotel, but we could not let the poor wife go back with her grief,
nor the children turn out again on the winter's night. I was glad to see
that she seemed now on perfectly good terms with herdame de compagnie,
who showed herself really solicitous for her and her comfort, and did
not seem displeased when I took her to my room. I found my poor little
sister-in-law on the whole less unhappy than formerly. People do get
accustomed to everything, and she had somehow come to believe that it
was the proper and fashionable arrangement, and made her husband more
distinguished, that he should imitate his Prince by living apart from
her, and only occasionally issuing his commands to her. He had not
treated her of late with open contempt, and he had once or twice take
a little notice of his son, and all this encouraged her in her firm
and quiet trust that in process of time, trouble, age, or illness
would bring him back to her. Her eyes began to brighten as she wondered
whether she could not obtain his liberty by falling at the Queen's
feet with a petition, leading her children in her hands. 'They were
so beautiful. The Queen must grant anything on the sight of her little
chevalier!'

And then she had a thousand motherly anecdotes of the children's
sweetness and cleverness to regale me with till she had talked herself
tolerably happily to sleep.

We kept her with us, as there were reports the next day of arrests
among the ladies of the Princes' party. The two Princesses of Conde
were permitted to retire to Chantilly, but then the Dowager-Princess was
known to be loyal, and the younger one was supposed to be a nonentity.
Madame de Longueville was summoned to the Palace, but she chose instead
to hide herself in a little house in the Faubourg St. Germain, whence
she escaped to Normandy, her husband's Government, hoping to raise the
people there to demand his release and that of her brothers.

The Prince's INTENDANT was taken, and there was an attempt to arrest the
whole Bouillon family, but the Duke and his brother, M. de Turenne, were
warned in time and escaped. As to the Duchess and her children, their
adventures were so curious that I must pause to tell their story. A
guard was sent to her house under arms to keep her there. There were
four little boys, and their attendants, on seeing the guards, let them
straight out through the midst of them, as if they were visitors, the
servants saying: 'You must go away. Messieurs les petits Princes cannot
play to-day. They are made prisoners.' They were taken to the house
of Marshal de Guesbriant, where they were dressed as girls, and thus
carried off to Bellechasse, whence they were sent to Blois.

There the little Chevalier of seven years old (Emmanuel Theodore was his
name, and he is now a Cardinal) fell ill, and could not go on with his
brothers when they were sent southwards, but was left with a lady named
Flechine. By and by, when the Court came to Guienne, Madame de Flechine
was afraid of being compromised if she was found to have a son of the
Duke of Bouillon in the house. She recollected that there was in a very
thick wood in the park a very thick bush, forming a bower or vault,
concealed by thorns and briers. There she placed the little boy with
his servant Defargues, giving them some bread, wine, water, a pie, a
cushion, and an umbrella in case of rain, and she went out herself very
night to meet Defargues and bring him fresh provisions. His Eminence
has once told me all about it, and how dreadfully frightened he was
a thunderstorm in the valet's absence, and when a glow-worm shone out
afterwards the poor child thought it was lightning remaining on the
ground, and screamed out to Defargues not to come in past it. He says
Defargues was a most excellent and pious soul, and taught him more
of his religion than ever he had known before. Afterwards Madame de
Flechine moved them to a little tower in the park, where they found a
book of the LIVES OF THE SAINTS, and Defargues taught his little master
to make wicker baskets. They walked out on the summer nights, and
enjoyed themselves very much.

As to poor Madame de Bouillon, her baby was born on that very day of the
arrest. Her sister-in-law and her eldest daughter remained with her, and
Madame Carnavalet; the captain of the guards had to watch over them all.
He was of course a gentleman whom they already knew, and he lived with
them as a guest. As soon as Madame de Bouillon had recovered, they
began to play at a sort of hide-and-seek, daring him to find them in the
hiding-places they devised, till at last he was not at all alarmed at
missing them. Then M. de Boutteville and her daughter escaped through a
cellar-window, and they would have got safely off, if the daughter
had not caught the smallbox. Her mother, who was already on the way to
Boxdeaux, came back to nurse her, and was taken by the bedside, and shut
up in the Bastille.

The two Princesses were at Chantilly, and rumours reached us that the
younger lady was about to attempt something for the deliverance of he
husband, and thereupon M. d'Aubepine became frantic to join them, and to
share in their councils. We tried to convince her that she could be
of no use, but no--suppose they were going to raise their vassals, she
could do the same by those of d'Aubepine, and she, who had hitherto been
the most timid and helpless of beings, now rose into strong resolution
and even daring. It was in vain that I represented to her that to raise
one's vassals to make war on the King was rank rebellion. To her there
was only one king--the husband who deserved so little from her. She had
given him her whole devotion, soul and body, and was utterly incapable
of seeing anything else. And Madame Croquelebois, being equally devoted
