"It makes no matter, George. I shall never marry you."

"Do you dislike me so much?"

"I am very fond of you. You are of my race and my kindred, and I love
every soul of the Hydes that has ever tarried on this earth."

"Well then?"

"I shall marry no one. I will show you the better way. Few can walk in
it, but Doctor Roslyn says, he thinks it may be my part--my happy
part--to do so:" and as she spoke she took from the little pocket at
her side a small copy of the gospels, and it opened of its own account
at the twentieth chapter of St. Luke. "See!" she said, "and read it for
yourself, George--"

"The children of this world marry and are given in marriage. But they
which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage.

"Neither can they die any more; for they are equal unto the angels, and
are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection."
[Footnote: St. Luke, chap. xx. 34-36.]

"To die no more! To be like unto the angels! To be the children of God!
This is the end and aim of my desires, to be among 'the children of
God!'"

"Dear Annie, I cannot understand this."

"Not yet. It is not your time. My soul, I think, is ages older than
yours. It takes ages of schooling to get into that class that may leave
Earth forever, and be as the angels. Even now I know, I am sure that
you are fretting and miserable for the love of some woman. For whose
love, George? Tell me."

Then Hyde plunged with headlong precipitancy into the story of his love
for Cornelia, and of the inexplicably cruel way in which it had been
brought to a close. "And yesterday," he continued with a sob in his
voice--"yesterday I heard that her father had taken her to
Philadelphia. I shall see her no more. He will marry her to Rem Van
Arenas, or to one of her Quaker cousins, and the taste is taken out of
my life, and I am only a walking misery."

"I do not believe it is Cornelia's fault."

"Here is her letter. Read it." Then Annie look the letter and after
reading it said, "If she be all you say, I will vow she wrote this in
her sleep. I should like to see her. Why do you think wrong of her?
What is love without faith in the one you love? Do you know first and
finally what true love is? It is THINKING kindly and nobly. For if we
GIVE all we have, and DO all we can do, and yet THINK unkindly, it
profits us nothing. Doctor Roslyn told me so. You remember him?"

"Your teacher?"

"My teacher, my friend, my father after the spirit. He told me that our
thoughts moulded our fate, because thought and life are one. So then,
if you really love Cornelia, you must think good of her, and then good
will come."

"If thought and life are one, Annie, if doing good, and giving good,
are nothing to thinking good, and we are to be judged by our quality of
thinking, there will be a greater score against all of us, than we can
imagine. I, for one, should not like to be brought face to face with
what I think, and have thought about people; it would be an accounting
beyond my power to settle."

"There is no accounting. If all the priests in Christendom tell you so,
believe them not. Do you think God keeps a score against you? Do you
think the future is some torture chamber, or condemned cell? Oh, how
you wrong God!"

"But we are taught, Annie, that the future must correct the past."

"True, but the future, like the present, is a school--only a school.
And the Great Master is so compassionate, so ready to help, so ready to
enlighten, so sure to make out of our foolishness some wise thing. If
we learn the lesson we came here to learn, He will say to us 'Well
done'--and then we shall go higher."

"If we do not learn it?"

"Ah then, we are turned back to try it over again! I should not like to
be turned back--would you?"

"But He will punish us for failure."

"Our earthly fathers are often impatient with us; His compassions fail
not. Oh this good God!" she cried in an ecstasy--"Oh that I knew where
I might find Him! Oh that I could come into His presence!" and her eyes
dilated, and were full of an incomparable joy, as if they were gazing
upon some glorious vision, and glad with the gladness of the angels.

Hyde looked at her with an intense interest. He wondered if this
angelic little creature had ever known the frailties and temptations of
mortal life, and she answered his thought as if he had spoken it aloud.

"Yes, cousin, I have known all temptations, and come through all
tribulations. My soul has wandered and lost its way, and been brought
back many and many a time, and bought every grace with much suffering.
But God is always present to help, while quest followed quest, and
lesson followed lesson, and goal succeeded goal; ever leaving some evil
behind, and carrying forward some of those gains which are eternal."

"If Adam had not fallen!" sighed George, "things might have been so
different."

"But the angels fell before Adam," she answered. "I wonder if Adam knew
about the fallen angels? Did he know about death before he saw Abel
dead? He was all day in the garden of Eden after eating of the fruit of
sin and death, and yet he did not put out his hand to take of the Tree
of Life. Did he know that he was already immortal? Was he--and are
we--fallen angels, working our way back to our first estate through
many trials and much suffering? Doctor Roslyn talked to me of these
things till I thought I felt wings stirring within me. Wings! Wings!
Wings to fly away and be at rest. Wings! they have been the dream of
every race and every age. Are they a memory of our past greatness, for
they haunt us, and draw us on and on, and higher and higher?--but why
do you look so troubled and reluctant?"

Before Hyde could answer, the Earl came into the room and the young man
was glad to see his father. A conversation so unusual, so suggestive
and cleaving made him unhappy. It took him up the high places that
indeed gave him a startling outlook of life, but he was not comfortable
at such altitude. He rose with something of this strange air about him,
and the Earl understood what the trend of the conversation had been.
For Annie had talked much to him on such subjects, and he had been
sensibly moved and impressed by the wisdom which the little maid had
learned from her venerable teacher. He lifted her head in passing, and
kissed her brow with that reverent affection we feel for those who
bring out what is noblest and best in our character, and who lead us
higher than our daily walk.

"My dear George," he said, "I am delighted to see you. I was afraid you
would stay in the city this dreadful weather. Is there any news?"

"A great deal, sir. I have brought you English and French papers."

"I will read them at my leisure. Give me the English news first. What
is it in substance?"

"The conquest of Mysore and Madras. Seringapatam has fallen; and Tippoo
has ceded to England one half his dominions and three millions of
pounds. The French have not now a foothold left in India, and 'Citizen
Tippoo' can no longer help the agents of the French Republic. Faith,
sir! Cornwallis has given England in the east, a compensation for what
she lost in the west."

"To make nations of free men, is the destiny of our race," replied the
Earl.

"Perhaps so; for it seems the new colony planted at Sydney Cove,
Australia, is doing wonderfully; and that would mean an English empire
in the south."

"Yet, I have just read a proclamation of the French Assembly, calling
on the people of France 'TO ANNIHILATE AT ONCE, the white, clay-footed
colossus of English power and diplomacy.' Anything else?"

"Mr. Fox and Mr. Burke are quarrelling as usual, and Mr. Pitt is making
the excesses of France the excuse for keeping back reform in England.
It is the old story. I did not care to read it. The French papers tell
their side of it. They call Burke a madman, and Pitt a monster, and the
Moniteur accuses them of having misrepresented the great French nation,
and says, 'they will soon be laid prostrate before the statue of
Liberty, from which they shall only rise to mount the scaffold, etc.,
etc.'"

"What bombastic nonsense!"

"Minister Morris is in the midst of horrors unmentionable. The other
foreign ministers have left France, and the French government is
deserted by all the world; yet Mr. Morris remains at his post, though
he was lately arrested in the street, and his house searched by armed
men."

"But this is an insult to the American nation! Why does he endure it?
He ought to return home."

"Because he will not abandon his duty in the hour of peril and
difficulty. Neither has the President given him permission to do so.
How could he desert American citizens unlawfully imprisoned, American
vessels unlawfully seized by French privateers, and American captains
detained in French ports on all kinds of pretences. I think Minister
Morris is precisely where he should be, saving the lives of American
citizens; many of whom are trembling to-day in the shadow of the
guillotine."

"It is to be hoped that Jefferson is now convinced of the execrable
nature of these brutal revolutionists."

"I can assure you, sir, he is not. He still excuses all their
abominations and says Minister Morris is a high-flying monarchy man,
and not to be taken without great allowance. I hear that Madame
Kippon's daughter, whom Mr. Morris rescued at the last hour, has
arrived in New York; and yesterday I met Mr. Van Ariens, who is
exceedingly anxious concerning his daughter, the Marquise de
Tounnerre." "Is she in danger? I thought her husband was a leader in
the new National Assembly."

"He is among the Girondists. They are giving themselves airs and making
fine speeches at present--but--"

"But what?"

"Their day will be short."

"What of the king?"

"The royal family are all prisoners in the Temple Tower. I do not dare
to read the particulars; but not a single protest against their
barbarity is made. Frenchmen who silently saw the Abbaye, the Force,
and the Carmes turned into human shambles three months ago, now hold
their peace while murders no less horrible are being slowly done in the
Temple."

"They are inconceivable monsters. Poor little Arenta! What will she do?"

"I am not very uneasy for her; she has wit enough to save her life if
put to such extremes; her father is much to be pitied; and it is
incredible, though true, that the great majority of our people are
still singing the MARSEILLAISE, though every letter of it is washed in
blood and tears."

"I am troubled about that pretty little Marquise."

"She is clever and full of resource. I have had only one letter from
her since her marriage, and it was written to the word 'glories!' She
seemed to be living in a blaze of triumph and very happy. But change is
the order of the day in France."

"Say of the hour, and you are nearer the truth."

"If Arenta is in trouble she will cry out, and call for help on every
hand. I never knew her to make a mistake where her own interests were
concerned. I told her father yesterday that it would be very difficult
to corner Arenta, and comforted him beyond my hope."

During this conversation Annie was in a reverie which it in no way
touched. She had the faculty of shutting her ears to sounds she did not
wish to take into her consciousness, and the French Revolution did not
exist for her. She was thinking all the time of her Cousin George, and
of the singular abruptness with which his love life had been cut short;
and it was this train of thought which led her--when the murmur of
voices ceased for a moment--to say impulsively:

"Uncle, it is my desire to go to Philadelphia," The Earl looked at her
with incredulity. "What nonsense, Annie!" he exclaimed. "The thing is
impossible."

"Why impossible?"

"For you, I mean. You would be very ill before the journey was
half-finished. The roads, as George will tell you, are nearly
impassable; and the weather after this fog may be intensely cold. For
you a journey to Philadelphia would be an arduous undertaking, and one
without any reasonable motive."

"Oh, indeed! Do you call George Washington an unreasonable motive? I
wish to see him. Imagine me within one hundred miles of this supreme
hero, and turning back to England without kissing his hand. I should be
laughed at--I should deserve to be laughed at."

"Yes, if the journey were an easier one."

"To be sure, the roads and the cold will be trials; but then my uncle,
you can give them to me, as God gives trials to His Beloved. He breaks
them up into small portions, and puts a night's sleep between the
portions. Can you not also do this?"

"You little Methodist!" answered the Earl, with a tender gleam in his
eyes. "I see that I shall have to give you your own way. Will you go
with us, George?"

"It will be a relief. New York is in the dumps. Little Burr having
beaten the Schuyler faction, thinks himself omnipotent; and this
quarrel between Mr. Jay and Governor Clinton keeps every one else on
the edge of ill-humour. All the dancing part of the town are gone to
Philadelphia; I have scarcely a partner left; and there is no
conversation now in New York that is not political. Burr, Schuyler,
Jay, Clinton! even the clergy have gone horse and foot into these
disputes."

"Burr has a kind of cleverness; one must admit that."

"He is under the curse of knowing everything."

"Nevertheless his opinions will not alter the axis of the earth. It is
however a dangerous thing to live in a community where politics are the
staple of talk, quarrels spring full armed from a word in such an
atmosphere."

"I have accommodated my politics, sir, to my own satisfaction; and I
make shift to answer people according to their idols. I vow, I am so
weary of the words 'honour and honesty' that they beat a tattoo on my
brain."

"When you are as old as I am, George, you will understand that these
words are the coin, with which men buy office. The corruption of
courtiers is a general article of faith, but the impudence of patriots
going to market with their honesty, beats courtly corruption to
nothing. However, let us go to Philadelphia and see the play. That is
what Annie desires."

"I desire to see Washington. I wish to see the greatest of Americans."

"Let me tell you, Annie," said the Earl, "that there never was a man in
