he had set off on his return to Perth.  On arriving at Huntingtower he
was told of the treachery of March, also of his fate, and that the
regent had beaten the enemy on the banks of the Carron, and was
pursuing him into his own dominions.  Ruthven was inadequate to the
exertion of following the successful troops, but Edwin, rejoicing at
this new victory, would not be detained, and crossing the Forth into
Mid-Lothian, had sped his eager way until the happy moment that brought
him again to the side of his first and dearest friend.

As they continued their route together, Edwin inquired the events of
the past time, and heard them related with wonder, horror, and
gratitude.  Grateful for the preservation of Wallace, grateful for the
rescue of his country from the menaced destruction, for some time he
could only clasp his friend's hand with strong emotion to his heart.
The death of his uncle Bothwell made that heart tremble within him at
the thought of how much severer might have been his deprivation; at
last, extricating his powers of speech from the spell of contradictory
feelings which enchained them, he said, "But if my uncle Mar and our
brave Graham were in the last conflict, where are they, that I do not
see them share your victory?"

"I hope," returned Wallace, "that we shall rejoin them in safety at
Stirling.  Our troops parted in the pursuit, and after having sent back
the Lowland chieftains, you see I have none with me now but my own
particular followers."

The regent's expectations that he should soon fall in with some of the
chasing squadrons, were the next morning gratified.  Crossing the
Bathgate Hills, he met the returning battalions of Lennox, with Lord
Mar's, and also Sir John Graham's.  Lord Lennox was thanked by Wallace
for his good services, and immediately dispatched to reoccupy his
station in Dumbarton.  But the captains of Mar and of Graham, could
give no other account of their leaders, than that they saw them last
fighting valiantly in the Southron camp, and had since supposed that
during the pursuit they must have joined the regent's squadron.  A cold
dew fell over the limbs of Wallace at these tidings; he looked on
Murray and on Edwin.  The expression of the former's face told him what
were his fears; but Edwin, ever sanguine, strove to encourage the hope
that all might yet be well: "They may not have yet returned from the
pursuit; or they may be gone on to Stirling."

But these comfortings were soon dispelled by the appearance of Lord
Ruthven, who (having been apprised of the regent's approach) came forth
to meet him.  The pleasure of seeing the earl so far recovered as to
have been able to leave Huntingtower, was checked by the first glance
of his face, on which was deeply characterized some tale of grief.
Edwin thought it was the recent disasters of Scotland he mourned; and
with a cheering voice he exclaimed, "Courage, my father! our regent
comes again a conqueror!  Edward has once more recrossed the plains of
Northumberland!"

"Thanks be to God for that!" replied Ruthven! "but what have not these
last conflicts cost the country!  Lord Mar is wounded unto death, and
lies in a chamber next to the yet unburied corpses of Lord Bute and the
dauntless Graham."  Wallace turned deadly pale; a mist passed over his
eyes, and staggering, he breathlessly supported himself on the arm of
Edwin.  Murray looked on him; but all was still in his heart: his own
beloved father had fallen; and in that stroke Fate seemed to have
emptied all her quiver.

"Lead me to their chambers!" cried Wallace; "show me where my friends
lie; let me hear the last prayer for Scotland from the lips of the
bravest of her veterans!"

Ruthven turned the head of his horse; and, as he rode along, he
informed the regent that Edwin had not left Huntingtower for the Forth
half an hour when an express arrived from Falkirk.  By it he learned
that, as soon as the inhabitants of Stirling saw the fire of the
Southron camp, they had hastened thither to enjoy the spectacle.  Some,
bolder than the rest, entered its deserted confines (for the retreating
squadrons were then flying over the plain); and amidst the slaughtered,
near the royal tent, one of these visitors thought he distinguished
groans.  Whether friend or foe, he stooped to render assistance to the
sufferer, and soon found it to be Lord Mar.  The earl begged to be
carried to some shelter that he might see his wife and daughter before
he died.  The people drew him out from under his horse and many a
mangled corpse; and, wrapping him in their plaids, conveyed him to
Falkirk, where they lodged him in the convent.

"A messenger was instantly dispatched to me," continued Ruthven; "and,
indifferent to all personal considerations, I set out immediately.  I
saw my dying brother-in-law.  At his request, that others might not
suffer what he had endured under the pressure of the slain, the field
had been sought for the wounded.  Many were conveyed into the
neighboring houses, while the dead were consigned to the earth.  Deep
have been dug the graves of mingled Scot and English on the banks of
the Carron!  Many of our fallen nobles, amongst whom was the princely
Badenoch, have been conveyed to the cemetery of their ancestors; others
are entombed in the church of Falkirk; but the bodies of Sir John
Graham and my brother Bothwell," said he, in a lower tone, "I have
retained till your return."

"You have done right," replied the till then, silent Wallace; and
spurring forward, he saw not the ground he trod, till, ascending the
hill of Falkirk, the venerable walls of its monastery presented
themselves to his view.  He threw himself off his horse and entered,
preceded by Lord Ruthven.

He stopped before the cell which contained the dying chief, and desired
the abbot to apprise the earl of his arrival.  The sound of that voice,
whose heart-consoling tones could be matched by none on earth,
penetrated to the ear of his almost insensible friend.  Mar started
from his pillow, and Wallace through the half-open door heard him say:
"Let him come in, Joanna!  All my mortal hopes now hang on him."

Wallace instantly stepped forward, and beheld the veteran stretched on
a couch, the image of that death to which he was so rapidly
approaching.  He hastened toward him; and the dying man, stretching
forth his arms exclaimed: "Come to me, Wallace, my son, the only hope
of Scotland, the only human trust of this anxious paternal heart!"

Wallace threw himself on his knees beside him, and taking his hand,
pressed it in speechless anguish to his lips; every present grief was
then weighing on his soul, and denied him the power of utterance.  Lady
Mar sat by the pillow of her husband, but she bore no marks of the
sorrow which convulsed the frame of Wallace.  She looked serious, but
her cheek wore its freshest bloom.  She spoke not, and the veteran
allowed the tears of enfeebled nature to fall on the bent head of his
friend.  "Mourn not for me," cried he, "nor think that these are
regretful drops.  I die as I have wished, in the field for Scotland.
Time must have soon laid my gray hair ignobly in the grave; and to
enter it thus covered with honorable wounds, in glory, has long been my
prayer.  But, dearest, most unwearied of friends, still the tears of
mortality will flow; for I leave my children fatherless in this
faithless world.  And my Helen!  Oh, Wallace, the angel who exposed her
precious self through the dangers of that midnight walk to save
Scotland, her father, and his friends, is--lost to us!  Joanna, tell the
rest," said he, gasping, "for I cannot."

Wallace turned to Lady Mar with an inquiring look of such wild horror
that she found her tongue cleave to the roof of her mouth, and her
complexion faded into the pallidness of his.

"Surely," exclaimed he, "there is not to be a wreck of all that is
estimable on earth.  The Lady Helen is not dead?"

"No," rejoined the earl; "but-"

He could proceed no further, and Lady Mar forced herself to speak.

"She has fallen into the hands of the enemy.  On my lord's being
brought to this place, he sent for myself and Lady Helen; but in
passing by Dunipacis, an armed squadron issued from behind the mound,
and putting our attendants to flight, carried her off.  I escaped
hither.  The reason for this attack was explained afterward by one of
the Southrons, who, having been wounded by our escort, was taken, and
brought to Falkirk.  He said that Lord Aymer de Valence, having been
sent by his beset monarch to call Lord Carrick to his assistance, found
the Bruce's camp deserted; but by accident learning that Lady Helen Mar
was to be brought to Falkirk, he stationed himself behind Dunipacis;
and springing out as soon as our cavalcade was in view, seized her.
She obtained, the rest were allowed to escape, but as the Lord de
Valence loves Helen, I cannot doubt he will have sufficient honor not
to insult the fame of her family, and so will make her his wife."

"God forbid!" ejaculated Mar, holding up his trembling hands; "God
forbid that my blood should ever mingle with that of any one of the
people who have wrought such woe to Scotland!  Swear to me, valiant
Wallace, by the virtues of her virgin heart, by your own immaculate
honor, that you will move heaven and earth to rescue my Helen from the
power of his Southron lord!"

"So help me Heaven!" answered Wallace, looking steadfastly upward.  A
groan burst from the lips of Lady Mar, and her head sunk on the side of
the couch.

"What?  Who is that?" exclaimed Mar, raising his head in alarm from his
pillow.

"Believe it your country, Donald!" replied she; "to what do you bind
its only defender?  Are you not throwing him into the very center of
his enemies, by making him swear to rescue Helen?  Think you that De
Valence will not foresee a pursuit, and take her into the heart of
England?  And thither must our regent follow him!  Release Sir William
Wallace from a vow that must destroy him!"

"Wallace," cried the now soul-struck earl, "what have I done?  Has a
father's anxiety asked amiss?  If so, pardon me!  But if my daughter
also must perish for Scotland, take her, O God, uncontaminated, and let
us meet in heaven!  Wallace, I dare not accept your vow."

"But I will fulfill it," cried he.  "Let thy paternal heart rest in
peace; and by Jesus' help, Lady Helen shall again be in her own
country, as free from Southron taint as she is from all mortal sin!  De
Valence dare not approach her heavenly innocence with violence; and her
Scottish heart will never consent to give him a lawful claim to her
precious self.  Edward's legions are far beyond the borders! but
wherever this earl may be, yet I will reach him.  For there is a
guiding hand above, and the demands of the morning at Falkirk are now
to be answered in the halls of Stirling."

Lord Ruthven, followed by Edwin and Murray, entered the room.  And the
two nephews were holding each a hand of their dying uncle in theirs,
when Lady Ruthven (who, exhausted with fatigue and anxiety, had retired
an hour before), reappeared at the door of the apartment.  She had been
informed of the arrival of the regent and her son, and now hastened to
give them a sorrowful welcome.

"Ah, my lord," cried she, as Wallace pressed her matron cheek to his;
"this is not as your triumphs are wont to be greeted!  You are still a
conqueror, and yet death, dreadful death, lies all around us!  And our
Helen, too--"

"Shall be restored to you, by the blessed aid of Heaven!" returned he,
"What is yet left for me to do, must be done; and then-" He paused, and
added, "The time is not far distant, then--"  He paused, and added "The
time is not far distant, Lady Ruthven, when we shall meet in the realms
to which so many of our bravest and dearest have just hastened."

With swimming eyes Edwin drew toward his master.  "My uncle would
sleep," said he; "he is exhausted, and will recall us when he wakes
from rest."  The eyes of the veteran were at that moment closed with
heavy slumber.  Lady Ruthven remained with the countess to watch by
him; and Wallace, gently withdrawing, was followed by Ruthven and the
two young men out of the apartment.

Lord Lochawe, with the Bishop of Dunkeld, and other chiefs, lay in
different chambers, pierced with many wounds; but none so grievous as
those of Lord Mar.  Wallace visited them all, and having gone through
the numerous places in the neighborhood, then made quarters for his
wounded men.  At the gloom of evening he returned to Falkirk.  He sent
Edwin forward to inquire after the repose of his uncle; but on himself
re-entering the monastery, he requested the abbot to conduct him to the
apartment in which the remains of Sir John Graham were deposited.  The
father obeyed; leading him along a dark passage, he opened a door, and
discovered the slain hero lying on a bier.  Two monks sat at its head,
with tapers in their hands.  Wallace waved them to withdraw; they set
down the lights and departed.  He was then alone.

For some time he stood with clasped hands, looking intently on the body
as it lay extended before him.  "Graham!  Graham!" cried he, at last,
in a voice of unutterable grief; "dost thou not rise at thy general's
voice?  Oh! is this to be the tidings I am to send to the brave father
who intrusted to me his son?  Lost in the prime of youth, in the
opening of thy renown, is it thus that all which is good is to be
martyrized by the enemies of Scotland?"  He sunk gradually on his knees
beside him.  "And shall I not look once more on that face," said he,
"which ever turned toward mine with looks of faith and love?"  The
shroud was drawn down by his hand.  He started on his feet at the
sight.  The changing touch of death had altered every feature--had
deepened the paleness of the bloodless corpse into an ashy hue.  "Where
is the countenance of my friend?" cried he.  "Where the spirit which
once moved in beauty and animating light over this face!  Gone; and all
I see before me is a mass of molded clay!  Graham!  Graham!" cried he,
looking upward, "thou art not here.  No more can I recognize my friend
in this deserted habitation of thy soul.  Thine own proper self, thine
immortal spirit, is ascended up above; and there my fond remembrance
shall ever seek thee!"  Again he knelt, but it was in devotion--a
devotion which drew the sting from death, and opened to his view the
victory of the Lord of Life over the King of Terrors.

Edward having learned from his father that Lord Mar still slept, and
being told by the abbot where the regent was, followed him to the
consecrated chamber.  On entering, he perceived him kneeling by the
body of his friend.  The youth drew near.  He loved the brave Graham,
and he almost adored Wallace; the scene, therefore, smote upon his
heart.  He dropped down by the side of the regent, and, throwing his
arms around his neck, in a convulsive voice exclaimed: "Our friend is
gone; but I yet live, and only in your smiles, my friend and brother!"

Wallace strained him to his breast.  He was silent for some minutes,
and then said: "To every dispensation of God I am resigned, my Edwin.
While I bow to this stroke, I acknowledge the blessing I still hold in
you and Murray.  But did we not feel these visitations from our Maker,
they would not be decreed to us.  To behold the dead is the penalty of
man for sin; for it is more pain to witness and to occasion death, than
for ourselves to die.  It is also a lesson which God teaches his sons;
and in the moment that he shows us death he convinces us of
immortality.  Look upon that face, Edwin!" continued he, turning his
eyes on the breathless clay.  His youthful auditor, awestruck, and his
tears checked by the solemnity of this address, looked as he directed
him.  "Doth not that inanimate mold of earth testify that nothing less
than an immortal spirit could have lighted up its marble substance with
the life and god-like actions we have seen it perform?"  Edwin
shuddered; and Wallace, letting the shroud fall over the face, added:
"Never more will I look at it, for it no longer wears the characters of
my friend--they are pictured on my soul; and himself, my Edwin, still
effulgent in beauty and glowing with imperishable life, looks down on
us from heaven!"  He rose as he spoke, and opening the door, the monks
re-entered, and placing themselves at the head of the bier, chanted the
vesper requiem.  When it was ended, Wallace kissed the crucifix they
laid on his friend's breast, and left the cell.




Chapter LV.

Church of Falkirk.


No eye closed that night in the monastery of Falkirk.  The Earl of Mar
awaked about the twelfth hour, and sent to call Lord Ruthven, Sir
William Wallace, and his nephews, to attend him.  As they approached,
the priests, who had just anointed his dying head with the sacred
unction, drew back.  The countess and Lady Ruthven supported his
pillow.  He smiled as he heard the advancing steps of those so dear to
him.  "I send for you," said he, "to give you the blessing of a true
Scot and a Christian!  May all who are here in thy blessed presence,
Redeemer of mankind!" cried he, looking up with a supernatural
brightness in his eye, "die as I do, rather than survive to see
Scotland enslaved!  But oh! may they rather long live under that
liberty, perpetuated, which Wallace has again given to his country;
peaceful will then be their last moments on earth, and full of joy
their entrance into heaven!"  His eyes closed as the concluding word
died upon his tongue.  Lady Ruthven looked intently on him; she bent
her face to his, but he breathed no more; and, with a feeble cry, she
fell back in a swoon.

The soul of the veteran earl was indeed fled.  The countess was taken,
shrieking, out of the apartment; but Wallace, Edwin, and Murray
remained, kneeling over the body, and when they concluded, the priests
throwing over it a cloud of incense, the mourners withdrew, and
separated to their chambers.

By daybreak, Wallace met Murray by appointment in the cloisters.  The
remains of his beloved father had been brought from Dunipacis to the
convent, and Murray now prepare to take them to Bothwell Castle, there
to be interred in the cemetery of his ancestors.  Wallace, who had
approved his design, entered with him into the solitary court-yard,
where the war-carriage stood which was to convey the deceased earl to
Clydesdale.  Four soldiers of his clan brought the corpse of their Lord
from a cell, and laid him on his martial bier.  His bed was the sweet
heather of Falkirk, spread by the hands of his son.  As Wallace laid
the venerable chief's sword and helmet on his bier, he covered the
whole with the flag he had torn from the standard of England in the
last victory.  "None other shroud is worthy of thy virtues!" cried he.
"Dying for Scotland, thus let the memorial of her glory be the witness
of thine!"

"Oh! my friend," answered Murray, looking on his chief with a smile,
which beamed the fairer shining through sorrow, "thy gracious spirit
can divest even death of its gloom.  My father yet lives in his fame!"

"And in a better existence, too!" gently replied Wallace; "else the
earth's fame were an empty shroud--it could not comfort."

The solemn procession, with Murray at its head, departed toward the
valleys of Clydesdale, and Wallace returned to his chamber.  Two hours
before noon he was summoned by the tolling of the chapel bell.  The
Earl of Bute and his dearer friend were to be laid in their last bed.
With a spirit that did not murmur, he saw the earth closed over both
graves; but at Graham's he lingered; and when the funeral stone shut
even the sod that covered him from his eyes, with his sword's point he
drew on the surface these memorable words:

    "Mente manuque potens, et Walli fidus Achates.
     Conditus hic Gramus, bello interfectus ab Anglis."**

**These lines may be translated thus:

            Here lies
    The powerful in mind and body, the friend of Wallace;
  Graham, faithful unto death! slain in battle by the English.

While he yet leaned on the stone, which gently gave way to the
registering pen of friendship, to be more deeply engraved afterward, a
monk approached him, attended by a shepherd boy.  At the sound of
steps, Wallace looked up.

"This young man," said the father, "brings dispatches to the lord
regent."

Wallace rose, and the youth presented his packet.  Withdrawing to a
little distance, he broke the seal, and read to this effect:

"My father and myself are in the Castle of Durham, and both under an
arrest.  We are to remain so till our arrival in London renders its
sovereign, in his own opinion, more secure: when there, you shall hear
from me again.  Meanwhile, be on your guard: the gold of Edward has
found its way into your councils.  Beware of them who, with patriotism
in their mouths, are purchased to betray you and their country into the
hands of the enemy!  Truest, noblest, best of Scots, farewell!--I must
not write more explicitly.

"P.S.--The messenger who takes this is a simple border shepherd: he
knows not whence comes the packet, hence he cannot bring an answer."

Wallace closed the letter; and putting gold into the shepherd's hand,
left the chapel.  In passing through the cloisters he met Ruthven, just
returned from Stirling, whither he had gone to inform the chiefs of the
council of the regent's arrival.  "When I summoned them to the
council-hall," continued Lord Ruthven, "and told them you had not only
defeated Edward on the Carron, but in so doing had gained a double
victory, over a foreign usurper and domestic traitors!-instead of the
usual open-hearted gratulations on such a communication, a low whisper
murmured through the hall; and the young Badenoch, unworthy of his
patriotic father, rising from his seat, gave utterance to so many
invectives against you, our country's soul, and arm!  I should deem it
treason even to repeat them.  Suffice it to say, that out of five
hundred chiefs and chieftains who were present, not one of those
parasites who used to fawn on you a week ago, and make the love of
honest men seem doubtful, now breathes one word for Sir William
Wallace.  But this ingratitude, vile as it is, I bore with patience
till Badenoch, growing in insolency, declared that late last night
dispatches had arrived from the King of France to the regent, and that
he (in right of his birth, assuming to himself that dignity) had put
their bearer, Sir Alexander Ramsay, under confinement, for having
persisted to dispute his authority to withhold them from you."

Wallace, who had listened in silence, drew a deep sigh as Ruthven
concluded; and, in that profound breath, exclaimed--"God must be our
fortress still; must save Scotland from this gangrene in her heart!
Ramsay shall be released; but I must first meet these violent men.  And
it must be alone, my lord," continued he; "you, and our coadjutors, may
wait my return at the city gates; but the sword of Edward, if need be,
shall defend me against his gold."  As he spoke, he laid his hand on
the jeweled weapon which hung at his side, and which he had wrested
from that monarch in the last conflict.

Aware that this treason, aimed at him, would strike his country, unless
timely warded off, he took his resolution; and requesting Ruthven not
to communicate to any one what had passed, he mounted his horse, and
struck into the road to Stirling.  He took the plume from his crest,
and closing his visor, enveloped himself in his plaid, that the people
might not know him as he went along.  But casting away his cloak, and
unclasping his helmet at the door of the keep, he entered the
council-hall, openly and abruptly.  By an instantaneous impulse of
respect, which even the base pay to virtue, almost every man arose at
his appearance.  He bowed to the assembly, and walked, with a composed
yet severe air, up to his station at the head of the room.  Young
Badenoch stood there; and as Wallace approached he fiercely grasped his
sword.  "Proud upstart!" cried he, "betrayer of my father! set a foot
further toward this chair, and the chastisement of every arm in this
council shall fall on you for your presumption!"

"It is not in the arms of thousands to put me from my right," replied
Wallace, calmly putting forth his hand and drawing the regent's chair
toward him.

"Will ye bear this?" cried Badenoch, stamping with his foot, and
plucking forth his sword; "is the man to exist who thus braves the
assembled lords of Scotland?"  While speaking, he made a desperate
lunge at the regent's breast; Wallace caught the blade in his hand, and
wrenching it from his intemperate adversary, broke it into shivers, and
cast the pieces at his feet; then, turning resolutely toward the
chiefs, who stood appalled, and looking on each other, he said, "I,
your duly elected regent, left you only a few days ago, to repel the
enemy whom the treason of Lord March would have introduced into these
very walls.  Many brave chiefs followed me to that field! and more,
whom I see now, loaded me as I passed with benedictions.  Portentous
was the day of Falkirk to Scotland.  Then did the mighty fall, and the
heads of counsel perish.  But treason was the parricide!  The late Lord
Badenoch stood his ground like a true Scot; but Athol and Buchan
deserted to Edward."  While speaking, he turned toward the furious son
of Badenoch, who, gnashing his teeth in impotent rage, stood listening
to the inflaming whispers of Macdougal of Lorn.  "Young chief," cried
he, "from their treachery date the fate of your brave father, and the
whole of our grievous loss of that day; but the wide destruction has
been avenged! more than chief for chief have perished in the Southron
ranks, and thousands of the lowlier sort now swell the banks of Carron.
Edward himself fell, wounded by my arm, and was born by his flying
squadrons over the wastes of Northumberland.  Thus have I returned to
you with my duties achieved in a manner worthy of your regent!  What,
then, means the arrest of my embassador? what this silence when the
representative of your power is insulted to your face?

"They mean," cried Badenoch, "that my words are the utterance of their
sentiments."  "They mean," cried Lorn, "that the prowess of the haughty
boaster, whom their intoxicated gratitude raised from the dust, shall
not avail him against the indignation of a nation over which he dares
to arrogate a right."

"Mean they what they will," returned Wallace, "they cannot dispossess
me of the rights with which assembled Scotland invested me on the
plains of Stirling.  And again I demand, by what authority do you and
they presume to imprison my officer, and withhold from me the papers
sent by the King of France to the Regent of Scotland?"

"By the authority that we will maintain," replied Badenoch; "by the
right of my royal blood, and by the sword of every brave Scot, who
spurns at the name of Wallace!"

"And as a proof that we speak not more than we act," cried Lorn, making
assign to the chiefs, "you are our prisoner!"

Many weapons were instantly unsheathed; and their bearers, hurrying to
the side of Badenoch and Lorn, attempted to lay hands on Wallace; but
he, drawing the sword of Edward, with a sweep of his valiant arm that
made the glittering blade seem a brand of fire, set his back against
the wall, and exclaimed:

"He that first makes a stroke at me shall find his death on this
Southron steel!  This sword I made the puissant arm of the usurper
yield to me; and this sword shall defend the Regent of Scotland against
his ungrateful countrymen!"

The chieftains who pressed on him recoiled at these words, but their
leaders, Badenoch and Lorn, waved them forward, with vehement
exhortations.

"Desist, young men!" continued he, "provoke me not beyond my bearing.
With a single blast of my bugle I could surround this building with a
band of warriors, who at sight of their chief being thus assaulted,
would lay this tumult in blood.  Let me pass, or abide the consequence!"

"Through my breast, then," exclaimed Badenoch; "for, with my consent,
you pass not here but on your bier.  What is in the arm of a single
man," cried he to the lords, "that ye cannot fall on him at once, and
cut him down?"

"I would not hurt a son of the virtuous Badenoch," returned Wallace;
"but his life be on your hands," said he, turning to the chiefs, "if
one of you point a sword to impede my passage."

"And wilt thou dare it, usurper of my powers and honors?" cried
Badenoch.  "Lorn, stand by your friend--all here who are true to the
Cummin and Macdougal, hem in the tyrant."

Many a traitor hand now drew forth its dagger, and the intemperate
Badenoch, drunk with choler and mad ambition, snatching a sword from
one of his accomplices, made another violent plunge at Wallace, but its
metal flew in splinters on the guard-stroke of the regent, and left
Badenoch at his mercy.  "Defend me, chieftains, or I am slain!" cried
he.  But Wallace did not let his hand follow its advantage; with the
dignity of conscious desert, he turned from the vanquished, and casting
the enraged Lorn from him, who had thrown himself in his way, he
exclaimed: "Scots, that arm will wither which dares to point its steel
on me."  The pressing crowd, struck in astonishment, parted before him
as they could have done in the path of a thunderbolt, and unimpeded, he
passed to the door.

That their regent had entered the keep was soon rumored through the
city; and when he appeared from the gate he was hailed by the
acclamations of the people.  He found his empire again in the hearts of
the lowly, they whom he had restored to their cottages, knelt to him in
the streets, and called for blessings on his name; while they--oh!
blasting touch of envy!-whom he had restored to castles, and elevated
from a state of vassalage to the power of princes, they raised against
him that very power to lay him in the dust.

Now it was, that when surrounded by the grateful citizens of Stirling
(whom it would have been as easy for him to have inflamed to the
massacre of Badenoch and his council, as to have lifted his bugle to
his lips), that he blew the summons for his captains.  Every man in the
keep flew to arms, expecting that Wallace was returning upon them with
the host he had threatened.  In a few minutes the Lord Ruthven, with
his brave followers, entered the inner ballium gate.  Wallace smiled
proudly as they drew near.  "My lords," said he, "you come to witness
the last act of my delegated power!  Sir Alexander Scrymgeour, enter
into that hall, which was once the seat of council, and tell the
violent men who fill it, that for the peace of Scotland, which I value
more than my life, I allow them to stand unpunished of their offense
against me.  But the outrage they have committed on the freedom of one
of her bravest sons I will not pardon, unless he be immediately set at
liberty; let them deliver to you Sir Alexander Ramsay, and then I
permit them to hear my final decision.  IF they refuse obedience, they
are all my prisoners, and, but for my pity on their blindness, should
perish by the laws."

Eager to open the prison door for his friend Ramsay, and little
suspecting to what he was calling the insurgents, Scrymgeour hastened
to obey.  Lorn and Badenoch gave him a very rough reception, uttering
such rebellious defiance of the regent that the brave standard-bearer
lost all patience, and denounced the immediate deaths of the whole
refractory assembly.  "The courtyard," cried he, "is armed with
thousands of the regent's followers, his foot is on your necks, obey,
or this will be a more grievous day for Scotland than even that of
Falkirk; for the Castle of Stirling will run with Scottish blood!"  At
this menace Badenoch became more enraged, and Scrymgeour, seeing no
chance of prevailing by argument, sent a messenger to privately tell
Wallace the result.  The regent immediately placed himself at the head
of twenty men, and, re-entering the keep, went directly to the warder,
whom he ordered, on his allegiance to the laws, to deliver Sir
Alexander Ramsay into his hands.  He was obeyed, and returned with his
recovered chieftain to the platform.  When Scrymgeour was apprised of
the knight's release, he turned to Badenoch, with whom he was still
contending in furious debate, and demanded:

"Will you or will you not attend me to the regent?  He of you all,"
added he, addressing the chieftains, "who in this simple duty disobeys,
shall receive from him the severer doom."

Badenoch and Lorn, affecting to deride this menace, replied, they would
not for an empire do the usurper the homage of a moment's voluntary
attention; but if any of their followers chose to view the mockery,
they were at liberty.  A very few, and those of the least turbulent
spirits went forth.  They began to fear having embarked in a desperate
cause; and, by their present acquiescence, were willing to deprecate
the wrath of Wallace, while thus assured of not exciting the resentment
of Badenoch.

When Wallace looked around him and saw the space before the keep filled
with armed men and citizens, he ascended an elevated piece of ground,
which rose a little to the left, and waving his hand in token that he
intended to speak, a profound silence took place of the buzz of
admiration, gratitude, and discontent.  He then addressed the people:

"Brother soldiers! friends! And--am I so to distinguish Scots?-enemies!"

At this word, a loud cry of "Perish all who are the enemies of our
glorious regent!" penetrated to the inmost chambers of the citadel.

Believing that the few of his partisans who had ventured out, were
falling under the vengeance of Wallace, Badenoch, with a brandished
weapon, and followed by the rest, sallied toward the door, but there he
stopped, for he saw his friends standing unmolested.

Wallace proceeded; and, with calm dignity, announced the hatred that
was now poured upon him by a large part of that nobility who had been
so eager to invest him with the high office he then held.

"Though they have broken their oaths," cried he, "I have fulfilled
mine!  They vowed to me all lawful obedience; I swore to free Scotland
or to die.  Every castle in this realm is restored to its ancient lord;
every fortress is filled with a native garrison; the sea is covered
with our ships, and the kingdom, one in itself, sits secure behind her
well-defended bulwarks.  Such have I, through the strength of the
Almighty arm, made Scotland!  Beloved by a grateful people, I could
wield half her power to the destruction of the rest; but I would not
pluck one stone out of the building I have raised.  To-day I deliver up
my commission, since its design is accomplished.  I resign the regency."

As he spoke, he took off his helmet, and stood uncovered before the
people.

"No, no!" seemed the voice from every lip; "we will acknowledge no
other power, we will obey no other leader!"

Wallace expressed his sense of their attachment, but repeating to them
that he had fulfilled the end of his office, by setting them free, he
explained that his retaining it was no longer necessary.  "Should I
remain your regent," continued he, "the country would be involved in
ruinous dissensions.  The majority of your nobles now find a vice in
the virtue they once extolled; and seeing its power, no longer needful,
seek to destroy my upholders with myself.  I therefore remove the cause
of contention.  I quit the regency; and I bequeath your liberty to the
care of your chiefs.  But should it be again in danger, remember, that
while life breathes in this heart, the spirit of William Wallace will
be with you still!"

With these words he descended the mound, and mounted his horse, amidst
the cries and tears of the populace.  They clung to his garments as he
rode along; and the women, with their children, throwing themselves on
their knees in his path, implored him not to leave them to the inroads
of a ravager; not to abandon them to the tyranny of their own lords;
who, unrestrained by a king, or a regent like himself, would soon
subvert his good laws, and reign despots over every district in the
country.  Wallace answered their entreaties with the language of
encouragement; adding, that he was not their prince, to lawfully
maintain a disputed power over the legitimate chiefs of the land.
"But," he said, "a rightful sovereign may yet be yielded to your
prayers; and to procure that blessing, daughters of Scotland, night and
day invoke the Giver of every good gift."

When Wallace and his weeping train separated, at the foot of Falkirk
Hill, he was met by his veterans of Lanark; who, having heard of what
had passed in the citadel, advanced to him with one voice, to declare
that they never would fight under any other commander.  "Wherever you
are, my faithful friends," returned he, "you shall still obey my word."
When he entered the monastery, the opposition that was made to his
resignation of the regency, by the Bishop of Dunkeld, Lord Loch-awe,
and others, was so vehement, so persuasive, that had not Wallace been
steadily principled not to involve his country in domestic war, he must
have yielded to the affectionate eloquence of their pleading.  But
showing to them the public danger attendant on his provoking the wild
ambition of the Cummins, and their multitudinous adherents, his
arguments, which the sober judgment of his friends saw conclusive, at
last ended the debate.  He then rose, saying, "I have yet to perform my
vow to our lamented Mar.  I shall seek his daughter; and then, my brave
companions, you shall hear of me, and, I trust, see me again!"




Chapter LVI.

The Monastery.


It being Lady Ruthven's wish that the remains of her brother should be
entombed with his ancestors, preparations were made for the mournful
cavalcade to set forth toward Braemar Castle.  The countess, hoping
that Wallace might be induced to accompany them, did not long object to
this proposal, which Lady Ruthven had enforced with tears.  Had any one
seen the tow, and been called upon to judge, by their deportment, of
the relationship in which each lady stood to the deceased, he must have
decided that the sister was the widow.  At the moment of her husband's
death, Lady Mar had felt a shock; she had long looked for this event,
as to the seal of her happiness; it was the sight of mortality that
appalled her.  The man she doted on, nay, even herself, must one day
lie as the object now before her--dead!-insensible to all earthly joys,
or pains! but awake, perhaps, fearfully awake, to the judgments of
another world!  This conviction caused her shrieks, when she saw Lord
Mar expire.  Every obstacle between her and Wallace she now believed
removed.  Her husband was dead; Helen was carried away by a man
devotedly enamored of her; and most probably was at that time his wife.
The specters of conscience passed from her eyes; she no longer thought
of death and judgment; and, under a pretense that her feelings could
not bear the sight of her husband's bier, she determined to seclude
herself in her own chamber, till the freshness of Wallace's grief for
his friend should have passed away.  But when she heard, from the
indignant Edwin, of the rebellious conduct of the young Lord Badenoch,
and that the regent had abdicated, her consternation superseded all
caution.  "I will soon humble that proud boy," exclaimed she; "and let
him know, that in opposing the elevation of Sir William Wallace, he
treads down his own interest.  You are beloved by the regent, Edwin!"
cried she, interrupting herself, and clasping his hand with
earnestness; "teach his enthusiastic heart the true interests of his
country!  I am the first woman of the house of Cummin; and is not that
family the most powerful** in the kingdom?  By the adherence of one
branch to Edward, the battle of Falkirk was lost; by the rebellion of
another, the regent of Scotland is obliged to relinquish that dignity?
It is in my power to move the whole race at my will; and if Wallace
would mingle his blood with theirs, would espouse me (an overture which
the love I bear my country impels me to make), every nerve would then
be strained to promote the elevation of their nearest kinswoman.
Wallace would reign in Scotland, and the whole land lie at peace."

**The family of Cummin was so powerful and numerous, that an incredible
number of chieftains of that name attended the first parliament which
Robert I. Held at Dunstaffnage Castle.  The relationship between the
heiress of Stratheaarn and that family was very near, her paternal
grandmother having been the daughter of a Lord Badenoch.--(1809.)

Edwin eyed her with astonishment while she spoke.  All her late conduct
to his cousin Helen, to his uncle, and to Wallace, was now explained;
and he saw in her flushed cheek, that it was not the patriot who
desired this match, but the enamored woman.

"You do not answer," said she; "have you any apprehension that Sir
William Wallace would reject the hand which would give him a crown?
which would dispense happiness to many thousand people?"

"No," replied he; "I believe that, much as he is devoted to the memory
of her, whom alone he can ever love, could he purchase true happiness
to Scotland by the sacrifice, he would espouse any virtuous woman who
could bring him so blessed a dowry.  But in your case, my honored aunt,
I can see no probability of such a consequence.  In the first place, I
know, that now the virtuous Earl of Badenoch is no more, he neither
respects nor fears the Cummins; and that he would scorn to purchase a
crown or even the people's happiness, by baseness in himself.  To rise
by their means, who, you have seen, will at any time immolate all that
is sacred to man to their own caprice, or fancied interests, would be
unworthy of him; therefore, I am sure, if you wish to marry Sir William
Wallace, you must not urge the use he may make of the Cummins as an
argument.  He need not stoop to cajole the men he may command.  Did he
not drive the one-half of their clan, with the English host to boot, to
seek any shelter from his vengeance?  And for them in the citadel, had
he chosen to give the word, they would now be all numbered with the
dust!  Aunt! he has a Divine Master, whose example he follows, though
in deep humility!  He lays down his power; it is not taken from him.
Earthly crowns are dross to him who looks for a heavenly one.
Therefore, honored lady, believe it no longer necessary to wound your
delicacy, by offering him a hand, which cannot produce the good you
meditate!"

The complexion of the countess varied a thousand times during this
answer.  Her reason assented to many parts of it; but the passion she
could not acknowledge to her nephew, urged her to persist.  "You may be
right, Edwin," she replied; "but still, as there is nothing very
repugnant in me, the project is surely worth trying!  At any rate, even
setting the Cummins aside, a marriage with the daughter of Strathearn,
by allying your noble friend to every illustrious house in the kingdom,
would make his interest theirs, and all must unit in retaining to him
the regency.  Scotland will be wrecked should he leave the helm; and,
sweet Edwin, though your young heart is yet unacquainted with the
strange inconsistencies of the tenderest passion, I must whisper you
that your friend will never be happy till he again live in the bosom of
domestic affection."

"Ah! but where is he to find it?" cried Edwin,  "what will ever restore
his Marion to his arms?"

"I," cried she-"I will be more than ever Marion was to him!  She knew
not--O! she could not--the boundless love that fills my heart for him!"
Edwin's blushes at this wild declaration told her how far she had
betrayed herself.  She attempted to palliate what she could no longer
conceal, and, covering her face with her hand, exclaimed, "You, who
love Sir William Wallace, cannot be surprised that all who adore human
excellence should participate in that sentiment.  How could I see him,
the benefactor of my family, the blessing to all Scotland, and not love
him?"

"True," replied Edwin; "but not as a wife would love her husband!  You
were married.  And was it possible you could feel thus when my uncle
lived?  So strong a passion cannot have grown in your breast since he
died; for surely, love should not enter a widow's heart at the side of
an unburied husband!"

"Edwin!" replied she, "you, who never felt the throbs of this tyrant,
judge with a severity you will one day regret.  When you love, and
struggle with a passion that drinks your very life, you will pity
Joanna of Mar, and forgive her!"

"I pity you now, aunt," replied he; "but you bewilder me.  I cannot
understand the possibility of a virtuous married woman suffering any
passion of this kind to get such domination over her as to cause her
one guilty sigh; for guilty must every wish be that militates against
the duty of her marriage vow.  Surely, love comes not in a whirlwind,
to seize the soul at once; but grows by degrees, according to the
development of the virtues of the object, and the freedom we give
ourselves in their contemplation--and, if it be virtue that you love in
Sir William Wallace, had you not virtue in your noble husband?"

The countess perceived by the remarks of Edwin than he was deeper read
in the human heart than she had suspected; that he was neither ignorant
of the feelings of the passion, nor of what ought to be its source; and
therefore, with a deep blush, she replied:

"Think for a moment before you condemn me.  I acknowledge every good
quality that your uncle possessed--but oh! Edwin, he had frailties that
you know not of--frailties that reduced me to be, what the world never
saw, the most unhappy of women."

Edwin turned pale at this charge against his uncle; and, while he
forbore to draw aside the veil which covered the sacred dead, little
did he think that the artful woman meant a frailty to which she had
equally shared, and the consequences of which dangerous vanity had
constrained her to become his wife.  She proceeded:

"I married your uncle when I was a girl, and knew not that I had a
heart.  I saw Wallace; his virtues stole me from myself, and I found--
In short, Edwin, your uncle became of too advanced an age to sympathize
with my younger heart.  How could I, then, defend myself against the
more congenial soul of your friend?  He was reserved during Mar's life!
but he did not repulse me with unkindness.  I therefore hope; and do
you, my Edwin, gently influence him in my favor, and I will forever
bless you."

"Aunt," answered he, looking at her attentively, "can you, without
displeasure, hear me speak a few, perhaps ungrateful, truths?"

"Say what you will," said she, trembling; "only be my advocate with the
noblest of human beings, and I can take naught amiss."

"Lady Mar," resumed he, "I answer you with unqualified sincerity,
because I love you, and venerate the memory of my uncle, whose
frailties, whatever they might be, were visible to you alone.  I answer
you with sincerity, because I would spare you much future pain, and Sir
William Wallace a task that would pierce him to the soul.  You confess
that he already knows you love him--that he has received such
demonstrations with coldness.  Recollect what it is you love him for,
and then judge if he could do otherwise.  Could he approve affections
which a wife transferred to him from her husband, and that husband his
friend?"

"Ah! but he is now dead!" interrupted she; "that obstacle is removed."

"But the other, which you raised yourself!" replied Edwin; "while a
wife, you showed to Sir William Wallace that you could not only indulge
yourself in wishes hostile to your nuptial faith, but divulge them to
him.  Ah! my aunt, what could you look for as the consequence of this?
My uncle yet lived when you did this!  And that act, were you youthful
as Hebe, and more tender than ever was fabled the queen of love, I am
sure, the virtue of Wallace would never pardon.  He never could pledge
his faith to one whose passions had so far silenced her sense of duty;
and did he even love you, he would not, for the empire of the world,
repose his honor in such keeping."

"Edwin!" cired she, at last summoning power to speak, for during the
latter part of this address she had sat gasping from unutterable
disappointment and rage; "are you not afraid to breathe all this to me?
I have given you my confidence and do you abuse it?  Do you stab me,
when I ask you to heal?"

"No, my dear aunt," replied he; "I speak the truth to you, ungrateful
as it is, to prevent you hearing it in perhaps a more painful form from
Wallace himself."

"Oh, no!" cried she, with contemptuous haughtiness; "he is a man, and
he knows how to pardon the excesses of love!  Look around you, foolish
boy, and see how many of our proudest lords have united their fates
with women who not only loved them while their husbands lived, but left
their homes and children to join their lovers!  And what is there in
me, a princess of the crowns of Scotland and of Norway--a woman who has
had the nobles of both kingdoms at her feet, and frowned upon them
all-that I should now be contemned?  Is the ingrate for whom alone I
ever felt a wish of love--is he to despise me for my passion?  You
mistake, Edwin; you know not the heart of man."

"Not of the common race of men, perhaps," replied he; "but certainly
that of Sir William Wallace.  Purity and he are too sincerely one for
personal vanity to blind his eyes to the deformity of the passion you
describe.  And mean as I am when compared with him, I must aver that,
were a married woman to love me, and seek to excuse her frailty, I
should see alone her contempt of the principles which are the only
impregnable bulwarks of innocence, and shrink from her as I would from
pollution."

"Then you declare yourself my enemy, Edwin?"

"No," replied he; "I speak to you as a son; but if you are determined
to avow to Sir William Wallace what you have revealed to me, I shall
not even observe on what has passed, but leave you, unhappy lady, to
the pangs I would have spared you."

He rose.  Lady Mar wrung her hands in a paroxysm of conviction that
what he said was true.

"Then, Edwin, I must despair?"

He looked at her with pity.

"Could you abhor the dereliction that your soul has thus made from
duty, and leave him, whom your unwidowed wishes now pursue, to seek
you; then I should say that you might be happy; for penitence appeases
God, and shall it not find grace with man?"

"Blessed Edwin," cried she, falling on his neck, and kissing him;
"whisper but my penitence to Wallace; teach him to think I hate myself.
Oh, make me that in his eyes which you would wish, and I will adore
you on my knees?"

The door opened at this moment, and Lord Ruthven entered.  The tears
she was profusely shedding on the bosom of his son, he attributed to
some conversation she might be holding respecting her deceased lord,
and taking her hand, he told her he came to propose her immediate
removal from the scene of so many horrors.

"My dear sister," said he, "I will attend you as far as Perth.  After
that, Edwin shall be your guard to Braemar, and my Janet will stay with
you there till time has softened your griefs."

Lady Mar looked at him.

"And where will be Sir William Wallace?"

"Here," answered Ruthven.  "Some considerations, consequent to his
receiving the French dispatches, will hold him some time longer south
of the Forth."

Lady Mar shook her head doubtfully, and reminded him that the chiefs in
the citadel had withheld the dispatches.

Lord Ruthven then informed her that, unknown to Wallace, Lord Loch-awe
had summoned the most powerful of his friends then near Stirling, and
attended by them, was carried on a littler into the citadel.  It
entered the council-hall, and from that bed of honorable wounds, he
threatened the assembly with instant vengeance from his troops without,
unless they would immediately swear fealty to Wallace, and compel
Badenoch to give up the French dispatches.  Violent tumults were the
consequence; but Loch-awe's litter being guarded by a double rank of
armed chieftains, and the keep being hemmed round by his men prepared
to put to the sword every Scot hostile to the proposition of their
lord, the insurgents at last complied, and forced Badenoch to
relinquish the royal packet.  This effected, Loch-awe and his train
returned to the monastery.  Wallace refused to resume the dignity he
had resigned, the reinvestment of which had been extorted from the
lords in the citadel.

"No," said he to Loch-awe; "it is indeed time that I should sink into
shades where I cannot be found, since I am become a word of contention
amongst my countrymen."

"He was not to be shaken," continued Ruthven; "but seeing matter in the
French dispatches that ought to be answered without delay, he yet
remains a few days at Falkirk."

"Then we will await him here," cried the countess.

"That cannot be," answered Ruthven, "it would be against ecclesiastical
law to detain the sacred dead so long from the grave.  Wallace will
doubtless visit Braemar, therefore I advise that to-morrow you leave
Falkirk."

Edwin seconded this counsel; and fearing to make further opposition,
she silently acquiesced.  But her spirit was not so quiescent.  At
night when she went to her cell, her ever wakeful fancy aroused a
thousand images of alarm.  She remembered the vow that Wallace had made
to seek Helen.  He had already given up the regency--an office which
might have detained him from such a pursuit; and might not a passion
softer than indignation against the ungrateful chieftains have dictated
this act?  "Should he love Helen, what is there not to fear?" cried
she; "and should he meet her, I am undone?"  Racked by jealousy, and
goaded by contradicting expectations, she rose from her bed and paced
the room in wild disorder.  One moment she strained her mind to
recollect every gracious look or word from him, and then her
imagination glowed with anticipated delight.  Again she thought of his
address to Helen, of his vow in her favor, and she was driven to
despair.  All Edwin's kind admonitions were forgotten; passion alone
was awake; and forgetful of her rank and sex, and of her situation, she
determined to see Wallace, and appeal to his heart for the last time.
She knew that he slept in an apartment at the other end of the
monastery; and that she might pass thither unobserved, she glided into
an opposite cell belonging to a sick monk, and stealing away his cloak,
threw it over her, and hurried along the cloisters.

The chapel doors were open.  In passing, she saw the bier of her lord
awaiting the hour of its removal, surrounded by priests, singing
anthems for the repose of his soul.  No tender recollections, no
remorse, knocked at the heart of Lady mar as she sped along.  Abandoned
all to thoughts of Wallace, she felt not that she had a soul; she
acknowledged not that she had a hope, but what centered in the smiles
of the man she was hastening to seek.

His door was fastened with a latch; she gently opened it, and found
herself in his chamber.  She trembled--she scarcely breathed; she
looked around; she approached his bed--but he was not there.
Disappointment palsied her heart, and she sunk upon a chair.  "Am I
betrayed?" said she to herself: "Has that youthful hypocrite warned him
hence?"  And then again she thought, "But how should Edwin guess that I
should venture here?  Oh, no, my cruel stars alone are against me!"

