cushion was placed on the right of the Prince, for the occupation of the
Begum. In front of this platform was a square tank, or pond of marble,
four feet deep, and filled to the brim, with water as clear as crystal,
having a large jet or fountain in the middle, which threw up a column of
it to the height of twenty feet.

The Prince Tippoo had scarcely dismounted from his elephant, and
occupied the musnod, or throne of cushions, when the stately form of the
Begum was seen advancing to the place of rendezvous. The elephant being
left at the gate of the gardens opening into the country, opposite to
that by which the procession of Tippoo had entered, she was carried
in an open litter, richly ornamented with silver, and borne on the
shoulders of six black slaves. Her person was as richly attired as silks
and gems could accomplish.

Richard Middlemas, as the Begum's General or Bukshee, walked nearest to
her litter, in a dress as magnificent in itself as it was remote from
all European costume, being that of a Banka, or Indian courtier. His
turban was of rich silk and gold, twisted very hard and placed on one
side of his head, its ends hanging down on the shoulder. His mustaches
were turned and curled, and his eyelids stained with antimony. The
vest was of gold brocade, with a cummerband, or sash, around his waist,
corresponding to his turban. He carried in his hand a large sword,
sheathed in a scabbard of crimson velvet, and wore around his middle
a broad embroidered sword-belt. What thoughts he had under this gay
attire, and the bold bearing which corresponded to it, it would be
fearful to unfold. His least detestable hopes were perhaps those which
tended to save Menie Gray, by betraying the Prince who was about to
confide in him, and the Begum, at whose intercession Tippoo's confidence
was to be reposed.

The litter stopped as it approached the tank, on the opposite side of
which the Prince was seated on his musnud. Middlemas assisted the Begum
to descend, and led her, deeply veiled with silver muslin, towards the
platform of marble. The rest of the retinue of the Begum followed in
their richest and most gaudy attire, all males, however; nor was there a
symptom of woman being in her train, except that a close litter, guarded
by twenty black slaves, having their sabres drawn, remained at some
distance in a thicket of flowering shrubs.

When Tippoo Saib, through the dim haze which hung over the Waterfall,
discerned the splendid train of the Begum advancing, he arose from his
musnud, so as to receive her near the foot of his throne, and exchanged
greetings with her upon the pleasure of meeting, and enquiries after
their mutual health. He then conducted her to the cushion placed near
to his own, while his courtiers anxiously showed their politeness in
accommodating those of the Begum with places upon the carpets around,
where they all sat down cross-legged--Richard Middlemas occupying a
conspicuous situation.

The people of inferior note stood behind, and amongst them was the
Sirdar of Hyder Ali, with Hartley and the Madras Vakeel. It would be
impossible to describe the feelings with which Hartley recognized the
apostate Middlemas and the Amazonian Mrs. Montreville. The sight of them
worked up his resolution to make an appeal against them in full Durbar,
to the justice which Tippoo was obliged to render to all who should
complain of injuries. In the meanwhile, the Prince, who had hitherto
spoken in a low voice, while acknowledging, it is to be supposed,
the service and the fidelity of the Begum, now gave the sign to his
attendant, who said, in an elevated tone, "Wherefore, and to requite
these services, the mighty Prince, at the request of the mighty Begum,
Mootee Mahul, beautiful as the moon, and wise as the daughter of
Giamschid, had decreed to take into his service the Bukshee of her
armies, and to invest him, as one worthy of all confidence, with the
keeping of his beloved capital of Bangalore."

The voice of the crier had scarce ceased, when it was answered by one
as loud, which sounded from the crowd of bystanders, "Cursed is he who
maketh the robber Leik his treasurer, or trusteth the lives of Moslemah
to the command of an apostate!"

With unutterable satisfaction, yet with trembling doubt and anxiety,
Hartley traced the speech to the elder Fakir, the companion of Barak.
Tippoo seemed not to notice the interruption, which passed for that of
some mad devotee, to whom the Moslem princes permit great freedoms. The
Durbar, therefore, recovered from their surprise; and, in answer to
the proclamation, united in the shout of applause which is expected to
attend every annunciation of the royal pleasure.

Their acclamation had no sooner ceased than Middlemas arose, bent
himself before the musnud, and, in a set speech, declared his
unworthiness of such high honour as had now been conferred, and his zeal
for the Prince's service. Something remained to be added, but his speech
faltered, his limbs shook, and his tongue seemed to refuse its office.

The Begum started from her seat, though contrary to etiquette, and said,
as if to supply the deficiency in the speech of her officer, "My slave
would say, that in acknowledgment of so great an honour conferred on my
Bukshee, I am so void of means, that I can only pray your Highness will
deign to accept a lily from Frangistan, to plant within the recesses of
the secret garden of thy pleasures. Let my lord's guards carry yonder
litter to the Zenana."

A female scream--was heard, as, at the signal from Tippoo, the guards of
his seraglio advanced to receive the closed litter from the attendants
of the Begum. The voice of the old Fakir was heard louder and sterner
than before.--"Cursed is the Prince who barters justice for lust! He
shall die in the gate by the sword of the stranger."

"This is too insolent!" said Tippoo. "Drag forward that Fakir, and cut
his robe into tatters on his back with your chabouks." [Footnote: Long
whips.]

But a scene ensued like that in the hall of Seyd. All who attempted to
obey the command of the incensed despot fell back from the Fakir, as
they would from the Angel of Death. He flung his cap and fictitious
beard on the ground, and the incensed countenance of Tippoo was subdued
in an instant, when he encountered the stern and awful eye of his
father. A sign dismissed him from the throne, which Hyder himself
ascended, while the official menials hastily disrobed him of his
tattered cloak, and flung on him a robe of regal splendour, and placed
on his head a jewelled turban. The Durbar rung with acclamations to
Hyder Ali Khan Behauder, "the good, the wise, the discoverer of hidden
things, who cometh into the Divan like the sun bursting from the
clouds."

The Nawaub at length signed for silence, and was promptly obeyed. He
looked majestically around him, and at length bent his look upon Tippoo,
whose downcast eyes, as he stood before the throne with his arms folded
on his bosom, were strongly contrasted with the haughty air of authority
which he had worn but a moment before. "Thou hast been willing," said
the Nawaub, "to barter the safety of thy capital for the possession of a
white slave. But the beauty of a fair woman caused Solomon ben David to
stumble in his path; how much more, then, should the son of Hyder Naig
remain firm under temptation!--That men may see clearly, we must remove
the light which dazzles them. Yonder Feringi woman must be placed at my
disposal."

"To hear is to obey," replied Tippoo, while the deep gloom on his brow
showed what his forced submission cost his proud and passionate spirit.
In the hearts of the courtiers present reigned the most eager curiosity
to see the _denouement_ of the scene, but not a trace of that wish
was suffered to manifest itself on features accustomed to conceal all
internal sensations. The feelings of the Begum were hidden under her
veil; while, in spite of a bold attempt to conceal his alarm, the
perspiration stood in large drops on the brow of Richard Middlemas. The
next words of the Nawaub sounded like music in the ear of Hartley.

"Carry the Feringi woman to the tent of the Sirdar Belash Cassim, [the
chief to whom Hartley had been committed.] Let her be tended in all
honour, and let him prepare to escort her, with the Vakeel and the
Hakim Hartley, to the Payeen-Ghaut, [the country beneath the passes,]
answering for their safety with his head." The litter was on its road to
the Sirdar's tents ere the Nawaub had done speaking. "For thee, Tippoo,"
continued Hyder, "I am not come hither to deprive thee of authority, or
to disgrace thee before the Durbar. Such things as thou hast promised
to this Feringi, proceed to make them good. The sun calleth not back the
splendour which he lends to the moon; and the father obscures not the
dignity which he has conferred on the son. What thou hast promised, that
do thou proceed to make good."

The ceremony of investiture was therefore recommenced, by which the
Prince Tippoo conferred on Middlemas the important government of the
city of Bangalore, probably with the internal resolution, that since
he was himself deprived of the fair European, he would take an early
opportunity to remove the new Killedar from his charge; while Middlemas
accepted it with the throbbing hope that he might yet outwit both father
and son. The deed of investiture was read aloud--the robe of honour was
put upon the newly created Killedar, and a hundred voices, while they
blessed the prudent choice of Tippoo, wished the governor good fortune,
and victory over his enemies.

A horse was led forward as the Prince's gift. It was a fine steed of
the Cuttyawar breed, high-crested, with broad hind-quarters; he was of
a white colour, but had the extremity of his tail and mane stained red.
His saddle was red velvet, the bridle and crupper studded--with gilded
knobs. Two attendants on lesser horses led this prancing animal, one
holding the lance, and the other the long spear of their patron. The
horse was shown to the applauding courtiers, and withdrawn in order
to be led in state through the streets, while the new Killedar should
follow on the elephant, another present usual on such an occasion, which
was next made to advance, that the world might admire the munificence of
the Prince.

The huge animal approached the platform, shaking his large wrinkled
head, which he raised and sunk, as if impatient, and curling upwards his
trunk from time to time, as if to show the gulf of his tongueless mouth.
Gracefully retiring with the deepest obeisance, the Killedar, well
pleased the audience was finished, stood by the neck of the elephant,
expecting the conductor of the animal would make him kneel down, that he
might ascend the gilded howdah, which awaited his occupancy.

"Hold, Feringi," said Hyder. "Thou hast received all that, was promised
thee by the bounty of Tippoo. Accept now what is the fruit of the
justice of Hyder."

As he spoke, he signed with his finger, and the driver of the elephant
instantly conveyed to the animal the pleasure of the Nawaub. Curling
his long trunk around the neck of the ill-fated European, the monster
suddenly threw the wretch prostrate before him, and stamping his huge
shapeless foot upon his breast, put an end at once to his life, and to
his crimes. The cry which the victim uttered was mimicked by the roar
of the monster, and a sound like an hysterical laugh mingling with a
scream, which rung from under the veil of the Begum. The elephant once
more raised his trunk aloft, and gaped fearfully.

The courtiers preserved a profound silence; but Tippoo, upon whose
muslin robe a part of the victim's blood had spirted, held
it up to the Nawaub, exclaiming in a sorrowful, yet resentful
tone,--"Father--father--was it thus my promise should have been kept?"

"Know, foolish boy," said Hyder Ali, "that the carrion which lies there
was in a plot to deliver Bangalore to the Feringis and the Mahrattas.
This Begum [she started when she heard herself named] has given us
warning of the plot, and has so merited her pardon for having originally
concurred in it,--whether altogether out of love to us we will not too
curiously enquire.--Hence with that lump of bloody clay, and let the
Hakim Hartley and the English Vakeel come before me."

They were brought forward,--while some of the attendants flung sand upon
the bloody traces, and others removed the crushed corpse.

"Hakim," said Hyder, "thou shalt return with the Feringi woman, and
with gold to compensate her injuries,--wherein the Begum, as is fitting,
shall contribute a share. Do thou say to thy nation, Hyder Ali acts
justly." The Nawaub then inclined himself graciously to Hartley, and
then turning to the Vakeel, who appeared much discomposed, "You have
brought to me," he said, "words of peace,--while your masters meditated
a treacherous war. It is not upon such as you that my vengeance ought to
alight. But tell the Kafr [or infidel] Paupiah and his unworthy master,
that Hyder Ali sees too clearly to suffer to be lost by treason the
advantages he has gained by war. Hitherto I have been in the Carnatic as
a mild Prince--in future I will be a destroying tempest! Hitherto I have
made inroads as a compassionate and merciful conqueror--hereafter I will
be the messenger whom Allah sends to the kingdoms which he visits in
judgment!"

It is well known how dreadfully the Nawaub kept this promise, and how
he and his son afterwards sunk before the discipline and bravery of the
Europeans. The scene of just punishment which he so faithfully exhibited
might be owing to his policy, his internal sense of right, and to
the ostentation of displaying it before an Englishman of sense and
intelligence, or to all of these motives mingled together--but in what
proportions it is not for us to distinguish.

Hartley reached the coast in safety with his precious charge, rescued
from a dreadful fate when she was almost beyond hope. But the nerves
and constitution of Menie Gray had received a shock from which she long
suffered severely, and never entirely recovered. The principal ladies of
the settlement, moved by the singular tale of her distress, received her
with the utmost kindness, and exercised towards her the most attentive
and affectionate hospitality. The Nawaub, faithful to his promise,
remitted to her a sum of no less than ten thousand gold Mohurs,
extorted, as was surmised, almost entirely from the hoards of the Begum
Mootee Mahul, or Montreville. Of the fate of that adventuress nothing
was known for certainty; but her forts and government were taken into
Hyder's custody, and report said, that, her power being abolished and
her consequence lost, she died by poison, either taken by herself, or
administered by some other person.

It might be thought a natural conclusion of the history of Menie Gray,
that she should have married Hartley, to whom she stood much indebted
for his heroic interference in her behalf. But her feelings were too
much and too painfully agitated, her health too much shattered, to
permit her to entertain thoughts of a matrimonial connexion, even with
the acquaintance of her youth, and the champion of her freedom. Time
might have removed these obstacles, but not two years, after their
adventures in Mysore, the gallant and disinterested Hartley fell a
victim to his professional courage, in withstanding the progress of
a contagious distemper, which he at length caught, and under which he
sunk. He left a considerable part of the moderate fortune which he
had acquired to Menie Gray, who, of course, did not want for many
advantageous offers of a matrimonial character. But she respected the
memory of Hartley too much, to subdue in behalf of another the reasons
which induced her to refuse the hand which he had so well deserved--nay,
it may be thought, had so fairly won.

She returned to Britain--what seldom occurs--unmarried though wealthy;
and, settling in her native village, appeared to find her only pleasure
in acts of benevolence which seemed to exceed the extent of her fortune,
had not her very retired life been taken into consideration. Two or
three persons with whom she was intimate, could trace in her character
that generous and disinterested simplicity and affection, which were the
ground-work of her character. To the world at large her habits seemed
those of the ancient Roman matron, which is recorded on her tomb in
these four words,

  DOMUM MANSIT--LANAM FECIT.




MR. CROFTANGRY'S CONCLUSION


  If you tell a good jest,
    And please all the rest,
  Comes Dingley, and asks you, "What was it?"
    And before she can know,
  Away she will go
    To seek an old rag in the closet.
                          Dean Swift.


While I was inditing the goodly matter which my readers have just
perused, I might be said to go through a course of breaking-in to stand
criticism, like a shooting-pony to stand fire. By some of those venial
breaches of confidence, which always take place on the like occasions,
my private flirtations with the Muse of Fiction became a matter
whispered in Miss Fairscribe's circle, some ornaments of which were, I
suppose, highly interested in the progress of the affair, while others
"really thought Mr. Chrystal Croftangry might have had more wit at his
time of day." Then came the sly intimation, the oblique remark, all that
sugar-lipped raillery which is fitted for the situation of a man about
to do a foolish thing, whether it be to publish or to marry, and that
accompanied with the discreet nods and winks of such friends as are in
the secret, and the obliging eagerness of others to know all about it.

At length the affair became so far public, that I was induced to face a
tea-party with my manuscript in my pocket, looking as simple and modest
as any gentleman of a certain age need to do upon such an occasion. When
tea had been carried round, handkerchiefs and smelling bottles prepared,
I had the honour of reading the Surgeon's Daughter for the entertainment
of the evening. It went off excellently; my friend Mr. Fairscribe, who
had been seduced from his desk to join the literary circle, only
fell asleep twice, and readily recovered his attention by help of his
snuff-box. The ladies were politely attentive, and when the cat, or
the dog, or a next neighbour, tempted an individual to relax, Katie
Fairscribe was on the alert, like an active whipper-in, with look,
touch, or whisper, to recall them to a sense of what was going on.
Whether Miss Katie was thus active merely to enforce the literary
discipline of her coterie, or whether she was really interested by the
beauties of the piece, and desirous to enforce them on others, I will
not venture to ask, in case I should end in liking the girl--and she
is really a pretty one. Better than wisdom would warrant, either for my
sake or hers.

I must own, my story here and there flagged a good deal; perhaps there
were faults in my reading, for while I should have been attending to
nothing but how to give the words effect as they existed, I was feeling
the chilling consciousness, that they might have been, and ought to have
been, a great deal better. However, we kindled up at last when we got to
the East Indies, although on the mention of tigers, an old lady, whose
tongue had been impatient for an hour, broke in with, "I wonder if Mr.
Croftangry ever heard the story of Tiger Tullideph?" and had nearly
inserted the whole narrative as an episode in my tale. She was, however,
brought to reason, and the subsequent mention of shawls, diamonds,
turbans, and cummerbands, had their usual effect in awakening the
imaginations of the fair auditors. At the extinction of the faithless
lover in a way so horribly new, I had, as indeed I expected, the good
fortune to excite that expression of painful interest which is produced
by drawing in the breath through the compressed lips; nay, one Miss of
fourteen actually screamed.

At length my task was ended, and the fair circle rained odours upon me,
as they pelt beaux at the Carnival with sugar-plums, and drench them
with scented spices. There was "Beautiful," and "Sweetly interesting,"
and "O Mr. Croftangry," and "How much obliged," and "What a delightful
evening," and "O Miss Katie, how could you keep such a secret so long?"
While the dear souls were thus smothering me with rose leaves, the
merciless old lady carried them all off by a disquisition upon shawls,
which she had the impudence to say, arose entirely out of my story. Miss
Katie endeavoured to stop the flow of her eloquence in vain; she threw
all other topics out of the field, and from the genuine Indian, she made
a digression to the imitation shawls now made at Paisley, out of real
Thibet wool, not to be known from the actual Country shawl, except by
some inimitable cross-stitch in the border. "It is well," said the old
lady, wrapping herself up in a rich Kashmire, "that there is some way of
knowing a thing that cost fifty guineas from an article that is sold for
five; but I venture to say there are not one out of ten thousand that
would understand the difference."

The politeness of some of the fair ladies would now have brought back
the conversation to the forgotten subject of our meeting. "How could
you, Mr. Croftangry, collect all these hard words about India?--you were
never there?"--"No, madam, I have not had that advantage; but, like
the imitative operatives of Paisley, I have composed my shawl by
incorporating into the woof a little Thibet wool, which my excellent
friend and neighbour, Colonel Mackerris, one of the best fellows who
ever trode a Highland moor, or dived into an Indian jungle, had the
