his hardship and persecution. There remains at the head of the
adjoining _bourg_, the choir of the ancient church of St. Bride, having
beneath it the vault which was used till lately as the burial-place of
this princely race, and only abandoned when their stone and leaden
coffins had accumulated, in the course of five or six hundred years, in
such a way that it could accommodate no more. Here a silver case,
containing the dust of what was once the brave heart of Good Sir James,
is still pointed out; and in the dilapidated choir above appears,
though in a sorely ruinous state, the once magnificent tomb of the
warrior himself. After detailing the well-known circumstances of Sir
James's death in Spain, 20th August, 1330, where he fell, assisting the
King of Arragon in an expedition against the Moors, when on his way
back to Scotland from Jerusalem, to which he had conveyed the heart of
Bruce,--the old poet Barbour tells us that--

    "Quhen his men lang had mad murnyn,
     Thai debowalyt him, and syne
     Gert scher him swa, that mycht be tane
     The flesch all haly frae the bane.
     And the carioune thar in haly place
     Erdyt, with rycht gret worschip, was.

    "The banys haue thai with them tane;
     And syne ar to thair schippis gane;
     Syne towart Scotland held thair way,
     And thar ar cummyn in full gret hy.
     And the banys honbrabilly
     In till the Kyrk of Douglas war
     Erdyt, with dule and mekill car.
     Schyr Archebald his sone gert syn
     Off alabastre, bath fair and fyne,
     Ordane a tumbe sa richly
     As it behowyt to swa worthy."

The monument is supposed to have been wantonly mutilated and defaced by
a detachment of Cromwell's troops, who, as was their custom, converted
the kirk of St. Bride of Douglas into a stable for their horses.
Enough, however, remains to identify the resting-place of the great Sir
James. The effigy, of dark stone, is crossed-legged, marking his
character as one who had died after performing the pilgrimage to the
Holy Sepulchre, and in actual conflict with the infidels of Spain; and
the introduction of the HEART, adopted as an addition to the old arms
of Douglas, in consequence of the knight's fulfilment of Bruce's dying
injunction, appears, when taken in connexion with the posture of the
figure, to set the question at rest. The monument, in its original
state, must have been not inferior in any respect to the best of the
same period in Westminster Abbey; and the curious reader is referred
for farther particulars of it to "The Sepulchral Antiquities of Great
Britain, by Edward Blore, F.S.A." London, 4to, 1826: where may also be
found interesting details of some of the other tombs and effigies in
the cemetery of the first house of Douglas.

As considerable liberties have been taken, with the historical
incidents on which this novel is founded, it is due to the reader to
place before him such extracts from Godscroft and Barbour as may enable
him to correct any mis-impression. The passages introduced in the
Appendix, from the ancient poem of "The Bruce," will moreover gratify
those who have not in their possession a copy of the text of Barbour,
as given in the valuable quarto edition of my learned friend Dr.
Jamieson, as furnishing on the whole a favourable specimen of the style
and manner of a venerable classic, who wrote when Scotland was still
full of the fame and glory of her liberators from the yoke of
Plantagenet, and especially of Sir James Douglas, "of whom," says
Godscroft, "we will not omit here, (to shut up all,) the judgment of
those times concerning him, in a rude verse indeed, yet such as beareth
witness of his true magnanimity and invincible mind in either fortune:--

  "Good Sir James Douglas (who wise, and wight, and worthy was,)
   Was never over glad in no winning, nor yet oversad for no lineing;
   Good fortune and evil chance he weighed both in one balance."
                                                             W. S.




APPENDIX.

No. I.

EXTRACTS FROM "THE HISTORY OF THE HOUSES OF DOUGLAS AND ANGUS. BY
MASTER DAVID HUME OF GODSCROFT." FOL. EDIT.

 * * * And here indeed the course of the King's misfortunes begins to
make some halt and stay by thus much prosperous successe in his own
person; but more in the person of Sir James, by the reconquests of his
owne castles and countries. From hence he went into Douglasdale, where,
by the means of his father's old servant, Thomas Dickson, he took in
the Castle of Douglas, and not being able to keep it, he caused burn
it, contenting himself with this, that his enemies had one strength
fewer in that country than before. The manner of his taking of it is
said to have beene thus:--Sir James taking only with him two of his
servants, went to Thomas Dickson, of whom he was received with tears,
after he had revealed himself to him, for the good old man knew him not
at first, being in mean and homely apparel. There he kept him secretly
in a quiet chamber, and brought unto him such as had been trusty
servants to his father, not all at, once, but apart by one and one, for
fear of discoverie. Their advice was, that on Palm-Sunday, when the
English would come forth to the church, and his partners were
conveened, that then he should give the word, and cry the Douglas
slogan, and presently set upon them that should happen to be there, who
being despatched, the Castle might be taken easily. This being
concluded, and they come, so soon as the English were entered into the
church with palms in their hands, (according to the costume of that
day,) little suspecting or fearing any such thing, Sir James, according
to their appointment, cryed too soon (a Douglas, a Douglas!) which
being heard in the church, (this was Saint Bride's church of Douglas,)
Thomas Dickson, supposing he had beene hard at hand, drew out his
sword, and ran upon them, having none to second him but another man, so
that, oppressed by the number of his enemies, he was beaten downe and
slaine. In the meantime, Sir James being come, the English that were in
the chancel kept off the Scots, and having the advantage of the strait
and narrow entrie, defended themselves manfully. But Sir James
encouraging his men, not so much by words as by deeds and good example,
and having slain the boldest resisters, prevailed at last, and entring
the place, slew some twenty-six of their number, and took the rest,
about ten or twelve persons, intending by them to get the Castle upon
composition, or to enter with them when the gates should be opened to
let them in: but it needed not, for they of the Castle were so secure,
that there was none left to keep it save the porter and the cooke, who
knowing nothing of what had hapned at the church, which stood a large
quarter of a mile from thence, had left the gate wide open, the porter
standing without, and the cooke dressing the dinner within. They
entered without resistance, and meat being ready, and the cloth laid,
they shut the gates, and tooke their refection at good leasure.

Now that he had gotten the Castle into his hands, considering with
himselfe (as he was a man no lesse advised than valiant) that it was
hard for him to keep it, the English being as yet the stronger in that
countrey, who if they should besiege him, he knewe of no reliefe, he
thought better to carry away such things as be most easily transported,
gold, silver, and apparell, with ammunition and armour, whereof he had
greatest use and need, and to destroy the rest of the provision,
together with the Castle itselfe, then to diminish the number of his
followers for a garrison there where it could do no good. And so he
caused carrie the meale and malt, and other cornes and graine, into the
cellar, and laid altogether in one heape: then he took the prisoners
and slew them, to revenge the death of his trustie and valiant servant,
Thomas Dickson, mingling the victuals with their bloud, and burying
their carkasses in the heap of corne: after that he struck out the
heads of the barrells and puncheons, and let the drink runn through
all; and then he cast the carkasses of dead horses and other carrion
amongst it, throwing the salt above all, so as to make altogether
unuseful to the enemie; and this cellar is called yet the Douglas
Lairder. Last of all, he set the house on fire, and burnt all the
timber, and what else the fire could overcome, leaving nothing but the
scorched walls behind him. And this seemes to be the first taking of
the Castle of Douglas, for it is supposed that he took it twice. For
this service, and others done to Lord William his father, Sir James
gave unto Thomas Dickson the lands of Hisleside, which hath beene given
him before the Castle was taken as an encouragement to whet him on, and
not after, for he was slain in the church; which was both liberally and
wisely done of him, thus to hearten and draw men to his service by such
a noble beginning. The Castle being burnt, Sir James retired, and
parting his men into divers companies, so as they might be most secret,
he caused cure such as were wounded in the fight, and he himselfe kept
as close as he could, waiting ever for an occasion to enterprise
something against the enemie. So soone as he was gone, the Lord
Clifford being advertised of what had happened, came himselfe in person
to Douglas, and caused re-edifie and repair the Castle in a very short
time, unto which he also added a Tower, which is yet called Harries
Tower from him, and so returned into England, leaving one Thurswall to
be Captain thereof.--Pp. 26-28.

    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

He (Sir James Douglas) getting him again into Douglasdale, did use this
stratagem against Thurswall, Captain of the Castle, under the said Lord
Clifford. He caused some of his folk drive away the cattle that fed
near unto the Castle, and when the Captain of the garrison followed to
rescue, gave orders to his men to leave them and to flee away. Thus he
did often to make the Captain slight such frays, and to make him
secure, that he might not suspect any further end to be on it; which
when he had wrought sufficiently (as he thought), he laid some men in
ambuscado, and sent others away to drive such beasts as they should
find in the view of the Castle, as if they had been thieves and
robbers, as they had done often before. The Captain hearing of it, and
supposing there was no greater danger now than had been before, issued
forth of the Castle, and followed after them with such haste that his
men (running who should be first) were disordered and out of their
ranks. The drivers also fled as fast as they could till they had drawn
the Captain a little way beyond the place of ambuscado, which when they
perceived, rising quickly out of their covert, they set fiercely upon
him and his company, and so slew himself and chased his men back to the
Castle, some of whom were overtaken and slain, others got into the
Castle and so were saved. Sir James, not being able to force the house,
took what booty he could get without in the fields, and so departed. By
this means, and such other exploits, he so affrighted the enemy, that
it was counted a matter of such great jeopardy to keep this Castle,
that it began to be called the adventurous (or hazardous) Castle of
Douglas: Whereupon Sir John Walton being in suit of an English lady,
she wrote to him that when he had kept the adventurous Castle of
Douglas seven years, then, he might think himself worthy to be a suitor
to her. Upon this occasion Walton took upon him the keeping of it, and
succeeded to Thurswall; but he ran the same fortune with the rest that
were before him.

For, Sir James having first dressed an ambuscado near unto the place,
he made fourteen of his men take so many sacks, and fill them with
grass, as though it had been corn, which they carried in the way toward
Lanark, the chief market town in that county: so hoping to draw forth
the Captain by that bait, and either to take him or the Castle, or both.

Neither was this expectation frustrate, for the Captain did bite, and
came forth to have taken this victual (as he supposed). But ere he
could reach these carriers, Sir James, with his company, had gotten
between the Castle and him; and these disguised carriers, seeing the
Captain following after them, did quickly cast off their upper
garments, wherein they had masked themselves, and throwing off their
sacks, mounted themselves on horseback, and met the Captain with a
sharp encounter, he being so much the more amazed that it was unlooked
for: wherefore, when he saw these carriers metamorphosed into warriors,
and ready to assault him, fearing (that which was) that there was some
train laid for them, he turned about to have retired into the Castle;
but there also he met with his enemies; between which two companies he
and his followers were slain, so that none escaped; the Captain
afterwards being searched, they found (as it is reported) his
mistress's letters about him. Then he went and took in the Castle, but
it is uncertain (say our writers) whether by force or composition; but
it seems that the Constable, and those that were within, have yielded
it up without force; in regard that he used them so gently, which he
would not have done if he had taken it at utterance. For he sent them
all safe home to the Lord Clifford, and gave them also provision and
money for their entertainment by the way. The Castle, which he had
burnt only before, now he razeth, and casts down the walls thereof to
the ground. By these and the like proceedings, within a short while he
freed Douglasdale, Attrict Forest, and Jedward Forest, of the English
garrisons and subjection.--_Ibid_. p. 29.

No. II.

[Extracts from THE BRUCE.--"Liber compositus per Magistrum Johannem
Barber Archidiaeonum Abyrdonensem, de gestis, bellis, et vertutibus,
Domini Roberti Brwyes, Regis Scocie illustrissimi, et de conquestu
regni Scocie per eundem, et de Domino Jacobo de Douglas."--Edited by
John Jamieson, D.D. F.R.S.F. &c. &c. Edinburgh, 1820.]

Now takis James his waige Towart Dowglas, his heretage, With twa yemen,
for his owtyn ma; That wes a symple stuff to ta, A land or a castell to
win. The quhethir he yarnyt to begyn Till bring purposs till ending;
For gud help is in gud begynnyng, For gud begynning, and hardy, Gyff it
be folwit wittily, May ger oftsyss unlikly thing Cum to full conabill
ending. Swa did it here: but he wes wyss And saw he mycht, on nakyn
wyss, Werray his fa with evyn mycht; Tharfur he thocht to wyrk with
slycht. And in Dowglas daile, his countre, Upon an evymiyng entryt he.
And than a man wonnyt tharby. That was off freyndis weill mychty, And
ryche of moble, and off cateill; And had bene till his fadyr leyll; And
till him selff in his yowthed. He haid done mony a thankfull deid. Thom
Dicson wes his name perlay. Till him he send; and gan him pray, That he
wald cum all anerly For to spek with him priuely. And he but daunger
till him gais: Bot fra he tauld him quhat he wais, He gret for joy, and
for pite; And him rycht till his houss had he; Quhar in a chambre
priuely He held him, and his cumpany, That nane had off him persaving.
Off mete, and drynk, and othyr thing, That mycht thuim eyss, thai had
plente. Sa wrocht he thorow sutelte, That all the lele men off that
land, That with his fadyr war duelland, This gud man gert cum, ane and
ane, And mak him manrent cuir ilkane; And he him selff fyrst homage
maid. Dowglas in part gret glaidschip haid, That the gud men off his
cuntre Wald swagate till him bundyn be. He speryt the conwyne off the
land, And quha the castell had in hand. And thai him tauld all halily;
And syne amang them priuely Thai ordanyt, that he still suld be In
hiddillis, and in priwete, Till Palme Sonday, that wes ner hand, The
thrid day eftyr folowand. For than the folk off that countre Assemblyt
at the kyrk wald be; And thai, that in the castell wer, Wald als be
thar, thar palmys to ber, As folk that had na dreid off ill; For thai
thoucht all wes at thair will. Than suld he cum with his twa men. Bot,
for that men suld nocht him ken, He suld ane mantill haiff auld and
bar, And a flaill, as he a thresscher war. Undyr the mantill nocht for
thi He suld be armyt priuely. And quhen the men off his countre, That
suld all boune befor him be, His ensenye mycht her hym cry. Then suld
thai, full enforcely, Rycht ymyddys the kyrk assaill The Ingliss men
with hard bataill Swa that nane mycht eschap them fra; For thar throwch
trowyt thai to ta The castell, that besid wes ner And quhen this, that
I tell you her, Wes diuisyt and undertane, Ilkane till his howss hame
is gane; And held this spek in priuete, Till the day off thar assembly.

The folk upon the Sonounday Held to Saynct Bridis kyrk thair way, And
tha that in the castell war Ischyt owt, bath les and mar, And went
thair palmys for to her; Owtane a cuk and a porter. James off Dowglas
off thair cummyng, And quhat thai war, had witting; And sped him till
the kyrk in hy Bot or he come, too hastily Ane off his criyt, "Dowglas!
Dowglas!" Thomas Dicson, that nerrest was Till thaim that war off the
castell, That war all innouth the chancell, Quhen he "Dowglas!" swa hey
herd cry, Drew owt his swerd; and fellely Ruschyt amang thaim to and
fra. Bot ane or twa, for owtyn ma, Than in hy war left lyand Quhill
Dowglas come rycht at hand. And then enforcyt on thaim the cry. Bot
thai the chansell sturdely Held, and thaim defendyt wele, Till off
thair men war slayne sumdell. Bot the Dowglace sa weill him bar, That
all the men, that with him war, Had comfort off his wele doyng; And he
him sparyt nakyn thing. Bot provyt swa his force in fycht, That throw
his worschip, and his mycht, His men sa keynly helpyt than, That thai
the chansell on thaim wan. Than dang thai on swa hardyly, That in
schort tyme men mycht se ly The twa part dede, or then deand. The lave
war sesyt sone in hand, Swa that off thretty levyt nane, That thai ne
war slayne ilkan, or tane.

James off Dowglas, quhen this wes done, The presoneris has he tane
alsone; And, with thaim off his cumpany, Towart the castell went in hy,
Or noyiss, or cry, suld ryss. And for he wald thaim sone suppriss, That
levyt in the castell war, That war but twa for owtyn mar, Fyve men or
sex befor send he, That fand all opyn the entre; And entryt, and the
porter tuk Rycht at the gate, and syne the cuk. With that Dowglas come
to the gat, And entryt in for owtyn debate; And fand the mete all ready
grathit, With burdys set, and clathis layit. The gaitis then he gert
sper, And sat, and eyt all at layser. Syne all the gudis turssyt thai
That thaim thocht thai mycht haiff away; And namly wapnys, and armyng,
Siluer, and tresour, and clethyng. Vyctallis, that, mycht nocht tursyt
be, On this manner destroyit he. All the vrctalis, owtane salt, Als
quheyt, and flour, and meill, and malt In the wyne sellar gert he
bring; And samyn on the flur all flyng. And the presoneris that he had
tane Rycht thar in gert he heid ilkane; Syne off the townnys he hedis
outstrak: A foule melle thar gane he mak. For meile, and malt, and
bluid, and wyne Ran all to gidder in a mellyne, That was unsemly for to
se. Tharfor the men of that countre, For swa fele thar mellyt wer,
Callit it the "Dowglas Lardner." Syne tuk he salt, as Ic hard tell, And
ded horss, and sordid the well. And brynt all, owtakyn stane; And is
forth, with his menye, gayne Till his resett; for him thoucht weill,
Giff he had haldyn the caslell, It had bene assegyt raith; And that him
thoucht to mekill waith. For he ne had hop of reskewyng. And it is to
peralous thing In castell assegyt to be, Quhar want is off thir thingis
thre; Victaill, or men with their armyng, Or than gud hop off rescuyng.
And for he dred thir thingis suld faile, He chesyt furthwart to
trawaill, Quhar he mycht at his larges be; And swa dryve furth his
destane.

On this wise wes the castell tan, And slayne that war tharin ilkan. The
Dowglas syne all his menye Gert in ser placis depertyt be; For men suld
wyt quhar thai war, That yeid depertyt her and thar. Thim that war
woundyt gert he ly In till hiddillis, all priuely; And gert gud leechis
till thaim bring Quhill that thai war in till heling. And him selff,
with a few menye, Quhile ane, quhile twa and quhile thre, And umqumll
all him allane. In hiddillis throw the land is gane. Sa dred he Inglis
men his mycht, That he durst nocht wele cum in sycht. For thai war that
tyme all weldand As maist lordis, our all the land.

Bot tythandis, that scalis sone, Off this deid that Dowglas has done,
Come to the Cliffurd his ere, in hy, That for his tynsaill wes sary;
And menyt his men that thai had slayne, And syne has to purpos tane, To
big the castell up agayne. Thar for, as man of mekill mayne, He
assemblit grret cumpany, And till Dowglas he went in hy. And biggyt wp
the castell swyth; And maid it rycht stalwart and styth And put tharin
victallis and men Ane off the Thyrwallys then He left behind him
Capitane, And syne till Ingland went agayne.
                      Book IV. v. 255-460.

Bot yeit than Janvss of Dowglas In Dowglas Daile travailland was; Or
ellys weill ner hand tharby, In hyddillys sumdeill priuely. For he wald
se his gouernyng, That had the castell in keping: And gert mak mony
juperty, To se quhethyr he wald ische blythly. And quhen he persavyt
that he Wald blythly ische with his menye, He maid a gadringr priuely
Off thaim that war on his party; That war sa fele, that thai durst fych
With Thyrwall, and all the mycht Off thaim that in the castell war. He
schupe him in the nycht so far To Sandylandis: and thar ner by He him
enbuschyt priuely, And send a few a trane to ma; That sone in the
mornyng gan ga, And tuk catell, that wes the castell by, And syne
withdrew thaim hastely Towart thaim that enbuschit war. Than Thyrwall,
for owtyn mar, Gert arme his men, forowtyn baid; Aud ischyt with all
the men he haid: And foiowyt fast eftir the cry. He wes armyt at poynt
clenly, Owtane [that] his hede wes bar. Than, with the men that with
him war, The catell folowit he gud speid, Rycht as a man that had na
dreid, Till that he gat off thaim a sycht. Than prekyt thai with all
thar mycht, Folowand thaim owt off aray And thai sped thaim fleand,
quhill thai Fer by thair buschement war past: And Thyrwall ay chassyt
fast. And than thai that enbuschyt war Ischyt till him, bath les and
mar And rayssyt sudanly the cry. And thai that saw sa sudanly That folk
come egyrly prikand Rycht betuix thairn and thair warank, Thai war in
to full gret effray. And, for thai war owt off aray, Sum off thaim
fled, and some abad. And Dowglas, that thar with him had A gret mengye,
full egrely Assaylyt, and scalyt thaim hastyly: And in schort tyme
ourraid thaim swa, That weile nane eschapyt thaim fra. Thyrwall, that
wes thair capitane, Wes thar in the bargane slane: And off his men the
mast party. The lave fled full effraytly.
                            Book V. v. 10-60




CASTLE DANGEROUS.

CHAPTER THE FIRST.

     Hosts have been known at that dread sound to yield,
     And, Douglas dead, his name hath won the field.
                                               JOHN HOME.


It was at the close of an early spring day, when nature, in a cold
province of Scotland, was reviving from her winter's sleep, and the air
at least, though not the vegetation, gave promise of an abatement of
the rigour of the season, that two travellers, whose appearance at that
early period sufficiently announced their wandering character, which,
in general, secured a free passage even through a dangerous country,
were seen coming from the south-westward, within a few miles of the
Castle of Douglas, and seemed to be holding their course in the
direction of the river of that name, whose dale afforded a species of
approach to that memorable feudal fortress. The stream, small in
comparison to the extent of its fame, served as a kind of drain to the
country in its neighbourhood, and at the same time afforded the means
of a rough road to the castle and village. The high lords to whom the
castle had for ages belonged, might, had they chosen, have made this
access a great deal smoother and more convenient; but there had been as
yet little or no exercise for those geniuses, who have taught all the
world that it is better to take the more circuitous road round the base
of a hill, than the direct course of ascending it on the one side, and
descending it directly on the other, without yielding a single step to
render the passage more easy to the traveller; still less were those
mysteries dreamed of which M'Adam has of late days expounded. But,
indeed, to what purpose should the ancient Douglasses have employed his
principles, even if they had known them in ever so much perfection?
Wheel-carriages, except of the most clumsy description, and for the
most simple operations of agriculture, were totally unknown. Even the
most delicate female had no resource save a horse, or, in case of sore
infirmity, a litter. The men used their own sturdy limbs, or hardy
horses, to transport themselves from place to place; and travellers,
females in particular, experienced no small inconvenience from the
rugged nature of the country. A swollen torrent sometimes crossed their
path, and compelled them to wait until the waters had abated their
frenzy. The bank of a small river was occasionally torn away by the
effects of a thunder-storm, a recent inundation, or the like
convulsions of nature; and the wayfarer relied upon his knowledge of
the district, or obtained the best local information in his power, how
to direct his path so as to surmount such untoward obstacles.

The Douglas issues from an amphitheatre of mountains which bounds the
valley to the south-west, from whose contributions, and the aid of
sudden storms, it receives its scanty supplies. The general aspect of
the country is that of the pastoral hills of the south of Scotland,
forming, as is usual, bleak and wild farms, many of which had, at no
great length of time from the date of the story, been covered with
trees; as some of them still attest by bearing the name of _shaw_, that
is, wild natural wood. The neighbourhood of the Douglas water itself
was flat land, capable of bearing strong crops of oats and rye,
supplying the inhabitants with what they required of these productions.
At no great distance from the edge of the river, a few special spots
excepted, the soil capable of agriculture was more and more mixed with
the pastoral and woodland country, till both terminated in desolate and
partly inaccessible moorlands.

Above all, it was war-time, and of necessity all circumstances of mere
convenience were obliged to give way to a paramount sense of danger;
the inhabitants, therefore, instead of trying to amend the paths which
connected them with other districts, were thankful that the natural
difficulties which surrounded them rendered it unnecessary to break up
or to fortify the access from more open countries. Their wants, with a
very few exceptions, were completely supplied, as we have already said,
by the rude and scanty produce of their own mountains and _holms_,
[Footnote: Holms, or flat plains, by the sides of the brooks and
rivers, termed in the south, _Ings_.] the last of which served for the
exercise of their limited agriculture, while the better part of the
mountains and forest glens produced pasture for their herds and flocks.
The recesses of the unexplored depths of these sylvan retreats being
seldom disturbed, especially since the lords of the district had laid
aside, during this time of strife, their constant occupation of
hunting, the various kinds of game had increased of late very
considerably; so that not only in crossing the rougher parts of the
hilly and desolate country we are describing, different varieties of
deer were occasionally seen, but even the wild cattle peculiar to
Scotland sometimes showed themselves, and other animals, which
indicated the irregular and disordered state of the period. The
wild-cat was frequently surprised in the dark ravines or the swampy
thickets; and the wolf, already a stranger to the more populous
districts of the Lothians, here maintained his ground against the
encroachments of man, and was still himself a terror to those by whom
he was finally to be extirpated. In winter especially, and winter was
hardly yet past, these savage animals were wont to be driven to
extremity for lack of food, and used to frequent, in dangerous numbers,
the battle-field, the deserted churchyard--nay, sometimes the abodes of
living men, there to watch for children, their defenceless prey, with
as much familiarity as the fox now-a-days will venture to prowl near
the mistress's [Footnote: The good dame, or wife of a respectable
farmer, is almost universally thus designated in Scotland.]
poultry-yard.

From what we have said, our readers, if they have made--as who in these
days has not--the Scottish tour, will be able to form a tolerably just
idea of the wilder and upper part of Douglas Dale, during the earlier
period of the fourteenth century. The setting sun cast his gleams along
a moorland country, which to the westward broke into larger swells,
terminating in the mountains called the Larger and Lesser Cairntable.
The first of these is, as it were, the father of the hills in the
neighbourhood, the source of an hundred streams, and by far the largest
of the ridge, still holding in his dark bosom, and in the ravines with
which his sides are ploughed, considerable remnants of those ancient
forests with which all the high grounds of that quarter were once
covered, and particularly the hills, in which the rivers--both those
which run to the east, and those which seek the west to discharge
themselves into the Solway---hide, like so many hermits, their original
and scanty sources.

The landscape was still illuminated by the reflection of the evening
sun, sometimes thrown back from pool or stream; sometimes resting on
grey rocks, huge cumberers of the soil, which labour and agriculture
have since removed, and sometimes contenting itself with gilding the
banks of the stream, tinged, alternately grey, green, or ruddy, as the
ground itself consisted of rock, or grassy turf, or bare earthen mound,
or looked at a distance like a rampart of dark red porphyry.
Occasionally, too, the eye rested on the steep brown extent of moorland
as the sunbeam glanced back from the little tarn or mountain pool,
whose lustre, like that of the eye in the human countenance, gives a
life and vivacity to every feature around.

The elder and stouter of the two travellers whom we have mentioned, was
a person well, and even showily dressed, according to the finery of the
times, and bore at his back, as wandering minstrels were wont, a case,
containing a small harp, rote or viol, or some such species of musical
instrument for accompanying the voice. The leathern case announced so
much, although it proclaimed not the exact nature of the instrument.
The colour of the traveller's doublet was blue, and that of his hose
violet, with slashes which showed a lining of the same colour with the
jerkin. A mantle ought, according to ordinary custom, to have covered
this dress; but the heat of the sun, though the season was so early,
had induced the wearer to fold up his cloak in small compass, and form
it into a bundle, attached to the shoulders like the military greatcoat
of the infantry soldier of the present day. The neatness with which it
was made up, argued the precision of a practised traveller, who had
been long accustomed to every resource which change of weather
required. A great profusion of narrow ribands or points, constituting
the loops with which our ancestors connected their doublet and hose,
formed a kind of cordon, composed of knots of blue or violet, which
surrounded the traveller's person, and thus assimilated in colour with
the two garments which it was the office of these strings to combine.
The bonnet usually worn with this showy dress, was of that kind with
which Henry the Eighth and his son, Edward the Sixth, are usually
represented. It was more fitted, from the gay stuff of which it was
composed, to appear in a public place, than to encounter a storm of
rain. It was party-coloured, being made of different stripes of blue
and violet; and the wearer arrogated a certain degree of gentility to
himself, by wearing a plume of considerable dimensions of the same
favourite colours. The features over which this feather drooped were in
no degree remarkable for peculiarity of expression. Yet in so desolate
a country as the west of Scotland, it would, not have been easy to pass
the man without more minute attention than he would have met with where
there was more in the character of the scenery to arrest the gaze of
the passengers.

A quick eye, a sociable look, seeming to say, "Ay, look at me, I am a
man worth noticing, and not unworthy your attention," carried with it,
nevertheless, an interpretation which might be thought favourable or
otherwise, according to the character of the person whom the traveller
met. A knight or soldier would merely have thought that he had met a
merry fellow, who could sing a wild song, or tell a wild tale, and help
to empty a flagon, with all the accomplishments necessary for a boon
companion at an hostelry, except perhaps an alacrity at defraying his
share of the reckoning. A churchman, on the other hand, might have
thought he of the blue and violet was of too loose habits, and
accustomed too little to limit himself within the boundaries of
beseeming mirth, to be fit society for one of his sacred calling. Yet
the Man of Song had a certain steadiness of countenance, which seemed
fitted to hold place in scenes of serious business as well as of
gaiety. A wayfaring passenger of wealth (not at that time a numerous
class) might have feared in him a professional robber, or one whom
opportunity was very likely to convert into such; a female might have
been apprehensive of uncivil treatment; and a youth, or timid person,
might have thought of murder, or such direful doings. Unless privately
armed, however, the minstrel was ill-accoutred for any dangerous
occupation. His only visible weapon was a small crooked sword, like
what we now call a hanger; and the state of the times would have
justified any man, however peaceful his intentions, in being so far
armed against the perils of the road.

If a glance at this man had in any respect prejudiced him in the
opinion of those whom he met on his journey, a look at his companion
would, so far as his character could be guessed at--for he was closely
muffled up--have passed for an apology and warrant for his associate.
The younger traveller was apparently in early youth, a soft and gentle
boy, whose Sclavonic gown, the appropriate dress of the pilgrim, he
wore more closely drawn about him than the coldness of the weather
seemed to authorize or recommend. His features, imperfectly seen under
the hood of his pilgrim's dress, were prepossessing in a high degree;
and though he wore a walking sword, it seemed rather to be in
compliance with general fashion than from any violent purpose he did
so. There were traces of sadness upon his brow, and of tears upon his
cheeks; and his weariness was such, as even his rougher companion
seemed to sympathize with, while he privately participated also in the
sorrow which left its marks upon a countenance so lovely. They spoke
together, and the elder of the two, while he assumed the deferential
air proper to a man of inferior rank addressing a superior, showed in
tone and gesture, something that amounted to interest and affection.

"Bertram, my friend," said the younger of the two, "how far are we
still from Douglas Castle? We have already come farther than the twenty
miles, which thou didst say was the distance from Cammock--or how didst
thou call the last hostelry which we left by daybreak?"

"Cummock, my dearest lady--I beg ten thousand excuses--my gracious
young lord."

"Call me Augustine," replied his comrade, "if you mean to speak as is
fittest for the time."

"Nay, as for that," said Bertram, "if your ladyship can condescend to
lay aside your quality, my own good breeding is not so firmly sewed to
me but that I can doff it, and resume it again without its losing a
stitch; and since your ladyship, to whom I am sworn in obedience, is
pleased to command that I should treat you as my own son, shame it were
to me if I were not to show you the affection of a father, more
especially as I may well swear my great oath, that I owe you the duty
of such, though well I wot it has, in our case, been the lot of the
parent to be maintained by the kindness and liberality of the child;
for when was it that I hungered or thirsted, and the _black
stock_[Footnote: The table dormant, which stood in a baron's hall, was
often so designated.] of Berkley did not relieve my wants?"

"I would have it so," answered the young pilgrim; "I would have it so.
What use of the mountains of beef, and the oceans of beer, which they
say our domains produce, if there is a hungry heart among our
vassalage, or especially if thou, Bertram, who hast served as the
minstrel of our house for more than twenty years, shouldst experience
such a feeling?"

"Certes, lady," answered Bertram, "it would be like the catastrophe
which is told of the Baron of Fastenough, when his last mouse was
starved to death in the very pantry; and if I escape this journey
without such a calamity, I shall think myself out of reach of thirst or
famine for the whole of my life."

"Thou hast suffered already once or twice by these attacks, my poor
friend," said the lady.

"It is little," answered Bertram, "any thing that I have suffered; and
I were ungrateful to give the inconvenience of missing a breakfast, or
making an untimely dinner, so serious a name. But then I hardly see how
your ladyship can endure this gear much longer. You must yourself feel,
that the plodding along these high lands, of which the Scots give us
such good measure in their miles, is no jesting matter; and as for
Douglas Castle, why it is still three good miles off."

"The question then is," quoth the lady, heaving a sigh, "what we are to
do when we have so far to travel, and when the castle gates must be
locked long before we arrive there?"

"For that I will pledge my word," answered Bertram. "The gates of
Douglas, under the care of Sir John de Walton, do not open so easily as
those of the buttery hatch at our own castle, when it is well oiled;
and if your ladyship take my advice, you will turn southward ho! and in
two days at farthest, we shall be in a land where men's wants are
provided for, as the inns proclaim it, with the least possible delay,
and the secret of this little journey shall never be known to living
mortal but ourselves, as sure as I am sworn minstrel, and man of faith."

"I thank thee for thy advice, mine honest Bertram," said the lady, "but
I cannot profit by it. Should thy knowledge of these parts possess thee
with an acquaintance with any decent house, whether it belong to rich
or poor, I would willingly take quarters there, if I could obtain them
from this time until to-morrow morning. The gates of Douglas Castle
will then be open to guests of so peaceful an appearance as we carry
with us, and--and--it will out--we might have time to make such
applications to our toilet as might ensure us a good reception, by
drawing a comb through our locks, or such like foppery."

"Ah, madam!" said Bertram, "were not Sir John de Walton in question,
methinks I should venture to reply, that an unwashed brow, an unkempt
head of hair, and a look far more saucy than your ladyship ever wears,
or can wear, were the proper disguise to trick out that minstrel's boy,
whom, you wish to represent in the present pageant."

"Do you suffer your youthful pupils to be indeed so slovenly and so
saucy, Bertram?" answered the lady. "I for one will not imitate them in
that particular; and whether Sir John be now in the Castle of Douglas
or not, I will treat the soldiers who hold so honourable a charge with
a washed brow, and a head of hair somewhat ordered. As for going back
without seeing a castle which has mingled even with my very dreams--at
a word, Bertram, thou mayst go that way, but I will not."

"And if I part with your ladyship on such terms," responded the
minstrel, "now your frolic is so nearly accomplished, it shall be the
foul fiend himself, and nothing more comely or less dangerous, that
shall tear me from your side; and for lodging, there is not far from
hence the house of one Tom Dickson of Hazelside, one of the most honest
fellows of the Dale, and who, although a labouring man, ranked as high
as a warrior, when I was in this country, as any noble gentleman that
rode in the band of the Douglas."

"He is then a soldier?" said the lady.

"When his country or his lord need his sword," replied Bertram--"and,
to say the truth, they are seldom at peace; but otherwise, he is no
enemy, save to the wolf which plunders his herds."

"But forget not, my trusty guide," replied the lady, "that the blood in
our veins is English, and consequently, that we are in danger from all
who call themselves foes to the ruddy Cross."

"Do not fear this man's faith," answered Bertram. "You may trust to him
as to the best knight or gentleman of the land. We may make good our
lodging by a tune or a song; and it may remember you that I undertook
(provided it pleased your ladyship) to temporize a little with the
Scots, who, poor souls, love minstrelsy, and when they have but a
silver penny, will willingly bestow it to encourage the _gay
science_--I promised you, I say, that we should be as welcome to them
as if we had been born amidst their own wild hills; and for the best
that such a house as Dickson's affords, the glee-man's son, fair lady,
shall not breathe a wish in vain. And now, will you speak your mind to
your devoted friend and adopted father, or rather your sworn servant
and guide, Bertram the Minstrel, what it is your pleasure to do in this
matter?"

"O, we will certainly accept of the Scot's hospitality," said the lady,
"your minstrel word being plighted that he is a true man. Tom Dickson,
call you him?"

"Yes," replied Bertram, "such is his name; and by looking on these
sheep, I am assured that we are now upon his land."

"Indeed?" said the lady, with some surprise; "and how is your wisdom
aware of that?"

"I see the first letter of his name marked upon this flock," answered
the guide. "Ah, learning is what carries a man through the world, as
well as if he had the ring by virtue of which old minstrels tell that
Adam understood the language of the beasts in paradise. Ah, madam!
there is more wit taught in the shepherd's shieling than the lady
thinks of, who sews her painted seam in her summer bower."

"Be it so, good Bertram. And although not so deeply skilled in the
knowledge of written language as you are, it is impossible for me to
esteem its value more than I actually do; so hold we on the nearest
road to this Tom Dickson's, whose very sheep tell of his whereabout. I
trust we have not very far to go, although the knowledge that our
journey is shortened by a few miles has so much recovered my fatigue,
that methinks I could dance all the rest of the way."




CHAPTER THE SECOND.

     _Rosalind_. Well, this is the Forest of Arden.
     _Touchstone_. Ay, now am I in Arden; the more fool I. When I
was at
     home I was in a better place; but travellers must be content.
     _Rosalind_. Ay, be so, good Touchstone. Look you, who comes
here; a
     young man and an old, in solemn talk.
                    As You Like It. _Scene IV. Act 2_.


As the travellers spoke together, they reached a turn of the path which
presented a more extensive prospect than the broken face of the country
had yet shown them. A valley, through which flowed a small tributary
stream, exhibited the wild, but not unpleasant, features of "a lone
vale of green braken;" here and there besprinkled with groups of
alder-trees, of hazels, and of copse-oakwood, which had maintained
their stations in the recesses of the valley, although they had
vanished from the loftier and more exposed sides of the hills. The
farm-house or mansion-house, (for, from its size and appearance, it
might have been the one or the other,) was a large but low building,
and the walls of the out-houses were sufficiently strong to resist any
band of casual depredators. There was nothing, however, which could
withstand a more powerful force; for, in a country laid waste by war,
the farmer was then, as now, obliged to take his chance of the great
evils attendant upon that state of things; and his condition, never a
very eligible one, was rendered considerably worse by the insecurity
attending it. About half a mile farther was seen a Gothic building of
very small extent, having a half dismantled chapel, which the minstrel
pronounced to be the Abbey of Saint Bride. "The place," he said, "I
understand, is allowed to subsist, as two or three old monks and as
many nuns, whom it contains, are permitted by the English to serve God
there, and sometimes to give relief to Scottish travellers; and who
have accordingly taken assurance with Sir John de Walton, and accepted
as their superior a churchman on whom he thinks he can depend. But if
these guests happen to reveal any secrets, they are, by some means or
other, believed to fly towards the English governor; and therefore,
unless your ladyship's commands be positive, I think we had best not
trust ourselves to their hospitality."

"Of a surety, no," said the lady, "if thou canst provide me with
lodgings where we shall have more prudent hosts."

At this moment, two human forms were seen to approach the farm-house in
a different direction from the travellers, and speaking so high, in a
tone apparently of dispute, that the minstrel and his companion could
distinguish their voices though the distance was considerable. Having
screened his eyes with his hand for some minutes, Bertram at length
exclaimed, "By our Lady, it is my old friend, Tom Dickson, sure
enough!--What can make him in such bad humour with the lad, who, I
think, may be the little wild boy, his son Charles, who used to run
about and plait rushes some twenty years ago? It is lucky, however, we
have found our friends astir; for I warrant, Tom hath a hearty piece of
beef in the pot ere he goes to bed, and he must have changed his wont
if an old friend hath not his share; and who knows, had we come later,
at what hour they may now find it convenient to drop latch and draw
bolt so near a hostile garrison; for if we call things by their right
names, such is the proper term for an English garrison in the castle of
a Scottish nobleman."

"Foolish man," answered the lady, "thou judgest of Sir John de Walton
as thou wouldst of some rude boor, to whom the opportunity of doing
what he wills is a temptation and license to exercise cruelty and
oppression. Now, I could plight you my word, that, setting apart the
quarrel of the kingdoms, which, of course, will be fought out in fair
battles on both sides, you will find that English and Scottish, within
this domain, and within the reach of Sir John de Walton's influence,
live together as that same flock of sheep and goats do with the
shepherd's dog; a foe from whom they fly upon certain occasions, but
around whom they nevertheless eagerly gather for protection should a
wolf happen to show himself."

"It is not to your ladyship," answered Bertram, "that I should venture
to state my opinion of such matters; but the young knight, when he is
sheathed in armour, is a different being from him who feasts in halls
among press of ladies; and he that feeds by another man's fireside, and
when his landlord, of all men in the world, chances to be the Black
Douglas, has reason to keep his eyes about him as he makes his
meal:--but it were better I looked after our own evening refreshment,
than that I stood here gaping and talking about other folk's matters."
So saying, he called out in a thundering tone of voice, "Dickson!--what
ho, Thomas Dickson!--will you not acknowledge an old friend who is much
disposed to trust his supper and night's lodging to your hospitality?"

The Scotchman, attracted by the call, looked first along the banks of
the river, then upward to the bare side of the hill, and at length cast
his eyes upon the two figures who were descending from it.

As if he felt the night colder while he advanced from the more
sheltered part of the valley to meet them, the Douglas Dale farmer
wrapped closer around him the grey plaid, which, from an early period,
has been used by the shepherds of the south of Scotland, and the
appearance of which gives a romantic air to the peasantry and middle
classes; and which, although less brilliant and gaudy in its colours,
is as picturesque in its arrangement as the more military tartan mantle
of the Highlands. When they approached near to each other, the lady
might observe that this friend of her guide was a stout athletic man,
somewhat past the middle of life, and already showing marks of the
approach, but none of the infirmities, of age, upon a countenance which
had been exposed to many a storm. Sharp eyes, too, and a quick
observation, exhibited signs of vigilance, acquired by one who had
lived long in a country where he had constant occasion for looking
around him with caution. His features were still swollen with
displeasure; and the handsome young man who attended him seemed to be
discontented, like one who had undergone no gentle marks of his
father's indignation, and who, from the sullen expression which mingled
with an appearance of shame on his countenance, seemed at once affected
by anger and remorse.

"Do you not remember me, old friend?" said Bertram, as they approached
within a distance for communing; "or have the twenty years which have
marched over us since we met, carried along with them all remembrance
of Bertram, the English minstrel?"

"In troth," answered the Scot, "it is not for want of plenty of your
countrymen to keep you in my remembrance, and I have hardly heard one
of them so much as whistle

    'Hey, now the day dawns,'

but it has recalled some note of your blythe rebeck; and yet, such
animals are we, that I had forgot the mien of my old friend, and
scarcely knew him at a distance. But we have had trouble lately; there
are a thousand of your countrymen that keep garrison in the Perilous
Castle of Douglas yonder, as well as in other places through the vale,
and that is but a woful sight for a true Scotchman--even my own poor
house has not escaped the dignity of a garrison of a man-at-arms,
besides two or three archer knaves, and one or two slips of mischievous
boys called pages, and so forth, who will not let a man say, 'this is
my own,' by his own fireside. Do not, therefore, think hardly of me,
old comrade, if I show you a welcome something colder than you might
expect from a friend of other days; for, by Saint Bride of Douglas, I
have scarcely anything left to which I can say welcome."

"Small welcome will serve," said Bertram. "My son, make thy reverence
to thy father's old friend. Augustine is learning my joyous trade, but
he will need some practice ere he can endure its fatigues. If you could
give him some little matter of food, and a quiet bed for the night,
there's no fear but that we shall both do well enough; for I dare say,
when you travel with my friend Charles there,--if that tall youth
chance to be my old acquaintance Charles,--you will find yourself
accommodated when his wants are once well provided for."

"Nay, the foul fiend take me if I do," answered the Scottish
husbandman. "I know not what the lads of this day are made of--not of
the same clay as their fathers, to be sure--not sprung from their
heather, which fears neither wind nor rain, but from some delicate
plant of a foreign country, which will not thrive unless it be
nourished under glass, with a murrain to it. The good Lord of
Douglas--I have been his henchman, and can vouch for it--did not in his
pagehood desire such food and lodging as, in the present day, will
hardly satisfy such a lad as your friend Charles."

"Nay," said Bertram, "it is not that my Augustine is over nice; but,
for other reasons, I must request of you a bed to himself; he hath of
late been unwell."

"Ay, I understand," said Dickson, "your son hath had a touch of that
illness which terminates so frequently in the black death you English
folk die of? We hear much of the havoc it has made to the southward.
Comes it hitherward?"

Bertram nodded.

"Well, my father's house," continued the farmer, "hath more rooms than
one, and your son shall have one well-aired and comfortable; and for
supper, ye shall have a part of what is prepared for your countrymen,
though I would rather have their room than their company. Since I am
bound to feed a score of them, they will not dispute the claim of such
a skilful minstrel as thou art to a night's hospitality. I am ashamed
to say that I must do their bidding even in my own house, Well-a-day,
if my good lord were in possession of his own, I have heart and hand
enough to turn the whole of them out of my house, like--like"----

"To speak plainly," said Bertram, "like a southern strolling gang from
Redesdale, whom I have seen you fling out of your house like a litter
of blind puppies, when not one of them looked behind to see who had
done him the courtesy until he was half-way to Cairntable."

"Ay," answered the Scotchman, drawing himself up at least six inches
taller than before; "then I had a house of my own, and a cause and an
arm to keep it. Now I am--what signifies it what I am?--the noblest
lord in Scotland is little better."

"Truly, friend," said Bertram, "now you view this matter in a rational
light. I do not say that the wisest, the richest, or the strongest man
in this world has any right to tyrannize over his neighbour, because he
is the more weak, ignorant, and the poorer; but yet if he does enter
into such a controversy, he must submit to the course of nature, and
that will always give the advantage in the tide of battle to wealth,
strength, and health."

"With permission, however," answered Dickson, "the weaker party, if he
use his facilities to the utmost, may, in the long run, obtain revenge
upon the author of his sufferings, which would be at least compensation
for his temporary submission; and he acts simply as a man, and most
foolishly as a Scotchman, whether he sustain these wrongs with the
insensibility of an idiot, or whether he endeavour to revenge them
before Heaven's appointed time has arrived.--But if I talk thus I shall
scare you, as I have scared some of your countrymen, from accepting a
meal of meat and a night's lodging, in a house where you might be
called with the morning to a bloody settlement of a national quarrel."

"Never mind," said Bertram, "we have been known to each other of old;
and I am no more afraid of meeting unkindness in your house, than you
expect me to come here for the purpose of adding to the injuries of
which you complain."

"So be it," said Dickson; "and you, my old friend, are as welcome to my
abode as when it never held any guest, save of my own inviting.--And
you, my young friend, Master Augustine, shall be looked after as well
as if you came with a gay brow and a light cheek, such as best becomes
the _gay science_."
