long, and with a muttered excuse they took their places in the boat
and rowed down the river.

"I want you to put us ashore on the left bank as soon as we are
our of sight of the town," Captain Heraugiere said. "As it will
be heavy work getting your boat back with only two of you, I will
give you a couple of crowns beyond the amount I bargained with you
for."

"That will do well enough," the man said. "We have got the tide
with us, and can drop down at our leisure."

As soon as they were landed they made a wide detour to avoid the
town, and coming down again upon the river above it, followed its
banks for three miles, when they put up at a little inn in the small
village of Leur on its bank. They had scarcely sat down to a meal
when a man came in and called for supper. The landlord placed
another plate at the table near them, and the man at once got into
conversation with them, and they learnt that he was master of a
peat boat that had that morning left Breda empty.

"We were in Breda ourselves this morning," Captain Heraugiere said,
"and saw a peat boat unloading there. There seemed to be a brisk
demand for the fuel."

"Yes; it is a good trade at present," the man said. "There are only
six of us who have permits to enter the port, and it is as much as
we can do to keep the town supplied with fuel; for, you see, at any
moment the river may be frozen up, so the citizens need to keep
a good stock in hand. I ought not to grumble, since I reap the
benefit of the Spanish regulations; but all these restrictions on
trade come mighty hard upon the people of Breda. It was not so in
the old time."

After supper was over Captain Heraugiere ordered a couple of flasks
of spirits, and presently learned from the boatman that his name
was Adrian Van de Berg, and that he had been at one time a servant
in the household of William of Orange. Little by little Captain
Heraugiere felt his way, and soon found that the boatman was an
enthusiastic patriot. He then confided to him that he himself was
an officer in the State's service, and had come to Breda to ascertain
whether there was any possibility of capturing the town by surprise.

"We hit on a plan today," he said, "which promises a chance of
success; but it needs the assistance of one ready to risk his life."

"I am ready to risk my life in any enterprise that has a fair
chance of success," the boatman said, "but I do not see how I can
be of much assistance."

"You can be of the greatest assistance if you will, and will render
the greatest service to your country if you will join in our plan.
What we propose is, that we should construct a shelter of boards
four feet high in the bottom of your boat, leading from your little
cabin aft right up to the bow. In this I calculate we could stow
seventy men; then the peat could be piled over it, and if you
entered the port somewhat late in the afternoon you could manage
that it was not unladen so as to uncover the roof of our shelter
before work ceased for the night. Then we could sally out, overpower
the guard on the quay, make for one of the gates, master the guard
there, and open it to our friends without."

"It is a bold plan and a good one," Van de Berg said, "and I am
ready to run my share of the risk with you. I am so well known in
Breda that they do not search the cargo very closely when I arrive,
and I see no reason why the party hidden below should not escape
observation. I will undertake my share of the business if you
decide to carry it out. I served the prince for fifteen years, and
am ready to serve his son. There are plenty of planks to be obtained
at a place three miles above here, and it would not take many hours
to construct the false deck. If you send a messenger here giving
me two days' notice, it shall be built and the peat stowed on it
by the time you arrive."

It was late at night before the conversation was concluded, and
the next morning Captain Heraugiere and Lionel started on their
return, struck the river some miles below Breda, obtained a passage
over the river in a passing boat late in the afternoon, and, sleeping
at Willemstad, went on board their boat next morning and returned
to Rotterdam. It was arranged that Lionel should say nothing about
their journey until Captain Heraugiere had opened the subject to
Prince Maurice.

"You are back before your time," Sir Francis Vere said when Lionel
reported himself for duty. "Has anything come of this project of
yours, whatever it may be?"

"We hope so, sir, Captain Heraugiere will make his report to Prince
Maurice. He is the leader of the party, and therefore he thought
it best that he should report to Prince Maurice, who, if he thinks
well of it, will of course communicate with you."

The next day a message arrived from Voorne requesting Sir Francis
Vere to proceed thither to discuss with the prince a matter of
importance. He returned after two days' absence, and presently sent
for Lionel.

"This is a rare enterprise that Captain Heraugiere has proposed to
the prince," he said, "and promises well for success. It is to be
kept a profound secret, and a few only will know aught of it until
it is executed. Heraugiere is of course to have command of the party
which is to be hidden in the barge, and is to pick out eighty men
from the garrisons of Gorcum and Lowesteyn. He has begged that you
shall be of the party, as he says that the whole matter was in the
first case suggested to him by you. The rest of the men and officers
will be Dutch."

A fortnight later, on the 22nd of February, Sir Francis Vere on his
return from the Hague, where Prince Maurice now was, told Lionel
that all was arranged. The message had come down from Van de Berg
that the hiding place was constructed. They were to join Heraugiere
the next day.

On the 24th of February the little party starred. Heraugiere had
chosen young, active, and daring men. With him were Captains Logier
and Fervet, and Lieutenant Held. They embarked on board a vessel,
and were landed near the mouth of the Mark, as De Berg was this
time going to carry the peat up the river instead of down, fearing
that the passage of seventy men through the country would attract
attention. The same night Prince Maurice, Sir Francis Vere, Count
Hohenlohe, and other officers sailed to Willemstad, their destination
having been kept a strict secret from all but those engaged in the
enterprise. Six hundred English troops, eight hundred Dutch, and
three hundred cavalry had been drawn from different garrisons, and
were also to land at Willemstad.

When Heraugiere's party arrived at the point agreed on at eleven
o'clock at night, Van de Berg was not there, nor was the barge;
and angry and alarmed at his absence they searched about for him
for hours, and at last found him in the village of Terheyde. He made
the excuse that he had overslept himself, and that he was afraid
the plot had been discovered. As everything depended upon his
cooperation, Heraugiere abstained from the angry reproaches which
the strange conduct of the man had excited; and as it was now
too late to do anything that night, a meeting was arranged for
the following evening, and a message was despatched to the prince
telling him that the expedition was postponed for a day. On their
return, the men all gave free vent to their indignation.

"I have no doubt," Heraugiere said, "that the fellow has turned
coward now that the time has come to face the danger. It is one
thing to talk about a matter as long as it is far distant, but
another to look it in the face when it is close at hand. I do not
believe that he will come tomorrow.

"If he does not he will deserve hanging," Captain Logier said;
"after all the trouble he has given in getting the troops together,
and after bringing the prince himself over."

"It will go very near hanging if not quite," Heraugiere muttered.
"If he thinks that he is going to fool us with impunity, he is
mightily mistaken. If he is a wise man he will start at daybreak,
and get as far away as he can before nightfall if he does not mean
to come."

The next day the party remained in hiding in a barn, and in the
evening again went down to the river. There was a barge lying there
laden high with turf. A general exclamation of satisfaction broke
from all when they saw it. There were two men on it. One landed
and came to meet them.

"Where is Van de Berg?" Captain Heraugiere asked as he came up.

"He is ill and unable to come, but has sent you this letter. My
brother and myself have undertaken the business."

The letter merely said that the writer was too ill to come, but
had sent in his place his two nephews, one or other of whom always
accompanied him, and who could be trusted thoroughly to carry out
the plan. The party at once went on board the vessel, descended
into the little cabin aft, and then passed through a hole made by
the removal of two planks into the hold that had been prepared for
them. Heraugiere remained on deck, and from time to time descended
to inform those below of the progress being made. It was slow
indeed, for a strong wind laden with sleet blew directly down the
river. Huge blocks of ice floated down, and the two boatmen with
their poles had the greatest difficulty in keeping the boat's head
up the stream.

At last the wind so increased that navigation became impossible,
and the barge was made fast against the bank. From Monday night
until Thursday morning the gale continued. Progress was impossible,
and the party cramped up in the hold suffered greatly from hunger
and thirst. On Thursday evening they could sustain it no longer and
landed. They were for a time scarce able to walk, so cramped were
their limbs by their long confinement, and made their way up painfully
to a fortified building called Nordand, standing far from any other
habitations. Here they obtained food and drink, and remained until
eleven at night. One of the boatmen came to them with news that the
wind had changed, and was now blowing in from the sea. They again
took their places on board, but the water was low in the river, and
it was difficult work passing the shallows, and it was not until
Saturday afternoon that they passed the boom below the town and
entered the inner harbour.

An officer of the guard came off in a boat and boarded the barge.
The weather was so bitterly cold that he at once went into the
little cabin and there chatted with the two boatmen. Those in the
hold could hear every word that was said, and they almost held their
breath, for the slightest noise would betray them. After a while
the officer got into his boat again, saying he would send some
men off to warp the vessel into the castle dock, as the fuel was
required by the garrison there. As the barge was making its way
towards the watergate, it struck upon a hidden obstruction in the
river and began to leak rapidly. The situation of those in the hold
was now terrible, for in a few minutes the water rose to their
knees, and the choice seemed to be presented to them of being
drowned like rats there, or leaping overboard, in which case they
would be captured and hung without mercy. The boatmen plied the
pumps vigorously, and in a short time a party of Italian soldiers
arrived from the shore and towed the vessel into the inner harbour,
and made her fast close to the guard house of the castle. A party
of labourers at once came on board and began to unload the turf;
the need of fuel both in the town and castle being great, for the
weather had been for some time bitterly cold.

A fresh danger now arose. The sudden immersion in the icy water
in the close cabin brought on a sudden inclination to sneeze and
cough. Lieutenant Held, finding himself unable to repress his cough,
handed his dagger to Lionel Vickars, who happened to be sitting
next to him, and implored him to stab him to the heart lest his
cough might betray the whole party; but one of the boatmen who was
standing close to the cabin heard the sounds, and bade his companion
go on pumping with as much noise and clatter as possible, while he
himself did the same, telling those standing on the wharf alongside
that the boat was almost full of water. The boatmen behaved with
admirable calmness and coolness, exchanging jokes with acquaintances
on the quay, keeping up a lively talk, asking high prices for their
peat, and engaging in long and animated bargains so as to prevent
the turf from being taken too rapidly ashore.

At last, when but a few layers of turf remained over the roof
of the hold, the elder brother told the men unloading that it was
getting too dark, and he himself was too tired and worn out to
attend to things any longer. He therefore gave the man some money
and told them to go to the nearest public house to drink his health,
and to return the first thing in the morning to finish unloading.
The younger of the two brothers had already left the boat. He made
his way through the town, and started at full speed to carry the
news to Prince Maurice that the barge had arrived safely in the
town, and the attempt would be made at midnight; also of the fact
they had learned from those on the wharf, that the governor had
heard a rumour that a force had landed somewhere on the coast, and
had gone off again to Gertruydenberg in all haste, believing that
some design was on foot against that town. His son Paolo was again
in command of the garrison.

A little before midnight Captain Heraugiere told his comrades that
the hour had arrived, and that only by the most desperate bravery
could they hope to succeed, while death was the certain consequence
of failure. The band were divided into two companies. He himself
with one was to attack the main guard house; the other, under
Fervet, was to seize the arsenal of the fortress. Noiselessly they
stole out from their hiding place, and formed upon the wharf within
the inclosure of the castle. Heraugiere moved straight upon the
guard house. The sentry was secured instantly; but the slight noise
was heard, and the captain of the watch ran out, but was instantly
cut down.

Others came out with torches, but after a brief fight were driven
into the guard house; when all were shot down through the doors
and windows. Captain Ferver and his band had done equally well. The
magazine of the castle was seized, and its defenders slain. Paolo
Lanzavecchia made a sally from the palace with a few of his adherents,
but was wounded and driven back; and the rest of the garrison of
the castle, ignorant of the strength of the force that had thus
risen as it were from the earth upon them, fled panic stricken,
not even pausing to destroy the bridge between the castle and the
town.

Young Paolo Lanzavecchia now began a parley with the assailants;
but while the negotiations were going on Hohenlohe with his cavalry
came up--having been apprised by the boatman that the attempt was
about to be made--battered down the palisade near the watergate,
and entered the castle. A short time afterwards Prince Maurice,
Sir Francis Vere, and other officers arrived with the main body of
the troops. But the fight was over before even Hohenlohe arrived;
forty of the garrison being killed, and not a single man of the
seventy assailants. The burgomaster, finding that the castle had
fallen, and that a strong force had arrived, then sent a trumpeter
to the castle to arrange for the capitulation of the town, which
was settled on the following terms:-- All plundering was commuted
for the payment of two months' pay to every soldier engaged in the
affair. All who chose might leave the city, with full protection
to life and property. Those who were willing to remain were not
to be molested in their consciences or households with regard to
religion.

The news of the capture of Breda was received with immense enthusiasm
throughout Holland. It was the first offensive operation that had
been successfully undertaken, and gave new hope to the patriots.

Parma was furious at the cowardice with which five companies of
foot and one of horse--all picked troops--had fled before the
attack of seventy Hollanders. Three captains were publicly beheaded
in Brussels and a fourth degraded to the ranks, while Lanzavecchia
was deprived of the command of Gertruydenberg.

For some months before the assault upon Breda the army of Holland
had been gaining vastly in strength and organization. Prince Maurice,
aided by his cousin Lewis William, stadholder of Friesland, had been
hard at work getting it into a state of efficiency. Lewis William,
a man of great energy and military talent, saw that the use of
solid masses of men in the field was no longer fitted to a state of
things when the improvements in firearms of all sorts had entirely
changed the condition of war. He therefore reverted to the old
Roman methods, and drilled his soldiers in small bodies; teaching
them to turn and wheel, advance or retreat, and perform all sorts
of manoeuvres with regularity and order. Prince Maurice adopted
the same plan in Holland, and the tactics so introduced proved so
efficient that they were sooner or later adopted by all civilized
nations.

At the time when William of Orange tried to relieve the hard pressed
city of Haarlem, he could with the greatest difficulty muster three
or four thousand men for the purpose. The army of the Netherlands
was now 22,000 strong, of whom 2000 were cavalry. It was well
disciplined, well equipped, and regularly paid, and was soon to
prove that the pains bestowed upon it had not been thrown away.
In the course of eighteen years that had followed the capture of
Brill and the commencement of the struggle with Spain, the wealth
and prosperity of Holland had enormously increased. The Dutch were
masters of the sea coast, the ships of the Zeelanders closed every
avenue to the interior, and while the commerce of Antwerp, Ghent,
Bruges, and the other cities of the provinces that remained in
the hands of the Spaniards was for the time destroyed, and their
population fell off by a half, Holland benefited in proportion.

From all the Spanish provinces men of energy and wealth passed
over in immense numbers to Holland, where they could pursue their
commerce and industries--free from the exactions and cruelty under
which they had for so many years groaned. The result was that the
cities of Holland increased vastly in wealth and population, and
the resources at the disposal of Prince Maurice enormously exceeded
those with which his father had for so many years sustained the
struggle.

For a while after the capture of Breda there was breathing time
in Holland, and Maurice was busy in increasing and improving his
army. Parma was fettered by the imperious commands of Philip, who
had completely crippled him by withdrawing a considerable number of
his troops for service in the war which he was waging with France.
But above all, the destruction of the Armada, and with it of the
naval supremacy of Spain, had changed the situation.

Holland was free to carry on her enterprises by sea, and had free
communication and commerce with her English ally; while communication
between Spain and the Netherlands was difficult. Reinforcements
could no longer be sent by sea, and had to be sent across Europe
from Italy. Parma was worn out by exertions, disappointment, and
annoyance, and his health was seriously failing; while opposed
to him were three young commanders--Maurice, Lewis William, and
Francis Vere--all men of military genius and full of confidence
and energy.



CHAPTER XV

A SLAVE IN BARBARY


The Terifa had left port but a few hours when a strong wind rose
from the north, and rapidly increased in violence until it was
blowing a gale. "Inez is terribly ill," Gerald said when he met
Geoffrey on deck the following morning.

"I believe at the present moment she would face her father and risk
everything if she could but be put on shore."

"I can well imagine that. However, she will think otherwise tomorrow
or next day. I believe these Mediterranean storms do not last long.
There is no fear of six weeks of bad weather such as we had when
we were last afloat together."

"No. I have just been speaking to the captain. He says they generally
blow themselves out in two or three days; but still, even that is
not a pleasant lookout. These vessels are not like your English
craft, which seem to be able to sail almost in the eye of the wind.
They are lubberly craft, and badly handled; and if this gale lasts
for three days we shall be down on the Barbary coast, and I would
rather risk another journey through Spain than get down so near
the country of the Moors."

"I can understand that," Geoffrey agreed. "However, I see there
are some thirty soldiers forward on their way to join one of the
regiments in Naples, so we ought to be able to beat off any corsair
that might come near us."

"Yes; but if we got down on their coast we might be attacked by
half a dozen of them," Gerald said. "However, one need not begin to
worry one's self at present; the gale may abate within a few hours."

At the end of the second day the wind went down suddenly; and
through the night the vessel rolled heavily, for the sea was still
high, and there was not a breath of wind to fill her sails and steady
her. By the morning the sea had gone down, but there was still an
absence of wind.

"We have had a horrible night," Gerald remarked, "but we may think
ourselves fortunate indeed," and he pointed to the south, where
the land was plainly visible at a distance of nine or ten miles.
"If the gale had continued to blow until now we should have been
on shore long before this."

"We are too near to be pleasant," Geoffrey said, "for they can
see us as plainly as we can see the land. It is to be hoped that
a breeze may spring up from the south before long and enable us
to creep off the land. Unless I am greatly mistaken I can see the
masts of some craft or other in a line with those white houses over
there."

"I don't see them," Gerald replied, gazing intently in the direction
in which Geoffrey pointed.

"Let us go up to the top, Gerald; we shall see her hull from there
plainly enough."

On reaching the top Gerald saw at once that his friend's eyes had
not deceived him.

"Yes, there is a vessel there sure enough, Geoffrey. I cannot see
whether she has one or two masts, for her head is in this direction."

"That is not the worst of it," Geoffrey said, shading his eyes and
gazing intently on the distant object. "She is rowing; I can see
the light flash on her oars every stroke. That is a Moorish galley,
and she is coming out towards us."

"I believe you are right," Gerald replied after gazing earnestly
for some time. "Yes, I saw the flash of the oars then distinctly."

They at once descended to the deck and informed the captain of what
