  They and the saddened friends, whose clasping hands
  Win from the solemn stone eternity.
  Yea, well they fared unto the evening god,
  Passing beyond the limit of the world,
  Where face to face the son his mother saw,
  A living man a shadow, while she spake
  Words that Odysseus and that Homer heard,--
  _I too, O child, I reached the common doom,
  The grave, the goal of fate, and passed away_.
  --Such, Anticleia, as thy voice to him,
  Across the dim gray gulf of death and time
  Is that of Greece, a mother's to a child,--
  Mother of each whose dreams are grave and fair--
  Who sees the Naiad where the streams are bright
  And in the sunny ripple of the sea
  Cymodoce with floating golden hair:
  And in the whisper of the waving oak
  Hears still the Dryad's plaint, and, in the wind
  That sighs through moonlit woodlands, knows the horn
  Of Artemis, and silver shafts and bow.
  Therefore if still around this broken vase,
  Borne by rough hands, unworthy of their load,
  Far from Cephisus and the wandering rills,
  There cling a fragrance as of things once sweet,
  Of honey from Hymettus' desert hill,
  Take thou the gift and hold it close and dear;
  For gifts that die have living memories--
  Voices of unreturning days, that breathe
  The spirit of a day that never dies.




ARGUMENT

Io, the daughter of Inachus, King of Argos, was beloved of Zeus. But
Hera was jealous of that love, and by her ill will was Io given over
to frenzy, and her body took the semblance of a heifer: and Argus, a
many-eyed herdsman, was set by Hera to watch Io whithersoever she
strayed. Yet, in despite of Argus, did Zeus draw nigh unto her in
the shape of a bull. And by the will of Zeus and the craft of Hermes
was Argus slain. Then Io was driven over far lands and seas by her
madness, and came at length to the land of Egypt. There was she
restored to herself by a touch of the hand of Zeus, and bare a child
called Epaphus. And from Epaphus sprang Libya, and from Libya, Belus;
and from Belus, Aegyptus and Danaus. And the sons of Aegyptus willed
to take the daughters of Danaus in marriage. But the maidens held
such wedlock in horror, and fled with their father over the sea to
Argos; and the king and citizens of Argos gave them shelter and
protection from their pursuers.



THE SUPPLIANT MAIDENS


DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  DANAUS, THE KING OF ARGOS, HERALD OF AEGYPTUS.
  _Chorus of the Daughters of Danaus. Attendants_.

  _Scene. --A sacred precinct near the gates of Argos: statue and
  shrines of Zeus and other deities stand around_.


CHORUS

  ZEUS! Lord and guard of suppliant hands!
    Look down benign on us who crave
    Thine aid--whom winds and waters drave
  From where, through drifting shifting sands,
    Pours Nilus to the wave.
  From where the green land, god-possest,
  Closes and fronts the Syrian waste,
  We flee as exiles, yet unbanned
  By murder's sentence from our land;
  But--since Aegyptus had decreed
  His sons should wed his brother's seed,--
  Ourselves we tore from bonds abhorred,
  From wedlock not of heart but hand,
  Nor brooked to call a kinsman lord!
  And Danaus, our sire and guide,
  The king of counsel, pond'ring well
  The dice of fortune as they fell,
  Out of two griefs the kindlier chose,
  And bade us fly, with him beside,
  Heedless what winds or waves arose,
  And o'er the wide sea waters haste,
  Until to Argos' shore at last
    Our wandering pinnace came--
  Argos, the immemorial home
  Of her from whom we boast to come--
  Io, the ox-horned maiden, whom,
  After long wandering, woe, and scathe,
  Zeus with a touch, a mystic breath,
    Made mother of our name.
  Therefore, of all the lands of earth,
  On this most gladly step we forth,
  And in our hands aloft we bear--
  Sole weapon for a suppliant's wear--
  The olive-shoot, with wool enwound!
    City, and land, and waters wan
  Of Inachus, and gods most high,
  And ye who, deep beneath the ground,
  Bring vengeance weird on mortal man,
  Powers of the grave, on you we cry!
  And unto Zeus the Saviour, guard
  Of mortals' holy purity!
  Receive ye us--keep watch and ward
  Above the suppliant maiden band!
  Chaste be the heart of this your land
  Towards the weak! but, ere the throng,
  The wanton swarm, from Egypt sprung,
  Leap forth upon the silted shore,
  Thrust back their swift-rowed bark again,
  Repel them, urge them to the main!
  And there, 'mid storm and lightning's shine,
  And scudding drift and thunder's roar,
  Deep death be theirs, in stormy brine!
  Before they foully grasp and win
  Us, maiden-children of their kin,
  And climb the couch by law denied,
  And wrong each weak reluctant bride.
    And now on her I call,

  Mine ancestress, who far on Egypt's shore
      A young cow's semblance wore,--
  A maiden once, by Hera's malice changed!
      And then on him withal,
  Who, as amid the flowers the grazing creature
      ranged,
  Was in her by a breath of Zeus conceived;
      And, as the hour of birth drew nigh,
  By fate fulfilled, unto the light he came;
      And Epaphus for name,
  Born from the touch of Zeus, the child received.
      On him, on him I cry,
      And him for patron hold--
    While in this grassy vale I stand,
      Where lo roamed of old!
  And here, recounting all her toil and pain,
  Signs will I show to those who rule the land
 That I am child of hers; and all shall understand,
 Hearing the doubtful tale of the dim past made plain.
        And, ere the end shall be,
  Each man the truth of what I tell shall see.
        And if there dwell hard by
  One skilled to read from bird-notes augury,
 That man, when through his ears shall thrill our
      tearful wail,
  Shall deem he hears the voice, the plaintive tale
 Of her, the piteous spouse of Tereus, lord of guile--
 Whom the hawk harries yet, the mourning nightingale.
 She, from her happy home and fair streams scared
      away,
    Wails wild and sad for haunts beloved erewhile.
    Yea, and for Itylus--ah, well-a-day!
      Slain by her own, his mother's hand,
 Maddened by lustful wrong, the deed by Tereus
      planned.
 Like her I wail and wail, in soft Ionian tones,
      And as she wastes, even so
  Wastes my soft cheek, once ripe with Nilus' suns
  And all my heart dissolves in utter woe
      Sad flowers of grief I cull,

  Fleeing from kinsmen's love unmerciful--
 Yea, from the clutching hands, the wanton crowd,
 I sped across the waves, from Egypt's land of cloud[1]

[Footnote: 1: _AeRas apogas_ This epithet may appear strange to
modern readers accustomed to think of Egypt as a land of cloudless
skies and pellucid atmosphere. Nevertheless both Pindar (_Pyth_ iv 93)
and Apollonius Rhodius (iv 267) speak of it in the same way as
Aeschylus. It has been conjectured that they allude to the fog banks
that often obscure the low coasts--a phenomenon likely to impress
the early navigators and to be reported by them.]

  Gods of the ancient cradle of my race,
  Hear me, just gods! With righteous grace
      On me, on me look down!
 Grant not to youth its heart's unchaste desire,
 But, swiftly spurning lust's unholy fire,
  Bless only love and willing wedlock's crown
  The war-worn fliers from the battle's wrack
  Find refuge at the hallowed altar-side,
      The sanctuary divine,--
  Ye gods! such refuge unto me provide--
      Such sanctuary be mine!
  Though the deep will of Zeus be hard to track,
      Yet doth it flame and glance,
  A beacon in the dark, 'mid clouds of chance
        That wrap mankind
 Yea, though the counsel fall, undone it shall not be,
 Whate'er be shaped and fixed within Zeus' ruling mind--
 Dark as a solemn grove, with sombre leafage shaded,
    His paths of purpose wind,
    A marvel to man's eye

 Smitten by him, from towering hopes degraded,
    Mortals lie low and still
 Tireless and effortless, works forth its will
      The arm divine!
 God from His holy seat, in calm of unarmed power,
 Brings forth the deed, at its appointed hour!
    Let Him look down on mortal wantonness!
  Lo! how the youthful stock of Belus' line
      Craves for me, uncontrolled--
      With greed and madness bold--
    Urged on by passion's sunless stress--
 And, cheated, learns too late the prey has 'scaped
      their hold!
  Ah, listen, listen to my grievous tale,
  My sorrow's words, my shrill and tearful cries!
        Ah woe, ah woe!
    Loud with lament the accents use,
 And from my living lips my own sad dirges flow!
       O Apian land of hill and dale,
 Thou kennest yet, O land, this faltered foreign wail--
       Have mercy, hear my prayer!
  Lo, how again, again, I rend and tear
  My woven raiment, and from off my hair
       Cast the Sidonian veil!

 Ah, but if fortune smile, if death be driven away,
 Vowed rites, with eager haste, we to the gods will pay!
      Alas, alas again!
 O wither drift the waves? and who shall loose the pain?

          O Apian land of hill and dale,
 Thou kennest yet, O land, this faltered foreign wail!
          Have mercy, hear my prayer!
  Lo, how again, again, I rend and tear
  My woven raiment, and from off my hair
          Cast the Sidonian veil!

  The wafting oar, the bark with woven sail,
          From which the sea foamed back,
  Sped me, unharmed of storms, along the breeze's track--
          Be it unblamed of me!
  But ah, the end, the end of my emprise!
  May He, the Father, with all-seeing eyes,
          Grant me that end to see!
  Grant that henceforth unstained as heretofore
    I may escape the forced embrace
    Of those proud children of the race
          That sacred Io bore.

  And thou, O maiden-goddess chaste and pure--
          Queen of the inner fane,--
  Look of thy grace on me, O Artemis,
    Thy willing suppliant--thine, thine it is,
  Who from the lustful onslaught fled secure,
    To grant that I too without stain
  The shelter of thy purity may gain!

  Grant that henceforth unstained as heretofore
    I may escape the forced embrace
    Of those proud children of the race
           That sacred Io bore!

           Yet if this may not be,
    We, the dark race sun-smitten, we
    Will speed with suppliant wands
  To Zeus who rules below, with hospitable hands
  Who welcomes all the dead from all the lands:
 Yea by our own hands strangled, we will go,
 Spurned by Olympian gods, unto the gods below!

    Zeus, hear and save!
 The searching, poisonous hate, that Io vexed and drave,
  Was of a goddess: well I know
  The bitter ire, the wrathful woe
    Of Hera, queen of heaven---
 A storm, a storm her breath, whereby we yet are driven!
    Bethink thee, what dispraise
  Of Zeus himself mankind will raise,
 If now he turn his face averted from our cries!
 If now, dishonoured and alone,
 The ox-horned maiden's race shall be undone,
 Children of Epaphus, his own begotten son---
 Zeus, listen from on high!--to thee our prayers arise.

    Zeus, hear and save!
 The searching poisonous hate, that Io vexed and drave,
  Was of a goddess: well I know
  The bitter ire, the wrathful woe
    Of Hera, queen of heaven--
 A  storm, a storm her breath, whereby we yet are driven!

DANAUS

  Children, be wary--wary he with whom
  Ye come, your trusty sire and steersman old:
  And that same caution hold I here on land,
  And bid you hoard my words, inscribing them
  On memory's tablets. Lo, I see afar
  Dust, voiceless herald of a host, arise;
  And hark, within their grinding sockets ring
  Axles of hurrying wheels! I see approach,
  Borne in curved cars, by speeding horses drawn,
  A speared and shielded band. The chiefs, perchance,
  Of this their land are hitherward intent
  To look on us, of whom they yet have heard
  By messengers alone. But come who may,
  And come he peaceful or in ravening wrath
  Spurred on his path, 'twere best, in any case,
  Damsels, to cling unto this altar-mound
  Made sacred to their gods of festival,--
  A shrine is stronger than a tower to save,
  A shield that none may cleave. Step swift thereto,
  And in your left hands hold with reverence
  The white-crowned wands of suppliance, the sign
  Beloved of Zeus, compassion's lord, and speak
  To those that question you, words meek and low
  And piteous, as beseems your stranger state,
  Clearly avowing of this flight of yours
  The bloodless cause; and on your utterance
  See to it well that modesty attend;
  From downcast eyes, from brows of pure control,
  Let chastity look forth; nor, when ye speak,
  Be voluble nor eager--they that dwell
  Within this land are sternly swift to chide.
  And be your words submissive: heed this well;
  For weak ye are, outcasts on stranger lands,
  And froward talk beseems not strengthless hands.

CHORUS

  O father, warily to us aware
  Thy words are spoken, and thy wisdom's best
  My mind shall hoard, with Zeus our sire to aid.

DANAUS

  Even so--with gracious aspect let him aid.

CHORUS

  Fain were I now to seat me by thy side.

DANAUS

  Now dally not, but put our thought in act.

CHORUS

  Zeus, pity our distress, or e'er we die.

DANAUS

  If so he will, your toils to joy will turn.

CHORUS

  Lo, on this shrine, the semblance of a bird.[2]

DANAUS

  Zeus' bird of dawn it is; invoke the sign.

CHORUS

  Thus I invoke the saving rays of morn.

[Footnote:   2: The whole of this dialogue in alternate verses is
disarranged in the MSS. The re-arrangement which has approved itself
to Paley has been here followed. It involves, however, a hiatus,
instead of the line to which this note is appended. The substance of
the lost line being easily deducible from the context, it has been
supplied in the translation.]

DANAUS

  Next, bright Apollo, exiled once from heaven.

CHORUS

  The exiled god will pity our exile.

DANAUS

  Yea, may he pity, giving grace and aid.

CHORUS

  Whom next invoke I, of these other gods?

DANAUS

  Lo, here a trident, symbol of a god.

