nomadic peasants were robbed of one privilege after the other, until
finally, during the first year of the sixteenth century, they were
formally made a part of the soil upon which they lived. The Russian
peasants ceased to be free men. They became serfs or slaves and they
remained serfs until the year 1861, when their fate had become so
terrible that they were beginning to die out.

In the seventeenth century, this new state with its growing territory
which was spreading quickly into Siberia, had become a force with which
the rest of Europe was obliged to reckon. In 1618, after the death of
Boris Godunow, the Russian nobles had elected one of their own number
to be Tsar. He was Michael, the son of Feodor, of the Moscow family of
Romanow who lived in a little house just outside the Kremlin.

In the year 1672 his great-grandson, Peter, the son of another Feodor,
was born. When the child was ten years old, his step-sister Sophia took
possession of the Russian throne. The little boy was allowed to spend
his days in the suburbs of the national capital, where the foreigners
lived. Surrounded by Scotch barkeepers, Dutch traders, Swiss
apothecaries, Italian barbers, French dancing teachers and German
school-masters, the young prince obtained a first but rather
extraordinary impression of that far-away and mysterious Europe where
things were done differently.

When he was seventeen years old, he suddenly pushed Sister Sophia
from the throne. Peter himself became the ruler of Russia. He was not
contented with being the Tsar of a semi-barbarous and half-Asiatic
people. He must be the sovereign head of a civilised nation. To change
Russia overnight from a Byzantine-Tartar state into a European empire
was no small undertaking. It needed strong hands and a capable head.
Peter possessed both. In the year 1698, the great operation of grafting
Modern Europe upon Ancient Russia was performed. The patient did not
die. But he never got over the shock, as the events of the last five
years have shown very plainly.




RUSSIA vs. SWEDEN

RUSSIA AND SWEDEN FIGHT MANY WARS TO DECIDE WHO SHALL BE THE LEADING
POWER OF NORTH-EASTERN EUROPE


IN the year 1698, Tsar Peter set forth upon his first voyage to western
Europe. He travelled by way of Berlin and went to Holland and to
England. As a child he had almost been drowned sailing a homemade boat
in the duck pond of his father's country home. This passion for water
remained with him to the end of his life. In a practical way it showed
itself in his wish to give his land-locked domains access to the open
sea.

While the unpopular and harsh young ruler was away from home, the
friends of the old Russian ways in Moscow set to work to undo all
his reforms. A sudden rebellion among his life-guards, the Streltsi
regiment, forced Peter to hasten home by the fast mail. He appointed
himself executioner-in-chief and the Streltsi were hanged and quartered
and killed to the last man. Sister Sophia, who had been the head of the
rebellion, was locked up in a cloister and the rule of Peter be-gan in
earnest. This scene was repeated in the year 1716 when Peter had gone
on his second western trip. That time the reactionaries followed the
leadership of Peter's half-witted son, Alexis. Again the Tsar returned
in great haste. Alexis was beaten to death in his prison cell and the
friends of the old fashioned Byzantine ways marched thousands of dreary
miles to their final destination in the Siberian lead mines. After that,
no further outbreaks of popular discontent took place. Until the time of
his death, Peter could reform in peace.

It is not easy to give you a list of his reforms in chronological order.
The Tsar worked with furious haste. He followed no system. He issued
his decrees with such rapidity that it is difficult to keep count.
Peter seemed to feel that everything that had ever happened before was
entirely wrong. The whole of Russia therefore must be changed within the
shortest possible time. When he died he left behind a well-trained army
of 200,000 men and a navy of fifty ships. The old system of government
had been abolished over night. The Duma, or convention of Nobles, had
been dismissed and in its stead, the Tsar had surrounded himself with an
advisory board of state officials, called the Senate.

Russia was divided into eight large "governments" or provinces. Roads
were constructed. Towns were built. Industries were created wherever it
pleased the Tsar, without any regard for the presence of raw material.
Canals were dug and mines were opened in the mountains of the east. In
this land of illiterates, schools were founded and establishments
of higher learning, together with Universities and hospitals and
professional schools. Dutch naval engineers and tradesmen and artisans
from all over the world were encouraged to move to Russia. Printing
shops were established, but all books must be first read by the imperial
censors. The duties of each class of society were carefully written
down in a new law and the entire system of civil and criminal laws was
gathered into a series of printed volumes. The old Russian costumes
were abolished by Imperial decree, and policemen, armed with scissors,
watching all the country roads, changed the long-haired Russian mou-jiks
suddenly into a pleasing imitation of smooth-shaven west. Europeans.

In religious matters, the Tsar tolerated no division of power. There
must be no chance of a rivalry between an Emperor and a Pope as had
happened in Europe. In the year 1721, Peter made himself head of the
Russian Church. The Patriarchate of Moscow was abolished and the Holy
Synod made its appearance as the highest source of authority in all
matters of the Established Church.

Since, however, these many reforms could not be success-ful while the
old Russian elements had a rallying point in the town of Moscow, Peter
decided to move his government to a new capital. Amidst the unhealthy
marshes of the Baltic Sea the Tsar built this new city. He began to
reclaim the land in the year 1703. Forty thousand peasants worked for
years to lay the foundations for this Imperial city. The Swedes attacked
Peter and tried to destroy his town and illness and misery killed tens
of thousands of the peasants. But the work was continued, winter and
summer, and the ready-made town soon began to grow. In the year 1712, it
was officially de-clared to be the "Imperial Residence." A dozen years
later it had 75,000 inhabitants. Twice a year the whole city was flooded
by the Neva. But the terrific will-power of the Tsar created dykes and
canals and the floods ceased to do harm. When Peter died in 1725 he was
the owner of the largest city in northern Europe.

Of course, this sudden growth of so dangerous a rival had been a source
of great worry to all the neighbours. From his side, Peter had watched
with interest the many adventures of his Baltic rival, the kingdom
of Sweden. In the year 1654, Christina, the only daughter of Gustavus
Adolphus, the hero of the Thirty Years War, had renounced the throne
and had gone to Rome to end her days as a devout Catholic. A Protestant
nephew of Gustavus Adolphus had succeeded the last Queen of the House of
Vasa. Under Charles X and Charles XI, the new dynasty had brought
Sweden to its highest point of development. But in 1697, Charles XI died
suddenly and was succeeded by a boy of fifteen, Charles XII.

This was the moment for which many of the northern states had waited.
During the great religious wars of the seventeenth century, Sweden had
grown at the expense of her neighbours. The time had come, so the owners
thought, to balance the account. At once war broke out between Russia,
Poland, Denmark and Saxony on the one side, and Sweden on the other. The
raw and untrained armies of Peter were disastrously beaten by Charles in
the famous battle of Narva in November of the year 1700. Then Charles,
one of the most interesting military geniuses of that century, turned
against his other enemies and for nine years he hacked and burned his
way through the villages and cities of Poland, Saxony, Denmark and
the Baltic provinces, while Peter drilled and trained his soldiers in
distant Russia.

As a result, in the year 1709, in the battle of Poltawa, the Moscovites
destroyed the exhausted armies of Sweden. Charles continued to be a
highly picturesque figure, a wonderful hero of romance, but in his vain
attempt to have his revenge, he ruined his own country. In the year
1718, he was accidentally killed or assassinated (we do not know which)
and when peace was made in 1721, in the town of Nystadt, Sweden had lost
all of her former Baltic possessions except Finland. The new Russian
state, created by Peter, had become the leading power of northern
Europe. But already a new rival was on the way. The Prussian state was
taking shape.




THE RISE OF PRUSSIA

THE EXTRAORDINARY RISE OF A LITTLE STATE IN A DREARY PART OF NORTHERN
GERMANY, CALLED PRUSSIA


THE history of Prussia is the history of a frontier district. In
the ninth century, Charlemagne had transferred the old centre of
civilisation from the Mediterranean to the wild regions of northwestern
Europe. His Frankish soldiers had pushed the frontier of Europe further
and further towards the east. They had conquered many lands from the
heathenish Slavs and Lithuanians who were living in the plain between
the Baltic Sea and the Carpathian Mountains, and the Franks administered
those outlying districts just as the United States used to administer
her territories before they achieved the dignity of statehood.

The frontier state of Brandenburg had been originally founded by
Charlemagne to defend his eastern possessions against raids of the wild
Saxon tribes. The Wends, a Slavic tribe which inhabited that region,
were subjugated during the tenth century and their market-place, by the
name of Brennabor, became the centre of and gave its name to the new
province of Brandenburg.

During the eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth centuries,
a succession of noble families exercised the functions of imperial
governor in this frontier state. Finally in the fifteenth century,
the House of Hohenzollern made its appear-ance, and as Electors of
Brandenburg, commenced to change a sandy and forlorn frontier territory
into one of the most efficient empires of the modern world.

These Hohenzollerns, who have just been removed from the historical
stage by the combined forces of Europe and America, came originally
from southern Germany. They were of very humble origin. In the twelfth
century a certain Frederick of Hohenzollern had made a lucky marriage
and had been appointed keeper of the castle of Nuremberg. His
descendants had used every chance and every opportunity to improve their
power and after several centuries of watchful grabbing, they had been
appointed to the dignity of Elector, the name given to those sovereign
princes who were supposed to elect the Emperors of the old German
Empire. During the Reformation, they had taken the side of the
Protestants and the early seventeenth century found them among the most
powerful of the north German princes.

During the Thirty Years War, both Protestants and Catholics had
plundered Brandenburg and Prussia with equal zeal. But under Frederick
William, the Great Elector, the damage was quickly repaired and by a
wise and careful use of all the economic and intellectual forces of the
country, a state was founded in which there was practically no waste.

Modern Prussia, a state in which the individual and his wishes and
aspirations have been entirely absorbed by the interests of the
community as a whole this Prussia dates back to the father of Frederick
the Great. Frederick William I was a hard working, parsimonious Prussian
sergeant, with a great love for bar-room stories and strong Dutch
tobacco, an intense dislike of all frills and feathers, (especially if
they were of French origin,) and possessed of but one idea. That idea
was Duty. Severe with himself, he tolerated no weakness in his subjects,
whether they be generals or common soldiers. The relation between
himself and his son Frederick was never cordial, to say the least. The
boorish manners of the father offended the finer spirit of the son.
The son's love for French manners, literature, philosophy and music was
rejected by the father as a manifestation of sissy-ness. There followed
a terrible outbreak between these two strange temperaments. Frederick
tried to escape to England. He was caught and court-martialed and forced
to witness the decapitation of his best friend who had tried to help
him. Thereupon as part of his punishment, the young prince was sent to
a little fortress somewhere in the provinces to be taught the details of
his future business of being a king. It proved a blessing in disguise.
When Frederick came to the throne in 1740, he knew how his country was
managed from the birth certificate of a pauper's son to the minutest
detail of a complicated annual Budget.

As an author, especially in his book called the "Anti-Macchiavelli,"
Frederick had expressed his contempt for the political creed of the
ancient Florentine historian, who had advised his princely pupils to lie
and cheat whenever it was necessary to do so for the benefit of their
country. The ideal ruler in Frederick's volume was the first servant of
his people, the enlightened despot after the example of Louis XIV. In
practice, however, Frederick, while working for his people twenty hours
a day, tolerated no one to be near him as a counsellor. His ministers
were superior clerks. Prussia was his private possession, to be treated
according to his own wishes. And nothing was allowed to interfere with
the interest of the state.

In the year 1740 the Emperor Charles VI, of Austria, died. He had tried
to make the position of his only daughter, Maria Theresa, secure
through a solemn treaty, written black on white, upon a large piece
of parchment. But no sooner had the old emperor been deposited in the
ancestral crypt of the Habsburg family, than the armies of Frederick
were marching towards the Austrian frontier to occupy that part of
Silesia for which (together with almost everything else in central
Europe) Prussia clamored, on account of some ancient and very doubtful
rights of claim. In a number of wars, Frederick conquered all of
Silesia, and although he was often very near defeat, he maintained
himself in his newly acquired territories against all Austrian
counter-attacks.

Europe took due notice of this sudden appearance of a very powerful new
state. In the eighteenth century, the Germans were a people who had been
ruined by the great religious wars and who were not held in high esteem
by any one. Frederick, by an effort as sudden and quite as terrific as
that of Peter of Russia, changed this attitude of contempt into one of
fear. The internal affairs of Prussia were arranged so skillfully that
the subjects had less reason for complaint than elsewhere. The treasury
showed an annual surplus instead of a deficit. Torture was abolished.
The judiciary system was improved. Good roads and good schools and good
universities, together with a scrupulously honest administration, made
the people feel that whatever services were demanded of them, they (to
speak the vernacular) got their money's worth.

After having been for several centuries the battle field of the French
and the Austrians and the Swedes and the Danes and the Poles, Germany,
encouraged by the example of Prussia, began to regain self-confidence.
And this was the work of the little old man, with his hook-nose and his
old uniforms covered with snuff, who said very funny but very unpleasant
things about his neighbours, and who played the scandalous game of
eighteenth century diplomacy without any regard for the truth, provided
he could gain something by his lies. This in spite of his book,
"Anti-Macchiavelli." In the year 1786 the end came. His friends were
all gone. Children he had never had. He died alone, tended by a single
servant and his faithful dogs, whom he loved better than human beings
because, as he said, they were never ungrateful and remained true to
their friends.




THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM

HOW THE NEWLY FOUNDED NATIONAL OR DYNASTIC STATES OF EUROPE TRIED TO
MAKE THEMSELVES RICH AND WHAT WAS MEANT BY THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM


WE have seen how, during the sixteenth and the seventeenth centuries,
the states of our modern world began to take shape. Their origins
were different in almost every case. Some had been the result of the
deliberate effort of a single king. Others had happened by chance. Still
others had been the result of favourable natural geographic boundaries.
But once they had been founded, they had all of them tried to strengthen
their internal administration and to exert the greatest possible
influence upon foreign affairs. All this of course had cost a great deal
of money. The mediaeval state with its lack of centralised power did not
depend upon a rich treasury. The king got his revenues from the crown
domains and his civil service paid for itself. The modern centralised
state was a more complicated affair. The old knights disappeared and
hired government officials or bureaucrats took their place. Army, navy,
and internal administration demanded millions. The question then became
where was this money to be found?

Gold and silver had been a rare commodity in the middle ages. The
average man, as I have told you, never saw a gold piece as long as
he lived. Only the inhabitants of the large cities were familiar with
silver coin. The discovery of America and the exploitation of the
Peruvian mines changed all this. The centre of trade was transferred
from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic seaboard. The old "commercial
cities" of Italy lost their financial importance. New "commercial
nations" took their place and gold and silver were no longer a
curiosity.

Through Spain and Portugal and Holland and England, precious metals
began to find their way to Europe The sixteenth century had its own
writers on the subject of political economy and they evolved a theory of
national wealth which seemed to them entirely sound and of the greatest
possible benefit to their respective countries. They reasoned that both
gold and silver were actual wealth. Therefore they believed that the
country with the largest supply of actual cash in the vaults of its
treasury and its banks was at the same time the richest country. And
since money meant armies, it followed that the richest country was also
the most powerful and could rule the rest of the world.

We call this system the "mercantile system," and it was accepted with
the same unquestioning faith with which the early Christians believed
in Miracles and many of the present-day American business men believe in
the Tariff. In practice, the Mercantile system worked out as follows:
To get the largest surplus of precious metals a country must have a
favourable balance of export trade. If you can export more to your
neighbour than he exports to your own country, he will owe you money
and will be obliged to send you some of his gold. Hence you gain and he
loses. As a result of this creed, the economic program of almost every
seventeenth century state was as follows:

1. Try to get possession of as many precious metals as you can.

2. Encourage foreign trade in preference to domestic trade.

3. Encourage those industries which change raw materials into exportable
finished products.

4. Encourage a large population, for you will need workmen for your
factories and an agricultural community does not raise enough workmen.

5. Let the State watch this process and interfere whenever it is
necessary to do so.


Instead of regarding International Trade as something akin to a force of
nature which would always obey certain natural laws regardless of man's
interference, the people of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
tried to regulate their commerce by the help of official decrees and
royal laws and financial help on the part of the government.

In the sixteenth century Charles V adopted this Mercantile System
(which was then something entirely new) and introduced it into his many
possessions. Elizabeth of England flattered him by her imitation. The
Bourbons, especially King Louis XIV, were fanatical adherents of this
doctrine and Colbert, his great minister of finance, became the prophet
of Mercantilism to whom all Europe looked for guidance.

The entire foreign policy of Cromwell was a practical application of
the Mercantile System. It was invariably directed against the rich rival
Republic of Holland. For the Dutch shippers, as the common-carriers of
the merchandise of Europe, had certain leanings towards free-trade and
therefore had to be destroyed at all cost.

It will be easily understood how such a system must affect the colonies.
A colony under the Mercantile System became merely a reservoir of gold
and silver and spices, which was to be tapped for the benefit of the
home country. The Asiatic, American and African supply of precious
metals and the raw materials of these tropical countries became a
monopoly of the state which happened to own that particular colony.
No outsider was ever allowed within the precincts and no native was
permitted to trade with a merchant whose ship flew a foreign flag.

Undoubtedly the Mercantile System encouraged the development of
young industries in certain countries where there never had been any
manufacturing before. It built roads and dug canals and made for better
means of transportation. It demanded greater skill among the workmen and
gave the merchant a better social position, while it weakened the power
of the landed aristocracy.

On the other hand, it caused very great misery. It made the natives in
the colonies the victims of a most shameless exploitation. It exposed
the citizens of the home country to an even more terrible fate. It
helped in a great measure to turn every land into an armed camp and
divided the world into little bits of territory, each working for its
own direct benefit, while striving at all times to destroy the power of
its neighbours and get hold of their treasures. It laid so much stress
upon the importance of owning wealth that "being rich" came to be
regarded as the sole virtue of the average citizen. Economic systems
come and go like the fashions in surgery and in the clothes of women,
and during the nineteenth century the Mercantile System was discarded in
favor of a system of free and open competition. At least, so I have been
told.




THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION

AT THE END OF THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY EUROPE HEARD STRANGE REPORTS OF
SOMETHING WHICH HAD HAPPENED IN THE WILDERNESS; OF THE NORTH AMERICAN
CONTINENT. THE DESCENDANTS OF THE MEN WHO HAD PUNISHED KING CHARLES FOR
HIS INSISTENCE UPON HIS "DIVINE RIGHTS" ADDED A NEW CHAPTER TO THE OLD
STORY OF THE STRUGGLE FOR SELF-GOVERNMENT


FOR the sake of convenience, we ought to go back a few centuries and
repeat the early history of the great struggle for colonial possessions.

As soon as a number of European nations had been created upon the new
basis of national or dynastic interests, that is to say, during and
immediately after the Thirty Years War, their rulers, backed up by the
capital of their merchants and the ships of their trading companies,
continued the fight for more territory in Asia, Africa and America.

The Spaniards and the Portuguese had been exploring the Indian Sea
and the Pacific Ocean for more than a century ere Holland and England
appeared upon the stage. This proved an advantage to the latter. The
first rough work had already been done. What is more, the earliest
navigators had so often made themselves unpopular with the Asiatic and
American and African natives that both the English and the Dutch were
welcomed as friends and deliverers. We cannot claim any superior virtues
for either of these two races. But they were merchants before everything
else. They never allowed religious considerations to interfere with
their practical common sense. During their first relations with weaker
races, all European nations have behaved with shocking brutality. The
English and the Dutch, however, knew better where to draw the dine.
Provided they got their spices and their gold and silver and their
taxes, they were willing to let the native live as it best pleased him.

It was not very difficult for them therefore to establish themselves
in the richest parts of the world. But as soon as this had been
accomplished, they began to fight each other for still further
possessions. Strangely enough, the colonial wars were never settled in
the colonies themselves. They were decided three thousand miles away
by the navies of the contending countries. It is one of the most
interesting principles of ancient and modern warfare (one of the few
reliable laws of history) that "the nation which commands the sea is
also the nation which commands the land." So far this law has never
failed to work, but the modern airplane may have changed it. In the
