help thinking, scarce worthy to be bachelor to the generous Trudchen. He
seemed, however, fully desirous to second the views which she had
formed in their favour, for, saluting them respectfully, he asked of the
Countess, in Flemish, on which road she desired to be conducted.

"Guide me," said she, "towards the nearest town on the frontiers of
Brabant."

"You have then settled the end and object of your journey," said
Quentin, approaching his horse to that of Isabelle, and speaking French,
which their guide did not understand.

"Surely," replied the young lady, "for, situated as I now am, it must be
of no small detriment to me if I were to prolong a journey in my present
circumstances, even though the termination should be a rigorous prison."

"A prison," said Quentin.

"Yes, my friend, a prison, but I will take care that you shall not share
it."

"Do not talk--do not think of me," said Quentin. "Saw I you but safe, my
own concerns are little worth minding."

"Do not speak so loud," said the Lady Isabelle, "you will surprise our
guide--you see he has already rode on before us,"--for, in truth, the
good natured Fleming, doing as he desired to be done by, had removed
from them the constraint of a third person, upon Quentin's first motion
towards the lady.

"Yes," she continued, when she noticed they were free from observation,
"to you, my friend, my protector--why should I be ashamed to call you
what Heaven has made you to me?--to you it is my duty to say that my
resolution is taken to return to my native country, and to throw myself
on the mercy of the Duke of Burgundy. It was mistaken, though well meant
advice, which induced me ever to withdraw from his protection, and place
myself under that of the crafty and false Louis of France."

"And you resolve to become the bride, then, of the Count of Campobasso,
the unworthy favourite of Charles?"

Thus spoke Quentin, with a voice in which internal agony struggled
with his desire to assume an indifferent tone, like that of the poor
condemned criminal, when, affecting a firmness which he is far from
feeling, he asks if the death warrant be arrived.

"No, Durward, no," said the Lady Isabelle, sitting up erect in her
saddle, "to that hated condition all Burgundy's power shall not sink
a daughter of the House of Croye. Burgundy may seize on my lands and
fiefs, he may imprison my person in a convent, but that is the worst I
have to expect, and worse than that I will endure ere I give my hand to
Campobasso."

"The worst?" said Quentin, "and what worse can there be than plunder and
imprisonment?--Oh, think, while you have God's free air around you,
and one by your side who will hazard life to conduct you to England,
to Germany, even to Scotland, in all of which you shall find generous
protectors.--Oh, while this is the case, do not resolve so rashly to
abandon the means of liberty, the best gift that Heaven gives!--Oh, well
sang a poet of my own land--


     "Ah, freedom is a noble thing--
     Freedom makes men to have liking--
     Freedom the zest to pleasure gives--
     He lives at ease who freely lives.
     Grief, sickness, poortith [poverty], want, are all
     Summ'd up within the name of thrall."

     [from Barbour's Bruce]


She listened with a melancholy smile to her guide's tirade in praise of
liberty, and then answered, after a moment's pause. "Freedom is for man
alone--woman must ever seek a protector, since nature made her incapable
to defend herself. And where am I to find one?--In that voluptuary
Edward of England--in the inebriated Wenceslaus of Germany--in
Scotland?--Ah, Durward, were I your sister, and could you promise me
shelter in some of those mountain glens which you love to describe
where, for charity, or for the few jewels I have preserved, I might lead
an unharrassed life, and forget the lot I was born to--could you promise
me the protection of some honoured matron of the land--of some baron
whose heart was as true as his sword--that were indeed a prospect, for
which it were worth the risk of farther censure to wander farther and
wider."

There was a faltering tenderness of voice with which the Countess
Isabelle made this admission that at once filled Quentin with a
sensation of joy, and cut him to the very heart. He hesitated a moment
ere he made an answer, hastily reviewing in his mind the possibility
there might be that he could procure her shelter in Scotland, but the
melancholy truth rushed on him that it would be alike base and cruel
to point out to her a course which he had not the most distant power or
means to render safe.

"Lady," he said at last, "I should act foully against my honour and oath
of chivalry, did I suffer you to ground any plan upon the thoughts that
I have the power in Scotland to afford you other protection than that
of the poor arm which is now by your side. I scarce know that my blood
flows in the veins of an individual who now lives in my native land. The
Knight of Innerquharity stormed our Castle at midnight, and cut off all
that belonged to my name. Were I again in Scotland, our feudal enemies
are numerous and powerful, I single and weak, and even had the King a
desire to do me justice, he dared not, for the sake of redressing the
wrongs of a poor individual, provoke a chief who rides with five hundred
horse."

"Alas!" said the Countess, "there is then no corner of the world safe
from oppression, since it rages as unrestrained amongst those wild
hills which afford so few objects to covet as in our rich and abundant
lowlands!"

"It is a sad truth, and I dare not deny it," said the Scot, "that for
little more than the pleasure of revenge, and the lust of bloodshed, our
hostile clans do the work of executioners on each other, and Ogilvies
and the like act the same scenes in Scotland as De la Marck and his
robbers do in this country."

"No more of Scotland, then," said Isabelle, with a tone of indifference,
either real or affected--"no more of Scotland,--which indeed I mentioned
but in jest, to see if you really dared to recommend to me, as a place
of rest, the most distracted kingdom in Europe. It was but a trial of
your sincerity, which I rejoice to see may be relied on, even when your
partialities are most strongly excited. So, once more, I will think of
no other protection than can be afforded by the first honourable baron
holding of Duke Charles, to whom I am determined to render myself."

"And why not rather betake yourself to your own estates, and to your own
strong castle, as you designed when at Tours?" said Quentin. "Why
not call around you the vassals of your father, and make treaty with
Burgundy, rather than surrender yourself to him? Surely there must be
many a bold heart that would fight in your cause, and I know at least of
one who would willingly lay down his life to give example."

"Alas," said the Countess, "that scheme, the suggestion of the crafty
Louis, and, like all which he ever suggested, designed more for his
advantage than for mine, has become practicable, since it was betrayed
to Burgundy by the double traitor Zamet Hayraddin. My kinsman was then
imprisoned, and my houses garrisoned. Any attempt of mine would but
expose my dependents to the vengeance of Duke Charles, and why should I
occasion more bloodshed than has already taken place on so worthless an
account? No. I will submit myself to my Sovereign as a dutiful vassal,
in all which shall leave my personal freedom of choice uninfringed,
the rather that I trust my kinswoman, the Countess Hameline, who first
counselled, and indeed urged my flight, has already taken this wise and
honourable step."

"Your kinswoman!" repeated Quentin, awakened to recollections to which
the young Countess was a stranger, and which the rapid succession of
perilous and stirring events had, as matters of nearer concern, in fact
banished from his memory.

"Ay--my aunt--the Countess Hameline of Croye--know you aught of her?"
said the Countess Isabelle. "I trust she is now under the protection of
the Burgundian banner. You are silent. Know you aught of her?"

The last question, urged in a tone of the most anxious inquiry, obliged
Quentin to give some account of what he knew of the Countess's fate.
He mentioned that he had been summoned to attend her in a flight from
Liege, which he had no doubt the Lady Isabelle would be partaker in--he
mentioned the discovery that had been made after they had gained the
forest--and finally, he told his own return to the castle, and the
circumstances in which he found it. But he said nothing of the views
with which it was plain the Lady Hameline had left the Castle of
Schonwaldt, and as little about the floating report of her having fallen
into the hands of William de la Marck. Delicacy prevented his even
hinting at the one, and regard for the feelings of his companion at a
moment when strength and exertion were most demanded of her, prevented
him from alluding to the latter, which had, besides, only reached him as
a mere rumour.

This tale, though abridged of those important particulars, made a strong
impression on the Countess Isabelle, who, after riding some time in
silence, said at last, with a tone of cold displeasure, "And so you
abandoned my unfortunate relative in a wild forest, at the mercy of a
vile Bohemian and a traitorous waiting woman?--Poor kinswoman, thou wert
wont to praise this youth's good faith!"

"Had I not done so, madam." said Quentin, not unreasonably offended at
the turn thus given to his gallantry, "what had been the fate of one
to whose service I was far more devotedly bound? Had I not left the
Countess Hameline of Croye to the charge of those whom she had herself
selected as counsellors and advisers, the Countess Isabelle had been ere
now the bride of William de la Marck, the Wild Boar of Ardennes."

"You are right," said the Countess Isabelle, in her usual manner, "and
I, who have the advantage of your unhesitating devotion, have done you
foul and ungrateful wrong. But oh, my unhappy kinswoman! and the wretch
Marthon, who enjoyed so much of her confidence, and deserved it so
little--it was she that introduced to my kinswoman the wretched
Zamet and Hayraddin Maugrabin, who, by their pretended knowledge of
soothsaying and astrology, obtained a great ascendancy over her mind, it
was she who, strengthening their predictions, encouraged her in--I know
not what to call them--delusions concerning matches and lovers, which
my kinswoman's age rendered ungraceful and improbable. I doubt not that,
from the beginning, we had been surrounded by these snares by Louis of
France, in order to determine us to take refuge at his Court, or rather
to put ourselves into his power, after which rash act on our part,
how unkingly, unknightly, ignobly, ungentlemanlike, he hath conducted
himself towards us, you, Quentin Durward, can bear witness. But, alas!
my kinswoman--what think you will be her fate?"

Endeavouring to inspire hopes which he scarce felt, Durward answered
that the avarice of these people was stronger than any other passion,
that Marthon, even when he left them, seemed to act rather as the Lady
Hameline's protectress, and in fine, that it was difficult to conceive
any object these wretches could accomplish by the ill usage or murder
of the Countess, whereas they might be gainers by treating her well, and
putting her to ransom.

To lead the Countess Isabelle's thoughts from this melancholy subject,
Quentin frankly told her the treachery of the Maugrabin, which he had
discovered in the night quarter near Namur, and which appeared the
result of an agreement betwixt the King and William de la Marck.
Isabelle shuddered with horror, and then recovering herself said, "I am
ashamed, and I have sinned in permitting myself so far to doubt of
the saints' protection, as for an instant to have deemed possible the
accomplishment of a scheme so utterly cruel, base, and dishonourable,
while there are pitying eyes in Heaven to look down on human miseries.
It is not a thing to be thought of with fear or abhorrence, but to be
rejected as such a piece of incredible treachery and villainy, as it
were atheism to believe could ever be successful. But I now see plainly
why that hypocritical Marthon often seemed to foster every seed of petty
jealousy or discontent betwixt my poor kinswoman and myself, whilst she
always mixed with flattery, addressed to the individual who was present,
whatever could prejudice her against her absent kinswoman. Yet never
did I dream she could have proceeded so far as to have caused my
once affectionate kinswoman to have left me behind in the perils of
Schonwaldt, while she made her own escape."

"Did the Lady Hameline not mention to you, then," said Quentin, "her
intended flight?"

"No," replied the Countess, "but she alluded to some communication which
Marthon was to make to me. To say truth, my poor kinswoman's head was
so turned by the mysterious jargon of the miserable Hayraddin, whom that
day she had admitted to a long and secret conference, and she threw out
so many strange hints that--that--in short, I cared not to press on her,
when in that humour, for any explanation. Yet it was cruel to leave me
behind her."

"I will excuse the Lady Hameline from intending such unkindness," said
Quentin, "for such was the agitation of the moment, and the darkness
of the hour, that I believe the Lady Hameline as certainly conceived
herself accompanied by her niece, as I at the same time, deceived by
Marthon's dress and demeanour, supposed I was in the company of both
the Ladies of Croye: and of her especially," he added, with a low but
determined voice, "without whom the wealth of worlds would not have
tempted me to leave."

Isabelle stooped her head forward, and seemed scarce to hear the
emphasis with which Quentin had spoken. But she turned her face to him
again when he began to speak of the policy of Louis, and, it was not
difficult for them, by mutual communication, to ascertain that the
Bohemian brothers, with their accomplice Marthon, had been the agents of
that crafty monarch, although Zamet, the elder of them, with a perfidy
peculiar to his race, had attempted to play a double game, and had
been punished accordingly. In the same humour of mutual confidence, and
forgetting the singularity of their own situation, as well as the perils
of the road, the travellers pursued their journey for several hours,
only stopping to refresh their horses at a retired dorff, or hamlet, to
which they were conducted by Hans Glover, who, in all other respects,
as well as in leaving them much to their own freedom in conversation,
conducted himself like a person of reflection and discretion.

Meantime, the artificial distinction which divided the two lovers
(for such we may now term them) seemed dissolved, or removed, by the
circumstances in which they were placed, for if the Countess boasted the
higher rank, and was by birth entitled to a fortune incalculably larger
than that of the youth, whose revenue lay in his sword, it was to be
considered that, for the present, she was as poor as he, and for her
safety, honour, and life, exclusively indebted to his presence of mind,
valour, and devotion. They spoke not indeed of love, for though the
young lady, her heart full of gratitude and confidence, might have
pardoned such a declaration, yet Quentin, on whose tongue there was laid
a check, both by natural timidity and by the sentiments of chivalry,
would have held it an unworthy abuse of her situation had he said
anything which could have the appearance of taking undue advantage of
the opportunities which it afforded them. They spoke not then of love,
but the thoughts of it were on both sides unavoidable, and thus they
were placed in that relation to each other, in which sentiments of
mutual regard are rather understood than announced, and which, with the
freedoms which it permits, and the uncertainties that attend it, often
forms the most delightful hours of human existence, and as frequently
leads to those which are darkened by disappointment, fickleness, and all
the pains of blighted hope and unrequited attachment.

It was two hours after noon, when the travellers were alarmed by the
report of the guide, who, with paleness and horror in his countenance,
said that they were pursued by a party of De la Marck's Schwarzreiters.
These soldiers, or rather banditti, were bands levied in the Lower
Circles of Germany, and resembled the lanzknechts in every particular,
except that the former acted as light cavalry. To maintain the name of
Black Troopers, and to strike additional terror into their enemies, they
usually rode on black chargers, and smeared with black ointment their
arms and accoutrements, in which operation their hands and faces often
had their share. In morals and in ferocity these Schwarzreiters emulated
their pedestrian brethren the Lanzknechts.

["To make their horses and boots shine, they make themselves as black
as colliers. These horsemen wear black clothes, and poor though they
be, spend no small time in brushing them. The most of them have black
horses,... and delight to have their boots and shoes shine with blacking
stuff, their hands and faces become black, and thereof they have their
foresaid name."... Fynes Morrison's Itinerary.--S.]

On looking back, and discovering along the long level road which they
had traversed a cloud of dust advancing, with one or two of the
headmost troopers riding furiously in front of it, Quentin addressed his
companion: "Dearest Isabelle, I have no weapon left save my sword, but
since I cannot fight for you, I will fly with you. Could we gain yonder
wood that is before us ere they come up, we may easily find means to
escape."

"So be it, my only friend," said Isabelle, pressing her horse to the
gallop, "and thou, good fellow," she added, addressing Hans Glover, "get
thee off to another road, and do not stay to partake our misfortune and
danger."

The honest Fleming shook his head, and answered her generous
exhortation, with Nein, nein! das geht nicht [no, no! that must not be],
and continued to attend them, all three riding toward the shelter of the
wood as fast as their jaded horses could go, pursued, at the same time,
by the Schwarzreiters, who increased their pace when they saw them fly.
But notwithstanding the fatigue of the horses, still the fugitives
being unarmed, and riding lighter in consequence, had considerably the
advantage of the pursuers, and were within about a quarter of a mile
of the wood, when a body of men at arms, under a knight's pennon, was
discovered advancing from the cover, so as to intercept their flight.

"They have bright armour," said Isabelle, "they must be Burgundians. Be
they who they will, we must yield to them, rather than to the lawless
miscreants who pursue us."

A moment after, she exclaimed, looking on the pennon, "I know the cloven
heart which it displays! It is the banner of the Count of Crevecoeur, a
noble Burgundian--to him I will surrender myself."

Quentin Durward sighed, but what other alternative remained, and how
happy would he have been but an instant before, to have been certain
of the escape of Isabelle, even under worse terms? They soon joined the
band of Crevecoeur, and the Countess demanded to speak to the leader,
who had halted his party till he should reconnoitre the Black Troopers,
and as he gazed on her with doubt and uncertainty, she said, "Noble
Count--Isabelle of Croye, the daughter of your old companion in arms,
Count Reinold of Croye, renders herself, and asks protection from your
valour for her and hers."

"Thou shalt have it, fair kinswoman, were it against a host--always
excepting my liege lord, of Burgundy. But there is little time to talk
of it. These filthy looking fiends have made a halt, as if they intended
to dispute the matter.--By Saint George of Burgundy, they have the
insolence to advance against the banner of Crevecoeur! What! will not
the knaves be ruled? Damian, my lance!--Advance banner!--Lay your spears
in the rest!--Crevecoeur to the Rescue!"

Crying his war cry, and followed by his men at arms, he galloped rapidly
forward to charge the Schwarzreiters.



CHAPTER XXIV: THE SURRENDER

     Rescue or none, Sir Knight, I am your captive:
     Deal with me what your nobleness suggests--
     Thinking the chance of war may one day place you
     Where I must now be reckon'd--I' the roll
     Of melancholy prisoners.

     ANONYMOUS


The skirmish betwixt the Schwarzreiters and the Burgundian men at arms
lasted scarcely five minutes, so soon were the former put to the rout by
the superiority of the latter in armour, weight of horse, and military
spirit. In less than the space we have mentioned, the Count of
Crevecoeur, wiping his bloody sword upon his horse's mane ere he
sheathed it, came back to the verge of the forest, where Isabelle had
remained a spectator of the combat. One part of his people followed him,
while the other continued to pursue the flying enemy for a little space
along the causeway.

"It is shame," said the Count, "that the weapons of knights and
gentlemen should be soiled by the blood of those brutal swine."

So saying, he returned his weapon to the sheath and added, "This is a
rough welcome to your home, my pretty cousin, but wandering princesses
must expect such adventures. And well I came up in time, for, let me
assure you, the Black Troopers respect a countess's coronet as little
as a country wench's coif, and I think your retinue is not qualified for
much resistance."

"My Lord Count," said the Lady Isabelle, "without farther preface, let
me know if I am a prisoner, and where you are to conduct me."

"You know, you silly child," answered the Count, "how I would answer
that question, did it rest on my own will. But you, and your foolish
match making, marriage hunting aunt, have made such wild use of your
wings of late, that I fear you must be contented to fold them up in a
cage for a little while. For my part, my duty, and it is a sad one, will
be ended when I have conducted you to the Court of the Duke, at Peronne
for which purpose I hold it necessary to deliver the command of this
reconnoitring party to my nephew, Count Stephen, while I return with you
thither, as I think you may need an intercessor.--And I hope the young
giddy pate will discharge his duty wisely."

"So please you, fair uncle," said Count Stephen, "if you doubt my
capacity to conduct the men at arms, even remain with them yourself, and
I will be the servant and guard of the Countess Isabelle of Croye."

"No doubt, fair nephew," answered his uncle, "this were a goodly
improvement on my scheme, but methinks I like it as well in the way I
planned it. Please you, therefore, to take notice, that your business
here is not to hunt after and stick these black hogs, for which you
seemed but now to have felt an especial vocation, but to collect and
bring to me true tidings of what is going forward in the country of
Liege, concerning which we hear such wild rumours. Let some half score
of lances follow me and the rest remain with my banner under your
guidance."

"Yet one moment, cousin of Crevecoeur," said the Countess Isabelle, "and
let me, in yielding myself prisoner, stipulate at least for the safety
of those who have befriended me in my misfortunes. Permit this good
fellow, my trusty guide, to go back unharmed to his native town of
Liege."

"My nephew," said Crevecoeur, after looking sharply at Glover's honest
breadth of countenance, "shall guard this good fellow, who seems,
indeed, to have little harm in him, as far into the territory as he
himself advances, and then leave him at liberty."

"Fail not to remember me to the kind Gertrude," said the Countess to her
guide, and added, taking a string of pearls from under her veil, "Pray
her to wear this in remembrance of her unhappy friend."

Honest Glover took the string of pearls, and kissed with clownish
gesture, but with sincere kindness, the fair hand which had found such a
delicate mode of remunerating his own labours and peril.

"Umph! signs and tokens," said the Count, "any farther bequests to make,
my fair cousin?--It is time we were on our way."

"Only," said the Countess, making an effort to speak, "that you will be
pleased to be favourable to this--this young gentleman."

"Umph!" said Crevecoeur, casting the same penetrating glance on Quentin
which he had bestowed on Glover, but apparently with a much less
satisfactory result, and mimicking, though not offensively, the
embarrassment of the Countess.

"Umph!--Ay--this is a blade of another temper.--And pray, my cousin,
what has this--this very young gentleman done, to deserve such
intercession at your hands?"

"He has saved my life and honour," said the Countess, reddening with
shame and resentment.

Quentin also blushed with indignation, but wisely concluded that to give
vent to it might only make matters worse.

"Life and honour?--Umph!" said again the Count Crevecoeur, "methinks it
would have been as well, my cousin, if you had not put yourself in the
way of lying under such obligations to this very young gentleman.--But
let it pass. The young gentleman may wait on us, if his quality permit,
and I will see he has no injury--only I will myself take in future the
office of protecting your life and honour, and may perhaps find for him
some fitter duty than that of being a squire of the body to damosels
errant."

"My Lord Count," said Durward, unable to keep silence any longer,
"lest you should talk of a stranger in slighter terms than you might
afterwards think becoming, I take leave to tell you, that I am Quentin
Durward, an Archer of the Scottish Bodyguard, in which, as you well
know, none but gentlemen and men of honour are enrolled."

"I thank you for your information, and I kiss your hands, Seignior
Archer," said Crevecoeur, in the same tone of raillery. "Have the
goodness to ride with me to the front of the party."

As Quentin moved onward at the command of the Count, who had now the
power, if not the right, to dictate his motions, he observed that the
Lady Isabelle followed his motions with a look of anxious and timid
interest, which amounted almost to tenderness, and the sight of which
brought water into his eyes. But he remembered that he had a man's part
to sustain before Crevecoeur, who, perhaps of all the chivalry in France
or Burgundy, was the least likely to be moved to anything but laughter
by a tale of true love sorrow. He determined, therefore, not to wait
his addressing him, but to open the conversation in a tone which should
assert his claim to fair treatment, and to more respect than the Count,
offended perhaps at finding a person of such inferior note placed so
near the confidence of his high born and wealthy cousin, seemed disposed
to entertain for him.

"My Lord Count of Crevecoeur," he said, in a temperate but firm tone of
voice, "may I request of you, before our interview goes farther, to tell
me if I am at liberty, or am to account myself your prisoner?"

"A shrewd question," replied the Count, "which at present I can only
answer by another.--Are France and Burgundy, think you, at peace or war
with each other?"

"That," replied the Scot, "you, my lord, should certainly know better
than I. I have been absent from the Court of France, and have heard no
news for some time."

"Look you there," said the Count, "you see how easy it is to ask
questions, but how difficult to answer them. Why, I myself, who have
been at Peronne with the Duke for this week and better, cannot resolve
this riddle any more than you, and yet, Sir Squire, upon the solution of
that question depends the said point, whether you are prisoner or free
man, and, for the present, I must hold you as the former.--Only, if you
have really and honestly been of service to my kinswoman, and for you
are candid in your answers to the questions I shall ask, affairs shall
stand the better with you."

"The Countess of Croye," said Quentin, "is best judge if I have rendered
any service, and to her I refer you on that matter. My answers you will
yourself judge of when you ask me your questions."

"Umph!--haughty enough," muttered the Count of Crevecoeur, "and very
like one that wears a lady's favour in his hat, and thinks he must carry
things with a high tone, to honour the precious remnant of silk and
tinsel. Well, sir, I trust it will be no abatement of your dignity,
if you answer me, how long you have been about the person of the Lady
Isabelle of Croye?"

"Count of Crevecoeur," said Quentin Durward, "if I answer questions
which are asked in a tone approaching towards insult, it is only lest
injurious inferences should be drawn from my silence respecting one to
whom we are both obliged to render justice. I have acted as escort to
the Lady Isabelle since she left France to retire into Flanders."

"Ho! ho!" said the Count, "and that is to say, since she fled from
Plessis les Tours?--You, an Archer of the Scottish Guard, accompanied
her, of course, by the express orders of King Louis?"

However little Quentin thought himself indebted to the King of France,
who, in contriving the surprisal of the Countess Isabelle by William de
la Marck, had probably calculated on the young Scotchman's being slain
in her defence, he did not yet conceive himself at liberty to betray
any trust which Louis had reposed, or had seemed to repose, in him, and
therefore replied to Count Crevecoeur's inference that it was sufficient
for him to have the authority of his superior officer for what he had
done, and he inquired no farther.

"It is quite sufficient," said the Count. "We know the King does not
permit his officers to send the Archers of his Guard to prance like
paladins by the bridle rein of wandering ladies, unless he hath some
politic purpose to serve. It will be difficult for King Louis to
continue to aver so boldly that he knew' not of the Ladies of Croye's
having escaped from France, since they were escorted by one of his own
Life guard.--And whither, Sir Archer, was your retreat directed?"

"To Liege, my lord," answered the Scot, "where the ladies desired to be
placed under the protection of the late Bishop."

"The late Bishop!" exclaimed the Count of Crevecoeur, "is Louis of
Bourbon dead?--Not a word of his illness had reached the Duke.--Of what
did he die?"

"He sleeps in a bloody grave, my lord--that is, if his murderers have
conferred one on his remains."

"Murdered!" exclaimed Crevecoeur again.--"Holy Mother of Heaven!--young
man, it is impossible!"

"I saw the deed done with my own eyes, and many an act of horror
besides."

"Saw it! and made not in to help the good Prelate!" exclaimed the Count,
"or to raise the castle against his murderers?--Know'st thou not
that even to look on such a deed, without resisting it, is profane
sacrilege?"

"To be brief, my lord," said Durward, "ere this act was done, the castle
was stormed by the bloodthirsty William de la Marck, with help of the
insurgent Liegeois."

"I am struck with thunder," said Crevecoeur. "Liege in
insurrection!--Schonwaldt taken!--the Bishop murdered--Messenger of
sorrow, never did one man unfold such a packet of woes!--Speak--knew you
of this assault--of this insurrection--of this murder?--Speak--thou art
one of Louis's trusted Archers, and it is he that has aimed this painful
arrow.--Speak, or I will have thee torn with wild horses!"

"And if I am so torn, my lord, there can be nothing rent out of me,
that may not become a true Scottish gentleman: I know no more of these
villainies than you--was so far from being partaker in them, that I
would have withstood them to the uttermost, had my means in a twentieth
degree equalled my inclination. But what could I do?--they were
hundreds, and I but one. My only care was to rescue the Countess
Isabelle, and in that I was happily successful. Yet, had I been near
enough when the ruffian deed was so cruelly done on the old man, I
had saved his gray hairs, or I had avenged them, and as it was, my
abhorrence was spoken loud enough to prevent other horrors."

"I believe thee, youth," said the Count, "thou art neither of an age nor
nature to be trusted with such bloody work, however well fitted to be
the squire of dames. But alas! for the kind and generous Prelate, to be
murdered on the hearth where he so often entertained the stranger with
Christian charity and princely bounty--and that by a wretch, a monster!
a portentous growth of blood and cruelty!--bred up in the very hall
where he has imbrued his hands in his benefactor's blood! But I know not
Charles of Burgundy--nay, I should doubt of the justice of Heaven, if
vengeance be not as sharp, and sudden, and severe, as this villainy
has been unexampled in atrocity. And, if no other shall pursue the
murderer"--here he paused, grasped his sword, then quitting his bridle,
struck both gauntleted hands upon his breast, until his corselet
clattered, and finally held them up to heaven, as he solemnly
continued,--"I--I, Philip Crevecoeur of Cordes, make a vow to God, Saint
Lambert, and the Three Kings of Cologne, that small shall be my thought
of other earthly concerns, till I take full revenge on the murderers of
the good Louis of Bourbon, whether I find them in forest or field, in
city or in country, in hill or in plain, in King's Court or in God's
Church! and thereto I pledge hands and living, friends and followers,
life and honour. So help me God, and Saint Lambert of Liege, and the
Three Kings of Cologne!"

When the Count of Crevecoeur had made his vow, his mind seemed in some
sort relieved from the overwhelming grief and astonishment with which
he had heard the fatal tragedy that had been acted at Schonwaldt, and he
proceeded to question Durward more minutely concerning the particulars
of that disastrous affair, which the Scot, nowise desirous to abate
the spirit of revenge which the Count entertained against William de la
Marck, gave him at full length.

"But those blind, unsteady, faithless, fickle beasts, the Liegeois,"
said the Count, "that they should have combined themselves with this
inexorable robber and murderer, to put to death their lawful Prince!"

Durward here informed the enraged Burgundian that the Liegeois, or at
least the better class of them, however rashly they had run into the
rebellion against their Bishop, had no design, so far as appeared to
him, to aid in the execrable deed of De la Marck but, on the contrary,
would have prevented it if they had had the means, and were struck with
horror when they beheld it.

"Speak not of the faithless, inconstant plebeian rabble!" said
Crevecoeur. "When they took arms against a Prince who had no fault, save
that he was too kind and too good a master for such a set of ungrateful
slaves--when they armed against him, and broke into his peaceful house,
what could there be in their intention but murder?--when they banded
themselves with the Wild Boar of Ardennes, the greatest homicide in
the marches of Flanders, what else could there be in their purpose but
murder, which is the very trade he lives by? And again, was it not one
of their own vile rabble who did the very deed, by thine own account?
I hope to see their canals running blood by the flight of their
burning houses. Oh, the kind, noble, generous lord, whom they have
slaughtered!--Other vassals have rebelled under the pressure of imposts
and penury but the men of Liege in the fullness of insolence and
plenty."

He again abandoned the reins of his war horse, and wrung bitterly the
