"In the distance it looked an enormous length, its great bulk outlined
in black against the starry sky, every port-hole and saloon blazing with
light. It was impossible to think anything could be wrong with such a
leviathan, were it not for that ominous tilt downward in the bows, where
the water was by now up to the lowest row of port-holes.

"Presently, about 2 A. M., as near as I can remember, we observed it
settling very rapidly, with the bows and the bridge completely under
water, and concluded it was now only a question of minutes before it
went; and so it proved."

Mr. Beasley went on to tell of the spectacle of the sinking of the
Titanic, the terrible experiences of the survivors in the life-boats and
their final rescue by the Carpathia as already related.



CHAPTER XV. JACK THAYER'S OWN STORY OF THE WRECK

SEVENTEEN-YEAR-OLD SON OF PENNSYLVANIA RAILROAD OFFICIAL TELLS
MOVING STORY OF HIS RESCUE--TOLD MOTHER TO BE BRAVE--SEPARATED FROM
PARENTS--JUMPED WHEN VESSEL SANK--DRIFTED ON OVERTURNED BOAT PICKED UP
BY CARPATHIA

ONE of the calmest of the passengers was: young Jack Thayer, the
seventeen-year-old son of Mr. and Mrs. John B. Thayer. When his mother
was put into the life-boat he kissed her and told her to be brave,
saying that he and his father would be all right. He and Mr. Thayer
stood on the deck as the small boat in which Mrs. Thayer was a passenger
made off from the side of the Titanic over the smooth sea.

The boy's own account of his experience as told to one of his rescuers
is one of the most remarkable of all the wonderful ones that have come
from the tremendous catastrophe:

"Father was in bed, and mother and myself were about to get into bed.
There was no great shock, I was on my feet at the time and I do not
think it was enough to throw anyone down. I put on an overcoat and
rushed up on A deck on the port side. I saw nothing there. I then went
forward to the bow to see if I could see any signs of ice. The only ice
I saw was on the well deck. I could not see very far ahead, having just
come out of a brightly lighted room.

"I then went down to our room and my father and mother came on deck with
me, to the starboard side of A deck. We could not see anything there.
Father thought he saw small pieces of ice floating around, but I could
not see any myself. There was no big berg. We walked around to the port
side, and the ship had then a fair list to port. We stayed there looking
over the side for about five minutes. The list seemed very slowly to be
increasing.

"We then went down to our rooms on C deck, all of us dressing quickly,
putting on all our clothes. We all put on life-preservers, and over
these we put our overcoats. Then we hurried up on deck and walked
around, looking out at different places until the women were all ordered
to collect on the port side.


SEPARATED FROM PARENTS

"Father and I said good-bye to mother at the top of the stairs on A
deck. She and the maid went right out on A deck on the port side and
we went to the starboard side. As at this time we had no idea the boat
would sink we walked around A deck and then went to B deck. Then we
thought we would go back to see if mother had gotten off safely, and
went to the port side of A deck. We met the chief steward of the main
dining saloon and he told us that mother had not yet taken a boat, and
he took us to her.

"Father and mother went ahead and I followed. They went down to B deck
and a crowd got in front of me and I was not able to catch them, and
lost sight of them. As soon as I could get through the crowd I tried to
find them on B deck, but without success. That is the last time I saw my
father. This was about one half an hour before she sank. I then went to
the starboard side, thinking that father and mother must have gotten off
in a boat. All of this time I was with a fellow named Milton C. Long, of
New York, whom I had just met that evening.

"On the starboard side the boats were getting away quickly. Some boats
were already off in a distance. We thought of getting into one of the
boats, the last boat to go on the forward part of the starboard side,
but there seemed to be such a crowd around I thought it unwise to make
any attempt to get into it. He and I stood by the davits of one of the
boats that had left. I did not notice anybody that I knew except Mr.
Lindley, whom I had also just met that evening. I lost sight of him in a
few minutes. Long and I then stood by the rail just a little aft of the
captain's bridge.


THOUGHT SHIP WOULD FLOAT

"The list to the port had been growing greater all the time. About
this time the people began jumping from the stern. I thought of jumping
myself, but was afraid of being stunned on hitting the water. Three
times I made up my mind to jump out and slide down the davit ropes and
try to make the boats that were lying off from the ship, but each time
Long got hold of me and told me to wait a while. He then sat down and
I stood up waiting to see what would happen. Even then we thought she
might possibly stay afloat.

"I got a sight on a rope between the davits and a star and noticed that
she was gradually sinking. About this time she straightened up on an
even keel and started to go down fairly fast at an angle of about 30
degrees. As she started to sink we left the davits and went back and
stood by the rail about even with the second funnel.

"Long and myself said good-bye to each other and jumped up on the rail.
He put his legs over and held on a minute and asked me if I was coming.
I told him I would be with him in a minute. He did not jump clear, but
slid down the side of the ship. I never saw him again.

"About five seconds after he jumped I jumped out, feet first. I was
clear of the ship; went down, and as I came up I was pushed away from
the ship by some force. I came up facing the ship, and one of the
funnels seemed to be lifted off and fell towards me about 15 yards away,
with a mass of sparks and steam coming out of it. I saw the ship in a
sort of a red glare, and it seemed to me that she broke in two just in
front of the third funnel.

"This time I was sucked down, and as I came up I was pushed out again
and twisted around by a large wave, coming up in the midst of a great
deal of small wreckage. As I pushed my hand from my head it touched the
cork fender of an over-

{illust. caption = READING ROOM OF THE TITANIC}

{illust. caption = Copyright, 1912. International News Service. THE
SENATORIAL INVESTIGATION--ISMAY ON THE GRILL

J. Bruce Ismay, Managing Director of the........}


turned life-boat. I looked up and saw some men on the top and asked them
to give me a hand. One of them, who was a stoker, helped me up. In a
short time the bottom was covered with about twenty-five or thirty men.
When I got on this I was facing the ship.



{illust. caption = SKETCHES OF THE TITANIC BY "JACK" THAYER

These sketches were outlined by John B. Thayer, Jr., on the day of the
disaster, and afterwards filled in by L. D. Skidmon, of Brooklyn.}



"The stern then seemed to rise in the air and stopped at about an
angle of 60 degrees. It seemed to hold there for a time and then with a
hissing sound it shot right down out of sight with people jumping from
the stern. The stern either pivoted around towards our boat, or we were
sucked towards it, and as we only had one oar we could not keep away.
There did not seem to be very much suction and most of us managed to
stay on the bottom of our boat.

"We were then right in the midst of fairly large wreckage, with people
swimming all around us. The sea was very calm and we kept the boat
pretty steady, but every now and then a wave would wash over it.


SAID THE LORD'S PRAYER

"The assistant wireless operator was right next to me, holding on to
me and kneeling in the water. We all sang a hymn and said the Lord's
Prayer, and then waited for dawn to come. As often as we saw the other
boats in a distance we would yell, 'Ship ahoy!' But they could not
distinguish our cries from any of the others, so we all gave it up,
thinking it useless. It was very cold and none of us were able to move
around to keep warm, the water washing over her almost all the time.

"Toward dawn the wind sprang up, roughening up the water and making it
difficult to keep the boat balanced. The wireless man raised our hopes
a great deal by telling us that the Carpathia would be up in about three
hours. About 3.30 or 4 o'clock some men on our boat on the bow sighted
her mast lights. I could not see them, as I was sitting down with a man
kneeling on my leg. He finally got up and I stood up. We had the second
officer, Mr. Lightoller, on board. We had an officer's whistle and
whistled for the boats in the distance to come up and take us off.

"It took about an hour and a half for the boats to draw near. Two boats
came up. The first took half and the other took the balance, including
myself. We had great difficulty about this time in balancing the boat,
as the men would lean too far, but we were all taken aboard the already
crowded boat, and in about a half or three-quarters of an hour later we
were picked up by the Carpathia.

"I have noticed Second Officer Lightoller's statement that 'J. B. Thayer
was on our overturned boat,' which would give the impression that it was
father, when he really meant it was I, as he only learned my name in
a subsequent conversation on the Carpathia, and did not know I was
'junior'."



CHAPTER XVI. INCIDENTS RELATED BY JAMES McGOUGH

WOMEN FORCED INTO THE LIFE-BOATS--WHY SOME MEN WERE SAVED BEFORE
WOMEN--ASKED TO MAN LIFE-BOATS

SURROUNDED by his wife and members of his family, James McGough, of
Philadelphia, a buyer for the Gimbel Brothers, whose fate had been in
doubt, recited a most thrilling and graphic picture of the disaster.

As the Carpathia docked, Mrs. McGough, a brother and several friends of
the buyer, met him, and after the touching reunion had taken place the
party proceeded to Philadelphia.

Vivid in detail, Mr. McGough's story differs essentially from one the
imagination would paint. He declared that the boat was driving at a high
rate of speed at the time of the accident, and seemed impressed by the
calmness and apathy displayed by the survivors as they tossed on the
frozen seas in the little life-boats until the Carpathia picked them up.

The Titanic did not plunge into the water suddenly, he declared, but
settled slowly into the deep with its hundreds of passengers.

"The collision occurred at 20 minutes of 12," said Mr. McGough. "I was
sleeping in my cabin when I felt a wrench, not severe or terrifying.

"It seemed to me to be nothing more serious than the racing of the
screw, which often occurs when a ship plunges her bow deep into a heavy
swell, raising the stern out of water. We dressed hurriedly and ran to
the upper deck. There was little noise or tumult at the time.

"The promenade decks being higher from the base of the ship and thus
more insecure, strained and creaked; so we went to the lower decks.
By this time the engines had been reversed, and I could feel the ship
backing off. Officers and stewards ran through the corridors, shouting
for all to be calm, that there was no danger. We were warned, however,
to dress and put life-preservers on us. I had on what clothing I could
find and had stuffed some money in my pocket.


PARTING OF ASTOR AND BRIDE

"As I passed the gymnasium I saw Colonel Astor and his young wife
together. She was clinging to him, piteously pleading that he go into
the life-boat with her. He refused almost gruffly and was attempting to
calm her by saying that all her fears were groundless, that the accident
she feared would prove a farce. It proved different, however.

"None, I believe, knew that the ship was about to sink. I did not
realize it just then. When I reached the upper deck and saw tons of ice
piled upon our crushed bow the full realization came to me.

"Officers stood with drawn guns ordering the women into the boats. All
feared to leave the comparative safety of a broad and firm deck for the
precarious smaller boats. Women clung to their husbands, crying that
they would never leave without them, and had to be torn away.

"On one point all the women were firm. They would not enter a Life-boat
until men were in it first. They feared to trust themselves to the seas
in them. It required courage to step into the frail crafts as they swung
from the creaking davits. Few men were willing to take the chance. An
officer rushed behind me and shouted:

"'You're big enough to pull an oar. Jump into this boat or we'll never
be able to get the women off.' I was forced to do so, though I admit
that the ship looked a great deal safer to me than any small boat.

"Our boat was the second off. Forty or more persons were crowded into
it, and with myself and members of the crew at the oars, were pulled
slowly away. Huge icebergs, larger than the Pennsylvania depot at New
York, surrounded us. As we pulled away we could see boat after boat
filled and lowered to the waves. Despite the fact that they were new
and supposedly in excellent working order, the blocks jammed in many
instances, tilting the boats, loaded with people, at varying angles
before they reached the water.


BAND CONTINUED PLAYING

"As the life-boats pulled away the officers ordered the bands to play,
and their music did much to quell panic. It was a heart-breaking sight
to us tossing in an eggshell three-fourths of a mile away, to see the
great ship go down. First she listed to the starboard, on which side the
collision had occurred, then she settled slowly but steadily, without
hope of remaining afloat.

"The Titanic was all aglow with lights as if for a function. First we
saw the lights of the lower deck snuffed out. A while later and the
second deck illumination was extinguished in a similar manner. Then the
third and upper decks were darkened, and without plunging or rocking the
great ship disappeared slowly from the surface of the sea.

"People were crowded on each deck as it lowered into the water, hoping
in vain that aid would come in time. Some of the life-boats caught in
the merciless suction were swallowed with her.

"The sea was calm--calm as the water in a tumbler. But it was freezing
cold. None had dressed heavily, and all, therefore, suffered intensely.
The women did not shriek or grow hysterical while we waited through the
awful night for help. We men stood at the oars, stood because there
was no room for us to sit, and kept the boat headed into the swell to
prevent her capsizing. Another boat was at our side, but all the others
were scattered around the water.

"Finally, shortly before 6 o'clock, we saw the lights of the Carpathia
approaching. Gradually she picked up the survivors in the other boats
and then approached us. When we were lifted to the deck the women fell
helpless. They were carried to whatever quarters offered themselves,
while the men were assigned to the smoking room.

"Of the misery and suffering which was witnessed on the rescue ship I
know nothing. With the other men survivors I was glad to remain in the
smoking room until New York was reached, trying to forget the awful
experience.

"To us aboard the Carpathia came rumors of misstatements which were
being made to the public. The details of the wreck were wofully
misunderstood.

"Let me emphasize that the night was not foggy or cloudy. There was just
the beginning of the new moon, but every star in the sky was shining
brightly, unmarred by clouds. The boats were lowered from both sides of
the Titanic in time to escape, but there was not enough for all.



CHAPTER XVII. WIRELESS OPERATOR PRAISES HEROIC WORK

STORY OF HAROLD BRIDE, THE SURVIVING WIRELESS OPERATOR OF THE TITANIC,
WHO WAS WASHED OVERBOARD AND RESCUED BY LIFE-BOAT--BAND PLAYED RAG-TIME
AND "AUTUMN"

ONE of the most connected and detailed accounts of the horrible disaster
was that told by Harold Bride, the wireless operator. Mr. Bride said:

"I was standing by Phillips, the chief operator, telling him to go to
bed, when the captain put his head in the cabin.

"'We've struck an iceberg,' the captain said, 'and I'm having an
inspection made to tell what it has done for us. You better get ready to
