"And who may that be, pray you?"

"Stephen Smotherwell, if it like your honour, lockman of this Fair City.
I marvel your knighthood knows him not."

"And I marvel thy knaveship knows him not on professional acquaintance,"
replied Ramorny; "but I see thy nose is unslit, thy ears yet uncropped,
and if thy shoulders are scarred or branded, thou art wise for using a
high collared jerkin."

"He, he! your honour is pleasant," said the mediciner. "It is not by
personal circumstances that I have acquired the intimacy of Stephen
Smotherwell, but on account of a certain traffic betwixt us, in which
an't please you, I exchange certain sums of silver for the bodies,
heads, and limbs of those who die by aid of friend Stephen."

"Wretch!" exclaimed the knight with horror, "is it to compose charms and
forward works of witchcraft that you trade for these miserable relics of
mortality?"

"He, he, he! No, an it please your knighthood," answered the mediciner,
much amused with the ignorance of his patron; "but we, who are knights
of the scalpel, are accustomed to practise careful carving of the limbs
of defunct persons, which we call dissection, whereby we discover, by
examination of a dead member, how to deal with one belonging to a living
man, which hath become diseased through injury or otherwise. Ah! if your
honour saw my poor laboratory, I could show you heads and hands, feet
and lungs, which have been long supposed to be rotting in the mould.
The skull of Wallace, stolen from London Bridge; the head of Sir
Simon Fraser [the famous ancestor of the Lovats, slain at Halidon Hill
(executed in London in 1306)], that never feared man; the lovely skull
of the fair Katie Logie [(should be Margaret Logie), the beautiful
mistress of David II]. Oh, had I but had the fortune to have preserved
the chivalrous hand of mine honoured patron!"

Out upon thee, slave! Thinkest thou to disgust me with thy catalogue of
horrors? Tell me at once where thy discourse drives. How can thy traffic
with the hangdog executioner be of avail to serve me, or to help my
servant Bonthron?"

"Nay, I do not recommend it to your knighthood, save in an extremity,"
replied Dwining. "But we will suppose the battle fought and our cock
beaten. Now we must first possess him with the certainty that, if unable
to gain the day, we will at least save him from the hangman, provided he
confess nothing which can prejudice your knighthood's honour."

"Ha! ay, a thought strikes me," said Ramorny. "We can do more than this,
we can place a word in Bonthron's mouth that will be troublesome enough
to him whom I am bound to curse for being the cause of my misfortune.
Let us to the ban dog's kennel, and explain to him what is to be done
in every view of the question. If we can persuade him to stand the bier
ordeal, it may be a mere bugbear, and in that case we are safe. If he
take the combat, he is fierce as a baited bear, and may, perchance,
master his opponent; then we are more than safe, we are avenged. If
Bonthron himself is vanquished, we will put thy device in exercise; and
if thou canst manage it cleanly; we may dictate his confession, take the
advantage of it, as I will show thee on further conference, and make a
giant stride towards satisfaction for my wrongs. Still there remains
one hazard. Suppose our mastiff mortally wounded in the lists, who shall
prevent his growling out some species of confession different from what
we would recommend?"

"Marry, that can his mediciner," said Dwining. "Let me wait on him, and
have the opportunity to lay but a finger on his wound, and trust me he
shall betray no confidence."

"Why, there's a willing fiend, that needs neither pushing nor
prompting!" said Ramorny.

"As I trust I shall need neither in your knighthood's service."

"We will go indoctrinate our agent," continued the knight. "We shall
find him pliant; for, hound as he is, he knows those who feed from those
who browbeat him; and he holds a late royal master of mine in deep hate
for some injurious treatment and base terms which he received at his
hand. I must also farther concert with thee the particulars of
thy practice, for saving the ban dog from the hands of the herd of
citizens."

We leave this worthy pair of friends to their secret practices, of which
we shall afterwards see the results. They were, although of different
qualities, as well matched for device and execution of criminal projects
as the greyhound is to destroy the game which the slowhound raises, or
the slowhound to track the prey which the gazehound discovers by the
eye. Pride and selfishness were the characteristics of both; but, from
the difference of rank, education, and talents, they had assumed the
most different appearance in the two individuals.

Nothing could less resemble the high blown ambition of the favourite
courtier, the successful gallant, and the bold warrior than the
submissive, unassuming mediciner, who seemed even to court and delight
in insult; whilst, in his secret soul, he felt himself possessed of a
superiority of knowledge, a power both of science and of mind, which
placed the rude nobles of the day infinitely beneath him. So conscious
was Henbane Dwining of this elevation, that, like a keeper of wild
beasts, he sometimes adventured, for his own amusement, to rouse the
stormy passions of such men as Ramorny, trusting, with his humble
manner, to elude the turmoil he had excited, as an Indian boy will
launch his light canoe, secure from its very fragility, upon a broken
surf, in which the boat of an argosy would be assuredly dashed to
pieces. That the feudal baron should despise the humble practitioner
in medicine was a matter of course; but Ramorny felt not the less the
influence which Dwining exercised over him, and was in the encounter
of their wits often mastered by him, as the most eccentric efforts of
a fiery horse are overcome by a boy of twelve years old, if he has been
bred to the arts of the manege. But the contempt of Dwining for Ramorny
was far less qualified. He regarded the knight, in comparison with
himself, as scarcely rising above the brute creation; capable, indeed,
of working destruction, as the bull with his horns or the wolf with his
fangs, but mastered by mean prejudices, and a slave to priest craft, in
which phrase Dwining included religion of every kind. On the whole, he
considered Ramorny as one whom nature had assigned to him as a serf, to
mine for the gold which he worshipped, and the avaricious love of
which was his greatest failing, though by no means his worst vice. He
vindicated this sordid tendency in his own eyes by persuading himself
that it had its source in the love of power.

"Henbane Dwining," he said, as he gazed in delight upon the hoards which
he had secretly amassed, and which he visited from time to time, "is no
silly miser that doats on those pieces for their golden lustre: it is
the power with which they endow the possessor which makes him thus adore
them. What is there that these put not within your command? Do you love
beauty, and are mean, deformed, infirm, and old? Here is a lure the
fairest hawk of them all will stoop to. Are you feeble, weak, subject
to the oppression of the powerful? Here is that will arm in your defence
those more mighty than the petty tyrant whom you fear. Are you splendid
in your wishes, and desire the outward show of opulence? This dark chest
contains many a wide range of hill and dale, many a fair forest full
of game, the allegiance of a thousand vassals. Wish you for favour in
courts, temporal or spiritual? The smiles of kings, the pardon of popes
and priests for old crimes, and the indulgence which encourages priest
ridden fools to venture on new ones--all these holy incentives to vice
may be purchased for gold. Revenge itself, which the gods are said to
reserve to themselves, doubtless because they envy humanity so sweet a
morsel--revenge itself is to be bought by it. But it is also to be won
by superior skill, and that is the nobler mode of reaching it. I will
spare, then, my treasure for other uses, and accomplish my revenge
gratis; or rather I will add the luxury of augmented wealth to the
triumph of requited wrongs."

Thus thought Dwining, as, returned from his visit to Sir John Ramorny,
he added the gold he had received for his various services to the mass
of his treasure; and, having gloated over the whole for a minute or two,
turned the key on his concealed treasure house, and walked forth on his
visits to his patients, yielding the wall to every man whom he met and
bowing and doffing his bonnet to the poorest burgher that owned a petty
booth, nay, to the artificers who gained their precarious bread by the
labour of their welked hands.

"Caitiffs," was the thought of his heart while he did such
obeisance--"base, sodden witted mechanics! did you know what this
key could disclose, what foul weather from heaven would prevent your
unbonneting? what putrid kennel in your wretched hamlet would be
disgusting enough to make you scruple to fall down and worship the owner
of such wealth? But I will make you feel my power, though it suits my
honour to hide the source of it. I will be an incubus to your city,
since you have rejected me as a magistrate. Like the night mare, I will
hag ride ye, yet remain invisible myself. This miserable Ramorny, too,
he who, in losing his hand, has, like a poor artisan, lost the only
valuable part of his frame, he heaps insulting language on me, as if
anything which he can say had power to chafe a constant mind like mine!
Yet, while he calls me rogue, villain, and slave, he acts as wisely as
if he should amuse himself by pulling hairs out of my head while my hand
had hold of his heart strings. Every insult I can pay back instantly
by a pang of bodily pain or mental agony, and--he, he!--I run no long
accounts with his knighthood, that must be allowed."

While the mediciner was thus indulging his diabolical musing, and
passing, in his creeping manner, along the street, the cry of females
was heard behind him.

"Ay, there he is, Our Lady be praised!--there is the most helpful man in
Perth," said one voice.

"They may speak of knights and kings for redressing wrongs, as they
call it; but give me worthy Master Dwining the potter carrier, cummers,"
replied another.

At the same moment, the leech was surrounded and taken hold of by the
speakers, good women of the Fair City.

"How now, what's the matter?" said Dwining, "whose cow has calved?"

"There is no calving in the case," said one of the women, "but a poor
fatherless wean dying; so come awa' wi' you, for our trust is constant
in you, as Bruce said to Donald of the Isles."

"Opiferque per orbem dicor," said Henbane Dwining. "What is the child
dying of?"

"The croup--the croup," screamed one of the gossips; "the innocent is
rouping like a corbie."

"Cynanche trachealis--that disease makes brief work. Show me the house
instantly," continued the mediciner, who was in the habit of exercising
his profession liberally, not withstanding his natural avarice, and
humanely, in spite of his natural malignity. As we can suspect him of no
better principle, his motive most probably may have been vanity and the
love of his art.

He would nevertheless have declined giving his attendance in the present
case had he known whither the kind gossips were conducting him, in time
sufficient to frame an apology. But, ere he guessed where he was going,
the leech was hurried into the house of the late Oliver Proudfute, from
which he heard the chant of the women as they swathed and dressed the
corpse of the umquhile bonnet maker for the ceremony of next morning, of
which chant the following verses may be received as a modern imitation:

     Viewless essence, thin and bare,
     Well nigh melted into air,
     Still with fondness hovering near
     The earthly form thou once didst wear,

     Pause upon thy pinion's flight;
     Be thy course to left or right,
     Be thou doom'd to soar or sink,
     Pause upon the awful brink.

     To avenge the deed expelling
     Thee untimely from thy dwelling,
     Mystic force thou shalt retain
     O'er the blood and o'er the brain.

     When the form thou shalt espy
     That darken'd on thy closing eye,
     When the footstep thou shalt hear
     That thrill'd upon thy dying ear,

     Then strange sympathies shall wake,
     The flesh shall thrill, the nerves shall quake,
     The wounds renew their clotter'd flood,
     And every drop cry blood for blood!

Hardened as he was, the physician felt reluctance to pass the threshold
of the man to whose death he had been so directly, though, so far as the
individual was concerned, mistakingly, accessory.

"Let me pass on, women," he said, "my art can only help the living--the
dead are past our power."

"Nay, but your patient is upstairs--the youngest orphan"--Dwining was
compelled to go into the house. But he was surprised when, the instant
he stepped over the threshold, the gossips, who were busied with the
dead body, stinted suddenly in their song, while one said to the others:

"In God's name, who entered? That was a large gout of blood."

"Not so," said another voice, "it is a drop of the liquid balm."

"Nay, cummer, it was blood. Again I say, who entered the house even
now?"

One looked out from the apartment into the little entrance, where
Dwining, under pretence of not distinctly seeing the trap ladder by
which he was to ascend into the upper part of this house of lamentation,
was delaying his progress purposely, disconcerted with what had reached
him of the conversation.

"Nay, it is only worthy Master Henbane Dwining," answered one of the
sibyls.

"Only Master Dwining," replied the one who had first spoken, in a tone
of acquiescence--"our best helper in need! Then it must have been balm
sure enough."

"Nay," said the other, "it may have been blood nevertheless; for
the leech, look you, when the body was found, was commanded by the
magistrates to probe the wound with his instruments, and how could the
poor dead corpse know that that was done with good purpose?"

"Ay, truly, cummer; and as poor Oliver often mistook friends for enemies
while he was in life, his judgment cannot be thought to have mended
now."

Dwining heard no more, being now forced upstairs into a species of
garret, where Magdalen sat on her widowed bed, clasping to her bosom
her infant, which, already black in the face and uttering the gasping,
crowing sound which gives the popular name to the complaint, seemed on
the point of rendering up its brief existence. A Dominican monk sat near
the bed, holding the other child in his arms, and seeming from time to
time to speak a word or two of spiritual consolation, or intermingle
some observation on the child's disorder.

The mediciner cast upon the good father a single glance, filled
With that ineffable disdain which men of science entertain against
interlopers. His own aid was instant and efficacious: he snatched the
child from the despairing mother, stripped its throat, and opened
a vein, which, as it bled freely, relieved the little patient
instantaneously. In a brief space every dangerous symptom disappeared,
and Dwining, having bound up the vein, replaced the infant in the arms
of the half distracted mother.

The poor woman's distress for her husband's loss, which had been
suspended during the extremity of the child's danger, now returned on
Magdalen with the force of an augmented torrent, which has borne down
the dam dike that for a while interrupted its waves.

"Oh, learned sir," she said, "you see a poor woman of her that you once
knew a richer. But the hands that restored this bairn to my arms must
not leave this house empty. Generous, kind Master Dwining, accept of
his beads; they are made of ebony and silver. He aye liked to have his
things as handsome as any gentleman, and liker he was in all his ways to
a gentleman than any one of his standing, and even so came of it."

With these words, in a mute passion of grief she pressed to her breast
and to her lips the chaplet of her deceased husband, and proceeded to
thrust it into Dwining's hands.

"Take it," she said, "for the love of one who loved you well. Ah, he
used ever to say, if ever man could be brought back from the brink of
the grave, it must be by Master Dwining's guidance. And his ain bairn
is brought back this blessed day, and he is lying there stark and stiff,
and kens naething of its health and sickness! Oh, woe is me, and walawa!
But take the beads, and think on his puir soul, as you put them through
your fingers, he will be freed from purgatory the sooner that good
people pray to assoilzie him."

"Take back your beads, cummer; I know no legerdemain, can do no
conjuring tricks," said the mediciner, who, more moved than perhaps his
rugged nature had anticipated, endeavoured to avoid receiving the ill
omened gift. But his last words gave offence to the churchman, whose
presence he had not recollected when he uttered them.

"How now, sir leech!" said the Dominican, "do you call prayers for the
dead juggling tricks? I know that Chaucer, the English maker, says of
you mediciners, that your study is but little on the Bible. Our mother,
the church, hath nodded of late, but her eyes are now opened to discern
friends from foes; and be well assured--"

"Nay, reverend father," said Dwining, "you take me at too great
advantage. I said I could do no miracles, and was about to add that,
as the church certainly could work such conclusions, those rich beads
should be deposited in your hands, to be applied as they may best
benefit the soul of the deceased."

He dropped the beads into the Dominican's hand, and escaped from the
house of mourning.

"This was a strangely timed visit," he said to himself, when he got safe
out of doors. "I hold such things cheap as any can; yet, though it is
but a silly fancy, I am glad I saved the squalling child's life. But
I must to my friend Smotherwell, whom I have no doubt to bring to my
purpose in the matter of Bonthron; and thus on this occasion I shall
save two lives, and have destroyed only one."



CHAPTER XXIII.

     Lo! where he lies embalmed in gore,
     His wound to Heaven cries:
     The floodgates of his blood implore
     For vengeance from the skies.

     Uranus and Psyche.


The High Church of St. John in Perth, being that of the patron saint
of the burgh, had been selected by the magistrates as that in which
the community was likely to have most fair play for the display of the
ordeal. The churches and convents of the Dominicans, Carthusians, and
others of the regular clergy had been highly endowed by the King and
nobles, and therefore it was the universal cry of the city council
that "their ain good auld St. John," of whose good graces they thought
themselves sure, ought to be fully confided in, and preferred to the new
patrons, for whom the Dominicans, Carthusians, Carmelites, and others
had founded newer seats around the Fair City. The disputes between the
regular and secular clergy added to the jealousy which dictated this
choice of the spot in which Heaven was to display a species of miracle,
upon a direct appeal to the divine decision in a case of doubtful guilt;
and the town clerk was as anxious that the church of St. John should be
preferred as if there had been a faction in the body of saints for and
against the interests of the beautiful town of Perth.

Many, therefore, were the petty intrigues entered into and disconcerted
for the purpose of fixing on the church. But the magistrates,
considering it as a matter touching in a close degree the honour of
the city, determined, with judicious confidence in the justice and
impartiality of their patron, to confide the issue to the influence of
St. John.

It was, therefore, after high mass had been performed with the greatest
solemnity of which circumstances rendered the ceremony capable, and
after the most repeated and fervent prayers had been offered to Heaven
by the crowded assembly, that preparations were made for appealing
to the direct judgment of Heaven on the mysterious murder of the
unfortunate bonnet maker.

The scene presented that effect of imposing solemnity which the rites
of the Catholic Church are so well qualified to produce. The eastern
window, richly and variously painted, streamed down a torrent of
chequered light upon the high altar. On the bier placed before it were
stretched the mortal remains of the murdered man, his arms folded on his
breast, and his palms joined together, with the fingers pointed upwards,
as if the senseless clay was itself appealing to Heaven for vengeance
against those who had violently divorced the immortal spirit from its
mangled tenement.

Close to the bier was placed the throne which supported Robert of
Scotland and his brother Albany. The Prince sat upon a lower stool,
beside his father--an arrangement which occasioned some observation, as,
Albany's seat being little distinguished from that of the King, the heir
apparent, though of full age, seemed to be degraded beneath his uncle in
the sight of the assembled people of Perth. The bier was so placed as to
leave the view of the body it sustained open to the greater part of the
multitude assembled in the church.

At the head of the bier stood the Knight of Kinfauns, the challenger,
and at the foot the young Earl of Crawford, as representing the
defendant. The evidence of the Duke of Rothsay in expurgation, as it
was termed, of Sir John Ramorny, had exempted him from the necessity of
attendance as a party subjected to the ordeal; and his illness served as
a reason for his remaining at home. His household, including those who,
though immediately in waiting upon Sir John, were accounted the Prince's
domestics, and had not yet received their dismissal, amounted to eight
or ten persons, most of them esteemed men of profligate habits, and who
might therefore be deemed capable, in the riot of a festival evening,
of committing the slaughter of the bonnet maker. They were drawn up in a
row on the left side of the church, and wore a species of white cassock,
resembling the dress of a penitentiary. All eyes being bent on them,
several of this band seemed so much disconcerted as to excite among the
spectators strong prepossessions of their guilt. The real murderer had
a countenance incapable of betraying him--a sullen, dark look, which
neither the feast nor wine cup could enliven, and which the peril of
discovery and death could not render dejected.

We have already noticed the posture of the dead body. The face was bare,
as were the breast and arms. The rest of the corpse was shrouded in a
winding sheet of the finest linen, so that, if blood should flow from
any place which was covered, it could not fail to be instantly manifest.

High mass having been performed, followed by a solemn invocation to the
Deity, that He would be pleased to protect the innocent, and make known
the guilty, Eviot, Sir John Ramorny's page, was summoned to undergo the
ordeal. He advanced with an ill assured step. Perhaps he thought his
internal consciousness that Bonthron must have been the assassin might
be sufficient to implicate him in the murder, though he was not directly
accessory to it. He paused before the bier; and his voice faltered,
as he swore by all that was created in seven days and seven nights, by
heaven, by hell, by his part of paradise, and by the God and author
of all, that he was free and sackless of the bloody deed done upon the
corpse before which he stood, and on whose breast he made the sign of
the cross, in evidence of the appeal. No consequences ensued. The body
remained stiff as before, the curdled wounds gave no sign of blood.

The citizens looked on each other with faces of blank disappointment.
They had persuaded themselves of Eviot's guilt, and their suspicions had
been confirmed by his irresolute manner. Their surprise at his escape
was therefore extreme. The other followers of Ramorny took heart, and
advanced to take the oath with a boldness which increased as one by
one they performed the ordeal, and were declared, by the voice of
the judges, free and innocent of every suspicion attaching to them on
account of the death of Oliver Proudfute.

But there was one individual who did not partake that increasing
confidence. The name of "Bonthron--Bonthron!" sounded three times
through the aisles of the church; but he who owned it acknowledged the
call no otherwise than by a sort of shuffling motion with his feet, as
if he had been suddenly affected with a fit of the palsy.

"Speak, dog," whispered Eviot, "or prepare for a dog's death!"

But the murderer's brain was so much disturbed by the sight before him,
that the judges, beholding his deportment, doubted whether to ordain him
to be dragged before the bier or to pronounce judgment in default; and
it was not until he was asked for the last time whether he would submit
to the ordeal, that he answered, with his usual brevity:

"I will not; what do I know what juggling tricks may be practised to
take a poor man's life? I offer the combat to any man who says I harmed
that dead body."

And, according to usual form, he threw his glove upon the floor of the
church.

Henry Smith stepped forward, amidst the murmured applauses of his fellow
citizens, which even the august presence could not entirely suppress;
and, lifting the ruffian's glove, which he placed in his bonnet, laid
down his own in the usual form, as a gage of battle. But Bonthron raised
it not.

"He is no match for me," growled the savage, "nor fit to lift my glove.
I follow the Prince of Scotland, in attending on his master of horse.
This fellow is a wretched mechanic."

Here the Prince interrupted him. "Thou follow me, caitiff! I discharge
thee from my service on the spot. Take him in hand, Smith, and beat
him as thou didst never thump anvil! The villain is both guilty and
recreant. It sickens me even to look at him; and if my royal father will
be ruled by me, he will give the parties two handsome Scottish axes, and
we will see which of them turns out the best fellow before the day is
half an hour older."

This was readily assented to by the Earl of Crawford and Sir Patrick
Charteris, the godfathers of the parties, who, as the combatants were
men of inferior rank, agreed that they should fight in steel caps, buff
jackets, and with axes, and that as soon as they could be prepared for
the combat.

The lists were appointed in the Skinners' Yards--a neighbouring space of
ground, occupied by the corporation from which it had the name, and
who quickly cleared a space of about thirty feet by twenty-five for
the combatants. Thither thronged the nobles, priests, and commons--all
excepting the old King, who, detesting such scenes of blood, retired
to his residence, and devolved the charge of the field upon the Earl
of Errol, Lord High Constable, to whose office it more particularly
belonged. The Duke of Albany watched the whole proceeding with a close
and wary eye. His nephew gave the scene the heedless degree of notice
which corresponded with his character.

When the combatants appeared in the lists, nothing could be more
striking than the contrast betwixt the manly, cheerful countenance of
the smith, whose sparkling bright eye seemed already beaming with the
victory he hoped for, and the sullen, downcast aspect of the brutal
Bonthron, who looked as if he were some obscene bird, driven into
sunshine out of the shelter of its darksome haunts. They made oath
severally, each to the truth of his quarrel--a ceremony which Henry
Gow performed with serene and manly confidence, Bonthron with a dogged
resolution, which induced the Duke of Rothsay to say to the High
Constable: "Didst thou ever, my dear Errol, behold such a mixture of
malignity, cruelty, and I think fear, as in that fellow's countenance?"

"He is not comely," said the Earl, "but a powerful knave as I have
seen."

"I'll gage a hogshead of wine with you, my good lord, that he loses the
day. Henry the armourer is as strong as he, and much more active; and
then look at his bold bearing! There is something in that other fellow
that is loathsome to look upon. Let them yoke presently, my dear
Constable, for I am sick of beholding him."

The High Constable then addressed the widow, who, in her deep weeds, and
having her children still beside her, occupied a chair within the lists:
"Woman, do you willingly accept of this man, Henry the Smith, to do
battle as your champion in this cause?"

"I do--I do, most willingly," answered Magdalen Proudfute; "and may the
blessing of God and St. John give him strength and fortune, since he
strikes for the orphan and fatherless!"

"Then I pronounce this a fenced field of battle," said the Constable
aloud. "Let no one dare, upon peril of his life, to interrupt this
combat by word, speech, or look. Sound trumpets, and fight, combatants!"

The trumpets flourished, and the combatants, advancing from the opposite
ends of the lists, with a steady and even pace, looked at each other
attentively, well skilled in judging from the motion of the eye the
direction in which a blow was meditated. They halted opposite to, and
within reach of, each other, and in turn made more than one feint
to strike, in order to ascertain the activity and vigilance of the
opponent. At length, whether weary of these manoeuvres, or fearing lest
in a contest so conducted his unwieldy strength would be foiled by the
activity of the smith, Bonthron heaved up his axe for a downright blow,
adding the whole strength of his sturdy arms to the weight of the weapon
in its descent. The smith, however, avoided the stroke by stepping
aside; for it was too forcible to be controlled by any guard which he
could have interposed. Ere Bonthron recovered guard, Henry struck him
a sidelong blow on the steel headpiece, which prostrated him on the
ground.

"Confess, or die," said the victor, placing his foot on the body of
the vanquished, and holding to his throat the point of the axe, which
terminated in a spike or poniard.

"I will confess," said the villain, glaring wildly upwards on the sky.
"Let me rise."

"Not till you have yielded," said Harry Smith.

"I do yield," again murmured Bonthron, and Henry proclaimed aloud that
his antagonist was defeated.

The Dukes of Rothsay and Albany, the High Constable, and the Dominican
prior now entered the lists, and, addressing Bonthron, demanded if he
acknowledged himself vanquished.

"I do," answered the miscreant.

"And guilty of the murder of Oliver Proudfute?"

"I am; but I mistook him for another."

"And whom didst thou intend to slay?" said the prior. "Confess, my son,
and merit thy pardon in another world for with this thou hast little
more to do."

"I took the slain man," answered the discomfited combatant, "for him
whose hand has struck me down, whose foot now presses me."

"Blessed be the saints!" said the prior; "now all those who doubt the
virtue of the holy ordeal may have their eyes opened to their error. Lo,
he is trapped in the snare which he laid for the guiltless."

"I scarce ever saw the man," said the smith. "I never did wrong to him
or his. Ask him, an it please your reverence, why he should have thought
of slaying me treacherously."

"It is a fitting question," answered the prior. "Give glory where it is
due, my son, even though it is manifested by thy shame. For what reason
wouldst thou have waylaid this armourer, who says he never wronged
thee?"

"He had wronged him whom I served," answered Bonthron, "and I meditated
the deed by his command."

"By whose command?" asked the prior.

Bonthron was silent for an instant, then growled out: "He is too mighty
for me to name."

"Hearken, my son," said the churchman; "tarry but a brief hour, and the
mighty and the mean of this earth shall to thee alike be empty sounds.
The sledge is even now preparing to drag thee to the place of execution.
Therefore, son, once more I charge thee to consult thy soul's weal by
glorifying Heaven, and speaking the truth. Was it thy master, Sir John
Ramorny, that stirred thee to so foul a deed?"

"No," answered the prostrate villain, "it was a greater than he." And at
the same time he pointed with his finger to the Prince.

"Wretch!" said the astonished Duke of Rothsay; "do you dare to hint that
I was your instigator?"

"You yourself, my lord," answered the unblushing ruffian.

"Die in thy falsehood, accursed slave!" said the Prince; and, drawing
his sword, he would have pierced his calumniator, had not the Lord High
Constable interposed with word and action.

"Your Grace must forgive my discharging mine office: this caitiff must
be delivered into the hands of the executioner. He is unfit to be dealt
with by any other, much less by your Highness."

"What! noble earl," said Albany aloud, and with much real or affected
emotion, "would you let the dog pass alive from hence, to poison the
people's ears with false accusations against the Prince of Scotland? I
say, cut him to mammocks upon the spot!"

"Your Highness will pardon me," said the Earl of Errol; "I must protect
him till his doom is executed."

"Then let him be gagged instantly," said Albany. "And you, my royal
nephew, why stand you there fixed in astonishment? Call your resolution
up--speak to the prisoner--swear--protest by all that is sacred that you
knew not of this felon deed. See how the people look on each other and
whisper apart! My life on't that this lie spreads faster than any Gospel
truth. Speak to them, royal kinsman, no matter what you say, so you be
constant in denial."

"What, sir," said Rothsay, starting from his pause of surprise and
mortification, and turning haughtily towards his uncle; "would you have
