"To love you, Rosa."

Rosa shook her head, after which followed a pause.

"Well,"--Cornelius at last broke the silence,--"well, Rosa, everything
changes in the realm of nature; the flowers of spring are succeeded by
other flowers; and the bees, which so tenderly caressed the violets
and the wall-flowers, will flutter with just as much love about the
honey-suckles, the rose, the jessamine, and the carnation."

"What does all this mean?" asked Rosa.

"You have abandoned me, Miss Rosa, to seek your pleasure elsewhere.
You have done well, and I will not complain. What claim have I to your
fidelity?"

"My fidelity!" Rosa exclaimed, with her eyes full of tears, and without
caring any longer to hide from Cornelius this dew of pearls dropping on
her cheeks, "my fidelity! have I not been faithful to you?"

"Do you call it faithful to desert me, and to leave me here to die?"

"But, Mynheer Cornelius," said Rosa, "am I not doing everything for you
that could give you pleasure? have I not devoted myself to your tulip?"

"You are bitter, Rosa, you reproach me with the only unalloyed pleasure
which I have had in this world."

"I reproach you with nothing, Mynheer Cornelius, except, perhaps,
with the intense grief which I felt when people came to tell me at the
Buytenhof that you were about to be put to death."

"You are displeased, Rosa, my sweet girl, with my loving flowers."

"I am not displeased with your loving them, Mynheer Cornelius, only it
makes me sad to think that you love them better than you do me."

"Oh, my dear, dear Rosa! look how my hands tremble; look at my pale
cheek, hear how my heart beats. It is for you, my love, not for
the black tulip. Destroy the bulb, destroy the germ of that flower,
extinguish the gentle light of that innocent and delightful dream, to
which I have accustomed myself; but love me, Rosa, love me; for I feel
deeply that I love but you."

"Yes, after the black tulip," sighed Rosa, who at last no longer
coyly withdrew her warm hands from the grating, as Cornelius most
affectionately kissed them.

"Above and before everything in this world, Rosa."

"May I believe you?"

"As you believe in your own existence."

"Well, then, be it so; but loving me does not bind you too much."

"Unfortunately, it does not bind me more than I am bound; but it binds
you, Rosa, you."

"To what?"

"First of all, not to marry."

She smiled.

"That's your way," she said; "you are tyrants all of you. You worship a
certain beauty, you think of nothing but her. Then you are condemned to
death, and whilst walking to the scaffold, you devote to her your last
sigh; and now you expect poor me to sacrifice to you all my dreams and
my happiness."

"But who is the beauty you are talking of, Rosa?" said Cornelius, trying
in vain to remember a woman to whom Rosa might possibly be alluding.

"The dark beauty with a slender waist, small feet, and a noble head; in
short, I am speaking of your flower."

Cornelius smiled.

"That is an imaginary lady love, at all events; whereas, without
counting that amorous Jacob, you by your own account are surrounded with
all sorts of swains eager to make love to you. Do you remember Rosa,
what you told me of the students, officers, and clerks of the Hague? Are
there no clerks, officers, or students at Loewestein?"

"Indeed there are, and lots of them."

"Who write letters?"

"They do write."

"And now, as you know how to read----"

Here Cornelius heaved a sigh at the thought, that, poor captive as he
was, to him alone Rosa owed the faculty of reading the love-letters
which she received.

"As to that," said Rosa, "I think that in reading the notes addressed to
me, and passing the different swains in review who send them to me, I am
only following your instructions."

"How so? My instructions?"

"Indeed, your instructions, sir," said Rosa, sighing in her turn; "have
you forgotten the will written by your hand on the Bible of Cornelius de
Witt? I have not forgotten it; for now, as I know how to read, I read it
every day over and over again. In that will you bid me to love and marry
a handsome young man of twenty-six or eight years. I am on the look-out
for that young man, and as the whole of my day is taken up with your
tulip, you must needs leave me the evenings to find him."

"But, Rosa, the will was made in the expectation of death, and, thanks
to Heaven, I am still alive."

"Well, then, I shall not be after the handsome young man, and I shall
come to see you."

"That's it, Rosa, come! come!"

"Under one condition."

"Granted beforehand!"

"That the black tulip shall not be mentioned for the next three days."

"It shall never be mentioned any more, if you wish it, Rosa."

"No, no," the damsel said, laughing, "I will not ask for
impossibilities."

And, saying this, she brought her fresh cheek, as if unconsciously,
so near the iron grating, that Cornelius was able to touch it with his
lips.

Rosa uttered a little scream, which, however, was full of love, and
disappeared.




Chapter 21. The Second Bulb


The night was a happy one, and the whole of the next day happier still.

During the last few days, the prison had been heavy, dark, and lowering,
as it were, with all its weight on the unfortunate captive. Its walls
were black, its air chilling, the iron bars seemed to exclude every ray
of light.

But when Cornelius awoke next morning, a beam of the morning sun
was playing about those iron bars; pigeons were hovering about with
outspread wings, whilst others were lovingly cooing on the roof or near
the still closed window.

Cornelius ran to that window and opened it; it seemed to him as if new
life, and joy, and liberty itself were entering with this sunbeam into
his cell, which, so dreary of late, was now cheered and irradiated by
the light of love.

When Gryphus, therefore, came to see his prisoner in the morning, he no
longer found him morose and lying in bed, but standing at the window,
and singing a little ditty.

"Halloa!" exclaimed the jailer.

"How are you this morning?" asked Cornelius.

Gryphus looked at him with a scowl.

"And how is the dog, and Master Jacob, and our pretty Rosa?"

Gryphus ground his teeth, saying.--

"Here is your breakfast."

"Thank you, friend Cerberus," said the prisoner; "you are just in time;
I am very hungry."

"Oh! you are hungry, are you?" said Gryphus.

"And why not?" asked Van Baerle.

"The conspiracy seems to thrive," remarked Gryphus.

"What conspiracy?"

"Very well, I know what I know, Master Scholar; just be quiet, we shall
be on our guard."

"Be on your guard, friend Gryphus; be on your guard as long as you
please; my conspiracy, as well as my person, is entirely at your
service."

"We'll see that at noon."

Saying this, Gryphus went out.

"At noon?" repeated Cornelius; "what does that mean? Well, let us wait
until the clock strikes twelve, and we shall see."

It was very easy for Cornelius to wait for twelve at midday, as he was
already waiting for nine at night.

It struck twelve, and there were heard on the staircase not only the
steps of Gryphus, but also those of three or four soldiers, who were
coming up with him.

The door opened. Gryphus entered, led his men in, and shut the door
after them.

"There, now search!"

They searched not only the pockets of Cornelius, but even his person;
yet they found nothing.

They then searched the sheets, the mattress, and the straw mattress of
his bed; and again they found nothing.

Now, Cornelius rejoiced that he had not taken the third sucker under his
own care. Gryphus would have been sure to ferret it out in the search,
and would then have treated it as he did the first.

And certainly never did prisoner look with greater complacency at a
search made in his cell than Cornelius.

Gryphus retired with the pencil and the two or three leaves of white
paper which Rosa had given to Van Baerle, this was the only trophy
brought back from the expedition.

At six Gryphus came back again, but alone; Cornelius tried to propitiate
him, but Gryphus growled, showed a large tooth like a tusk, which he had
in the corner of his mouth, and went out backwards, like a man who is
afraid of being attacked from behind.

Cornelius burst out laughing, to which Gryphus answered through the
grating,--

"Let him laugh that wins."

The winner that day was Cornelius; Rosa came at nine.

She was without a lantern. She needed no longer a light, as she could
now read. Moreover, the light might betray her, as Jacob was dogging
her steps more than ever. And lastly, the light would have shown her
blushes.

Of what did the young people speak that evening? Of those matters of
which lovers speak at the house doors in France, or from a balcony into
the street in Spain, or down from a terrace into a garden in the East.

They spoke of those things which give wings to the hours; they spoke of
everything except the black tulip.

At last, when the clock struck ten, they parted as usual.

Cornelius was happy, as thoroughly happy as a tulip-fancier would be to
whom one has not spoken of his tulip.

He found Rosa pretty, good, graceful, and charming.

But why did Rosa object to the tulip being spoken of?

This was indeed a great defect in Rosa.

Cornelius confessed to himself, sighing, that woman was not perfect.

Part of the night he thought of this imperfection; that is to say, so
long as he was awake he thought of Rosa.

After having fallen asleep, he dreamed of her.

But the Rosa of his dreams was by far more perfect than the Rosa of real
life. Not only did the Rosa of his dreams speak of the tulip, but also
brought to him a black one in a china vase.

Cornelius then awoke, trembling with joy, and muttering,--

"Rosa, Rosa, I love you."

And as it was already day, he thought it right not to fall asleep again,
and he continued following up the line of thought in which his mind was
engaged when he awoke.

Ah! if Rosa had only conversed about the tulip, Cornelius would
have preferred her to Queen Semiramis, to Queen Cleopatra, to Queen
Elizabeth, to Queen Anne of Austria; that is to say, to the greatest or
most beautiful queens whom the world has seen.

But Rosa had forbidden it under pain of not returning; Rosa had
forbidden the least mention of the tulip for three days. That meant
seventy-two hours given to the lover to be sure; but it was seventy-two
hours stolen from the horticulturist.

There was one consolation: of the seventy-two hours during which
Rosa would not allow the tulip to be mentioned, thirty-six had passed
already; and the remaining thirty-six would pass quickly enough:
eighteen with waiting for the evening's interview, and eighteen with
rejoicing in its remembrance.

Rosa came at the same hour, and Cornelius submitted most heroically to
the pangs which the compulsory silence concerning the tulip gave him.

His fair visitor, however, was well aware that, to command on the one
point, people must yield on another; she therefore no longer drew back
her hands from the grating, and even allowed Cornelius tenderly to kiss
her beautiful golden tresses.

Poor girl! she had no idea that these playful little lovers' tricks were
much more dangerous than speaking of the tulip was; but she became aware
of the fact as she returned with a beating heart, with glowing cheeks,
dry lips, and moist eyes.

And on the following evening, after the first exchange of salutations,
she retired a step, looking at him with a glance, the expression of
which would have rejoiced his heart could he but have seen it.

"Well," she said, "she is up."

"She is up! Who? What?" asked Cornelius, who did not venture on a
belief that Rosa would, of her own accord, have abridged the term of his
probation.

"She? Well, my daughter, the tulip," said Rosa.

"What!" cried Cornelius, "you give me permission, then?"

"I do," said Rosa, with the tone of an affectionate mother who grants a
pleasure to her child.

"Ah, Rosa!" said Cornelius, putting his lips to the grating with the
hope of touching a cheek, a hand, a forehead,--anything, in short.

He touched something much better,--two warm and half open lips.

Rosa uttered a slight scream.

Cornelius understood that he must make haste to continue the
conversation. He guessed that this unexpected kiss had frightened Rosa.

"Is it growing up straight?"

"Straight as a rocket," said Rosa.

"How high?"

"At least two inches."

"Oh, Rosa, take good care of it, and we shall soon see it grow quickly."
