things which are scarce and difficult of attainment appear honourable
and acceptable to men. And a third topic is, to put the question,
whether, if there are any instances of men who, in the times of our
ancestors, were thought worthy of such honours on account of their
eminent virtue, they will not be likely to think it some diminution
of their own glory, when they see that such men as these have such
rewards conferred on them. And then comes the enumeration of those
men, and the comparison of them with those against whom the orator is
speaking. But the topics to be used by the man who is claiming the
reward are, first of all, the exaggeration of his own action; and
next, the comparison of the actions of those men who have had rewards
conferred on them with his own; and lastly, he will urge that other
men will be repelled from the pursuit of virtue if he himself is
denied the reward to which he is entitled.

But the means of conferring the rewards are taken into consideration
when any pecuniary reward is asked for; for then it is necessary to
consider whether there is an abundance of land, and revenue, and
money, or a dearth of them. The common topics are,--that it is
desirable to increase the resources of the state, not to diminish
them; and that he is a shameless man who is not content with gratitude
in requital of his services, but who demands also solid rewards. But,
on the other hand, it may be urged, that it is a sordid thing to
argue about money, when the question is about showing gratitude to a
benefactor; and that the claimant is not asking wages for a piece of
work, but honour such as is due for an important service.

And we have now said enough about the statements of cases; now it
seems necessary to speak of those controversies which turn upon the
letter of the law.

XL. The controversy turns upon the letter of the law when some doubt
arises from the consideration of the exact terms in which it is drawn
up. That arises from ambiguity, from the letter of the law, from its
intention, from contrary laws, from ratiocination, and definition. But
a controversy arises from ambiguity, when it is an obscure point what
was the intention of the writer, because the written words mean two or
even more different things. In this manner:--"The father of a family,
when he was making his son his heir, left a hundredweight of silver
plate to his wife, in these terms:

"Let my heir give my wife a hundredweight of silver plate, consisting
of such vessels as may be chosen. After he was dead, the mother
demands of her son some very magnificent vessels of very valuable
carving. He says that he is only bound to give her those vessels which
he himself chooses." Here, in the first place, it is necessary to show
if possible that the will has not been drawn up in ambiguous terms,
because all men in ordinary conversation are accustomed to employ that
expression, whether consisting of one word or more, in that meaning in
which the speaker hopes to show that this is to be understood. Then
it is desirable to prove that from both the preceding and subsequent
language of the will, the real meaning which is being sought may
be made evident. So that if all the words, or most of them, were
considered separately by themselves, they would appear of doubtful
meaning. But as for those which can be made intelligible by a
consideration of the whole document, these have no business to be
thought obscure.

In the next place, it will be proper to draw one's conclusion as to
the intentions which were entertained by the writer from all his other
writings, and actions, and sayings, and his general disposition, and
from the usual tenor of his life; and to scrutinise that very document
in which this ambiguous phrase is contained which is the subject of
the present inquiry, all over, in all its parts, so as to see whether
there is anything opposite to that interpretation which we contend
for, or contrary to that which the adversary insists on adopting. For
it will be easy to consider what it is probable that the man who drew
up the document intended, from its whole tenor, and from the
character of the writer, and from those other circumstances which are
characteristic of the persons concerned. In the next place, it will
be desirable to show, if the facts of the case itself afford any
opportunity for doing so, that that meaning which the opposite party
contends for, is a much more inconvenient one to adopt than that which
we have assumed to be the proper one, because there is no possible
means of carrying out or complying with that other meaning; but what
we contend for can be accomplished with great ease and convenience.

As in this law (for there is no objection to citing an imaginary
one for the sake of giving an instance, in order to the more easy
comprehension of the matter):--"Let not a prostitute have a golden
crown. If such a case exists, it must be confiscated." Now, in
opposition to a man who contended that that was to become public
property in accordance with this law, it might be argued, "that there
could be no way of making a prostitute public property, and there is
no intelligible meaning for the law if that is what is to be adopted
as its proper construction; but as to the confiscation of anything
made of gold, the management and the result is easy, and there is no
difficulty in it."

XLI. And it will be desirable also to pay diligent attention to this
point, whether if that sense is sanctioned which the opposite party
contends for, any more advantageous, or honourable, or necessary
object appears to have been omitted by the framer of the document in
question. That will be done if we can prove that the object which
we are attempting to prove is either honourable, or expedient, or
necessary; and if we can also assert that the interpretation which our
adversaries insist upon, is not at all entitled to such a character.
In the next place, if there is in the law itself any controversy
arising from any ambiguity, it will be requisite to take great care to
show that the meaning which our adversaries adopt is provided for in
some other law. But it will be very serviceable indeed to point out
how the testator would have expressed himself, if he had wished the
interpretation which the adversary puts upon his words to be carried
into execution or understood. As for instance, in this cause, the one,
I mean, in which the question is about the silver plate, the woman
might argue, "That there was no use in adding the words 'as may be
chosen,' if the matter was left to the selection of the heir; for if
no such words had been inserted, there could have been no doubt at all
that the heir might have given whatever he himself chose. So that it
was downright madness, if he wished to take precautions in favour of
his heir, to add words which might have been wholly left out without
such omission prejudicing his heir's welfare."

Wherefore, it will be exceedingly advisable to employ this species of
argument in such causes:--"If he had written with this intention he
would not have employed that word; he would not have placed that word
in that place;" for it is from such particulars as these that it is
easiest to collect the intention of the writer. In the next place, it
is necessary to inquire when the document was drawn up, in order that
it may be understood what it was likely that he should have wished
at such a time. Afterwards it will be advisable to point out, by
reference to the topics furnished by the deliberative argument, what
is more useful and what more honourable to the testator to write, and
to the adversary to prove; and it will be well for both parties to
employ common topics, if there is any room for extending either
argument.

XLII. A controversy arises with respect to the letter of the document
and to its meaning, when one party employs the very words which are
set down in the paper; and the other applies all his arguments to that
which he affirms that the framer of the document intended. But the
intention of the framer of the document must be proved by the man who
defends himself, by reference to that intention, to have always the
same object in view and the same meaning; and it must also, either
by reference to the action or to some result, be adapted to the time
which the inquiry concerns. It must be proved always to have the same
object in view, in this way:--"The head of a house, at a time when he
had no children, but had a wife, inserted this clause in his will: 'If
I have a son or sons born to me, he or they is or are to be my heir
or heirs.' Then follow the ordinary provisions. After that comes the
following clause: 'If my son dies before he comes into the property,
which is held in trust for him, then,' says the clause, 'you shall be
my reversionary heir.' He never has a son. His next of kin raise a
dispute with the man who is named as the heir, in the case of the
testator's son dying before he comes into the property which his
guardians are holding for him." In this case it cannot be said that
the meaning of the testator ought to be made to suit the time or some
particular result, because that intention alone is proved on which the
man who is arguing against the language of the will relies, in order
to defend his own right to the inheritance.

There is another class of topics which introduce the question as to
the meaning of expressions, in which the mere simple intention of the
framer is not endeavoured to be proved, for that has the same weight
with reference to every period and every action; but it is argued that
it ought to be interpreted with reference to some particular action,
or to some event happening at that particular time. And that is
especially supported by the divisions of the juridical assumptive mode
of investigation. For then the comparison is instituted; as in the
case of "a man who, though the law forbad the gates to be opened
by night, did open them in a certain war, and admitted some
reinforcements into the town, in order to prevent their being
overwhelmed by the enemy if they remained outside the gates; because
the enemy were encamped close to the walls." Then comes the retorting
of the charge; as in the case of "that soldier who, when the common
law of all men forbad any one to kill a man, slew his own military
tribune who was attempting to offer violence to him." Then comes
the exculpation; as in the case of "that man who, when the law had
appointed some particular days within which he was to proceed on his
embassy, did not set out because the quaestor did not furnish him with
money for his expenses." Then comes the admission of the fact by way
of purgation, and also by the excuse of ignorance; as "in the case of
the sacrificing a calf;" and with reference to compulsion, as "in the
case of the beaked ship;" and with reference to accident, as "in the
case of the sudden rise of the river Eurotas." Wherefore, it is best
that the meaning should be introduced in such a way, as that the
framer of the law should be proved to have intended some one definite
thing; else in such a way that he should be proved to have meant this
particular thing, under these circumstances, and at this time.

XLIII. He, therefore, who is defending the exact language of the law,
will generally be able to use all these topics; and will always be
able to use the greater part of them. First of all, he will employ a
panegyric of the framer of it, and the common topic that those who
are the judges have no business to consider anything except what
is expressly stated in the law; and so much the more if any legal
document be brought forward, that is to say, either the law itself,
or some portion of the law. Afterwards--and this is a point of the
greatest importance--he will employ a comparison of the action or of
the charge brought by the opposite party with the actual words of the
law; he will show what is contained in the law, what has been done,
what the judge has sworn. And it will be well to vary this topic in
many ways, sometimes professing to wonder in his own mind what can be
said against this argument; sometimes recurring to the duty of the
judge, and asking of him what more he can think it requisite to
hear, or what further he expects; sometimes by bringing forward
the adversary himself, as if in the position of a person making an
accusation; that is to say, by asking him whether he denies that the
law is drawn up in that manner, or whether he denies that he himself
has contravened it, or disputed it. If he denies either of these
points, then one must avow that one will say no more; if he denies
neither of them, and yet continues to urge his arguments in opposition
to one, then one must say that it is impossible for any one ever to
expect to see a more impudent man. And it will be well to dwell on
this point as if nothing besides were to be said, as if nothing could
be said in contradiction, by reciting several times over what is
written; by often contrasting the conduct of the adversary with what
is written; and sometimes by recurring vehemently to the topic of the
judge himself; in which one will remind the judge of what oath he has
taken, of what his conduct is bound to be; and urge that there are two
causes on account of which a judge is bound to hesitate, one if the
law be obscurely worded, the other if the adversary denies anything.
But as in this instance the wording of the law is plain, and the
adversary admits every fact that is alleged, the judge has now nothing
to do but to fulfil the law, and not to interpret it.

XLIV. When this point has been sufficiently insisted on, then it will
be advisable to do away with the effect of those things which the
adversary has been able to urge by way of objection. But such
objections will be made if the framer of the law can be absolutely
proved to have meant one thing, and written another; as in that
dispute concerning the will which we mentioned just now: or some
adventitious cause may be alleged why it was not possible or not
desirable to obey the written law minutely. If it is stated that the
framer of the law meant one thing, and wrote another, then he who
appeals to the letter of the law will say that it is our business not
to discuss the intention of a man who has left us a plain proof of
that intention, to prevent our having any doubt about it; and that
many inconveniences must ensue if the principle is laid down that we
may depart from the letter of the law. For that then those who frame
laws will not think that the laws which they are making will remain
firm; and those who are judges will have no certain principle to
follow if once they get into the habit of departing from the letter of
the law. But if the intention of the framer of the law is what is to
be looked at, then it is he, and not his adversaries, who relies on
the meaning of the lawgiver. For that that person comes much nearer to
the intention of the framer of a law who interprets it from his own
writings, than he who does not look at the meaning of the framer of
the law by that writing of his own which he has left to be as it were
an image of his meaning, but who investigates it under the guidance of
some private suspicions of his own.

If the party who stands on the meaning of the lawgiver brings forward
any reasons, then, in the first place, it will be necessary to reply
to those reasons; to urge how absurd it is for a man not to deny that
he has acted contrary to the law, but at the same time to give some
reason for having acted so. Then one will say too that all things are
turned upside down; that formerly prosecutors were in the habit of
trying to persuade the judges that the person who was being prosecuted
before them was implicated in some fault, and of alleging some reasons
which had instigated him to commit this fault; but that now the
accused person himself is giving the reasons why he has offended
against the laws. Then it will be proper to introduce this division,
each portion of which will have many lines of argument suitable to it:
in the first place, that there is no law with reference to which it
is allowable to allege any reasons contrary to the law; in the next
place, that if such a course is admissible in any law, this is such a
law that it is not admissible with respect to it; and lastly, that,
even if such reasons ever might be alleged, at all events this is not
such a reason.

XLV. The first part of the argument is confirmed by pretty nearly the
same topics as these: that the framer of the law was not deficient in
either ability, or pains, or any faculty requisite to enable him to
express plainly what his intention was; that it would not have been
either displeasing or difficult to him to insert such an exception as
that which the opposite party contends for in his law, if he thought
any exception requisite; and in fact, that those people who frame
laws often do insert clauses of exceptions. After that it is well to
enumerate some of the laws which have exceptional clauses attached to
them, and to take especial care to see whether in the law itself which
is under discussion there is any exception made in any chapter, or
whether the same man who framed this law has made exceptions in other
laws, so that it may be more naturally inferred that he would have
made exceptions in this one, if he had thought exceptions requisite;
and it will be well also to show that to admit of a reason for
violating the law is the same thing as abrogating the law, because
when once such a reason is taken into consideration it is no use to
consider it with reference to the law, inasmuch as it is not stated in
the law. And if such a principle is once laid down, then a reason for
violating the law, and a licence to do so, is given to every one, as
soon as they perceive that you as judges decide the matter in a way
which depends on the ability of the man who has violated the law, and
not with reference to the law which you have sworn to administer.
Then, too, one must point out that all principles on which judges are
to judge, and citizens are to live, will be thrown into confusion if
the laws are once departed from; for the judges will not have any
rules to follow, if they depart from what is set down in the law, and
no principles on which they can reprove others for having acted in
defiance of the law. And that all the rest of the citizens will be
ignorant what they are to do, if each of them regulates all his
actions according to his own ideas, and to whatever whim or fancy
comes into his head, and not according to the common statute law of
the state.

After that it will be suitable to ask the judges why they occupy
themselves at all with the business of other people;--why they allow
themselves to be harassed in discharging the offices of the republic,
when they might often spend the time in promoting their own ends and
private interests;--why they take an oath in a certain form;--why they
assemble at a regular time and go away at a regular time;--why no
one of them ever alleges any reason for being less frequent in his
discharge of his duty to the republic, except such as is set down in
some formal law as an exception. And one may ask, whether they think
it right that they should be bound down and exposed to so much
inconvenience by the laws, and at the same time allow our adversaries
to disregard the laws. After that it will be natural to put the
question to the judges whether, when the party accused himself
endeavours to set down in the law, as an exception, that particular
case in which he admits that he has violated the law, they will
consent to it. And to ask also, whether what he has actually done is
more scandalous and more shameless than the exception which he wishes
to insert in the law;--what indeed can be more shameless? Even if the
judges were inclined to make such an addition to the law, would the
people permit it? One might also press upon them that this is even a
more scandalous measure, when they are unable to make an alteration in
the language and letter of the law, to alter it in the actual facts,
and to give a decision contrary to it; and besides, that it is a
scandalous thing that anything should be taken from the law, or that
the law should be abrogated or changed in any part whatever, without
the people having any opportunity of knowing, or approving, or
disapproving of what is done; that such conduct is calculated to bring
the judges themselves into great odium; that it is not the proper time
nor opportunity for amending the laws; that this ought only to be
brought forward in an assembly of the people, and only to be done by
the people; that if they now do so, the speaker would like to know
who is the maker of the new law, and who are to obey it; that he
sees actions impending, and wishes to prevent them; that as all
such proceedings as these are exceedingly useless and abundantly
discreditable, the law, whatever it is like, ought, while it exists,
to be maintained by the judges, and hereafter, if it is disapproved
of, to be amended by the people. Besides this, if there were no
written law, we should take great trouble to find one; and we should
not place any confidence in that man, not even if he were in no
personal danger himself; but now, when there is a written law, it is
downright insanity to attend to what that man says who has violated
the law, rather than to the language of the law itself. By these and
similar arguments it is proved that it is not right to admit any
excuse which is contrary to the letter of the law.

XLVI. The second part is that in which it is desirable to prove that
if such a proceeding is right with respect to other laws, it is not
advisable with respect to this one. This will be shown if the
law appears to refer to matters of the greatest importance, and
usefulness, and honourableness, and sanctity; so that it is
disadvantageous, or discreditable, or impious not to obey the law as
carefully as possible in such a matter. Or the law may be proved to
have been drawn up so carefully, and such great diligence may be shown
to have been exercised in framing each separate provision of it, and
in making every exception that was allowable, that it is not at all
probable that anything proper to be inserted has been omitted in so
carefully considered a document.

The third topic is one exceedingly necessary for a man who is arguing
in defence of the letter of the law; by which it may be urged, that
even if it is decent for an excuse to be admitted contrary to
the letter of the law, still that excuse which is alleged by his
adversaries is of all others the least proper to be so alleged. And
this topic is necessary for him on this account,--because the man who
is arguing against the letter of the law ought always to have some
point of equity to allege on his side. For it is the greatest possible
impudence for a man who wishes to establish some point in opposition
to the exact letter of the law, not to attempt to fortify himself in
so doing, with the assistance of the law. If therefore the accuser in
any respect weakens the defence by this topic, he will appear in
every respect to have more justice and probability in favour of
his accusation. For all the former part of his speech has had this
object,--that the judges should feel it impossible, even if they
wished it, to avoid condemning the accused person; but this part has
for its object the making them wish to give such a decision, even if
it were not inevitable.

And that result will be obtained, if we use those topics by which
guilt may be proved not to be in the man who defends himself, by using
the topic of comparison, or by getting rid of the accusation, or by
recrimination, or by some species of confession, (concerning all which
topics we have already written with all the precision of which we were
capable,) and if we take those which the case will admit of for the
purpose of throwing discredit on the argument of our adversary;--or
if reasons and arguments are adduced to show why or with what design
those expressions were inserted in the law or will in question, so
that our side of the question may appear established by the meaning
and intention of the writer, and not only by the language which he has
employed. Or the fact may be proved by other statements and arguments.

XLVII. But any one who speaks against the letter of the law will first
of all introduce that topic by which the equity of the excuse is
proved; or he will point out with what feelings, with what design, and
on what account he did the action in question. And whatever excuse he
alleges he will defend according to some of the rules which I have
already given with respect to assumptions. And when he has dwelt on
this topic for some time, and set forth the principles of his conduct
and the equity of his cause in the most specious manner he can, he
will also add, in opposition to the arguments of his adversaries,
that it is from these topics for the most part that excuses which are
admissible ought to be drawn. He will urge that there is no law which
sanctions the doing of any disadvantageous or unjust action; that all
punishments which are enacted by the laws have been enacted for the
sake of chastising guilt and wickedness; that the very framer of the
laws, if he were alive, would approve of this conduct, and would
have done the very same thing himself if he had been in similar
circumstances. And that it is on this account that the framer of the
law appointed judges of a certain rank and age, in order that there
might be men, not capable merely of reading out what he had written,
which any boy might do, but able also to understand his thoughts and
to interpret his intentions. He will add, that that framer of the law,
if he had been intrusting the laws which he was drawing up to foolish
men and illiterate judges, would have set down everything with the
most scrupulous diligence; but, as it is, because he was aware what
sort of men were to be the judges, he did not put down many things
which appeared to him to be evident; and he expected that you would be
not mere readers of his writings, but interpreters of his intentions.
Afterwards he will proceed to ask his adversaries--"What would you
say if I had done so and so?" "What would you think if so and so had
happened?" "Suppose any one of those things had happened which would
have had a most unfailing excuse, or a most undeniable necessity,
would you then have prosecuted me?" But the law has nowhere made any
such exception. It follows, therefore, that it is not every possible
circumstance which is mentioned in the written law but that some
things which are self-evident are guarded against by unexpressed
exceptions. Then he will urge, that nothing could be carried on
properly either by the laws or by any written document whatever, or
even in daily conversation, or in the commands given in a private
household, if every one chose to keep his eyes on the exact language
of the order, and not to take into consideration the intentions of him
who uttered the order.

XLVIII. After that he will be able, by reference to the divisions
of usefulness and honour, to point out how inexpedient or how
dishonourable that would have been which the opposite party say ought
to have been done, or to be done now. And on the other hand, how
expedient and how honourable that is which we have done, or demand
should be done. In the next place, he will urge that we set a value on
our laws not on account of their wording, which is a slight and
often obscure indication of their intention, but on account of the
usefulness of those things concerning which they are written, and the
wisdom and diligence of those men who wrote them. Afterwards he will
proceed to describe what the law is, so that it shall appear to
consist of meanings, not of words; and that the judge may appear to be
obedient to the law, who follows its meaning and not its strict words.
After that he will urge how scandalous it is that he should have the
same punishment inflicted on him who has violated the law out of some
mere wickedness and audacity, as on the man who, on account of some
honourable or unavoidable reason, has departed not from the spirit of
the law, but from its letter. And by these and similar arguments
he will endeavour to prove that the excuse is admissible, and is
admissible in this law, and that the excuse which he himself is
alleging ought to be admitted.

And, as we said that this would be exceedingly useful to the man who
was relying on the letter of the law, to detract in some degree from
that equity which appeared to be on the side of the adversary; so also
it will be of the greatest advantage to the man who is speaking in
opposition to the letter of the law, to convert something of the exact
letter of the law to his own side of the argument, or else to show
that something has been expressed ambiguously. And afterwards, to
take that portion of the doubtful expression which may serve his own
purpose, and defend it; or else to introduce some definition of
a word, and to bring over the meaning of that word which seems
unfavourable to him to the advantage of his own cause, or else, from
what is set down in the law to introduce something which is not set
down by means of ratiocination, which we will speak of presently. But
in whatever matter, however little probable it may be, he defends
himself by an appeal to the exact letter of the law, even when his
case is full of equity, he will unavoidably gain a great advantage,
because if he can withdraw from the cause of the opposite party that
point on which it principally relies, he will mitigate and take off
the effect of all its violence and energy. But all the rest of the
common topics taken from the divisions of assumptive argument will
suit each side of the question. It will also be suitable for him whose
argument takes its stand on the letter of the law, to urge that laws
ought to be looked at, not with reference to the advantage of that man
who has violated them, but according to their own intrinsic value, and
that nothing ought to be considered more precious than the laws. On
the other side, the speaker will urge, that laws depend upon the
intention of the framer of them, and upon the general advantage,
not upon words, and also, how scandalous it is for equity to be
overwhelmed by a heap of letters, and defended in vain by the
intention of the man who drew up the law.

XLIX. But from contrary laws a controversy arises, when two or more
laws appear to be at variance with one another In this manner--There
is a law, "That he who has slain a tyrant shall receive the regard of
men who conquer at Olympia, and shall also ask whatever he pleases of
the magistrate, and the magistrate shall grant it to him." There is
also another law--"When a tyrant is slain, the magistrate shall also
put to death his five nearest relations." Alexander, who was the tyrant
of Pherse, a city in Thessaly, was slain by his own wife, whose name
was Thebe, at night, when he was in bed with her, she, as a reward,
demands the liberty of her son whom she had by the tyrant. Some say
that according to this law that son ought to be put to death. The
matter is referred to a court of justice. Now in a case of this
kind the same topics and the same rules will suit each side of the
question, because each party is bound to establish his own law, and
to invalidate the one contrary to it. First of all, therefore, it is
requisite to show the nature of the laws, by considering which law has
reference to more important, that is to say, to more honourable and
more necessary matters. From which it results, that if two or more,
or ever so many laws cannot all be maintained, because they are at
variance with one another, that one ought to be considered the most
desirable to be maintained, which appears to have reference to the
most important matters. Then comes the question also, which law was
passed last; for the newest law is the most important. And also, which
law enjoins anything, and which merely allows it; for that which is
enjoined is necessary, that which is allowed is optional. Also one
must consider by which law a penalty is appointed for the violation
of it; or which has the heaviest penalty attached to it; for that law
must be the most carefully maintained which is sanctioned by the most
severe penalties. Again, one must inquire which law enjoins, and which
forbids anything; for it often happens that the law which forbids
something appears by some exception as it were to amend the law which
commands something. Then, too, it is right to consider which law
comprehends the entire class of subjects to which it refers, and which
embraces only a part of the question; which may be applied generally
to many classes of questions, and which appears to have been framed to
apply to some special subject. For that which has been drawn up with
reference to some particular division of a subject, or for some
special purpose, appears to come nearer to the subject under
discussion, and to have more immediate connexion with the present
action. Then arises the question, which is the thing which according
to the law must be done immediately; which will admit of some delay or
slackness in the execution. For it is right that that should be done
first which must be done immediately. In the next place, it is well to
take pains that the law one is advocating shall appear to depend on
its own precise language; and that the law with a contrary sense
should appear to be introduced with a doubtful interpretation, or by
some ratiocination or definition, in order that that law which is
expressed in plain language may appear to be the more solemn and
efficient. After that it will be well to add the meaning of the law
which is on one's own side according to the strict letter of it; and
also to explain the opposite law so as to make it appear to have
another meaning, in order that, if possible, they may not seem to be
inconsistent with one another. And, last of all, it will be a good
thing, if the cause shall afford any opportunity for so doing, to take
care that on our principles both the laws may seem to be upheld, but
that on the principle contended for by our adversaries one of them
must be put aside. It will be well also to consider all the common
topics and those which the cause itself furnishes, and to take them
from the most highly esteemed divisions of the subjects of expediency
and honour, showing by means of amplification which law it is most
desirable to adhere to.

L. From ratiocination there arises a controversy when, from what
is written somewhere or other, one arrives at what is not written
anywhere; in this way:--"If a man is mad, let those of his family and
his next of kin have the regulation of himself and of his property."
And there is another law--"In whatever manner a head of a family has
made his will respecting his family and his property, so let it be."
And another law--"If a head of a family dies intestate, his family
and property shall belong to his relations and to his next of kin." A
certain man was convicted of having murdered his father. Immediately,
because he was not able to escape, wooden shoes were put upon his
feet, and his mouth was covered with a leathern bag, and bound fast,
then he was led away to prison, that he might remain there while a bag
was got ready for him to be put into and thrown into a river. In
the meantime some of his friends bring tablets to the prison, and
introduce witnesses also; they put down those men as his heirs whom he
himself desires; the will is sealed; the man is afterwards executed.
There is a dispute between those who are set down as his heirs in the
will, and his next of kin, about his inheritance. In this instance
there is no positive law alleged which takes away the power of making
a will from people who are in such a situation. But from other laws,
both those which inflict a punishment of this character on a man
guilty of such a crime, and those, too, which relate to a man's power
of making a will, it is possible to come by means of ratiocination to
a conclusion of this sort, that it is proper to inquire whether he had
the power of making a will.

But we think that these and such as these are the common topics
suitable to an argument of this description. In the first place, a
panegyric upon, and a confirmation of that writing which you are
producing. Then a comparison of the matter which is the subject of
discussion, with that which is a settled case, in such a manner that
the case which is under investigation may appear to resemble that
about which there are settled and notorious rules. After that, one
will express admiration, (by way of comparison), how it can happen
that a man who admits that this is fair, can deny that other thing,
which is either more equitable still, or which rests on exactly
similar principles; then, too, one will contend that the reason why
there is no precise law drawn up for such a case, is because, as there
was one in existence applicable to the other case, the framer of that
law thought that no one could possibly entertain a doubt in this case;
and afterwards it will be well to urge that there are many cases not
provided for in many laws, which beyond all question were passed over
merely because the rule as to them could be so easily collected out
of the other cases which were provided for; and last of all, it is
necessary to point out what the equity of the case requires, as is
done in a plain judicial case.

But the speaker who is arguing on the other side is bound to try and
invalidate the comparison instituted, which he will do if he can show
that that which is compared is different from that with which it is
compared in kind, in nature, in effect, in importance, in time, in
situation, in character, in the opinion entertained of it; if it is
shown also in what class that which is adduced by way of comparison
ought to stand, and in what rank that also ought to be considered, for
the sake of which the other thing is mentioned. After that, it will be
well to point out how one case differs from the other, so that it does
not seem that any one ought to have the same opinion of both of them.
And if he himself also is able to have recourse to ratiocination, he
must use the same ratiocination which has been already spoken of. If
he cannot, then he will declare that it is not proper to consider
anything except what is written; that all laws are put in danger if
comparisons are once allowed to be instituted; that there is hardly
anything which does not seem somewhat like something else; that when
there are many circumstances wholly dissimilar, still there are
separate laws for each individual case; and that all things can be
proved to be like or unlike to each other. The common topics derived
from ratiocination ought to arrive by conjecture from that which is
written to that which is not written; and one may urge that no one can
embrace every imaginable case in a written law, but that he frames a
law best who takes care to make one thing understood from another. One
may urge, too, that in opposition to a ratiocination of this sort,
conjecture is no better than a divination, and that it would be a
sign of a very stupid framer of laws not to be able to provide for
everything which he wished to.

LI. Definition is when a word is set down in a written document, whose
exact meaning is inquired into, in this manner:--There is a law,
"Whoever in a severe tempest desert their ship shall be deprived of
all their property; the ship and the cargo shall belong to those men
who remain by the ship." Two men, when they were sailing on the open
sea, and when the ship belonged to one of them and the cargo to
another, noticed a shipwrecked man swimming and holding out his hands
to them. Being moved with pity they directed the ship towards him, and
took the man into their vessel. A little afterwards the storm began to
toss them also about very violently, to such a degree that the owner
of the ship, who was also the pilot, got into a little boat, and from
that he guided the ship as well as he could by the rope by which the
boat was fastened to the ship, and so towed along; but the man to whom
the cargo belonged threw himself on his sword in despair. On this
the shipwrecked man took the helm and assisted the ship as far as he
could. But after the waves went down and the tempest abated, the ship
arrived in harbour. But the man who had fallen on his sword turned out
to be but slightly wounded, and easily recovered of his wound. And
then every one of these three men claimed the ship and cargo for his
own. Every one of them relies on the letter of the law to support
their claim, and a dispute arises as to the meaning of the words.
For they seek to ascertain by definitions what is the meaning of the
expressions "to abandon the ship," "to stand by the ship," and even
what "the ship" itself is. And the question must be dealt with with
reference to all the same topics as are employed in a statement of the
case which turns upon a definition.

Now, having explained all those argumentations which are adapted to
the judicial class of causes, we will proceed in regular order to
give topics and rules for the deliberative and demonstrative class
of arguments; not that there is any cause which is not at all times
conversant with some statement of the case or other; but because there
are nevertheless some topics peculiar to these causes, not separated
from the statement of the case, but adapted to the objects which are
more especially kept in view by these kinds of argumentation.

For it seems desirable that in the judicial kind the proper end
is equity; that is to say, some division of honesty. But in the
deliberative kind Aristotle thinks that the proper object is
expediency; we ourselves, that it is expediency and honesty combined.
In the demonstrative kind it is honesty only. Wherefore, in this kind
of cause also, some kinds of argumentation will be handled in a common
manner, and in similar ways to one another. Some will be discussed
more separately with reference to their object, which is what we must
always keep in view in every kind of speech. And we should have no
objection to give an example of each kind of statement of the case, if
we did not see that, as obscure things are made more plain by speaking
of them, so also things which are plain are sometimes made more
obscure by a speech. At present let us go on to precepts of
deliberation.

LII. Of matters to be aimed at there are three classes; and on the
other hand there is a corresponding number of things to be avoided.
For there is something which of its own intrinsic force draws us to
itself, not catching us by any idea of emolument, but alluring us by
its own dignity. Of this class are virtue, science, truth. And there
is something else which seems desirable, not on account of its own
excellence or nature, but on account of its advantage and of the
utility to be derived from it--such as money. There are also some
things formed of parts of these others in combination, which allure us
and draw us after them by their own intrinsic character and dignity,
and which also hold out some prospect of advantage to us, to induce
us to seek it more eagerly, as friendship, and a fair reputation;
and from these their opposites will easily be perceived, without our
saying anything about them.

But in order that the principle may be explained in the more simple
way, the rules which we have laid down shall be enumerated briefly.
For those which belong to the first kind of discussion are called
honourable things; those which belong to the second, are called useful
things; but this third thing, because it contains some portion of what
is honourable, and because the power of what is honourable is the more
important part, is perceived to be altogether a compound kind, made up
of a twofold division; still it derives its name from its better part,
and is called honourable. From this it follows, that there are these
parts in things which are desirable,--what is honourable, and what is
useful. And these parts in things which are to be avoided,--what is
dishonourable, and what is useless. Now to these two things there
are two other important circumstances to be added,--necessity and
affection: the one of which is considered with reference to force, the
other with reference to circumstances and persons. Hereafter we will
write more explicitly about each separately. At present we will
explain first the principles of what is honourable.

LIII. That which either wholly or in some considerable portion of it
is sought for its own sake, we call honourable: and as there are two
divisions of it, one of which is simple and the other twofold, let us
