Goldberga; and now he looked long at her with a look that seemed to be
questioning. Alsi was going to his seat in the cross bench, where the
parents of the couple are wont to sit at a wedding while the vows are
made, but he seemed to bethink himself. It is my belief that he said
what he did in order to shame both Havelok and Goldberga.

"Why, it is not seemly that the bridegroom should sit alone without one
to be by him. Where are your friends, Curan?"

At that Alsi met with more than he bargained for. At once Berthun came
forward, and forth came I, and without a word we sat one on each side of
him. There were others who would have come also, for I saw even Eglaf
take a step towards the high place, had we not done so.

Alsi's face became black at that, for here was not the friendless churl
he was scoffing at. But he tried to smile, as if pleased.

"Why, this is well," he said. "Good it is to see a master helping his
man, and a soldier ready to back a comrade of a sort. Now we have
witnesses. Let us go on with the wedding."

Now the golden loving cup that was used at the feasts had been filled
and set at a little side table that stood there, and it was to be the
bride cup that should be drunk between the twain when all was settled.
So Alsi took this cup and held it, while he sat in the place of the
father of the bride. Now, I knew nothing of what should he done, but
Berthun did so, and well he took my brother's part, having undertaken
for him thus.

"It is the custom," said Alsi, "that the bridegroom should state what he
sets forth of the dowry to the bride."

Whereat Berthun, without hesitation, spoke hastily to Havelok, and told
him to let him answer, meaning, as I have not the least doubt, to
promise all that he had saved in long years of service. But Havelok
smiled a little, and set his hand to his neck, and I remembered one
thing that he had--a ring which had always hung on a cord under his
jerkin since he came to Grimsby, and which my father had bidden him keep
ever.

"This give I," he said, setting it on the floor at his feet, "and with
it all that I am, and all that I shall hereafter be, and all that shall
be mine at any time."

Alsi looked at the ring as it flashed before him, and his face changed.
No such jewel had he in all his treasures, for it was of dwarf work in
gold, set with a deep crimson stone that was like the setting sun for
brightness. I do not know whence these stones came, unless it were from
the East. Eleyn the queen, his mother, was thence, and I know now that
the ring was hers. But I think that when Alsi saw this he half repented
of the match, though he had gone too far now to draw back. So he bowed,
and said that it was well, as he would have said had there been nothing
forthcoming.

Then Berthun, in his turn, asked for the bridegroom that the dowry of
the bride should be stated for all to hear.

"The wealth left my niece by her father," said Alsi. "The matter of the
kingdom is for the Witan of the East Anglians to settle."

Then came from out the king's chamber two men bearing bags of gold, and
that was set before the princess. It was a noble dowry, and honest was
the king in this matter at least.

Now were the vows to be said and the bride cup to be drunk, and that was
the hardest part of all to Havelok.

Slowly he rose as the king held it out to him, and he took it from his
hand and stood before Goldberga; and she, too, rose and faced him, and
for a moment they stood thus, surely the most handsome couple that had
ever been.

Then Havelok said, looking in the clear eyes of the princess, "This have
I sworn, that I will wed no unwilling bride. It is but for you to say
one word, and the cup falls, and all is ended."

Alsi started at that, and I thought he was going to speak, but he held
his peace. Still as a rock was Havelok while he waited for the answer,
and the folk in the hall were as still as he. They began to see that all
was not right as the king would have it thought.

Once the princess looked at Alsi, and that with pride in her face, and
then she looked long and steadfastly at Havelok, and one by one his
fingers loosened themselves on the golden stem of the cup, that she
might know him ready for her word.

Then she put forth her hand and closed it round his strong fingers, that
he must hold it fast by her doing, and that was all that was needed. It
was more than words could have told. And she smiled as she did it.

And at that a light came on Havelok's face, and he smiled gravely back
at her, and he said in a low voice that shook a little, "May the gods so
treat me as I treat you, my princess. Can it be that you will trust me
thus?"

She answered in no words, but I saw her hand tighten over his, and her
eyes never left his face.

Then Havelok raised his other hand, and took that of Goldberga, which
was on the cup, and faced to the people.

"Thus do I pledge her who shall be henceforward my wife through good and
ill; and may Odin, Freya, and Niord be witnesses of my oath of faith to
her in all that the word may mean."

So he drank, and I stole a glance at the king. Never saw I a man so
amazed, for to him the Danish names of the Asir had come as some sort of
a shock, seeing that he had deemed this man, with the name of Curan, a
Briton. And he looked at Berthun with a look that seemed to say more
than was likely to be pleasant by-and-by. But the steward paid no heed
to him.

Now Havelok had made his vow, and he gave the cup to the princess; and
she, too, turned a little toward the people, but still she looked on
Havelok.

"Faith shall answer to faith," she said in a clear voice. "Here do I
take this man for my husband, in the sight of God, and with you all as
witnesses, and I pray that the blessing of Him may be on us both."

So she drank also, and Havelok stopped and raised the wondrous ring from
where it had been unheeded on the floor, and took the band of Goldberga,
and set it on her finger, and kissed the hand ere he let it go.

But Goldberga lifted her face toward him, and he bent and kissed her
forehead, and so they were wedded.

I have heard men scoff at the thought of love at first sight, but never
can any one of us do so who saw this wedding.


    CHAPTER XVII. HOW THE BRIDE WENT HOME.

Now the folk cheered, and loudest of all honest Eglaf and his warriors.
I wondered what should come next, for neither feast nor bride ale was
prepared, and Berthun was looking puzzled. Then I saw that the only face
in all the wide hall which was not bright was that of Alsi, and his brow
was black as a thunder cloud, while his fingers were white with the
force with which he clutched and twisted the end of his jewelled belt.
Plainly he was in a royal rage that none had scoffed at this wedding,
but that all had taken it as a matter that was right altogether.

But he had one more evil thing in his mind that must be seen through;
and he came forward, smoothing his face, as best he might, to the fixed
smile that I had seen when he spoke with Ragnar, and learned that his
first plot had miscarried.

"Now, friends," he said, "all this has been so hasty that we have
prepared no feast. Even now, it seems that the horses stand at the door
to take bride and bridegroom hence, and doubtless there waits somewhere
the feast that has been bespoken without my knowledge. Well, strange are
the ways of lovers, and we will pardon them. I have therefore only to
bid them farewell."

With that he turned to Havelok, and held out his hand, as in all good
fellowship, but Havelok would not see it.

"Fare as it shall be meted to you by the Asir, King Alsi," he said, "for
at least Loki loves craft."

Then he turned to me, and asked hurriedly where we should go if we must
leave thus.

"To Grimsby," I said. "That is home."

Alsi spoke to the princess now, and maybe it was as well that he did not
offer so much as his hand. Wise was he in his way.

"Farewell, niece," he said; "all this shall come shortly before the
Witan of Ethelwald's folk."

"Farewell, uncle," she answered calmly. "That is a matter which I will
see to myself. You have carried out your oath to the letter, so far, and
now it remains that you should leave the government of the realm to me."

With that she put her hand on Havelok's arm.

"Come, husband; we have heard that the horses wait. Let us be gone."

And then in a quick whisper she added, as if nigh overdone, "Take me
hence quickly, for I may not bear more."

They wasted no more words; and through a lane of folk, who blessed them,
those two went to the great door down the long hall, and I followed, and
Berthun and the nurse came after me. One flung the door open; and on the
steps, all unaware of what had happened, lounged Mord, waiting, and up
and down on the green the grooms led the horses of the princess--six
in all. On two were packed her goods, and the third had a pack saddle
that waited for the bags that held her dowry. The other three were for
herself and Mord and the nurse. There was not one for Havelok.

"This is hasty, my princess," Mord said. "Whither are we bound?"

"For Grimsby, Mord," I answered quickly. "Are there no more horses to be
had?"

"Never a one, unless we steal from the king," he answered.

The people were crowding out now that they might see the start, and I
saw Berthun speak to a man among them who was a stranger to me. And from
him he turned directly with a glad face.

"Go down to such a hostelry," he said to me, "and there ask for what
horses you will. Maybe I shall have to follow you for my part in this
matter--that is, if I am not put in the dungeon."

"Faith," I answered, "better had you come with us than run that risk.
Alsi is in a bad mood."

He shook his head; and then the people behind him made way, for the king
was coming.

"Almost had you forgotten this," he said; "and I think you will want it."

The men with the money were there, and he waved his hand to them.
Havelok lifted the princess to her horse without heeding him, and the
men set the bags on the pack horses.

"See the bridegroom down the street, you who were his witnesses," the
king went on, with a curling lip; "and if you are a wise man, master
Berthun, you will not come back again."

Berthun bowed and went into the hail, past the king, and across to his
own door, without a word. After him the thronging people closed up, and
though I thought that a housecarl would have been sent to see what he
was about, this would have made an open talk, and Alsi forbore.

"Let Havelok take your horse, Mord," I whispered to him; "I will tell
you why directly."

He nodded, and I told Havelok to mount. Then I helped up the nurse, who
wept and muttered to herself; and so we started, Alsi standing on the
steps with words of feigned goodspeed as we did so.

But the housecarls and the people shouted with wishes that were real, no
doubt thinking that we were bound for the far-off kingdom of the prince
who had won Goldberga by service as a kitchen knave in her uncle's hall
for very love of her.

Directly we were outside the gate that leads down the hill, I saw
Withelm, who was there waiting for me, and he knew at once what had
happened.

He came to my side, and asked only, "Already?"

"Already," I answered; "but it is well. Go to the widow's straightway,
and bring Havelok's arms to him at the hostelry at the end of the
marketplace, where we have to find more horses."

He went at once, and silently we came down the street and to the
courtyard of the inn. Some few folk stared at us; but the princess was
hardly known here, and she had cast her long, white mantle hoodwise over
her head and face, so that one could not tell who she was. So early in
the day there were few people in the marketplace either.

Berthun was in the courtyard of the inn, and I was glad to see him, for
I did not know what would happen to him. It was likely that Alsi would
seek for someone on whom to visit his anger at the way things had gone.
But the steward had been warned, and was not one to run any risk.

"I did but go back for a few things that I did not care to leave," he
said; and he showed me that he had brought his own horse from the
stables, and on it were large saddlebags. No poor man was Berthun after
years of service in the palace, where gifts from thane and lady are
always ready for the man who has had the care of them. Across the saddle
bow also were his mail shirt and arms, and his shield hung with his helm
from the peak.

"You see that I must needs cast in my lot with yours, or rather
Curan's," he said, laughing; "but it is in my mind that in the end I
shall not be sorry to have done so. I think that I am tired of the
fireside, and want adventure for a while."

"Well," I answered, "you are likely to have them, and that shortly, if I
am not mistaken; but we shall see. Now about these horses, for we had
better get out of Lincoln as soon as we may."

The man he had spoken with was a merchant, who came yearly, and was a
friend of his. He had more horses than he meant to keep, as he had here
each year; for every one knows that a horse can always be sold in
Lincoln, and they were good ones. Then my gold came in well, and I
bought three, one for each of us brothers. I daresay that I paid dearly
for them, but there was no time for haggling in the way that a horse
dealer loves. Out of the way of Alsi we must get, before he bethought
him of more crafty devices. And I thought, moreover, that we should be
riding towards East Anglia shortly, and it was not everywhere that a
steed fit to carry Havelok on a long journey was to be had.

I had bidden him leave all this to me as we came down the hill, and glad
he was to do so. Now he had dismounted, and stood by the side of the
princess, speaking earnestly to her. It was plain that what he said was
pleasant to her also. But we left them apart, as one might suppose.

Now came a warrior into the courtyard, and he bore more arms. It was
Withelm, who had borrowed the gear of the widow's dead husband, that he
might be ready for whatever might happen: and it was good to see
Havelok's eyes grow bright as he spied the well-known weapons that his
brother had in his arms. He said one word to Goldberga, and then came to us.

"Let me get into war gear at once," he said, laughing in a way that
lightened my heart. "I shall not feel that I have shaken off service to
Alsi until I have done so."

And then he saw Berthun here for the first time.

"Nay, but here is my master," he added. "And I will say that I owe him
much for his kindness."

"Now the kindness shall be on your part, if any was on mine. Take me
into your service, I pray you, henceforward."

"Good friend of mine," said Havelok, "naught have I to offer you. And
how should one serve me?"

"With heart and hand and head, neither more nor less," answered Berthun.
"I have seen you serve, and now will see you command. Let me bide with
you, my master, at least, giving you such service as I may."

"Such help as you may, rather. For now we all serve the princess,"
Havelok said.

And with that Berthun was well content for the time.

"Well, then," said I, "see to Havelok's arms, while we get the horses
ready, for I want Withelm here."

So Havelok and his new man went into the house with his arms, and then I
saw Goldberga beckoning to us. It was the first time that I had spoken
to her, and I think that I was frightened, if that is what they call the
feeling that makes one wish to be elsewhere. But there was nothing to
fear in the sweet face that she turned to us.

"Brothers," she said, "Havelok tells me that it was one of you who
brought David the priest to me. I do not rightly know yet which is Withelm."

With that she smiled and blushed a little, and I stood, helm in hand,
stupidly enough. But my brother was more ready.

"I am Withelm, my princess--" he began.

"Nay; but 'sister' it shall be between me and my husband's brothers.
Now, brother Withelm, there is one thing that is next my heart, and in
it I know you will help me."

There she wavered for a moment, and then went on bravely.
