unconscious illness. "Alone, too," thought he; "no one near to tend me!
Nature my only nurse! But alas! alas! how long a time may thus have
been wasted, and my adored Irene--quick, quick, not a moment more will I
lose."

He soon found himself in the open street; the air revived him; and that
morning had sprung up the blessed breeze, the first known for weeks. He
wandered on very slowly and feebly till he came to a broad square,
from which, in the vista, might be seen one of the principal gates of
Florence, and the fig-trees and olive-groves beyond, it was then that
a Pilgrim of tall stature approached towards him as from the gate; his
hood was thrown back, and gave to view a countenance of great but
sad command; a face, in whose high features, massive brow, and proud,
unshrinking gaze, shaded by an expression of melancholy more stern than
soft, Nature seemed to have written majesty, and Fate disaster. As in
that silent and dreary place, these two, the only tenants of the street,
now encountered, Adrian stopped abruptly, and said in a startled and
doubting voice: "Do I dream still, or do I behold Rienzi?"

The Pilgrim paused also, as he heard the name, and gazing long on the
attenuated features of the young lord, said: "I am he that was Rienzi!
and you, pale shadow, is it in this grave of Italy that I meet with the
gay and high Colonna? Alas, young friend," he added, in a more relaxed
and kindly voice, "hath the Plague not spared the flower of the Roman
nobles? Come, I, the cruel and the harsh Tribune, I will be thy nurse:
he who might have been my brother, shall yet claim from me a brother's
care."

With these words he wound his arm tenderly round Adrian; and the young
noble, touched by his compassion, and agitated by the surprise, leaned
upon Rienzi's breast in silence.

"Poor youth," resumed the Tribune, for so, since rather fallen than
deposed, he may yet be called; "I ever loved the young, (my brother died
young;) and you more than most. What fatality brought thee hither?"

"Irene!" replied Adrian, falteringly.

"Is it so, really? Art thou a Colonna, and yet prize the fallen? The
same duty has brought me also to the city of Death. From the furthest
south--over the mountains of the robber--through the fastnesses of my
foes--through towns in which the herald proclaimed in my ear the price
of my head--I have passed hither, on foot and alone, safe under the
wings of the Almighty One. Young man, thou shouldst have left this task
to one who bears a wizard's life, and whom Heaven and Earth yet reserve
for an appointed end!"

The Tribune said this in a deep and inward voice; and in his raised eye
and solemn brow might be seen how much his reverses had deepened his
fanaticism, and added even to the sanguineness of his hopes.

"But," asked Adrian, withdrawing gently from Rienzi's arm, "thou
knowest, then, where Irene is to be found; let us go together. Lose not
a moment in this talk; time is of inestimable value, and a moment in
this city is often but the border to eternity."

"Right," said Rienzi, awakening to his object. "But fear not, I have
dreamt that I shall save her, the gem and darling of my house. Fear not,
I have no fear."

"Know you where to seek?" said Adrian, impatiently; "the Convent holds
far other guests."

"Ha! so said my dream!"

"Talk not now of dreams," said the lover; "but if you have no other
guide, let us part at once in quest of her. I will take yonder street,
you take the opposite, and at sunset let us meet in the same spot."

"Rash man!" said the Tribune, with great solemnity; "scoff not at the
visions which Heaven makes a parable to its Chosen. Thou seekest counsel
of thy human wisdom; I, less presumptuous, follow the hand of the
mysterious Providence, moving even now before my gaze as a pillar of
light through the wilderness of dread. Ay, meet we here at sunset, and
prove whose guide is the most unerring. If my dream tell me true, I
shall see my sister living, ere the sun reach yonder hill, and by a
church dedicated to St. Mark."

The grave earnestness with which Rienzi spoke impressed Adrian with a
hope which his reason would not acknowledge. He saw him depart with that
proud and stately step to which his sweeping garments gave a yet more
imposing dignity, and then passed up the street to the right hand.
He had not got half way when he felt himself pulled by the mantle. He
turned, and saw the shapeless mask of a Becchino.

"I feared you were sped, and that another had cheated me of my office,"
said the gravedigger, "seeing that you returned not to the old Prince's
palace. You don't know me from the rest of us I see, but I am the one
you told to seek--"

"Irene!"

"Yes, Irene di Gabrini; you promised ample reward."

"You shall have it."

"Follow me."

The Becchino strode on, and soon arrived at a mansion. He knocked twice
at the porter's entrance, an old woman cautiously opened the door. "Fear
not, good aunt," said the gravedigger; "this is the young Lord I spoke
to thee of. Thou sayest thou hadst two ladies in the palace, who alone
survived of all the lodgers, and their names were Bianca de Medici,
and--what was the other?"

"Irene di Gabrini, a Roman lady. But I told thee this was the fourth day
they left the house, terrified by the deaths within it."

"Thou didst so: and was there anything remarkable in the dress of the
Signora di Gabrini?"

"Yes, I have told thee: a blue mantle, such as I have rarely seen,
wrought with silver."

"Was the broidery that of stars, silver stars," exclaimed Adrian, "with
a sun in the centre?"

"It was."

"Alas! alas! the arms of the Tribune's family! I remember how I
praised the mantle the first day she wore it--the day on which we were
betrothed!" And the lover at once conjectured the secret sentiment
which had induced Irene to retain thus carefully a robe so endeared by
association.

"You know no more of your lodgers?"

"Nothing."

"And is this all you have learned, knave?" cried Adrian.

"Patience. I must bring you from proof to proof, and link to link, in
order to win my reward. Follow, Signor."

The Becchino then passing through the several lanes and streets, arrived
at another house of less magnificent size and architecture. Again
he tapped thrice at the parlour door, and this time came forth a man
withered, old, and palsied, whom death seemed to disdain to strike.

"Signor Astuccio," said the Becchino, "pardon me; but I told thee I
might trouble thee again. This is the gentleman who wants to know, what
is often best unknown--but that's not my affair. Did a lady--young and
beautiful--with dark hair, and of a slender form, enter this house,
stricken with the first symptom of the Plague, three days since?"

"Ay, thou knowest that well enough; and thou knowest still better, that
she has departed these two days: it was quick work with her, quicker
than with most!"

"Did she wear anything remarkable?"

"Yes, troublesome man: a blue cloak, with stars of silver."

"Couldst thou guess aught of her previous circumstances?"

"No, save that she raved much about the nunnery of Santa Maria de'
Pazzi, and bravos, and sacrilege."

"Are you satisfied, Signor?" asked the gravedigger, with an air of
triumph, turning to Adrian. "But no, I will satisfy thee better, if thou
hast courage. Wilt thou follow?"

"I comprehend thee; lead on. Courage! What is there on earth now to
fear?"

Muttering to himself, "Ay, leave me alone. I have a head worth
something; I ask no gentleman to go by my word; I will make his own eyes
the judge of what my trouble is worth," the gravedigger now led the way
through one of the gates a little out of the city. And here, under a
shed, sat six of his ghastly and ill-omened brethren, with spades and
pick-axes at their feet.

His guide now turned round to Adrian, whose face was set, and resolute
in despair.

"Fair Signor," said he, with some touch of lingering compassion,
"wouldst thou really convince thine own eyes and heart?--the sight may
appal, the contagion may destroy, thee,--if, indeed, as it seems to me,
Death has not already written 'mine' upon thee."

"Raven of bode and woe!" answered Adrian, "seest thou not that all
I shrink from is thy voice and aspect? Show me her I seek, living or
dead."

"I will show her to you, then," said the Becchino, sullenly, "such as
two nights since she was committed to my charge. Line and lineament may
already be swept away, for the Plague hath a rapid besom; but I have
left that upon her by which you will know the Becchino is no liar. Bring
hither the torches, comrades, and lift the door. Never stare; it's the
gentleman's whim, and he'll pay it well."

Turning to the right while Adrian mechanically followed his conductors,
a spectacle whose dire philosophy crushes as with a wheel all the pride
of mortal man--the spectacle of that vault in which earth hides all that
on earth flourished, rejoiced, exulted--awaited his eye!

The Becchini lifted a ponderous grate, lowered their torches (scarcely
needed, for through the aperture rushed, with a hideous glare, the light
of the burning sun,) and motioned to Adrian to advance. He stood upon
the summit of the abyss and gazed below.

It was a large deep and circular space, like the bottom of an exhausted
well. In niches cut into the walls of earth around, lay, duly coffined,
those who had been the earliest victims of the plague, when the
Becchino's market was not yet glutted, and priest followed, and friend
mourned the dead. But on the floor below, there was the loathsome
horror! Huddled and matted together--some naked, some in shrouds already
black and rotten--lay the later guests, the unshriven and unblest! The
torches, the sun, streamed broad and red over Corruption in all its
stages, from the pale blue tint and swollen shape, to the moistened
undistinguishable mass, or the riddled bones, where yet clung, in strips
and tatters, the black and mangled flesh. In many, the face remained
almost perfect, while the rest of the body was but bone; the long hair,
the human face, surmounting the grisly skeleton. There was the infant,
still on the mother's breast; there was the lover, stretched across the
dainty limbs of his adored! The rats, (for they clustered in numbers to
that feast,) disturbed, not scared, sate up from their horrid meal as
the light glimmered over them, and thousands of them lay round, stark,
and dead, poisoned by that they fed on! There, too, the wild satire of
the gravediggers had cast, though stripped of their gold and jewels, the
emblems that spoke of departed rank;--the broken wand of the Councillor;
the General's baton; the Priestly Mitre! The foul and livid exhalations
gathered like flesh itself, fungous and putrid, upon the walls, and
the--

But who shall detail the ineffable and unimaginable horrors that reigned
over the Palace where the Great King received the prisoners whom the
sword of the Pestilence had subdued?

But through all that crowded court--crowded with beauty and with birth,
with the strength of the young and the honours of the old, and the
valour of the brave, and the wisdom of the learned, and the wit of
the scorner, and the piety of the faithful--one only figure attracted
Adrian's eye. Apart from the rest, a latecomer--the long locks streaming
far and dark over arm and breast--lay a female, the face turned
partially aside, the little seen not recognisable even by the mother
of the dead,--but wrapped round in that fatal mantle, on which, though
blackened and tarnished, was yet visible the starry heraldry assumed by
those who claimed the name of the proud Tribune of Rome. Adrian saw no
more--he fell back in the arms of the gravediggers: when he recovered,
he was still without the gates of Florence--reclined upon a green
mound--his guide stood beside him--holding his steed by the bridle as it
grazed patiently on the neglected grass. The other brethren of the axe
had resumed their seat under the shed.

"So, you have revived! Ah! I thought it was only the effluvia; few stand
it as we do. And so, as your search is over, deeming you would now be
quitting Florence if you have any sense left to you, I went for your
good horse. I have fed him since your departure from the palace. Indeed
I fancied he would be my perquisite, but there are plenty as good. Come,
young sir, mount. I feel a pity for you, I know not why, except that you
are the only one I have met for weeks who seem to care for another
more than for yourself. I hope you are satisfied now that I showed some
brains, eh! in your service; and as I have kept my promise, you'll keep
yours."

"Friend," said Adrian, "here is gold enough to make thee rich; here,
too, is a jewel that merchants will tell thee princes might vie to
purchase. Thou seemest honest, despite thy calling, or thou mightest
have robbed and murdered me long since. Do me one favour more."

"By my poor mother's soul, yes."

"Take yon--yon clay from that fearful place. Inter it in some quiet and
remote spot--apart--alone! You promise me?--you swear it?--it is well!
And now help me on my horse. Farewell Italy, and if I die not with this
stroke, may I die as befits at once honour and despair--with trumpet and
banner round me--in a well-fought field against a worthy foe!--Save a
knightly death, nothing is left to live for!"




BOOK VII. THE PRISON.

     "Fu rinchiuso in una torre grossa e larga; avea libri assai,
     suo Tito Livio, sue storie di Roma, la Bibbia." &c.--"Vita
     di Cola di Rienzi", lib. ii. c. 13.

     "He was immured in a high and spacious tower; he had books
     enough, his Titus Livius, his histories of Rome, the Bible,"
     &c.



Chapter 7.I. Avignon.--The Two Pages.--The Stranger Beauty.

There is this difference between the Drama of Shakspeare, and that
of almost every other master of the same art; that in the first, the
catastrophe is rarely produced by one single cause--one simple and
continuous chain of events. Various and complicated agencies work out
the final end. Unfettered by the rules of time and place, each time,
each place depicted, presents us with its appropriate change of action,
or of actors. Sometimes the interest seems to halt, to turn aside, to
bring us unawares upon objects hitherto unnoticed, or upon qualities of
the characters hitherto hinted at, not developed. But, in reality, the
pause in the action is but to collect, to gather up, and to grasp, all
the varieties of circumstance that conduce to the Great Result: and the
art of fiction is only deserted for the fidelity of history. Whoever
seeks to place before the world the true representation of a man's
life and times, and, enlarging the Dramatic into the Epic, extends
his narrative over the vicissitudes of years, will find himself
unconsciously, in this, the imitator of Shakspeare. New characters, each
conducive to the end--new scenes, each leading to the last, rise before
him as he proceeds, sometimes seeming to the reader to delay, even while
they advance, the dread catastrophe. The sacrificial procession sweeps
along, swelled by new comers, losing many that first joined it; before,
at last, the same as a whole, but differing in its components, the crowd
reach the fated bourn of the Altar and the Victim!

It is five years after the date of the events I have recorded, and my
story conveys us to the Papal Court at Avignon--that tranquil seat of
power, to which the successors of St. Peter had transplanted the luxury,
the pomp, and the vices, of the Imperial City. Secure from the fraud or
violence of a powerful and barbarous nobility, the courtiers of the See
surrendered themselves to a holyday of delight--their repose was devoted
to enjoyment, and Avignon presented, at that day, perhaps the gayest
and most voluptuous society of Europe. The elegance of Clement VI. had
diffused an air of literary refinement over the grosser pleasures of
the place, and the spirit of Petrarch still continued to work its way
through the councils of faction and the orgies of debauch.

Innocent VI. had lately succeeded Clement, and whatever his own claims
to learning, (Matteo Villani (lib. iii. cap. 44) says, that Innocent VI.
had not much pretension to learning. He is reported, however, by other
authorities, cited by Zefirino Re, to have been "eccellente canonista."
He had been a professor in the University of Toulouse.) he, at least,
appreciated knowledge and intellect in others; so that the graceful
pedantry of the time continued to mix itself with the pursuit of
pleasure. The corruption which reigned through the whole place was too
confirmed to yield to the example of Innocent, himself a man of simple
habits and exemplary life. Though, like his predecessor, obedient to the
policy of France, Innocent possessed a hard and an extended ambition.
Deeply concerned for the interests of the Church, he formed the project
of confirming and re-establishing her shaken dominion in Italy; and he
regarded the tyrants of the various states as the principal obstacles
to his ecclesiastical ambition. Nor was this the policy of Innocent
VI. alone. With such exceptions as peculiar circumstances necessarily
occasioned, the Papal See was, upon the whole, friendly to the political
liberties of Italy. The Republics of the Middle Ages grew up under the
shadow of the Church; and there, as elsewhere, it was found, contrary
to a vulgar opinion, that Religion, however prostituted and perverted,
served for the general protection of civil freedom,--raised the lowly,
and resisted the oppressor.

At this period there appeared at Avignon a lady of singular and
matchless beauty. She had come with a slender but well appointed retinue
from Florence, but declared herself of Neapolitan birth; the widow of
a noble of the brilliant court of the unfortunate Jane. Her name was
Cesarini. Arrived at a place where, even in the citadel of Christianity,
Venus retained her ancient empire, where Love made the prime business of
life, and to be beautiful was to be of power; the Signora Cesarini had
scarcely appeared in public before she saw at her feet half the rank and
gallantry of Avignon. Her female attendants were beset with bribes
and billets; and nightly, beneath her lattice, was heard the plaintive
serenade. She entered largely into the gay dissipation of the town, and
her charms shared the celebrity of the hour with the verse of Petrarch.
But though she frowned on none, none could claim the monopoly of her
smiles. Her fair fame was as yet unblemished; but if any might presume
beyond the rest, she seemed to have selected rather from ambition than
love, and Giles, the warlike Cardinal d'Albornoz, all powerful at the
sacred court, already foreboded the hour of his triumph.

It was late noon, and in the ante-chamber of the fair Signora waited
two of that fraternity of pages, fair and richly clad, who, at that day,
furnished the favourite attendants to rank of either sex.

"By my troth," cried one of these young servitors, pushing from him the
dice with which himself and his companion had sought to beguile their
leisure, "this is but dull work! and the best part of the day is gone.
Our lady is late."

"And I have donned my new velvet mantle," replied the other,
compassionately eyeing his finery.

"Chut, Giacomo," said his comrade, yawning; "a truce with thy
conceit.--What news abroad, I wonder? Has his Holiness come to his
senses yet?"

"His senses! what, is he mad then?" quoth Giacomo, in a serious and
astonished whisper.

"I think he is; if, being Pope, he does not discover that he may at
length lay aside mask and hood. 'Continent Cardinal--lewd Pope,' is the
old motto, you know; something must be the matter with the good man's
brain if he continue to live like a hermit."

"Oh, I have you! but faith, his Holiness has proxies eno'. The bishops
take care to prevent women, Heaven bless them! going out of fashion; and
Albornoz does not maintain your proverb, touching the Cardinals."

"True, but Giles is a warrior,--a cardinal in the church, but a soldier
in the city."

"Will he carry the fort here, think you, Angelo?"

"Why, fort is female, but--"

"But what?"

"The Signora's brow is made for power, rather than love, fair as it is.
She sees in Albornoz the prince, and not the lover. With what a step she
sweeps the floor! it disdains even the cloth of gold!"

"Hark!" cried Giacomo, hastening to the lattice, "hear you the hoofs
below? Ah, a gallant company!"

"Returned from hawking," answered Angelo, regarding wistfully the
cavalcade, as it swept the narrow street. "Plumes waving, steeds
curvetting--see how yon handsome cavalier presses close to that dame!"

"His mantle is the colour of mine," sighed Giacomo.

As the gay procession paced slowly on, till hidden by the winding
street, and as the sound of laughter and the tramp of horses was yet
faintly heard, there frowned right before the straining gaze of the
pages, a dark massive tower of the mighty masonry of the eleventh
century: the sun gleamed sadly on its vast and dismal surface, which was
only here and there relieved by loopholes and narrow slits, rather
than casements. It was a striking contrast to the gaiety around, the
glittering shops, and the gaudy train that had just filled the space
below. This contrast the young men seemed involuntarily to feel; they
drew back, and looked at each other.

"I know your thoughts, Giacomo," said Angelo, the handsomer and elder of
the two. "You think yon tower affords but a gloomy lodgment?"

"And I thank my stars that made me not high enough to require so grand a
cage," rejoined Giacomo.

"Yet," observed Angelo, "it holds one, who in birth was not our
superior."

"Do tell me something of that strange man," said Giacomo, regaining his
seat; "you are Roman and should know."

"Yes!" answered Angelo, haughtily drawing himself up, "I am Roman! and I
should be unworthy my birth, if I had not already learned what honour is
due to the name of Cola di Rienzi."

"Yet your fellow-Romans merely stoned him, I fancy," muttered Giacomo.
"Honour seems to lie more in kicks than money. Can you tell me,"
continued the page in a louder key, "can you tell me if it be true, that
Rienzi appeared at Prague before the Emperor, and prophesied that the
late Pope and all the Cardinals should be murdered, and a new Italian
Pope elected, who should endue the Emperor with a golden crown, as
Sovereign of Sicilia, Calabria, and Apulia, (An absurd fable, adopted
by certain historians.) and himself with a crown of silver, as King of
Rome, and all Italy? And--"

"Hush!" interrupted Angelo, impatiently. "Listen to me, and you shall
know the exact story. On last leaving Rome (thou knowest that, after
his fall, he was present at the Jubilee in disguise) the Tribune--" here
Angelo, pausing, looked round, and then with a flushed cheek and raised
voice resumed, "Yes, the Tribune, that was and shall be--travelled in
disguise, as a pilgrim, over mountain and forest, night and day, exposed
to rain and storm, no shelter but the cave,--he who had been, they
say, the very spoilt one of Luxury. Arrived at length in Bohemia,
he disclosed himself to a Florentine in Prague, and through his aid
obtained audience of the Emperor Charles."

"A prudent man, the Emperor!" said Giacomo, "close-fisted as a miser. He
makes conquests by bargain, and goes to market for laurels,--as I have
heard my brother say, who was under him."

"True; but I have also heard that he likes bookmen and scholars--is
wise and temperate, and much is yet hoped from him in Italy! Before the
Emperor, I say, came Rienzi. 'Know, great Prince,' said he, 'that I am
that Rienzi to whom God gave to govern Rome, in peace, with justice, and
to freedom. I curbed the nobles, I purged corruption, I amended law. The
powerful persecuted me--pride and envy have chased me from my dominions.
Great as you are, fallen as I am, I too have wielded the sceptre and
might have worn a crown. Know, too, that I am illegitimately of
your lineage; my father the son of Henry VII.; (Uncle to the Emperor
Charles.) the blood of the Teuton rolls in my veins; mean as were my
earlier fortunes and humble my earlier name! From you, O King, I seek
protection, and I demand justice." (See, for this speech, "the Anonymous
Biographer," lib. ii. cap. 12.)

"A bold speech, and one from equal to equal," said Giacomo; "surely you
swell us out the words."

"Not a whit; they were written down by the Emperor's scribe, and every
Roman who has once heard knows them by heart: once every Roman was the
equal to a king, and Rienzi maintained our dignity in asserting his
own."

Giacomo, who discreetly avoided quarrels, knew the weak side of
his friend; and though in his heart he thought the Romans as
good-for-nothing a set of turbulent dastards as all Italy might furnish,
he merely picked a straw from his mantle, and said, in rather an
impatient tone, "Humph! proceed! did the Emperor dismiss him?"

"Not so: Charles was struck with his bearing and his spirit, received
him graciously, and entertained him hospitably. He remained some time
at Prague, and astonished all the learned with his knowledge and
eloquence." (His Italian contemporary delights in representing this
remarkable man as another Crichton. "Disputava," he says of him when at
Prague, "disputava con Mastri di teologia; molto diceva, parlava cose
meravigliose...abbair fea ogni persona."--"He disputed with Masters of
theology--he spoke much, he discoursed things wonderful--he astonished
every one.")

"But if so honoured at Prague, how comes he a prisoner at Avignon?"

"Giacomo," said Angelo, thoughtfully, "there are some men whom we, of
another mind and mould, can rarely comprehend, and never fathom. And of
such men I have observed that a supreme confidence in their own fortunes
or their own souls, is the most common feature. Thus impressed, and thus
buoyed, they rush into danger with a seeming madness, and from danger
soar to greatness, or sink to death. So with Rienzi; dissatisfied with
empty courtesies and weary of playing the pedant, since once he had
played the prince;--some say of his own accord, (though others relate
that he was surrendered to the Pope's legate by Charles,) he left the
Emperor's court, and without arms, without money, betook himself at once
to Avignon!"

"Madness indeed!"

"Yet, perhaps his only course, under all circumstances," resumed the
elder page. "Once before his fall, and once during his absence from
Rome, he had been excommunicated by the Pope's legate. He was accused of
heresy--the ban was still on him. It was necessary that he should clear
himself. How was the poor exile to do so? No powerful friend stood
up for the friend of the people. No courtier vindicated one who had
trampled on the neck of the nobles. His own genius was his only friend;
on that only could he rely. He sought Avignon, to free himself from the
accusations against him; and, doubtless, he hoped that there was but one
step from his acquittal to his restoration. Besides, it is certain that
the Emperor had been applied to, formally to surrender Rienzi. He had
the choice before him; for to that sooner or later it must come--to
go free, or to go in bonds--as a criminal, or as a Roman. He chose the
latter. Wherever he passed along, the people rose in every town, in
every hamlet. The name of the great Tribune was honoured throughout all
Italy. They besought him not to rush into the very den of peril--they
implored him to save himself for that country which he had sought to
raise. 'I go to vindicate myself, and to triumph,' was the Tribune's
answer. Solemn honours were paid him in the cities through which he
passed; ("Per tutto la via li furo fatti solenni onori," &c.--"Vita di
Cola di Rienzi", lib. ii. cap. 13.) and I am told that never ambassador,
prince, or baron, entered Avignon with so long a train as that which
followed into these very walls the steps of Cola di Rienzi."

"And on his arrival?"

"He demanded an audience, that he might refute the charges against him.
He flung down the gage to the proud cardinals who had excommunicated
him. He besought a trial."

"And what said the Pope?"

"Nothing--by word. Yon tower was his answer!"

"A rough one!"

"But there have been longer roads than that from the prison to the
palace, and God made not men like Rienzi for the dungeon and the chain."

As Angelo said this with a loud voice, and with all the enthusiasm with
which the fame of the fallen Tribune had inspired the youth of Rome, he
heard a sigh behind him. He turned in some confusion, and at the door
which admitted to the chamber occupied by the Signora Cesarini, stood a
female of noble presence. Attired in the richest garments, gold and gems
were dull to the lustre of her dark eyes, and as she now stood, erect
and commanding, never seemed brow more made for the regal crown--never
did human beauty more fully consummate the ideal of a heroine and a
queen.

"Pardon me, Signora," said Angelo, hesitatingly; "I spoke loud, I
disturbed you; but I am Roman, and my theme was--"

"Rienzi!" said the lady, approaching; "a fit one to stir a Roman heart.
Nay--no excuses: they would sound ill on thy generous lips. Ah, if--"
the Signora paused suddenly, and sighed again; then in an altered and
graver tone she resumed--"If fate restore Rienzi to his proper fortunes,
he shall know what thou deemest of him."

"If you, lady, who are of Naples," said Angelo, with meaning emphasis,
"speak thus of a fallen exile, what must I have felt who acknowledge a
sovereign?"

"Rienzi is not of Rome alone--he is of Italy--of the world," returned
the Signora. "And you, Angelo, who have had the boldness to speak thus
of one fallen, have proved with what loyalty you can serve those who
have the fortune to own you."

As she spoke, the Signora looked at the page's downcast and blushing
face long and wistfully, with the gaze of one accustomed to read the
soul in the countenance.

"Men are often deceived," said she sadly, yet with a half smile; "but
women rarely,--save in love. Would that Rome were filled with such as
you! Enough! Hark! Is that the sound of hoofs in the court below?"

"Madam," said Giacomo, bringing his mantle gallantly over his shoulder,
"I see the servitors of Monsignore the Cardinal d'Albornoz.--It is the
Cardinal himself."

"It is well!" said the Signora, with a brightening eye; "I await
him!" With these words she withdrew by the door through which she had
surprised the Roman page.



Chapter 7.II. The Character of a Warrior Priest--an Interview--the
Intrigue and Counter-intrigue of Courts.

Giles, (or Egidio, (Egidio is the proper Italian equivalent to the
French name Gilles,--but the Cardinal is generally called, by the
writers of that day, Gilio d'Albornoz.)) Cardinal d'Albornoz, was one of
the most remarkable men of that remarkable time, so prodigal of genius.
Boasting his descent from the royal houses of Aragon and Leon, he
had early entered the church, and yet almost a youth, attained the
archbishopric of Toledo. But no peaceful career, however brilliant,
sufficed to his ambition. He could not content himself with the honours
of the church, unless they were the honours of a church militant. In
the war against the Moors, no Spaniard had more highly distinguished
himself; and Alphonso XI. king of Castile, had insisted on receiving
from the hand of the martial priest the badge of knighthood. After the
death of Alphonso, who was strongly attached to him, Albornoz repaired
to Avignon, and obtained from Clement VI. the cardinal's hat. With
Innocent he continued in high favour, and now, constantly in the
councils of the Pope, rumours of warlike preparation, under the banners
of Albornoz, for the recovery of the papal dominions from the various
tyrants that usurped them, were already circulated through the court.
(It is a characteristic anecdote of this bold Churchman, that Urban V.
one day demanded an account of the sums spent in his military expedition
against the Italian tyrants. The Cardinal presented to the Pope a wagon,
filled with the keys of the cities and fortresses he had taken. "This is
my account," said he; "you perceive how I have invested your money." The
Pope embraced him, and gave him no further trouble about his accounts.)
Bold, sagacious, enterprising, and cold-hearted,--with the valour of the
knight, and the cunning of the priest,--such was the character of Giles,
Cardinal d'Albornoz.

Leaving his attendant gentlemen in the antechamber, Albornoz was ushered
into the apartment of the Signora Cesarini. In person, the Cardinal
was about the middle height; the dark complexion of Spain had faded by
thought, and the wear of ambitious schemes, into a sallow but hardy hue;
his brow was deeply furrowed, and though not yet passed the prime of
life, Albornoz might seem to have entered age, but for the firmness
of his step, the slender elasticity of his frame, and an eye which had
acquired calmness and depth from thought, without losing any of the
brilliancy of youth.

"Beautiful Signora," said the Cardinal, bending over the hand of the
Cesarini with a grace which betokened more of the prince than of the
priest; "the commands of his Holiness have detained me, I fear, beyond
the hour in which you vouchsafed to appoint my homage, but my heart has
been with you since we parted."

"The Cardinal d'Albornoz," replied the Signora, gently withdrawing her
hand, and seating herself, "has so many demands on his time, from the
duties of his rank and renown, that methinks to divert his attention for
a few moments to less noble thoughts is a kind of treason to his fame."

"Ah, Lady," replied the Cardinal, "never was my ambition so nobly
directed as it is now. And it were a prouder lot to be at thy feet than
on the throne of St. Peter."

A momentary blush passed over the cheek of the Signora, yet it seemed
the blush of indignation as much as of vanity; it was succeeded by an
extreme paleness. She paused before she replied; and then fixing her
large and haughty eyes on the enamoured Spaniard, she said, in a low
voice,

"My Lord Cardinal, I do not affect to misunderstand your words; neither
do I place them to the account of a general gallantry. I am vain enough
to believe you imagine you speak truly when you say you love me."

"Imagine!" echoed the Spaniard.

