and despise him. Girls, I here forbid you once for all to mention that
signor's name to me again; else I'll whip you till the blood comes. You
know how I can lay on when I'm roused."

"We do. We do."

"Then provoke me not to it;" and her eye flashed daggers, and she turned
to Gerard all instantaneous honey. "Addio, il Gerardo." And Gerard bowed
himself out of this velvet tiger's den.

He came next day and coloured her; and next he was set to make a
portrait of her on a large scale; and then a full-length figure; and
he was obliged to set apart two hours in the afternoon, for drawing and
painting this princess, whose beauty and vanity were prodigious, and
candidates for a portrait of her numerous. Here the thriving Gerard
found a new and fruitful source of income.

Margaret seemed nearer and nearer.


It was Holy Thursday. No work this day. Fra Colonna and Gerard sat in a
window and saw the religious processions. Their number and pious ardour
thrilled Gerard with the devotion that now seemed to animate the whole
people, lately bent on earthly joys.

Presently the Pope came pacing majestically at the head of his
cardinals, in a red hat, white cloak, a capuchin of red velvet, and
riding a lovely white Neapolitan barb, caparisoned with red velvet
fringed and tasselled with gold; a hundred horsemen, armed cap-a-pie,
rode behind him with their lances erected, the butt-end resting on the
man's thigh. The cardinals went uncovered, all but one, de Medicis, who
rode close to the Pope and conversed with him as with an equal. At every
fifteen steps the Pope stopped a single moment, and gave the people his
blessing, then on again.

Gerard and the friar now came down, and threading some by-streets
reached the portico of one of the seven churches. It was hung with
black, and soon the Pope and cardinals, who had entered the church
by another door, issued forth, and stood with torches on the steps,
separated by barriers from the people; then a canon read a Latin Bull,
excommunicating several persons by name, especially such princes as were
keeping the Church out of any of her temporal possessions.

At this awful ceremony Gerard trembled, and so did the people. But two
of the cardinals spoiled the effect by laughing unreservedly the whole
time.

When this was ended, the black cloth was removed, and revealed a gay
panoply; and the Pope blessed the people, and ended by throwing his
torch among them: so did two cardinals. Instantly there was a scramble
for the torches: they were fought for, and torn in pieces by the
candidates, so devoutly that small fragments were gained at the price
of black eyes, bloody noses, and burnt fingers; In which hurtling his
holiness and suite withdrew in peace.

And now there was a cry, and the crowd rushed to a square where was a
large, open stage: several priests were upon it praying. They rose, and
with great ceremony donned red gloves. Then one of their number kneeled,
and with signs of the lowest reverence drew forth from a shrine a square
frame, like that of a mirror, and inside was as it were the impression
of a face.

It was the Verum icon, or true impression of our Saviour's face, taken
at the very moment of His most mortal agony for us. Received as it was
without a grain of doubt, imagine how it moved every Christian heart.

The people threw themselves on their faces when the priest raised it on
high; and cries of pity were in every mouth, and tears in almost every
eye. After a while the people rose, and then the priest went round the
platform, showing it for a single moment to the nearest; and at each
sight loud cries of pity and devotion burst forth.

Soon after this the friends fell in with a procession of Flagellants,
flogging their bare shoulders till the blood ran streaming down; but
without a sign of pain in their faces, and many of them laughing and
jesting as they lashed. The bystanders out of pity offered them wine;
they took it, but few drank it; they generally used it to free the tails
of the cat, which were hard with clotted blood, and make the next stroke
more effective. Most of them were boys, and a young woman took pity on
one fair urchin. "Alas! dear child," said she, "why wound thy white skin
so?" "Basta," said he, laughing, "'tis for your sins I do it, not for
mine."

"Hear you that?" said the friar. "Show me the whip that can whip
the vanity out of man's heart! The young monkey; how knoweth he that
stranger is a sinner more than he?"

"Father," said Gerard, "surely this is not to our Lord's mind. He was so
pitiful."

"Our Lord?" said the friar, crossing himself. "What has He to do with
this? This was a custom in Rome six hundred years before He was born.
The boys used to go through the streets, at the Lupercalia flogging
themselves. And the married women used to shove in, and try and get a
blow from the monkeys' scourges; for these blows conferred fruitfulness
in those days. A foolish trick this flagellation; but interesting to
the bystander; reminds him of the grand old heathen. We are so prone to
forget all we owe them."

Next they got into one of the seven churches, and saw the Pope give the
mass. The ceremony was imposing, but again--spoiled by the inconsistent
conduct of the cardinals and other prelates, who sat about the altar
with their hats on, chattering all through the mass like a flock of
geese.

The eucharist in both kinds was tasted by an official before the Pope
would venture on it; and this surprised Gerard beyond measure. "Who is
that base man? and what doth he there?"

"Oh, that is 'the Preguste,' and he tastes the eucharist by way of
precaution. This is the country for poison; and none fall oftener by it
than the poor Popes."

"Alas! so I have heard; but after the miraculous change of the bread
and wine to Christ His body and blood, poison cannot remain; gone is the
bread with all its properties and accidents; gone is the wine."

"So says Faith; but experience tells another tale. Scores have died in
Italy poisoned in the host."

"And I tell you, father, that were both bread and wine charged with
direst poison before his holiness had consecrated them, yet after
consecration I would take them both withouten fear."

"So would I, but for the fine arts."

"What mean you?"

"Marry, that I would be as ready to leave the world as thou, were it not
for those arts, which beautify existence here below, and make it dear to
men of sense and education. No; so long as the Nine Muses strew my path
with roses of learning and art, me may Apollo inspire with wisdom and
caution, that knowing the wiles of my countrymen, I may eat poison
neither at God's altar nor at a friend's table, since, wherever I eat
it or drink it, it will assuredly cut short my mortal thread; and I am
writing a book--heart and soul in it--'The Dream of Polifilo,' the
man of many arts. So name not poison to me till that is finished and
copied."

And now the great bells of St. John Lateran's were rung with a clash at
short intervals, and the people hurried thither to see the heads of St.
Peter and St. Paul.

Gerard and the friar got a good place in the church, and there was a
great curtain, and after long and breathless expectation of the people,
this curtain was drawn by jerks, and at a height of about thirty feet
were two human heads with bearded faces, that seemed alive. They were
shown no longer than the time to say an Ave Maria, and then the curtain
drawn. But they were shown in this fashion three times. St. Peter's
complexion was pale, his face oval, his beard grey and forked; his head
crowned with a papal mitre. St. Paul was dark skinned, with a thick,
square beard; his face also and head were more square and massive, and
full of resolution.

Gerard was awe-struck. The friar approved after his fashion.

"This exhibition of the 'imagines,' or waxen effigies of heroes and
demigods, is a venerable custom, and inciteth the vulgar to virtue by
great and invisible examples.

"Waxen images? What, are they not the apostles themselves, embalmed, or
the like?"

The friar moaned.

"They did not exist in the year 800. The great old Roman families always
produced at their funerals a series of these 'imagines,' thereby tying
past and present history together, and showing the populace the
features of far-famed worthies. I can conceive nothing more thrilling or
instructive. But then the effigies were portraits made during life or
at the hour of death. These of St. Paul and St. Peter are moulded out of
pure fancy."

"Ah! say not so, father."

"But the worst is, this humour of showing them up on a shelf, and half
in the dark, and by snatches, and with the poor mountebank trick of a
drawn curtain.

'Quodcunque ostendis mihi sic incredulus odi.'

Enough; the men of this day are not the men of old. Let us have done
with these new-fangled mummeries, and go among the Pope's books; there
we shall find the wisdom we shall vainly hunt in the streets of modern
Rome."

And this idea having once taken root, the good friar plunged and tore
through the crowd, and looked neither to the right hand nor to the left,
till he had escaped the glories of the holy week, which had brought
fifty thousand strangers to Rome; and had got nice and quiet among the
dead in the library of the Vatican.

Presently, going into Gerard's room, he found a hot dispute afoot
between him and Jacques Bonaventura. That spark had come in, all steel
from head to toe; doffed helmet, puffed, and railed most scornfully on a
ridiculous ceremony, at which he and his soldiers had been compelled to
attend the Pope; to wit the blessing of the beasts of burden.

Gerard said it was not ridiculous; nothing a Pope did could be
ridiculous.

The argument grew warm, and the friar stood grimly neuter, waiting like
the stork that ate the frog and the mouse at the close of their combat,
to grind them both between the jaws of antiquity; when lo, the curtain
was gently drawn, and there stood a venerable old man in a purple skull
cap, with a beard like white floss silk, looking at them with a kind
though feeble smile.

"Happy youth," said he, "that can heat itself over such matters."

They all fell on their knees. It was the Pope.

"Nay, rise, my children," said he, almost peevishly. "I came not into
this corner to be in state. How goes Plutarch?"

Gerard brought his work, and kneeling on one knee presented it to his
holiness, who had seated himself, the others standing.

His holiness inspected it with interest.

"'Tis excellently writ," said he.

Gerard's heart beat with delight.

"Ah! this Plutarch, he had a wondrous art, Francesco. How each character
standeth out alive on his page: how full of nature each, yet how unlike
his fellow!"

Jacques Bonaventura. "Give me the Signor Boccaccio."

His Holiness. "An excellent narrator, capitano, and writeth exquisite
Italian. But in spirit a thought too monotonous. Monks and nuns were
never all unchaste: one or two such stories were right pleasant and
diverting; but five score paint his time falsely, and sadden the heart
of such as love mankind. Moreover, he hath no skill at characters. Now
this Greek is supreme in that great art: he carveth them with pen; and
turning his page, see into how real and great a world we enter of war,
and policy, and business, and love in its own place: for with him, as in
the great world, men are not all running after a wench. With this great
open field compare me not the narrow garden of Boccaccio, and his little
mill-round of dishonest pleasures."

"Your holiness, they say, hath not disdained to write a novel."

"My holiness hath done more foolish things than one, whereof it repents
too late. When I wrote novels I little thought to be head of the
Church."

"I search in vain for a copy of it to add to my poor library."

"It is well. Then the strict orders I gave four years ago to destroy
every copy in Italy have been well discharged. However, for your
comfort, on my being made Pope, some fool turned it into French: so that
you may read it, at the price of exile."

"Reduced to this strait we throw ourselves on your holiness's
generosity. Vouchsafe to give us your infallible judgment on it!"

"Gently, gently, good Francesco. A Pope's novels are not matters of
faith. I can but give you my sincere impression. Well then the work
in question had, as far as I can remember, all the vices of Boccaccio,
without his choice Italian."

Fra Colonna. "Your holiness is known for slighting Aeneas Silvius as
other men never slighted him. I did him injustice to make you his
judge. Perhaps your holiness will decide more justly between these two
boys-about blessing the beasts."

The Pope demurred. In speaking of Plutarch he had brightened up for
a moment, and his eye had even flashed; but his general manner was as
unlike what youthful females expect in a Pope as you can conceive. I can
only describe it in French. Le gentilhomme blase. A highbred, and
highly cultivated gentleman, who had done, and said, and seen, and
known everything, and whose body was nearly worn out. But double languor
seemed to seize him at the father's proposal.

"My poor Francesco," said he, "bethink thee that I have had a life of
controversy, and am sick on't; sick as death. Plutarch drew me to this
calm retreat; not divinity."

"Nay, but, your holiness, for moderating of strife between two hot young
bloods, {Makarioi oi eirinopioi}."

"And know you nature so ill, as to think either of these high-mettled
youths will reck what a poor old Pope saith?"

"Oh! your holiness," broke in Gerard, blushing and gasping, "sure, here
is one who will treasure your words all his life as words from Heaven."

"In that case," said the Pope, "I am fairly caught. As Francesco here
would say--

{ouk estin ostis est' anyr eleutheos}.

I came to taste that eloquent heathen, dear to me e'en as to thee, thou
paynim monk; and I must talk divinity, or something next door to it.
But the youth hath a good and a winning face, and writeth Greek like an
angel. Well then, my children, to comprehend the ways of the Church, we
should still rise a little above the earth, since the Church is between
heaven and earth, and interprets betwixt them.

"The question is then, not how vulgar men feel, but how the common
Creator of man and beast doth feel, towards the lower animals. This, if
we are too proud to search for it in the lessons of the Church, the next
best thing is to go to the most ancient history of men and animals."

Colonna. "Herodotus."

"Nay, nay; in this matter Herodotus is but a mushroom. Finely were we
sped for ancient history, if we depended on your Greeks, who did but
write on the last leaf of that great book, Antiquity."

The friar groaned. Here was a Pope uttering heresy against his demigods.

"'Tis the Vulgate I speak of. A history that handles matters three
thousand years before him pedants call 'the Father of History.'"

Colonna. "Oh! the Vulgate? I cry your holiness mercy. How you frightened
me. I quite forgot the Vulgate."

"Forgot it? art sure thou ever readst it, Francesco mio?"

"Not quite, your holiness. 'Tis a pleasure I have long promised myself,
the first vacant moment. Hitherto these grand old heathen have left me
small time for recreation."

His Holiness. "First then you will find in Genesis that God, having
created the animals, drew a holy pleasure, undefinable by us, from
contemplating of their beauty. Was it wonderful? See their myriad forms;
their lovely hair and eyes, their grace, and of some the power and
majesty: the colour of others, brighter than roses, or rubies. And when,
for man's sin, not their own, they were destroyed, yet were two of each
kind spared.

"And when the ark and its trembling inmates tumbled solitary on the
world of water, then, saith the word, 'God remembered Noah, and the
cattle that were with him in the ark.'

"Thereafter God did write His rainbow in the sky as a bond that earth
should be flooded no more; and between whom the bond? between God and
man? nay, between God and man, and every living creature of all flesh:
or my memory fails me with age. In Exodus God commanded that the cattle
should share the sweet blessing of the one day's rest. Moreover He
'forbade to muzzle the ox that trod out the corn. 'Nay, let the poor
overwrought soul snatch a mouthful as he goes his toilsome round: the
bulk of the grain shall still be for man.' Ye will object perchance
that St. Paul, commenting this, saith rudely, 'Doth God care for oxen?'
Verily, had I been Peter, instead of the humblest of his successors,
I had answered him. 'Drop thy theatrical poets, Paul, and read the
Scriptures: then shalt thou know whether God careth only for men and
sparrows, or for all his creatures. O, Paul,' had I made bold to say,
'think not to learn God by looking into Paul's heart, nor any heart of
man, but study that which he hath revealed concerning himself.'

"Thrice he forbade the Jews to boil the kid in his mother's milk; not
that this is cruelty, but want of thought and gentle sentiments, and so
paves the way for downright cruelty. A prophet riding on an ass did
meet an angel. Which of these two, Paulo judice, had seen the heavenly
spirit? marry, the prophet. But it was not so. The man, his vision
cloyed with sin, saw nought. The poor despised creature saw all. Nor is
this recorded as miraculous. Poor proud things, we overrate ourselves.
The angel had slain the prophet and spared the ass, but for that
creature's clearer vision of essences divine. He said so, methinks.
But in sooth I read it many years agone. Why did God spare repentant
Nineveh? Because in that city were sixty thousand children, besides much
cattle.

"Profane history and vulgar experience add their mite of witness. The
cruel to animals end in cruelty to man; and strange and violent deaths,
marked with retribution's bloody finger, have in all ages fallen from
heaven on such as wantonly harm innocent beasts. This I myself have
seen. All this duly weighed, and seeing that, despite this Francesco's
friends, the Stoics, who in their vanity say the creatures all subsist
for man's comfort, there be snakes and scorpions which kill 'Dominum
terra' with a nip, musquitoes which eat him piecemeal, and tigers and
sharks which crack him like an almond, we do well to be grateful to
these true, faithful, patient, four-footed friends, which, in lieu of
powdering us, put forth their strength to relieve our toils, and do feed
us like mothers from their gentle dugs.

"Methinks then the Church is never more divine than in this benediction
of our four-footed friends, which has revolted you great theological
authority, the captain of the Pope's guards; since here she inculcates
humility and gratitude, and rises towards the level of the mind divine,
and interprets God to man, God the Creator, parent, and friend of man
and beast.

"But all this, young gentles, you will please to receive, not as
delivered by the Pope ex cathedra, but uttered carelessly, in a free
hour, by an aged clergyman. On that score you will perhaps do well to
entertain it with some little consideration. For old age must surely
bring a man somewhat, in return for his digestion (his 'dura puerorum
ilia,' eh, Francesco!), which it carries away."

Such was the purport of the Pope's discourse but the manner high bred,
languid, kindly, and free from all tone of dictation. He seemed to be
gently probing the matter in concert with his hearers, not playing
Sir Oracle. At the bottom of all which was doubtless a slight touch of
humbug, but the humbug that embellishes life; and all sense of it was
lost in the subtle Italian grace of the thing.

"I seem to hear the oracle of Delphi," said Fra Colonna
enthusiastically.

"I call that good sense," shouted Jacques Bonaventura.

"Oh, captain, good sense!" said Gerard, with a deep and tender reproach.

The Pope smiled on Gerard. "Cavil not at words; that was an unheard
of concession from a rival theologian." He then asked for all Gerard's
work, and took it away in his hand. But before going, he gently pulled
Fra Colonna's ear, and asked him whether he remembered when they were
school-fellows together and robbed the Virgin by the roadside of the
money dropped into her box. "You took a flat stick and applied bird-lime
to the top, and drew the money out through the chink, you rogue," said
his holiness severely.

"To every signor his own honour," replied Fra Colonna. "It was your
holiness's good wit invented the manoeuvre. I was but the humble
instrument."

"It is well. Doubtless you know 'twas sacrilege."

"Of the first water; but I did it in such good company, it troubles me
not."

"Humph! I have not even that poor consolation. What did we spend it in,
dost mind?"

"Can your holiness ask? why, sugar-plums."

"What, all on't?"

"Every doit."

"These are delightful reminiscences, my Francesco. Alas! I am getting
old. I shall not be here long. And I am sorry for it, for thy sake. They
will go and burn thee when I am gone. Art far more a heretic than Huss,
whom I saw burned with these eyes; and oh, he died like a martyr."

"Ay, your holiness; but I believe in the Pope; and Huss did not."

"Fox! They will not burn thee; wood is too dear. Adieu, old playmate;
adieu, young gentlemen; an old man's blessing be on you."

That afternoon the Pope's secretary brought Gerard a little bag: in it
were several gold pieces.

He added them to his store.

Margaret seemed nearer and nearer.

For some time past, too, it appeared as if the fairies had watched over
him. Baskets of choice provisions and fruits were brought to his door by
porters, who knew not who had employed them, or affected ignorance; and
one day came a jewel in a letter, but no words.



CHAPTER LXI

The Princess Claelia ordered a full-length portrait of herself. Gerard
advised her to employ his friend Pietro Vanucci.

But she declined. "'Twill be time to put a slight on the Gerardo, when
his work discontents me." Then Gerard, who knew he was an excellent
draughtsman, but not so good a colourist, begged her to stand to him
as a Roman statue. He showed her how closely he could mimic marble
on paper. She consented at first; but demurred when this enthusiast
explained to her that she must wear the tunic, toga, and sandals of the
ancients.

"Why, I had as lieve be presented in my smock," said she, with mediaeval
frankness.

"Alack! signorina," said Gerard, "you have surely never noted the
ancient habit; so free, so ample, so simple, yet so noble; and most
becoming your highness, to whom Heaven hath given the Roman features,
and eke a shapely arm and hand, his in modern guise."

"What, can you flatter, like the rest, Gerardo? Well, give me time to
think on't. Come o' Saturday, and then I will say ay or nay."

The respite thus gained was passed in making the tunic and toga, etc.,
and trying them on in her chamber, to see whether they suited her style
of beauty well enough to compensate their being a thousand years out of
date.

Gerard, hurrying along to this interview, was suddenly arrested, and
rooted to earth at a shop window.

His quick eye had discerned in that window a copy of Lactantius lying
open. "That is fairly writ, anyway," thought he.

He eyed it a moment more with all his eyes.

It was not written at all. It was printed.

Gerard groaned.

"I am sped; mine enemy is at the door. The press is in Rome."

He went into the shop, and affecting nonchalance, inquired how long the
printing-press had been in Rome. The man said he believed there was no
such thing in the city. "Oh, the Lactantius; that was printed on the top
of the Apennines."

"What, did the printing-press fall down there out o' the moon?"

"Nay, messer," said the trader, laughing; "it shot up there out of
Germany. See the title-page!"

Gerard took the Lactantius eagerly, and saw the following--

     Opera et impensis Sweynheim et Pannartz
     Alumnorum Joannis Fust.
     Impressum Subiacis. A.D. 1465.

"Will ye buy, messer? See how fair and even be the letters. Few are left
can write like that; and scarce a quarter of the price."

"I would fain have it," said Gerard sadly, "but my heart will not let
me. Know that I am a caligraph, and these disciples of Fust run after me
round the world a-taking the bread out of my mouth. But I wish them no
ill. Heaven forbid!" And he hurried from the shop.

"Dear Margaret," said he to himself, "we must lose no time; we must
make our hay while shines the sun. One month more and an avalanche of
printer's type shall roll down on Rome from those Apennines, and lay us
waste that writers be."

And he almost ran to the Princess Claelia.

He was ushered into an apartment new to him. It was not very large,
but most luxurious; a fountain played in the centre, and the floor was
covered with the skins of panthers, dressed with the hair, so that no
footfall could be heard. The room was an ante-chamber to the princess's
boudoir, for on one side there was no door, but an ample curtain of
gorgeous tapestry.

Here Gerard was left alone till he became quite uneasy, and doubted
whether the maid had not shown him to the wrong place.

These doubts were agreeably dissipated.

A light step came swiftly behind the curtain; it parted in the middle,
and there stood a figure the heathens might have worshipped. It was not
quite Venus, nor quite Minerva; but between the two; nobler than Venus,
more womanly than Jupiter's daughter. Toga, tunic, sandals; nothing was
modern. And as for beauty, that is of all times.

Gerard started up, and all the artist in him flushed with pleasure.

"Oh!" he cried innocently, and gazed in rapture.

This added the last charm to his model: a light blush tinted her cheeks,
and her eyes brightened, and her mouth smiled with delicious complacency
at this genuine tribute to her charms.

When they had looked at one another so some time, and she saw Gerard's
eloquence was confined to ejaculating and gazing, she spoke. "Well,
Gerardo, thou seest I have made myself an antique monster for thee."

"A monster? I doubt Fra Colonna would fall down and adore your highness,
seeing you so habited."

"Nay, I care not to be adored by an old man. I would liever be loved by
a young one: of my own choosing."

Gerard took out his pencils, arranged his canvas, which he had covered
with stout paper, and set to work; and so absorbed was he that he had
no mercy on his model. At last, after near an hour in one posture,
"Gerardo," said she faintly, "I can stand so no more, even for thee."

"Sit down and rest awhile, Signora."

"I thank thee," said she; and sinking into a chair turned pale and
sighed.

Gerard was alarmed, and saw also he had been inconsiderate. He took
water from the fountain and was about to throw it in her face; but she
put up a white hand deprecatingly: "Nay, hold it to my brow with thine
hand: prithee, do not fling it at me!"

Gerard timidly and hesitating applied his wet hand to her brow.

"Ah!" she sighed, "that is reviving. Again."

He applied it again. She thanked him, and asked him to ring a little
hand-bell on the table. He did so, and a maid came, and was sent to
Floretta with orders to bring a large fan.

Floretta speedily came with the fan.

She no sooner came near the princess, than that lady's highbred nostrils
suddenly expanded like a bloodhorse's. "Wretch!" said she; and rising
up with a sudden return to vigour, seized Floretta with her left hand,
twisted it in her hair, and with the right hand boxed her ears severely
three times.

Floretta screamed and blubbered; but obtained no mercy.

The antique toga left quite disengaged a bare arm, that now seemed as
powerful as it was beautiful: it rose and fell like the piston of a
modern steam-engine, and heavy slaps resounded one after another on
Floretta's shoulders; the last one drove her sobbing and screaming
through the curtain, and there she was heard crying bitterly for some
time after.

"Saints of heaven!" cried Gerard, "what is amiss? what has she done?"

"She knows right well. 'Tis not the first time. The nasty toad! I'll
learn her to come to me stinking of the musk-cat."

"Alas! Signora, 'twas a small fault, methinks."

"A small fault? Nay, 'twas a foul fault." She added with an amazing
sudden descent to humility and sweetness, "Are you wroth with me for
beating her, Gerar-do?"

"Signora, it ill becomes me to school you; but methinks such as Heaven
appoints to govern others should govern themselves."

"That is true, Gerardo. How wise you are, to be so young." She then
called the other maid, and gave her a little purse. "Take that to
Floretta, and tell her 'the Gerardo' hath interceded for her; and so I
must needs forgive her. There, Gerardo."

Gerard coloured all over at the compliment; but not knowing how to
turn a phrase equal to the occasion, asked her if he should resume her
picture.

"Not yet; beating that hussy hath somewhat breathed me. I'll sit awhile,
and you shall talk to me. I know you can talk, an it pleases you, as
rarely as you draw."

"That were easily done.

"Do it then, Gerardo."

Gerard was taken aback.

"But, signora, I know not what to say. This is sudden."

"Say your real mind. Say you wish you were anywhere but here."

"Nay, signora, that would not be sooth. I wish one thing though."

"Ay, and what is that?" said she gently.

"I wish I could have drawn you as you were beating that poor lass. You
were awful, yet lovely. Oh, what a subject for a Pythoness!"

"Alas! he thinks but of his art. And why keep such a coil about my
beauty, Gerardo? You are far fairer than I am. You are more like Apollo
than I to Venus. Also, you have lovely hair and lovely eyes--but you
know not what to do with them."

"Ay, do I. To draw you, signora."

"Ah, yes; you can see my features with them; but you cannot see what any
Roman gallant had seen long ago in your place. Yet sure you must have
noted how welcome you are to me, Gerardo?"

"I can see your highness is always passing kind to me; a poor stranger
like me."

"No, I am not, Gerardo. I have often been cold to you; rude sometimes;
and you are so simple you see not the cause. Alas! I feared for my own
heart. I feared to be your slave. I who have hitherto made slaves. Ah!
Gerardo, I am unhappy. Ever since you came here I have lived upon
your visits. The day you are to come I am bright. The other days I am
listless, and wish them fled. You are not like the Roman gallants. You
make me hate them. You are ten times braver to my eye; and you are
wise and scholarly, and never flatter and lie. I scorn a man that lies.
Gerar-do, teach me thy magic; teach me to make thee as happy by my side
as I am still by thine."

As she poured out these strange words, the princess's mellow voice sunk
almost to a whisper, and trembled with half-suppressed passion, and her
white hand stole timidly yet earnestly down Gerard's arm, till it rested
like a soft bird upon his wrist, and as ready to fly away at a word.

Destitute of vanity and experience, wrapped up in his Margaret and his
art, Gerard had not seen this revelation coming, though it had come by
regular and visible gradations.

He blushed all over. His innocent admiration of the regal beauty that
besieged him, did not for a moment displace the absent Margaret's image.
Yet it was regal beauty, and wooing with a grace and tenderness he had
never even figured in imagination. How to check her without wounding
her?

He blushed and trembled.

The siren saw, and encouraged him.

"Poor Gerardo," she murmured, "fear not; none shall ever harm thee under
my wing. Wilt not speak to me, Gerar-do mio?"

"Signora!" muttered Gerard deprecatingly.

At this moment his eye, lowered in his confusion, fell on the shapely
white arm and delicate hand that curled round his elbow like a tender
vine, and it flashed across him how he had just seen that lovely limb
employed on Floretta.

He trembled and blushed.

"Alas!" said the princess, "I scare him. Am I then so very terrible? Is
it my Roman robe? I'll doff it, and habit me as when thou first camest
to me. Mindest thou? 'Twas to write a letter to yon barren knight Ercole
d'Orsini. Shall I tell thee? 'twas the sight of thee, and thy pretty
ways, and thy wise words, made me hate him on the instant. I liked the
fool well enough before; or wist I liked him. Tell me now how many times
hast thou been here since then. Ah! thou knowest not; lovest me not, I
doubt, as I love thee. Eighteen times, Gerardo. And each time dearer
to me. The day thou comest not 'tis night, not day, to Claelia. Alas!
I speak for both. Cruel boy, am I not worth a word? Hast every day a
princess at thy feet? Nay, prithee, prithee, speak to me, Gerar-do."

"Signora," faltered Gerard, "what can I say, that were not better left
unsaid? Oh, evil day that ever I came here."

"Ah! say not so. 'Twas the brightest day ever shone on me or indeed on
thee. I'll make thee confess so much ere long, ungrateful one."

"Your highness," began Gerard, in a low, pleading voice.

"Call me Claelia, Gerar-do."

"Signora, I am too young and too little wise to know how I ought to
speak to you, so as not to seem blind nor yet ungrateful. But this I
know, I were both naught and ungrateful, and the worst foe e'er you had,
did I take advantage of this mad fancy. Sure some ill spirit hath had
leave to afflict you withal. For 'tis all unnatural that a princess
adorned with every grace should abase her affections on a churl."

The princess withdrew her hand slowly from Gerard's wrist.

Yet as it passed lightly over his arm it seemed to linger a moment at
parting.

"You fear the daggers of my kinsmen," said she, half sadly, half
contemptuously.

"No more than I fear the bodkins of your women," said Gerard haughtily.
"But I fear God and the saints, and my own conscience."

"The truth, Gerardo, the truth! Hypocrisy sits awkwardly on thee.
Princesses, while they are young, are not despised for love of God, but
of some other woman. Tell me whom thou lovest; and if she is worthy thee
I will forgive thee."

"No she in Italy, upon my soul."

"Ah! there is one somewhere then. Where? where?"

"In Holland, my native country."

"Ah! Marie de Bourgoyne is fair, they say. Yet she is but a child."

"Princess, she I love is not noble. She is as I am. Nor is she so
fair as thou. Yet is she fair; and linked to my heart for ever by her
virtues, and by all the dangers and griefs we have borne together, and
for one another. Forgive me; but I would not wrong my Margaret for all
the highest dames in Italy."

The slighted beauty started to her feet, and stood opposite him, as
beautiful, but far more terrible than when she slapped Floretta, for
then her cheeks were red, but now they were pale, and her eyes full of
concentrated fury.

"This to my face, unmannered wretch," she cried. "Was I born to be
insulted, as well as scorned, by such as thou? Beware! We nobles brook
no rivals. Bethink thee whether is better, the love of a Cesarini, or
her hate: for after all I have said and done to thee, it must be love or
hate between us, and to the death. Choose now!"

He looked up at her with wonder and awe, as she stood towering over him
in her Roman toga, offering this strange alternative.

He seemed to have affronted a goddess of antiquity; he a poor puny
mortal.

He sighed deeply, but spoke not.

Perhaps something in his deep and patient sigh touched a tender chord in
that ungoverned creature; or perhaps the time had come for one passion
to ebb and another to flow. The princess sank languidly into a seat, and
the tears began to steal rapidly down her cheeks.

"Alas! alas!" said Gerard. "Weep not, sweet lady; your tears they
do accuse me, and I am like to weep for company. My kind patron, be
yourself; you will live to see how much better a friend I was to you
than I seemed."

"I see it now, Gerardo," said the princess. "Friend is the word! the
only word can ever pass between us twain. I was mad. Any other man had
ta'en advantage of my folly. You must teach me to be your friend and
nothing more."

Gerard hailed this proposition with joy; and told her out of Cicero how
godlike a thing was friendship, and how much better and rarer and more
lasting than love: to prove to her he was capable of it, he even told
her about Denys and himself.

She listened with her eyes half shut, watching his words to fathom his
character, and learn his weak point.

At last, she addressed him calmly thus: "Leave me now, Gerardo, and come
as usual to-morrow. You will find your lesson well bestowed."

She held out her hand to him: he kissed it; and went away pondering
deeply this strange interview, and wondering whether he had done
prudently or not.

The next day he was received with marked distance, and the princess
stood before him literally like a statue, and after a very short
sitting, excused herself and dismissed him. Gerard felt the chilling
difference; but said to himself, "She is wise." So she was in her way.

The next day he found the princess waiting for him surrounded by young
nobles flattering her to the skies. She and they treated him like a
dog that could do one little trick they could not. The cavaliers in
particular criticised his work with a mass of ignorance and insolence
combined that made his cheeks burn.

The princess watched his face demurely with half-closed eyes at each
sting the insects gave him; and when they had fled, had her doors closed
against every one of them for their pains.

The next day Gerard found her alone: cold and silent. After standing to
him so some time, she said, "You treated my company with less respect
than became you."

"Did I, Signora?"

"Did you? you fired up at the comments they did you the honour to make
on your work."

"Nay, I said nought," observed Gerard.

"Oh, high looks speak as plain as high words. Your cheeks were red as
blood."

"I was nettled a moment at seeing so much ignorance and ill-nature
together."

"Now it is me, their hostess, you affront."

"Forgive me, Signora, and acquit me of design. It would ill become me to
affront the kindest patron and friend I have in Rome but one."

"How humble we are all of a sudden. In sooth, Ser Gerardo, you are a
capital feigner. You can insult or truckle at will."

"Truckle? to whom?"

"To me, for one; to one, whom you affronted for a base-born girl like
yourself; but whose patronage you claim all the same."

Gerard rose, and put his hand to his heart. "These are biting words,
signora. Have I really deserved them?"

"Oh, what are words to an adventurer like you? cold steel is all you
fear?"

"I am no swashbuckler, yet I have met steel with steel and methinks I
had rather face your kinsmen's swords than your cruel tongue, lady. Why
do you use me so?"

"Gerar-do, for no good reason, but because I am wayward, and shrewish,
and curst, and because everybody admires me but you."

"I admire you too, Signora. Your friends may flatter you more; but
believe me they have not the eye to see half your charms. Their babble
yesterday showed me that. None admire you more truly, or wish you
better, than the poor artist, who might not be your lover, but hoped
to be your friend; but no, I see that may not be between one so high as
you, and one so low as I."

"Ay! but it shall, Gerardo," said the princess eagerly. "I will not be
so curst. Tell me now where abides thy Margaret; and I will give thee a
present for her; and on that you and I will be friends."

"She is a daughter of a physician called Peter, and they bide at
Sevenbergen; ah me, shall I e'er see it again?"

"'Tis well. Now go." And she dismissed him somewhat abruptly.

Poor Gerard. He began to wade in deep waters when he encountered this
Italian princess; callida et calida selis filia. He resolved to go no
more when once he had finished her likeness. Indeed he now regretted
having undertaken so long and laborious a task.

This resolution was shaken for a moment by his next reception, which was
all gentleness and kindness.

After standing to him some time in her toga, she said she was fatigued,
and wanted his assistance in another way: would he teach her to draw a
little? He sat down beside her, and taught her to make easy lines. He
found her wonderfully apt. He said so.

"I had a teacher before thee, Gerar-do. Ay, and one as handsome as
thyself." She then went to a drawer, and brought out several heads
drawn with a complete ignorance of the art, but with great patience and
natural talent. They were all heads of Gerard, and full of spirit; and
really not unlike. One was his very image. "There," said she. "Now thou
seest who was my teacher."

"Not I, signora."

"What, know you not who teaches us women to do all things? 'Tis love,
Gerar-do. Love made me draw because thou draweth, Gerar-do. Love prints
thine image in my bosom. My fingers touch the pen, and love supplies the
want of art, and lo thy beloved features lie upon the paper."

Gerard opened his eyes with astonishment at this return to an
interdicted topic. "Oh, Signora, you promised me to be friends and
nothing more."

She laughed in his face. "How simple you are: who believes a woman
promising nonsense, impossibilities? Friendship, foolish boy, who
ever built that temple on red ashes? Nay Gerardo," she added gloomily,
"between thee and me it must be love or hate."

"Which you will, signora," said Gerard firmly. "But for me I will
neither love nor hate you; but with your permission I will leave you."
And he rose abruptly.

She rose too, pale as death, and said, "Ere thou leavest me so, know thy
fate; outside that door are armed men who wait to slay thee at a word
from me."

"But you will not speak that word, signora."

"That word I will speak. Nay, more, I shall noise it abroad it was for
proffering brutal love to me thou wert slain; and I will send a special
messenger to Sevenbergen: a cunning messenger, well taught his lesson.
Thy Margaret shall know thee dead, and think thee faithless; now, go to
thy grave; a dog's. For a man thou art not."

Gerard turned pale, and stood dumb-stricken. "God have mercy on us
both."

"Nay, have thou mercy on her, and on thyself. She will never know in
Holland what thou dost in Rome; unless I be driven to tell her my tale.
Come, yield thee, Gerar-do mio: what will it cost thee to say thou
lovest me? I ask thee but to feign it handsomely. Thou art young: die
not for the poor pleasure of denying a lady what-the shadow of a heart.
Who will shed a tear for thee? I tell thee men will laugh, not weep
over thy tombstone-ah!" She ended in a little scream, for Gerard threw
himself in a moment at her feet, and poured out in one torrent of
eloquence the story of his love and Margaret's. How he had been
imprisoned, hunted with bloodhounds for her, driven to exile for her;
how she had shed her blood for him, and now pined at home. How he
had walked through Europe environed by perils, torn by savage brutes,
attacked by furious men with sword and axe and trap, robbed, shipwrecked
for her.

The princess trembled, and tried to get away from him; but he held
her robe, he clung to her, he made her hear his pitiful story and
Margaret's; he caught her hand, and clasped it between both his, and his
tears fell fast on her hand, as he implored her to think on all the
woes of the true lovers she would part; and what but remorse, swift
and lasting, could come of so deep a love betrayed, and so false a love
feigned, with mutual hatred lurking at the bottom.

In such moments none ever resisted Gerard.

The princess, after in vain trying to get away from him, for she felt
his power over her, began to waver, and sigh, and her bosom to rise and
fall tumultuously, and her fiery eyes to fill.

"You conquer me," she sobbed. "You, or my better angel. Leave Rome!"

"I will, I will."

"If you breathe a word of my folly, it will be your last."

"Think not so poorly of me. You are my benefactress once more. Is it for
me to slander you?"

"Go! I will send you the means. I know myself; if you cross my path
again, I shall kill you. Addio; my heart is broken."

She touched her bell. "Floretta," said she, in a choked voice, "take him
safe out of the house, through my chamber, and by the side postern."

He turned at the door; she was leaning with one hand on a chair, crying,
with averted head. Then he thought only of her kindness, and ran back
and kissed her robe. She never moved.

Once clear of the house he darted home, thanking Heaven for his escape,
soul and body.

"Landlady," said he, "there is one would pick a quarrel with me. What is
to be done?"

"Strike him first, and at vantage! Get behind him; and then draw."

"Alas, I lack your Italian courage. To be serious, 'tis a noble."

"Oh, holy saints, that is another matter. Change thy lodging awhile, and
keep snug; and alter the fashion of thy habits."

She then took him to her own niece, who let lodgings at some little
distance, and installed him there.

He had little to do now, and no princess to draw, so he set himself
resolutely to read that deed of Floris Brandt, from which he had
hitherto been driven by the abominably bad writing. He mastered it, and
saw at once that the loan on this land must have been paid over and over
again by the rents, and that Ghysbrecht was keeping Peter Brandt out of
his own.

"Fool! not to have read this before," he cried. He hired a horse and
rode down to the nearest port. A vessel was to sail for Amsterdam in
four days.

He took a passage; and paid a small sum to secure it.

"The land is too full of cut-throats for me," said he; "and 'tis lovely
fair weather for the sea. Our Dutch skippers are not shipwrecked like
these bungling Italians."

When he returned home there sat his old landlady with her eyes
sparkling.

"You are in luck, my young master," said she. "All the fish run to your
net this day methinks. See what a lackey hath brought to our house! This
bill and this bag."

Gerard broke the seals, and found it full of silver crowns. The letter
contained a mere slip of paper with this line, cut out of some MS.:--"La
lingua non ha osso, ma fa rompere il dosso."

"Fear me not!" said Gerard aloud. "I'll keep mine between my teeth."

"What is that?"

"Oh, nothing. Am I not happy, dame? I am going back to my sweetheart
with money in one pocket, and land in the other." And he fell to dancing
round her.

"Well," said she, "I trow nothing could make you happier."

"Nothing, except to be there."

"Well, that is a pity, for I thought to make you a little happier with a
letter from Holland."

"A letter? for me? where? how? who brought it?--Oh, dame!"

"A stranger; a painter, with a reddish face and an outlandish name;
Anselmin, I trow."

"Hans Memling! a friend of mine. God bless him!"

"Ay, that is it: Anselmin. He could scarce speak a word, but a had the
wit to name thee; and a puts the letter down, and a nods and smiles, and
I nods and smiles, and gives him a pint o' wine, and it went down him
like a spoonful."

"That is Hans, honest Hans. Oh, dame, I am in luck to-day; but I
deserve it. For, I care not if I tell you, I have just overcome a great
temptation for dear Margaret's sake."

"Who is she?"

"Nay, I'd have my tongue cut out sooner than betray her, but oh, it was
a temptation. Gratitude pushing me wrong, Beauty almost divine pulling
me wrong: curses, reproaches, and hardest of all to resist, gentle tears
from eyes used to command. Sure some saint helped me Anthony belike. But
my reward is come."

"Ay, is it, lad; and no farther off than my pocket. Come out, Gerard's
reward," and she brought a letter out of her capacious pocket.

Gerard threw his arm round her neck and hugged her.

"My best friend," said he, "my second mother, I'll read it to you.

"Ay, do, do."

"Alas! it is not from Margaret. This is not her hand." And he turned it
about.

"Alack; but maybe her bill is within. The lasses are aye for gliding in
their bills under cover of another hand."

"True. Whose hand is this? sure I have seen it. I trow 'tis my dear
friend the demoiselle Van Eyck. Oh, then Margaret's bill will be
inside." He tore it open. "Nay, 'tis all in one writing. 'Gerard, my
well beloved son' (she never called me that before that I mind), 'this
letter brings thee heavy news from one would liever send thee joyful
tidings. Know that Margaret Brandt died in these arms on Thursday
sennight last.' (What does the doting old woman mean by that?) 'The last
word on her lips was "Gerard:" she said, "Tell him I prayed for him at
my last hour; and bid him pray for me." She died very comfortable, and
I saw her laid in the earth, for her father was useless, as you shall
