the square, half expecting to find that she had been recognised and
arrested. As he reached the square, he saw that curious people were
loitering about the carriage; as he pushed through them, he heard them
questioning why travellers should on so hot a morning of spring sit
muffled up in a close, dark carriage when they could take their ease
beneath trees in the inn-garden. One man laughed out at the Princess and
the comical figure she made with her scarlet cloak drawn tight about her
face. Wogan himself had bought that cloak in Strasbourg to guard his
Princess from the cold of the Brenner, and guessed what discomfort its
ermine lining must now be costing her. And this lout dared to laugh and
make her, this incomparable woman, a butt for his ridicule! Wogan took a
step towards the fellow with his fists clenched, but thought the better
of his impulse, and turning away ran to the palace of Prince Taxis.

This desperate course alone remained to him; he must have speech with
the Prince-bishop himself. At the palace, however, he was informed that
the Prince was in bed with the gout. Mr. Wogan, however, insisted.

"You will present my duties to the Prince; you will show him my
passport; you will say that the Count of Cernes has business of the last
importance in Italy, and begs permission, since the Prince of Baden has
hired every post-horse in the town, to requisition half a dozen
farm-horses from the fields."

Mr. Wogan kicked his heels in the courtyard while the message was taken.
At any moment some rumour of the curious spectacle in the square might
be brought to the palace and excite inquiry. There might be another
courier in pursuit besides the man whom Gaydon kept a prisoner. Wogan
was devoured with a fever of impatience. It seemed to him hours before
the Prince's secretary returned to him. The secretary handed him back
his passport, and on the part of the Prince made a speech full of
civilities.

"Here's a great deal of jam, sir," said Wogan. "I misdoubt me but what
there's a most unpalatable pill hidden away in it."

"Indeed," said the secretary, "the Prince begs you to be content and to
wait for the post-horses to return."

"Ah, ah!" cried Wogan, "but that's the one thing I cannot do. I must
speak plainly, it appears." He drew the secretary out of ear-shot, and
resumed: "My particular business is to catch up the Prince of Baden. He
is summoned back to Innspruck. Do you understand?" he asked
significantly.

"Sir, we are well informed in Trent as to the Emperor's wishes," said
the secretary, with a great deal of dignity.

"No, no, my friend," said Wogan. "It is not by the Emperor the Prince of
Baden is summoned, though I have no doubt the summons is much to his
taste."

The secretary stepped back in surprise.

"By her Highness the Princess?" he exclaimed.

"She changes her mind; she is willing where before she was obdurate. To
tell you the truth, the Prince plied her too hard, and she would have
none of him. Now that he turns his back and puts the miles as fast as he
can between himself and her, she cannot sleep for want of him."

The secretary nodded his head sagaciously.

"Her Highness is a woman," said he, "and that explains all. But it will
do her no harm to suffer a little longer for her obstinacy, and, to tell
you the truth, the Prince Taxis is so tormented with the gout that--"

"That you are unwilling to approach him a second time," interrupted
Wogan. "I have no doubt of it. I have myself seen prelates in a most
unprelatical mood. But here is a case where needs must. I have not told
you all. There is a devil of a fellow called Charles Wogan."

The secretary nodded his head.

"A mad Irishman who has vowed to free her Highness."

"He has set out from Strasbourg with that aim."

"He will hang for it, then, but he will never rescue her;" and the
secretary began to laugh. "I cannot upon my honour vex the Prince again
because a gallows-bird has prated in his cups."

"No, no," said Wogan; "you do not follow me. Charles Wogan will come to
the gallows over this adventure. For my part, I would have him broken on
the wheel and tortured in many uncomfortable ways. These Irishmen all
the world over are pestilent fellows. But the trouble is this: If her
Highness hears of his attempt, she is, as you sagely discovered, a
woman, a trivial, trifling thing. She will be absurd enough to imagine
her rescue possible; she will again change her mind, and it is precisely
that which General Heister fears. He would have her formally betrothed
to the Prince of Baden before Charles Wogan is caught and hanged
sky-high. Therefore, since I was pressing into Italy, he charged me with
this message to the Prince of Baden. Now observe this, if you please.
Suppose that I do not overtake the Prince; suppose that her Highness
hears of Wogan's coming and again changes her mind,--who will be to
blame? Not I, for I have done my best, not Prince Taxis, for he is not
informed, but Prince Taxis's secretary."

The secretary yielded to Wogan's argument. He might be in a great fear
of Prince Taxis, but he was in a greater of the Emperor's wrath. He left
Wogan again, and in a little while came back with the written
permission which Wogan desired. Wogan wasted no time in unnecessary
civilities; the morning had already been wasted. The clocks were
striking one as he hurried away from the palace, and before two the
Princess Clementina was able to throw back her cloak from about her face
and take the air; for the berlin was on the road from Trent to Roveredo.

"Those were the four worst hours since we left Innspruck," she said. "I
thought I should suffocate." The revulsion from despair, the knowledge
that each beat of the hoofs brought them nearer to safety, the glow of
the sun upon a country which was Italy in all but name, raised them all
to the top of their spirits. Clementina was in her gayest mood; she
lavished caresses upon her "little woman," as she called Mrs. Misset;
she would have Wogan give her an account of his interview with Prince
Taxis's secretary; she laughed with the merriest enjoyment over his
abuse of Charles Wogan.

"But it was not myself alone whom I slandered," said he. "Your Highness
had a share of our abuse. Our heads wagged gravely over woman's
inconstancies. It was not in nature but you must change your mind.
Indeed, your Highness would have laughed."

But at all events her Highness did not laugh now. On the contrary, her
eyes lost all their merriment, and her blood rushed hotly into her
cheeks. She became for that afternoon a creature of moods, now talking
quickly and perhaps a trifle wildly, now relapsing into long silences.
Wogan was troubled by a thought that the strain of her journey was
telling its tale even upon her vigorous youth. It may be that she noted
his look of anxiety, but she said to him abruptly and with a sort of
rebellion,--

"You would despise any woman who had the temerity to change her mind."

"Nay; I do not say that."

"But it is merely politeness that restrains you. You would despise her,
judging her by men. When a man changes his mind, why, it is so, he
changes his mind. But when a girl does, it may well be that for the
first time she is seriously exercising her judgment. For her upbringing
renders it natural that she should allow others to make up her mind for
her at the first."

"That I think is very true," said Wogan.

Clementina, however, was not satisfied with his assent. She attacked him
again and almost vindictively.

"You of course would never change your mind for any reason, once it was
fixed. You are resolute. You are quite, quite perfect."

Mr. Wogan could not imagine what he had done thus to provoke her irony.

"Madam," he pleaded, "I am not in truth so obstinate a fellow as you
make me out. I have often changed my mind. I take some pride in it on
occasion."

Her Highness inclined to a greater graciousness.

"I am glad to know it. You shall give me examples. One may have a stiff
neck and yet no cause for pride."

Wogan looked so woe-begone under this reproof that Clementina suddenly
broke out into a laugh, and so showed herself in a fresh and more
familiar mood. The good-humour continued; she sat opposite to Mr. Wogan;
if she moved, her hand, her knee, her foot, must needs touch his; she
made him tell her stories of his campaigns; and so the evening came upon
them,--an evening of stars and mysterious quiet and a clear, dark sky.

They passed Roveredo; they drew near to Ala, the last village in the
Emperor's territories. Five miles beyond Ala they would be on Venetian
soil, and already they saw the lights of the village twinkling like so
many golden candles. But the berlin, which had drawn them so stoutly
over these rugged mountain-roads, failed them at the last. One of the
hind wheels jolted violently upon a great stone, there was a sudden
cracking of wood, and the carriage lurched over, throwing its occupants
one against the other.

Wogan disentangled himself, opened the door, and sprang out. He sprang
out into a pool of water. One glance at the carriage, dark though the
night was, told him surely what had happened. The axle-tree was broken.
He saw that Clementina was about to follow him.

"There is water," said he. "It is ankle-deep."

"And no white stone," she answered with a laugh, "whereon I can safely
set my foot?"

"No," said he, "but you can trust without fear to my arms;" and he
reached them out to her.

"Can I?" said she, in a curious voice; and when he had lifted her from
the carriage, she was aware that she could not. He lifted her daintily,
like a piece of porcelain; but to lift her was not enough, he must carry
her. His arms tightened about her waist, hers in spite of herself about
his shoulders. He took a step or two from the carriage, with the water
washing over his boots, and the respectful support of a servant became
the warm grip of a man. He no longer held her daintily; he clipped her
close to him, straining her breasts against his chest; he was on fire
with her. She could not but know it; his arms shook, his bosom heaved;
she felt the quick hammering of his heart; and a murmur, an inarticulate
murmur, of infinite longing trembled from his throat. And something of
his madness passed into her and made a sweet tumult in her blood. He
stopped still holding her; he felt her fingers clasp tighter; he looked
downwards into her face upturned to his. They were alone for a moment,
these two, alone in an uninhabited world. The broken carriage, the busy
fingers about it, the smoking horses, the lights of Ala twinkling in the
valley, had not even the substance of shadows. They simply were not, and
they never had been. There were just two people alive between the
Poles,--not princess and servant, but man and woman in the primitive
relationship of rescuer and rescued; and they stood in the dark of a
translucent night of spring, with the stars throbbing above them to the
time of their passionate hearts, and the earth stretching about them
rich as black velvet. He looked down into her eyes as once in the
night-time he had done before; and again he marvelled at their
steadiness and their mysterious depths. Her eyes were fixed on his and
did not flinch; her arms were close about his neck; he bent his head
towards her, and she said in a queer, toneless voice, low but as steady
as her eyes,--

"I know. Ah, but well I know. Last night I dreamed; I rode on your black
horse into your city of dreams;" and the moment of passion ended in
farce. For Wogan, startled by the words, set her down there and then
into the pool. She stood over her ankles in water. She uttered a little
cry and shivered. Then she laughed and sprang lightly onto dry soil,
making much of her companion's awkwardness. Wogan joined in the
laughter, finding therein as she did a cover and a cloak.

"We must walk to Ala," said he.

"It is as well," said she. "There was a time when cavaliers laid their
cloaks in the mud to save a lady's shoe-sole."

"Madam," said Wogan, "the chivalry of to-day has the same intention."

"But in its effect," said she, "it is more rheumatical."

Wogan searched in the carriage and drew out a coil of rope which he
slung across his shoulders like a bandolier. Clementina laughed at him
for his precautions, but Wogan was very serious. "I would not part with
it," said he. "I never travelled for four days without being put to it
for a piece of rope."

They left the postillion to make what he could of the berlin and walked
forward in the clear night to Ala. The shock of the tumble had alarmed
Mrs. Misset; the fatigue of the journey had strained her endurance to
the utmost. She made no complaint, but she could walk but slowly and
with many rests by the way. It took a long while for them to reach the
village. They saw the lights diminish in the houses; the stars grew
pale; there came a hint of morning in the air. The laughter at Wogan's
awkwardness had long since died away, and they walked in silence.

Forty-eight hours had passed since the berlin left Innspruck.
Twenty-four hours ago Clementina knew Wogan's secret. Now he was aware
that she knew it. They could not look into each other's faces, but their
eyes conversed of it. If they turned their heads sharply away, that
aversion of their gaze spoke no less clearly. There was a link between
them now, and a secret link, the sweeter on that account,
perhaps,--certainly the more dangerous. The cloud had grown much bigger
than a man's hand. Moreover, she had never seen James Stuart; she had
his picture, it is true, but the picture could not recall. It must
create, not revivify his image to her thoughts, and that it could not
do; so that he remained a shadowy figure to her, a mere number of
features, almost an abstraction. On the other hand the King's emissary
walked by her side, sat sleepless before her, had held her in his arms,
had talked with her, had risked his life for her; she knew him. What she
knew of James Stuart, she knew chiefly from the lips of this emissary.
On this walk to Ala he spoke of his master, and remorsefully in the
highest praise. But she knew his secret, she knew that he loved her, and
therefore every remorseful, loyal word he spoke praised him more than it
praised his master. And it happened that just as they came to the
outskirts of the village, she dropped a handkerchief which hung loosely
about her neck. For a moment she did not remark her loss; when she did
and turned, she saw that her companion was rising from the ground on
which no handkerchief longer lay, and that he had his right hand in his
breast. She turned again without a word, and walked forward. But she
knew that kerchief was against his heart, and the cloud still grew.




CHAPTER XVIII


They reached Ala towards two o'clock of the morning. The town had some
reputation in those days for its velvets and silks, and Wogan made no
doubt that somewhere he would procure a carriage to convey them the
necessary five miles into Venetian territory. The Prince of Baden was
still ahead of them, however. The inn of "The Golden Lion" had not a
single horse fit for their use in its stables. Wogan, however, obtained
there a few likely addresses and set out alone upon his search. He
returned in a couple of hours with a little two-wheeled cart drawn by a
pony, and sent word within that he was ready. Clementina herself with
her hood thrown back from her face came out to him at the door. An oil
lamp swung in the passage and lit up her face. Wogan could see that the
face was grave and anxious.

"Your Highness and Mrs. Misset can ride in the cart. It has no springs,
to be sure, and may shake to pieces like plaster. But if it carries you
five miles, it will serve. Misset and I can run by the side."

"But Lucy Misset must not go," said Clementina. "She is ill, and no
wonder. She must not take one step more to-night. There would be great
danger, and indeed she has endured enough for me." The gravity of the
girl's face, as much as her words, convinced Wogan that here was no
occasion for encouragement or resistance. He said with some
embarrassment,--

"Yet we cannot leave her here alone; and of us two men, her husband must
stay with her."

"Dare we wait till the morning?" asked Clementina. "Lucy may be
recovered then."

Wogan shook his head.

"The courier we stopped at Wellishmile was not the only man sent after
us. Of that we may be very sure. Here are we five miles from safety, and
while those five miles are still unbridged--Listen!"

Wogan leaned his head forward and held up his hand for silence. In the
still night they could hear far away the galloping of a horse. The sound
grew more distinct as they listened.

"The rider comes from Italy," said Clementina. "But he might have come
from Trent," cried Wogan. "We left Trent behind twelve hours ago, and
more. For twelve hours we crept and crawled along the road; these last
miles we have walked. Any moment the Emperor's troopers might come
riding after us. Ah, but we are not safe! I am afraid!"

Clementina turned sharply towards him as he spoke this unwonted
confession.

"You!" she exclaimed with a wondering laugh. Yet he had spoken the
truth. His face was twitching; his eyes had the look of a man scared out
of his wits.

"Yes, I am afraid," he said in a low, uneasy voice. "When I have all but
won through the danger, then comes my moment of fear. In the thick of
it, perils tread too close upon the heels of peril for a man to count
them up. Each minute claims your hands and eyes and brain,--claims you
and inspires you. But when the danger's less, and though less still
threatens; when you're just this side of safety's frontier and not
safe,--indeed, indeed, one should be afraid. A vain spirit of
confidence, and the tired head nods, and the blow falls on it from
nowhere. Oh, but I have seen examples times out of mind. I beg you, no
delay!"

The hoofs of the approaching horse sounded ever louder while Wogan
spoke; and as he ended, a man rode out from the street into the open
