where they cannot reach me. Therefore I will keep them watching
this place until I can strike them a blow that will end the trouble
once for all. They will be sure that we gather men on the Quantock
side, whence Heregar can keep them; and so, while they watch for us
to attack them thence, we will gather beyond Selwood, calling all
the thanes from Hants and Wilts and Dorset and Somerset to meet me
on a fixed day, and so fall on them. Now we will build a fort
yonder on Stane hill that will make them wonder, and so the plan
will begin to work. For I have only told you the main lines
thereof; the rest must go as can be planned from day to day."

Then he looked steadfastly at the Selwood heights, and added:

"And if the plan fails, and the battle I look for goes against us,
there remain Heregar's places yet. Petherton, Combwich, and
Dowsborough are good places, where a king may die in a ring of
foes, looking out over the land for which his life is given."

"We shall not fail, my king," said Heregar. "Devon will gather to
you across the Quantocks also."

"Ay," he said; "and you will need them with you."

Then said I:

"Hubba is in Wales, and is likely to come here when he hears that
his fellows are gathering against us. Then will Devon be needed at
Combwich in Parret mouth, or at Watchet."

"That will be Devon's work," the king said. "If Hubba comes before
your ships are ready to meet him, he must at least be driven to
land elsewhere, or our stronghold is taken behind us."

Now I was so sure that Hubba would come, that this seemed to me to
be the weakest part of the king's plan. But Alfred thought little
of it.

"My stronghold seems to be on Quantock side; it is rather beyond
Selwood, in the hearts of my brave thanes and freemen. Fear not,
cousin. Hubba will come, and you and Heregar will meet him; and
whether you win or not, my plan holds."

Then I knew that the king saw far beyond what was plain to me, and
I was very confident in him. And I am sure that I was the only man
who had the least doubt from the beginning.

Now, after all was planned, Heregar and I rode back to his place,
and sent word everywhere that the king was safe, though he
commanded us to tell no man where he lay as yet. None but thanes
were to be in the island with him; and from that time the name we
knew it by began, as one by one the athelings crossed the fen paths
thereto, and were lost, as it were, in the hiding place.

Then we wrought there at felling timber and hewing, until we had
bridged the river and made a causeway through the peat to Stanmoor
hill, and then began to make a triple line of earthworks around its
summit. No carelessly-built fort was this, for the king said: "If
the nobles build badly, there will be excuse for every churl to do
the like hereafter. Therefore this must needs be the most
handsomely-wrought fort in all Wessex."

There came to us at this fort many faithful workmen, sent from the
towns and countryside, until we had a camp there. But every night,
after working with us and cheering all with his voice and example,
Alfred went back to Athelney with us; and none would seek to
disturb him there, so that for long none quite knew, among the
lesser folk, where he bided. Presently the queen and athelings came
there to him, and were safe.

That time in the fens was not altogether unpleasant, though the
life was hard. Ever was Alfred most cheerful, singing and laughing
as we wrought, and a word of praise from him was worth more than
gold to every man. And then there were the hunting, the fishing,
and the snaring of wild fowl, that were always on hand to supply
our wants, though now we had plenty of food from the Quantock side.
I know this, that many a man who was in Athelney with Alfred was
the better therefor all the days of his after life. Men say that
there is a steadfast look in the faces of the Athelney thanes, by
which they can be well known by those who note the ways of men.

The frost lasted till February went out in rain and south winds.
And then the Danes began to gather along the southern hills,
watching us. By that time we had made causeways to other islets
from the fort, and the best of these was to Othery, a long, flat
island that lay to the east, nearer to the Polden Hills and
Edington.

So one day the king sent for me as we wrought at the fort, and both
he and I were horny handed and clay stained from the work. I came
with spade in hand, and he leaned on a pick. Whereat he laughed.

"Faith, brother king, now can I speak in comrade's wise to my
churls as you speak to your seamen. Nor do I think that I shall be
the worse ruler for that."

Then he took my arm, and pointed to Edington hill.

"For many nights past I have seen watch fires yonder," he said;
"and that is a place where I might strike the Danes well. So I
would draw them thither in force. Do you feel as if a fight would
be cheerful after this spade work?"

Now I could wish for nothing better, and I said so.

"Well, then," he went on, laughing at my eagerness, "go to
Ethelnoth, and take twenty men, and do you and he fall on that post
from Othery by night; and when you have scattered it, come back
into the fen. I would have you lose no men, but I would make the
Danes mass together by attack on some one point, and that as soon
as may be, before Hubba comes. I do not want to hold their place."

Now that was the first of daily attacks on the Danish posts, at
different places along the Selwood and Polden hills, until they
thought that we wished to win Edington height, where we began and
annoyed them most often. So I will tell how such a raid fared.

Good it was to lay aside pick and spade and take sword Helmbiter
again, and don mail and helm; and I made Harek fence with me, lest
I should have lost my sword craft through use of the weapons
whereby the churl conquers mother earth. But once the good sword
was in my hand I forgot all but the warrior's trade.

So Ethelnoth and I and twenty young thanes went in the evening to
Othery island, and there found a fenman to guide us, and so went to
the foot of Edington hill just as darkness fell. The watch-fire
lights, that were our guide, twinkled above us through the trees
that were on the hillside; and we made at once for them, sending on
the fenman to spy out the post before we were near it. It was very
dark, and it rained now and then.

When he came back to where we had halted, he said that there were
about twenty tents, pitched in four lines, with a fire between each
line; and that the men were mostly under cover, drinking before
setting watch, if they set any at all.

So we drew nearer, skirting round into cover of some trees that
came up to the tents, for the hilltop was bare for some way. The
lighted tents looked very cheerful, and sounds of song and laughter
came from them, and now and then a man crossed from one to another,
or fed the fires with fresh wood, that hissed and sputtered as he
cast it on.

"How shall we attack?" said Ethelnoth.

"Why, run through the camp in silence first and cut the tent lines,
and then raise a war shout and come back on them. Then we may slay
a few, and the rest will be scared badly enough."

Thereat we both laughed under our breath, for it seemed like a
schoolboy's prank. Well, after the long toil in the fen, we were
like boys just freed from school, though our game was the greatest
of all--that of war--the game of Hodur's playground, as we Norse
say.

Then I said:

"After we come through for the second time, we must take to this
cover, and so get together at some place by the hill foot. There is
a shed by a big tree that can be found easily."

So we passed the wood, and our comrades chuckled. It was good sport
to see the shadows of the careless Danes on the tent walls, and to
know that they dreamed of nothing less than that Saxons were on
them. Four rows of tents there were, and there were twenty-two of
us; so we told off men to each row, and then made for them at a
moment when no man was about--hacking at the ropes, and laughing to
see the tents fall. It was strange to watch the shadows start up
and stand motionless, as the first patter of feet came and the
first blows fell, and then bustle, helpless and confused, with
savage shouts and curses, as the heavy canvas and skins fell in
upon them.

Now we were through the camp, and the outcries were loud behind us.
Two or three tents did not fall, and from them the men swarmed,
half armed and startled, not knowing if this was not some sorry
jest at first; and then rang our war cry from the dark, and we were
back upon them. We were but two-and-twenty to a hundred, but they
knew not what was on hand, while we did; and so we cut through them
without meeting with any hurt. Two tents were on fire and blazing
high, and blackened men cut and tore their way out of them howling;
and I think that more than one Dane was cut down by his comrades in
the panic that fell on all.

Yet even as we passed into the cover and went our way back towards
the fen, some bolder spirits began to rally, and a horn was blown.
But we were gone, leaving six slain and many more wounded among
them, while not one of us was scratched.

They did not follow us, and we heard the clamour we had caused
going on for some time after we had gained the fen. Presently, too,
when we reached Othery, we saw a fire signal lit to call for help,
and we were well content. Doubtless those Danes waked under arms
all that night through.

After that these attacks were seldom so easy, for the Danes kept
good watch enough; but they were ever the same in most ways.
Suddenly in the night would come the war cry and the wild rush of
desperate men on some Danish outpost, and before they knew what to
do we were away and into the fen again. We grew to know every path
well before long, and sometimes we would fall on small parties of
our foes when they were on the march or raiding the cattle, and cut
through them, and get back to our fastness.

Once or twice we were followed in the grey of early morning; but
few Danes ever got back from that pursuit. We would cut them off
amid the peat bogs, or they would founder therein, and sink under
the weight of armour.

Then they tried to force some fenmen they caught to guide them to
us at Othery. Once the brave fenman led them to where they dared
not move till daylight came, while the blue fen lights flitted
round them like ghosts in the dark; and then the fen people swarmed
round them, and ended them with arrows and sling stones from a
distance. They tried no more night attacks on us after that. But
again they came in some force by daylight, and we had a strange
fight on a narrow strip of hard land in Sedgemoor, with all
advantage on our side. No Danes won back to the Polden Hills.

Then they dared not try the fens any more, and daily we kept their
sentries watching, and nightly we fell on outposts, until at last
they thought our force grew very great, and began to gather on
Edington hill, even as Alfred wished. And this saved many a village
and farm and town from plunder, for the fear of Alfred the king
began to grow among his foes.

Then the king made his next move; for, now that the way was open,
he sent to Odda at Exeter, bidding him move up to Taunton by some
northerly road, gathering what Devon men he could on the way. There
is hardly a stronger town in Wessex than the great fortress that
Ine the king made.

At this time I began to be full of thoughts about my ships. But
they could hardly be built as yet; and most of them were in
southern havens, whence, even were they ready, one could not bring
them round the stormy Land's End in early March. Yet the weather
was mild and open, and I began to think that at any time Hubba
might bring his Danes across the narrow Severn sea to join his
kinsmen at Edington. We heard, too, that Guthrum, the king of East
Anglia, was there now, and that he had summoned every warrior who
would leave the land he had won to come to him.

Men have blamed Guthrum for treachery in this; but seeing that the
peace was broken, and that he must needs fight for the peace at
least of his kingdom, I hold that this is not right. At all events,
Alfred blamed him not in the time to come. Nevertheless, I suppose
that in men's minds he always will be held answerable for what the
other chiefs wrought of ill, because he bore the name of king from
the first, and ruled East Anglia. No Saxon, who is used to hold his
king as over all, will understand how little power a host-king of
the north has.

Now all this while my good ship lay at Bridgwater, and with her
were fifty of my men, who were well quartered among the townsfolk,
and helped to guard the bridge. And, as I have said, two ships were
being built there. So one day in the third week in March I rode
away with Kolgrim from Athelney, to see how all things were going
on there, meaning also to go to Heregar's place for a time, having
messages to give him from the king.

Harek was coming with me; but Alfred asked me to spare him for this
time.

"I have to learn somewhat from the scald," he said.

"Wizardry, my king?" I asked, laughing, for that was ever a jest at
the scald's expense after it was known how we found out that Alfred
was at Denewulf's house.

"Nay, but song," he answered. "Now I see not why I should not tell
you who put the thought into my mind; but I am going, as you did,
to spy out the Danish camp. And I will go as a gleeman, and be
welcome enough as a Saxon who has enough love of Danes to learn
some northern sagas for them!"

"My king," I cried, "this is too perilous altogether."

He looked quaintly at me.

"Go to, cousin; are you to have all the glory? If you went, why not
I? Maybe I too may find a chance of helping some fair maiden on the
way back."

Then I prayed him to do nothing rash, for that he was the one hope
of England.

"And maybe the one man in England who can do any good by going,
therefore," he answered. "And neither you nor I would ask any man
to do for us what we durst not do ourselves."

"You will be known, my king," I said.

Whereon he held out his hands, which were hard and horny now with
hard work, and he laughed as he did so.

"Look at those," he said, "and at my unkempt hair and beard! Verily
I may be like Alfred the king in some ways, but not in these. They
will pass me anywhere."

So I could not dissuade him, and ever as I tried to do so he waxed
more cheerful, and made sport of me, throwing my own doings in my
teeth, and laughing about Thora. So I was fain to get away from his
presence, lest I should grow angry at last. And when I was going he
said:

"Have no fear, cousin; I will not go unless I am well prepared."

So I went, and next day was back in Athelney, riding hard; for
Hubba's ships had been sighted from the Quantocks, and they were
heading for the Parret. What I looked for and feared was coming.

Then Alfred sent messengers to Odda, who had come to Taunton two
days before this. And he gathered every man from the fen, and we
went to Bridgwater, leaving our little force there, and so rode on
the way to Combwich, thinking to see the sails of the ships in
Bridgwater Bay. But a shift of wind had come, and they were yet
