cluster, and beneath which my spirit can dream of God.  Oh! none can
know what the pilgrim feels as he walks on his holy course; nursing no
fear, and dreading no danger--for God is with him!  He hears the winds
murmur glad tidings; the woods sleep in the shadow of Almighty
wings--the stars are the Scriptures of Heaven, the tokens of love, and
the witnesses of immortality.  Night is the Pilgrim's day.' With these
words the old man pressed Apaecides to his breast, and taking up his
staff and scrip, the dog bounded cheerily before him, and with slow
steps and downcast eyes he went his way.

The convert stood watching his bended form, till the trees shut the last
glimpse from his view; and then, as the stars broke forth, he woke from
the musings with a start, reminded of his appointment with Olinthus.



Chapter V

THE PHILTRE.  ITS EFFECT.

WHEN Glaucus arrived at his own home, he found Nydia seated under the
portico of his garden.  In fact, she had sought his house in the mere
chance that he might return at an early hour: anxious, fearful,
anticipative, she resolved upon seizing the earliest opportunity of
availing herself of the love-charm, while at the same time she half
hoped the opportunity might be deferred.

It was then, in that fearful burning mood, her heart beating, her cheek
flushing, that Nydia awaited the possibility of Glaucus's return before
the night.  He crossed the portico just as the first stars began to
rise, and the heaven above had assumed its most purple robe.

'Ho, my child, wait you for me?'

'Nay, I have been tending the flowers, and did but linger a little while
to rest myself.'

'It has been warm,' said Glaucus, placing himself also on one of the
seats beneath the colonnade.

'Very.'

'Wilt thou summon Davus?  The wine I have drunk heats me, and I long for
some cooling drink.'

Here at once, suddenly and unexpectedly, the very opportunity that Nydia
awaited presented itself; of himself, at his own free choice, he
afforded to her that occasion.  She breathed quick--'I will prepare for
you myself,' said she, 'the summer draught that Ione loves--of honey and
weak wine cooled in snow.'

'Thanks,' said the unconscious Glaucus.  'If Ione love it, enough; it
would be grateful were it poison.'

Nydia frowned, and then smiled; she withdrew for a few moments, and
returned with the cup containing the beverage.  Glaucus took it from her
hand.  What would not Nydia have given then for one hour's prerogative
of sight, to have watched her hopes ripening to effect--to have seen the
first dawn of the imagined love--to have worshipped with more than
Persian adoration the rising of that sun which her credulous soul
believed was to break upon her dreary night!  Far different, as she
stood then and there, were the thoughts, the emotions of the blind girl,
from those of the vain Pompeian under a similar suspense.  In the last,
what poor and frivolous passions had made up the daring whole! What
petty pique, what small revenge, what expectation of a paltry triumph,
had swelled the attributes of that sentiment she dignified with the name
of love! but in the wild heart of the Thessalian all was pure,
uncontrolled, unmodified passion--erring, unwomanly, frenzied, but
debased by no elements of a more sordid feeling. Filled with love as
with life itself, how could she resist the occasion of winning love in
return!

She leaned for support against the wall, and her face, before so
flushed, was now white as snow, and with her delicate hands clasped
convulsively together, her lips apart, her eyes on the ground, she
waited the next words Glaucus should utter.

Glaucus had raised the cup to his lips, he had already drained about a
fourth of its contents, when his eye suddenly glancing upon the face of
Nydia, he was so forcibly struck by its alteration, by its intense, and
painful, and strange expression, that he paused abruptly, and still
holding the cup near his lips, exclaimed:

'Why, Nydia! Nydia! I say, art thou ill or in pain?  Nay, thy face
speaks for thee.  What ails my poor child?'  As he spoke, he put down
the cup and rose from his seat to approach her, when a sudden pang shot
coldly to his heart, and was followed by a wild, confused, dizzy
sensation at the brain. The floor seemed to glide from under him--his
feet seemed to move on air--a mighty and unearthly gladness rushed upon
his spirit--he felt too buoyant for the earth--he longed for wings, nay,
it seemed in the buoyancy of his new existence, as if he possessed them.
He burst involuntarily into a loud and thrilling laugh.  He clapped his
hands--he bounded aloft--he was as a Pythoness inspired; suddenly as it
came this preternatural transport passed, though only partially, away.
He now felt his blood rushing loudly and rapidly through his veins; it
seemed to swell, to exult, to leap along, as a stream that has burst its
bounds, and hurries to the ocean.  It throbbed in his ear with a mighty
sound, he felt it mount to his brow, he felt the veins in the temples
stretch and swell as if they could no longer contain the violent and
increasing tide--then a kind of darkness fell over his eyes--darkness,
but not entire; for through the dim shade he saw the opposite walls glow
out, and the figures painted thereon seemed, ghost-like, to creep and
glide.  What was most strange, he did not feel himself ill--he did not
sink or quail beneath the dread frenzy that was gathering over him. The
novelty of the feelings seemed bright and vivid--he felt as if a younger
health had been infused into his frame.  He was gliding on to
madness--and he knew it not!

Nydia had not answered his first question--she had not been able to
reply--his wild and fearful laugh had roused her from her passionate
suspense: she could not see his fierce gesture--she could not mark his
reeling and unsteady step as he paced unconsciously to and fro; but she
heard the words, broken, incoherent, insane, that gushed from his lips.
She became terrified and appalled--she hastened to him, feeling with her
arms until she touched his knees, and then falling on the ground she
embraced them, weeping with terror and excitement.

'Oh, speak to me! speak! you do not hate me?--speak, speak!'

'By the bright goddess, a beautiful land this Cyprus!  Ho! how they fill
us with wine instead of blood! now they open the veins of the Faun
yonder, to show how the tide within bubbles and sparkles.  Come hither,
jolly old god! thou ridest on a goat, eh?--what long silky hair he has!
He is worth all the coursers of Parthia.  But a word with thee--this
wine of thine is too strong for us mortals.  Oh! beautiful! the boughs
are at rest! the green waves of the forest have caught the Zephyr and
drowned him!  Not a breath stirs the leaves--and I view the Dreams
sleeping with folded wings upon the motionless elm; and I look beyond,
and I see a blue stream sparkle in the silent noon; a fountain--a
fountain springing aloft!  Ah! my fount, thou wilt not put out rays of
my Grecian sun, though thou triest ever so hard with thy nimble and
silver arms.  And now, what form steals yonder through the boughs? she
glides like a moonbeam!--she has a garland of oak-leaves on her head.
In her hand is a vase upturned, from which she pours pink and tiny
shells and sparkling water.  Oh! look on yon face!  Man never before saw
its like.  See! we are alone; only I and she in the wide forest.  There
is no smile upon her lips--she moves, grave and sweetly sad.  Ha! fly,
it is a nymph!--it is one of the wild Napaeae!  Whoever sees her becomes
mad-fly! see, she discovers me!'

'Oh! Glaucus! Glaucus! do you not know me?  Rave not so wildly, or thou
wilt kill me with a word!'

A new change seemed now to operate upon the jarring and disordered mind
of the unfortunate Athenian.  He put his hand upon Nydia's silken hair;
he smoothed the locks--he looked wistfully upon her face, and then, as
in the broken chain of thought one or two links were yet unsevered, it
seemed that her countenance brought its associations of Ione; and with
that remembrance his madness became yet more powerful, and it swayed and
tinged by passion, as he burst forth:

'I swear by Venus, by Diana, and by Juno, that though I have now the
world on my shoulders, as my countryman Hercules (ah, dull Rome! whoever
was truly great was of Greece; why, you would be godless if it were not
for us!)--I say, as my countryman Hercules had before me, I would let it
fall into chaos for one smile from Ione.  Ah, Beautiful,--Adored,' he
added, in a voice inexpressibly fond and plaintive, 'thou lovest me not.
Thou art unkind to me.  The Egyptian hath belied me to thee--thou
knowest not what hours I have spent beneath thy casement--thou knowest
not how I have outwatched the stars, thinking thou, my sun, wouldst rise
at last--and thou lovest me not, thou forsakest me!  Oh! do not leave me
now!  I feel that my life will not be long; let me gaze on thee at least
unto the last.  I am of the bright land of thy fathers--I have trod the
heights of Phyle--I have gathered the hyacinth and rose amidst the
olive-groves of Ilyssus.  Thou shouldst not desert me, for thy fathers
were brothers to my own.  And they say this land is lovely, and these
climes serene, but I will bear thee with me--Ho! dark form, why risest
thou like a cloud between me and mine?  Death sits calmly dread upon thy
brow--on thy lip is the smile that slays: thy name is Orcus, but on
earth men call thee Arbaces.  See, I know thee! fly, dim shadow, thy
spells avail not!'

'Glaucus! Glaucus!' murmured Nydia, releasing her hold and falling,
beneath the excitement of her dismay, remorse, and anguish, insensible
on the floor.

'Who calls?' said he in a loud voice.  'Ione, it is she! they have borne
her off--we will save her--where is my stilus?  Ha, I have it!  I come,
Ione, to thy rescue!  I come!  I come!'

So saying, the Athenian with one bound passed the portico, he traversed
the house, and rushed with swift but vacillating steps, and muttering
audibly to himself, down the starlit streets.  The direful potion burnt
like fire in his veins, for its effect was made, perhaps, still more
sudden from the wine he had drunk previously.  Used to the excesses of
nocturnal revellers, the citizens, with smiles and winks, gave way to
his reeling steps; they naturally imagined him under the influence of
the Bromian god, not vainly worshipped at Pompeii; but they who looked
twice upon his face started in a nameless fear, and the smile withered
from their lips.  He passed the more populous streets; and, pursuing
mechanically the way to Ione's house, he traversed a more deserted
quarter, and entered now the lonely grove of Cybele, in which Apaecides
had held his interview with Olinthus.



Chapter VI

A REUNION OF DIFFERENT ACTORS.  STREAMS THAT FLOWED APPARENTLY APART
RUSH INTO ONE GULF.

IMPATIENT to learn whether the fell drug had yet been administered by
Julia to his hated rival, and with what effect, Arbaces resolved, as the
evening came on, to seek her house, and satisfy his suspense. It was
customary, as I have before said, for men at that time to carry abroad
with them the tablets and the stilus attached to their girdle; and with
the girdle they were put off when at home.  In fact, under the
appearance of a literary instrument, the Romans carried about with them
in that same stilus a very sharp and formidable weapon.  It was with his
stilus that Cassius stabbed Caesar in the senate-house.  Taking, then,
his girdle and his cloak, Arbaces left his house, supporting his steps,
which were still somewhat feeble (though hope and vengeance had
conspired greatly with his own medical science, which was profound, to
restore his natural strength), by his long staff--Arbaces took his way
to the villa of Diomed.

And beautiful is the moonlight of the south!  In those climes the night
so quickly glides into the day, that twilight scarcely makes a bridge
between them.  One moment of darker purple in the sky--of a thousand
rose-hues in the water--of shade half victorious over light; and then
burst forth at once the countless stars--the moon is up--night has
resumed her reign!

Brightly then, and softly bright, fell the moonbeams over the antique
grove consecrated to Cybele--the stately trees, whose date went beyond
tradition, cast their long shadows over the soil, while through the
openings in their boughs the stars shone, still and frequent.  The
whiteness of the small sacellum in the centre of the grove, amidst the
dark foliage, had in it something abrupt and startling; it recalled at
once the purpose to which the wood was consecrated--its holiness and
solemnity.

With a swift and stealthy pace, Calenus, gliding under the shade of the
trees, reached the chapel, and gently putting back the boughs that
completely closed around its rear, settled himself in his concealment; a
concealment so complete, what with the fane in front and the trees
behind, that no unsuspicious passenger could possibly have detected him.
Again, all was apparently solitary in the grove: afar off you heard
faintly the voices of some noisy revellers or the music that played
cheerily to the groups that then, as now in those climates, during the
nights of summer, lingered in the streets, and enjoyed, in the fresh air
and the liquid moonlight, a milder day.

From the height on which the grove was placed, you saw through the
intervals of the trees the broad and purple sea, rippling in the
distance, the white villas of Stabiae in the curving shore, and the dim
Lectiarian hills mingling with the delicious sky.  Presently the tall
figure of Arbaces, in his way to the house of Diomed, entered the
extreme end of the grove; and at the same instant Apaecides, also bound
to his appointment with Olinthus, crossed the Egyptian's path.

'Hem! Apaecides,' said Arbaces, recognizing the priest at a glance;
'when last we met, you were my foe.  I have wished since then to see
you, for I would have you still my pupil and my friend.'

Apaecides started at the voice of the Egyptian; and halting abruptly,
gazed upon him with a countenance full of contending, bitter, and
scornful emotions.

'Villain and impostor!' said he at length; 'thou hast recovered then
from the jaws of the grave!  But think not again to weave around me thy
guilty meshes.  Retiarius, I am armed against thee!'

'Hush!' said Arbaces, in a very low voice--but his pride, which in that
descendant of kings was great, betrayed the wound it received from the
insulting epithets of the priest in the quiver of his lip and the flush
of his tawny brow.  'Hush! more low! thou mayest be overheard, and if
other ears than mine had drunk those sounds--why...'

'Dost thou threaten?--what if the whole city had heard me?'

'The manes of my ancestors would not have suffered me to forgive thee.
But, hold, and hear me.  Thou art enraged that I would have offered
violence to thy sister.  Nay, peace, peace, but one instant, I pray
thee.  Thou art right; it was the frenzy of passion and of jealousy--I
have repented bitterly of my madness.  Forgive me; I, who never implored
pardon of living man, beseech thee now to forgive me. Nay, I will atone
the insult--I ask thy sister in marriage--start not--consider--what is
the alliance of yon holiday Greek compared to mine?  Wealth
unbounded--birth that in its far antiquity leaves your Greek and Roman
names the things of yesterday--science--but that thou knowest!  Give me
thy sister, and my whole life shall atone a moment's error.'

'Egyptian, were even I to consent, my sister loathes the very air thou
breathest: but I have my own wrongs to forgive--I may pardon thee that
thou hast made me a tool to thy deceits, but never that thou hast
seduced me to become the abettor of thy vices--a polluted and a perjured
man. Tremble!--even now I prepare the hour in which thou and thy false
gods shall be unveiled.  Thy lewd and Circean life shall be dragged to
day--thy mumming oracles disclosed--the fane of the idol Isis shall be a
byword and a scorn--the name of Arbaces a mark for the hisses of
execration!  Tremble!'

The flush on the Egyptian's brow was succeeded by a livid paleness.  He
looked behind, before, around, to feel assured that none were by; and
then he fixed his dark and dilating eye on the priest, with such a gaze
of wrath and menace, that one, perhaps, less supported than Apaecides by
the fervent daring of a divine zeal, could not have faced with
unflinching look that lowering aspect. As it was, however, the young
convert met it unmoved, and returned it with an eye of proud defiance.

'Apaecides,' said the Egyptian, in a tremulous and inward tone, 'beware!
What is it thou wouldst meditate?  Speakest thou--reflect, pause before
thou repliest--from the hasty influences of wrath, as yet divining no
settled purpose, or from some fixed design?'

'I speak from the inspiration of the True God, whose servant I now am,'
answered the Christian, boldly; 'and in the knowledge that by His grace
human courage has already fixed the date of thy hypocrisy and thy
demon's worship; ere thrice the sun has dawned, thou wilt know all!
Dark sorcerer, tremble, and farewell!'

All the fierce and lurid passions which he inherited from his nation and
his clime, at all times but ill concealed beneath the blandness of craft
and the coldness of philosophy, were released in the breast of the
Egyptian. Rapidly one thought chased another; he saw before him an
obstinate barrier to even a lawful alliance with Ione--the
fellow-champion of Glaucus in the struggle which had baffled his
designs--the reviler of his name--the threatened desecrator of the
goddess he served while he disbelieved--the avowed and approaching
revealer of his own impostures and vices.  His love, his repute, nay,
his very life, might be in danger--the day and hour seemed even to have
been fixed for some design against him.  He knew by the words of the
convert that Apaecides had adopted the Christian faith: he knew the
indomitable zeal which led on the proselytes of that creed.  Such was
his enemy; he grasped his stilus--that enemy was in his power! They were
now before the chapel; one hasty glance once more he cast around; he saw
none near--silence and solitude alike tempted him.

'Die, then, in thy rashness!' he muttered; 'away, obstacle to my rushing
fates!'

And just as the young Christian had turned to depart, Arbaces raised his
hand high over the left shoulder of Apaecides, and plunged his sharp
weapon twice into his breast.

Apaecides fell to the ground pierced to the heart--he fell mute, without
even a groan, at the very base of the sacred chapel.

Arbaces gazed upon him for a moment with the fierce animal joy of
conquest over a foe.  But presently the full sense of the danger to
which he was exposed flashed upon him; he wiped his weapon carefully in
the long grass, and with the very garments of his victim; drew his cloak
round him, and was about to depart, when he saw, coming up the path,
right before him, the figure of a young man, whose steps reeled and
vacillated strangely as he advanced: the quiet moonlight streamed full
upon his face, which seemed, by the whitening ray, colorless as marble.
The Egyptian recognized the face and form of Glaucus.  The unfortunate
and benighted Greek was chanting a disconnected and mad song, composed
from snatches of hymns and sacred odes, all jarringly woven together.

'Ha!' thought the Egyptian, instantaneously divining his state and its
terrible cause; 'so, then, the hell-draught works, and destiny hath sent
thee hither to crush two of my foes at once!'

Quickly, even ere this thought occurred to him, he had withdrawn on one
side of the chapel, and concealed himself amongst the boughs; from that
lurking place he watched, as a tiger in his lair, the advance of his
second victim. He noted the wandering and restless fire in the bright
and beautiful eyes of the Athenian; the convulsions that distorted his
statue-like features, and writhed his hueless lip.  He saw that the
Greek was utterly deprived of reason.  Nevertheless, as Glaucus came up
to the dead body of Apaecides, from which the dark red stream flowed
slowly over the grass, so strange and ghastly a spectacle could not fail
to arrest him, benighted and erring as was his glimmering sense.  He
paused, placed his hand to his brow, as if to collect himself, and then
saying:

'What ho! Endymion, sleepest thou so soundly?  What has the moon said to
thee?  Thou makest me jealous; it is time to wake'--he stooped down with
the intention of lifting up the body.

Forgetting--feeling not--his own debility, the Egyptian sprung from his
hiding-place, and, as the Greek bent, struck him forcibly to the ground,
over the very body of the Christian; then, raising his powerful voice to
its highest pitch, he shouted:

'Ho, citizens--oh! help me!--run hither--hither!--A murder--a murder
before your very fane!  Help, or the murderer escapes!' As he spoke, he
placed his foot on the breast of Glaucus: an idle and superfluous
precaution; for the potion operating with the fall, the Greek lay there
motionless and insensible, save that now and then his lips gave vent to
some vague and raving sounds.

As he there stood awaiting the coming of those his voice still continued
to summons, perhaps some remorse, some compunctious visitings--for
despite his crimes he was human--haunted the breast of the Egyptian; the
defenceless state of Glaucus--his wandering words--his shattered reason,
smote him even more than the death of Apaecides, and he said, half
audibly, to himself:

'Poor clay!--poor human reason; where is the soul now?  I could spare
thee, O my rival--rival never more!  But destiny must be obeyed--my
safety demands thy sacrifice.' With that, as if to drown compunction, he
shouted yet more loudly; and drawing from the girdle of Glaucus the
stilus it contained, he steeped it in the blood of the murdered man, and
laid it beside the corpse.

And now, fast and breathless, several of the citizens came thronging to
the place, some with torches, which the moon rendered unnecessary, but
which flared red and tremulously against the darkness of the trees; they
surrounded the spot.  'Lift up yon corpse,' said the Egyptian, 'and
guard well the murderer.'

They raised the body, and great was their horror and sacred indignation
to discover in that lifeless clay a priest of the adored and venerable
Isis; but still greater, perhaps, was their surprise, when they found
the accused in the brilliant and admired Athenian.

'Glaucus!' cried the bystanders, with one accord; 'is it even credible?'

'I would sooner,' whispered one man to his neighbor, 'believe it to be
the Egyptian himself.'

Here a centurion thrust himself into the gathering crowd, with an air of
authority.

'How! blood spilt! who the murderer?'

The bystanders pointed to Glaucus.

'He!--by Mars, he has rather the air of being the victim!

'Who accuses him?'

'I,' said Arbaces, drawing himself up haughtily; and the jewels which
adorned his dress flashing in the eyes of the soldier, instantly
convinced that worthy warrior of the witness's respectability.

'Pardon me--your name?' said he.

'Arbaces; it is well known methinks in Pompeii.  Passing through the
grove, I beheld before me the Greek and the priest in earnest
conversation.  I was struck by the reeling motions of the first, his
violent gestures, and the loudness of his voice; he seemed to me either
drunk or mad.  Suddenly I saw him raise his stilus--I darted
forward--too late to arrest the blow.  He had twice stabbed his victim,
and was bending over him, when, in my horror and indignation, I struck
the murderer to the ground.  He fell without a struggle, which makes me
yet more suspect that he was not altogether in his senses when the crime
was perpetrated; for, recently recovered from a severe illness, my blow
was comparatively feeble, and the frame of Glaucus, as you see, is
strong and youthful.'

'His eyes are open now--his lips move,' said the soldier. 'Speak,
prisoner, what sayest thou to the charge?'

'The charge--ha--ha!  Why, it was merrily done; when the old hag set her
serpent at me, and Hecate stood by laughing from ear to ear--what could
I do?  But I am ill--I faint--the serpent's fiery tongue hath bitten me.
Bear me to bed, and send for your physician; old AEsculapius himself
will attend me if you let him know that I am Greek.  Oh, mercy--mercy!
I burn!--marrow and brain, I burn!'

And, with a thrilling and fierce groan, the Athenian fell back in the
arms of the bystanders.

'He raves,' said the officer, compassionately; 'and in his delirium he
has struck the priest.  Hath any one present seen him to-day!'

'I,' said one of the spectators, 'beheld him in the morning.  He passed
my shop and accosted me.  He seemed well and sane as the stoutest of
us!'

'And I saw him half an hour ago,' said another, 'passing up the streets,
muttering to himself with strange gestures, and just as the Egyptian has
described.'

'A corroboration of the witness! it must be too true.  He must at all
events to the praetor; a pity, so young and so rich!  But the crime is
dreadful: a priest of Isis, in his very robes, too, and at the base
itself of our most ancient chapel!'

At these words the crowd were reminded more forcibly, than in their
excitement and curiosity they had yet been, of the heinousness of the
sacrilege.  They shuddered in pious horror.

'No wonder the earth has quaked,' said one, 'when it held such a
monster!'

'Away with him to prison--away!' cried they all.

And one solitary voice was heard shrilly and joyously above the rest:
'The beasts will not want a gladiator now,  Ho, ho, for the merry, merry
show!

It was the voice of the young woman whose conversation with Medon has
been repeated.

'True--true--it chances in season for the games!' cried several; and at
that thought all pity for the accused seemed vanished.  His youth, his
beauty, but fitted him better for the purpose of the arena.

'Bring hither some planks--or if at hand, a litter--to bear the dead,'
said Arbaces: 'a priest of Isis ought scarcely to be carried to his
temple by vulgar hands, like a butchered gladiator.'

At this the bystanders reverently laid the corpse of Apaecides on the
ground, with the face upwards; and some of them went in search of some
contrivance to bear the body, untouched by the profane.

It was just at that time that the crowd gave way to right and left as a
sturdy form forced itself through, and Olinthus the Christian stood
immediately confronting the Egyptian.  But his eyes, at first, only
rested with inexpressible grief and horror on that gory side and
upturned face, on which the agony of violent death yet lingered.

'Murdered!' he said.  'Is it thy zeal that has brought thee to this?
Have they detected thy noble purpose, and by death prevented their own
shame?'

He turned his head abruptly, and his eyes fell full on the solemn
features of the Egyptian.

As he looked, you might see in his face, and even the slight shiver of
his frame, the repugnance and aversion which the Christian felt for one
whom he knew to be so dangerous and so criminal.  It was indeed the gaze
of the bird upon the basilisk--so silent was it and so prolonged.  But
shaking off the sudden chill that had crept over him, Olinthus extended
his right arm towards Arbaces, and said, in a deep and loud voice:

'Murder hath been done upon this corpse!  Where is the murderer? Stand
forth, Egyptian!  For, as the Lord liveth, I believe thou art the man!'

An anxious and perturbed change might for one moment be detected on the
dusky features of Arbaces; but it gave way to the frowning expression of
indignation and scorn, as, awed and arrested by the suddenness and
vehemence of the charge, the spectators pressed nearer and nearer upon
the two more prominent actors.

'I know,' said Arbaces, proudly, 'who is my accuser, and I guess
wherefore he thus arraigns me.  Men and citizens, know this man for the
most bitter of the Nazarenes, if that or Christians be their proper
name!  What marvel that in his malignity he dares accuse even an
Egyptian of the murder of a priest of Egypt!'

'I know him!  I know the dog!' shouted several voices.  'It is Olinthus
the Christian--or rather the Atheist--he denies the gods!'

'Peace, brethren,' said Olinthus, with dignity, 'and hear me!  This
murdered priest of Isis before his death embraced the Christian
faith--he revealed to me the dark sins, the sorceries of yon
Egyptian--the mummeries and delusions of the fane of Isis.  He was about
to declare them publicly.  He, a stranger, unoffending, without enemies!
who should shed his blood but one of those who feared his witness?  Who
might fear that testimony the most?--Arbaces, the Egyptian!'

'You hear him!' said Arbaces; 'you hear him! he blasphemes!  Ask him if
he believes in Isis!'

'Do I believe in an evil demon?' returned Olinthus, boldly.

A groan and shudder passed through the assembly.  Nothing daunted, for
prepared at every time for peril, and in the present excitement losing
all prudence, the Christian continued:

'Back, idolaters! this clay is not for your vain and polluting rites--it
is to us--to the followers of Christ, that the last offices due to a
Christian belong.  I claim this dust in the name of the great Creator
who has recalled the spirit!'

With so solemn and commanding a voice and aspect the Christian spoke
these words, that even the crowd forbore to utter aloud the execration
of fear and hatred which in their hearts they conceived. And never,
perhaps, since Lucifer and the Archangel contended for the body of the
mighty Lawgiver, was there a more striking subject for the painter's
genius than that scene exhibited.  The dark trees--the stately fane--the
moon full on the corpse of the deceased--the torches tossing wildly to
and fro in the rear--the various faces of the motley audience--the
insensible form of the Athenian, supported, in the distance, and in the
foreground, and above all, the forms of Arbaces and the Christian: the
first drawn to its full height, far taller than the herd around; his
arms folded, his brow knit, his eyes fixed, his lip slightly curled in
defiance and disdain.  The last bearing, on a brow worn and furrowed,
the majesty of an equal command--the features stern, yet frank--the
aspect bold, yet open--the quiet dignity of the whole form impressed
with an ineffable earnestness, hushed, as it were, in a solemn sympathy
with the awe he himself had created.  His left hand pointing to the
corpse--his right hand raised to heaven.

The centurion pressed forward again.

'In the first place, hast thou, Olinthus, or whatever be thy name, any
proof of the charge thou hast made against Arbaces, beyond thy vague
suspicions?'
