happiness, whilst he lies there so still and cold?"

"I was just about to bid thee give me leave to bury him, whilst
thou dost rest thyself awhile. We will not grudge him that last
service; and it will be safer and better to do it here than to give
notice of his death to the gipsies and outlaws, and so bring them
down upon us in this place, provoking perchance their vengeance
upon ourselves. I have here a spade, brought to dig after the
treasure. I little thought it would first be used to dig Long
Robin's grave. But the task had better be done, and that quickly.
The man is dead as a stone. We will bury him away out of our sight
ere we do aught beside."

Petronella assented with a slight shudder. She could not regret the
death of the giant gipsy, who himself made so light of human life,
and would have slain her brother before her eyes without a qualm.
But she shivered each time she looked at the motionless form, and
was glad when, after some hours of hard work beneath the trees,
Cuthbert succeeded in dragging the corpse away and in covering it
up from sight. Kneeling beside the rude grave, the girl breathed a
prayer for the soul of the departed man, and repeated many an ave
and paternoster, in the hope of smoothing for him his passage into
eternity (being still considerably imbued with the teachings of her
early life, which the newer and clearer faith had by no means
eradicated), and then she rose comforted and relieved, feeling as
though a dark weight had passed from her spirit.

Daylight had now come, and the girl was very weary. She looked so
wan and white that Cuthbert was alarmed, and fed her tenderly with
the best his wallet could supply; after which he took her up to his
nest in the sycamore, first bringing the rug that was lying in the
hollow tree to wrap around her. There he succeeded in making her so
comfortable and secure that she fell asleep almost at once, and he
was hopeful she would sleep the whole time of his absence, for she
was worn out with fatigue, and only just recovering from an
illness. How she had borne the fatigues of that night he scarce
knew; but she possessed her share of the Trevlyn tenacity of
purpose, and her strong will had conquered the feebleness of her
frame.

It was a satisfaction to see her sink into a tranquil sleep, and
secure in the certainty that she could not be seen by any person
entering the dell. Certain that none but a chance traveller ever
did come nigh this haunted spot, he was not afraid to leave her;
and after studying the simple contrivance by which the round slab
was raised and lowered in the well, he dropped it to its former
position, and went on his way to the village with a light heart.

The secret of the lost treasure, he was fully certain, was now his;
and though the work of rescue might require time and patience and
labour, he was convinced it could be accomplished, and that he,
with the help of his sister, should find himself competent for the
task.

It was evening before he returned, but he found Petronella where he
had left her. She had slept almost unbrokenly throughout the day,
and was now greatly refreshed and invigorated. The air of the
forest and the sweet breath of the pines were enough, as she said,
to give her new life; and she descended eagerly to meet and greet
her brother, and to examine the purchases he had made.

The first excitement was the ass who bore the heavy load. Cuthbert
had had some trouble in making a way for the creature to pass down
into the dell; but once here, he would never stray away of his own
accord. Indeed, he appeared to have no disposition that way, for he
began at once to crop the emerald sward around the well with an air
of great contentment, whilst Cuthbert unloaded him and displayed
his purchases to his sister.

"There is thy suit, young Peter," he said with a smile. "I trow
thou wilt make a pretty boy, and wilt find thyself more fitted for
our new life thus habited, and canst rove in the forest thus clad,
an thou hast a mind that way, more safely than thou couldest in a
maid's dress. And here is wine to put some colour into thy pale
cheeks, and food to last us many a day, and blankets to wrap about
us by night when the wind blows chill, and this heavy cloak to keep
the rain from thee when the skies weep. And see, here is a rope
which I trow will let me to the very bottom of the well, an we can
once turn the water some other way; and the ass can drag me forth
again--and the treasure likewise--when once this matter has been
accomplished. The hot, dry weather is coming apace. Men say already
that the springs be something low. All this favours our plans; and
if I can find the spring that feeds this well, as like enough I
may, then will I make shift to turn its waters another way, and the
pixies' well shall be dry!"

Petronella gazed at him in surprise.

"Brother, whence comes all this knowledge to thee? I should never
have dreamed such a thing might be!"

"But I have read of such things being done ere now," answered
Cuthbert eagerly. "I have spent many an hour at Master Cole's shop
upon the bridge reading of such matters--how men mine and
counter-mine, and dig and delve, and sink wells and drain them, and
do many strange things of which we never dreamed in past days. In
times of war it is wondrous how many shifts of that or like kind
they think of and perform. I little thought how soon I myself
should want some such thing accomplished; but I read all eagerly,
and Master Anthony Cole explained much that perplexed me; and I
trow I might e'en do some such thing myself, with thee and this
patient beast to help me in my toil!"

It was with undisguised admiration that Petronella regarded her
brother, and very happy and merry was the meal taken together
beside the well under the green-wood trees. It was hard to realize
that this smiling girl, with the faint pink bloom in her cheek, and
the bright eager eyes, was the cowed and sorrowful Petronella of a
few days back. Cuthbert looked at her with glad pride as she talked
to him and petted the docile ass, who came and stood beside them
and got a full share of such things as were pleasant to his palate.
Petronella had never had the care of a live thing before, and was
delighted with the affection shown towards her at once by the
gentle creature.

Her sleep that night in the tree was sound and refreshing; and when
she joined Cuthbert, dressed in her suit of boys' garments;
laughing, blushing, and delighted with the freedom of motion that
they gave her; he found it hard to believe it was really
Petronella, and vowed it would not be hard to call her Peter, for
that there was little enough of the Petronella of old days to be
found in her.

And from that day forward a happy life began for the brother and
sister thus strangely located in the pixies' dell. Each day saw the
girl growing stronger, brighter, and happier, till she could
scarcely believe it was so short a time since she had fled from her
father's house; whilst Cuthbert, intent upon his plans and his
engineering operations, grew brown and muscular and self reliant,
watching carefully and tenderly over his sister, but spending his
time in healthful toil, and in working out self-imposed problems,
confident that these would in the end succeed in enabling him to
carry out the purpose of his heart.

The pixies' well proved very deep. Soundings taken by the rope
showed that only too clearly. The water flowed three feet over the
false bottom Robin had contrived the better to conceal his hiding
place, whilst below that there was fully ten feet of water; and
Petronella's face grew long as she saw the result of the sounding,
for she could not imagine how any treasure could be got at that lay
thirteen feet below the surface of the water.

"Never mind that, sister mine," said Cuthbert. "Belike it is to
that very fact that it owes its long safety. Even Robin must have
known that to bring it forth again must be a matter of time and
patience. He could not visit it in a moment of haste or fright, and
filch a piece away as he would. Doubtless the place was chosen by
the old Long Robin of past days for the very difficulty there must
be in bringing forth the prize. I have often thought that no buried
treasure could so long have escaped prying hands and covetous
spirits. Bit by bit some would have gone. It is the water that has
been the best protection."

Petronella saw the force of that argument; but as she leaned over
the wall, trying to peer into the dark depths whilst Cuthbert
talked of his scheme for draining it dry, she heaved a little sigh,
and said:

"And what if, after all that long labour, there be no treasure
there in spite of all we believe?"

He looked a little taken aback, but was struck by the practical
nature of the suggestion. He pondered awhile, and then he spoke.

"That is a thought worthy of consideration," he said. "It were a
foolish thing to waste the whole summer only to be deceived in the
end.

"Peter," he added suddenly, as if struck by a new idea, "I am no
fearer of water. I can dive and swim, and I have long wind, and can
hold my breath a great while. Thinkest thou that if I were to leap
into the well and dive to the bottom, thou couldst give me the rope
when I reappeared, and with the aid of the ass pull me forth again?
I can dive through the water, I trow, albeit the well is none too
wide. But I could not climb the steep stone sides; thou and the ass
must help me there."

Petronella was a little timid of the experiment lest harm should
befall her brother, and persuaded him at last to tie the rope about
him ere he dived, so that in the event of his striking his head, or
in any other way hurting himself, she would have power to pull him
up and out, even if he should have lost consciousness. After making
her promise not to use this power unless she were fully persuaded
he was in some difficulty and unable to help himself, Cuthbert
consented to this amendment; and when all preparations were
complete he balanced himself for a moment on the edge of the well,
and then launched himself downwards in a line as straight as an
arrow.

Eagerly and breathlessly Petronella watched for his reappearance,
holding her own breath the while, as though in some way that would
help the diver. He was long gone, as it seemed to her. She had been
forced to take one deep respiration, and was almost tempted to pull
at the rope in her hand, when the water suddenly became again
disturbed and full of bubbles, and a head appeared above it again.

"Cuthbert!" she exclaimed, in a tone of glad relief, "O Cuthbert,
what hast thou found?"

He was clinging to the rope with one hand; the other was beneath
the water out of sight. He raised his eyes, and said between his
gasping breaths:

"Draw me up; the water is chill as ice!"

From the sound of his voice she could not tell whether success had
crowned the attempt or not. She turned without another word, and
led the donkey onwards, gently drawing Cuthbert from the depths of
the well. As she did so he gave a sudden shout of triumph, and
springing over the side of the wall, flung at her feet a solid
golden flagon richly chased, with the arms of the Trevlyns engraved
upon it.

"I scarce dared to look at what I had got as I came up!" he cried,
as he sprang high into the air in the exuberance of his spirit;
"but that will lay all doubt at rest. The lost treasure of Trevlyn
is lost no longer, and Cuthbert and Petronella have found it!"



Chapter 18: "Saucy Kate."


"Wife, what ails the child?"

Lady Frances Trevlyn raised her calm eyes from her embroidery, and
gave one swift glance around the room, as if to make sure that she
and her husband were alone.

"Dost thou speak of Kate?" she asked then in a low voice.

"Ay, marry I do," answered Sir Richard, as he took the seat beside
the glowing hearth, near to his wife's chair, which was his regular
place when he was within doors. "I scarce know the child again in
some of her moods. She was always wayward and capricious, but as
gay and happy as the day was long--as full of sunshine as a May
morning. Whence come, then, all these vapours and reveries and
bursts of causeless weeping? I have found her in tears more oft
these last three months than in all the years of her life before;
and though she strives to efface the impression by wild outbreaks
of mirth, such as we used of old to know, there is something hollow
and forced about these merry moods, and the laugh will die away the
moment she is alone, and a look will creep upon her face that I
like not to see."

"Thou hast watched her something closely, Richard."

"Ay, truly I have. I would have watched any child of mine upon whom
was passing so strange a change; but thou knowest that Kate has
ever been dear to me--I have liked to watch her in her tricksy
moods. She has been more full of affection for me than her graver
sisters, and even her little whims and faults that we have had to
check have but endeared her to me the more. The whimsies of the
child have often brought solace to my graver cares. I love Kate
right well, and like not to see this change in her. What dost thou
think of it, goodwife?"

Lady Frances shook her head gravely.

"Methinks the child has something on her mind, and her sisters
think so likewise, but what it is we none of us can guess. She
keeps her secret well."

"It is not like Kate to have a secret; it is still less like her to
hide it."

"That is what I feel. I have looked day by day and hour by hour for
her to come to me or to thee to tell what is in her mind. But the
weeks have sped by and her lips are still sealed, and, as thou
sayest, she is losing her gay spirits, or else her gaiety is over
wild, but doth not ring true; and there is a look in her eyes that
never used to be there, and which I like not."

"I know the look well--one of wistful, unsatisfied longing. It goes
to my heart to see it there. And hast thou noted that the bloom is
paling in her cheeks, and that she will sit at home long hours,
dreaming in the window seat or beside the hearth, when of old she
was for ever scouring the woods, and coming home laden with flowers
or ferns or berries? I like it not, nor do I understand it. And
thou sayest her sisters know not the cause? I thought that young
maidens always talked together of their secrets."

"Kate doth not. I have talked with Cecilia anent the matter, and
she knows not the cause. Bess has opined that this change first
appeared when it was decided that we went not to London this year,
as we had talked of doing earlier in the summer. Bess says she
noted then how disappointed Kate appeared; and she is of opinion
that she has never been the same since."

Sir Richard stroked his beard with meditative gravity, and looked
into the fire.

"It is true that the change has come upon her since that decision
was made; and yet I find it something difficult to think that such
was the cause. Kate never loved the life of the city, and was wild
with delight when she first tasted the sweets of freedom in these
woods and gardens. She loves her liberty right well, and has said a
thousand times how glorious a thing it is to range at will as she
does here. Capricious as the child has often shown herself, it is
hard to believe that she is pining already for what she left with
so glad a heart. It passes my understanding; I know not what to
think."

Lady Frances raised her eyes for a moment to her husband's face,
and then asked quietly:

"Hast thou ever thought whether some secret love may be the cause
of all?"

The knight started and looked full at his wife.

"I have indeed thought some such thing, but I can scarce believe
that such is the case with our Kate."

"Yet it is often so when maidens change and grow pale and dreamy,
and sit brooding and thinking when erst they laughed and played.
Kate is double the woman she was six months gone by. She will sit
patiently at her needle now, when once she would throw it aside
after one short hour; and she will seek to learn all manner of
things in the still room and pantry that she made light of a short
while back, as matters of no interest or concern to her. She would
make an excellent housewife if she had the mind, as I have always
seen; and now she does appear to have the mind, save when her fits
of gloom and sadness be upon her, and everything becomes a burden."

Sir Richard looked aroused and interested. A smile stole over his
face.

"Our saucy Kate in love, and that secretly! Marry, that is
something strange; and yet I am not sorry at the thought, for I
feared her fancy was something too much taken by her cousin
Culverhouse; and since his father must look for a large dower for
his son's bride, our Kate could never have been acceptable to him.
Nor do I like the marriage of cousins so close akin, albeit in
these times men are saying that there be no ill in such unions."

Lady Frances shook her head gravely.

"I would sooner see daughter of mine wedded in a lowlier sphere. My
heart shrinks from the thought of seeing any child of ours in the
high places of this world. There be snares and pitfalls abounding
there. We have seen enough to know so much. There be bitter
strivings and envyings and hatreds amongst those of lofty degree. I
would have my children wed with godly and proper men; but I would
sooner give them to simple gentlemen of no high-sounding title,
than to those whose duties in life will call them to places round
about the throne, and will throw them amidst the turmoil of Court
life."

Sir Richard smiled at this unworldly way of looking at things; but
the Trevlyns had suffered from being somewhat too well known at
Court, and he understood the feeling.

"Truly we live in perilous times," he said thoughtfully, "and
obscurity is often the best security for happiness and well being.
But to return to Kate. If she is truly forgetting her girlish fancy
for her cousin, as I would gladly believe--and she has not set eyes
on him this year and more--towards whom can her fancy be straying?"

"Thou dost not think she can be pining after her cousin?"

"Nay, surely not," was the quick and decided answer. "Had she pined
it would have been at the first, when they were separated from each
other, and thou knowest how gay and happy she was then. It is but
these past few months that we have seen the change. Depend upon it,
there is some one else. Would that it might be good Sir Robert
Fortescue, who has been here so much of late, and has paid much
attention to our saucy Kate! Wife, what thinkest thou of that? He
is an excellent good man, and would make a stanch and true husband.
He is something old for the child, for sure; but there is no
knowing how the errant fancy of maidenhood will stray."

"I would it might be so," answered Lady Frances. "Sir Robert is a
good and a godly man, and I would gladly give our restless,
capricious Kate to one who could be father and husband in one. But
I confess the thought had not come to me, nor had I thought that he
came hither to seek him a wife."

Sir Richard smiled meaningly.

"Nor had I until of late; but I begin to think that is his object.
He pays more heed to the girls than he did when first he came to
visit us, and he has dropped a word here and a hint there, all
pointing in one direction. And dost thou not note that our Kate is
often brightest and best when he is by? I had never thought before
that her girlish fancy might have been caught by his gray hair and
soldier-like air; yet many stranger things have happened. Wife,
dost thou think it can be?"

"I would it were; it would be well for all. I will watch and see,
and do thou likewise. I had not thought the child's fancy thus
taken; but if it were so, I should rejoice. He would be a good
husband and a kind one, and our headstrong second daughter will
need control as well as love in the battle of life."

So the parents watched with anxious eyes, eager to see some
indication which should encourage them in this newly-formulated
hope. When once the idea had been started, it seemed to both as if
nothing could be better than a marriage between their high-spirited
but affectionate and warm-hearted daughter and this knight of forty
summers, who had won for himself wealth and fame, and a soldier's
reputation for unblemished honour and courage in many foreign
lands. If not exactly the man to produce an immediate impression on
the heart of a young girl, he might well win his way to favour in
time; and certainly it did seem as though Kate took pleasure in
listening to his stories of flood and field, whilst her bright eyes
and merry saucy ways (for she was still her old bright self at
times, and never more frequently so than in the company of Sir
Robert) appeared very attractive to him.

When we are increasingly wishful for a certain turn in affairs, and
begin sedulously to watch for it, unconsciously setting ourselves
to work to aid and abet, and push matters on to the desired
consummation, it is wonderful how easy it is to believe all is
going as we wish, and to see in a thousand little trifling
circumstances corroboration of our wishes. Before another fortnight
had sped by, Kate's parents had almost fully persuaded themselves
of the truth of their suspicion. They were convinced that the
attachment between their child and their guest was advancing
rapidly, and a day came when Sir Richard sought his wife with a
very happy expression of countenance.

"Well, wife, the doubt will shortly be at an end. Sir Robert has
spoken openly at last."

"Spoken of his love for our Kate?"

"Not in these words, but the meaning is the same. He has asked me
if I am willing to entrust one of my daughters to his keeping."

"One of our daughters?" repeated Lady Frances. "And did he not name
Kate? He cannot love them all."

"He spoke of Cecilia and Kate both," answered Sir Richard. "Sir
Robert is not a hot-headed youth, full of the fire of a first
passion. He wishes an alliance with our house, and he sees that
Cecilia, with her four years' seniority, would perchance in the
eyes of the world be the more suitable wife; and he admires her
beauty, and thinks well of her dutifulness, her steadiness, and her
many virtues. Yet it is Kate that takes his fancy most, and if he
could hope to win the wayward fancy and the warm heart of our
second child, she is the one whom he would fain choose as his own.
He has spoken freely and frankly to me, and it comes to this: he
would willingly marry Cecilia, and doubtless make her an excellent
husband, and value the connection with the house of Trevlyn; but if
he could succeed in winning the love of our saucy Kate, he would
sooner have her than the more staid sister, only he fears his gray
hairs and his wrinkles will unfit him as a suitor for the child.
But we, who suspect her heart of turning towards him, have little
fear of this. Kate's sharp eyes have looked beneath the surface.
She has shown that she has a wise head upon her shoulders. So I
told Sir Robert--"

"Not that the child had loved him unbidden, I trust, my husband? I
would not have him think that!"

"Verily no, goodwife; but I told him there was no man living to
whom I would more gladly give a daughter of mine; and that I would
sound both of the maidens, and see how their hearts were set
towards him. But I trow he went away happy, thinking he might win
Kate after all. I could not but whisper a word of hope, and tell
him how wondrous tame the wild bird had latterly become, and how
that her mother had wondered whether thoughts of love had entered
into her head."

Lady Frances smiled, half shaking her head the while, yet not
entirely displeased even with such an admission as that. She had
been watching her daughter closely of late, and she had tried to
think as she wished to think; the consequence being that she had
reached a very decided conclusion in accordance with her desires,
and had small doubts as to the state of her daughter's heart.

"I verily believe the child's sadness has come from the fear that
her youth will stand as a bar to her happiness. She knows Sir
Robert is old enough to be her father, and fears that his
attentions are paid as to a child. Thus has she striven to grow
more wise, more womanly, more fit to be the mistress of his house.
Methinks I see it all. And what is the next thing to be done? Must
we speak with the child?"

"Ay, verily; for I have promised an answer to Sir Robert before
many days have passed. He is to come again at the week's end, and
his bride is to be presented to him. Thinkest thou that Cecilia
will be grieved to find her younger sister preferred before her?
Does she, too, think aught of Sir Robert?"

"I trow she likes him well, though whether she has thought of him
as husband or lover I know not. She is more discreet than Kate, and
can better hide her feelings. I doubt not were her hand asked she
would give it gladly; but more than that I cannot say."

"Then let us hope her heart has not been deeply touched, for I
should be sorry to give her pain. But let us incontinently send for
Kate hither at once to us. I shall rejoice to see the light of
untroubled happiness shining once again in those bright eyes. I
would fain see my saucy Kate her own self again ere she leaves us
as a wedded wife."

So Kate was summoned, and came before her parents with something of
timidity in her aspect, looking furtively from one to the other, as
if a question trembled on her lips that she did not dare to utter.

She had changed in many ways from the gay, laughing girl of a few
months back. There were the same resolution and individuality in
the expression of the face, and the delicate features had by no
means lost all their old animation and bloom; but there was greater
depth in the dark eyes, and more earnestness and gravity in the
expression of both eyes and mouth. There was added sweetness as
well as added thoughtfulness; and mingling strangely with these
newer expressions was one still stranger on the face of Kate--a
look of shrinking, almost of fear, as though she were treading some
dangerous path, where lurked hidden perils that might at any moment
overwhelm her.

The swift look of wistful questioning, the nervous movements of the
slim hands, the parted lips and quickly coming breath, were not
lost upon the parents, who were watching the advance of their
daughter with no small interest and curiosity. But the smile upon
both faces seemed to reassure the girl; and as her father held out
his hand, she came and stood beside him willingly, looking from one
to the other with fluttering breath and changing colour.

"You sent for me, my father?"

"Yes, Kate; we have somewhat to say to thee, thy mother and I.
Canst guess what that something is?"

A vivid blush for a moment dyed her cheek and as quickly faded; but
she did not speak, only shook her head.

Sir Richard gave his wife a quick smile, and took Kate's hand in
his.

"My child," he said, with unwonted tenderness, "why hast thou been
keeping a secret from thy mother and me?"

