  His firm-set teeth, and sever'd sheer his tongue.
  Dismounted down he fell, and from his hand
  Let slide the flowing reins, which, to the earth
  Stooping, Meriones in haste resumed,                           750
  And briefly thus Idomeneus address'd.
    Now drive, and cease not, to the fleet of Greece!
  Thyself see'st victory no longer ours.
    He said; Idomeneus whom, now, dismay
  Seized also, with his lash plying severe                       755
  The coursers ample-maned, flew to the fleet.
  Nor Ajax, dauntless hero, not perceived,
  Nor Menelaus, by the sway of Jove
  The victory inclining fast to Troy,
  And thus the Telamonian Chief began.                           760
    Ah! who can be so blind as not to see
  The eternal Father, now, with his own hand
  Awarding glory to the Trojan host,
  Whose every spear flies, instant, to the mark
  Sent forth by brave or base? Jove guides them all,             765
  While, ineffectual, ours fall to the ground.
  But haste, devise we of ourselves the means
  How likeliest we may bear Patroclus hence,
  And gladden, safe returning, all our friends,
  Who, hither looking anxious, hope have none                    770
  That we shall longer check the unconquer'd force
  Of hero-slaughtering Hector, but expect
  [12]To see him soon amid the fleet of Greece.
  Oh for some Grecian now to carry swift
  The tidings to Achilles' ear, untaught,                        775
  As I conjecture, yet the doleful news
  Of his Patroclus slain! but no such Greek
  May I discern, such universal gloom
  Both men and steeds envelops all around.
  Father of heaven and earth! deliver thou                       780
  Achaia's host from darkness; clear the skies;
  Give day; and (since thy sovereign will is such)
  Destruction with it--but oh give us day![13]
    He spake, whose tears Jove saw with pity moved,
  And chased the untimely shades; bright beam'd the sun          785
  And the whole battle was display'd. Then spake
  The hero thus to Atreus' mighty son.
    Now noble Menelaus! looking forth,
  See if Antilochus be yet alive,
  Brave son of Nestor, whom exhort to fly                        790
  With tidings to Achilles, of the friend
  Whom most he loved, of his Patroclus slain.
    He ceased, nor Menelaus, dauntless Chief,
  That task refused, but went; yet neither swift
  Nor willing. As a lion leaves the stalls                       795
  Wearied himself with harassing the guard,
  Who, interdicting him his purposed prey,
  Watch all the night; he famish'd, yet again
  Comes furious on, but speeds not, kept aloof
  By spears from daring hands dismissed, but more                800
  By flash of torches which, though fierce, he dreads,
  Till at the dawn, sullen he stalks away;
  So from Patroclus Menelaus went
  Heroic Chief! reluctant; for he fear'd
  Lest the Achaians should resign the dead,                      805
  Through consternation, to the host of Troy.
  Departing, therefore, he admonish'd oft
  Meriones and the Ajaces, thus.
    Ye two brave leaders of the Argive host,
  And thou, Meriones! now recollect                              810
  The gentle manners of Patroclus fallen
  Hapless in battle, who by carriage mild
  Well understood, while yet he lived, to engage
  All hearts, through prisoner now of death and fate.
    So saying, the hero amber-hair'd his steps                   815
  Turn'd thence, the field exploring with an eye
  Sharp as the eagle's, of all fowls beneath
  The azure heavens for keenest sight renown'd,
  Whom, though he soar sublime, the leveret
  By broadest leaves conceal'd 'scapes not, but swift            820
  Descending, even her he makes his prey;
  So, noble Menelaus! were thine eyes
  Turn'd into every quarter of the host
  In search of Nestor's son, if still he lived.
  Him, soon, encouraging his band to fight,                      825
  He noticed on the left of all the field,
  And sudden standing at his side, began.
    Antilochus! oh hear me, noble friend!
  And thou shalt learn tidings of such a deed
  As best had never been. Thou know'st, I judge,                 830
  And hast already seen, how Jove exalts
  To victory the Trojan host, and rolls
  Distress on ours; but ah! Patroclus lies,
  Our chief Achaian, slain, whose loss the Greeks
  Fills with regret. Haste, therefore, to the fleet,             835
  Inform Achilles; bid him haste to save,
  If save he can, the body of his friend;
  He can no more, for Hector hath his arms.
    He ceased. Antilochus with horror heard
  Those tidings; mute long time he stood, his eyes               840
  Swam tearful, and his voice, sonorous erst,
  Found utterance none. Yet even so distress'd,
  He not the more neglected the command
  Of Menelaus. Setting forth to run,
  He gave his armor to his noble friend                          845
  Laodocus, who thither turn'd his steeds,
  And weeping as he went, on rapid feet
  Sped to Achilles with that tale of wo.
    Nor could the noble Menelaus stay
  To give the weary Pylian band, bereft                          850
  Of their beloved Antilochus, his aid,
  But leaving them to Thrasymedes' care,
  He flew to Menoetiades again,
  And the Ajaces, thus, instant bespake.
    He goes. I have dispatch'd him to the fleet                  855
  To seek Achilles; but his coming naught
  Expect I now, although with rage he burn
  Against illustrious Hector; for what fight
  Can he, unarm'd, against the Trojans wage?
  Deliberating, therefore, frame we means                        860
  How best to save Patroclus, and to 'scape
  Ourselves unslain from this disastrous field.
    Whom answer'd the vast son of Telamon.
  Most noble Menelaus! good is all
  Which thou hast spoken. Lift ye from the earth                 865
  Thou and Meriones, at once, and bear
  The dead Patroclus from the bloody field.
  To cope meantime with Hector and his host
  Shall be our task, who, one in name, nor less
  In spirit one, already have the brunt                          870
  Of much sharp conflict, side by side, sustain'd.
    He ended; they enfolding in their arms
  The dead, upbore him high above the ground
  With force united; after whom the host
  Of Troy, seeing the body borne away,                           875
  Shouted, and with impetuous onset all
  Follow'd them. As the hounds, urged from behind
  By youthful hunters, on the wounded boar
  Make fierce assault; awhile at utmost speed
  They stretch toward him hungering, for the prey,               880
  But oft as, turning sudden, the stout brawn
  Faces them, scatter'd on all sides escape;
  The Trojans so, thick thronging in the rear,
  Ceaseless with falchions and spears double-edged
  Annoy'd them sore, but oft as in retreat                       885
  The dauntless heroes, the Ajaces turn'd
  To face them, deadly wan grew every cheek,
  And not a Trojan dared with onset rude
  Molest them more in conflict for the dead.
    Thus they, laborious, forth from battle bore                 890
  Patroclus to the fleet, tempestuous war
  Their steps attending, rapid as the flames
  Which, kindled suddenly, some city waste;
  Consumed amid the blaze house after house
  Sinks, and the wind, meantime, roars through the fire;         895
  So them a deafening tumult as they went
  Pursued, of horses and of men spear-arm'd.
  And as two mules with strength for toil endued,
  Draw through rough ways down from the distant hills
  Huge timber, beam or mast; sweating they go,                   900
  And overlabor'd to faint weariness;
  So they the body bore, while, turning oft,
  The Ajaces check'd the Trojans. As a mound
  Planted with trees and stretch'd athwart the mead
  Repels an overflow; the torrents loud                          905
  Baffling, it sends them far away to float
  The level land, nor can they with the force
  Of all their waters burst a passage through;
  So the Ajaces, constant, in the rear
  Repress'd the Trojans; but the Trojans them                    910
  Attended still, of whom AEneas most
  Troubled them, and the glorious Chief of Troy.
  They as a cloud of starlings or of daws
  Fly screaming shrill, warn'd timely of the kite
  Or hawk, devourers of the smaller kinds,                       915
  So they shrill-clamoring toward the fleet,
  Hasted before AEneas and the might
  Of Hector, nor the battle heeded more.
  Much radiant armor round about the foss
  Fell of the flying Grecians, or within                         920
  Lay scatter'd, and no pause of war they found.




                              THE ILIAD.

                             BOOK XVIII.




                   ARGUMENT OF THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK.


Achilles, by command of Juno, shows himself to the Trojans, who fly at
his appearance; Vulcan, at the insistence of Thetis, forges for him a
suit of armor.




                             BOOK XVIII.


  Thus burn'd the battle like devouring fire.
  Meantime, Antilochus with rapid steps
  Came to Achilles. Him he found before
  His lofty barks, occupied, as he stood,
  With boding fears of all that had befall'n.                      5
  He groan'd, and to his noble self he said.
    Ah! wo is me--why falls Achaia's host,
  With such disorder foul, back on the fleet?
  I tremble lest the Gods my anxious thoughts
  Accomplish and my mother's words, who erst                      10
  Hath warn'd me, that the bravest and the best
  Of all my Myrmidons, while yet I live,
  Slain under Troy, must view the sun no more.
  Brave Menoetiades is, doubtless, slain.
  Unhappy friend! I bade thee oft, our barks                      15
  Deliver'd once from hostile fires, not seek
  To cope in arms with Hector, but return.
    While musing thus he stood, the son approach'd
  Of noble Nestor, and with tears his cheeks
  Bedewing copious, his sad message told.                         20
    Oh son of warlike Peleus! thou shalt hear
  Tidings of deeds which best had never been.
  Patroclus is no more. The Grecians fight
  For his bare corse, and Hector hath his arms.[1]
    Then clouds of sorrow fell on Peleus' son,                    25
  And, grasping with both hands the ashes, down
  He pour'd them on his head, his graceful brows
  Dishonoring, and thick the sooty shower
  Descending settled on his fragrant vest.
  Then, stretch'd in ashes, at the vast extent                    30
  Of his whole length he lay, disordering wild
  With his own hands, and rending off his hair.
  The maidens, captived by himself in war
  And by Patroclus, shrieking from the tent
  Ran forth, and hemm'd the glorious Chief around.[2]             35
  All smote their bosoms, and all, fainting, fell.
  On the other side, Antilochus the hands
  Held of Achilles, mourning and deep groans
  Uttering from his noble heart, through fear
  Lest Peleus' son should perish self-destroy'd.                  40
  Loud groan'd the hero, whose loud groans within
  The gulfs of ocean, where she sat beside
  Her ancient sire, his Goddess-mother heard,
  And hearing shriek'd; around her at the voice
  Assembled all the Nereids of the deep                           45
  Cymodoce, Thalia, Glauca came,
  Nisaea, Spio, Thoa, and with eyes
  Protuberant beauteous Halia; came with these
  Cymothoee, and Actaea, and the nymph
  Of marshes, Limnorea, nor delay'd                               50
  Agave, nor Amphithoee the swift,
  Iaera, Doto, Melita, nor thence
  Was absent Proto or Dynamene,
  Callianira, Doris, Panope,
  Pherusa or Amphinome, or fair                                   55
  Dexamene, or Galatea praised
  For matchless form divine; Nemertes pure
  Came also, with Apseudes crystal-bright,
  Callianassa, Maera, Clymene,
  Janeira and Janassa, sister pair,                               60
  And Orithya and with azure locks
  Luxuriant, Amathea; nor alone
  Came these, but every ocean-nymph beside,
  The silver cave was fill'd; each smote her breast,
  And Thetis, loud lamenting, thus began.                         65
    Ye sister Nereids, hear! that ye may all
  From my own lips my boundless sorrow learn.
  Ah me forlorn! ah me, parent in vain
  Of an illustrious birth! who, having borne
  A noble son magnanimous, the chief                              70
  Of heroes, saw him like a thriving plant
  Shoot vigorous under my maternal care,
  And sent him early in his gallant fleet
  Embark'd, to combat with the sons of Troy.
  But him from fight return'd I shall receive                     75
  Beneath the roof of Peleus, never more;
  And while he lives, and on the sun his eyes
  Opens, he mourns, nor, going, can I aught
  Assist him; yet I go, that I may see
  My darling son, and from his lips be taught                     80
  What grief hath now befallen him, who close
  Abiding in his tent shares not the war.
  So saying she left the cave, whom all her nymphs
  Attended weeping, and where'er they pass'd
  The breaking billows open'd wide a way.                         85
  At fruitful Troy arrived, in order fair
  They climb'd the beach, where by his numerous barks
  Encompass'd, swift Achilles sighing lay.
  Then, drawing nigh to her afflicted son,
  The Goddess-mother press'd between her palms                    90
  His temples, and in accents wing'd inquired.
    Why weeps my son? what sorrow wrings thy soul?
  Speak, hide it not. Jove hath fulfill'd the prayer
  Which erst with lifted hands thou didst prefer,
  That all Achaia's host, wanting thy aid,                        95
  Might be compell'd into the fleet, and foul
  Disgrace incur, there prison'd for thy sake.
    To whom Achilles, groaning deep, replied.
  My mother! it is true; Olympian Jove
  That prayer fulfils; but thence, what joy to me,               100
  Patroclus slain? the friend of all my friends
  Whom most I loved, dear to me as my life--
  Him I have lost. Slain and despoil'd he lies
  By Hector of his glorious armor bright,
  The wonder of all eyes, a matchless gift                       105
  Given by the Gods to Peleus on that day
  When thee they doom'd into a mortal's arms.
  Oh that with these thy deathless ocean-nymphs
  Dwelling content, thou hadst my father left
  To espouse a mortal bride, so hadst thou 'scaped               110
  Pangs numberless which thou must now endure
  For thy son's death, whom thou shalt never meet
  From Troy return'd, in Peleus' mansion more!
  For life I covet not, nor longer wish
  To mix with human kind, unless my spear                        115
  May find out Hector, and atonement take
  By slaying him, for my Patroclus slain.
    To whom, with streaming tears, Thetis replied.
  Swift comes thy destiny as thou hast said,
  For after Hector's death thine next ensues.                    120
    Then answer, thus, indignant he return'd.
  Death, seize me now! since when my friend was slain,
  My doom was, not to succor him. He died
  From home remote, and wanting me to save him.
  Now, therefore, since I neither visit more                     125
  My native land, nor, present here, have aught
  Avail'd Patroclus or my many friends
  Whom noble Hector hath in battle slain,
  But here I sit unprofitable grown,
  Earth's burden, though of such heroic note,                    130
  If not in council foremost (for I yield
  That prize to others) yet in feats of arms,
  Such as none other in Achaia's host,
  May fierce contention from among the Gods
  Perish, and from among the human race,                         135
  With wrath, which sets the wisest hearts on fire;
  Sweeter than dropping honey to the taste,
  But in the bosom of mankind, a smoke![3]
  Such was my wrath which Agamemnon roused,
  The king of men. But since the past is fled                    140
  Irrevocable, howsoe'er distress'd,
  Renounce we now vain musings on the past,
  Content through sad necessity. I go
  In quest of noble Hector, who hath slain
  My loved Patroclus, and such death will take                   145
  As Jove ordains me and the Powers of Heaven
  At their own season, send it when they may.
  For neither might the force of Hercules,
  Although high-favored of Saturnian Jove,
  From death escape, but Fate and the revenge                    150
  Restless of Juno vanquish'd even Him.
  I also, if a destiny like his
  Await me, shall, like him, find rest in death;
  But glory calls me now; now will I make
  Some Trojan wife or Dardan with both hands                     155
  Wipe her soft cheeks, and utter many a groan.
  Long time have I been absent from the field,
  And they shall know it. Love me as thou may'st,
  Yet thwart me not, for I am fixt to go.
    Whom Thetis answer'd, Goddess of the Deep.                   160
  Thou hast well said, my son! it is no blame
  To save from threaten'd death our suffering friends.
  But thy magnificent and dazzling arms
  Are now in Trojan hands; them Hector wears
  Exulting, but ordain'd not long to exult,                      165
  So habited; his death is also nigh.
  But thou with yonder warring multitudes
  Mix not till thou behold me here again;
  For with the rising sun I will return
  To-morrow, and will bring thee glorious arms,                  170
  By Vulcan forged himself, the King of fire.[4]
    She said, and turning from her son aside,
  The sisterhood of Ocean thus address'd.
    Plunge ye again into the briny Deep,
  And to the hoary Sovereign of the floods                       175
  Report as ye have heard. I to the heights
  Olympian haste, that I may there obtain
  From Vulcan, glorious artist of the skies,
  Arms of excelling beauty for my son.
    She said; they plunged into the waves again,                 180
  And silver-footed Thetis, to the heights
  Olympian soaring swiftly to obtain
  Arms for renown'd Achilles, disappear'd.
    Meantime, with infinite uproar the Greeks
  From Hector's hero-slaying arm had fled                        185
  Home to their galleys station'd on the banks
  Of Hellespont. Nor yet Achaia's sons
  Had borne the body of Patroclus clear
  From flight of darts away, but still again
  The multitude of warriors and of steeds                        190
  Came on, by Priameian Hector led
  Rapid as fire. Thrice noble Hector seized
  His ancles from behind, ardent to drag
  Patroclus, calling to his host the while;
  But thrice, the two Ajaces, clothed with might,                195
  Shock'd and repulsed him reeling. He with force
  Fill'd indefatigable, through his ranks
  Issuing, by turns assail'd them, and by turns
  Stood clamoring, yet not a step retired;
  But as the hinds deter not from his prey                       200
  A tawny lion by keen hunger urged,
  So would not both Ajaces, warriors bold,
  Intimidate and from the body drive
  Hector; and he had dragg'd him thence and won
  Immortal glory, but that Iris, sent                            205
  Unseen by Jove and by the powers of heaven,
  From Juno, to Achilles brought command
  That he should show himself. Full near she drew,
  And in wing'd accents thus the Chief address'd.
    Hero! most terrible of men, arise!                           210
  protect Patroclus, for whose sake the war
  Stands at the fleet of Greece. Mutual prevails
  The slaughter, these the dead defending, those
  Resolute hence to drag him to the gates
  Of wind-swept Ilium. But beyond them all                       215
  Illustrious Hector, obstinate is bent
  To win him, purposing to lop his head,
  And to exhibit it impaled on high.
  Thou then arise, nor longer on the ground
  Lie stretch'd inactive; let the thought with shame             220
  Touch thee, of thy Patroclus made the sport
  Of Trojan dogs, whose corse, if it return
  Dishonored home, brings with it thy reproach.
    To whom Achilles matchless in the race.
  Iris divine! of all the Gods, who sent thee?                   225
    Then, thus, the swift ambassadress of heaven.
  By Juno sent I come, consort of Jove.
  Nor knows Saturnian Jove high-throned, himself,
  My flight, nor any of the Immortal Powers,
  Tenants of the Olympian heights snow-crown'd.                  230
    Her answer'd then Pelides, glorious Chief.
  How shall I seek the fight? they have my arms.
  My mother charged me also to abstain
  From battle, till she bring me armor new
  Which she hath promised me from Vulcan's hand.                 235
  Meantime, whose armor else might serve my need
  I know not, save perhaps alone the shield
  Of Telamonian Ajax, whom I deem
  Himself now busied in the stormy van,
  Slaying the Trojans in my friend's defence.                    240
    To whom the swift-wing'd messenger of heaven,
  Full well we know thine armor Hector's prize
  Yet, issuing to the margin of the foss,
  Show thyself only. Panic-seized, perchance,
  The Trojans shall from fight desist, and yield                 245
  To the o'ertoil'd though dauntless sons of Greece
  Short respite; it is all that war allows.
    So saying, the storm-wing'd Iris disappear'd.
  Then rose at once Achilles dear to Jove,
  Athwart whose shoulders broad Minerva cast                     250
  Her AEgis fringed terrific, and his brows
  Encircled with a golden cloud that shot
  Fires insupportable to sight abroad.
  As when some island, situate afar
  On the wide waves, invested all the day                        255
  By cruel foes from their own city pour'd,
  Upsends a smoke to heaven, and torches shows
  On all her turrets at the close of eve
  Which flash against the clouds, kindled in hope
  Of aid from neighbor maritime allies,                          260
  So from Achilles' head light flash'd to heaven.
  Issuing through the wall, beside the foss
  He stood, but mix'd not with Achaia's host,
  Obedient to his mother's wise command.
  He stood and shouted; Pallas also raised                       265
  A dreadful shout and tumult infinite
  Excited throughout all the host of Troy.
  Clear as the trumpet's note when it proclaims
  A numerous host approaching to invest
  Some city close around, so clear the voice                     270
  Rang of AEacides, and tumult-toss'd
  Was every soul that heard the brazen tone.
  With swift recoil the long-maned coursers thrust
  The chariots back, all boding wo at hand,
  And every charioteer astonish'd saw                            275
  Fires that fail'd not, illumining the brows
  Of Peleus' son, by Pallas kindled there.
  Thrice o'er the trench Achilles sent his voice
  Sonorous, and confusion at the sound
  Thrice seized the Trojans, and their famed allies.             280
  Twelve in that moment of their noblest died
  By their own spears and chariots, and with joy
  The Grecians from beneath a hill of darts
  Dragging Patroclus, placed him on his bier.
  Around him throng'd his fellow-warriors bold,                  285
  All weeping, after whom Achilles went
  Fast-weeping also at the doleful sight
  Of his true friend on his funereal bed
  Extended, gash'd with many a mortal wound,
  Whom he had sent into the fight with steeds                    290
  And chariot, but received him thence no more.
    And now majestic Juno sent the sun,
  Unwearied minister of light, although
  Reluctant, down into the Ocean stream.[5]
  So the sun sank, and the Achaians ceased                       295
  From the all-wasting labors of the war.
  On the other side, the Trojans, from the fight
  Retiring, loosed their steeds, but ere they took
  Thought of refreshment, in full council met.
  It was a council at which no man sat,                          300
  Or dared; all stood; such terror had on all
  Fallen, for that Achilles had appear'd,
  After long pause from battle's arduous toil.
  First rose Polydamas the prudent son
  Of Panthus, above all the Trojans skill'd                      305
  Both in futurity and in the past.
  He was the friend of Hector, and one night
  Gave birth to both. In council one excell'd
  And one still more in feats of high renown.
  Thus then, admonishing them, he began.                         310
    My friends! weigh well the occasion. Back to Troy
  By my advice, nor wait the sacred morn
  Here, on the plain, from Ilium's walls remote
  So long as yet the anger of this Chief
  'Gainst noble Agamemnon burn'd, so long                        315
  We found the Greeks less formidable foes,
  And I rejoiced, myself, spending the night
  Beside their oary barks, for that I hoped
  To seize them; but I now tremble at thought
  Of Peleus' rapid son again in arms.                            320
  A spirit proud as his will scorn to fight
  Here, on the plain, where Greeks and Trojans take
  Their common share of danger and of toil,
  And will at once strike at your citadel,
  Impatient till he make your wives his prey.                    325
  Haste--let us home--else thus shall it befall;
  Night's balmy influence in his tent detains
  Achilles now, but rushing arm'd abroad
  To-morrow, should he find us lingering here,
  None shall mistake him then; happy the man                     330
  Who soonest, then, shall 'scape to sacred Troy!
  Then, dogs shall make and vultures on our flesh
  Plenteous repast. Oh spare mine ears the tale!
  But if, though troubled, ye can yet receive
  My counsel, thus assembled we will keep                        335
  Strict guard to-night; meantime, her gates and towers
  With all their mass of solid timbers, smooth
  And cramp'd with bolts of steel, will keep the town.
  But early on the morrow we will stand
  All arm'd on Ilium's towers. Then, if he choose,               340
  His galleys left, to compass Troy about,
  He shall be task'd enough; his lofty steeds
  Shall have their fill of coursing to and fro
  Beneath, and gladly shall to camp return.
  But waste the town he shall not, nor attempt                   345
  With all the utmost valor that he boasts
  To force a pass; dogs shall devour him first.
    To whom brave Hector louring, and in wrath.
  Polydamas, I like not thy advice
  Who bidd'st us in our city skulk, again                        350
  Imprison'd there. Are ye not yet content?
  Wish ye for durance still in your own towers?
  Time was, when in all regions under heaven
  Men praised the wealth of Priam's city stored
  With gold and brass; but all our houses now                    355
  Stand emptied of their hidden treasures rare.
  Jove in his wrath hath scatter'd them; our wealth
  Is marketed, and Phrygia hath a part
  Purchased, and part Maeonia's lovely land.
  But since the son of wily Saturn old                           360
  Hath given me glory now, and to inclose
  The Grecians in their fleet hemm'd by the sea,
  Fool! taint not with such talk the public mind.
  For not a Trojan here will thy advice
  Follow, or shall; it hath not my consent.                      365
  But thus I counsel. Let us, band by band,
  Throughout the host take supper, and let each,
  Guarded against nocturnal danger, watch.
  And if a Trojan here be rack'd in mind
  Lest his possessions perish, let him cast                      370
  His golden heaps into the public maw,[6]
  Far better so consumed than by the Greeks.
  Then, with the morrow's dawn, all fair array'd
  In battle, we will give them at their fleet
  Sharp onset, and if Peleus' noble son                          375
  Have risen indeed to conflict for the ships,
  The worse for him. I shall not for his sake
  Avoid the deep-toned battle, but will firm
  Oppose his utmost. Either he shall gain
  Or I, great glory. Mars his favors deals                       380
  Impartial, and the slayer oft is slain.
  So counsell'd Hector, whom with shouts of praise
  The Trojans answer'd:--fools, and by the power
  Of Pallas of all sober thought bereft!
  For all applauded Hector, who had given                        385
  Advice pernicious, and Polydamas,
  Whose counsel was discreet and wholesome none.
  So then they took repast. But all night long
  The Grecians o'er Patroclus wept aloud,
  While, standing in the midst, Pelides led                      390
  The lamentation, heaving many a groan,
  And on the bosom of his breathless friend
  Imposing, sad, his homicidal hands.
  As the grim lion, from whose gloomy lair
  Among thick trees the hunter hath his whelps                   395
  Purloin'd, too late returning mourns his loss,
  Then, up and down, the length of many a vale
  Courses, exploring fierce the robber's foot,
  Incensed as he, and with a sigh deep-drawn
  Thus to his Myrmidons Achilles spake.                          400
    How vain, alas! my word spoken that day
  At random, when to soothe the hero's fears
  Menoetius, then our guest, I promised him
  His noble son at Opoeis again,
  Living and laden with the spoils of Troy!                      405
  But Jove performs not all the thoughts of man,
  For we were both destined to tinge the soil
  Of Ilium with our blood, nor I shall see,
  Myself, my father in his mansion more
  Or Thetis, but must find my burial here.                       410
  Yet, my Patroclus! since the earth expects
  Me next, I will not thy funereal rites
  Finish, till I shall bring both head and arms
  Of that bold Chief who slew thee, to my tent.
  I also will smite off, before thy pile,                        415
  The heads of twelve illustrious sons of Troy,
  Resentful of thy death. Meantime, among
  My lofty galleys thou shalt lie, with tears
  Mourn'd day and night by Trojan captives fair
  And Dardan compassing thy bier around,                         420
  Whom we, at price of labor hard, ourselves
  With massy spears toiling in battle took
  From many an opulent city, now no more.
    So saying, he bade his train surround with fire
  A tripod huge, that they might quickly cleanse                 425
  Patroclus from all stain of clotted gore.
  They on the blazing hearth a tripod placed
  Capacious, fill'd with water its wide womb,
  And thrust dry wood beneath, till, fierce, the flames
  Embraced it round, and warm'd the flood within.                430
  Soon as the water in the singing brass
  Simmer'd, they bathed him, and with limpid oil
  Anointed; filling, next, his ruddy wounds
  With unguent mellow'd by nine circling years,
  They stretch'd him on his bed, then cover'd him                435
  From head to feet with linen texture light,
  And with a wide unsullied mantle, last.[7]
  All night the Myrmidons around the swift
  Achilles stood, deploring loud his friend,
  And Jove his spouse and sister thus bespake.                   440
    So then, Imperial Juno! not in vain
  Thou hast the swift Achilles sought to rouse
  Again to battle; the Achaians, sure,
  Are thy own children, thou hast borne them all.
    To whom the awful Goddess ample-eyed.                        445
  What word hath pass'd thy lips, Jove, most severe?
  A man, though mortal merely, and to me
  Inferior in device, might have achieved
  That labor easily. Can I who boast
  Myself the chief of Goddesses, and such                        450
  Not by birth only, but as thine espoused,
  Who art thyself sovereign of all the Gods,
  Can I with anger burn against the house
  Of Priam, and want means of just revenge?
    Thus they in heaven their mutual conference                  455
  Meantime, the silver-footed Thetis reach'd
  The starr'd abode eternal, brazen wall'd
  Of Vulcan, by the builder lame himself
  Uprear'd, a wonder even in eyes divine.
  She found him sweating, at his bellows huge                    460
  Toiling industrious; tripods bright he form'd
  Twenty at once, his palace-wall to grace
  Ranged in harmonious order. Under each
  Two golden wheels he set, on which (a sight
  Marvellous!) into council they should roll                     465
  Self-moved, and to his house, self-moved, return.
  Thus far the work was finish'd, but not yet
  Their ears of exquisite design affixt,
  For them he stood fashioning, and prepared
  The rivets. While he thus his matchless skill                  470
  Employ'd laborious, to his palace-gate
  The silver-footed Thetis now advanced,
  Whom Charis, Vulcan's well-attired spouse,
  Beholding from the palace portal, flew
  To seize the Goddess' hand, and thus inquired.                 475
    Why, Thetis! worthy of all reverence
  And of all love, comest thou to our abode,
  Unfrequent here? But enter, and accept
  Such welcome as to such a guest is due.
    So saying, she introduced and to a seat                      480
  Led her with argent studs border'd around
  And foot-stool'd sumptuously;[8] then, calling forth
  Her spouse, the glorious artist, thus she said.
    Haste, Vulcan! Thetis wants thee; linger not.
  To whom the artist of the skies replied.                       485
    A Goddess then, whom with much cause I love
  And venerate is here, who when I fell
  Saved me, what time my shameless mother sought
  To cast me, because lame, out of all sight;
  Then had I been indeed forlorn, had not                        490
  Eurynome the daughter of the Deep
  And Thetis in their laps received me fallen.
  Nine years with them residing, for their use
  I form'd nice trinkets, clasps, rings, pipes, and chains,
  While loud around our hollow cavern roar'd                     495
  The surge of the vast deep, nor God nor man,
  Save Thetis and Eurynome, my life's
  Preservers, knew where I was kept conceal'd.
  Since, therefore, she is come, I cannot less
  Than recompense to Thetis amber-hair'd                         500
  With readiness the boon of life preserved.
  Haste, then, and hospitably spread the board
  For her regale, while with my best dispatch
  I lay my bellows and my tools aside.
    He spake, and vast in bulk and hot with toil                 505
  Rose limping from beside his anvil-stock
  Upborne, with pain on legs tortuous and weak.
  First, from the forge dislodged he thrust apart
  His bellows, and his tools collecting all
  Bestow'd them, careful, in a silver chest,                     510
  Then all around with a wet sponge he wiped
  His visage, and his arms and brawny neck
  Purified, and his shaggy breast from smutch;
  Last, putting on his vest, he took in hand
  His sturdy staff, and shuffled through the door.               515
  Beside the King of fire two golden forms
  Majestic moved, that served him in the place
  Of handmaids; young they seem'd, and seem'd alive,
  Nor want they intellect, or speech, or force,
  Or prompt dexterity by the Gods inspired.                      520
  These his supporters were, and at his side
  Attendant diligent, while he, with gait
  Uncouth, approaching Thetis where she sat
  On a bright throne, seized fast her hand and said,
    Why, Thetis! worthy as thou art of love                      525
  And of all reverence, hast thou arrived,
  Unfrequent here? Speak--tell me thy desire,
  Nor doubt my services, if thou demand
  Things possible, and possible to me.
    Then Thetis, weeping plenteously, replied.                   530
  Oh Vulcan! Is there on Olympius' heights
  A Goddess with such load of sorrow press'd
  As, in peculiar, Jove assigns to me?
  Me only, of all ocean-nymphs, he made
  Spouse to a man, Peleus AEacides,                               535
  Whose bed, although reluctant and perforce,
  I yet endured to share. He now, the prey
  Of cheerless age, decrepid lies, and Jove
  Still other woes heaps on my wretched head.
  He gave me to bring forth, gave me to rear                     540
  A son illustrious, valiant, and the chief
  Of heroes; he, like a luxuriant plant
  Upran[9] to manhood, while his lusty growth
  I nourish'd as the husbandman his vine
  Set in a fruitful field, and being grown                       545
  I sent him early in his gallant fleet
  Embark'd, to combat with the sons of Troy;
  But him from fight return'd I shall receive,
  Beneath the roof of Peleus, never more,
  And while he lives and on the sun his eyes                     550
  Opens, affliction is his certain doom,
  Nor aid resides or remedy in me.
  The virgin, his own portion of the spoils,
  Allotted to him by the Grecians--her
  Atrides, King of men, resumed, and grief                       555
  Devour'd Achilles' spirit for her sake.
  Meantime, the Trojans shutting close within
  Their camp the Grecians, have forbidden them
  All egress, and the senators of Greece
  Have sought with splendid gifts to soothe my son.              560
  He, indisposed to rescue them himself
  From ruin, sent, instead, Patroclus forth,
  Clad in his own resplendent armor, Chief
  Of the whole host of Myrmidons. Before
  The Scaean gate from morn to eve they fought,                   565
  And on that self-same day had Ilium fallen,
  But that Apollo, to advance the fame
  Of Hector, slew Menoetius' noble son
  Full-flush'd with victory. Therefore at thy knees
  Suppliant I fall, imploring from thine art                     570
  A shield and helmet, greaves of shapely form
  With clasps secured, and corselet for my son.
  For those, once his, his faithful friend hath lost,
  Slain by the Trojans, and Achilles lies,
  Himself, extended mournful on the ground.                      575
    Her answer'd then the artist of the skies.
  Courage! Perplex not with these cares thy soul.
  I would that when his fatal hour shall come,
  I could as sure secrete him from the stroke
  Of destiny, as he shall soon have arms                         580
  Illustrious, such as each particular man
  Of thousands, seeing them, shall wish his own.
    He said, and to his bellows quick repair'd,
  Which turning to the fire he bade them heave.
  Full twenty bellows working all at once                        595
  Breathed on the furnace, blowing easy and free
