Verily his was the gladdest face I had seen, and his words put some heart
into me, whereas, of the rest save our own Scots, I liked neither what I
saw, nor what I heard.

I had but to walk down the street, through elbowing throngs of grooms,
pages, men-at-arms, and archers, till I found the Paris Gate, whence the
windmill was plain to behold.  It was such an old place as we see in
Northern France, plain, strong, with red walls which the yellow mosses
stain, and with high grey roofs.  The Maid's banner, with the Holy Dove,
and the Sacred Name, drooped above the gateway, and beside the door, on
the mounting-stone, sat the boy, Louis des Coutes, her page.  He was a
lad of fifteen years, merry enough of his nature, and always went gaily
clad, and wearing his yellow hair long.  But now he sat thoughtful on the
mounting-stone, cutting at a bit of wood with his dagger.

"So you have come to take your part," he said, when we had saluted each
the other.  "Faith, I hope you bring good luck with you, and more joy to
my mistress, for we need all that you can bring."

"Why, what ails all of you?" I asked.  "I have seen never a hopeful face,
save that of one of my own countrymen.  You are not afraid of a crack on
your curly pate, are you?"

"Curly or not, my head knows better than to knock itself against Paris
walls.  They are thick, and high, and the windows of every house on the
wall are piled with stones, to drop upon us.  And I know not well why,
but things go ill with us.  I never saw Her," and he nodded towards the
open gateway, "so out of comfort.  When there is fighting toward, she is
like herself, and she is the first to rise and the last to lie down.  But,
in all our waiting here, she has passed many an hour praying in the
chapel, where the dead kings lie, yet her face is not glad when she comes
forth.  It was wont to shine strangely, when she had been praying, at the
chapel in Couldray, while we were at Chinon.  But now it is otherwise.
Moreover, we saw Paris very close to-day, and there were over many red
crosses of St. George upon the walls.  And to-morrow is the Feast of the
Blessed Virgin, no day for bloodshed."

"Faint heart!" said I (and, indeed, after the assault on Paris, Louis des
Coutes went back, and rode no more with the maid).  "The better the day,
the better the deed!  May I go within?"

"I will go with you," he said, "for she said that you would come, and
bade me bring you to her."

We entered the gateway together, and before us lay the square of the
farm, strewn with litter, and from within the byre we heard the milk ring
in the pails, for the women were milking the cows.  And there we both
stood astonished, for we saw the Maid as never yet I had seen her.  She
was bareheaded, but wore the rest of her harness, holding in her hand a
measure of corn.  All the fowls of the air seemed to be about her,
expecting their meat.  But she was not throwing the grain among them, for
she stood as still as a graven image, and, wonderful to tell, a dove was
perched on her shoulder, and a mavis was nestling in her breast, while
many birds flew round her, chiefly doves with burnished plumage, flitting
as it were lovingly, and softly brushing her now and again with their
wings.  Many a time had I heard it said that, while she was yet a child,
the wild birds would come and nestle in the bosom of the Maid, but I had
never believed the tale.  Yet now I saw this thing with mine own eyes, a
fair sight and a marvellous, so beautiful she looked, with head
unhelmeted, and the wild fowl and tame flitting about her and above her,
the doves crooning sweetly in their soft voices.  Then her lips moved,
and she spoke--

"Tres doulx Dieu, en l'onneur de vostre saincte passion, je vous requier,
se vous me aimes, que vous me revelez ce que je doy faire demain pour
vostre gloire!"

So she fell silent again, and to me it seemed that I must not any longer
look upon that holy mystery, so, crossing myself, I laid my hand on the
shoulder of the page, and we went silently from the place.

"Have you ever seen it in this manner?" I whispered, when we were again
without the farmyard.

"Never," said he, trembling, "though once I saw a stranger thing."

"And what may that have been?"

"Nay, I spoke of it to her, and she made me swear that I never would
reveal it to living soul, save in confession.  But she is not as other
women."

What he had in his mind I know not, but I bade him good even, and went
back into the town, where lights were beginning to show in the casements.
In the space within the gates were many carts gathered, full of faggots
wherewith to choke up the fosse under Paris, and tables to throw above
the faggots, and so cross over to the assault.




CHAPTER XXI--HOW A HUNDRED SCOTS SET FORTH TO TAKE PARIS TOWN


Entering the tavern of "The Crane," I found the doorways crowded with
archers of our Guard, among whom was Randal Rutherford.

When I had come, they walked into a chamber on the ground floor, calling
for wine, and bidding certain French burgesses go forth, who needed no
second telling.  The door was shut, two sentinels of ours were posted
outside, and then Randal very carefully sounded all the panels of the
room, looking heedfully lest there should be any hole whereby what passed
among us might be heard in another part of the house, but he found
nothing of the kind.

The room being full, some sitting and some standing, as we could, Randal
bade Father Urquhart, our chaplain, tell us to what end we had been
called together.

The good father thereupon stood up, and spoke in a low voice, but so that
all could hear, for we were all hushed to listen.

"There is," he said, "within Paris, a certain Carmelite, a Frenchman, and
a friend of Brother Richard, the Preacher, whom, as you know, the English
drove from the town."

"I saw him at Troyes," said one, "where he kneeled before the Maid, and
they seemed very loving."

"That is the man, that is Brother Richard.  Now, as I was busy tending
the wounded, in the skirmish three days agone, this Carmelite was about
the same duty for those of his party.  He put into my hand a slip of
paper, wherein Brother Richard commended him to any Scot or Frenchman of
the King's party, as an honest man, and a friend of the King's.  When I
had read this, the Carmelite spoke with me in Latin, and in a low voice.
His matter was this: In Paris, he said, there is a strong party of
Armagnacs, who have, as we all know, a long score to settle with them of
Burgundy.  They are of the common folk and labourers, but among them are
many rich burgesses.  They have banded themselves together by an oath to
take our part, within the town, if once we win a gate.  Here is a cedule
signed by them with their names or marks, and this he gave me as a proof
of good faith."

Here he handed a long slip of parchment, all covered with writing, to
Randal, and it went round among us, but few there were clerks, save
myself.  I looked on it, and the names, many of them attested by seals
with coat armour, were plain to be read.

"Their counsel is to muster in arms secretly, and to convey themselves,
one by one, into certain houses hard by the Port St. Denis, where certain
of their party dwell.  Now, very early to-morrow morning, before dawn,
the purpose of the English is to send forth a company of a hundred men-at-
arms, who will make a sudden onset on the windmill, where the Maid lies
to-night, and so will take her, if they may."

"By St. Bride of Douglas," said one of us, "they will get their kail
through the reek, for our guard is to lie in arms about the windmill, and
be first in the field to-morrow."

"The craft is, then," Father Urquhart went on, "that we shall destroy
this English company with sword or arrow, but with no alarm of culverins
or cannon.  Meanwhile, some five score of you will put on to-night the
red cross of St. George, with plain armour, so that the English shall
mistake you for their own men returning from the sally, and some few men
in our own colours and coats you will hale with you as prisoners.  And,
if one of you can but attire himself in some gear of the Maid's, with a
hucque of hers, scarlet, and dight with the Lilies of France, the English
gate-wards will open to you all the more eagerly."

"By the bones of St. Boswell!" cried Randal in his loud voice, but the
good Father put a hand on his mouth.

"Quiet, man!" he said.

"By the blessed bones of St. Boswell," Randal said again, as near a
whisper as he could attain to, "the lady of the linen-basket shall come
as the Maid.  We have no man so maidenly."

They all shouted, laughing, and beating the tables with hands and
tankards.

"Silence!" cried Robin Lindsay.

"Nay, the louder we laugh, the less will any suspect what is forward,"
said Randal Rutherford.

"Norman, will you play this part in the mumming?"

I was ashamed to say no, though I liked it not over well, and I nodded
with my head.

"How maidenly he blushes!" cried one, and there was another clamour, till
the walls rang.

"So be it then," says Father Urquhart, "and now you know all.  The honest
Armagnacs will rise so soon as you are well within the gate.  They
command both sides of the street that leads to the Port St. Denis, and
faith, if the English want to take it, when a hundred Scots are within,
they will have to sally forth by another gate, and come from the outside.
And you are to run up the banner of Scotland over the Port, when once you
hold it, so the French attack will be thereby."

"We played the same game before Verneuil fight, and won it," said one;
"will the English have forgotten the trick?"

"By St. Bride, when once they see us haling the Maid along, they will
forget old stratagems of war.  This is a new device!  Oh to see their
faces when we cry 'St. Andrew,' and set on!"

"I am not so old as you all in the wars," I began.

"No, Mademoiselle la Lavandiere, but you are of the right spirit, with
your wench's face."

"But," I said, "how if the English that are to attack the windmill in the
first grey of the morning come not to hand-strokes, or take to their
heels when they find us awake, and win back to Paris before us?  Our
craft, methinks, is to hold them in an ambush, but what if we catch them
not?  Let but one runaway be swift of foot, and we are undone."

"There is this to be said," quoth Father Urquhart, "that the English
company is to sally forth by the Port St. Denis, and it is the Port St.
Denis that our Armagnacs will be guarding.  Now I speak as a man of
peace, for that is my calling.  But how would it be if your hundred men
and Norman set forth in the dark, and lay hid not very far from the St.
Denis Gate?  Then some while after the lighting of the bale-fires from
the windmill, to be lit when the English set on, make straight for the
gate, and cry, 'St. George for England!'  If you see not the bale-fires
ere daylight, you will come back with what speed you may; but if you do
see them, then--"

"Father, you have not lived long on the Highland line for nothing," quoth
Robin Lindsay.

"A very proper stratagem indeed," I said, "but now, gentlemen, there is
one little matter; how will Sir Hugh Kennedy take this device of ours?  If
we try it and fail, without his privity, we had better never return, but
die under Paris wall.  And, even if we hold the gate, and Paris town is
taken, faith I would rather affront the fire of John the Lorrainer than
the face of Sir Hugh."

No man spoke, there were not two minds on this matter, so, after some
chaffer of words, it was agreed to send Father Urquhart with Randal to
show the whole scheme to Sir Hugh, while the rest of us should await
their coming back with an answer.  In no long time they were with us, the
father very red and shamefaced.

"He gave the good father the rough side of his tongue," quoth Randal,
"for speaking first to me, and not to him.  Happily we were over cunning
to say aught of our gathering here.  But when he had let his bile flow,
he swore, and said that he could spare a hundred dyvour loons of his
command, on the cast of the dice, and, now silence all! not a word or a
cry," here he held up his hand, "we are to take 'fortune of war'!"

Every man grinned gladly on his neighbour, in dead stillness.

"Now," said Randal, "slip out by threes and fours, quietly, and to
quarters; but you, Norman, wait with me."




CHAPTER XXII--HOW NORMAN LESLIE FARED IN PARIS TOWN


"Norman, my lad, all our fortunes are made," said Randal to me when we
were left alone.  "There will be gilt spurs and gold for every one of us,
and the pick of the plunder."

"I like it not," I answered; whereon he caught me rudely by both
shoulders, looking close into my face, so that the fume of the wine he
had been drinking reached my nostrils.

"Is a Leslie turning recreant?" he asked in a low voice.  "A pretty tale
to tell in the kingdom of Fife!"

I stood still, my heart very hot with anger, and said no word, while his
grip closed on me.

"Leave hold," I cried at last, and I swore an oath, may the Saints
forgive me,--"I will not go!"

He loosed his grasp on me, and struck one hand hard into the other.

"That I should see this, and have to tell it!" he said, and stepping to
the table, he drank like one thirsty, and then fell to pacing the
chamber.  He seemed to be thinking slowly, as he wiped and plucked at his
beard.

"What is it that ails you?" he asked.  "Look you, this onfall and
stratagem of war may not miscarry.  Perdition take the fool, it is safe!"

"Have I been seeking safety since you knew me?" I asked.

"Verily no, and therefore I wonder at you the more; but you have been
long sick, and men's minds are changeful.  Consider the thing, nom Dieu!
If there be no two lights shown from the mill, we step back silently, and
all is as it was; the English have thought worse of their night onfall,
or the Carmelite's message was ruse de guerre.  But if we see the two
lights, then the hundred English are attempting the taking of the mill;
the St. Denis Gate is open for their return, and we are looked for by our
Armagnacs within Paris.  We risk but a short tussle with some drowsy pock-
puddings, and then the town is ours.  The Gate is as strong to hold
against an enemy from within as from without.  Why, man, run to Louis de
Coutes, and beg a cast suit of the Maid's; she has plenty, for she is a
woman in this, that dearly she loves rich attire."

"Randal," I said, "I will go with you, and the gladdest lad in France to
be going, but I will go in my own proper guise as a man-at-arms.  To wear
the raiment of the Blessed Maid, a man and a sinner like me, I will in
nowise consent; it is neither seemly nor honourable.  Take your own way,
put me under arrest if you will, and spoil my fortunes, and make me a man
disgraced, but I will not wear her holy raiment.  It is not the deed of a
gentleman, or of a Christian."

He plucked at his beard.  "I am partly with you," he said.  "And yet it
were a great bourde to play off on the English, and most like to take
them and to be told of in ballad and chronicle, like one of Wallace's
onfalls.  For, seeing the Pucelle, as they will deem, in our hands, they
will think all safe, and welcome us open armed.  O Norman, can we do
nothing?  Stop, will you wear another woman's short kirtle over your
cuisses and taslet?  She shall be no saint, I warrant you, but, for a
sinner, a bonny lass and a merry.  As a gentleman I deem this fair
stratagem of war.  If I were your own brother,--the Saints have his soul
in their keeping,--I would still be of this counsel.  Will you, my lad?"

He looked so sad, and yet withal so comical, that I held out my hand to
him, laughing.

"Disguise me as you will," I said, "I have gone mumming as Maid Marion
before now, in the Robin Hood play, at St. Andrews"; and as I spoke, I
saw the tall thatched roofs of South Street, and the Priory Gates open,
the budding elms above the garden wall of St. Leonard's, and all the May-
day revel of a year agone pouring out into the good town.

"You speak like yourself now, bless your beardless face!  Come forth," he
said, taking a long pull at a tankard,--"that nothing might be
wasted,"--and so we went to quarters, and Randal trudged off, soon coming
back, laughing, with the red kirtle.  Our men had been very busy
furbishing up the red cross of St. George on their breasts, and stripping
themselves of any sign of our own colours.  As for my busking, never had
maid such rough tire-women; but by one way or another, the apparel was
accommodated, and they all said that, at a little distance of ground, the
English would be finely fooled, and must deem that the Maid herself was
being led to them captive.

It was now in the small hours of morning, dark, save for the glimmer of
stars, here and there in a cloudy sky.  Father Urquhart himself went up
to the roof of the mill, to say his orisons, having with him certain
faggots of pitch-wood, for lighting the beacon-fires if need were; and,
as it chanced, braziers to this end stood ready on the roof, as is custom
on our own Border keeps.

We Scots, a hundred in all, in English colours, with three or four as
prisoners, in our own badges, fared cautiously, and with no word spoken,
through dewy woods, or lurking along in dry ditches where best we might,
towards the St. Denis Gate of Paris.  I had never been on a night
surprise or bushment before, and I marvelled how orderly the others kept,
as men used to such work, whereas I went stumbling and blindlings.  At
length, within sight of the twinkling lights of Paris, and a hundred
yards or thereby off the common way, we were halted in a little wood, and
bidden to lie down; no man was so much as to whisper.  Some slept, I
know, for I heard their snoring, but for my part, I never was less in
