    My sire thine altars hath adorned, or I
    Enriched them from the chase, and hung on high
    Spoils in thy deep-domed temple, or arrayed
    Thy roof with plunder; make this troop to fly,
    And guide my weapons through the air." He prayed,
And, winged with strength, the steel went whistling through the shade.

LIII. It struck the shield of Sulmo at his side;
    There broke the shaft and splintered. Down he rolled
    Pierced through the midriff, and his life's warm tide
    Poured from his bosom, and the long sobs told
    Its heavings, ere the stiffening limbs grew cold.
    All look around and tremble, when again
    The youth another javelin, waxing bold,
    Aimed from his ear-tip. Through the temples twain
Of Tagus whizzed the steel, and warmed within the brain.

LIV. Fierce Volscens raves with anger, nor espies
    The wielder of the weapon, nor which way
    To rush, aflame with fury. "Thou," he cries,
    "Thy blood meanwhile the penalty shall pay
    For both," and with his falchion bared to slay
    Springs at Euryalus. Then, wild with fear,
    Poor Nisus shouts, in frenzy of dismay,
    Nor longer in the dark can hide, nor bear
A pang of grief so keen--to lose a friend so dear,

LV. "Me--me, behold the doer! mine the deed!
    Kill me, Rutulians. By this hand they fell.
    He could not--durst not. By the skies I plead,
    By yon bright stars, that witnessed what befell,
    He only loved his hapless friend too well."
    Vain was his prayer; the weapon, urged amain,
    Pierced through his ribs and snowy breast. Out swell
    Dark streams of gore his lovely limbs to stain;
The sinking neck weighs o'er the shoulders of the slain.

LVI. So doth the purple floweret, dying, droop,
    Smit by the ploughshare. So the poppy frail
    On stricken stalk its languid head doth stoop,
    And bows o'erladen with the drenching hail.
    But onward now, through thickest ranks of mail,
    Rushed Nisus. Volscens only will he slay;
    He waits for none but Volscens. They assail
    From right and left, and crowd his steps to stay.
He whirls his lightning brand, and presses to his prey.

LVII. Ere long he meets him clamouring, and down
    His throat he drives the griding sword amain,
    And takes his life, ere laying down his own.
    Then, pierced he sinks upon his comrade slain,
    And death's long slumber puts an end to pain.
    O happy pair! if aught my verse ensure,
    No length of time shall make your memory wane,
    While, throned upon the Capitol secure,
The AEneian house shall reign, and Roman rule endure.

LVIII. Weeping, the victors took the spoils and prey,
    And back dead Volscens to their camp they bore.
    Nor less the wailing in the camp that day,
    Brave Rhamnes found, and many a captive more,
    Numa, Serranus, weltering in their gore.
    Thick round the dead and dying, where the plain
    Reeks freshly with the frothing blood, they pour.
    Sadly they know Messapus' spoils again,
The trappings saved with sweat, the helmet of the slain.

LIX. Now, rising from Tithonus' saffron couch,
    The Goddess of the dawn with orient ray
    Sprinkled the earth, and 'neath the wakening touch
    Of sunlight, all things stand revealed to-day.
    Turnus himself, accoutred for the fray,
    Wakes up his warriors with the morning light.
    At once each captain marshals in array
    His company, in brazen arms bedight,
And rumours whet their rage, and prick them to the fight.

LX. Nay more, aloft upon the javelin's end,
    With shouts they bear--a miserable sight!--
    The heads, the heads of Nisus and his friend.
    On the walls' left--the river flanked their right--
    The sturdy Trojans stand arrayed for fight,
    And line the trenches and each lofty tower,
    Sad, while the foemen, clamorous with delight,
    March onward, with the heroes' heads before,
Well known--alas! too well--and dropping loathly gore.

LXI. Now Fame, winged herald, through the wildered town
    Swift to Euryalus' mother speeds her way.
    Life's heat forsakes her; from her hand drops down
    The shuttle, and the task-work rolls away.
    Forth with a shriek, like women in dismay,
    Rending her hair, in frantic haste she flies,
    And seeks the ramparts and the war's array,
    Heedless of darts and dangers and surprise,
Heedless of armed men, and fills the heaven with cries.

LXII. "Thou--is it thou, Euryalus, my own?
    Thou, the late solace of my age? Ah, why
    So cruel? Could'st thou leave me here alone,
    Nor let thy mother bid a last good-bye?
    Now left a prey on Latin soil to lie
    Of dogs and birds, nor I, thy mother, there
    To wash thy wounds, and close thy lightless eye,
    And shroud thee in the robe I wrought so fair,
Fain with the busy loom to soothe an old wife's care!

LXIII. "Where shall I follow thee? Thy corpse defiled,
    Thy mangled limbs--where are they? Woe is me!
    Is this then all of what was once my child?
    Was it for this I roamed the land and sea?
    Pierce _me_, Rutulians; hurl your darts at me,
    Me first, if ye a mother's love can know.
    Great Sire of Heaven, have pity! set me free.
    Hurl with thy bolt to Tartarus below
This hateful head, that longs to quit a world of woe!"

LXIV. So wails the mother, weeping and undone,
    And sorrow smites each warrior, as he hears,
    Each groaning, as a father for his son.
    Grief runs, like wildfire, through the Trojan peers,
    And numbs their courage, and augments their fears.
    Then, fain the spreading sorrow to allay,
    Ilioneus and Iulus, bathed in tears
    Call Actor and Idaeus; gently they
The aged dame lift up, and to her home convey.

LXV. Now terribly the brazen trumpet pealed
    Its summons, and the war-shout rent the air.
    On press the Volscians, locking shield to shield,
    And fill the trenches, and the breastwork tear.
    These plant their ladders for assault, where'er
    A gap, just glimmering, shows the line less dense.
    Vain hope! the Teucrians with their darts are there.
    Stout poles they ply, and thrust them from the fence,
Trained by a lingering siege, and tutored to defence.

LXVI. Stones, too, they roll, to crush the serried shields:
    Blithely the warriors bear the storm below,
    Yet not for long; for, see, the penthouse yields.
    Down on the midst, where thickest press the foe,
    The Teucrians, rolling, with a crash let go
    A ponderous mass, that opens to the light
    The jointed shields, and lays the warriors low.
    Nor care they longer in the dark to fight,
But vie with distant darts to sweep the rampart's height.

LXVII. Pine-stock in hand, Mezentius hurls the flame;
    There, fierce Messapus rends the palisade,--
    Tamer of steeds, from Neptune's loins he came,--
    And shouts aloud for ladders to invade.
    Aid me, Calliope; ye Muses, aid
    To sing of Turnus and his deeds that day,
    The deaths he wrought, the havoc that he made,
    And whom each warrior singled for his prey;
Roll back the war's great scroll, the mighty leaves display.

LXVIII. Built high, with lofty gangways, stood a tower,
    Fit post of vantage, which the Latins vied,
    With utmost effort and with all their power,
    To capture and destroy, while armed inside
    With stones, the Trojans through the loopholes plied
    Their missiles. Turnus, 'mid the foremost, cast
    A blazing brand, and, fastening to the side,
    Up went the flame; from floor to floor it passed,
Clung to and licked the posts, and maddened with the blast.

LXIX. Within 'twas hurrying and tumultuous fright,
    As, crowding backward, they retreat before
    The advancing flames, and vainly long for flight.
    Lo! toppling suddenly, the tower went o'er,
    And shook the wide air with reverberant roar.
    Half-dead, the huge mass following amain,
    They come to earth, stabbed by the darts they bore,
    Or pierced by splinters through the breast. Scarce twain
Escape--Helenor one, and Lycus--from the slain.

LXX. Of these Helenor,--whom to Lydia's lord
    By stealth his slave, the fair Licymnia, bore,
    And sent to Ilium, where a simple sword
    And plain, white shield, yet unrenowned, he wore,--
    He, when he sees, around him and before,
    The Latin hosts, as when in fierce disdain,
    Hemmed round by huntsmen, in his rage the boar
    O'erleaps the spears, so, where the thickest rain
The foemen's darts, springs forth Helenor to be slain.

LXXI. But fleeter far, young Lycus hastes to slip
    Through swords, through foes, and gains the walls, and tries
    To climb them, and a comrade's hand to grip.
    With foot and spear behind him, as he flies,
    Comes Turnus. Scornfully the victor cries,
    "Mad fool! to fly, whom I have doomed to fall;
    Think'st thou to baffle Turnus of his prize?"
    Therewith he grasps him hanging, and withal
Down with his victim drags huge fragments of the wall.

LXXII. E'en so some snowy swan, or timorous hare
    Jove's armour-bearer, swooping from the sky,
    Grips in his talons, and aloft doth bear.
    So, where apart the folded weanlings lie,
    Swift at some lamb the warrior-wolf doth fly,
    And leaves the mother, bleating in her woe.
    Loud rings the noise of battle. With a cry
    The foe press on; these fill the trench below,
These to the topmost towers the blazing firebrands throw.

LXXIII. Ilioneus with a rock's huge fragment quelled
    Lucetius, creeping to the gate below
    With fire. Asylas Corynaeus felled,
    Liger Emathion, one skilled to throw
    The flying dart, one famous with the bow.
    Caenus--brief triumph!--made Ortygius fall,
    With Dioxippus, Turnus lays him low,
    Then Itys, Clonius, Promolus withal,
Sagaris, and Idas last, the warder of the wall.

LXXIV. There, slain by Capys, poor Privernus lay,
    Grazed by Themilla's javelin; with a start
    The madman flung his trusty shield away,
    And clapped his left hand to the wounded part,
    Fain, as he thought, to ease him of the smart.
    Thereat, a light-winged arrow, unespied,
    Whirred on the wind. It missed the warrior's heart,
    But pierced his hand, and pinned it to his side,
And, entering, clave the lung, and with a gasp he died.

LXXV. With broidered scarf of Spanish crimson, stood
    A comely youth, young Arcens was his name,
    Sent by his father, from Symaethus' flood,
    And nurtured in his mother's grove, he came,
    Where, rich and kind, Palicus' altars flame.
    His lance laid by, thrice whirling round his head
    The whistling thong, Mezentius took his aim.
    Clean through his temples hissed the molten lead,
And prostrate in the dust, the gallant youth lay dead.

LXXVI. Then first, 'tis said, in war Ascanius drew
    His bow, wherewith in boyish days he plied
    The flying game. His hand Numanus slew,
    Called Remulus, to Turnus late allied,
    For Turnus' youngest sister was his bride.
    He, puffed with new-won royalty and proud,
    Stalked in the forefront of the fight, and cried
    With random clamour and big words and loud,
Fain by his noise to show his grandeur to the crowd.

LXXVII. "Think ye no shame, poor cowards, thus again
    Behind your sheltering battlements to stand,
    Twice-captured Phrygians! and to plant in vain
    These walls, to shield you from the foemen's hand?
    Lo, these the varlets who our wives demand!
    What God, what madness blinded you, that e'er
    Ye thought to venture to Italia's land?
    No wily-worded Ithacan is near;
Far other foes than he or Atreus' sons are here.

LXXVIII. "Our babes are hardened in the frost and flood,
    Strong is the stock and sturdy whence we came.
    Our boys from morn till evening scour the wood,
    Their joy is hunting, and the steed to tame,
    To bend the bow, the flying shaft to aim.
    Patient of toil, and used to scanty cheer,
    Our youths with rakes the stubborn glebe reclaim,
    Or storm the town. Through life we grasp the spear.
In war it strikes the foe, in peace it goads the steer.

LXXIX. "Age cannot stale, nor creeping years impair
    Stout hearts as ours, nor make our strength decay.
    Our hoary heads the heavy helmet bear.
    Our joy is in the foray, day by day
    To reap fresh plunder, and to live by prey.
    Ye love to dance, and dally with the fair,
    In saffron robes with purple flounces gay.
    Your toil is ease, and indolence your care,
And tunics hung with sleeves, and ribboned coifs ye wear.

LXXX. "Go Phrygian women, for ye are not men!
    Hence, to your Dindymus, and roam her heights
    With Corybantian eunuchs! Get ye, then,
    And hear the flute, harsh-grating, that invites
    With twy-mouthed music to her lewd delights,
    Where boxen pipe and timbrel from afar
    Shriek forth the summons to her sacred rites.
    Put by the sword, poor dotards as ye are,
Leave arms to men, like us, nor meddle with the war."

LXXXI. Such taunts Ascanius brooked not. Stung with pride,
    A shaft he fitted to the horse-hair twine,
    And, turning, stood with outstretched arms, and cried:
    "Bless, Jove omnipotent, this bold design:
    Aid me, and yearly offerings shall be thine.
    A milk-white steer--I bind me to the vow--
   Myself will lead, the choicest, to thy shrine,
   Tall as his mother, and with gilded brow,
And butting horns, and hoofs, that spurn the sand e'en now."

LXXXII. Jove heard, and leftward, where the sky was blue,
    Thundered aloud. At once the fateful bow
    Twanged; with a whirr the fateful arrow flew,
    And pierced the head of Remulus. "Now go,
    And teach thy proud tongue to insult a foe,
    And scoff at Trojan valour. _This_ reply
    Twice-captured Phrygians to thy taunts bestow."
    Ascanius spoke; the Teucrians with a cry,
Press on, their joyous hearts uplifting to the sky.

LXXXIII. Meanwhile, Apollo from his cloudy car
    The Ausonian host, and leaguered town descries,
    And calls the youthful conqueror from afar:
    "Hail to thy maiden prowess; yonder lies
    Thy path, brave boy, to glory and the skies.
    O sons of Gods, and sire of Gods to be,
    All wars shall cease beneath the race to rise
    From great Assaracus. Nor thine, nor thee
Shall narrow Troy contain; so stands the Fate's decree."

LXXXIV. He spake, and through the breathing air shot down,
    And sought Ascanius, now a god no more,
    But shaped like aged Butes, whilom known
    The servant of the Dardan king, who bore
    Anchises' shield, and waited at his door,
    Then left to guard Ascanius. Such in view
    Apollo seemed; such clanging arms he wore;
    Such were his hoary tresses, voice, and hue,
And these his words, as near the fiery youth he drew:

LXXXV "Enough, to live, and see Numanus bleed,
    Child of AEneas! This, thy valour's due,
    Great Phoebus grants, nor stints a rival's meed.
    Now cease."--He spake, and vanished from their view.
    His arms divine the Dardan chieftains knew,
    And heard the quiver rattle in his flight.
    So, warned by Phoebus' presence, back they drew
    The fiery youth, then plunged into the fight.
Death seems a welcome risk, and danger a delight.

LXXXVI. Shouts fill the walls and outworks; casque and shield
    Clash; bows are bent, and javelins hurled amain:
    Fierce grows the fight, and weapons strew the field.
    So fierce what time the Kid-star brings the rain,
    The storm, from westward rising, beats the plain:
    So thick with hail, the clouds, asunder riven,
    Pour down a deluge on the darkened main,
    When Jove, upon his dreaded south-wind driven
Stirs up the watery storm, and rends the clouds of heaven.

LXXXVII. Pandarus and Bitias, whom in Ida's grove
    The nymph Iaera to Alcanor bare,
    Tall as their mountains or the pines of Jove,
    Fling back the gate committed to their care,
    And bid the foemen enter, if they dare.
    With waving plumes, and armed from top to toe,
    In front, beside the gateway, stand the pair,
    Tall as twin oaks, with nodding crests, that grow
Where Athesis' sweet stream or Padus' waters flow.

LXXXVIII. Up rush the foemen to the open gate,
    Quercens, Aquicolus, in armour bright,
    Brave Haemon, Tmarus, eager and elate,
    In troops they come, in troops they turn in flight,
    Or fall upon the threshold, slain outright.
    Now fiercer swells the discord, louder grows
    The noise of strife, as, hastening to unite,
    The sons of Troy their banded ranks oppose,
And battle hand to hand and, sallying, charge the foes.

LXXXIX. Elsewhere to Turnus, as he raged, and marred
    The ranks, came tidings of the foe, elate
    With new-wrought carnage, and the gates unbarred.
    Forth from his work he rushes, grim with hate,
    To seek the brothers, and the Dardan gate.
    Here brave Antiphates, the first in view
    (The bastard offspring of Sarpedon great,
    Borne by a Theban) with his dart he slew;
Swift through the yielding air the Italian cornel flew.

XC. Down through his throat into the chest it passed.
    Out from the dark pit gushed a foaming tide;
    The cold steel, warming in the lung, stood fast.
    Then Merops, Erymas, Aphidnus died,
    And Bitias, fierce with flaming eyes of pride.
    No dart for him; no dart his life had ta'en.
    A spear phalaric, thundering, pierced his side.
    Nor bulls' tough hides, nor corselet's twisted chain,
Twice linked with golden scales the monstrous blow sustain.

XCI. Prone falls the giant in a heap. Earth groans,
    His shield above him thunders. Such the roar,
    When falls the solid pile of quarried stones,
    Sunk in the sea off Baiae's echoing shore;
    So vast the ruin, when the waves close o'er,
    And the black sands mount upward, as the block,
    Dashed headlong, settles on the deep-sea floor,
    And Prochyta and Arime's steep rock,
Piled o'er Typhoeus, quake and tremble with the shock.

XCII. Now Mars armipotent the Latins lends
    Fresh heart and strength, but Fear and black Dismay
    And Flight upon the Teucrian troops he sends.
    From right and left they hurry to the fray,
    And o'er each spirit comes the War-God's sway.
    But when brave Pandarus saw his brother's fate,
    And marked the swerving fortune of the day,
    He set his broad-built shoulders to the gate;
The groaning hinges yield, and backward rolls the weight.

XCIII. Full many a friend without the camp he leaves,
    Sore straitened in the combat; these, the rest,
    Saved like himself, he rescues and receives.
    Madman! who, blind to Turnus, as he pressed
    Among them, made the dreaded foe his guest.
    Fierce as a tiger in the fold, he preys.
    Loud ring his arms; his helmet's blood-red crest
    Waves wide; strange terrors from his eyes outblaze,
And on his dazzling shield the living lightning plays.

XCIV. That hated form, those giant limbs too plain
    The Trojans see, and stand aghast with fear.
    Then, fired with fury for his brother slain,
    Forth leaping, shouts huge Pandarus with a jeer,
    "No Queen Amata's bridal halls are here;
    No Ardea this; around the camps the foe.
    No flight for thee." He, smiling, calm of cheer,
    "Come, if thou durst; full soon shall Priam know
Thou too hast found a new Achilles to thy woe."

XCV. He spake. Then Pandarus a javelin threw,
    Cased in its bark, with hardened knots and dried.
    The breezes caught the missile as it flew;
    Saturnian Juno turned the point aside,
    And fixed it in the gate. "Ha! bravely tried!
    Not so _this_ dart shalt thou escape; not so
    Send I the weapon and the wound." He cried,
    And, sword in hand, uprising to the blow,
Between the temples clave the forehead of his foe.

XCVI. The beardless cheeks, so fearful was the gash,
    Gape wide. Aloud his clanging arms resound.
    Earth groans beneath, as prone, amid the splash
    Of blood and brains, he sprawls upon the ground,
    And right and left hangs, severed by the wound,
    His dying head. In terror, strewn afar,
    The Trojans fly. Then, then had Turnus found
    Time and the thought to burst the town-gate's bar,
That day had seen the last of Trojans and the war.

XCVII. But lust of death, and vengeance unappeased
    Urged on the conqueror. Phalaris he slew,
    Then hamstrung Gyges, and their javelins seized,
    And hurled them at their comrades, as they flew,
    For Juno nerved and strengthened him anew.
    Here Halys fell, and hardy Phlegeus there,
    Pierced through his shield. Alcander down he threw,
    Prytanis, Noemon, Halius unaware,
As on the walls they stood, and roused the battle's blare.

XCVIII. Slain, too, was Lynceus, as he ran for aid,
    Cheering his friends. Back-handed, with fierce sway,
    His right knee bent, he swung the sweeping blade,
    And head and helmet tumbled far away.
    Fell Clytius, Amycus expert to slay
    The wood-deer, and the venomed barb to wing,
    And Creteus, too, who loved the minstrel's lay,
    The Muses' friend, whose joy it was to sing
Of steeds, and arms and men, and wake the lyre's sweet string.

XCIX. Then meet at length, their kinsmen's slaughter known,
    Brave Mnestheus, and Serestus fierce, and see
    Their friends in flight, and foemen in the town.
    Then Mnestheus cries: "Friends, whither would ye flee?
    What other walls, what further town have we?
    Shame on the thought, shall then a single foe,
    One man alone, O townsmen! ay, and he
    Cooped thus within your ramparts, work such woe,
Such deaths--and unavenged? and lay your choicest low?

C.  "Is yours no pity, sluggard souls? no shame
    For Troy's old gods, and for your native land,
    And for the great AEneas, and his name?"
    Fired by his words, they gather heart, and stand,
    Shoulder to shoulder, rallying in a band.
    Backward, but slowly he retreats, too proud
    To turn, and seeks the ramparts hard at hand,
    Girt by the stream; while, clamouring aloud,
Fiercer the foe press on, and larger grows the crowd.

CI. As when an angry lion, held at bay,
    And pressed with galling javelins, half in fright,
    But grim and glaring, step by step gives way,
    Too wroth to turn, too valorous for flight,
    And fain, but impotent, to wreak his spite
    Against his armed assailants; even so,
    Slowly and wavering, Turnus quits the fight,
    Boiling with rage; yet twice he charged the foe,
Twice round the walls in rout they fled before his blow.

CII. But now new hosts come swarming from the town,
    Nor Juno dares his failing force to stay,
    For Jove in wrath sent heavenly Iris down,
    Stern threats to bear, should Turnus disobey,
    And longer in the Trojan camp delay.
    No more his shield, nor strength of hand avail
