[Illustration: Beaver Coin of Hudson's Bay Company, melted from Old Tea
Chests, one Coin representing one Beaver.]

The furs were quickly transferred to the French ships, and the soldiers
were turned loose to loot the fort.  The Indians fled, among them Moses
Norton's gentle daughter, now in her twenty-second year.  She could not
revert to the loathsome habits of savage life; she dared not go to the
fort filled with lawless foreign soldiers; and she perished of
starvation outside the walls.  Matonabbee had been absent when the
French came.  He returned to find the fort where he had spent his life
in ruins.  The English whom he thought invincible were defeated and
prisoners of war.  Hearne, whom the dauntless old chief had led through
untold perils, was a captive.  Matonabbee's proud spirit was broken.
The grief was greater than he could bear.  All that living stood for
had been lost.  Drawing off from observation, Matonabbee blew his
brains out.


[1] I have purposely avoided bringing up the dispute as to a mistake of
some few degrees made by Hearne in his calculations--the point really
being finical.

[2] I am sorry to say that in pioneer border warfares I have heard of
white men acting in a precisely similar beastly manner after some
brutal conflict.  To be frank, I know of one case in the early days of
Minnesota fur trade, where the irate fur trader killed and devoured his
weak companion, not from famine, but sheer frenzy of brutalized
passion.  Such naked light does wilderness life shed over our
drawing-room philosophies of the triumphantly strong being the highest
type of manhood.

[3] Again the wilderness plunges us back to the primordial: if man be
but the supreme beast of prey, whence this consciousness of blood guilt
in these unschooled children of the wilds?




PART IV

1780-1793

FIRST ACROSS THE ROCKIES--HOW MACKENZIE
  CROSSED THE NORTHERN ROCKIES AND LEWIS
  AND CLARK WERE FIRST TO CROSS FROM
  MISSOURI TO COLUMBIA




CHAPTER X

1780-1793

FIRST ACROSS THE ROCKIES

How Mackenzie found the Great River named after him and then pushed
across the Mountains to the Pacific, forever settling the question of a
Northwest Passage


There is an old saying that if a man has the right mettle in him, you
may stick him a thousand leagues in the wilderness on a barren rock and
he will plant pennies and grow dollar bills.  In other words, no matter
where or how, success will succeed.  No class illustrates this better
than a type that has almost passed away--the old fur traders who were
lords of the wilderness.  Cut off from all comfort, from all
encouragement, from all restraint, what set of men ever had fewer
incentives to go up, more temptations to go down?  Yet from the fur
traders sprang the pioneer heroes of America.  When young Donald Smith
came out--a raw lad--to America, he was packed off to eighteen years'
exile on the desert coast of Labrador.  Donald Smith came out of the
wilderness to become the Lord Strathcona of to-day.  Sir Alexander
Mackenzie's life presents even more dramatic contrasts.  A clerk in a
counting-house at Montreal one year, the next finds him at Detroit
setting out for the backwoods of Michigan to barter with Indians for
furs.  Then he is off with a fleet of canoes forty strong for the Upper
Country of forest and wilderness beyond the Great Lakes, where he
fights such a desperate battle with rivals that one of his companions
is murdered, a second lamed, a third wounded.  In all this Alexander
Mackenzie was successful while still in the prime of his manhood,--not
more than thirty years of age; and the reward of his success was to be
exiled to the sub-arctics of the Athabasca, six weeks' travel from
another fur post,--not a likely field to play the hero.  Yet Mackenzie
emerged from the polar wilderness bearing a name that ranks with
Columbus and Carrier and La Salle.

[Illustration: Alexander Mackenzie, from a Painting of the Explorer.]

Far north of the Missouri beyond the borderlands flows the
Saskatchewan.  As far north again, beyond the Saskatchewan, flows
another great river, the Athabasca, into Athabasca Lake, on whose blue
shores to the north lies a little white-washed fort of some twenty log
houses, large barn-like stores, a Catholic chapel, an Episcopal
mission, and a biggish residence of pretence for the chief trader.
This is Fort Chipewyan.  At certain seasons Indian tepees dot the
surrounding plains; and bronze-faced savages, clad in the ill-fitting
garments of white people, shamble about the stores, or sit haunched
round the shady sides of the log houses, smoking long-stemmed pipes.
These are the Chipewyans come in from their hunting-grounds; but for
the most part the fort seems chiefly populated by regiments of husky
dogs, shaggy-coated, with the sharp nose of the fox, which spend the
long winters in harness coasting the white wilderness, and pass the
summers basking lazily all day long except when the bell rings for fish
time, when half a hundred huskies scramble wildly for the first meat
thrown.

A century ago Chipewyan was much the same as to-day, except that it lay
on the south side of the lake.  Mails came only once in two years
instead of monthly, and rival traders were engaged in the merry game of
slitting each other's throats.  All together, it wasn't exactly the
place for ambition to dream; but ambition was there in the person of
Alexander Mackenzie, the young fur trader, dreaming what he hardly
dared hope.  Business men fight shy of dreamers; so Mackenzie told his
dreams to no one but his cousin Roderick, whom he pledged to secrecy.
For fifty years the British government had offered a reward of 20,000
pounds to any one who should discover a Northwest Passage between the
Atlantic and the Pacific.  The hope of such a passageway had led many
navigators on bootless voyages; and here was Mackenzie with the same
bee in his bonnet.  To the north of Chipewyan he saw a mighty river,
more than a mile wide in places, walled in by great ramparts, and
flowing to unknown seas.  To the west he saw another river rolling
through the far mountains.  Where did this river come from, and where
did both rivers go?  Mackenzie was not the man to leave vital questions
unanswered.  He determined to find out; but difficulties lay in the
way.  He couldn't leave the Athabascan posts.  That was overcome by
getting his cousin Roderick to take charge.  The Northwest Fur Company,
which had succeeded the French fur traders of Quebec and Montreal when
Canada passed from the hands of the French to the English, wouldn't
assume any cost or risk for exploring unknown seas.  This was more
niggardly than the Hudson's Bay Company, which had paid all cost of
outlay for its explorers; but Mackenzie assumed risk and cost himself.
Then the Indians hesitated to act as guides; so Mackenzie hired guides
when he could, seized them by compulsion when he couldn't hire them,
and went ahead without guides when they escaped.

[Illustration: Eskimo trading his Pipe, carved from Walrus Tusk, for
the Value of Three Beaver Skins.]

May--the frog moon--and June--the bird's egg moon--were the festive
seasons at Fort Chipewyan on Lake Athabasca.  Indian hunters came
tramping in from the Barren Lands with toboggan loads of pelts drawn by
half-wild husky dogs.  Woody Crees and Slaves and Chipewyans paddled
across the lake in canoes laden to the gunwales with furs.  A world of
white skin tepees sprang up like mushrooms round the fur post.  By June
the traders had collected the furs, sorted and shipped them in
flotillas of keel boat, barge, and canoe, east to Lake Superior and
Montreal.  On the evening of June 2, 1789, Alexander Mackenzie, chief
trader, had finished the year's trade and sent the furs to the Eastern
warehouses of the Northwest Company, on Lake Superior, at Fort William,
not far from where Radisson had first explored, and La Verendrye
followed.  Indians lingered round the fort of the Northern lake engaged
in mad _boissons_, or drinking matches, that used up a winter's
earnings in the spree of a single week.  Along the shore lay upturned
canoes, keels red against the blue of the lake, and everywhere in the
dark burned the red fires of the boatmen melting resin to gum the seams
of the canoes; for the canoes were to be launched on a long voyage the
next day.  Mackenzie was going to float down with the current of the
Athabasca or Grand River, and find out where that great river emptied
in the North.

The crew must have spent the night in a last wild spree; for it was
nine in the morning before all hands were ready to embark.  In
Mackenzie's large birch canoe went four Canadian _voyageurs_, their
Indian wives, and a German.  In other canoes were the Indian hunters
and interpreters, led by "English Chief," who had often been to Hudson
Bay.  Few provisions were taken.  The men were to hunt, the women to
cook and keep the _voyageurs_ supplied with moccasins, which wore out
at the rate of one pair a day for each man.  Traders bound for Slave
Lake followed behind.  Only fifty miles were made the first day.
Henceforth Mackenzie embarked his men at three and four in the morning.

[Illustration:  Quill and Bead Work on Buckskin, Mackenzie River
Indians.]

The mouth of Peace River was passed a mile broad as it pours down from
the west, and the boatmen _portaged_ six rapids the third day, one of
the canoes, steered by a squaw more intent on her sewing than the
paddles, going over the falls with a smash that shivered the bark to
kindling-wood.  The woman escaped, as the current caught the canoe, by
leaping into the water and swimming ashore with the aid of a line.  Ice
four feet thick clung to the walls of the rampart shores, and this
increased the danger of landing for a _portage_, the Indians whining
out their complaints in exactly the tone of the wailing north wind that
had cradled their lives--"Eduiy, eduiy!--It is hard, white man, it is
hard!"  And harder the way became.  For nine nights fog lay so heavily
on the river that not a star was seen.  This was followed by driving
rain and wind.  Mackenzie hoisted a three-foot sail and cut over the
water before the wind with the hiss of a boiling kettle.  Though the
sail did the work of the paddles, it gave the _voyageurs_ no respite.
Cramped and rain-soaked, they had to bail out water to keep the canoe
afloat.  In this fashion the boats entered Slave Lake, a large body of
water with one horn pointing west, the other east.  Out of both horns
led unknown rivers.  Which way should Mackenzie go?  Low-lying
marshlands--beaver meadows where the wattled houses of the beaver had
stopped up the current of streams till moss overgrew the swamps and the
land became quaking muskeg--lay along the shores of the lake.  There
were islands in deep water, where caribou had taken refuge, travelling
over ice in winter for the calves to be safe in summer from wolf pack
and bear.  Mackenzie hired a guide from the Slave Indians to pilot the
canoes over the lake; but the man proved useless.  Days were wasted
poking through mist and rushes trying to find an outlet to the Grand
River of the North.  Finally, English Chief lost his temper and
threatened to kill the Slave Indian unless he succeeded in taking the
canoes out of the lake.  The waters presently narrowed to half a mile;
the current began to race with a hiss; sails were hoisted on
fishing-poles; and Mackenzie found himself out of the rushes on the
Grand River to the west of Slave Lake.

[Illustration: Fort William, Headquarters Northwest Company, Lake
Superior.]

Here pause was made at a camp of Dog Ribs, who took the bottom from the
courage of Mackenzie's comrades by gruesome predictions that old age
would come upon the _voyageurs_ before they reached salt water.  There
were impassable falls ahead.  The river flowed through a land of famine
peopled by a monstrous race of hostiles who massacred all Indians from
the South.  The effect of these cheerful prophecies was that the Slave
Lake guide refused to go on.  English Chief bodily put the recalcitrant
into a canoe and forced him ahead at the end of a paddle.  Snow-capped
mountains loomed to the west.  The river from Bear Lake was passed,
greenish of hue like the sea, and the Slave Lake guide now feigned such
illness that watch was kept day and night to prevent his escape.  The
river now began to wind, with lofty ramparts on each side; and once, at
a sharp bend in the current, Mackenzie looked back to see Slave Lake
Indians following to aid the guide in escaping.  After that one of the
white men slept with the fellow each night to prevent desertion; but
during the confusion of a terrific thunder-storm, when tents and
cooking utensils were hurled about their heads, the Slave succeeded in
giving his watchers the slip.  Mackenzie promptly stopped at an
encampment of strange Indians, and failing to obtain another guide by
persuasion, seized and hoisted a protesting savage into the big canoe,
and signalled the unwilling captive to point the way.  The Indians of
the river were indifferent, if not friendly; but once Mackenzie
discovered a band hiding their women and children as soon as the
boatmen came in view.  The unwilling guide was forced ashore, as
interpreter, and gifts pacified all fear.  But the incident left its
impression on Mackenzie's comrades.  They had now been away from
Chipewyan for forty days.  If it took much longer to go back, ice would
imprison them in the polar wilderness.  Snow lay drifted in the
valleys, and scarcely any game was seen but fox and grouse.  The river
was widening almost to the dimensions of a lake, and when this was
whipped by a north wind the canoes were in peril enough.  The four
Canadians besought Mackenzie to return.  To return Mackenzie had not
the slightest intention; but he would not tempt mutiny.  He promised
that if he did not find the sea within seven days, he would go back.

That night the sun hung so high above the southern horizon that the men
rose by mistake to embark at twelve o'clock.  They did not realize that
they were in the region of midnight sun; but Mackenzie knew and
rejoiced, for he must be near the sea.  The next day he was not
surprised to find a deserted Eskimo village.  At that sight the
enthusiasm of the others took fire.  They were keen to reach the sea,
and imagined that they smelt salt water.  In spite of the lakelike
expanse of the river, the current was swift, and the canoes went ahead
at the rate of sixty and seventy miles a day--if it could be called day
when there was no night.  Between the 13th and 14th of July the
_voyageurs_ suddenly awakened to find themselves and their baggage
floating in rising water.  What had happened to the lake?  Their hearts
took a leap; for it was no lake.  It was the tide.  They had found the
sea.

How hilariously jubilant were Mackenzie's men, one may guess from the
fact that they chased whales all the next day in their canoes.  The
whales dived below, fortunately; for one blow of a finback or sulphur
bottom would have played skittles with the canoes.  Coming back from
the whale hunt, triumphant as if they had caught a dozen finbacks, the
men erected a post, engraving on it the date, July 14, 1789, and the
names of all present.

It had taken six weeks to reach the Arctic.  It took eight to return to
Chipewyan, for the course was against stream, in many places tracking
the canoes by a tow-line.  The beaver meadows along the shore impeded
the march.  Many a time the quaking moss gave way, and the men sank to
mid-waist in water.  While skirting close ashore, Mackenzie discovered
the banks of the river to be on fire.  The fire was a natural tar bed,
which the Indians said had been burning for centuries and which burns
to-day as when Mackenzie found it.  On September 12, with a high sail
up and a driving wind, the canoes cut across Lake Athabasca and reached
the beach of Chipewyan at three in the afternoon, after one hundred and
two days' absence.  Mackenzie had not found the Northwest Passage.  He
had proved there was no Northwest Passage, and discovered the
Mississippi of the north--Mackenzie River.

[Illustration: Running a Rapid on Mackenzie River.]

Mackenzie spent the long winter at Fort Chipewyan; but just as soon as
the rivers cleared of ice, he took passage in the east-bound canoes and
hurried down to the Grand Portage or Fort William on Lake Superior, the
headquarters of the Northwest Company, where he reported his discovery
of Mackenzie River.  His report was received with utter indifference.
The company had other matters to think about.  It was girding itself
for the life-and-death struggle with its rival, the Hudson's Bay
Company.  "My expedition was hardly spoken of, but that is what I
expected," he writes to his cousin.  But chagrin did not deter purpose.
He asked the directors' permission to explore that other broad
stream--Peace River--rolling down from the mountains.  His request was
granted.  Winter saw him on furlough in England, studying astronomy and
surveying for the next expedition.  Here he heard much of the Western
Sea--the Pacific--that fired his eagerness.  The voyages of Cook and
Hanna and Meares were on everybody's lips.  Spain and England and
Russia were each pushing for first possession of the northwest coast.
Mackenzie hurried back to his Company's fort on the banks of Peace
River, where he spent a restless winter waiting for navigation to open.
Doubts of his own ambitions began to trouble him.  What if Peace River
did not lead to the west coast at all?  What if he were behind some
other discoverer sent out by the Spaniards or the Russians?  "I have
been so vexed of late that I cannot sit down to anything steadily," he
confesses in a letter to his cousin.  Such a tissue-paper wall
separates the aims of the real hero from those of the fool, that almost
every ambitious man must pass through these periods of self-doubt
before reaching the goal of his hopes.  But despondency did not benumb
Mackenzie into apathy, as it has weaker men.

By April he had shipped the year's furs from the forks of Peace River
to Chipewyan.  By May his season's work was done.  He was ready to go
up Peace River.  A birch canoe thirty feet long, lined with lightest of
cedar, was built.  In this were stored pemmican and powder.  Alexander
Mackay, a clerk of the company, was chosen as first assistant.  Six
Canadian _voyageurs_--two of whom had accompanied Mackenzie to the
Arctic--and two Indian hunters made up the party of ten who stepped
into the canoes at seven in the evening of May 9, 1793.

Peace River tore down from the mountains flooded with spring thaw.  The
crew soon realized that paddles must be bent against the current of a
veritable mill-race; but it was safer going against, than with, such a
current, for unknown dangers could be seen from below instead of above,
where suction would whirl a canoe on the rocks.  Keen air foretold the
nearing mountains.  In less than a week snow-capped peaks had crowded
the canoe in a narrow canon below a tumbling cascade where the river
was one wild sheet of tossing foam as far as eye could see.  The
difficulty was to land; for precipices rose on each side in a wall,
down which rolled enormous boulders and land-slides of loose earth.  To
_portage_ goods up these walls was impossible.  Fastening an
eighty-foot tow-line to the bow, Mackenzie leaped to the declivity, axe
in hand, cut foothold along the face of the steep cliff to a place
where he could jump to level rock, and then, turning, signalled through
the roar of the rapids for his men to come on.  The _voyageurs_ were
paralyzed with fear.  They stripped themselves ready to swim if they
missed the jump, then one by one vaulted from foothold to foothold
where Mackenzie had cut till they came to the final jump across water.
Here Mackenzie caught each on his shoulders as the _voyageurs_ leaped.
The tow-line was then passed round trees growing on the edge of the
precipice, and the canoe tracked up the raging cascade.  The waves
almost lashed the frail craft to pieces.  Once a wave caught her
sideways; the tow-line snapped like a pistol shot, for just one instant
the canoe hung poised, and then the back-wash of an enormous boulder
