"Even after I have insulted you?" said the count, with a sort of regret.

"Some are placed so high that insult cannot touch them. Monsieur le
comte,--I am one of them."

As she said the words, the girl assumed an air of pride and nobility
which impressed the prisoner and made the whole of this strange intrigue
much less clear to Hulot than the old soldier had thought it. He twirled
his moustache and looked uneasily at Mademoiselle de Verneuil, who made
him a sign, as if to say she was still carrying out her plan.

"Now," continued Marie, after a pause, "let us discuss these matters.
Francine, my dear, bring lights."

She adroitly led the conversation to the times which had now, within
a few short years, become the "ancien regime." She brought back
that period to the count's mind by the liveliness of her remarks and
sketches, and gave him so many opportunities to display his wit, by
cleverly throwing repartees in his way, that he ended by thinking he
had never been so charming; and that idea having rejuvenated him, he
endeavored to inspire this seductive young woman with his own good
opinion of himself. The malicious creature practised, in return, every
art of her coquetry upon him, all the more adroitly because it was mere
play to her. Sometimes she let him think he was making rapid progress,
and then, as if surprised at the sentiment she was feeling, she showed a
sudden coolness which charmed him, and served to increase imperceptibly
his impromptu passion. She was like a fisherman who lifts his line
from time to time to see if the fish is biting. The poor count allowed
himself to be deceived by the innocent air with which she accepted two
or three neatly turned compliments. Emigration, Brittany, the Republic,
and the Chouans were far indeed from his thoughts. Hulot sat erect
and silent as the god Thermes. His want of education made him quite
incapable of taking part in a conversation of this kind; he supposed
that the talking pair were very witty, but his efforts at comprehension
were limited to discovering whether they were plotting against the
Republic in covert language.

"Montauran," the count was saying, "has birth and breeding, he is a
charming fellow, but he doesn't understand gallantry. He is too young
to have seen Versailles. His education is deficient. Instead of
diplomatically defaming, he strikes a blow. He may be able to love
violently, but he will never have that fine flower of breeding in his
gallantry which distinguished Lauzun, Adhemar, Coigny, and so many
others! He hasn't the winning art of saying those pretty nothings to
women which, after all, they like better than bursts of passion, which
soon weary them. Yes, though he has undoubtedly had many love-affairs,
he has neither the grace nor the ease that should belong to them."

"I have noticed that myself," said Marie.

"Ah!" thought the count, "there's an inflection in her voice, and a look
in her eye which shows me plainly I shall soon be _on terms_ with her;
and faith! to get her, I'll believe all she wants me to."

He offered her his hand, for dinner was now announced. Mademoiselle de
Verneuil did the honors with a politeness and tact which could only have
been acquired by the life and training of a court.

"Leave us," she whispered to Hulot as they left the table. "You will
only frighten him; whereas, if I am alone with him I shall soon find
out all I want to know; he has reached the point where a man tells me
everything he thinks, and sees through my eyes only."

"But afterwards?" said Hulot, evidently intending to claim the prisoner.

"Afterwards, he is to be free--free as air," she replied.

"But he was taken with arms in his hand."

"No," she said, making one of those sophistical jokes with which women
parry unanswerable arguments, "I had disarmed him. Count," she said,
turning back to him as Hulot departed, "I have just obtained your
liberty, but--nothing for nothing," she added, laughing, with her head
on one side as if to interrogate him.

"Ask all, even my name and my honor," he cried, intoxicated. "I lay them
at your feet."

He advanced to seize her hand, trying to make her take his passion
for gratitude; but Mademoiselle de Verneuil was not a woman to be thus
misled. So, smiling in a way to give some hope to this new lover,
she drew back a few steps and said: "You might make me regret my
confidence."

"The imagination of a young girl is more rapid than that of a woman," he
answered, laughing.

"A young girl has more to lose than a woman."

"True; those who carry a treasure ought to be distrustful."

"Let us quit such conventional language," she said, "and talk seriously.
You are to give a ball at Saint-James. I hear that your headquarters,
arsenals, and base of supplies are there. When is the ball to be?"

"To-morrow evening."

"You will not be surprised if a slandered woman desires, with a woman's
obstinacy, to obtain a public reparation for the insults offered to her,
in presence of those who witnessed them. I shall go to your ball. I ask
you to give me your protection from the moment I enter the room until I
leave it. I ask nothing more than a promise," she added, as he laid his
hand on his heart. "I abhor oaths; they are too like precautions. Tell
me only that you engage to protect my person from all dangers,
criminal or shameful. Promise to repair the wrong you did me, by openly
acknowledging that I am the daughter of the Duc de Verneuil; but say
nothing of the trials I have borne in being illegitimate,--this will pay
your debt to me. Ha! two hours' attendance on a woman in a ball-room
is not so dear a ransom for your life, is it? You are not worth a ducat
more." Her smile took the insult from her words.

"What do you ask for the gun?" said the count, laughing.

"Oh! more than I do for you."

"What is it?"

"Secrecy. Believe me, my dear count, a woman is never fathomed except
by a woman. I am certain that if you say one word of this, I shall be
murdered on my way to that ball. Yesterday I had warning enough. Yes,
that woman is quick to act. Ah! I implore you," she said, "contrive that
no harm shall come to me at the ball."

"You will be there under my protection," said the count, proudly.
"But," he added, with a doubtful air, "are you coming for the sake of
Montauran?"

"You wish to know more than I know myself," she answered, laughing. "Now
go," she added, after a pause. "I will take you to the gate of the town
myself, for this seems to me a cannibal warfare."

"Then you do feel some interest in me?" exclaimed the count. "Ah!
mademoiselle, permit me to hope that you will not be insensible to my
friendship--for that sentiment must content me, must it not?" he added
with a conceited air.

"Ah! diviner!" she said, putting on the gay expression a woman assumes
when she makes an avowal which compromises neither her dignity nor her
secret sentiments.

Then, having slipped on a pelisse, she accompanied him as far as
the Nid-aux-Crocs. When they reached the end of the path she said,
"Monsieur, be absolutely silent on all this; even to the marquis"; and
she laid her finger on both lips.

The count, emboldened by so much kindness, took her hand; she let him do
so as though it were a great favor, and he kissed it tenderly.

"Oh! mademoiselle," he cried, on knowing himself beyond all danger,
"rely on me for life, for death. Though I owe you a gratitude equal to
that I owe my mother, it will be very difficult to restrain my feelings
to mere respect."

He sprang into the narrow pathway. After watching him till he
reached the rocks of Saint-Sulpice, Marie nodded her head in sign of
satisfaction, saying to herself in a low voice: "That fat fellow has
given me more than his life for his life! I can make him my creator at
a very little cost! Creature or creator, that's all the difference there
is between one man and another--"

She did not finish her thought, but with a look of despair she turned
and re-entered the Porte Saint-Leonard, where Hulot and Corentin were
awaiting her.

"Two more days," she cried, "and then--" She stopped, observing that
they were not alone--"he shall fall under your guns," she whispered to
Hulot.

The commandant recoiled a step and looked with a jeering contempt,
impossible to render, at the woman whose features and expression gave no
sign whatever of relenting. There is one thing remarkable about women:
they never reason about their blameworthy actions,--feeling carries
them off their feet; even in their dissimulation there is an element of
sincerity; and in women alone crime may exist without baseness, for
it often happens that they do not know how it came about that they
committed it.

"I am going to Saint-James, to a ball the Chouans give to-morrow night,
and--"

"But," said Corentin, interrupting her, "that is fifteen miles distant;
had I not better accompany you?"

"You think a great deal too much of something I never think of at all,"
she replied, "and that is yourself."

Marie's contempt for Corentin was extremely pleasing to Hulot, who made
his well-known grimace as she turned away in the direction of her own
house. Corentin followed her with his eyes, letting his face express
a consciousness of the fatal power he knew he could exercise over the
charming creature, by working upon the passions which sooner or later,
he believed, would give her to him.

As soon as Mademoiselle de Verneuil reached home she began to deliberate
on her ball-dress. Francine, accustomed to obey without understanding
her mistress's motives, opened the trunks, and suggested a Greek
costume. The Republican fashions of those days were all Greek in style.
Marie chose one which could be put in a box that was easy to carry.

"Francine, my dear, I am going on an excursion into the country; do you
want to go with me, or will you stay behind?"

"Stay behind!" exclaimed Francine; "then who would dress you?"

"Where have you put that glove I gave you this morning?"

"Here it is."

"Sew this green ribbon into it, and, above all, take plenty of
money." Then noticing that Francine was taking out a number of the new
Republican coins, she cried out, "Not those; they would get us murdered.
Send Jeremie to Corentin--no, stay, the wretch would follow me--send to
the commandant; ask him from me for some six-franc crowns."

With the feminine sagacity which takes in the smallest detail, she
thought of everything. While Francine was completing the arrangements
for this extraordinary trip, Marie practised the art of imitating an
owl, and so far succeeded in rivalling Marche-a-Terre that the
illusion was a good one. At midnight she left Fougeres by the gate
of Saint-Leonard, took the little path to Nid-aux-Crocs, and started,
followed by Francine, to cross the Val de Gibarry with a firm step,
under the impulse of that strong will which gives to the body and
its bearing such an expression of force. To leave a ball-room with
sufficient care to avoid a cold is an important affair to the health of
a woman; but let her have a passion in her heart, and her body becomes
adamant. Such an enterprise as Marie had now undertaken would have
floated in a bold man's mind for a long time; but Mademoiselle de
Verneuil had no sooner thought of it than its dangers became to her
attractions.

"You are starting without asking God to bless you," said Francine,
turning to look at the tower of Saint-Leonard.

The pious Breton stopped, clasped her hands, and said an "Ave" to Saint
Anne of Auray, imploring her to bless their expedition; during which
time her mistress waited pensively, looking first at the artless
attitude of her maid who was praying fervently, and then at the effects
of the vaporous moonlight as it glided among the traceries of the church
building, giving to the granite all the delicacy of filagree. The pair
soon reached the hut of Galope-Chopine. Light as their steps were they
roused one of those huge watch-dogs on whose fidelity the Bretons rely,
putting no fastening to their doors but a simple latch. The dog ran to
the strangers, and his bark became so threatening that they were forced
to retreat a few steps and call for help. But no one came. Mademoiselle
de Verneuil then gave the owl's cry, and instantly the rusty hinges
of the door made a creaking sound, and Galope-Chopine, who had risen
hastily, put out his head.

"I wish to go to Saint-James," said Marie, showing the Gars' glove.
"Monsieur le Comte de Bauvan told me that you would take me there and
protect me on the way. Therefore be good enough to get us two riding
donkeys, and make yourself ready to go with us. Time is precious, for
if we do not get to Saint-James before to-morrow night I can neither see
the ball nor the Gars."

Galope-Chopine, completely bewildered, took the glove and turned it over
and over, after lighting a pitch candle about a finger thick and
the color of gingerbread. This article of consumption, imported into
Brittany from the North, was only one more proof to the eyes in this
strange country of a utter ignorance of all commercial principles, even
the commonest. After seeing the green ribbon, staring at Mademoiselle
de Verneuil, scratching his ear, and drinking a beaker of cider (having
first offered a glass to the beautiful lady), Galope-Chopine left her
seated before the table and went to fetch the required donkeys.

The violet gleam cast by the pitch candle was not powerful enough
to counteract the fitful moonlight, which touched the dark floor and
furniture of the smoke-blackened cottage with luminous points. The
little boy had lifted his pretty head inquisitively, and above it two
cows were poking their rosy muzzles and brilliant eyes through the holes
in the stable wall. The big dog, whose countenance was by no means the
least intelligent of the family, seemed to be examining the strangers
with as much curiosity as the little boy. A painter would have stopped
to admire the night effects of this scene, but Marie, not wishing to
enter into conversation with Barbette, who sat up in bed and began to
show signs of amazement at recognizing her, left the hovel to escape
its fetid air and the questions of its mistress. She ran quickly up the
stone staircase behind the cottage, admiring the vast details of the
landscape, the aspect of which underwent as many changes as spectators
made steps either upward to the summits or downward to the valleys.
The moonlight was now enveloping like a luminous mist the valley of
Couesnon. Certainly a woman whose heart was burdened with a despised
love would be sensitive to the melancholy which that soft brilliancy
inspires in the soul, by the weird appearance it gives to objects and
the colors with which it tints the streams.

The silence was presently broken by the braying of a donkey. Marie went
quickly back to the hut, and the party started. Galope-Chopine, armed
with a double-barrelled gun, wore a long goatskin, which gave him
something the look of Robinson Crusoe. His blotched face, seamed with
wrinkles, was scarcely visible under the broad-brimmed hat which the
Breton peasants still retain as a tradition of the olden time; proud to
have won, after their servitude, the right to wear the former ornament
of seignorial heads. This nocturnal caravan, protected by a guide whose
clothing, attitudes, and person had something patriarchal about them,
bore no little resemblance to the Flight into Egypt as we see it
represented by the sombre brush of Rembrandt. Galope-Chopine carefully
avoided the main-road and guided the two women through the labyrinth of
by-ways which intersect Brittany.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil then understood the Chouan warfare. In
threading these complicated paths, she could better appreciate the
condition of a country which when she saw it from an elevation had
seemed to her so charming, but into which it was necessary to penetrate
before the dangers and inextricable difficulties of it could be
understood. Round each field, and from time immemorial, the peasants
have piled mud walls, about six feet high, and prismatic in shape;
on the top of which grow chestnuts, oaks and beeches. The walls thus
planted are called hedges (Norman hedges) and the long branches of the
trees sweeping over the pathways arch them. Sunken between these
walls (made of a clay soil) the paths are like the covered ways of a
fortification, and where the granite rock, which in these regions comes
to the surface of the ground, does not make a sort of rugged natural
pavement, they become so impracticable that the smallest vehicles can
only be drawn over them by two pairs of oxen or Breton horses, which
are small but usually vigorous. These by-ways are so swampy that
foot-passengers have gradually by long usage made other paths beside
them on the hedge-banks which are called "rotes"; and these begin and
end with each division into fields. In order to cross from one field to
another it is necessary to climb the clay banks by means of steps which
are often very slippery after a rain.

Travellers have many other obstacles to encounter in these intricate
paths. Thus surrounded, each field is closed by what is called in the
West an _echalier_. That is a trunk or stout branch of a tree, one end
of which, being pierced, is fitted to an upright post which serves as a
pivot on which it turns. One end of the _echalier_ projects far enough
beyond the pivot to hold a weight, and this singular rustic gate, the
post of which rests in a hole made in the bank, is so easy to work that
a child can handle it. Sometimes the peasants economize the stone which
forms the weight by lengthening the trunk or branch beyond the pivot.
This method of enclosure varies with the genius of each proprietor.
Sometimes it consists of a single trunk or branch, both ends of which
are embedded in the bank. In other places it looks like a gate, and is
made of several slim branches placed at regular distances like the steps
of a ladder lying horizontally. The form turns, like the _echalier_, on
a pivot. These "hedges" and _echaliers_ give the region the appearance
of a huge chess-board, each field forming a square, perfectly isolated
from the rest, closed like a fortress and protected by ramparts. The
gate, which is very easy to defend, is a dangerous spot for assailants.
The Breton peasant thinks he improves his fallow land by encouraging the
growth of gorse, a shrub so well treated in these regions that it soon
attains the height of a man. This delusion, worthy of a population which
puts its manure on the highest spot in the courtyard, has covered the
soil to a proportion of one fourth with masses of gorse, in the midst
of which a thousand men might ambush. Also there is scarcely a field
without a number of old apple-trees, the fruit being used for cider,
which kill the vegetation wherever their branches cover the ground. Now,
if the reader will reflect on the small extent of open ground within
these hedges and large trees whose hungry roots impoverish the soil, he
will have an idea of the cultivation and general character of the region
through which Mademoiselle de Verneuil was now passing.

It is difficult to say whether the object of these enclosures is to
avoid all disputes of possession, or whether the custom is a lazy one of
keeping the cattle from straying, without the trouble of watching them;
at any rate such formidable barriers are permanent obstacles, which make
these regions impenetrable and ordinary warfare impossible. There lies
the whole secret of the Chouan war. Mademoiselle de Verneuil saw plainly
the necessity the Republic was under to strangle the disaffection by
means of police and by negotiation, rather than by a useless employment
of military force. What could be done, in fact, with a people wise
enough to despise the possession of towns, and hold to that of an open
country already furnished with indestructible fortifications? Surely,
nothing except negotiate; especially as the whole active strength of
these deluded peasants lay in a single able and enterprising leader. She
admired the genius of the minister who, sitting in his study, had
been able to grasp the true way of procuring peace. She thought she
understood the considerations which act on the minds of men powerful
enough to take a bird's-eye view of an empire; men whose actions,
criminal in the eyes of the masses, are the outcome of a vast and
intelligent thought. There is in these terrible souls some mysterious
blending of the force of fate and that of destiny, some prescience which
suddenly elevates them above their fellows; the masses seek them for a
time in their own ranks, then they raise their eyes and see these lordly
souls above them.

Such reflections as these seemed to Mademoiselle de Verneuil to justify
and even to ennoble her thoughts of vengeance; this travail of her soul
and its expectations gave her vigor enough to bear the unusual fatigues
of this strange journey. At the end of each property Galope-Chopine made
the women dismount from their donkeys and climb the obstructions;
then, mounting again, they made their way through the boggy paths which
already felt the approach of winter. The combination of tall trees,
sunken paths, and enclosed places, kept the soil in a state of humidity
which wrapped the travellers in a mantle of ice. However, after much
wearisome fatigue, they managed to reach the woods of Marignay by
sunrise. The journey then became less difficult, and led by a broad
footway through the forest. The arch formed by the branches, and the
great size of the trees protected the travellers from the weather, and
the many difficulties of the first half of their way did not recur.

They had hardly gone a couple of miles through the woods before they
heard a confused noise of distant voices and the tinkling of a bell, the
silvery tones of which did not have the monotonous sound given by the
movements of cattle. Galope-Chopine listened with great attention, as he
walked along, to this melody; presently a puff of wind brought several
chanted words to his ear, which seemed to affect him powerfully, for he
suddenly turned the wearied donkeys into a by-path, which led away from
Saint-James, paying no attention to the remonstrances of Mademoiselle de
Verneuil, whose fears were increased by the darkness of the forest path
along which their guide now led them. To right and left were enormous
blocks of granite, laid one upon the other, of whimsical shape. Across
them huge roots had glided, like monstrous serpents, seeking from afar
the juicy nourishment enjoyed by a few beeches. The two sides of the
road resembled the subterranean grottos that are famous for stalactites.
Immense festoons of stone, where the darkling verdure of ivy and holly
allied itself to the green-gray patches of the moss and lichen, hid
the precipices and the openings into several caves. When the three
travellers had gone a few steps through a very narrow path a most
surprising spectacle suddenly unfolded itself to Mademoiselle de
Verneuil's eyes, and made her understand the obstinacy of her Chouan
