little expected to see madame here.'

'I came, sire,' she said proudly, addressing herself to the king, and
ignoring me, 'out of no love to M. de Marsac, but as any person bearing
a message to him might come. Nor can you, sire,' she added with spirit,
'feel half as much surprise at seeing me here, as I at seeing your
Majesty.'

'I can believe that,' the king answered drily. 'I would you had not seen
me.'

'The King of France is seen only when he chooses,' she replied,
curtseying to the ground.

'Good,' he answered. 'Let it be so, and you will oblige the King of
France, madame. But enough,' he continued, turning from her to me;
'since this is not the lady I came to see, M. de Marsac, where is she?'

'In the inner room, sire, I opine,' I said, advancing to Fanchette with
more misgiving at heart than my manner evinced. 'Your mistress is here,
is she not?' I continued, addressing the woman sharply.

'Ay, and will not come out,' she rejoined, sturdily keeping her place.

'Nonsense!' I said. 'Tell her--'

'You may tell her what you please,' she replied, refusing to budge an
inch. 'She can hear.'

'But, woman!' I cried impatiently, 'you do not understand. I MUST speak
with her. I must speak with her at once! On business of the highest
importance.'

'As you please,' she said rudely, still keeping her seat. 'I have told
you you can speak.'

Perhaps I felt as foolish on this occasion as ever in my life; and
surely never was man placed in a more ridiculous position. After
overcoming numberless obstacles, and escaping as many perils, I had
brought the king here, a feat beyond my highest hopes--only to be
baffled and defeated by a waiting-woman! I stood irresolute; witless and
confused; while the king waited half angry and half amused, and madame
kept her place by the entrance, to which she had retreated.

I was delivered from my dilemma by the curiosity which is,
providentially perhaps, a part of woman's character, and which led
mademoiselle to interfere herself. Keenly on the watch inside, she had
heard part of what passed between us, and been rendered inquisitive by
the sound of a strange man's voice, and by the deference which she
could discern I paid to the visitor. At this moment, she cried out,
accordingly, to know who was there; and Fanchette, seeming to take this
as a command, rose and dragged her stool aside, saying peevishly and
without any increase of respect, 'There, I told you she could hear.'

'Who is it?' mademoiselle asked again, in a raised voice.

I was about to answer when the king signed to me to stand back, and,
advancing himself, knocked gently on the door. 'Open, I pray you,
mademoiselle,' he said courteously.

'Who is there?' she cried again, her voice trembling.

'It is I, the king,' he answered softly; but in that tone of majesty
which belongs not to the man, but to the descendant, and seems to be the
outcome of centuries of command.

She uttered an exclamation and slowly, and with seeming reluctance,
turned the key in the lock. It grated, and the door opened. I caught a
glimpse for an instant of her pale face and bright eyes, and then his
Majesty, removing his hat, passed in and closed the door; and I withdrew
to the farther end of the room, where madame continued to stand by the
entrance.

I entertained a suspicion, I remember, and not unnaturally, that she
had come to my lodging as her husband's spy; but her first words when I
joined her dispelled this. 'Quick!' she said with an imperious gesture.
'Hear me and let me go! I have waited long enough for you, and suffered
enough through you. As for that, woman in there, she is mad, and her
servant too! Now, listen to me. You spoke to me honestly to-day, and
I have come to repay you. You have an appointment with my husband
to-morrow at Chaverny. Is it not so?' she added impatiently.

I replied that it was so.

'You are to go with one friend,' she went on, tearing the glove she
had taken off, to strips in her excitement, 'He is to meet you with one
also?'

'Yes,' I assented reluctantly, 'at the bridge, madame.'

'Then do not go,' she rejoined emphatically. 'Shame on me that I should
betray my husband; but it were worse to send an innocent man to his
death. He will meet you with one sword only, according to his challenge,
but there will be those under the bridge who will make certain work.
There, I have betrayed him now!' she continued bitterly. 'It is done.
Let me go!'

'Nay, but, madame,' I said, feeling more concerned for her, on whom from
the first moment of meeting her I had brought nothing but misfortune,
than surprised by this new treachery on his part, 'will you not run some
risk in returning to him? Is there nothing I can do for you--no step I
can take for your protection?'

'None!' she said repellently and almost rudely, 'except to speed my
going.'

'But you will not pass through the streets alone?'

She laughed so bitterly my heart ached for her. 'The unhappy are always
safe,' she said.

Remembering how short a time it was since I had surprised her in the
first happiness of wedded love, I felt for her all the pity it was
natural I should feel. But the responsibility under which his Majesty's
presence and the charge of mademoiselle laid me forbade me to indulge
in the luxury of evincing my gratitude. Gladly would I have escorted her
back to her home--even if I could not make that home again what it had
been, or restore her husband to the pinnacle from which I had dashed
him--but I dared not do this. I was forced to content myself with less,
and was about to offer to send one of my men with her, when a hurried
knocking at the outer door arrested the words on my lips.

Signing to her to stand still, I listened. The knocking was repeated,
and grew each moment more urgent. There was a little grille, strongly
wired, in the upper part of the door, and this I was about to open in
order to learn what was amiss, when Simon's voice reached me from the
farther side imploring me to open the door quickly. Doubting the lad's
prudence, yet afraid to refuse lest I should lose some warning he had to
give, I paused a second, and then undid the fastenings. The moment the
door gave way he fell in bodily, crying out to me to bar it behind him.
I caught a glimpse through the gap of a glare as of torches, and saw
by this light half a dozen flushed faces in the act of rising above the
edge of the landing. The men who owned them raised a shout of triumph at
sight of me, and, clearing the upper steps at a bound, made a rush for
the door. But in vain. We had just time to close it and drop the two
stout bars. In a moment, in a second, the fierce outcry fell to a dull
roar; and safe for the time, we had leisure to look in one another's
faces and learn the different aspects of alarm. Madame was white to the
lips, while Simon's eyes seemed starting from his head, and he shook in
every limb with terror.

At first, on my asking him what it meant, he could not speak. But that
would not do, and I was in the act of seizing him by the collar to force
an answer from him when the inner door opened, and the king came out,
his face wearing an air of so much cheerfulness as proved both his
satisfaction with mademoiselle's story and his ignorance of all we were
about. In a word he had not yet taken the least alarm; but seeing Simon
in my hands, and madame leaning against the wall by the door like one
deprived of life, he stood and cried out in surprise to know what it
was.

'I fear we are besieged, sire,' I answered desperately, feeling my
anxieties increased a hundredfold by his appearance--'but by whom I
cannot say. This lad knows, however,' I continued, giving Simon, a
vicious shake, 'and he shall speak. Now, trembler,' I said to him, 'tell
your tale?'

'The Provost-Marshal!' he stammered, terrified afresh by the king's
presence: for Henry had removed his mask. 'I was on guard below. I had
come up a few steps to be out of the cold, when I heard them enter.
There are a round score of them.'

I cried out a great oath, asking him why he had not gone up and warned
Maignan, who with his men was now cut off from us in the rooms above.
'You fool!' I continued, almost beside myself with rage, 'if you had not
come to this door they would have mounted to my rooms and beset them!
What is this folly about the Provost-Marshal?'

'He is there,' Simon answered, cowering away from me, his face working.

I thought he was lying, and had merely fancied this in his fright. But
the assailants at this moment began to hail blows on the door, calling
on us to open, and using such volleys of threats as penetrated even the
thickness of the oak; driving the blood from the women's cheeks, and
arresting the king's step in a manner which did not escape me. Among
their cries I could plainly distinguish the words, 'In the king's name!'
which bore out Simon's statement.

At the moment I drew comfort from this; for if we had merely to deal
with the law we had that on our side which was above it. And I speedily
made up my mind what to do. 'I think the lad speaks the truth, sire,' I
said coolly. 'This is only your Majesty's Provost-Marshal. The worst to
be feared, therefore, is that he may learn your presence here before
you would have it known. It should not be a matter of great difficulty,
however, to bind him to silence, and if you will please to mask, I will
open the grille and speak with him.'

The king, who had taken his stand in the middle of the room, and seemed
dazed and confused by the suddenness of the alarm and the uproar,
assented with a brief word. Accordingly I was preparing to open the
grille when Madame de Bruhl seized my arm, and forcibly pushed me back
from it.

'What would you do?' she cried, her face full of terror. 'Do you not
hear? He is there.'

'Who is there?' I said, startled more by her manner than her words.

'Who?' she answered; 'who should be there? My husband! I hear his voice,
I tell you! He has tracked me here! He has found me, and will kill me!'

'God forbid!' I said, doubting if she had really heard his voice. To
make sure, I asked Simon if he had seen him; and my heart sank when I
heard from him too that Bruhl was of the party. For the first time I
became fully sensible of the danger which threatened us. For the first
time, looking round the ill-lit room on the women's terrified faces,
and the king's masked figure instinct with ill-repressed nervousness, I
recognised how hopelessly we were enmeshed. Fortune had served Bruhl so
well that, whether he knew it or not, he had us all trapped--alike
the king whom he desired to compromise, and his wife whom he hated,
mademoiselle who had once escaped him, and me who had twice thwarted
him. It was little to be wondered at if my courage sank as I looked from
one to another, and listened to the ominous creaking of the door, as the
stout panels complained under the blows rained upon them. For my first
duty, and that which took the PAS of all others, was to the king--to
save him harmless. How, then, was I to be answerable for mademoiselle,
how protect Madame de Bruhl?--how, in a word, redeem all those pledges
in which my honour was concerned?

It was the thought of the Provost-Marshal which at this moment rallied
my failing spirits. I remembered that until the mystery of his presence
here in alliance with Bruhl was explained there was no need to despair;
and turning briskly to the king I begged him to favour me by standing
with the women in a corner which was not visible from the door. He
complied mechanically, and in a manner which I did not like; but lacking
time to weigh trifles, I turned to the grille and opened it without more
ado.

The appearance of my face at the trap was greeted with a savage cry of
recognition, which subsided as quickly into silence. It was followed
by a momentary pushing to and fro among the crowd outside, which in its
turn ended in the Provost-Marshal coming to the front. 'In the king's
name!' he said fussily.

'What is it?' I replied, eyeing rather the flushed, eager faces which
scowled over his shoulders than himself. The light of two links, borne
by some of the party, shone ruddily on the heads of the halberds, and,
flaring up from time to time, filled all the place with wavering, smoky
light. 'What do you want?' I continued, 'rousing my lodging at this time
of night?'

'I hold a warrant for your arrest,' he replied bluntly. 'Resistance will
be vain. If you do not surrender I shall send for a ram to break in the
door.'

'Where is your order?' I said sharply. 'The one you held this morning
was cancelled by the king himself.'

'Suspended only,' he answered. 'Suspended only. It was given out to me
again this evening for instant execution. And I am here in pursuance of
it, and call on you to surrender.'

'Who delivered it to you?' I retorted.

'M. de Villequier,' he answered readily. 'And here it is. Now, come,
sir,' he continued, 'you are only making matters worse. Open to us.'

'Before I do so,' I said drily, 'I should like to know what part in the
pageant my friend M. de Bruhl, whom I see on the stairs yonder, proposes
to play. And there is my old friend Fresnoy,' I added. 'And I see one or
two others whom I know, M. Provost. Before I surrender I must know among
other things what M. de Bruhl's business is here.'

'It is the business of every loyal man to execute the king's warrant,'
the Provost answered evasively. 'It is yours to surrender, and mine to
lodge you in the Castle. 'But I am loth to have a disturbance. I will
give you until that torch goes out, if you like, to make up your mind.
At the end of that time, if you do not surrender, I shall batter down
the door.'

'You will give the torch fair play?' I said, noting its condition.

He assented; and thanking him sternly for this indulgence, I closed the
grille.



CHAPTER XXV. TERMS OF SURRENDER.

I still had my hand on the trap when a touch on the shoulder caused me
to turn, and in a moment apprised me of the imminence of a new peril; a
peril of such a kind that, summoning all my resolution, I could scarcely
hope to cope with it. Henry was at my elbow. He had taken of his mask,
and a single glance at his countenance warned me that that had happened
of which I had already felt some fear. The glitter of intense excitement
shone in his eyes. His face, darkly-flushed and wet with sweat, betrayed
overmastering emotion, while his teeth, tight clenched in the effort to
restrain the fit of trembling which possessed him, showed between his
lips like those of a corpse. The novelty of the danger which menaced
him, the absence of his gentlemen, and of all the familiar faces and
surroundings without which he never moved, the hour, the mean house,
and his isolation among strangers, had proved too much for nerves long
weakened by his course of living, and for a courage, proved indeed in
the field, but unequal to a sudden stress. Though he still strove to
preserve his dignity, it was alarmingly plain to my eyes that he was on
the point of losing, if he had not already lost, all self-command.

'Open!' he muttered between his teeth, pointing impatiently to the trap
with the hand with which he had already touched me. 'Open, I say, sir!'

I stared at him, startled and confounded. 'But your Majesty,' I ventured
to stammer, 'forgets that I have not yet--'

'Open, I say!' he repeated passionately. 'Do you hear me, sir? I desire
that this door be opened.' His lean hand shook as with the palsy, so
that the gems on it twinkled in the light and rattled as he spoke.

I looked helplessly from him to the women and back again, seeing in
a flash all the dangers which might follow from the discovery of his
presence there--dangers which I had not before formulated to myself, but
which seemed in a moment to range themselves with the utmost clearness
before my eyes. At the same time I saw what seemed to me to be a way of
escape; and emboldened by the one and the other, I kept my hand on the
trap and strove to parley with him.

'Nay, but, sire,' I said hurriedly, yet still with as much deference
as I could command, 'I beg you to permit me first to repeat what I have
seen. M. de Bruhl is without, and I counted six men whom I believe to be
his following. They are ruffians ripe for any crime; and I implore your
Majesty rather to submit to a short imprisonment--'

I paused struck dumb on that word, confounded by the passion which
lightened in the king's face. My ill-chosen expression had indeed
applied the spark to his wrath. Predisposed to suspicion by a hundred
treacheries, he forgot the perils outside in the one idea which on the
instant possessed his mind; that I would confine his person, and had
brought him hither for no other purpose. He glared round him with eyes
full of rage and fear, and his trembling lips breathed rather than spoke
the word 'Imprison?'

Unluckily, a trifling occurrence added at this moment to his disorder,
and converted it into frenzy. Someone outside fell heavily against the
door; this, causing madame to utter a low shriek, seemed to shatter the
last remnant of the king's self-control. Stamping his foot on the floor,
he cried to me with the utmost wildness to open the door--by which I had
hitherto kept my place.

But, wrongly or rightly, I was still determined to put off opening it;
and I raised my hands with the intention of making a last appeal to
him. He misread the gesture, and retreating a step, with the greatest
suddenness whipped out his sword, and in a moment had the point at my
breast, and his wrist drawn back to thrust.

It has always been my belief that he would not have dealt the blow,
but that the mere touch of the hilt, awaking the courage which he
undoubtedly possessed, and which did not desert him in his last moments,
would have recalled him to himself. But the opportunity was not
given him, for while the blade yet quivered, and I stood motionless,
controlling myself by an effort, my knee half bent and my eyes on his,
Mademoiselle de la Vire sprang forward at his back, and with a loud
scream clutched his elbow. The king, surprised, and ignorant who held
him, flung up his point wildly, and striking the lamp above his head
with his blade, shattered it in an instant, bringing down the pottery
with a crash and reducing the room to darkness; while the screams of
the women, and the knowledge that we had a madman among us, peopled, the
blackness with a hundred horrors.

Fearing above all for mademoiselle, I made my way as soon as I could
recover my wits to the embers of the fire, and regardless of the king's
sword, which I had a vague idea was darting about in the darkness, I
searched for and found a half-burnt stick, which I blew into a blaze.
With this, still keeping my back to the room, I contrived to light a
taper that I had noticed standing by the hearth; and then, and then
only, I turned to see what I had to confront.

Mademoiselle de la Vire stood in a corner, half-fierce, half-terrified,
and wholly flushed. She had her hand wrapped up in a 'kerchief already
stained with blood; and from this I gathered that the king in his frenzy
had wounded her slightly. Standing before her mistress, with her hair
bristling, like a wild-cat's fur, and her arms akimbo, was Fanchette,
her harsh face and square form instinct with fury and defiance. Madame
de Bruhl and Simon cowered against the wall not far from them; and in a
chair, into which he had apparently just thrown himself, sat the king,
huddled up and collapsed, the point of his sword trailing on the ground
beside him, and his nerveless hand scarce retaining force to grip the
pommel.

In a moment I made up my mind what to do, and going to him in silence, I
laid my pistols, sword, and dagger on a stool by his side. Then I knelt.

'The door, sire,' I said, 'is there. It is for your Majesty to open it
when you please. Here, too, sire, are my weapons. I am your prisoner,
the Provost-Marshal is outside, and you can at a word deliver me to him.
Only one thing I beg, sire,' I continued earnestly, 'that your Majesty
will treat; as a delusion the idea that I meditated for a moment
disrespect or violence to your person.'

He looked at me dully, his face pale, his eyes fish-like. 'Sanctus,
man!' he muttered, 'why did you raise your hand?'

'Only to implore your Majesty to pause a moment,' I answered, watching
the intelligence return slowly to his face. 'If you will deign to listen
I can explain in half a dozen words, sire. M. de Bruhl's men are six
or seven, the Provost has eight or nine; but the former are the wilder
blades, and if M. de Bruhl find your Majesty in my lodging, and infer
his own defeat, he will be capable of any desperate stroke. Your person
would hardly be safe in his company through the streets. And there is
another consideration,' I went on, observing with joy that the king
listened, and was gradually regaining his composure. 'That is, the
secrecy you desired to preserve, sire, until this matter should be
well advanced. M. de Rosny laid the strictest injunctions on me in that
respect, fearing an EMEUTE in Blois should your Majesty's plans become
known.'

'You speak fairly,' the king answered with returning energy, though he
avoided looking at the women. 'Bruhl is likely enough to raise one. But
how am I to get out, sir?' he continued, querulously. 'I cannot remain
here. I shall be missed, man! I am not a hedge-captain, neither sought
nor wanted!'

'If your Majesty would trust me?' I said slowly and with hesitation.

'Trust you!' he retorted peevishly, holding up his hands and gazing
intently at his nails, of the shape and whiteness of which he was
prouder than any woman. 'Have I not trusted you? If I had not trusted
you, should I have been here? But that you were a Huguenot--God forgive
me for saying it!--I would have seen you in hell before I would have
come here with you!'

I confess to having heard this testimony to the Religion with a pride
which made me forget for a moment the immediate circumstances--the peril
in which we stood, the gloomy room darkly lighted by a single candle,
the scared faces in the background, even the king's huddled figure, in
which dejection and pride struggled for expression. For a moment only;
then I hastened to reply, saying that I doubted not I could still
extricate his Majesty without discovery.

'In Heaven's name do it, then!' he answered sharply. 'Do what you like,
man! Only get me back into the castle, and it shall not be a Huguenot
will entice me out again. I am over old for these adventures!'

A fresh attack on the door taking place as he said this induced me to
lose no time in explaining my plan, which he was good enough to approve,
after again upbraiding me for bringing him into such a dilemma. Fearing
lest the door should give way prematurely, notwithstanding the bars
I had provided for it, and goaded on by Madame de Bruhl's face, which
evinced the utmost terror, I took the candle and attended his Majesty
into the inner room; where I placed my pistols beside him, but silently
resumed my sword and dagger. I then returned for the women, and
indicating by signs that they were to enter, held the door open for
them.

Mademoiselle, whose bandaged hand I could not regard without emotion,
though the king's presence and the respect I owed him forbade me to
utter so much as a word, advanced readily until she reached the doorway
abreast of me. There, however, looking back, and seeing Madame de Bruhl
following her, she stopped short, and darting a haughty glance at me,
muttered, 'And--that lady? Are we to be shut up together, sir?'

'Mademoiselle,' I answered quickly in the low tone she had used herself,
'have I ever asked anything dishonourable of you?'

She seemed by a slight movement of the head to answer in the negative.

'Nor do I now,' I replied with earnestness. 'I entrust to your care a
lady who has risked great peril for US; and the rest I leave to you.'

She looked me very keenly in the face for a second, and then, without
answering, she passed on, Madame and Fanchette following her in that
order. I closed the door and turned to Simon; who by my direction had
blown the embers of the fire into a blaze so as to partially illumine
the room, in which only he and I now remained. The lad seemed afraid to
meet my eye, and owing to the scene at which he had just assisted, or to
the onslaught on the door, which grew each moment more furious, betrayed
greater restlessness than I had lately observed in him. I did not doubt
his fidelity, however, or his devotion to mademoiselle; and the orders I
had to give him were simple enough.

'This is what you have got to do,' I said, my hand already on the bars.
'The moment I am outside secure this door. After that, open to no one
except Maignan. When he applies, let him in with caution, and bid him,
as he loves M. de Rosny, take his men as soon as the coast is clear, and
guard the King of France to the castle. Charge him to be brave and wary,
for his life will answer for the king's.'

Twice I repeated this; then fearing lest the Provost-Marshal should make
good his word and apply a ram to the door, I opened the trap. A dozen
angry voices hailed my appearance, and this with so much violence and
impatience that it was some time before I could get a hearing; the
knaves threatening me if I would not instantly open, and persisting that
I should do so without more words. Their leader at length quieted them,
but it was plain that his patience too was worn out. 'Do you surrender
or do you not?' he said. 'I am not going to stay out of my bed all night
for you!'

'I warn you,' I answered, 'that the order you have there has been
cancelled by the king!'

'That is not my business,' he rejoined hardily.

'No, but it will be when the king sends for you to-morrow morning,' I
retorted; at which he looked somewhat moved. 'However, I will surrender
to you on two conditions,' I continued, keenly observing the coarse
faces of his following. 'First, that you let me keep my arms until we
reach the gate-house, I giving you my parole to come with you quietly.
That is number one.'

'Well,' the Provost-Marshal said more civilly, 'I have no objection to
that.'

'Secondly, that you do not allow your men to break into my lodgings. I
will come out quietly, and so an end. Your order does not direct you to
sack my goods.'

'Tut, tut!' he replied; 'I want, you to come out. I do not want to go
in.'

'Then draw your men back to the stairs,' I said. 'And if you keep terms
with me, I will uphold you to-morrow, For your orders will certainly
bring you into trouble. M. de Retz, who procured it this morning, is
