
The sound momentarily increased in volume, and the distant light
brightened until a long line of white foam was clearly discernible.
It approached with extraordinary speed. There was a sudden puff of
air. It lasted but a few seconds, and then died away.

"Hold on!" the captain again shouted.

Half a minute later, with a tremendous roar, the wind struck the
brig. Knowing which way it would come, Fairclough had, half an hour
before, lowered a boat and brought the vessel's head round, so that
it pointed north. The boat had then been hoisted up.

In the interval of waiting, the ship's head had slightly drifted
round, again, and the wind struck her on the quarter. So great was
the pressure that she heeled far over, burying her bows so deeply
that it seemed as if she were going to dive, head foremost. The
water swept over the bulwarks in torrents, and extended almost up
to the foot of the foremast. Then, very slowly, as she gathered
way, the bow lifted and, in a minute, she was scudding fast before
the gale; gathering speed, every moment, from the pressure of the
wind upon her masts and hull, and from the fragment of sail shown
forward. At present there were no waves, the surface of the water
seeming pressed almost flat by the weight of the wind.

Then there was a deafening crash, and a blaze of light. The
fore-top mast was riven in fragments, but none of these fell on the
deck, the wind carrying them far ahead.

"You had better make your way forward, Mr. Hardy," Fairclough
shouted, into the lieutenant's ear, "and see if anyone is hurt."

Fortunately the precaution which had been taken, of ordering the
men away from the mast, had prevented any loss of life; but several
of the men were temporarily blinded. Three or four had been struck
to the deck, by the passage of the electric fluid close to them;
but these presently regained their feet. Hardy returned, and
reported to the captain.

"You had better send the carpenter down, to see that there is no
fire below."

In a minute the man ran up, with the news that he believed the foot
of the mast was on fire. Mr. Hardy went to a group of men.

"Get some buckets, my lads," he said quietly, "and make your way
down to the hold. I will go with you. As was to be expected, the
lightning has fired the foot of the mast; but there is no cause for
alarm. As we have discovered it so soon, we shall not be long in
getting it under."

The men at once filled the fire buckets and, led by Mr. Hardy, went
below. As soon as the hatchway leading to the hold was lifted, a
volume of smoke poured up.

"Wait a minute, till it has cleared off a little," the lieutenant
said; and then, to the midshipman who had accompanied him:

"Go to the captain, and tell him that there is more smoke than I
like, and ask him to come below. Tell him I think the pumps had
better be rigged, and the hose passed down."

Fairclough, who was accompanied by Harry, joined him just as he was
about to descend the ladder.

"I will go down with you, Mr. Hardy," he said.

"Mr. Eden, will you go up and send down all hands, except those at
the wheel? Set a strong gang to rig the pumps, and pass the hose
down."

He and the lieutenant then made their way along the hold. The smoke
was very thick, and it was only by stooping low that they could get
along. They could see, however, a glow of light ahead.

"We can do nothing with this," the captain said, "beyond trying to
keep it from spreading, until we have shifted all these stores. The
gang with buckets had better come down, empty them on the pile, and
then set to work to clear the stuff away, as quickly as possible."

The men, who came along gradually and with difficulty, began to
remove the barrels, coils of rope, and spare sails stowed there.
Several of them were overpowered by the smoke, and had to be
carried up again; and others came down and took their places.

In three or four minutes the hose was passed down, and the clank of
the pumps could be heard. Mr. Hardy took the nozzle and while the
men, now a strong party, worked at the stores, directed a stream of
water upon the flames.

For a time, the efforts seemed to make no impression, and the steam
added to the difficulty of working. Another gang of men were set to
work, forward of the mast and, after half an hour's labour, the
stores were so far removed that the hose could be brought to play
upon the burning mass at the foot of the mast.

The lieutenant had been relieved by Harry, and he by the two
midshipmen, in succession. Changes were frequent and, in another
quarter of an hour, it was evident that the flames were well under
control. The men engaged below relieved those at the pumps and, in
an hour from the first outbreak, all danger was over, though
pumping was kept up for some time longer.

The captain made frequent visits to the deck. The vessel was still
running before the wind, and the sea had got up. The motion of the
ship was becoming more and more violent but, as there was nothing
to be done, the men below were not disturbed at their work, and
this was continued until smoke no longer ascended.



Chapter 14: The Great Andaman.


Leaving a party below, to clear away the burnt barrels and debris,
and to extinguish any fire that might still smoulder among them,
the rest returned on deck. Terrible as was the storm, it was a
relief, to all, to cling to the rail and breathe the fresh air,
after the stifling atmosphere of the hold.

The scene, however, was a terrible one. Lightning was flashing
overhead incessantly, although the thunder was only occasionally
heard, above the howl of the storm. The sea was broken and
irregular, leaping in masses over the bulwarks, and sweeping the
decks. The force of the wind continually tore the heads off the
waves, and carried the spray along in blinding showers.

"We are very near the eye of the hurricane," Captain Fairclough
shouted, in Lindsay's ear. "The men at the wheel tell me she has
been twice round the compass, already; but this broken sea would,
alone, tell that. We must get a little sail on the main mast, and
try to edge out of it."

A small stay sail was got out and hoisted, and the helm was put
down a little. Though still running at but a slight angle before
the wind, the pressure was now sufficient to lay her down to her
gunwale. The crew gathered under shelter of the weather bulwark,
holding on by belaying pins and stanchions.

Night had now set in, but it made little difference; for the
darkness had, before, been intense, save for the white crests of
the tossing waves. Sheets of foam blew across the deck and,
sometimes, a heavy fall of water toppled down on the crew. A
pannikin of hot soup had been served out to the men, and this would
be the last hot refreshment they would obtain, before the gale
broke; for the hatchways were all battened down, and it was
impossible to keep the fire alight.

"The best thing you can do is to turn in, Lindsay," Fairclough
said, after the former had finished his soup--a task of no slight
difficulty, under the circumstances. "You can do no good by
remaining up."

"How long is it likely to last?"

"Probably for two or three days, possibly longer."

"I will take your advice," Harry said. "I shall be glad to get
these wet clothes off."

For a time, he was sorry that he had lain down, for the motion was
so violent that he could, with difficulty, keep himself in his
berth. Being, however, completely worn out by the buffeting of the
gale, the efforts required to hold on, the excitement of the fire
and storm, it was not long before he dropped off to sleep; and he
did not wake up until a ray of dim light showed that the morning
was breaking. The motion of the ship was unabated and after, with
great difficulty, getting into his clothes, he went up on deck.

Except that the clouds were somewhat more broken, there was no
change. Dark masses of vapour flew overhead, torn and ragged. The
wild tumble of waves rose and fell, without order or regularity.
Forward, the bulwark on both bows had been carried away, and the
deck was swept clear of every movable object.

One watch was below, the men of the other were for the most part
gathered aft, and lashed to belaying pins. Fairclough was standing
near the wheel. With some difficulty, Harry made his way to him.

"Not much change since last night," he said. "I feel quite ashamed
of myself, for having been sleeping in my berth while you have all
been exposed to this gale."

"There has not been much to do," the commander said. "In fact,
there is nothing to be done, except to keep her as much as we dare
from running straight before the wind. We have not had much success
that way for, as you see, the tumble of water shows that we are
still but a short distance from the centre of the gale. I sent the
starboard watch below at four bells and, in a few minutes, we shall
be relieved. Hardy wanted to stay with me, but I would not have it.

"The cook has managed, somehow, to boil some water, and served a
pannikin of coffee to all hands, just before the watch turned in;
and he has sent word that he will have some more ready, by the time
they come up again."

He looked at his watch, and called out, "four bells."

One of the men made his way to the bell, with alacrity. The watch
below did not come up, for a few minutes, as they waited to drink
their coffee. As soon as they appeared, the men on deck went below.

"All the better for your sleep, Mr. Hardy?" Fairclough asked, as
the other joined him.

"Very much better, sir. I think the cook ought to have a medal. The
cup of coffee before we turned in, and that we have just drunk,
have made new men of us."

"You will call me, instantly, if there is any change, Mr. Hardy.

"Mr. Eden, you had better come with us. The coffee will be ready,
in my cabin."

There was no possibility of sitting at the table. But, sitting down
on the floor to leeward, and holding a mug in one hand and a
biscuit in the other, they managed, with some difficulty, to
dispose of the meal. Then Fairclough, putting on some dry clothes,
threw himself on his bunk. The midshipman retired to his own cabin,
and Harry went on deck.

"How are we heading, Mr. Hardy?" he shouted, when he joined the
lieutenant.

"At the present moment, we are running nearly due east but, as we
have been round the compass, several times, since the gale struck
us, there is no means of saying, with anything like certainty,
where our position is. But I was talking it over with the captain,
before I went down, and we both agreed that, as the centre of the
hurricane is undoubtedly moving to the northeast, we must have gone
a good many miles in that direction.

"Of course, there is no means of determining how far till we can
get a glimpse of the sun; but there is no doubt that, if the gale
continues, we shall soon be in a very perilous position, for we
must be driving towards the Andamans. We may have the luck to pass
north of them, or to go between them.

"We tried, last night, to get up a little more sail; but she would
not stand it, and we were obliged to take it off again. So we can
do nothing but hope for the best."

Two hours later, Fairclough came out again.

"I am afraid that you have not been to sleep," Harry said.

"No. I am all the better for the rest, but sleep was out of the
question.

"How is she heading now, Mr. Hardy?"

"Northeast, sir."

Fairclough took his telescope from the rack in the companion and,
slinging it over his shoulder, mounted the ratlines to the top.

"Have you made out anything?" he asked the sailor stationed there.

"I have thought, once or twice, sir, that I saw land ahead; but I
could not say for certain. It is so thick that it is only when the
clouds open a bit that one has a chance."

Although he had taken his glass with him, Fairclough did not
attempt to use it, at present; but stood gazing fixedly ahead. A
quarter of an hour later there was a sudden rift in the clouds, and
a low shore was visible, some five or six miles ahead; and a dark
mass, much farther off, rising into the cloud. Fairclough instantly
unslung the telescope, and adjusted it. A minute afterwards the
clouds closed in again and, telling the man to keep a sharp
lookout, he descended to the deck.

"We must set the main top-sail on her again, close reefed, of
course. We are running straight for land and, unless I am much
mistaken, it is the great Andaman. There is a lofty hill, some
distance back from the shore. I only caught a glimpse of its lower
part, but none of the small islands have any hill to speak of. The
shore is about six miles off and, as the peak lies about the centre
of the island, and as this is a hundred and forty miles long, we
are some seventy miles from the northern point.

"You know what that means. However, we must do all that we can, to
keep her off."

"Ay, ay, sir," Hardy said, turning without another word, and then
gave orders to the men to set the top sail.

This was done, and the ship's course was laid parallel to the
shore. The wind was now nearly northwest, and she lay down until
the water was several planks up her deck. The crew were all lashed
to windward, clustering where they would be most out of danger,
should the mast go.

Fairclough stood for a minute, looking at the shivering mast, and
the shrouds stretched like iron bars.

"We must get the guns overboard, Mr. Hardy; she will never stand
this," and indeed the waves, striking her broadside, were falling
in a cascade over her.

Calling four of the men, Hardy made his way down into the lee
scuppers, where the water was nearly up to their waists; opened the
portholes and slacked the lashings, when the four guns disappeared
overboard. It required much greater pains to get down the guns from
the port side, as tackle had to be attached to each, so that they
could be lowered carefully, one by one, across the deck; but all
worked heartily, and these also were launched overboard.

"That has eased her, a bit," Fairclough said, when Hardy rejoined
him. "They helped to pin her down, and I could almost feel the
difference, as each gun went overboard."

"I am afraid that it will make no difference, in the long run,"
Hardy said. "She must be making a great deal of leeway, and I
should say that she will be on shore in a couple of hours, at the
latest. Still, we may have time to look out for a soft spot."

"We should not have much chance, in that case, Hardy; my only hope
is in another shift of wind."

"But it will go round more to the north, sir, and then we sha'n't
be able to lie our course, at all. It has gone round a point, since
we got up the top sail."

"Quite so; and I doubt whether it will go round soon enough to save
us. If it should go round a little more to the north, we must try
and get her on the other tack; but I am afraid, in such a sea, she
will not go about. Of course, our great aim is to reach Port
Cornwallis; or, if we cannot get as far as that, I have just been
having a look at the chart, and I see there are three narrow
straits. How much water there is in them, I do not know. They are
most vaguely marked on the chart. One of them is but thirty miles
north of our present position and, if we find that we cannot make
the northern point, I shall try to get in there. I am not sure
that, in any case, it would not be the best plan; for if there is
only water enough to run a mile or so up this passage, we shall
ground in comparatively still water; whereas, as the wind has been
blowing from every quarter, it is almost certain that there will be
a tremendous sea in the open port."

Fairclough placed himself at the wheel, and told the two midshipmen
to go round, and tell the crew that there was an inlet ahead, but
the depth of the water was uncertain. When they approached it, all
hands would come aft, so as to avoid being crushed by the falling
masts. A dozen of the men were to take hatchets, and cut away the
wreckage if the mast fell, leaving only a couple of the shrouds
uncut. When this was done, directly the vessel began to break up,
those who could not swim were to make their way by these shrouds to
the floating mast. Those who could swim could make, at once, for
the shore.

"When all have left the ship but Mr. Hardy and myself, we will cut
the shrouds; and the masts will probably ground, ere long."

While before the sailors had, for the most part, been gazing at the
coast, on which they had little doubt that their bodies would soon
be cast up; they became lively and active, as soon as they received
the order. It seemed that, after all, there was a chance for them.

Four hours passed. The wind had now so far headed them that the
brig could no longer keep her course parallel with the shore. Twice
they had endeavoured to put her about, but each time failed; and
she was now making so much leeway that the coast was less than
three miles away. A tremendous sea was breaking upon it. One of the
midshipmen had, for the past hour, been in the foretop with a
glass; and the captain himself now went up, and took his place
beside him. He saw at once that, accustomed as he was to use his
telescope in rough weather, it would be useless here; for the
motion was so great that it was only by following the midshipman's
example, and lashing himself to the mast, that he could retain a
footing.

"You are sure that you have seen no break in the surf, Mr. Eden?"

"Quite sure, sir."

"We ought not to be far from it, now, if it is rightly marked on
the chart."

Another hour passed, and they were within a mile and a half of the
shore.

"I think that I can see a break, over there, sir," and the
midshipman pointed to a spot a mile along the coast.

"Pray God that it may be so," Fairclough said, "for it is our only
chance."

Two or three minutes later, he said:

"You are right, there is certainly a break there. There is a line
of surf, but it does not run up the shore, as it does everywhere
else."

He at once descended to the deck.

"Thank God!" he said, as he joined Mr. Hardy and Harry who, on
seeing him coming down, had made their way to the shrouds, "there
is a break in the surf. It is not a complete break, but there is
certainly an inlet of some sort. And though it looks as if there
were a bar, there may be plenty of water for us for, with such a
sea as this, it would break in three fathoms of water and, as we
don't draw more than two, we may get over it. At any rate, it is
our only hope."

"It gives us a chance, if we strike," the lieutenant said, "for it
will be comparatively calm water, inside the bar. Those who can
swim should have no difficulty in getting ashore. The others might
do so, on wreckage. Her masts are sure to come out of her, if she
strikes heavily."

"I shall be obliged if you will go up to the foretop, Hardy, and
con the brig in; but mind you, come down before we get to the white
water. You may as well send Mr. Eden down."

Mr. Hardy was not long before he came down again and, at the
captain's suggestion, both he and Harry went below, and armed
themselves with pistols. As soon as they came up again, they took
their places by Fairclough. The seamen had all gathered aft. The
boatswain had cut the lashings holding the spars--that had been
sent down from aloft--in their place by the bulwarks. The boats had
all been torn from their davits, or smashed; with the exception of
the largest cutter, which lay bottom upwards in the middle of the
ship, securely lashed to the deck.

"Now, men," the captain said, raising his voice almost to a shout,
so that all might hear him, "you have behaved as well as men could
do, during this storm; and I have no doubt that you will continue
to do so, to the end. Remember that no one is to leave the ship,
till I give the order. If you are cool and calm, there is good
ground for hope that all may be saved.

"If the mast falls, you who have hatchets run forward at once, and
stand in readiness to cut the lanyards; but don't strike until I
give the order."

They were now fast approaching the line of surf.

"Let everyone take hold of something," Mr. Fairclough shouted. "If
we strike, we are sure to be pooped."

Another minute, and she was close to the breaking waves. Everyone
held his breath as, impelled by a great breaker, she dashed into
the surf with the swiftness of an arrow. There was a shock,
followed by a grating noise, and then the brig slowly came to a
standstill.

"Hold on, hold on for your lives!" the captain shouted, as a wave
even larger than the last came towering up behind them, in an
almost perpendicular wall. It struck the vessel with tremendous
force, and swept waist deep along the deck; while the vessel,
herself, surged forward. There was another shock, but this time
much slighter and, as the next wave carried them on, there was a
general cheer from the sailors.

"She has floated, she is through it, hurrah!"

She was, indeed, over the bar.

"There are men in the water," Fairclough shouted. "Get ready to
cast ropes to them."

Four men, who had been swept overboard by the rush of water, were
rescued; two others were found dead on the deck, having been dashed
against the stanchions, or other obstacles.

The brig continued her course, four or five hundred yards farther
then, as the banks of the inlet closed in, Fairclough gave orders
for the anchors to be let go. Everything had been prepared for this
order, and the anchors at once dropped and, as soon as fifty
fathoms of chain had been run out, the brig swung round head to
wind.

"Muster the men, and see if any are missing."

This was done, and only one, besides three found dead, did not
answer to his name. The general opinion was that he had struck
against something, as he was swept overboard, and had been killed
or disabled; for all who had been seen in the water had been
rescued.

"Serve out an allowance of grog, all round, Mr. Eden," Fairclough
said, "and tell the cook to get his fire alight, as soon as
possible. We shall all be glad of a good meal.

"Well, thank God, everything has ended far better than we could
have hoped for!"

Two hours later the crew, having got into dry clothes, were sitting
down, enjoying a plentiful allowance of pea soup and salt junk;
while the officers were partaking of similar fare, in the cabin.
None who saw them there would have dreamt of the long struggle they
had been through, and that the ship was well nigh a wreck. It was
now late in the afternoon, and Fairclough gave orders that all
might turn in, as soon as they liked; except that an anchor watch,
of four men, must maintain a sharp lookout, for the natives of the
island were bitterly hostile to the whites.

"I don't think there is any real danger," he said to Harry, "or
that they will attempt to take the ship. Their habit is, I have
heard, to lie in hiding, and to shoot their arrows at any stranger
who may land."

They sat chatting, for an hour, after the meal was concluded. Then
the conversation flagged, and Fairclough said, presently:

"I think that we may as well follow the men's example, and turn in.
I can hardly keep my eyes open."

The gale was still blowing strongly, in the morning, though its
force had somewhat abated. But inside the bar there was but a
slight swell, and the brig rode easily at her anchors; for the wind
was now several points west of north, and they were consequently
protected by the land.

The work of repairing damages began at once for, owing to the
length of the voyage, the stores of provisions and water were
beginning to run very short. Two or three buffaloes had been
bought, at the village where Harry had landed but, with the
