
When Washington had taken command of the army there had still been
no real thought of separating from Britain.  So for his flag he
had used the British ensign with the Union Jack in the corner.  But
instead of a red ground he had used a ground of thirteen red and
white stripes, on stripe for each colony.  But when all hope of
reconciliation was gone Congress decided that the Union Jack must
be cut out of the flag altogether, and in its place a blue square
was to be used with thirteen white stars in a circle, one star for
each state, just as there was one stripe for each state.

People, however, were too busy doing other things and had no time
to see to the making of flags.  So the first one was hoisted by
Colonel Willett, after the battle of Orskany.  He had captured five
standards.  These, as victor, he hoisted on the fort.  To make his
triumph complete, however, he wanted an American flag to hoist over
them.  But he had none.  So a soldier's wife gave her red petticoat,
some one else supplied a white shirt, and out of that and an old
blue jacket was made the first American flag to float upon the
breeze.

This, of course, was only a rough and ready flag, and Betsy Ross,
a seamstress, who lived in Arch Street, Philadelphia, had the honour
of making the first real one.  While in Philadelphia Washington and
some members of council called upon Betsy to ask her to make the
flag.  Washington had brought a sketch with him, but Betsy suggested
some alterations.  So Washington drew another sketch, and there and
then Betsy set to work, and very soon her flag also was floating
in the breeze.

__________





Chapter 58 - Burgoyne's Campaign - Bemis Heights and Saratoga




After all the fierce fighting at Oriskany neither side could claim
a victory.  The British had received a check, but were by no means
beaten.  Fort Stanwix was still besieged, and unless relief came
must soon fall into the hands of the enemy.

Colonel Gansewoort, the commandant of the fort, therefore now sent to
Schuyler asking for help, and Benedict Arnold, who had but lately
arrived, volunteering for the service, was soon on his way with
twelve hundred men.  Arnold was ready enough to fight, as he was.  But
he knew that his force was much smaller than that of the British,
and, after some thought, he fell upon a plan by which theirs could
be made less.

A spy had been caught within the American lines, and was condemned
to death.  He was an almost half-witted creature, with queer cunning
ways, and the Indians looked upon him as a sort of Medicine Man,
and feared him accordingly.  Knowing this, Arnold thought that he
might be useful to him, and promised to spare his life if he would
go to the British camp and spread a report among their Indian allies
that the Americans were coming down upon them in tremendous force.

The man was glad enough to get a chance to escape being hanged, and
his brother being held as hostage, he set out.  He acted his part
well.  Panting and breathless, with his coat torn in many places
by bullets, and a face twisted with fear, he dashed into the enemy
camp.  There he told his eager listeners that he had barely escaped
with his life from the Americans (which was true enough) and that
they were marching towards them in vast numbers, and showed his
bullet-riddled coat as proof of his story.

"How many are they?" he was asked.

In reply the man spread his hands abroad, pointing to the leaves
of the trees and shaking his head as if in awe.

The Indians were greatly disturbed, and began to hold a council.  While
they were still consulting, an Indian, friendly to the Americans,
who was in the plot, arrived.  He told the same story as the spy,
pointing like him to the numberless trees of the forest when asked
how many of the enemy were coming.

Then another and still another Indian arrived.  They all told the
same tale.  A mysterious bird had come to warn them, they said, that
the whole valley was filled with warriors.

At length the Indians could bear no more.  Already many of their best
warriors had been slain.  They would no longer stay to be utterly
wiped out, and they prepared to flee.

In vain the British commander implored them to stay.  Bribes, threats,
and promises were all alike useless.  At last he offered them "fire
water." For if only he could make them drunk, he thought, they
might forget their fear.  But even the much coveted "fire water" had
no power to still their terrors.  They refused to drink, and with
clamour and noise they fled.

The panic spread to the rest of the army.  Two battalions of white men
followed in the wake of their redskin brothers, and the commander,
deserted by the bulk of his army, was forced to join in the general
retreat.

It was a humiliating and disorderly flight.  The Indians, when they
recovered from their terror, had lost every vestige of respect
for their white brothers.  Soon they became insolent, and amused
themselves by playing on their fears. "They are coming! They are
coming!" they would cry whenever the weary fugitives lay down to
rest.  Then they would laugh to see the white men leap up again,
fling away their knapsacks and their rifles, so as to make the
greater haste, and stumble onward.

At length the shameful retreat came to an end, and, hungry and
ragged, a feeble remnant of the expedition reached the shores of
Lake Ontario, and passed over into Canada.

Such was the news brought to Burgoyne soon after the defeat at
Bennington.  It make his dark outlook darker still.  No help could
ever come to him now from the north, and all his hopes were fixed
on Howe's advancing host from the south.  But no news of Howe's
approach reached him.  Day by day the American force round him
was increasing.  Day by day his own was growing weaker.  At last
in desperation he decided to risk a battle.  For he saw that he
must either soon cut his way through the hostile forces or perish
miserable.

General Horatio Gates was now in command of the Americans instead
of Schuyler.  Gates was nothing of a soldier.  Indeed it was said
of him that all throughout the beginning of the war he never so
much as heard the sound of a gun, and that when there was a battle
to the fore he always had business elsewhere.  Like Lee he was an
Englishman by birth.  And even as Lee had been jealous of Washington
so Gates was jealous of Schuyler, and at last he succeeded in ousting
him.  He did so at a good time for himself, for all the hard work
of this campaign was done, and Gates stepped in time to reap the
glory.

Burgoyne thought little of Gates, and called him an old woman.  So
he was the more ready to give battle.  But the Americans were now
so thoroughly aroused that they would have fought well without a
leader.  Besides, Arnold was with them, and Arnold they would have
followed anywhere.

The Americans were strongly entrenched on Bemis Heights, and on
the day of battle Gates would have done nothing but sit still and
let the enemy wear himself out in attacks.  But this did not suit
Arnold's fiery temper, and he begged hard to be allowed to charge
the enemy.  Bates grudgingly gave him leave, and with a small force
he bore down upon the British.  The fight was fierce, and finding
his force too small Arnold sent to Gates asking for reinforcements.
But Gates, although he had ten thousand troops standing idle,
refused to send a man.  So, with his always diminishing handful of
troops, Arnold fought on till night fell.

Again neither side could claim a victory.  But Burgoyne had lost
nearly six hundred men, and his position was not one whit the
better.  Gates took all the credit to himself, and when he sent his
account of the battle to Congress he did not so much as mention
Arnold's name.  Out of this, and his refusal to send reinforcements,
a furious quarrel arouse between the two men, and Gates told Arnold
that he had no further use for his services and that he could go.
Arnold, shaken with wrath, would have gone had not his brother
officers with one voice begged him to stay.  So he stayed, but he
had no longer any command.

Like a caged and wounded lion Burgoyne now sought a way out of
the trap in which he was.  But turn which way he would there was no
escape.  He was hemmed in on all sides.  So eighteen days after the
battle of Bemis Heights he took the field again on the same ground.
It was a desperate adventure, for what could six thousand worn and
weary men do against twenty thousand already conscious of success?

The British fought with dogged courage.  Chafing with impatience
Arnold watched the battle from the heights.  He saw how an attack
might be made with advantage, how victory might be won.  At length
he could bear inaction no longer, and, leaping on to his horse, he
dashed into the fray.

"Go after that fellow and bring him back," shouted Gates; "he will
be doing something rash."

The messenger sped after him.  But Arnold was too quick, and the battle
was well nigh won before Gates' order reached him.  As Arnold came
his men gave a ringing cheer, and for the rest of the day he and
Daniel Morgan were the leaders of the battle, Gates never leaving
his headquarters.

Where the bullets flew thickest, there Arnold was to be found.  The
madness of battle was upon him, and, like one possessed, he rode
through flame and smoke, his clear voice raised above the hideous
clamour, cheering and directing his men.

The fight was fierce and long, but as the day wore on there could
be no more doubt about the end.  The British were defeated.  Yet so
long as daylight lasted they fought on.

Just as the sun was setting Arnold and his men had routed a party
of Germans, and a wounded German, lying on the ground, shot at
Arnold, killing his horse and shattering his leg - the same leg
which had been wounded at Quebec.

As Arnold fell, one of his men, with a cry of rage dashed at the
German and would have killed him where he lay.  But Arnold stopped
him. "For God's sake, don't hurt him." he cried, "he's a fine
fellow." So the man's life was spared.

Arnold's leg was so badly shattered that the doctors talked of
cutting it off.  Arnold, however, would not hear of it.

"If that is all you can do for me," he said, "put me on another
horse and let me see the battle out."

But the battle was over, for night had put an end to the dreadful
strife.

With this defeat Burgoyne's last hope vanished.  To fight again
would be merely to sacrifice his brave soldiers.  He had only food
in the camp for a week, and there was still no sign of help coming
from the south.  There was nothing left to him but to surrender.

So on October 17th he surrendered to General Gates, with all his
cannon, ammunition, and great stores, and nearly six thousand men.

As his soldiers laid down their arms many of them wept bitterly.
But there was no one there to see or deride their grief.  For the
Americans, having no wish to add to the sorrow of their brave foe,
stayed within their lines.  Then, as the disarmed soldiers marched
away, Burgoyne stepped out of the ranks, and, drawing his sword,
gave it to General Gates.

"The fortune of war has made me your prisoner," he said.

"It was through no fault of yours," replied Gates, with a grave
courtesy, as he handed back the sword.

__________





Chapter 59 - Brandywine - Germantown - Valley Forge




Washington spent the winter of 1776-7 at Morristown.  In May he once
more led his army out, and while the forces in the north, under
Schuyler and then Gates, were defeating Burgoyne, he was holding
his own against Howe's far more formidable army further south.

Howe had spent the winter at New York, which from the time of its
capture to the end of the war, remained the British headquarters.
In the spring he determined to capture Philadelphia, the "revel
capital," and began to march through New Jersey.  But in every move
he made he found himself checked by Washington.  It was like a game
of chess.  Washington's army was only about half the size of Howe's,
so he refused to be drawn into an open battle, but harried and
harassed his foe at every turn, and at length drove Howe back to
Staten Island.

Having failed to get to Philadelphia by land, Howe now decided to
go by sea, and , sailing up Chesapeake Bay, he landed in Maryland
in the end of August.  But there again he found Washington waiting
for him.  And now, although his army was still much smaller than
Howe's, Washington determined to risk a battle rather than give up
Philadelphia without a blow.

With his usual care and genius Washington chose his position well,
on the banks of the Brandywine, a little river which falls into the
Delaware at Wilmington about twenty-six miles from Philadelphia.
On both sides the battle was well fought.  But the British army was
larger, better equipped, and better drilled, and they gained the
victory.

This defeat made the fate of Philadelphia certain, and Congress
fled once more, this time to Lancaster.  Yet for a fortnight longer
Washington held back the enemy, and only on the 26th of September
did the British march into the city.  But before they had time to
settle into their comfortable quarters Washington gave battle again,
at Germantown, on the outskirts of Philadelphia.

It was a well contested battle, and at one time it seemed as if it
might end in victory for the Americans.  But Washington's plan of
battle was rather a hard one for inexperienced troops to carry out.
They were as brave as any men who ever carried rifles, but they
were so ignorant of drill that they could not even form into column
or wheel to right or left in soldierly fashion.  A thick fog, too,
which hung over the field from early morning, made it difficult to
distinguish friend from foe, and at one time two divisions of the
Americans, each mistaking the other for the enemy, fired upon each
other.

But although the battle of Germantown was a defeat for the Americans
it by no means spelled disaster.  Another two months of frays and
skirmishes followed.  Then the British settled down to comfortable
winter quarters in Philadelphia, and Washington marched his war-worn
patriots to Valley Forge, about twenty miles away.

Wile the Americans had been busy losing and winning battles, Pitt
in England was still struggling for peace and kindly understanding
between Britain and her colonies. "You can never conquer the
Americans," he cried. "If I were an American, as I am an Englishman,
while a foreign troop was landed in my country I would never lay
down my arms, --never, never, never!"

But Pitt talked in vain.  For the King was deaf to all the great
minister's pleadings.  In his eyes the Americans were rebels who
must be crushed, and Pitt was but the "trumpet of sedition."

But meanwhile all Europe had been watching the struggle of these
same rebels, watching it, too, with keep interest and admiration.
And now soldiers from many countries came to offer help to the
Americans.  Among them the best known perhaps are Kosciuszko, who
later fought so bravely for his own land, Poland; and Lafayette,
who took a large share in the French Revolution.

Lafayette was at this time only nineteen.  He had an immense admiration
for Washington, and after they met, in spite of the difference in
the their ages, they became lifelong friends, and Lafayette named
his eldest son after Washington.

But the Americans owed more perhaps to Baron von Steuben than to
any other foreigner.  Von Steuben was a German, and had fought under
Frederick the Great.

Washington had taken up winter quarters at Valley Forge, which is
a beautiful little valley.  But that winter it was a scene of misery
and desolation.  The cold was terrible, and the army was ragged and
hungry.  The men had neither coats, shirts, nor shoes, and often
their feet and hands froze so that they had to be amputated.  For
days at a time they had but one poor meal a day.  Even Washington
saw no hope of help. "I am now convinced beyond a doubt," he wrote,
"that unless some great and capital change takes place this army
must inevitably be reduced to one or other of these three things:
starve, dissolve, or disperse."

Much of this misery was due to the neglect and folly of Congress.
It had sadly changed from the brave days of the Declaration of
Independence.  It was filled now with politicians who cared about
their own advancement rather than with patriots who sought their
country's good.  They refused to see that money, and still more
money, was needed to keep a properly equipped army in the field.
They harassed Washington with petty interference with his plans.
They gave promotion to useless officers against his wishes and
better judgment.  There was plenty of food in the country, stores
of clothing were ready for the army's use, but they lay by the
wayside, rotting, because there was no money to pay men to bring
it to the army.  Washington wore himself out in fruitless efforts
to awaken Congress to a sense of its duty.  And at length, utterly
despairing of any support, weary of seeing his men suffer and
dwindle day by day under the miseries of Valley Forge, he wrote out
his resignation as Commander-in-Chief of the army.  And it needed
all the persuasions of his officers to make him tear it up.

It was to this camp of misery at Valley Forge that Baron von Steuben
came.  And the ragged, hungry, perishing army he drilled.  To these
men, brave enough, but all unused to discipline, he taught what
discipline meant.

At first it was by no means easy.  For the Baron knew little English
and the men he tried to teach knew not a word of French or German.
So misunderstandings were many, and when one day a young American
officer named Walker, who knew French, came to von Steuben and offered
to act as interpreter he was overjoyed. "Had I seen an angel from
heaven," he cried, "I could not have been more glad."

But even then, between his own mistakes and the men's mistakes,
the Baron was often driven distracted, and lost his temper.  Once,
it is said, utterly worn out, he turned the troops over to Walker.
"Come, my friend," he cried, "take them; I can curse them no longer."

But in spite of all hindrances and failings, both men and officers
learned so much from von Steuben that when the terrible winter was
over the army went forth again to fight far more fit to face the
foe than before.

__________





Chapter 60 - War on the Sea




Besides being themselves more fit to fight, the Americans now
received other help, for France joined with America in her struggle
against Britain.  And after this the war was not confined to America
only.  There was war on the sea, now, as well as on land, and whenever
the British and the French navies met there was fighting.

The Americans themselves also carried the war on to the sea.  At
first they had no fleet, but very soon they began to build ships
and before long they had a little fleet of six.  Of this fleet Esek
Hopkins was made commander-in-chief.  He was an old salt, for he had
been captain of a trading vessel for thirty years.  But as a naval
commander he was not a success.  He had no knowledge of warfare, he
was touchy, obstinate, and could not get on with Congress, which
he said was a pack of ignorant clerks who knew nothing at all.
The fleet under him only made one cruise.  Then he was dismissed,
and was succeeded by James Nicholson, the son of a Scotsman from
Berwick-on-Tweed.

As the war went on other vessels were added to the first six.  But
the largest was not bigger than a small British cruiser, and in
the end they were nearly all taken, or sunk to prevent them being
taken.  Still before their end they fought many gallant fights, and
did some good work for their country.

The first shot of the Revolution on the water was fired by Captain
Abraham Whipple when he chased a tender belonging to the British
cruiser Rose, and captured her.  This was, however, not the first
shot the hardy Captain had fired against the British.  For in 1772,
before the "Boston Tea Party," even, had taken place, he had seized
and burned the British revenue schooner, Gaspé, in Narragansett
Bay.

The commander of the Gaspé had been trying to put down smuggling
on the coast of Rhode Island.  He stopped all vessels, and examined
even market boats, to see if they had any smuggled goods.  This
made the Rhode Island people very angry.  They had smuggled as they
liked for a hundred years; the British laws against it seemed to
them mere tyranny; and they looked upon the commander of the Gaspé
as little better than a pirate, who was interfering with their lawful
trade.  So when one day the people learned that the Gaspé had gone
aground a few miles from Providence, and could not be got off before
three o'clock in the morning, they determined to attack her.

Abraham Whipple was chosen as captain for the expedition.  He and
his men boarded the Gaspé, wounded the captain, overpowered the
crew, and burned the schooner to the water's edge.

When the British commander-in-chief heard of it he was furious,
and he wrote to Whipple.

"Sir," he said, "you, Abraham Whipple, on the 10th of June, 1772,
burned his Majesty's ship the Gaspé, and I will hang you at the
yardarm."

To this Whipple, nothing daunted, replied: "Sir, always catch a
man before you hang him."

Whipple was never caught until 1778, when with his ship the Providence
he tried to relieve Charleston, in South Carolina, which was at
that time besieged by the British.  Then he was not hanged, but kept
prisoner until the end of the war.

Lambert Wickes, captain of the Reprisal, was another gallant naval
officer.  When Benjamin Franklin was sent as United States ambassador
to France in 1776 he sailed in the Reprisal, which was the first
American warship to visit the shores of Europe.

It might be here interesting to note that besides being minister
to France, Franklin had to look after naval affairs in a general
way.  He used his powers with wisdom, and often with great humanity.
Among other things he gave all American naval commanders orders
that they were not to attack the great discoverer, Captain Cook,
no matter in what part of the ocean they might meet him.  They were
not merely forbidden to attack him, they were even commanded to
offer him any aid they could.  For it would not beseem Americans,
said Franklin, to fight against one who had earned the admiration
of the whole world.

The Reprisal did not return home before it had made its presence
felt.  For, having landed Franklin, Wickes cruised about the Bay of
Biscay and the English Channel, capturing many British merchantmen,
and taking them to France, where he sold them.

At this time France was still at peace with Britain, and the
British Government complained bitterly to the French at this breach
of neutrality.  They were, therefore, forced to order the American
ships to leave France, and Wickes sailed for home.

On the way the Reprisal was chased by a British warship, and Wickes
only saved himself from capture by throwing his guns overboard.  He
thus escaped one danger, however, only to fall into another, and
in a storm off the coast of Newfoundland the Reprisal went down,
and all on board were lost.

But of all the naval commanders on the American side, the Scotsman,
John Paul Jones, was the most famous.  He was the son of a gardener,
and was born at Arbigland in Kirkcudbrightshire.  From a child he
had been fond of the sea, and when still only a boy of twelve he
began his seafaring life on board a ship trading with Virginia.
For some years he led a roving and adventurous life.  Then after a
time he came to live in America, which, he said himself, "has been
my favourite country since the age of thirteen, when I first saw
it."

His real name was John Paul.  But he took the name of Jones out of
gratitude to Mr.  Jones, a gentleman of Virginia, who had befriended
him when he was poor and in trouble.

When the War of the Revolution broke out Jones was a young man of
twenty-seven, and he threw himself heart and soul into the struggle
on the side of the Americans.  He was the first man to receive a naval
commission after the signing of the Declaration of Independence.
He was, too, the first man to break the American naval flag from
the mast.  This was not, however, the Stars and Stripes, but a yellow
flag with a pine tree and a rattlesnake, and the words, "Tread on
me how dares."

Jones became famous at once for his deeds of skill and daring, for
it was his sole ambition, he said, "to fight a battle under the
new flag, which will teach the world that the American flag means
something afloat, and must be respected at sea." But he never liked
the yellow flag.  It was more fit for a pirate ship, he thought,
than to be the ensign of a great nation, and he it was who first
sailed under the Stars and Stripes, which he hoisted on his little
ship, the Ranger.  This was only a vessel of three hundred tons.  In
it in November, 1777, he crossed the Atlantic, harried the coasts
of England and Scotland, and then made his way to France.

From France Jones set out again with a little fleet of four ships.
His flagship he called Bonhomme Richard, as a compliment both to
France and Franklin.  Franklin being the author of "Poor Richard's
Almanac," for which Bonhomme Richard was the French translation.

The Bonhomme Richard was the largest vessel of the American navy,
but it was only a worn-out old East India merchantman, turned into
a man-of-war by having portholes for guns cut in the sides.  And,
although, Jones did not know it at the time, the guns themselves
had all been condemned as unsafe before they were sent on board.
The other ships of the squadron were also traders fitted up with
guns in the same way, but were all much smaller than the Bonhomme.

With this raffish little fleet Paul Jones set out to do great
deeds.  His bold plan was to attack Liverpool, the great centre of
shipping, but that had to be given up, for he found it impossible
to keep his little squadron together.  Sometimes he would only have
one other ship with him, sometimes he would be quite alone.  So
he cruised about the North Sea, doing a great deal of damage to
British shipping, catching merchantmen, and sending them to France
as prizes.

At length one afternoon in September, when he had only the Pallas
with him, he sighted a whole fleet of merchantmen off the coast
of England and at once gave chase.  The merchantmen were being
convoyed by two British men-of-war, the Serapis and the Countess of
Scarborough, and they at once got between Jones and his prey.  Then
the merchantmen made off as fast as they could, and the men-of-war
came on.  Presently the captain of the Serapis hailed the Bonhomme
Richard.

"What ship are you?" he shouted.

"I can't hear what you say," replied Jones, who wanted to get
nearer.

That made the British captain suspicious.  Nearer and nearer the
two vessels drew on to each other.

"Hah," he said, "it is probably Paul Jones.  If so there is hot work
ahead."

Again the Serapis sent a hail.

"What ship is that? Answer immediately, or I shall be obliged to
fire into you."

Paul Jones answered this time - with a broadside - and a terrible
battle began.  The carnage was awful.  The decks were soon cumbered
with dead and dying.  The two ships were so near that the muzzles
of the guns almost touched each other.  Both were soon riddled with
shot, and leaking so that the pumps could hardly keep pace with
rising water.  Still the men fought on.

Jones was everywhere, firing guns himself, encouraging his men,
cheering them with his voice and his example. "The commodore had
but to look at a man to make him brave," said a Frenchman, who was
there. "Such was the power of one heart that knew no fear."

The sun went down over the green fields of England, and the great
red harvest moon came up.  Still through the calm moonlit night the
guns thundered, and a heavy cloud of smoke hung over the sea.  Two
of the rotten old guns on the Bonhomme Richard had burst at the
first charge, killing and wounding the gunners; others were soon
utterly useless.  For a minute not one could be fired, and the
Captain of the Serapis thought that the Americans were beaten.

"Have you struck?" he shouted, through the smoke of the battle.

"No," cried Jones, "I haven't begun to fight yet."

The next instant the roar and rattle of the musketry crashed forth
again.  Both ships were now on fire, and a great hole smashed in
the side of the Bonhomme.

"For God's sake, strike, Captain," said one of his officers.

Jones looked at him silently for a minute.  The he answered: "No,"
he cried, "I will sink.  I will never strike."

The ships were now side by side, and Jones gave orders to lash
the Bonhomme Richard to the Serapis.  He seized a rope himself and
helped to do it.  The carpenter beside him, finding the lines tangled
rapped out a sailor's oath.

But Jones was calm as if nothing was happening.

"Don't swear, Mr.  Stacy," he said. "We may soon all be in eternity.
Let us do our duty."

Lashed together now the two ships swung on the waves in a death
grapple.  The guns on the Bonhomme Richard were nearly all silenced.
But a sailor climbed out on to the yards, and began to throw hand
grenades into the Serapis.  He threw one right into the hold, where
it fell upon a heap of cartridges and exploded, killing about twenty
men.  That ended the battle.  With his ship sinking and aflame, and
the dead lying thick about him, the British captain struck his
flag, and the Americans boarded the Serapis and took possession.

In silence and bitterness of heart Captain Pearson bowed and handed
his sword to Jones.  But Jones had only admiration for his gallant
foe.  He longed to say something to comfort him, but he looked so
sad and dignified that he knew not what to say.  At length he spoke.

"Captain Pearson," he said "you have fought like a hero.  You have
worn this sword to your credit, and to the honour of your service.
I hope your King will reward you suitably."

But Captain Pearson could not answer, his heart was still too sore.
Without a word he bowed again and turned away.

While this terrible fight had been going on the Pallas had engaged
the Countess of Scarborough, and captured her, and now appeared,
not much worse for the fight.  But the Bonhomme Richard was an
utter wreck, and was sinking fast.  So as quickly as possible, the
sailors, utterly weary as they were with fighting, began to move the
wounded to the Serapis.  The crew of the British ship, too, worked
with a will, doing their best to save the enemies of the night
before.  At length all were safely carried aboard the Serapis, and
only the dead were left on the gallant old Bonhomme Richard.

"To them," says Jones, in his journal, "I gave the good old ship
for their coffin, and in it they found a sublime sepulchre.  And the
last mortal eyes ever saw of the Bonhomme Richard was the defiant
waving of her unconquered and unstricken flag as she went down."

So this strange sea-duel was over.  The victorious ship went down, and
the victorious captain sailed away in his prize.  But the Serapis,
too, was little more than a wreck.  Her main mast was shot away.
Her other masts and spars were badly damaged, and could carry but
little sail, and it seemed doubtful if she would ever reach port.
But, after a perilous journey, the coasts of Holland were sighted,
and the Serapis was duly anchored in the Texel.

With deeds like these the little American navy realised Jones'
desire.  But beyond that they did little to bring the war to an end.
Far more was done by the privateers, which were fitted out by the
hundred.  They scoured the seas like greyhounds, attacking British
merchantmen on every trade route, capturing and sinking as many
as three hundred in one year.  This kind of warfare paid so well,
indeed that farming was almost given up in many states, the farmers
having all gone off to make their fortunes by capturing British
merchantmen.

As for Paul Jones he never had a chance again of showing his great
prowess.  When the war was over he entered the service of Russia,
and became an admiral.  He died in Paris in 1792, but for a long time
it was not known where he was buried.  His grave was discovered in
1905, and his body was brought to America by a squadron of the navy
which was sent to France for the purpose, and reburied at Annapolis
with the honour due to a hero.

__________





Chapter 61 - The Battle of Monmouth - The Story of Captain Molly




While the Americans were learning endurance in the hard school of
Valley Forge the British were having a gay time in Philadelphia.
The grave old Quaker town rang with song and laughter as never
before.  Balls and parties, theatricals and races, followed each
other in a constant round of gaiety.  And amid this light-hearted
jollity Howe seemed to forget all about the war.

Had he chosen he could easily have attacked Valley Forge, and crushed
