for she was now engaged as my partner. Banter in a whisper, gave me to
understand that she was an incorrigible coquette, who would grant the
same favour to any young fellow in England of a tolerable appearance,
merely to engage him among the herd of her admirers, that she might
have the pleasure of seeing them daily increase; that she was of a cold
insensible disposition, dead to every passion but vanity, and so blind
to merit, that he would lay any wager the wealthiest fool would carry
her at last. I attributed a good deal of this intelligence to the
satirical turn of my friend, or resentment for having himself suffered
a rebuff from the lady in question, and, at any rate, trusted so much to
my own accomplishments as to believe no woman could resist the ardour of
my addresses.

Full of this confidence I repaired to Hampstead in company with
Billy Chatter, my Lord Hobble, and Doctor Wagtail. There I saw a very
brilliant assembly, before whom I had the honour to walk a minuet with
Melinda, who charmed me with her frank manner and easiness of behaviour.
Before the country dances began, I received a message by a person I did
not know from Bragwell, who was present, importing that nobody who knew
him presumed to dance with Melinda while he was there in person, that I
would do well to relinquish her without noise, because he had a mind to
lead up a country dance with her. This extraordinary intimation, which
was delivered in the lady's hearing, did not at all discompose me, who,
by this time, was pretty well acquainted with the character of my rival.
I therefore, without the least symptom of concern bade the gentleman
tell Mr. Bragwell, that since I was so happy as to obtain the lady's
consent, I should not be solicitous about his; and desired the bearer
himself to bring me no such impertinent messages for the future.
Melinda, affected a sort of confusion, and pretended to wonder that Mr.
Bragwell should give himself such liberties with regard to her, who had
no manner of connection with the fellow. I laid hold of this opportunity
to display my valour, and offered to call him to an account for his
insolence, a proposal which she absolutely refused, under pretence of
consulting my safety; though I could perceive, by the sparkling of her
eyes, that she would not have thought herself affronted by being the
subject of a duel. I was by no means pleased with this discovery of
her thoughts, which not only argued the most unjustifiable vanity, but
likewise the most barbarous indifference; however, I was allured by her
fortune, and resolved to gratify her pride, in making her the occasion
of a public quarrel between me and Bragwell, who, I was pretty certain,
would never drive matters to a dangerous extremity.

While we danced together, I observed this formidable rival at one end
of the room, encircled with a cluster of beaux, to whom he talked with
great vehemence, casting many big looks at me from time to time. I
guessed the subject of his discourse, and as soon as I had handed my
partner to her seat, strutted up to the place where he stood, and,
cocking my hat in his face, demanded aloud, if he had anything to say
to me. He answered with a sullen tone, "Nothing, at present, sir;" and
turned about upon his heel. "Well," said I, "you where I am to be found
at any time." His companions stared at one another, and I returned to
the lady, whose features brightened at my approach, and immediately a
whisper ran through the whole room; after which so many eyes were turned
upon me that I was ready to sink with confusion. When the ball broke up,
I led her to her coach, and, like a true French gallant, would have got
up behind it, in order to protect her from violence on the road, but she
absolutely refused my offer, and expressed her concern that there was
not an empty seat for me within the vehicle.

Next day, in the afternoon, I waited on her at her lodgings, by
permission, in company with Chatter, and was very civilly received by
her mother, with whom she lived. There were a good many fashionable
people present, chiefly young fellows, and immediately after tea, a
couple of card tables were set, at one of which I had the honour to play
with Melinda, who in less than three hours, made shift to plunder me of
eight guineas. I was well enough content to lose a little money with a
good grace, that I might have an opportunity in the meantime to say soft
things, which are still most welcome when attended with good luck; but I
was by no means satisfied of her fair play, a circumstance that
shocked me not a little, and greatly impaired my opinion of her
disinterestedness and delicacy. However, I was resolved to profit
by this behaviour, and treat her in my turn with less ceremony;
accordingly, I laid close siege to her, and, finding her not at all
disgusted with the gross incense I offered, that very night made a
declaration of love in plain terms. She received my addresses with great
gaiety, and pretended to laugh them off, but at the same time treated
me with such particular complacency that I was persuaded I had made
a conquest of her heart, and concluded myself the happiest man alive.
Elevated with these flattering ideas, I sat down again to cards after
supper, and with great cheerfulness suffered myself to be cheated of ten
guineas more.

It was late before I took my leave, after being favoured with a general
invitation; and, when I got into bed, the adventures of the day
hindered me from sleeping. Sometimes I pleased myself with the hopes of
possessing a fine woman with ten thousand pounds; then I would ruminate
on the character I had heard of her from Banter, and compare it with the
circumstances of her conduct towards me, which seemed to bear too great
a resemblance to the picture he had drawn. This introduced a melancholy
reflection on the expense I had undergone, and the smallness of my funds
to support it, which, by-the-by, were none of my own. In short, I found
myself involved in doubts and perplexities, that kept me awake the
greatest part of the night.

In the morning, Strap, with whom I had not conversed for two days,
presented himself with the utensils for shaving me; upon which, I
asked his opinion of the lady he had seen me conduct to her coach at
Hampstead. "Odds! she's a delicious creature!" cried he, "and, as I am
informed, a great fortune. I am sorry you did not insist on going home
with her. I dare say, she would not have refused your company; for she
seems to be a good-humoured soul." "There's a time for all things," said
I, "you must know, Strap, I was in company with her till one o'clock
this morning." I had no sooner pronounced these words than he began to
caper about the room, and snap his fingers, crying in a transport, "The
day's our own--the day's our own!" I gave him to understand that his
triumph was a little premature, and that I had more difficulties to
surmount than he was aware of; then I recounted to him the intelligence
I had received from Banter. At which he changed colour, shook his head,
and observed there was no faith in woman. I told him I was resolved to
make a bold push notwithstanding, although I foresaw it would lead me
into a great expense; and bade him guess the sum I had lost last night
at cards. He scratched his chin, and protested his abhorrence of cards,
the very name of which being mentioned, made him sweat with vexation, as
it recalled the money-dropper to his remembrance. "But, however," said
he, "you have to do with other guess people now. Why, I suppose, if you
had a bad run last night, you would scarce come off for less than ten or
twelve shilling." I was mortified at this piece of simplicity, which
I imagined, at that time, was all affected by way of reprimand for my
folly; and asked with some heat if he thought I had spent the evening
in a cellar with chairmen and bunters; giving him to know, at the same
time, that my expense had amounted to eighteen guineas.

It would require the pencil of Hogarth to express the astonishment and
concern of Strap on hearing this piece of news; the basin, in which he
was preparing the lather for my chin, dropped out of his hands, and he
remained some time immovable in that ludicrous attitude, with his mouth
open, and his eyes thrust forward considerably beyond their station;
but, remembering my disposition, which was touchy, and impatient of
control, he smothered his chagrin, and attempted to recollect himself.
With this view he endeavoured to laugh, but in spite if his teeth, broke
out in a whimper, took up his wash-ball and pewter-pot, scrubbed my
beard with the one, and discharged the other upon my face. I took no
notice of this confusion, but after he had fully recovered himself, put
him in mind of his right, and assured him of my readiness to surrender
my effects whenever he should think proper to demand them. He was
nettled at my insinuation, which he thought proceeded from my distrust
of his friendship; and begged I would never talk to him in that strain
again, unless I had a mind to break his heart.

This good creature's unalterable friendship for me affected me with
the most grateful sentiments, and acted as a spur to my resolution of
acquiring a fortune, that I might have it in my power to manifest my
generosity in my turn. For this purpose, I determined to bring matters
to a speedy conclusion with Melinda; well knowing that a few such nights
as the last would effectually incapacitate me from prosecuting that or
any other advantageous amour.

While my meditation was busied in planning out my future conduct, Mr.
Banter favoured me with a visit, and after breakfast asked how I
had passed the preceding evening. I answered I was very agreeably
entertained at a private house. "Yes," said he, with a sarcastic smile,
"you deserve something extraordinary for the price you paid." I was
surprised at this remark, and pretended ignorance of his meaning. "Come,
come, Mr. Random," continued he, "you need not make a mystery of it to
me; the whole town has it. I wish that foolish affair between you
and Bragwell at Hampstead had been less public. It has set all the
busybodies at work to find out your real character and situation; and
you cannot imagine what conjectures have already circulated at your
expense. One suspects you to be a Jesuit in disguise; another thinks you
are an agent from the Pretender; a third believes you to be an upstart
gamester, because nobody knows anything of your family or fortune; a
fourth is of opinion that you are an Irish fortune-hunter." This last
hypothesis touched me so nearly that, to conceal my confusion, I was
fain to interrupt his detail, and damn the world for an envious
meddling community, that would not suffer a gentleman to live without
molestation. He took no notice of this apostrophe, but went on. "For my
own part, I neither know nor desire to know who or what you are. This
I am certain of, that few people make a mystery of their origin or
situation, who can boast of anything advantageous in either; and my
own opinion of the matter is that you have raised yourself, by your
industry, from nothing to the appearance you now maintain, and which you
endeavour to support by some matrimonial scheme." Here he fixed his eyes
steadfastly upon me and perceiving my face covered with blushes, told
me, how he was confirmed in his opinion. "Look ye, Random," said he, "I
have divined your plan, and am confident it will never succeed. You are
too honest and too ignorant of the town to practise the necessary cheats
of your profession, and detect the conspiracies that will be formed
against you. Besides, you are downright bashful. What the devil! set
up for a fortune hunter before you have conquered the sense of shame!
Perhaps you are entitled by your merit, and I believe you are, to a
richer and a better wife than Melinda; but take my word for it, she is
not to be won at that rate;--or, if you are so lucky as to carry her,
between you and me, you may say, as Teague said, By my soul, I have
gained a loss! She would take care to spend her fortune in a twinkling,
and soon make you sick of her extravagance."

I was alarmed by his discourse, while I resented the freedom of it, and
expressed my disgust by telling him, he was mistaken in my intentions,
and desiring he would give me leave to regulate my conduct according to
the dictates of my own reason. He made no apology for the liberty he
had taken, and ascribed it to the warmth of his friendship for me; as an
uncommon instance of which he borrowed five guineas, assuring me there
were very few people in the world who whom he could so far favour with
his confidence. I gave him the money, and professed myself so well
convinced of his sincerity, that he had no occasion to put it to such
extraordinary proofs for the future. "I thought," said he, "to have
asked five pieces more, but hearing you were bubbled of eighteen last
night, I presumed you might be out of cash, and resolved to model my
demand accordingly." I could not help admiring the cavalier behaviour
of this spark, of whom I desired to know his reason for saying I was
bubbled. He then gave me to understand, that before he came to my
lodgings, he had beat up Tom Tossle, who, being present, informed him of
the particulars, rehearsed all the fine things I said to Melinda, with
which he proposed to entertain the town, and among other circumstances,
assured him my mistress cheated with so little art, that nobody but a
mere novice could be imposed upon.

The thoughts of becoming a subject of raillery for coxcombs, and losing
my money to boot, stung me to the quick; but I made a virtue of my
indignation, and swore that no man should with impunity either asperse
the character of Melinda, or turn my behaviour into ridicule. He replied
in a dry manner, that I would find it a Herculean task to chastise
everybody who should laugh at my expense; and, as for the character
of Melinda, he did not see how it could suffer by what was laid to her
charge; for that cheating at cards, far from being reckoned a blemish
among people of fashion, was looked upon as an honourable indication of
superior genius and address. "But let us waive this subject," said he,
"and go to the coffee-house, in order to make a party for dinner."






CHAPTER XLVIII

We repair to the coffee-house, where we overhear a curious dispute
between Wagtail and Medlar, which is referred to our decision--the
Doctor gives an account of his experiment--Medlar is roasted by Banter
at the ordinary--the old gentleman's advice to me

Being as willing to drop the theme as he was to propose it, I
accompanied him thither, where we found Mr. Medlar and Dr. Wagtail
disputing upon the word Custard, which the physician affirmed should
be spelt with a G, observing that it was derived from the Latin
verb gustare, "to taste;" but Medlar pleaded custom in behalf of C,
observing, that, by the Doctor's rule, we ought to change pudding into
budding, because it is derived from the French word boudin; and in that
case why not retain the original orthography and pronunciation of all
the foreign words we have adopted, by which means our language would
become a dissonant jargon without standard or propriety? The controversy
was referred to us; and Banter, notwithstanding his real opinion to
the contrary, decided it in favour of Wagtail; upon which the peevish
annuitant arose, and uttering the monosyllable pish! with great
emphasis, removed to another table.

We then inquired of the doctor, what progress he had made in the
experiment of distilling tinder-water; and he told us he had been at all
the glass-houses about town, but could find nobody who would undertake
to blow a retort large enough to hold the third part of the quantity
prescribed; but he intended to try the process on as much as would
produce five drops, which would be sufficient to prove the specific,
and then he would make it a parliamentary affair; that he had already
purchased a considerable weight of rags, in reducing which to tinder, he
had met with a misfortune, which had obliged him to change his lodgings;
for he had gathered them in a heap on the floor, and set fire to them
with a candle, on the supposition that the boards would sustain no
damage, because it is the nature of flame to ascend; but, by some very
extraordinary accident, the wood was invaded, and began to blaze with
great violence, which disordered him so much, that he had not the
presence of mind enough to call for assistance, and the whole house must
have been consumed with him in the midst of it, had not the smoke that
rolled out of the windows in clouds alarmed the neighbourhood, and
brought people to his succour: that he had lost a pair of black velvet
breeches and a tie-wig in the hurry, besides the expense of the rags,
which were rendered useless by the water used to quench the flame, and
the damage of the floor, which he was compelled to repair; that his
landlord, believing him distracted, had insisted on his quitting
his apartment at a minute's warning, and he was put to incredible
inconvenience; but now he was settled in a very comfortable house, and
had the use of a large paved yard for preparing his tinder; so that he
hoped in a very short time to reap the fruits of his labour.

After having congratulated the doctor on his prospect, and read the
papers, we repaired to an auction of pictures, where we entertained
ourselves an hour or two; from thence we adjourned to the Mall, and,
after two or three turns, went back to dinner, Banter assuring us, that
he intended to roast Medlar at the ordinary; and, indeed, we were no
sooner set than this cynic began to execute his purpose, by telling
the old gentleman that he looked extremely well, considering the little
sleep he had enjoyed last night. To this compliment Medlar made no
reply, but by a stare, accompanied with a significant grin; and Banter
went on thus; "I don't know whether most to admire the charity of your
mind, or the vigour of your body. Upon my soul, Mr. Medlar, you do
generous things with the best taste of any man I know! You extend your
compassion to real objects, and exact only such returns as they are
capable of making. You must know, gentlemen," said he, turning to the
company, "I had been up most part of the night with a friend who is ill
of a fever, and, on my return home this morning, chanced to pass by
a gin shop still open, whence issued a confused sound of mirth and
jollity: upon which, I popped in my head, and perceived Mr. Medlar
dancing bareheaded in the midst of ten or twenty ragged bunters,
who rejoiced at his expense. But indeed, Mr. Medlar, you should not
sacrifice your constitution to your benevolence. Consider, you grow old
apace; and, therefore, have a reverend care of your health, which must
certainly be very much impaired by these nocturnal expeditions." The
testy senior could no longer contain himself, but cried hastily, "'Tis
well known that your tongue is no slanderer." "I think," said the other,
"you might spare that observation, as you are very sensible, that my
tongue has done you signal service on many occasions. You may remember,
that, when you made your addresses to the fat widow who kept a
public-house at Islington, there was a report spread very much to the
prejudice of your manhood, which coming to the ears of your
mistress, you were discarded immediately: and I brought matters to a
reconciliation, by assuring her you had three bastards at nurse in the
country. How you ruined your own affair afterwards, it is neither my
business nor inclination to relate."

This anecdote, which had no other foundation than in Banter's own
invention, afforded a good deal of mirth to everybody present, and
provoked Mr. Medlar beyond all sufferance; so that he started up in a
mighty passion, and, forgetting that his mouth was full, bespattered
those who sat next to him, while he discharged his indignation in a
volley of oaths, and called Banter insignificant puppy, impertinent
jackanapes, and a hundred such appellations; telling the company he had
invented these false and malicious aspersions, because he would not lend
him money to squander away upon rooks and whores. "A very likely story,"
said Banter, "that I should attempt to borrow money of a man who is
obliged to practise a thousand shifts to make his weekly allowance hold
out till Saturday night. Sometimes he sleeps four-and-twenty hours at
a stretch, by which means he saves three meals, besides coffee-house
expense. Sometimes he is fain to put up with bread and cheese and small
beer for dinner; and sometimes he regales on twopennyworth of ox cheek
in a cellar." "You are a lying miscreant!" cried Medlar, in an ecstacy
of rage; "I can always command money enough to pay your tailor's bill,
which I am sure is no trifle; and I have a good mind to give you a
convincing proof of my circumstances, by prosecuting you for defamation,
sirrah." By this time the violence of his wrath had deprived him of his
appetite, and he sat silent, unable to swallow one mouthful, while
his tormentor enjoyed his mortification, and increased his chagrin, by
advising him to lay in plentifully for his next day's fast.

Dinner being ended, we came down stairs to the coffee room, and Banter
went away to keep an appointment, saying, he supposed he should see
Wagtail and me in the evening at the Bedford Coffee-house. He was no
sooner gone than the old gentleman took me aside, and said, he was
sorry to see me so intimate with that fellow, who was one of the most
graceless rakes about town, and had already wasted a good estate and
constitution upon harlots; that he had been the ruin of many a young
man, by introducing them into debauched company, and setting a lewd
example of all manner of wickedness; and that, unless I were on
my guard, he would strip me in a short time both of my money and
reputation. I thanked him for his information, and promised to conduct
myself accordingly, wishing, however, his caution had been a few
hours more early, by which means I might have saved five guineas.
Notwithstanding this intelligence, I was inclinable to impute some part
of the charge to Medlar's revenge for the liberties taken with him at
dinner; and therefore, as soon as I could disengage myself, applied
to Wagtail for his opinion of the character in question, resolved to
compare their accounts, allowing for the prejudice of each, and to form
my judgment upon both, without adhering strictly to either. The doctor
assured me, that he was a very pretty gentleman of family and fortune;
a scholar, a wit, a critic, and perfectly well acquainted with the
town; that his honour and courage were unquestionable, though some
extravagances he had been guilty of, and his talents for satire had
procured him enemies, and made some people shy of his acquaintance. From
these different sketches, I concluded that Banter was a young fellow of
some parts, who had spent his fortune, but retained his appetites, and
fallen out with the world, because he could not enjoy it to his wish.

I went to the Bedford Coffee-house in the evening, where I met my
friends, from thence proceeded to the play, and afterwards carried them
home to my lodgings, where we supped in great good humour.






CHAPTER XLIX

I receive a Challenge--the Consequence of it--the Quarrel being made
up, am put in Arrest by the Care and Affection of Strap--but immediately
released upon explaining my Affair--the Behaviour of Mr. Oregan and
his two Friends--I visit Melinda, whom I divert with an account of the
Duel--propose Marriage--she refers the Matter to her Mother, of whom
I make a solemn Demand of her Daughter--the old Lady's behaviour--I am
discarded---resent their Disdain

When I was ready to go abroad next day, Strap brought me a letter,
To Mr. Random, Esq., these; which, upon opening, I found contained a
challenge conceived in these very extraordinary terms:


"Sir,--Whereas I am informed that you make love to Miss Melinda
Goosetrap, this is to let you know that she is under promise of marriage
to me; and that I am at this present waiting at the back of Montague
House, with a pair of good pistols in my hand; and if you will keep your
appointment, I will make your tongue confess (after the breath is out
of your body) that you do not deserve her so well as Yours, etc. Rourk
Oregan."

I guessed, from the style and superscription of this billet, that my
rival was a true Milesian, and was not a little uneasy at the contents;
especially that part, in which he asserted his right to my mistress by
promise, a circumstance I did not not know how to reconcile to her good
sense and penetration. However, this was no time for me to decline
the defiance, because the success of my addresses in a great measure
depended upon my behaviour in that affair. I therefore immediately
loaded my pistols, and betook myself in a hackney coach to the place
appointed, where I found a tall raw-boned man, with a hard-featured
countenance and black bushy beard, walking by himself, wrapped up in a
shabby green coat, over which his own hair descended in leathern
queue from his head, that was covered with a greasy hat trimmed with a
tarnished pointe d'Espagne. He had no sooner perceived me advancing than
he pulled a pistol from his bosom, and, presenting it at me, snapped it
without the least preamble. Alarmed at this rude salutation, I made a
stand, and, before he could adjust his other piece, fired one of mine
at him, without doing any damage, By this time he was ready with his
second, that flashed in the pan without going off; upon which he called,
with a true Tipperary cadence, "Fire away, honey!" and began to hammer
his flint with great deliberation. But I was resolved to make use of
the advantage fortune had given me, and therefore stepped up without
throwing away my fire, desiring him to ask his life, or prepare for
another world; but this stout Hibernian refused to condescend, and
complained bitterly of my having quitted my ground before he could
return my shot: saying I ought to go back to my station, and let him
have an equal chance with me. I endeavoured to persuade him that I had
given him a double chance already: and it was my business to prevent him
from enjoying a third; but now, since I had an opportunity, I demanded
a parley, and desired to know his condition and reason for calling me to
the field, who, to the best of my remembrance, far from having done
him any injury, had never before seen him. He told me that he was
a gentleman of fortune, who had spent all he had, and, hearing that
Melinda had got ten thousand pounds, he intended to make himself master
of that sum by espousing her, and he was determined, in an honourable
way, to cut the throats of all those who stood between him and his
hopes.

I then demanded to know the foundation of his hopes; and now that I
had seen him, being more and more astonished at the circumstance of
the promise, desired that he would explain that mystery. He gave me to
understand, that he trusted entirely to his birth and personal merit;
that he had frequently written to Melinda, setting forth his claim and
pretensions, but she was never kind enough to send an answer, or even
to admit him into her presence; and that the promise he mentioned in his
letter was made by his friend Mr. Gahagan, who assured him that no woman
could resist a man of his appearance. I could not forbear laughing to
excess at the simplicity of my rival, who did not seem to relish my
mirth, but began to be very serious: upon which I endeavoured to appease
him, by giving him my word and honour that, far from prejudicing
his addresses to the lady, I would represent him to her in the most
favourable light I could with any regard to truth; but he must not be
surprised if she should remain blind to his deserts, for nothing was
more capricious than a woman's mind, and the affection of that sex was
seldom purchased with virtue alone. That my declaration might have the
better effect, I took notice of his deshabille, and, professing sorrow
at seeing a gentleman reduced, slipped two guineas into his hand, at
sight of which he threw away his pistols, and hugging me in his arms,
cried, "Arrah, by Jasus, now, you are the best friend I have met
with these seven long years!" When I had suffered some minutes in his
embrace, he quitted me, and picking up his rusty arms, wished the devil
might burn him if ever he should give me any further trouble about
womankind.

The quarrel being thus amicably composed, I begged leave to look at his
pistols, which I found so crazy and so foul, that I believe it was happy
for him neither of them was discharged, for one of them would certainly
have split in the going off, and he would, in all probability, have lost
his hand in the explosion; but what gave me a lively idea of the man's
character was, to find, upon examination, that one of them had been
loaded without being primed, and the other primed without a charge.

While we walked home together, I expressed a desire of knowing my new
friend's history; and he informed me of his having served in the German
army as a volunteer against the Turks; that for his behaviour at the
siege of Belgrade, he had been honoured with an ensign's commission, and
afterwards promoted to the rank of lieutenant, in which station it was
his misfortune to affront his captain, who challenged him to the field,
and was killed in the duel, upon which he was obliged to retreat; that
he had been in England some years soliciting his friends for provision
in the British army; but being hitherto unsuccessful, was desired by Mr.
Gahagan to turn his thoughts to matrimony, and make his fortune by an
advantageous match; in consequence of which advice, he had made up to
Melinda: and, having heard by means of an Irish footman in the family,
that I was her chief favourite, had called me out in hopes of removing
by my death the greatest obstruction to his desires; but now he was
convinced of my honour and generosity, he swore by the blessed Virgin,
he would think of her no more, if there were not another woman in the
world. As a further proof of his veracity, which I did not at all doubt,
he opened an old iron snuff-box, and pulled out his commission in
the Imperial army, and his captain's challenge, which he preserved as
testimonials of his character. I was so well convinced of this poor
man's honesty and courage, that I determined to speak in his behalf
to some of my acquaintance, who might recommend his case to the
consideration of those who could provide for him; and in the meantime
to accommodate him with a few clothes, by which his appearance would be
much mended, and himself enabled to renew his solicitations in person.

As we walked along conversing socially together, we were met by a file
of musketeers, and Strap at their head, who no sooner approached than,
with a frantic look, he cried, "Seize them! In the name of God seize
them!" We were accordingly surrounded, and I put in arrest by the
corporal, who was commanding officer; but Captain Oregan disengaged
himself, and ran with such speed towards Tottenham Court Road that he
was out of sight in a moment. When my arms were delivered up, and myself
secured, Strap became a little more composed, and asked pardon for the
liberty he had taken, which he hoped I would excuse, as it proceeded
from his affection. He then told me that, suspecting the letter (which
by the by was brought by the author himself) contained something
extraordinary, he had peeped through the keyhole, and seen me load my
pistols; upon which he ran down to Whitehall, and applied to the officer
on guard for a party to put me in arrest, but before he returned, I
was gone in a coach; that he had inquired which way I went, and, having
heard that duels were commonly fought at the back of Montague House, he
conducted the guard to this place, where he thanked God for having found
me safe and sound. I gave him to understand that I forgave his officious
concern for once, but cautioned him in pretty severe terms for making
me the subject of idle conversation for the future; then turning to the
corporal, thanked him for his care, and gave him a crown to drink with
his men, assuring him that the rencontre was over long before he
came up, and everything compromised, as he might have observed by our
behaviour; as a farther proof of which, he would find upon examination
that one of my pistols had been discharged: but this civil person,
without giving himself or me any farther trouble, received the bounty
with a thousand bows and acknowledgments, and, returning the pistols,
released me immediately.

He was not gone a hundred yards, when my friend Oregan came up in order
to rescue me, with two tatterdemalions, whom he had engaged for that
purpose about the purlieus of St. Giles's. One of them was armed with
a musket that wanted a lock, and another with a rusty broadsword, but
their dress surpassed all description. When he understood I was already
free he made an apology for his abrupt departure, and introduced me to
his two companions: First, to Counsellor Fitzclabber, who, he told me,
was then employed in compiling a history of the kings of Minster,
from Irish manuscripts; and then to his friend Mr. Gahagan, who was a
profound philosopher and politician, and had projected many excellent
schemes for the good of his country. But it seems these literati had
been very ill rewarded for their ingenious labours; for, between them
both, there was but one shirt, and half a pair of breeches. I thanked
them very kindly for their readiness to assist me, and, having offered
my service in my turn, bade them good morrow, desiring Oregan to
accompany me to my lodgings, where he was fitted with decent clothes
from my wardrobe, so much to his satisfaction, that he swore eternal
gratitude and friendship to me, and, at my request, recounted all the
adventures of his life.

In the afternoon, I waited on Melinda, who received me with great
kindness and familiarity, and laughed excessively at my adventure with
the Irishman, to whose wishes she was no stranger, having more than
a dozen letters in her possession, which he had written to her on the
subject of love, and which, for my entertainment, she submitted to
my perusal. Having made ourselves merry at the expense of this poor
admirer, I seized the opportunity of her mother's going out of the room,
and introduced my own passion, which I recommended to her with all
the ardour and eloquence I was master of. I flattered, sighed, swore,
entreated, and acted a thousand extravagancies, in hopes of making
some impression on her heart; but she heard everything I said without
discovering the least emotion; and other company came in before she
would vouchsafe one serious reply. After tea, the cards were brought in
according to custom, and it was my good fortune to have Melinda for my
partner; by which means, instead of losing, I came off with five guineas
clear gain.

I soon became acquainted with a good many people of fashion, and spent
my time in the modish diversions of the town, such as plays, operas,
masquerades, drums, assemblies, and muppet-shows; chiefly in company
with Melinda, whom I cultivated with all the eagerness and address that
my prospect could inspire, and my education afford. I spared neither
my person nor my purse to gratify her vanity and pride; my rivals were
intimidated, and indeed outshone; and, after all, I began to fear that
the dear creature had not a heart to lose.

At last, finding myself unable to support the expense of this amour
much longer, I was determined to bring the matter to a crisis; and
one evening, while we were together by ourselves, complained of her
indifference, described the tortures of suspense to a love-sick mind,
and pressed her to disclose her sentiments of matrimony and me with such
earnestness, that she could not, with all her art, shift the subject,
but was obliged to come to an eclaircissement. She told me, with a
careless air, that she had no objection to my person, and if I could
satisfy her mother in other particulars, I should not find her averse
to the match; but she was resolved to do nothing in such a momentous
concern without the advice and consent of her parent. This was no very
agreeable declaration to me, whose aim had been to win her inclination
first, and then secure my conquest by a private marriage, to which I
flattered myself she would express no reluctance. That I might not,
however, desert my cause before it was desperate, I waited on her
mother; and, with great formality, demanded the daughter in marriage.
