metropolis, and emerging into the open air, Waverley felt a renewal of
both health and spirits, and turned his recollection with firmness upon
the events of the preceding evening, and with hope and resolution
towards those of the approaching day.

When he had surmounted a small craggy eminence called St. Leonard's
Hill, the King's Park, or the hollow between the mountain of Arthur's
Seat and the rising grounds on which the southern part of Edinburgh is
now built, lay beneath him, and displayed a singular and animating
prospect. It was occupied by the army of the Highlanders, now in the
act of preparing for their march. Waverley had already seen something
of the kind at the hunting-match which he attended with Fergus MacIvor;
but this was on a scale of much greater magnitude, and incomparably
deeper interest. The rocks, which formed the background of the scene,
and the very sky itself, rang with the clang of the bagpipers,
summoning forth, each with his appropriate pibroch, his chieftain and
clan. The mountaineers, rousing themselves from their couch under the
canopy of heaven with the hum and bustle of a confused and irregular
multitude, like bees alarmed and arming in their hives, seemed to
possess all the pliability of movement fitted to execute military
manoeuvres. Their motions appeared spontaneous and confused, but the
result was order and regularity; so that a general must have praised
the conclusion, though a martinet might have ridiculed the method by
which it was attained.

The sort of complicated medley created by the hasty arrangements of the
various clans under their respective banners, for the purpose of
getting into the order of march, was in itself a gay and lively
spectacle. They had no tents to striket having generally, and by
choice, slept upon the open field, although the autumn was now waning
and the nights began to be frosty. For a little space, while they were
getting into order, there was exhibited a changing, fluctuating, and
confused appearance of waving tartans and floating plumes, and of
banners displaying the proud gathering word of Clanronald, Ganion
Coheriga (Gainsay who dares), Loch-Sloy, the watchword of the
MacFarlanes; Forth, fortune, and fill the fetters, the motto of the
Marquis of Tullibardine; Bydand, that of Lord Lewis Gordon, and the
appropriate signal words and emblems of many other chieftains and clans.

At length the mixed and wavering multitude arranged themselves into a
narrow and dusky column of great length, stretching through the whole
extent of the valley. In the front of the column the standard of the
Chevalier was displayed, bearing a red cross upon a white ground, with
the motto Tandem Triumphans. The few cavalry, being chiefly Lowland
gentry, with their domestic servants and retainers, formed the advanced
guard of the army; and their standards, of which they had rather too
many in respect of their numbers, were seen waving upon the extreme
verge of the horizon. Many horsemen of this body, among whom Waverley
accidentally remarked Balmawhapple and his lieutenant, Jinker (which
last, however, had been reduced, with several others, by the advice of
the Baron of Bradwardine, to the situation of what he called reformed
officers, or reformadoes), added to the liveliness, though by no means
to the regularity, of the scene, by galloping their horses as fast
forward as the press would permit, to join their proper station in the
van. The fascinations of the Circes of the High Street, and the
potations of strength with which they had been drenched over night, had
probably detained these heroes within the walls of Edinburgh somewhat
later than was consistent with their morning duty. Of such loiterers,
the prudent took the longer and circuitous, but more open, route to
attain their place in the march, by keeping at some distance from the
infantry, and making their way through the inclosures to the right, at
the expense of leaping over or pulling down the drystone fences. The
irregular appearance and vanishing of these small parties of horsemen,
as well as the confusion occasioned by those who endeavoured, though
generally without effect, to press to the front through the crowd of
Highlanders, maugre their curses, oaths, and opposition, added to the
picturesque wildness what it took from the military regularity of the
scene.

While Waverley gazed upon this remarkable spectacle, rendered yet more
impressive by the occasional discharge of cannon-shot from the Castle
at the Highland guards as they were withdrawn from its vicinity to join
their main body, Callum, with his usual freedom of interference,
reminded him that Vich lan Vohr's folk were nearly at the head of the
column of march which was still distant, and that 'they would gang very
fast after the cannon fired.' Thus admonished, Waverley walked briskly
forward, yet often casting a glance upon the darksome clouds of
warriors who were collected before and beneath him. A nearer view,
indeed, rather diminished the effect impressed on the mind by the more
distant appearance of the army. The leading men of each clan were well
armed with broad-sword, target, and fusee, to which all added the dirk,
and most the steel pistol. But these consisted of gentlemen, that is,
relations of the chief, however distant, and who had an immediate title
to his countenance and protection. Finer and hardier men could not have
been selected out of any army in Christendom; while the free and
independent habits which each possessed, and which each was yet so well
taught to subject to the command of his chief, and the peculiar mode of
discipline adopted in Highland warfare, rendered them equally
formidable by their individual courage and high spirit, and from their
rational conviction of the necessity of acting in unison, and of giving
their national mode of attack the fullest opportunity of success.

But, in a lower rank to these, there were found individuals of an
inferior description, the common peasantry of the Highland country,
who, although they did not allow themselves to be so called, and
claimed often, with apparent truth, to be of more ancient descent than
the masters whom they served, bore, nevertheless, the livery of extreme
penury, being indifferently accoutred, and worse armed, half naked,
stinted in growth, and miserable in aspect. Each important clan had
some of those Helots attached to them: thus, the MacCouls, though
tracing their descent from Comhal, the father of Finn or Fingal, were a
sort of Gibeonites, or hereditary servants to the Stewarts of Appin;
the Macbeths, descended from the unhappy monarch of that name, were
subjects to the Morays and clan Donnochy, or Robertsons of Athole; and
many other examples might be given, were it not for the risk of hurting
any pride of clanship which may yet be left, and thereby drawing a
Highland tempest into the shop of my publisher. Now these same Helots,
though forced into the field by the arbitrary authority of the
chieftains under whom they hewed wood and drew water, were in general
very sparingly fed, ill dressed, and worse armed. The latter
circumstance was indeed owing chiefly to the general disarming act,
which had been carried into effect ostensibly through the whole
Highlands, although most of the chieftains contrived to elude its
influence by retaining the weapons of their own immediate clansmen, and
delivering up those of less value, which they collected from these
inferior satellites. It followed, as a matter of course, that, as we
have already hinted, many of these poor fellows were brought to the
field in a very wretched condition.

From this it happened that, in bodies, the van of which were admirably
well armed in their own fashion, the rear resembled actual banditti.
Here was a pole-axe, there a sword without a scabbard; here a gun
without a lock, there a scythe set straight upon a pole; and some had
only their dirks, and bludgeons or stakes pulled out of hedges. The
grim, uncombed, and wild appearance of these men, most of whom gazed
with all the admiration of ignorance upon the most ordinary productions
of domestic art, created surprise in the Lowlands, but it also created
terror. So little was the condition of the Highlands known at that late
period that the character and appearance of their population, while
thus sallying forth as military adventurers, conveyed to the
South-Country Lowlanders as much surprise as if an invasion of African
Negroes or Esquimaux Indians had issued forth from the northern
mountains of their own native country. It cannot therefore be wondered
if Waverley, who had hitherto judged of the Highlanders generally from
the samples which the policy of Fergus had from time to time exhibited,
should have felt damped and astonished at the daring attempt of a body
not then exceeding four thousand men, and of whom not above half the
number, at the utmost, were armed, to change the fate and alter the
dynasty of the British kingdoms.

As he moved along the column, which still remained stationary, an iron
gun, the only piece of artillery possessed by the army which meditated
so important a revolution, was fired as the signal of march. The
Chevalier had expressed a wish to leave this useless piece of ordnance
behind him; but, to his surprise, the Highland chiefs interposed to
solicit that it might accompany their march, pleading the prejudices of
their followers, who, little accustomed to artillery, attached a degree
of absurd importance to this field-piece, and expected it would
contribute essentially to a victory which they could only owe to their
own muskets and broadswords. Two or three French artillerymen were
therefore appointed to the management of this military engine, which
was drawn along by a string of Highland ponies, and was, after all,
only used for the purpose of firing signals. [Footnote: See Note 6.]

No sooner was its voice heard upon the present occasion than the whole
line was in motion. A wild cry of joy from the advancing batallions
rent the air, and was then lost in the shrill clangour of the bagpipes,
as the sound of these, in their turn, was partially drowned by the
heavy tread of so many men put at once into motion. The banners
glittered and shook as they moved forward, and the horse hastened to
occupy their station as the advanced guard, and to push on
reconnoitring parties to ascertain and report the motions of the enemy.
They vanished from Waverley's eye as they wheeled round the base of
Arthur's Seat, under the remarkable ridge of basaltic rocks which
fronts the little lake of Duddingston.

The infantry followed in the same direction, regulating their pace by
another body which occupied a road more to the southward. It cost
Edward some exertion of activity to attain the place which Fergus's
followers occupied in the line of march.





CHAPTER XLV

AN INCIDENT GIVES RISE TO UNAVAILING REFLECTIONS


When Waverley reached that part of the column which was filled by the
clan of Mac-Ivor, they halted, formed, and received him with a
triumphant flourish upon the bagpipes and a loud shout of the men, most
of whom knew him personally, and were delighted to see him in the dress
of their country and of their sept. 'You shout,' said a Highlander of a
neighbouring clan to Evan Dhu, 'as if the Chieftain were just come to
your head.'

'_Mar e Bran is e a brathair_, If it be not Bran, it is Bran's
brother,' was the proverbial reply of Maccombich. [Footnote: Bran, the
well-known dog of Fingal. is often the theme of Highland proverb as
well as song.]

'O, then, it is the handsome Sassenach duinhe-wassel that is to be
married to Lady Flora?'

'That may be, or it may not be; and it is neither your matter nor mine,
Gregor.'

Fergus advanced to embrace the volunteer, and afford him a warm and
hearty welcome; but he thought it necessary to apologize for the
diminished numbers of his battalion (which did not exceed three hundred
men) by observing he had sent a good many out upon parties.

The real fact, however, was, that the defection of Donald Bean Lean had
deprived him of at least thirty hardy fellows, whose services he had
fully reckoned upon, and that many of his occasional adherents had been
recalled by their several chiefs to the standards to which they most
properly owed their allegiance. The rival chief of the great northern
branch, also, of his own clan had mustered his people, although he had
not yet declared either for the government or for the Chevalier, and by
his intrigues had in some degree diminished the force with which Fergus
took the field. To make amends for these disappointments, it was
universally admitted that the followers of Vich Ian Vohr, in point of
appearance, equipment, arms, and dexterity in using them, equalled the
most choice troops which followed the standard of Charles Edward. Old
Ballenkeiroch acted as his major; and, with the other officers who had
known Waverley when at Glennaquoich, gave our hero a cordial reception,
as the sharer of their future dangers and expected honours.

The route pursued by the Highland army, after leaving the village of
Duddingston, was for some time the common post-road betwixt Edinburgh
and Haddington, until they crossed the Esk at Musselburgh, when,
instead of keeping the low grounds towards the sea, they turned more
inland, and occupied the brow of the eminence called Carberry Hill, a
place already distinguished in Scottish history as the spot where the
lovely Mary surrendered herself to her insurgent subjects. This
direction was chosen because the Chevalier had received notice that the
army of the government, arriving by sea from Aberdeen, had landed at
Dunbar, and quartered the night before to the west of Haddington, with
the intention of falling down towards the sea-side, and approaching
Edinburgh by the lower coast-road. By keeping the height, which
overhung that road in many places, it was hoped the Highlanders might
find an opportunity of attacking them to advantage. The army therefore
halted upon the ridge of Carberry Hill, both to refresh the soldiers
and as a central situation from which their march could be directed to
any point that the motions of the enemy might render most advisable.
While they remained in this position a messenger arrived in haste to
desire Mac-Ivor to come to the Prince, adding that their advanced post
had had a skirmish with some of the enemy's cavalry, and that the Baron
of Bradwardine had sent in a few prisoners.

Waverley walked forward out of the line to satisfy his curiosity, and
soon observed five or six of the troopers who, covered with dust, had
galloped in to announce that the enemy were in full march westward
along the coast. Passing still a little farther on, he was struck with
a groan which issued from a hovel. He approached the spot, and heard a
voice, in the provincial English of his native county, which
endeavoured, though frequently interrupted by pain, to repeat the
Lord's Prayer. The voice of distress always found a ready answer in our
hero's bosom. He entered the hovel, which seemed to be intended for
what is called, in the pastoral counties of Scotland, a smearing-house;
and in its obscurity Edward could only at first discern a sort of red
bundle; for those who had stripped the wounded man of his arms and part
of his clothes had left him the dragoon-cloak in which he was enveloped.

'For the love of God,' said the wounded man, as he heard Waverley's
step, 'give me a single drop of water!'

'You shall have it,' answered Waverley, at the same time raising him in
his arms, bearing him to the door of the hut, and giving him some drink
from his flask.

'I should know that voice,' said the man; but looking on Waverley's
dress with a bewildered look--'no, this is not the young squire!'

This was the common phrase by which Edward was distinguished on the
estate of Waverley-Honour, and the sound now thrilled to his heart with
the thousand recollections which the well-known accents of his native
country had already contributed to awaken. 'Houghton!' he said, gazing
on the ghastly features which death was fast disfiguring, 'can this be
you?'

'I never thought to hear an English voice again,' said the wounded
man;'they left me to live or die here as I could, when they found I
would say nothing about the strength of the regiment. But, O squire!
how could you stay from us so long, and let us be tempted by that fiend
of the pit, Rufinn? we should have followed you through flood and fire,
to be sure.'

'Rufin! I assure you, Houghton, you have been vilely imposed upon.'

'I often thought so,' said Houghton,'though they showed us your very
seal; and so Tims was shot and I was reduced to the ranks.'

'Do not exhaust your strength in speaking,' said Edward; 'I will get
you a surgeon presently.'

He saw Mac-Ivor approaching, who was now returning from headquarters,
where he had attended a council of war, and hastened to meet him.
'Brave news!'shouted the Chief; 'we shall be at it in less than two
hours. The Prince has put himself at the head of the advance, and, as
he drew his sword, called out, "My friends, I have thrown away the
scabbard." Come, Waverley, we move instantly.'

'A moment--a moment; this poor prisoner is dying; where shall I find a
surgeon?'

'Why, where should you? We have none, you know, but two or three French
fellows, who, I believe, are little better than _garqons apothecaires_.'

'But the man will bleed to death.'

'Poor fellow!' said Fergus, in a momentary fit of compassion; then
instantly added, 'But it will be a thousand men's fate before night; so
come along.'

'I cannot; I tell you he is a son of a tenant of my uncle's.'

'O, if he's a follower of yours he must be looked to; I'll send Callum
to you; but _diaoul! ceade millia mottigheart_,' continued the
impatient Chieftain, 'what made an old soldier like Bradwardine send
dying men here to cumber us?'

Callum came with his usual alertness; and, indeed, Waverley rather
gained than lost in the opinion of the Highlanders by his anxiety about
the wounded man. They would not have understood the general
philanthropy which rendered it almost impossible for Waverley to have
passed any person in such distress; but, as apprehending that the
sufferer was one of his _following_ they unanimously allowed that
Waverley's conduct was thatof akind and considerate chieftain, who
merited the attachment of his people. In about a quarter of an hour
poor Humphrey breathed his last, praying his young master, when he
returned to Waverley-Honour, to be kind to old Job Houghton and his
dame, and conjuring him not to fight with these wild petticoat-men
against old England.

When his last breath was drawn, Waverley, who had beheld with sincere
sorrow, and no slight tinge of remorse, the final agonies of mortality,
now witnessed for the first time, commanded Callum to remove the body
into the hut. This the young Highlander performed, not without
examining the pockets of the defunct, which, however, he remarked had
been pretty well spunged. He took the cloak, however, and proceeding
with the provident caution of a spaniel hiding a bone, concealed it
among some furze and carefully marked the spot, observing that, if he
chanced to return that way, it would be an excellent rokelay for his
auld mother Elspat.

It was by a considerable exertion that they regained their place in the
marching column, which was now moving rapidly forward to occupy the
high grounds above the village of Tranent, between which and the sea
lay the purposed march of the opposite army.

This melancholy interview with his late sergeant forced many unavailing
and painful reflections upon Waverley's mind. It was clear from the
confession of the man that Colonel Gardiner's proceedings had been
strictly warranted, and even rendered indispensable, by the steps taken
in Edward's name to induce the soldiers of his troop to mutiny. The
circumstance of the seal he now, for the first time, recollected, and
that he had lost it in the cavern of the robber, Bean Lean. That the
artful villain had secured it, and used it as the means of carrying on
an intrigue in the regiment for his own purposes, was sufficiently
evident; and Edward had now little doubt that in the packet placed in
his portmanteau by his daughter he should find farther light upon his
proceedings. In the meanwhile the repeated expostulation of
Houghton--'Ah, squire, why did you leave us?' rung like a knell in his
ears.

'Yes,' he said, 'I have indeed acted towards you with thoughtless
cruelty. I brought you from your paternal fields, and the protection of
a generous and kind landlord, and when I had subjected you to all the
rigour of military discipline, I shunned to bear my own share of the
burden, and wandered from the duties I had undertaken, leaving alike
those whom it was my business to protect, and my own reputation, to
suffer under the artifices of villainy. O, indolence and indecision of
mind, if not in yourselves vices--to how much exquisite misery and
mischief do you frequently prepare the way!'





CHAPTER XLVI

THE EVE OF BATTLE


Although the Highlanders marched on very fast, the sun was declining
when they arrived upon the brow of those high grounds which command an
open and extensive plain stretching northward to the sea, on which are
situated, but at a considerable distance from each other, the small
villages of Seaton and Cockenzie, and the larger one of Preston. One of
the low coastroads to Edinburgh passed through this plain, issuing upon
it from the enclosures of Seaton House, and at the town or village of
Preston again entering the denies of an enclosed country. By this way
the English general had chosen to approach the metropolis, both as most
commodious for his cavalry, and being probably of opinion that by doing
so he would meet in front with the Highlanders advancing from Edinburgh
in the opposite direction. In this he was mistaken; for the sound
judgment of the Chevalier, or of those to whose advice he listened,
left the direct passage free, but occupied the strong ground by which
it was overlooked and commanded.

When the Highlanders reached the heights above the plain described,
they were immediately formed in array of battle along the brow of the
hill. Almost at the same instant the van of the English appeared
issuing from among the trees and enclosures of Seaton, with the purpose
of occupying the level plain between the high ground and the sea; the
space which divided the armies being only about half a mile in breadth.
Waverley could plainly see the squadrons of dragoons issue, one after
another, from the defiles, with their videttes in front, and form upon
the plain, with their front opposed to that of the Prince's army. They
were followed by a train of field-pieces, which, when they reached the
flank of the dragoons, were also brought into line and pointed against
the heights. The march was continued by three or four regiments of
infantry marching in open column, their fixed bayonets showing like
successive hedges of steel, and their arms glancing like lightning, as,
at a signal given, they also at once wheeled up, and were placed in
direct opposition to the Highlanders. A second train of artillery, with
another regiment of horse, closed the long march, and formed on the
left flank of the infantry, the whole line facing southward.

While the English army went through these evolutions, the Highlanders
showed equal promptitude and zeal for battle. As fast as the clans came
upon the ridge which fronted their enemy, they were formed into line,
so that both armies got into complete order of battle at the same
moment. When this was accomplished, the Highlanders set up a tremendous
yell, which was re-echoed by the heights behind them. The regulars, who
were in high spirits, returned a loud shout of defiance, and fired one
or two of their cannon upon an advanced post of the Highlanders. The
latter displayed great earnestness to proceed instantly to the attack,
Evan Dhu urging to Fergus, by way of argument, that 'the SIDIER ROY was
tottering like an egg upon a staff, and that they had a' the vantage of
the onset, for even a haggis (God bless her!) could charge down hill.'

But the ground through which the mountaineers must have descended,
although not of great extent, was impracticable in its character, being
not only marshy but intersected with walls of dry stone, and traversed
in its whole length by a very broad and deep ditch, circumstances which
must have given the musketry of the regulars dreadful advantages before
the mountaineers could have used their swords, on which they were
taught to rely. The authority of the commanders was therefore
interposed to curb the impetuosity of the Highlanders, and only a few
marksmen were sent down the descent to skirmish with the enemy's
advanced posts and to reconnoitre the ground.

Here, then, was a military spectacle of no ordinary interest or usual
occurrence. The two armies, so different in aspect and discipline, yet
each admirably trained in its own peculiar mode of war, upon whose
conflict the temporary fate at least of Scotland appeared to depend,
now faced each other like two gladiators in the arena, each meditating
upon the mode of attacking their enemy. The leading officers and the
general's staff of each army could be distinguished in front of their
lines, busied with spy-glasses to watch each other's motions, and
occupied in despatching the orders and receiving the intelligence
conveyed by the aides-de-camp and orderly men, who gave life to the
scene by galloping along in different directions, as if the fate of the
day depended upon the speed of their horses. The space between the
armies was at times occupied by the partial and irregular contest of
individual sharp-shooters, and a hat or bonnet was occasionally seen to
fall, as a wounded man was borne off by his comrades. These, however,
were but trifling skirmishes, for it suited the views of neither party
to advance in that direction. From the neighbouring hamlets the
peasantry cautiously showed themselves, as if watching the issue of the
expected engagement; and at no great distance in the bay were two
square-rigged vessels, bearing the English flag, whose tops and yards
were crowded with less timid spectators.

When this awful pause had lasted for a short time, Fergus, with another
chieftain, received orders to detach their clans towards the village of
Preston, in order to threaten the right flank of Cope's army and compel
him to a change of position. To enable him to execute these orders, the
Chief of Glennaquoich occupied the church-yard of Tranent, a commanding
situation, and a convenient place, as Evan Dhu remarked, 'for any
gentleman who might have the misfortune to be killed, and chanced to be
curious about Christian burial.' To check or dislodge this party, the
English general detached two guns, escorted by a strong party of
cavalry. They approached so near that Waverley could plainly recognise
the standard of the troop he had formerly commanded, and hear the
trumpets and kettle-drums sound the signal of advance which he had so
often obeyed. He could hear, too, the well-known word given in the
English dialect by the equally well-distinguished voice of the
commanding officer, for whom he had once felt so much respect. It was
at that instant, that, looking around him, he saw the wild dress and
appearance of his Highland associates, heard their whispers in an
uncouth and unknown language, looked upon his own dress, so unlike that
which he had worn from his infancy, and wished to awake from what
seemed at the moment a dream, strange, horrible, and unnatural. 'Good
God!' he muttered, 'am I then a traitor to my country, a renegade to my
standard, and a foe, as that poor dying wretch expressed himself, to my
native England!'

Ere he could digest or smother the recollection, the tall military form
of his late commander came full in view, for the purpose of
reconnoitring. 'I can hit him now,' said Callum, cautiously raising his
fusee over the wall under which he lay couched, at scarce sixty yards'
distance.

Edward felt as if he was about to see a parricide committed in his
presence; for the venerable grey hair and striking countenance of the
veteran recalled the almost paternal respect with which his officers
universally regarded him. But ere he could say 'Hold!' an aged
Highlander who lay beside Callum Beg stopped his arm. 'Spare your
shot,' said the seer, 'his hour is not yet come. But let him beware of
to-morrow; I see his winding-sheet high upon his breast.'

Callum, flint to other considerations, was penetrable to superstition.
He turned pale at the words of the _taishatr_, and recovered his piece.
Colonel Gardiner, unconscious of the danger he had escaped, turned his
horse round and rode slowly back to the front of his regiment.

By this time the regular army had assumed a new line, with one flank
inclined towards the sea and the other resting upon the village of
Preston; and, as similar difficulties occurred in attacking their new
position, Fergus and the rest of the detachment were recalled to their
former post. This alteration created the necessity of a corresponding
change in General Cope's army, which was again brought into a line
parallel with that of the Highlanders. In these manoeuvres on both
sides the daylight was nearly consumed, and both armies prepared to
rest upon their arms for the night in the lines which they respectively
occupied.

'There will be nothing done to-night,' said Fergus to his friend
Waverley; 'ere we wrap ourselves in our plaids, let us go see what the
Baron is doing in the rear of the line.'

When they approached his post, they found the good old careful officer,
after having sent out his night patrols and posted his sentinels,
engaged in reading the Evening Service of the Episcopal Church to the
remainder of his troop. His voice was loud and sonorous, and though his
spectacles upon his nose, and the appearance of Saunders Saunderson, in
military array, performing the functions of clerk, had something
ludicrous, yet the circumstances of danger in which they stood, the
military costume of the audience, and the appearance of their horses
saddled and picqueted behind them, gave an impressive and solemn effect
to the office of devotion.

'I have confessed to-day, ere you were awake,' whispered Fergus to
Waverley; 'yet I am not so strict a Catholic as to refuse to join in
this good man's prayers.'

Edward assented, and they remained till the Baron had concluded the
service.

As he shut the book, 'Now, lads,' said he, 'have at them in the morning
with heavy hands and light consciences.' He then kindly greeted
Mac-Ivor and Waverley, who requested to know his opinion of their
situation. Why, you know Tacitus saith, "In rebus bellicis maxime
dominalur Fortuna," which is equiponderate with our vernacular adage,
"Luck can maist in the mellee." But credit me, gentlemen, yon man is
not a deacon o' his craft. He damps the spirits of the poor lads he
commands by keeping them on the defensive, whilk of itself implies
inferiority or fear. Now will they lie on their arms yonder as anxious
and as ill at ease as a toad under a harrow, while our men will be
quite fresh and blithe for action in the morning. Well, good-night. One
thing troubles me, but if to-morrow goes well off, I will consult you
about it, Glennaquoich.'

'I could almost apply to Mr. Bradwardine the character which Henry
gives of Fluellen,' said Waverley, as his friend and he walked towards
their bivouac:

    'Though it appears a little out of fashion,
    There is much care and valour in this "Scotchman."'

'He has seen much service,' answered Fergus, 'and one is sometimes
astonished to find how much nonsense and reason are mingled in his
composition. I wonder what can be troubling his mind; probably
something about Rose. Hark! the English are setting their watch.'

The roll of the drum and shrill accompaniment of the fifes swelled up
the hill--died away--resumed its thunder--and was at length hushed. The
trumpets and kettle-drums of the cavalry were next heard to perform the
beautiful and wild point of war appropriated as a signal for that piece
of nocturnal duty, and then finally sunk upon the wind with a shrill
and mournful cadence.

The friends, who had now reached their post, stood and looked round
them ere they lay down to rest. The western sky twinkled with stars,
but a frost-mist, rising from the ocean, covered the eastern horizon,
and rolled in white wreaths along the plain where the adverse army lay
couched upon their arms. Their advanced posts were pushed as far as the
side of the great ditch at the bottom of the descent, and had kindled
large fires at different intervals, gleaming with obscure and hazy
lustre through the heavy fog which encircled them with a doubtful halo.

The Highlanders,'thick as leaves in Vallombrosa,' lay stretched upon
the ridge of the hill, buried (excepting their sentinels) in the most
profound repose. 'How many of these brave fellows will sleep more
soundly before to-morrow night, Fergus!' said Waverley, with an
involuntary sigh.

'You must notthink of that,' answered Fergus, whose ideas were entirely
military. 'You must only think of your sword, and by whom it was given.
All other reflections are now TOO LATE.'

With the opiate contained in this undeniable remark Edward endeavoured
to lull the tumult of his conflicting feelings. The Chieftain and he,
combining their plaids, made a comfortable and warm couch. Callum,
sitting down at their head (for it was his duty to watch upon the
immediate person of the Chief), began a long mournful song in Gaelic,
to a low and uniform tune, which, like the sound of the wind at a
distance, soon lulled them to sleep.





CHAPTER XLVII

THE CONFLICT


When Fergus Mac-Ivor and his friend had slept for a few hours, they
were awakened and summoned to attend the Prince. The distant village
clock was heard to toll three as they hastened to the place where he
lay. He was already surrounded by his principal officers and the chiefs
of clans. A bundle of pease-straw, which had been lately his couch, now
served for his seat. Just as Fergus reached the circle, the
consultation had broken up. 'Courage, my brave friends!' said the
Chevalier, 'and each one put himself instantly at the head of his
command; a faithful friend [Footnote: See Note 7.] has offered to guide
us by a practicable, though narrow and circuitous, route, which,
sweeping to our right, traverses the broken ground and morass, and
enables us to gain the firm and open plain upon which the enemy are
lying. This difficulty surmounted, Heaven and your good swords must do
the rest.'

The proposal spread unanimous joy, and each leader hastened to get his
men into order with as little noise as possible. The army, moving by
its right from off the ground on which they had rested, soon entered
the path through the morass, conducting their march with astonishing
silence and great rapidity. The mist had not risen to the higher
grounds, so that for some time they had the advantage of star-light.
But this was lost as the stars faded before approaching day, and the
head of the marching column, continuing its descent, plunged as it were
into the heavy ocean of fog, which rolled its white waves over the
whole plain, and over the sea by which it was bounded. Some
difficulties were now to be encountered, inseparable from darkness, a
narrow, broken, and marshy path, and the necessity of preserving union
in the march. These, however, were less inconvenient to Highlanders,
from their habits of life, than they would have been to any other
troops, and they continued a steady and swift movement.

As the clan of Ivor approached the firm ground, following the track of
those who preceded them, the challenge of a patrol was heard through
the mist, though they could not see the dragoon by whom it was
made--'Who goes there?'

'Hush!' cried Fergus, 'hush! let none answer, as he values his life;
press forward'; and they continued their march with silence and
rapidity.

The patrol fired his carabine upon the body, and the report was
instantly followed by the clang of his horse's feet as he galloped off.
'Hylax in limine latrat,' said the Baron of Bradwardine, who heard the
shot;'that loon will give the alarm.'

The clan of Fergus had now gained the firm plain, which had lately
borne a large crop of corn. But the harvest was gathered in, and the
expanse was unbroken by tree, bush, or interruption of any kind. The
rest of the army were following fast, when they heard the drums of the
enemy beat the general. Surprise, however, had made no part of their
plan, so they were not disconcerted by this intimation that the foe was
upon his guard and prepared to receive them. It only hastened their
dispositions for the combat, which were very simple.

The Highland army, which now occupied the eastern end of the wide
plain, or stubble field, so often referred to, was drawn up in two
lines, extending from the morass towards the sea. The first was
destined to charge the enemy, the second to act as a reserve. The few
horse, whom the Prince headed in person, remained between the two
lines. The adventurer had intimated a resolution to charge in person at
the head of his first line; but his purpose was deprecated by all
around him, and he was with difficulty induced to abandon it.

Both lines were now moving forward, the first prepared for instant
combat. The clans of which it was composed formed each a sort of
separate phalanx, narrow in front, and in depth ten, twelve, or fifteen
files, according to the strength of the following. The best-armed and
best-born, for the words were synonymous, were placed in front of each
of these irregular subdivisions. The others in the rear shouldered
forward the front, and by their pressure added both physical impulse
and additional ardour and confidence to those who were first to
encounter the danger.

'Down with your plaid, Waverley,' cried Fergus, throwing off his own;
'we'll win silks for our tartans before the sun is above the sea.'

The clansmen on every side stript their plaids, prepared their arms,
and there was an awful pause of about three minutes, during which the
men, pulling off their bonnets, raised their faces to heaven and
uttered a short prayer; then pulled their bonnets over their brows and
began to move forward, at first slowly. Waverley felt his heart at that
moment throb as it would have burst from his bosom. It was not fear, it
was not ardour: it was a compound of both, a new and deeply energetic
impulse that with its first emotion chilled and astounded, then fevered
and maddened his mind. The sounds around him combined to exalt his
enthusiasm; the pipes played, and the clans rushed forward, each in its
own dark column. As they advanced they mended their pace, and the
muttering sounds of the men to each other began to swell into a wild
cry.

At this moment the sun, which was now risen above the horizon,
dispelled the mist. The vapours rose like a curtain, and showed the two
armies in the act of closing. The line of the regulars was formed
directly fronting the attack of the Highlanders; it glittered with the
appointments of a complete army, and was flanked by cavalry and
artillery. But the sight impressed no terror on the assailants.

'Forward, sons of Ivor,' cried their Chief, 'or the Camerons will draw
the first blood!' They rushed on with a tremendous yell.

The rest is well known. The horse, who were commanded to charge the
advancing Highlanders in the flank, received an irregular fire from
their fusees as they ran on and, seized with a disgraceful panic,
wavered, halted, disbanded, and galloped from the field. The artillery
men, deserted by the cavalry, fled after discharging their pieces, and
the Highlanders, who dropped their guns when fired and drew their
broadswords, rushed with headlong fury against the infantry.

It was at this moment of confusion and terror that Waverley remarked an
English officer, apparently of high rank, standing, alone and
unsupported, by a fieldpiece, which, after the flight of the men by
whom it was wrought, he had himself levelled and discharged against the
clan of Mac-Ivor, the nearest group of Highlanders within his aim.
Struck with his tall, martial figure, and eager to save him from
inevitable destruction, Waverley outstripped for an instant even the
speediest of the warriors, and, reaching the spot first, called to him
to surrender. The officer replied by a thrust with his sword, which
Waverley received in his target, and in turning it aside the
Englishman's weapon broke. At the same time the battle-axe of Dugald
Mahony was in the act of descending upon the officer's head. Waverley
intercepted and prevented the blow, and the officer, perceiving further
resistance unavailing, and struck with Edward's generous anxiety for
his safety, resigned the fragment of his sword, and was committed by
Waverley to Dugald, with strict charge to use him well, and not to
pillage his person, promising him, at the same time, full
indemnification for the spoil.

On Edward's right the battle for a few minutes raged fierce and thick.
The English infantry, trained in the wars in Flanders, stood their
ground with great courage. But their extended files were pierced and
broken in many places by the close masses of the clans; and in the
personal struggle which ensued the nature of the Highlanders' weapons,
and their extraordinary fierceness and activity, gave them a decided
superiority over those who had been accustomed to trust much to their
array and discipline, and felt that the one was broken and the other
useless. Waverley, as he cast his eyes towards this scene of smoke and
slaughter, observed Colonel Gardiner, deserted by his own soldiers in
spite of all his attempts to rally them, yet spurring his horse through
the field to take the command of a small body of infantry, who, with
their backs arranged against the wall of his own park (for his house
was close by the field of battle), continued a desperate and unavailing
resistance. Waverley could perceive that he had already received many
wounds, his clothes and saddle being marked with blood. To save this
good and brave man became the instant object of his most anxious
exertions. But he could only witness his fall. Ere Edward could make
his way among the Highlanders, who, furious and eager for spoil, now
thronged upon each other, he saw his former commander brought from his
horse by the blow of a scythe, and beheld him receive, while on the
ground, more wounds than would have let out twenty lives. When Waverley
came up, however, perception had not entirely fled. The dying warrior
seemed to recognize Edward, for he fixed his eye upon him with an
