fingers all that I had ever seen. There was William Harker the strong
man, who lifted Farmer Alcott's roan mare; and there was Tubby Lawson
the dwarf, who could fit himself into a pickle jar--these two I well
remember from the wonder wherewith they struck my youthful soul. Then
there was the show of the playing dolls, and that of the enchanted
island and Mynheer Munster from the Lowlands, who could turn himself
round upon a tight-rope while playing most sweetly upon a virginal.
Last, but far the best in my estimation, was the grand play at the
Portsdown Fair, entitled 'The true and ancient story of Maudlin, the
merchant's daughter of Bristol, and of her lover Antonio. How they were
cast away on the shores of Barbary, where the mermaids are seen floating
upon the sea and singing in the rocks, foretelling their danger.' This
little piece gave me keener pleasure than ever in after years I received
from the grandest comedies of Mr. Congreve and of Mr. Dryden, though
acted by Kynaston, Betterton, and the whole strength of the King's own
company. At Chichester once I remember that I paid a penny to see the
left shoe of the youngest sister of Potiphar's wife, but as it looked
much like any other old shoe, and was just about the size to have fitted
the show-woman, I have often feared that my penny fell into the hands of
rogues.

There were other shows, however, which I might see for nothing, and yet
were more real and every whit as interesting as any for which I
paid. Now and again upon a holiday I was permitted to walk down to
Portsmouth--once I was even taken in front of my father upon his pad
nag, and there I wandered with him through the streets with wondering
eyes, marvelling over the strange sights around me. The walls and the
moats, the gates and the sentinels, the long High Street with the great
government buildings, and the constant rattle of drums and blare of
trumpets; they made my little heart beat quicker beneath my sagathy
stuff jacket. Here was the house in which some thirty years before the
proud Duke of Buckingham had been struck down by the assassin's dagger.
There, too, was the Governor's dwelling, and I remember that even as I
looked he came riding up to it, red-faced and choleric, with a nose such
as a Governor should have, and his breast all slashed with gold. 'Is he
not a fine man?' I said, looking up at my father. He laughed and drew
his hat down over his brows. 'It is the first time that I have seen Sir
Ralph Lingard's face,' said he, 'but I saw his back at Preston fight.
Ah, lad, proud as he looks, if he did but see old Noll coming in through
the door he would not think it beneath him to climb out through the
window!' The clank of steel or the sight of a buff-coat would always
serve to stir up the old Roundhead bitterness in my father's breast.

But there were other sights in Portsmouth besides the red-coats and
their Governor. The yard was the second in the kingdom, after Chatham,
and there was ever some new war-ship ready upon the slips. Then there
was a squadron of King's ships, and sometimes the whole fleet at
Spithead, when the streets would be full of sailors, with their faces as
brown as mahogany and pigtails as stiff and hard as their cutlasses. To
watch their rolling gait, and to hear their strange, quaint talk,
and their tales of the Dutch wars, was a rare treat to me; and I have
sometimes when I was alone fastened myself on to a group of them, and
passed the day in wandering from tavern to tavern. It chanced one day,
however, that one of them insisted upon my sharing his glass of Canary
wine, and afterwards out of roguishness persuaded me to take a second,
with the result that I was sent home speechless in the carrier's cart,
and was never again allowed to go into Portsmouth alone. My father was
less shocked at the incident than I should have expected, and reminded
my mother that Noah had been overtaken in a similar manner. He also
narrated how a certain field-chaplain Grant, of Desborough's regiment,
having after a hot and dusty day drunk sundry flagons of mum, had
thereafter sung certain ungodly songs, and danced in a manner unbecoming
to his sacred profession. Also, how he had afterwards explained that
such backslidings were not to be regarded us faults of the individual,
but rather as actual obsessions of the evil one, who contrived in this
manner to give scandal to the faithful, and selected the most godly for
his evil purpose. This ingenious defence of the field-chaplain was the
saving of my back, for my father, who was a believer in Solomon's axiom,
had a stout ash stick and a strong arm for whatever seemed to him to be
a falling away from the true path.

From the day that I first learned my letters from the horn-book at my
mother's knee I was always hungry to increase my knowledge, and never a
piece of print came in my way that I did not eagerly master. My father
pushed the sectarian hatred of learning to such a length that he was
averse to having any worldly books within his doors. (Note A, Appendix)
I was dependent therefore for my supply upon one or two of my friends in
the village, who lent me a volume at a time from their small libraries.
These I would carry inside my shirt, and would only dare to produce when
I could slip away into the fields, and lie hid among the long grass, or
at night when the rushlight was still burning, and my father's snoring
assured me that there was no danger of his detecting me. In this way
I worked up from Don Bellianis of Greece and the 'Seven Champions,'
through Tarleton's 'Jests' and other such books, until I could take
pleasure in the poetry of Waller and of Herrick, or in the plays of
Massinger and Shakespeare. How sweet were the hours when I could lay
aside all thought of freewill and of predestination, to lie with my
heels in the air among the scented clover, and listen to old Chaucer
telling the sweet story of Grisel the patient, or to weep for the chaste
Desdemona, and mourn over the untimely end of her gallant spouse. There
were times as I rose up with my mind full of the noble poetry, and
glanced over the fair slope of the countryside, with the gleaming sea
beyond it, and the purple outline of the Isle of Wight upon the horizon;
when it would be borne in upon me that the Being who created all this,
and who gave man the power of pouring out these beautiful thoughts, was
not the possession of one sect or another, or of this nation or that,
but was the kindly Father of every one of the little children whom
He had let loose on this fair playground. It grieved me then, and it
grieves me now, that a man of such sincerity and lofty purpose as your
great grandfather should have been so tied down by iron doctrines, and
should imagine his Creator to be so niggard of His mercy as to withhold
it from nine-and-ninety in the hundred. Well, a man is as he is trained,
and if my father bore a narrow mind upon his broad shoulders, he has at
least the credit that he was ready to do and to suffer all things
for what he conceived to be the truth. If you, my dears, have more
enlightened views, take heed that they bring you to lead a more
enlightened life.

When I was fourteen years of age, a yellow-haired, brown-faced lad, I
was packed off to a small private school at Petersfield, and there I
remained for a year, returning home for the last Saturday in each month.
I took with me only a scanty outfit of schoolbooks, with Lilly's 'Latin
Grammar,' and Rosse's 'View of all the Religions in the World from the
Creation down to our own Times,' which was shoved into my hands by my
good mother as a parting present. With this small stock of letters I
might have fared badly, had it not happened that my master, Mr. Thomas
Chillingfoot, had himself a good library, and took a pleasure in
lending his books to any of his scholars who showed a desire to improve
themselves. Under this good old man's care I not only picked up some
smattering of Latin and Greek, but I found means to read good English
translations of many of the classics, and to acquire a knowledge of the
history of my own and other countries. I was rapidly growing in mind as
well as in body, when my school career was cut short by no less an event
than my summary and ignominious expulsion. How this unlooked-for ending
to my studies came about I must now set before you.

Petersfield had always been a great stronghold of the Church, having
hardly a Nonconformist within its bounds. The reason of this was that
most of the house property was owned by zealous Churchmen, who refused
to allow any one who differed from the Established Church to settle
there. The Vicar, whose name was Pinfold, possessed in this manner great
power in the town, and as he was a man with a high inflamed countenance
and a pompous manner, he inspired no little awe among the quiet
inhabitants. I can see him now with his beaked nose, his rounded
waistcoat, and his bandy legs, which looked as if they had given way
beneath the load of learning which they were compelled to carry. Walking
slowly with right hand stiffly extended, tapping the pavement at every
step with his metal-headed stick, he would pause as each person passed
him, and wait to see that he was given the salute which he thought due
to his dignity. This courtesy he never dreamed of returning, save in
the case of some of his richer parishioners; but if by chance it were
omitted, he would hurry after the culprit, and, shaking his stick in his
face, insist upon his doffing his cap to him. We youngsters, if we met
him on our walks, would scuttle by him like a brood of chickens passing
an old turkey cock, and even our worthy master showed a disposition to
turn down a side-street when the portly figure of the Vicar was seen
rolling in our direction. This proud priest made a point of knowing the
history of every one within his parish, and having learnt that I was the
son of an Independent, he spoke severely to Mr. Chillingfoot upon the
indiscretion which he had shown in admitting me to his school. Indeed,
nothing but my mother's good name for orthodoxy prevented him from
insisting upon my dismissal.

At the other end of the village there was a large day-school. A constant
feud prevailed between the scholars who attended it and the lads who
studied under our master. No one could tell how the war broke out, but
for many years there had been a standing quarrel between the two, which
resulted in skirmishes, sallies, and ambuscades, with now and then a
pitched battle. No great harm was done in these encounters, for the
weapons were usually snowballs in winter and pine-cones or clods of
earth in the summer. Even when the contest got closer and we came to
fisticuffs, a few bruises and a little blood was the worst that could
come of it. Our opponents were more numerous than we, but we had the
advantage of being always together and of having a secure asylum upon
which to retreat, while they, living in scattered houses all over the
parish, had no common rallying-point. A stream, crossed by two bridges,
ran through the centre of the town, and this was the boundary which
separated our territories from those of our enemies. The boy who crossed
the bridge found himself in hostile country.

It chanced that in the first conflict which occurred after my arrival at
the school I distinguished myself by singling out the most redoubtable
of our foemen, and smiting him such a blow that he was knocked helpless
and was carried off by our party as a prisoner. This feat of arms
established my good name as a warrior, so I came at last to be regarded
as the leader of our forces, and to be looked up to by bigger boys than
myself. This promotion tickled my fancy so much, that I set to work to
prove that I deserved it by devising fresh and ingenious schemes for the
defeat of our enemies.

One winter's evening news reached us that our rivals were about to make
a raid upon us under cover of night, and that they proposed coming by
the little used plank bridge, so as to escape our notice. This bridge
lay almost out of the town, and consisted of a single broad piece of
wood without a rail, erected for the good of the town clerk, who lived,
just opposite to it. We proposed to hide ourselves amongst the bushes on
our side of the stream, and make an unexpected attack upon the invaders
as they crossed. As we started, however, I bethought me of an ingenious
stratagem which I had read of as being practised in the German wars, and
having expounded it to the great delight of my companions, we took Mr.
Chillingfoot's saw, and set off for the seat of action.

On reaching the bridge all was quiet and still. It was quite dark and
very cold, for Christmas was approaching. There were no signs of our
opponents. We exchanged a few whispers as to who should do the daring
deed, but as the others shrank from it, and as I was too proud to
propose what I dare not execute, I gripped the saw, and sitting
astraddle upon the plank set to work upon the very centre of it.

My purpose was to weaken it in such a way that, though it would bear the
weight of one, it would collapse when the main body of our foemen were
upon it, and so precipitate them into the ice-cold stream. The water was
but a couple of feet deep at the place, so that there was nothing for
them but a fright and a ducking. So cool a reception ought to deter
them from ever invading us again, and confirm my reputation as a daring
leader. Reuben Lockarby, my lieutenant, son of old John Lockarby of the
Wheatsheaf, marshalled our forces behind the hedgerow, whilst I sawed
vigorously at the plank until I had nearly severed it across. I had no
compunction about the destruction of the bridge, for I knew enough of
carpentry to see that a skilful joiner could in an hour's work make
it stronger than ever by putting a prop beneath the point where I had
divided it. When at last I felt by the yielding of the plank that I had
done enough, and that the least strain would snap it, I crawled quietly
off, and taking up my position with my schoolfellows, awaited the coming
of the enemy.

I had scarce concealed myself when we heard the steps of some one
approaching down the footpath which led to the bridge. We crouched
behind the cover, convinced that the sound must come from some scout
whom our foemen had sent on in front--a big boy evidently, for his step
was heavy and slow, with a clinking noise mingling with it, of which we
could make nothing. Nearer came the sound and nearer, until a shadowy
figure loomed out of the darkness upon the other side, and after pausing
and peering for a moment, came straight for the bridge. It was only as
he was setting foot upon the plank and beginning gingerly to pick his
way across it, that we discerned the outlines of the familiar form, and
realised the dreadful truth that the stranger whom we had taken for the
advance guard of our enemy was in truth none other than Vicar Pinfold,
and that it was the rhythmic pat of his stick which we heard mingling
with his footfalls. Fascinated by the sight, we lay bereft of all power
to warn him--a line of staring eyeballs. One step, two steps, three
steps did the haughty Churchman take, when there was a rending crack,
and he vanished with a mighty splash into the swift-flowing stream. He
must have fallen upon his back, for we could see the curved outline
of his portly figure standing out above the surface as he struggled
desperately to regain his feet. At last he managed to get erect, and
came spluttering for the bank with such a mixture of godly ejaculations
and of profane oaths that, even in our terror, we could not keep from
laughter. Rising from under his feet like a covey of wild-fowl, we
scurried off across the fields and so back to the school, where, as you
may imagine, we said nothing to our good master of what had occurred.

The matter was too serious, however, to be hushed up. The sudden chill
set up some manner of disturbance in the bottle of sack which the Vicar
had just been drinking with the town clerk, and an attack of gout set in
which laid him on his back for a fortnight. Meanwhile an examination of
the bridge had shown that it had been sawn across, and an inquiry traced
the matter to Mr. Chillingfoot's boarders. To save a wholesale expulsion
of the school from the town, I was forced to acknowledge myself as both
the inventor and perpetrator of the deed. Chillingfoot was entirely in
the power of the Vicar, so he was forced to read me a long homily
in public--which he balanced by an affectionate leave-taking in
private--and to expel me solemnly from the school. I never saw my old
master again, for he died not many years afterwards; but I hear that his
second son William is still carrying on the business, which is larger
and more prosperous than of old. His eldest son turned Quaker and went
out to Penn's settlement, where he is reported to have been slain by the
savages.

This adventure shocked my dear mother, but it found great favour in the
eyes of my father, who laughed until the whole village resounded
with his stentorian merriment. It reminded him, he said, of a similar
stratagem executed at Market Drayton by that God-fearing soldier Colonel
Pride, whereby a captain and three troopers of Lunsford's own regiment
of horse had been drowned, and many others precipitated into a river, to
the great glory of the true Church and to the satisfaction of the
chosen people. Even of the Church folk many were secretly glad at the
misfortune which had overtaken the Vicar, for his pretensions and his
pride had made him hated throughout the district.

By this time I had grown into a sturdy, broad-shouldered lad, and every
month added to my strength and my stature. When I was sixteen I could
carry a bag of wheat or a cask of beer against any man in the village,
and I could throw the fifteen-pound putting-stone to a distance of
thirty-six feet, which was four feet further than could Ted Dawson, the
blacksmith. Once when my father was unable to carry a bale of skins out
of the yard, I whipped it up and bare it away upon my shoulders. The
old man would often look gravely at me from under his heavy thatched
eyebrows, and shake his grizzled head as he sat in his arm-chair puffing
his pipe. 'You grow too big for the nest, lad,' he would say. 'I doubt
some of these days you'll find your wings and away!' In my heart I
longed that the time would come, for I was weary of the quiet life of
the village, and was anxious to see the great world of which I had heard
and read so much. I could not look southward without my spirit stirring
within me as my eyes fell upon those dark waves, the white crests of
which are like a fluttering signal ever waving to an English youth and
beckoning him to some unknown but glorious goal.



Chapter III. Of Two Friends of my Youth


I fear, my children, that you will think that the prologue is over long
for the play; but the foundations must be laid before the building is
erected, and a statement of this sort is a sorry and a barren thing
unless you have a knowledge of the folk concerned. Be patient, then,
while I speak to you of the old friends of my youth, some of whom you
may hear more of hereafter, while others remained behind in the country
hamlet, and yet left traces of our early intercourse upon my character
which might still be discerned there.

Foremost for good amongst all whom I knew was Zachary Palmer, the
village carpenter, a man whose aged and labour-warped body contained the
simplest and purest of spirits. Yet his simplicity was by no means the
result of ignorance, for from the teachings of Plato to those of Hobbes
there were few systems ever thought out by man which he had not studied
and weighed. Books were far dearer in my boyhood than they are now,
and carpenters were less well paid, but old Palmer had neither wife nor
child, and spent little on food or raiment. Thus it came about that on
the shelf over his bed he had a more choice collection of books--few as
they were in number--than the squire or the parson, and these books he
had read until he not only understood them himself, but could impart
them to others.

This white-bearded and venerable village philosopher would sit by his
cabin door upon a summer evening, and was never so pleased as when
some of the young fellows would slip away from their bowls and their
quoit-playing in order to lie in the grass at his feet, and ask him
questions about the great men of old, their words and their deeds. But
of all the youths I and Reuben Lockarby, the innkeeper's son, were his
two favourites, for we would come the earliest and stop the latest to
hear the old man talk. No father could have loved his children better
than he did us, and he would spare no pains to get at our callow
thoughts, and to throw light upon whatever perplexed or troubled us.
Like all growing things, we had run our heads against the problem of
the universe. We had peeped and pryed with our boyish eyes into those
profound depths in which the keenest-sighted of the human race had seen
no bottom. Yet when we looked around us in our own village world, and
saw the bitterness and rancour which pervaded every sect, we could not
but think that a tree which bore such fruit must have something amiss
with it. This was one of the thoughts unspoken to our parents which
we carried to good old Zachary, and on which he had much to say which
cheered and comforted us.

'These janglings and wranglings,' said he, 'are but on the surface,
and spring from the infinite variety of the human mind, which will ever
adapt a creed to suit its own turn of thought. It is the solid core that
underlies every Christian creed which is of importance. Could you
but live among the Romans or the Greeks, in the days before this new
doctrine was preached, you would then know the change that it has
wrought in the world. How this or that text should be construed is a
matter of no moment, however warm men may get over it. What is of the
very greatest moment is, that every man should have a good and solid
reason for living a simple, cleanly life. This the Christian creed has
given us.'

'I would not have you be virtuous out of fear,' he said upon another
occasion. 'The experience of a long life has taught me, however, that
sin is always punished in this world, whatever may come in the next.
There is always some penalty in health, in comfort, or in peace of
mind to be paid for every wrong. It is with nations as it is with
individuals. A book of history is a book of sermons. See how the
luxurious Babylonians were destroyed by the frugal Persians, and how
these same Persians when they learned the vices of prosperity were put
to the sword by the Greeks. Read on and mark how the sensual Greeks were
trodden down by the more robust and hardier Romans, and finally how the
Romans, having lost their manly virtues, were subdued by the nations
of the north. Vice and destruction came ever hand in hand. Thus did
Providence use each in turn as a scourge wherewith to chastise the
follies of the other. These things do not come by chance. They are part
of a great system which is at work in your own lives. The longer you
live the more you will see that sin and sadness are never far apart, and
that no true prosperity can exist away from virtue.'

A very different teacher was the sea-dog Solomon Sprent, who lived in
the second last cottage on the left-hand side of the main street of the
village. He was one of the old tarpaulin breed, who had fought under
the red cross ensign against Frenchman, Don, Dutchman, and Moor, until a
round shot carried off his foot and put an end to his battles for ever.
In person he was thin, and hard, and brown, as lithe and active as a
cat, with a short body and very long arms, each ending in a great hand
which was ever half closed as though shutting on a rope. From head to
foot he was covered with the most marvellous tattooings, done in blue,
red, and green, beginning with the Creation upon his neck and winding up
with the Ascension upon his left ankle. Never have I seen such a walking
work of art. He was wont to say that had he been owned and his body cast
up upon some savage land, the natives might have learned the whole of
the blessed gospel from a contemplation of his carcass. Yet with sorrow
I must say that the seaman's religion appeared to have all worked into
his skin, so that very little was left for inner use. It had broken out
upon the surface, like the spotted fever, but his system was clear of
it elsewhere. He could swear in eleven languages and three-and-twenty
dialects, nor did he ever let his great powers rust for want of
practice. He would swear when he was happy or when he was sad, when he
was angry or when he was loving, but this swearing was so mere a trick
of speech, without malice or bitterness, that even my father could
hardly deal harshly with the sinner. As time passed, however, the old
man grew more sober and more thoughtful, until in his latter days he
went back to the simple beliefs of his childhood, and learned to fight
the devil with the same steady courage with which he had faced the
enemies of his country.

Old Solomon was a never-failing source of amusement and of interest to
my friend Lockarby and myself. On gala days he would have us in to dine
with him, when he would regale us with lobscouse and salmagundi, or
perhaps with an outland dish, a pillaw or olla podrida, or fish broiled
after the fashion of the Azores, for he had a famous trick of cooking,
and could produce the delicacies of all nations. And all the time that
we were with him he would tell us the most marvellous stories of Rupert,
under whom he served; how he would shout from the poop to his squadron
to wheel to the right, or to charge, or to halt, as the case might be,
as if he were still with his regiment of horse. Of Blake, too, he had
many stories to tell. But even the name of Blake was not so dear to our
old sailor as was that of Sir Christopher Mings. Solomon had at one time
been his coxswain, and could talk by the hour of those gallant deeds
which had distinguished him from the day that he entered the navy as a
cabin boy until he fell upon his own quarter-deck, a full admiral of the
red, and was borne by his weeping ship's company to his grave in Chatham
churchyard. 'If so be as there's a jasper sea up aloft,' said the old
seaman, 'I'll wager that Sir Christopher will see that the English flag
has proper respect paid to it upon it, and that we are not fooled by
foreigners. I've served under him in this world, and I ask nothing
better than to be his coxswain in the next--if so be as he should chance
to have a vacancy for such.' These remembrances would always end in the
brewing of an extra bowl of punch, and the drinking of a solemn bumper
to the memory of the departed hero.

Stirring as were Solomon Sprent's accounts of his old commanders, their
effect upon us was not so great as when, about his second or third
glass, the floodgates of his memory would be opened, and he would pour
out long tales of the lands which he had visited, and the peoples which
he had seen. Leaning forward in our seats with our chins resting upon
our hands, we two youngsters would sit for hours, with our eyes fixed
upon the old adventurer, drinking in his words, while he, pleased at the
interest which he excited, would puff slowly at his pipe and reel off
story after story of what he had seen or done. In those days, my dears,
there was no Defoe to tell us the wonders of the world, no _Spectator_
to lie upon our breakfast table, no Gulliver to satisfy our love of
adventure by telling us of such adventures as never were. Not once in
a month did a common newsletter fall into our hands. Personal hazards,
therefore, were of more value then than they are now, and the talk of a
man like old Solomon was a library in itself. To us it was all real. His
husky tones and ill-chosen words were as the voice of an angel, and our
eager minds filled in the details and supplied all that was wanting in
his narratives. In one evening we have engaged a Sallee rover off the
Pillars of Hercules; we have coasted down the shores of the African
continent, and seen the great breakers of the Spanish Main foaming upon
the yellow sand; we have passed the black ivory merchants with their
human cargoes; we have faced the terrible storms which blow ever around
the Cape de Boa Esperanza; and finally, we have sailed away out over the
great ocean beyond, amid the palm-clad coral islands, with the knowledge
that the realms of Prester John lie somewhere behind the golden haze
which shimmers upon the horizon. After such a flight as that we would
feel, as we came back to the Hampshire village and the dull realities
of country life, like wild birds who had been snared by the fowler and
clapped into narrow cages. Then it was that the words of my father, 'You
will find your wings some day and fly away,' would come back to me, and
set up such a restlessness as all the wise words of Zachary Palmer could
not allay.


Chapter IV. Of the Strange Fish that we Caught at Spithead

One evening in the month of May 1685, about the end of the first week
of the month, my friend Reuben Lockarby and I borrowed Ned Marley's
pleasure boat, and went a-fishing out of Langston Bay. At that time I
was close on one-and-twenty years of age, while my companion was one
year younger. A great intimacy had sprung up between us, founded on
mutual esteem, for he being a little undergrown man was proud of my
strength and stature, while my melancholy and somewhat heavy spirit took
a pleasure in the energy and joviality which never deserted him, and
in the wit which gleamed as bright and as innocent as summer lightning
through all that he said. In person he was short and broad, round-faced,
ruddy-cheeked, and in truth a little inclined to be fat, though he would
never confess to more than a pleasing plumpness, which was held, he
said, to be the acme of manly beauty amongst the ancients. The stern
test of common danger and mutual hardship entitle me to say that no
man could have desired a stauncher or more trusty comrade. As he was
destined to be with me in the sequel, it was but fitting that he should
have been at my side on that May evening which was the starting-point of
our adventures.

We pulled out beyond the Warner Sands to a place half-way between them
and the Nab, where we usually found bass in plenty. There we cast the
heavy stone which served us as an anchor overboard, and proceeded to
set our lines. The sun sinking slowly behind a fog-bank had slashed the
whole western sky with scarlet streaks, against which the wooded slopes
of the Isle of Wight stood out vaporous and purple. A fresh breeze was
blowing from the south-east, flecking the long green waves with crests
of foam, and filling our eyes and lips with the smack of the salt spray.
Over near St. Helen's Point a King's ship was making her way down the
channel, while a single large brig was tacking about a quarter of a mile
or less from where we lay. So near were we that we could catch a glimpse
of the figures upon her deck as she heeled over to the breeze, and could
bear the creaking of her yards and the flapping of her weather-stained
canvas as she prepared to go about.

'Look ye, Micah,' said my companion, looking up from his fishing-line.
'That is a most weak-minded ship--a ship which will make no way in the
world. See how she hangs in the wind, neither keeping on her course nor
tacking. She is a trimmer of the seas--the Lord Halifax of the ocean.'

'Why, there is something amiss with her,' I replied, staring across with
hand-shaded eyes. 'She yaws about as though there were no one at the
helm. Her main-yard goes aback! Now it is forward again! The folk on her
deck seem to me to be either fighting or dancing. Up with the anchor,
Reuben, and let us pull to her.'

'Up with the anchor and let us get out of her way,' he answered, still
gazing at the stranger. 'Why will you ever run that meddlesome head of
yours into danger's way? She flies Dutch colours, but who can say whence
she really comes? A pretty thing if we were snapped up by a buccaneer
and sold in the Plantations!'

'A buccaneer in the Solent!' cried I derisively. 'We shall be seeing the
black flag in Emsworth Creek next. But hark! What is that?'

The crack of a musket sounded from aboard the brig. Then came a moment's
silence and another musket shot rang out, followed by a chorus of shouts
and cries. Simultaneously the yards swung round into position, the sails
caught the breeze once more, and the vessel darted away on a course
which would take her past Bembridge Point out to the English Channel. As
she flew along her helm was put hard down, a puff of smoke shot out
from her quarter, and a cannon ball came hopping and splashing over
the waves, passing within a hundred yards of where we lay. With this
farewell greeting she came up into the wind again and continued her
course to the southward.

'Heart o' grace!' ejaculated Reuben in loose lipped astonishment. 'The
murdering villains!'

'I would to the Lord that King's ship would snap them up!' cried I
savagely, for the attack was so unprovoked that it stirred my bile.
'What could the rogues have meant? They are surely drunk or mad!'

'Pull at the anchor, man, pull at the anchor!' my companion shouted,
springing up from the seat. 'I understand it! Pull at the anchor!'

'What then?' I asked, helping him to haul the great stone up, hand over
hand, until it came dripping over the side.

'They were not firing at us, lad. They were aiming at some one in the
water between us and them. Pull, Micah! Put your back into it! Some poor
fellow may he drowning.'

'Why, I declare!' said I, looking over my shoulder as I rowed, 'there
is his head upon the crest of a wave. Easy, or we shall be over him! Two
more strokes and be ready to seize him! Keep up, friend! There's help at
hand!'

'Take help to those who need help' said a voice out of the sea. 'Zounds,
man, keep a guard on your oar! I fear a pat from it very much more than
I do the water.'

These words were delivered in so calm and self-possessed a tone that all
concern for the swimmer was set at rest. Drawing in our oars we faced
round to have a look at him. The drift of the boat had brought us so
close that he could have grasped the gunwale had he been so minded.

'Sapperment!' he cried in a peevish voice; 'to think of my brother Nonus
serving me such a trick! What would our blessed mother have said could
she have seen it? My whole kit gone, to say nothing of my venture in
the voyage! And now I have kicked off a pair of new jack boots that
cost sixteen rix-dollars at Vanseddar's at Amsterdam. I can't swim in
jack-boots, nor can I walk without them.'

'Won't you come in out of the wet, sir?' asked Reuben, who could scarce
keep serious at the stranger's appearance and address. A pair of long
arms shot out of the water, and in a moment, with a lithe, snake-like
motion, the man wound himself into the boat and coiled his great length
upon the stern-sheets. Very lanky he was and very thin, with a craggy
hard face, clean-shaven and sunburned, with a thousand little wrinkles
intersecting it in every direction. He had lost his hat, and his short
wiry hair, slightly flecked with grey, stood up in a bristle all over
his head. It was hard to guess at his age, but he could scarce have been
under his fiftieth year, though the ease with which he had boarded our
boat proved that his strength and energy were unimpaired. Of all his
characteristics, however, nothing attracted my attention so much as his
eyes, which were almost covered by their drooping lids, and yet looked
out through the thin slits which remained with marvellous brightness and
keenness. A passing glance might give the idea that he was languid and
half asleep, but a closer one would reveal those glittering, shifting
lines of light, and warn the prudent man not to trust too much to his
first impressions.

'I could swim to Portsmouth,' he remarked, rummaging in the pockets of
his sodden jacket; 'I could swim well-nigh anywhere. I once swam from
Gran on the Danube to Buda, while a hundred thousand Janissaries
danced with rage on the nether bank. I did, by the keys of St. Peter!
Wessenburg's Pandours would tell you whether Decimus Saxon could
swim. Take my advice, young men, and always carry your tobacco in a
water-tight metal box.'

As he spoke he drew a flat box from his pocket, and several wooden
tubes, which he screwed together to form a long pipe. This he stuffed
with tobacco, and having lit it by means of a flint and steel with a
piece of touch-paper from the inside of his box, he curled his legs
under him in Eastern fashion, and settled down to enjoy a smoke. There
was something so peculiar about the whole incident, and so preposterous
about the man's appearance and actions, that we both broke into a roar
of laughter, which lasted until for very exhaustion we were compelled
to stop. He neither joined in our merriment nor expressed offence at
it, but continued to suck away at his long wooden tube with a perfectly
stolid and impassive face, save that the half-covered eyes glinted
rapidly backwards and forwards from one to the other of us.
