spirit it contains, or to cross it in its desires and purposes--him I
will crush unhesitatingly to the earth, I will see him torn in pieces.
Sentence is passed on the Roman, and if your ruffians do their duty, and
if the gods accept the holocaust that I had slain before them at sunset
for the success of my project, in a couple of hours Publius Cornelius
Scipio will have bled to death.

"He is in a position to laugh at me--as a man--but I therefore--as a
man--have the right, and--as a king--have the power, to make sure that
that laugh shall be his last. If I could murder Rome as I can him how
glad should I be! for Rome alone hinders me from being the greatest of
all the great kings of our time; and yet I shall rejoice to-morrow when
they tell me Publius Cornelius Scipio has been torn by wild beasts, and
his body is so mutilated that his own mother could not recognize it more
than if a messenger were to bring me the news that Carthage had broken
the power of Rome."

Euergetes had spoken the last words in a voice that sounded like the
roll of thunder as it growls in a rapidly approaching storm, louder,
deeper, and more furious each instant. When at last he was silent
Eulaeus said: "The immortals, my lord, will not deny you this happiness.
The brave fellows whom you condescended to see and to talk to strike as
certainly as the bolt of our father Zeus, and as we have learned from
the Roman's horse-keeper where he has hidden Irene, she will no more
elude your grasp than the crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt.--Now, allow
me to put on your mantle, and then to call the body-guard that they may
escort you as you return to your residence."

"One thing more," cried the king, detaining Eulaeus. "There are always
troops by the Tombs of Apis placed there to guard the sacred places; may
not they prove a hindrance to your friends?"

"I have withdrawn all the soldiers and armed guards to Memphis down to
the last man," replied Eulaeus, "and quartered them within the White
Wall. Early tomorrow, before you proceed to business, they will
be replaced by a stronger division, so that they may not prove a
reinforcement to your brother's troops here if things come to fighting."

"I shall know how to reward your foresight," said Euergetes as Eulaeus
quitted the room.

Again Klea heard a door open, and the sound of many hoofs on the
pavement of the court-yard, and when she went, all trembling, up to the
window, she saw Euergetes himself, and the powerfully knit horse that
was led in for him. The tyrant twisted his hand in the mane of the
restless and pawing steed, and Klea thought that the monstrous mass
could never mount on to the horse's back without the aid of many men;
but she was mistaken, for with a mighty spring the giant flung himself
high in the air and on to the horse, and then, guiding his panting steed
by the pressure of his knees alone, he bounded out of the prison-yard
surrounded by his splendid train.

For some minutes the court-yard remained empty, then a man hurriedly
crossed it, unlocked the door of the room where Klea was, and informed
her that he was a subaltern under Glaucus, and had brought her a message
from him.

"My lord," said the veteran soldier to the girl, "bid me greet you, and
says that he found neither the Roman Publius Scipio, nor his friend the
Corinthian at home. He is prevented from coming to you himself; he has
his hands full of business, for soldiers in the service of both the
kings are quartered within the White Wall, and all sorts of squabbles
break out between them. Still, you cannot remain in this room, for it
will shortly be occupied by a party of young officers who began the
fray. Glaucus proposes for your choice that you should either allow
me to conduct you to his wife or return to the temple to which you are
attached. In the latter case a chariot shall convey you as far as the
second tavern in Khakem on the borders of the desert-for the city is
full of drunken soldiery. There you may probably find an escort if you
explain to the host who you are. But the chariot must be back again in
less than an hour, for it is one of the king's, and when the banquet is
over there may be a scarcity of chariots."

"Yes--I will go back to the place I came from," said Klea eagerly,
interrupting the messenger. "Take me at once to the chariot."

"Follow me, then," said the old man.

"But I have no veil," observed Klea, "and have only this thin robe on.
Rough soldiers snatched my wrapper from my face, and my cloak from off
my shoulders."

"I will bring you the captain's cloak which is lying here in the
orderly's room, and his travelling-hat too; that will hide your face
with its broad flap. You are so tall that you might be taken for a man,
and that is well, for a woman leaving the palace at this hour would
hardly pass unmolested. A slave shall fetch the things from your temple
to-morrow. I may inform you that my master ordered me take as much care
of you as if you were his own daughter. And he told me too--and I had
nearly forgotten it--to tell you that your sister was carried off by
the Roman, and not by that other dangerous man, you would know whom he
meant. Now wait, pray, till I return; I shall not be long gone."

In a few minutes the guard returned with a large cloak in which he
wrapped Klea, and a broad-brimmed travelling-hat which she pressed down
on her head, and he then conducted her to that quarter of the palace
where the king's stables were. She kept close to the officer, and was
soon mounted on a chariot, and then conducted by the driver--who took
her for a young Macedonian noble, who was tempted out at night by
some assignation--as far as the second tavern on the road back to the
Serapeum.




CHAPTER XIX.

While Klea had been listening to the conversation between Euergetes and
Eulaeus, Cleopatra had been sitting in her tent, and allowing herself to
be dressed with no less care than on the preceding evening, but in other
garments.

It would seem that all had not gone so smoothly as she wished during the
day, for her two tire-women had red eyes. Her lady-in-waiting, Zoe, was
reading to her, not this time from a Greek philosopher but from a Greek
translation of the Hebrew Psalms: a discussion as to their poetic merit
having arisen a few days previously at the supper-table. Onias, the
Israelite general, had asserted that these odes might be compared with
those of Alcman or of Pindar, and had quoted certain passages that had
pleased the queen. To-day she was not disposed for thought, but wanted
something strange and out of the common to distract her mind, so she
desired Zoe to open the book of the Hebrews, of which the translation
was considered by the Hellenic Jews in Alexandria as an admirable
work--nay, even as inspired by God himself; it had long been known to
her through her Israelite friends and guests.

Cleopatra had been listening for about a quarter of an hour to Zoe's
reading when the blast of a trumpet rang out on the steps which led
up her tent, announcing a visitor of the male sex. The queen glanced
angrily round, signed to her lady to stop reading, and exclaimed:

"I will not see my husband now! Go, Thais, and tell the eunuchs on the
steps, that I beg Philometor not to disturb me just now. Go on, Zoe."

Ten more psalms had been read, and a few verses repeated twice or thrice
by Cleopatra's desire, when the pretty Athenian returned with flaming
cheeks, and said in an excited tone:

"It is not your husband, the king, but your brother Euergetes, who asks
to speak with you."

"He might have chosen some other hour," replied Cleopatra, looking round
at her maid. Thais cast down her eyes, and twitched the edge of her robe
between her fingers as she addressed her mistress; but the queen, whom
nothing could escape that she chose to see, and who was not to-day
in the humor for laughing or for letting any indiscretion escape
unreproved, went on at once in an incensed and cutting tone, raising her
voice to a sharp pitch:

"I do not choose that my messengers should allow themselves to be
detained, be it by whom it may--do you hear! Leave Me this instant
and go to your room, and stay there till I want you to undress me this
evening. Andromeda--do you hear, old woman?--you can bring my brother to
me, and he will let you return quicker than Thais, I fancy. You need
not leer at yourself in the glass, you cannot do anything to alter your
wrinkles. My head-dress is already done. Give me that linen wrapper,
Olympias, and then he may come! Why, there he is already! First you ask
permission, brother, and then disdain to wait till it is given you."

"Longing and waiting," replied Euergetes, "are but an ill-assorted
couple. I wasted this evening with common soldiers and fawning
flatterers; then, in order to see a few noble countenances, I went into
the prison, after that I hastily took a bath, for the residence of your
convicts spoils one's complexion more, and in a less pleasant manner,
than this little shrine, where everything looks and smells like
Aphrodite's tiring-room; and now I have a longing to hear a few good
words before supper-time comes."

"From my lips?" asked Cleopatra.

"There are none that can speak better, whether by the Nile or the
Ilissus."

"What do you want of me?"

"I--of you?"

"Certainly, for you do not speak so prettily unless you want something."

"But I have already told you! I want to hear you say something wise,
something witty, something soul-stirring."

"We cannot call up wit as we would a maid-servant. It comes unbidden,
and the more urgently we press it to appear the more certainly it
remains away."

"That may be true of others, but not of you who, even while you declare
that you have no store of Attic salt, are seasoning your speech with it.
All yield obedience to grace and beauty, even wit and the sharp-tongued
Momus who mocks even at the gods."

"You are mistaken, for not even my own waiting-maids return in proper
time when I commission them with a message to you."

"And may we not to be allowed to sacrifice to the Charites on the way to
the temple of Aphrodite?"

"If I were indeed the goddess, those worshippers who regarded my
hand-maidens as my equals would find small acceptance with me."

"Your reproof is perfectly just, for you are justified in requiring that
all who know you should worship but one goddess, as the Jews do but one
god. But I entreat you do not again compare yourself to the brainless
Cyprian dame. You may be allowed to do so, so far as your grace is
concerned; but who ever saw an Aphrodite philosophizing and reading
serious books? I have disturbed you in grave studies no doubt; what is
the book you are rolling up, fair Zoe?"

"The sacred book of the Jews, Sire," replied Zoe; "one that I know you
do not love."

"And you--who read Homer, Pindar, Sophocles, and Plato--do you like it?"
asked Euergetes.

"I find passages in it which show a profound knowledge of life, and
others of which no one can dispute the high poetic flight," replied
Cleopatra. "Much of it has no doubt a thoroughly barbarian twang, and it
is particularly in the Psalms--which we have now been reading, and which
might be ranked with the finest hymns--that I miss the number and rhythm
of the syllables, the observance of a fixed metre--in short, severity of
form. David, the royal poet, was no less possessed by the divinity when
he sang to his lyre than other poets have been, but he does not seem to
have known that delight felt by our poets in overcoming the difficulties
they have raised for themselves. The poet should slavishly obey the laws
he lays down for himself of his own free-will, and subordinate to them
every word, and yet his matter and his song should seem to float on a
free and soaring wing. Now, even the original Hebrew text of the Psalms
has no metrical laws."

"I could well dispense with them," replied Euergetes; "Plato too
disdained to measure syllables, and I know passages in his works which
are nevertheless full of the highest poetic beauty. Besides, it has been
pointed out to me that even the Hebrew poems, like the Egyptian, follow
certain rules, which however I might certainly call rhetorical
rather than poetical. The first member in a series of ideas stands in
antithesis to the next, which either re-states the former one in a new
form or sets it in a clearer light by suggesting some contrast. Thus
they avail themselves of the art of the orator--or indeed of the
painter--who brings a light color into juxtaposition with a dark one, in
order to increase its luminous effect. This method and style are indeed
not amiss, and that was the least of all the things that filled me with
aversion for this book, in which besides, there is many a proverb which
may be pleasing to kings who desire to have submissive subjects, and to
fathers who would bring up their sons in obedience to themselves and to
the laws. Even mothers must be greatly comforted by them,--who ask no
more than that their children may get through the world without being
jostled or pushed, and unmolested if possible, that they may live longer
than the oaks or ravens, and be blessed with the greatest possible
number of descendants. Aye! these ordinances are indeed precious to
those who accept them, for they save them the trouble of thinking for
themselves. Besides, the great god of the Jews is said to have dictated
all that this book contains to its writers, just as I dictate to
Philippus, my hump-backed secretary, all that I want said. They regard
everyone as a blasphemer and desecrator who thinks that anything written
in that roll is erroneous, or even merely human. Plato's doctrines are
not amiss, and yet Aristotle had criticised them severely and attempted
to confute them. I myself incline to the views of the Stagyrite, you to
those of the noble Athenian, and how many good and instructive hours we
owe to our discussions over this difference of opinion! And how
amusing it is to listen when the Platonists on the one hand and the
Aristotelians on the other, among the busy threshers of straw in the
Museum at Alexandria, fall together by the ears so vehemently that they
would both enjoy flinging their metal cups at each others' heads--if
the loss of the wine, which I pay for, were not too serious to bear. We
still seek for truth; the Jews believe they possess it entirely.

"Even those among them who most zealously study our philosophers believe
this; and yet the writers of this book know of nothing but actual
present, and their god--who will no more endure another god as his
equal than a citizen's wife will admit a second woman to her husband's
house--is said to have created the world out of nothing for no other
purpose but to be worshipped and feared by its inhabitants.

"Now, given a philosophical Jew who knows his Empedocles--and I grant
there are many such in Alexandria, extremely keen and cultivated
men--what idea can he form in his own mind of 'creation out of nothing?'
Must he not pause to think very seriously when he remembers the
fundamental axiom that 'out of nothing, nothing can come,' and that
nothing which has once existed can ever be completely annihilated? At
any rate the necessary deduction must be that the life of man ends in
that nothingness whence everything in existence has proceeded. To live
and to die according to this book is not highly profitable. I can easily
reconcile myself to the idea of annihilation, as a man who knows how to
value a dreamless sleep after a day brimful of enjoyment--as a man who
if he must cease to be Euergetes would rather spring into the open jaws
of nothingness--but as a philosopher, no, never!"

"You, it is true," replied the queen, "cannot help measuring all and
everything by the intellectual standard exclusively; for the gods, who
endowed you with gifts beyond a thousand others, struck with blindness
or deafness that organ which conveys to our minds any religious or moral
sentiment. If that could see or hear, you could no more exclude the
conviction that these writings are full of the deepest purport than I
can, nor doubt that they have a powerful hold on the mind of the reader.

"They fetter their adherents to a fixed law, but they take all
bitterness out of sorrow by teaching that a stern father sends us
suffering which is represented as being sometimes a means of education,
and sometimes a punishment for transgressing a hard and clearly defined
law. Their god, in his infallible but stern wisdom, sets those who cling
to him on an evil and stony path to prove their strength, and to let
them at last reach the glorious goal which is revealed to them from the
beginning."

"How strange such words as these sound in the mouth of a Greek,"
interrupted Euergetes. "You certainly must be repeating them after the
son of the Jewish high-priest, who defends the cause of his cruel god
with so much warmth and skill."

"I should have thought," retorted Cleopatra, "that this overwhelming
figure of a god would have pleased you, of all men; for I know of no
weakness in you. Quite lately Dositheos, the Jewish centurion--a very
learned man--tried to describe to my husband the one great god to whom
his nation adheres with such obstinate fidelity, but I could not help
thinking of our beautiful and happy gods as a gay company of amorous
lords and pleasure-loving ladies, and comparing them with this stern and
powerful being who, if only he chose to do it, might swallow them all
up, as Chronos swallowed his own children."

"That," exclaimed Euergetes, "is exactly what most provokes me in
this superstition. It crushes our light-hearted pleasure in life, and
whenever I have been reading the book of the Hebrews everything has come
into my mind that I least like to think of. It is like an importunate
creditor that reminds us of our forgotten debts, and I love pleasure
and hate an importunate reminder. And you, pretty one, life blooms for
you--"

"But I," interrupted Cleopatra, "I can admire all that is great; and
does it not seem a bold and grand thing even to you, that the mighty
idea that it is one single power that moves and fills the world, should
be freely and openly declared in the sacred writings of the Jews--an
idea which the Egyptians carefully wrap up and conceal, which the
priests of the Nile only venture to divulge to the most privileged of
those who are initiated into their mysteries, and which--though the
Greek philosophers indeed have fearlessly uttered it--has never been
introduced by any Hellene into the religion of the people? If you were
not so averse to the Hebrew nation, and if you, like my husband and
myself, had diligently occupied yourself with their concerns and their
belief you would be juster to them and to their scriptures, and to the
great creating and preserving spirit, their god--"

"You are confounding this jealous and most unamiable and ill-tempered
tyrant of the universe with the Absolute of Aristotle!" cried Euergetes;
"he stigmatises most of what you and I and all rational Greeks require
for the enjoyment of life as sin--sin upon sin. And yet if my easily
persuadable brother governed at Alexandria, I believe the shrewd
priests might succeed in stamping him as a worshipper of that magnified
schoolmaster, who punishes his untutored brood with fire and torment."

"I cannot deny," replied Cleopatra, "that even to me the doctrine of the
Jews has something very fearful in it, and that to adopt it seems to
me tantamount to confiscating all the pleasures of life.--But enough of
such things, which I should no more relish as a daily food than you
do. Let us rejoice in that we are Hellenes, and let us now go to the
banquet. I fear you have found a very unsatisfactory substitute for what
you sought in coming up here."

"No--no. I feel strangely excited to-day, and my work with Aristarchus
would have led to no issue. It is a pity that we should have begun to
