the pair came out into the anteroom: She, radiant with happiness, and
so graceful in her fashionable, costly, and well-chosen garb, so
royal-looking in spite of her no more than middle height, that even in
the capital she would have excited the admiration of the men and the
envy of the women: He, content, but with a thoughtful smile on his lips.

He had not yet closed the door when in the anteroom he perceived two
female figures, who had come in while Martina was knocking at her
niece's door. These were Katharina and her waiting-maid.

Anubis had been brought to these rooms after his fall from the roof,
and notwithstanding the preparations that had been made for illustrious
guests Philippus could not be persuaded to allow his patient, for whom
perfect quiet was indispensable, to be moved to the lower floor.

The listener who had been so severely punished had with him his mother,
Katharina's old nurse; the water-wagtail, with her maid, had accompanied
her to see the lad, for she was very anxious to assure herself whether
her foster-brother, before his tumble, had succeeded in hearing
anything; but the poor fellow was so weak and his pain so severe that
she had not the heart to torment him with questions. However, her
Samaritan's visit brought her some reward, for to meet Orion coming out
of Paula's room with so beautiful and elegant a woman was a thing worth
opening her eyes to see. She would have walked from home hither twice
over only to see the clothes and jewels of this heaven sent stranger.
Such a being rarely strayed to Memphis,--and might not this radiant and
beautiful creature be "the other" after all, and not Paula? Might not
Orion have been trifling with her rival as he had already trifled with
her? They must have had a rapturous meeting in that room; every feature
of the fair beauty's saint-like face betrayed the fact. Oh, that Orion!
She would have liked to throttle him; and yet she was glad to think that
there was another besides herself--and she so elegant and lovely--whom
he had betrayed.

"He will stay!" Heliodora exclaimed as she came out of the room; and
Martina held out her hand to the young man, with a fervent: "God bless
you for that!"

She was delighted to see how happy her niece looked but the lively
old woman's eyes were everywhere at once, and when she caught sight of
Katharina who had stood still with curiosity, she turned to her with a
friendly nod and said to Orion:

"Your sister? Or the little niece of whom you used to speak?"

Orion called Katharina and introduced her to his guests, and the girl
explained what had brought her hither; in such a sweet and pathetic
manner--for she was sincerely fond of her foster-brother and
play-fellow--that she quite charmed Martina and Heliodora, and the
younger woman expressed a hope that they might see her often. Indeed,
when she was gone, Martina exclaimed: "A charming little thing! As fresh
and bright as a newly-fledged bird, so brisk and pretty too--and how
nicely she prattles!"

"And the richest heiress in Memphis into the bargain," added Orion.
But, noticing that on this Heliodora cast down her eyes with a troubled
expression, he went on with a laugh: "Our mothers destined us to marry
each other, but we are too ill-matched in size, and not exactly made for
a pair in other ways."

Then, taking leave of them, he went to Nilus and informed him of his
decision. His request that the treasurer would make his excuses to
Rufinus, carry his greetings to Thomas' daughter, and make the most
of his reasons for remaining behind, sent the good man almost beside
himself for joy; and he so far forgot his modest reserve as to embrace
Orion as a son.

The young host sat with his visitors till nearly midnight: and when,
on the following morning, Martina first greeted her niece--who looked
peacefully happy though somewhat tired--she was able to tell her that
the two men had already gone across the Nile, and, she hoped, settled
everything with the Arab governor. Great was her disappointment when
presently Justinus and Orion came back to say that Amru, instead of
returning to Fostat from the review at Heliopolis, had gone straight
to Alexandria. He had engagements there for a few days, and would then
start for Medina.

The senator saw nothing for it but to follow him up, and Orion
volunteered to accompany him.

A faint attempt on Heliodora's part to detain him met with a decisive,
nay, stern refusal. This journey was indeed sheer flight from his own
weakness and from the beautiful creature who could never be anything to
him.

Early in the day he had found time to write to Paula; but he had cast
aside more than one unfinished letter before he could find the right
words. He told her that he loved her and her alone; and as his stylus
marked the wax he felt, with horror of himself, that in fact his heart
was Paula's, and his determination ripened to put an end once for all to
his connection with Heliodora, and not allow himself to see Paula again
till he had forever cut the tie that bound him to the young widow.

The two women went out to see the travellers start, and as they returned
to the house, hanging their heads like defeated warriors, in the
vestibule they met Katharina and her maid. Martina wanted to detain the
little girl, and to persuade her to go up to their rooms with them; but
Katharina refused, and appeared to be in a great hurry. She had just
come from seeing Anubis, who was in less pain to-day, and who had done
his best to tell her what he had overheard. That the flight was to be
northwards he was certain; but he had either misunderstood or forgotten
the name of the place whither the sisters were bound.

His mother and the nurse were dismissed from the room, and then the
water-wagtail in her gratitude had bent over him, had raised his pretty
face a little, and had given him two such sweet kisses that the poor boy
had been quite uneasy. But, when he was alone with his mother once more,
he had felt happier and happier, and the remembrance of the transient
rapture he had known had alleviated the pain he was suffering on
Katharina's account.

Katharina, meanwhile, did not go home at once to her mother; on the
contrary, she went straight off to the Bishop of Memphis, to whom
she divulged all she had learnt with regard to the inhabitants of the
convent and the intended rescue. The gentle Plotinus even had been
roused to great wrath, and no sooner had she left him than he set out
for Fostat to invoke the help of Amru, and--finding him absent--of his
Vekeel to enable him to pursue the fugitive Melchite sisters.

When the water-wagtail was at home again and alone in her room, she said
to herself, with calm satisfaction, that she had now contrived something
which would spoil several days for Orion and for Paula, and that might
prove even fatal, so far as she was concerned.




CHAPTER VIII.

Nilus had performed his errand well, and Rufinus was forced to admit
that Orion had done his part and had planned the enterprise with so much
care and unselfishness that his personal assistance could be dispensed
with. Under these circumstances he scarcely owed the young man a grudge
for placing himself at the service of his Byzantine friends; still,
his not coming to the house disturbed and vexed him, less on his own
account, or that of the good cause, than for Paula's sake, for her
feelings towards Orion had remained no secret to him or his wife.

Dame Joanna, indeed, felt the young man's conduct more keenly than
Rufinus; she would have been glad to withhold her husband from the
enterprise, whose dangers now appeared to her frightened soul tenfold
greater than they were. But she knew that the Nile would flow backwards
before she could dissuade him from keeping his promise to the abbess, so
she forced herself to preserve at any rate outward composure.

Before Paula, Rufinus declared that Orion was fully justified and he
loudly praised the young man's liberality in providing the Nile-boat
and the vessel for the sea-voyage, and such admirable substitutes for
himself. Pulcheria was delighted with her father's undertaking; she
only longed to go with him and help him to save her dear nuns. The
ship-builder had brought with him, besides his sons, three other Greeks
of the orthodox confession, shipwrights like himself, who were out
of work in consequence of the low ebb of the Nile, which had greatly
restricted the navigation. Hence they were glad to put a hand to such
a good work, especially as it would be profitable, too, for Orion had
provided the old man with ample funds.

As the evening grew cooler after sundown Paula had got better. She did
not, indeed, know what to think of Orion's refusal to start. First she
was grieved, then she rejoiced; for it certainly preserved him from
great perils. In the early days after his return from Constantinople she
had heard his praise of the senator's kindness and hospitality, in which
the Mukaukas, who had pleasant memories of the capital, heartily joined.
He must, of course, be glad to be able to assist those friends, of all
others; and Nilus, who was respectfully devoted to her, had greeted her
from Orion with peculiar warmth. He would come to-morrow, no doubt;
and the oftener she repeated to herself his assertion that he had never
betrayed affectionate trust, the more earnestly she felt prompted, in
spite of the abbess' counsel, to abandon all hesitancy, to follow
the impulse of her heart, and to be his at once in full and happy
confidence.

The waning moon had not yet risen, and the night was very dark when the
nuns set forth. The boat was too large to come close to the shore in
the present low state of the river, and the sisters, disguised as
peasant-women, had to be carried on board one by one from the convent
garden. Last of all the abbess was to be lifted over the shallow water,
and the old ship-builder held himself in readiness to perform this
service. Joanna, Pulcheria, Perpetua, and Eudoxia, who was also
zealously orthodox, were standing round as she gave Paula a parting kiss
and whispered: "God bless thee, child!--All now depends on you, and you
must be doubly careful to abide by your promise."

"I owe him, in the first place, friendly trust," was Paula's whispered
reply, and the abbess answered: "But you owe yourself firmness and
caution." Rufinus was the last; his wife and daughter clung around him
still.

"Take example from that poor girl," cried the old man, clasping his wife
in his arms. "As sure as man is the standard of all things, all must go
well with me this time if everlasting Love is not napping. Till we meet
again, best of good women!--And, if ill befalls your stupid old husband,
always remember that he brought it upon himself in trying to save a
quarter of a hundred innocent women from the worst misfortunes. At
any rate I shall fall on the road I myself have chosen.--But why has
Philippus not come to take leave of me?"

Dame Joanna burst into tears: "That-that is so hard too! What has
come over him that he has deserted us, and just now of all times? Ah,
husband! If you love me, take Gibbus with you on the voyage."

"Yes, master, take me," the hunchbacked gardener interposed. "The Nile
will be rising again by the time we come back, and till then the flowers
can die without my help. I dreamt last night that you picked a rose from
the middle of my Bump. It stuck up there like the knob on the lid of a
pot. There is some meaning in it and, if you leave me at home, what is
the good of the rose--that is to say what good will you get out of me?"

"Well then, carry your strange flower-bed on board," said the old man
laughing. "Now, are you satisfied Joanna?"

Once more he embraced her and Pulcheria and, as a tear from his wife's
eyes dropped on his hand, he whispered in her ear: "You have been the
rose of my life; and without you Eden--Paradise itself can have no
joys."

The boat pushed out into the middle of the stream and was soon hidden by
the darkness from the eyes of the women on the bank.

The convent bells were soon heard tolling after the fugitives: Paula and
Pulcheria were pulling them. There was not a breath of air; not enough
even to fill the small sail of the seaward-bound boat; but the rowers
pulled with all their might and the vessel glided northward. The captain
stood at the prow with his pole; sounding the current: his brother,
no less skilled, took the helm.--The shallowness of the water made
navigation very difficult, and those who knew the river best might
easily run aground on unexpected shoals or newly-formed mud-drifts. The
moon had scarcely risen when the boat was stranded at a short distance
below Fostat, and the men had to go overboard to push it off to an
accompaniment of loud singing which, as it were, welded their individual
wills and efforts into one. Thus it was floated off again; but such
delays were not unfrequent till they reached Letopolis, where the Nile
forks, and where they hoped to steal past the toll-takers unobserved.
Almost against their expectation, the large boat slipped through under
the heavy mist which rises from the waters before sunrise, and the
captain and crew, steering down the Phatmetic branch of the river with
renewed spirit, ascribed their success to the intercession of the pious
sisters.

By daylight it was easier to avoid the sand-banks; but how narrow was
the water-way-at this season usually overflowing! The beds of papyrus on
the banks now grew partly on dry land, and their rank green had faded to
straw-color. The shifting ooze of the shore had hardened to stone, and
the light west wind, which now rose and allowed of their hoisting the
sail, swept clouds of white dust before it. In many cases the soil was
deeply fissured and wide cracks ran across the black surface, yawning to
heaven for water like thirsty throats. The water-wheels stood idle, far
away from the stream, and the fields they were wont to irrigate looked
like the threshing floors on which the crops they bore should be
threshed out. The villages and palm-groves were shrouded in shimmering
mist, quivering heat, and dazzling yellow light; and the passer-by on
the raised dykes of the shore bent his head as he dragged his weary feet
through the deep dust.

The sun blazed pitilessly in the cloudless sky, down on land and river,
and on the fugitive nuns who had spread their white head-cloths above
them for an awning and sat in dull lethargy, awaiting what might he
before them.

The water-jar passed from hand to band; but the more they drank the
more acute was their discomfort, and their longing for some other
refreshment. At meal time the dishes were returned to the tiny cabin
almost untouched. The abbess and Rufinus tried to speak comfort to them;
but in the afternoon the superior herself was overpowered by the heat,
and the air in the little cabin, to which she retired, was even less
tolerable stuffy than on deck.

Thus passed a long day of torment, the hottest that even the men could
remember; and they on the whole suffered least from it, though they
toiled at the oar without ceasing and with wonderful endurance.

At length evening fell after those fearful midday hours; and as a cool
breeze rose shortly before sunset to fan their moist brows, the hapless
victims awoke to new energies. Their immediate torment had so crushed
them that, incapable of anticipating the future, they had ceased either
to fear or to hope; but now they could rejoice in thinking of the start
they had gained over their pursuers. They were hungry and enjoyed their
evening meal; the abbess made friends with the worthy ship-wright, and
began an eager conversation with Rufinus as to Paula and Orion: Her
wish that the young man should spend a time of probation did not at all
please Rufinus; with such a wife as Paula, he could not fail to be at
all times the noble fellow which his old friend held him to be in spite
of his having remained at home.

The hump-backed gardener made the younger nuns merry with his jests, and
after supper they all united in prayer.

Even the oarsmen had found new vigor and new life; and it was well that
few of the Greek sisters understood Egyptian, for the more jovial of
them started a song in praise of the charms of the maids they loved,
which was not composed for women's ears.

The nuns chatted of those they had left behind, and many a one spoke
of a happy meeting at home once more; but an elderly nun put a stop to
this, saying that it was a sin to anticipate the ways of God's mercy,
or, when His help was still so sorely needed, to speak as though He had
already bestowed it. They could only tremble and pray, for they knew
from experience that a threatening disaster never turned to a good end
unless it had been expected with real dread.

Another one then began to speculate as to whether their pursuers
could overtake them on foot or on horseback, and as it seemed only too
probable that they could, their hearts sank again with anxiety. Ere
long, however, the moon rose; the objects that loomed on the banks and
were mirrored in the stream, were again clearly visible and lost their
terrors.

The lower down they sailed, the denser were the thickets of papyrus on
the shore. Thousands of birds were roosting there, but they were all
asleep; a "dark ness that might be felt" brooded over the silent land
scape. The image of the moon floated on the dark water, like a gigantic
lotos-flower below the smaller, fragrant lotos-blossoms that it out-did
in sheeny whiteness; the boat left a bright wake in its track, and every
stroke of the oar broke the blackness of the water, which reflected the
light in every drop. The moonlight played on the delicate tufts that
crowned the slender papyrus-stems, filmy mist, like diaphanous brocade
of violet and silver, veiled the trees; and owls that shun the day, flew
from one branch to another on noiseless, rhythmic wings.

The magic of the night fell on the souls of the nuns; they ceased
prattling; but when Sister Martha, the nightingale of the sisterhood,
began to sing a hymn the others followed her example. The sailors'
songs were hushed, and the psalms of the virgin sisters, imploring the
protection of the Almighty, seemed to float round the gliding boat as
softly as the light of the circling moon. For hours--and with increased
zeal as the comet rose in the sky--they gave themselves up to the
soothing and encouraging pleasure of singing; but one by one the voices
died away and their peaceful hymn was borne down the river to the sea,
by degrees more low, more weary, more dreamlike.

They sat looking in their laps, gazing in rapture up to heaven, or
at the dazzling ripples and the lotos flowers on the surface. No one
thought of the shore, not even the men, who had been lulled to sleep
or daydreams by the nuns' singing. The pilot's eyes were riveted on the
channel--and yet, as morning drew near, from time to time there was a
twinkle, a flash behind the reed-beds on the eastern bank, and now and
then there was a rustling and clatter there. Was it a jackal that had
plunged into the dense growth to surprise a brood of water-fowl; was it
a hyena trampling through the thicket?

The flashing, the rustling, the dull footfall on parched earth followed
the barge all through the night like a sinister, lurid, and muttering
shadow.

Suddenly the captain started and gazed eastwards.--What was that?

There was a herd of cattle feeding in a field beyond the reeds-two bulls
perhaps were sharpening their horns. The river was so low, and the
banks rose so high, that it was impossible to see over them. But at this
moment a shrill voice spoke his name, and then the hunchback whispered
in his ear:

"There--over there--it is glittering again.--I will bite off my own
nose if that is not--there, again. Merciful God! I am not mistaken.
Harness--and there, that is the neighing of a horse; I know the sound.
The east is growing grey. By all the saints, we are pursued!"

The captain looked eastwards with every sense alert, and after a few
minutes silence he said decidedly "Yes."

"Like a flight of quail for whom the fowler spreads his net," sighed
the gardener; but the boatman impatiently signed to him to be quiet, and
gazed cautiously on every side. Then he desired Gibbus to wake Rufinus
and the shipwrights, and to hide all the nuns in the cabin.

"They will be packed as close as the dates sent to Rome in boxes,"
muttered the gardener, as he went to call Rufinus. "Poor souls, their
saints may save them from suffocation; and as for me, on my faith, if it
were not that Dame Joanna was the very best creature on two legs, and
if I had not promised her to stick to the master, I would jump into the
water and try the hospitality of the flamingoes and storks in the reeds!
We must learn to condescend!"

While he was fulfilling his errand, the captain was exchanging a few
words with his brother at the helm. There was no bridge near, and that
was well. If the horsemen were indeed in pursuit of them, they must ride
through the water to reach them; and scarcely three stadia lower down,
the river grew wider and ran through a marshy tract of country; the only
channel was near the western bank, and horsemen attempting to get to it
ran the risk of foundering in the mud. If the boat could but get as far
as that reach, much would be gained.

The captain urged the men to put forth all their strength, and very soon
the boat was flying along under the western shore, and divided by an
oozy flat from the eastern bank. Day was breaking, and the sky was
tinged red as with blood--a sinister omen that this morning was destined
to witness bitter strife and gaping wounds.

The seed sown by Katharina was beginning to grow. At the bishop's
request the Vekeel had despatched a troop of horse in pursuit of the
nuns, with orders to bring the fugitives back to Memphis and take their
escort prisoners. As the boat had slipped by the toll watch unperceived,
the Arabs had been obliged to divide, so as to follow down each arm
of the Nile. Twelve horsemen had been told off to pursue the Phasmetic
branch; for by every calculation these must suffice for the capture of
a score or so of nuns, and a handful of sailors would scarcely dare
to attempt to defend themselves. The Vekeel had heard nothing of the
addition to the party of the ship-master and his sons.

The pursuers had set out at noon of the previous day, and had overtaken
the vessel about two hours before daylight. But their leader thought
it well to postpone the attack till after sunrise, lest any of the
fugitives should escape. He and his men were all Arabs, and though well
acquainted with the course of that branch of the river which they were
to follow, they were not familiar with its peculiarities.

As soon as the morning star was invisible, the Moslems performed their
devotions, and then rushed out of the papyrus-beds. Their leader, making
a speaking trumpet of his hand, shouted to the boat his orders to stop.
He was commissioned by the governor to bring it back to Fostat. And the
fugitives seemed disposed to obey, for the boat lay to. The captain
had recognized the speaker as the captain of the watch from Fostat, an
inexorable man; and now, for the first time, he clearly understood the
deadly peril of the enterprise. He was accustomed, no doubt, to evade
the commands of his superiors, but would no more have defied them
than have confronted Fate; and he at once declared that resistance
was madness, and that there was no alternative but to yield. Rufinus,
however, vehemently denied this; he pointed out to him that the same
punishment awaited him, whether he laid down his arms or defended
himself, and the old ship-wright eagerly exclaimed:

"We built this boat, and I know you of old, Setnau; You will not turn
Judas--and, if you do, you know that Christian blood will be shed on
this deck before we can show our teeth to those Infidels."

The captain, with all the extravagant excitability of his southern
blood, beat his forehead and his breast, bemoaned himself as a betrayed
and ruined man, and bewailed his wife and children. Rufinus, however,
put an end to his ravings. He had consulted with the abbess, and he put
it strongly to the unhappy man that he could, in any case, hope for no
mercy from the unbelievers; while, on Christian ground, he would easily
find a safe and comfortable refuge for himself and his family. The
abbess would undertake to give them all a passage on board the ship that
was awaiting her, and to set them on shore wherever he might choose.

Setnau thought of a brother living in Cyprus; still, for him it meant
sacrificing his house and garden at Doomiat, where, at this very hour,
fifty date-palms were ripening their fruit; it meant leaving the fine
new Nile-boat by which he and his family got their living; and as he
represented this to the old man, bitter tears rolled down his brown
cheeks. Rufinus explained to him that, if he should succeed in saving
the sisters, he might certainly claim some indemnification. He might
even calculate the value of his property, and not only would he have
the equivalent paid to him out of the convent treasure, now on board in
heavy coffers, but a handsome gift into the bargain.

Setnau exchanged a meaning glance with his brother, who was a single
man, and when it was also agreed that he, too, might embark on the
sea-voyage he shook hands with Rufinus on the bargain. Then, giving
himself a shake, as if he had thrown off something that cramped him, and
sticking his leather cap knowingly on one side of his shaven head, he
drew himself up to his full height and scornfully shouted back to the
Arab--who had before now treated him and other Egyptian natives with
insolent haughtiness--that if he wanted anything of him he might come
and fetch it.

The Moslem's patience was long since exhausted, and at this challenge
he signed to his followers and sprang first into the river; but the
foremost horses soon sank so deep in the ooze that further advance was
evidently impossible, and the signal to return was perforce given. In
this manoeuvre a refractory horse lost his footing, and his rider was
choked in the mud.

On this, the men in the boat could see the foe holding council with
lively gesticulations, and the captain expressed his fears lest they
should give up all hope of capturing the boat, and ride forward to
Doomiat to combine with the Arab garrison to cut off their further
flight. But he had not reckoned on the warlike spirit of these men, who
had overcome far greater difficulties in twenty fights ere this. They
were determined to seize the boat, to take its freight prisoners, and
have them duly punished.

Six horsemen, among them the leader of the party, were now seen to
dismount; they tied their horses up, and then proceeded to fell three
tall palms with their battle-axes; the other five went off southwards.
These, no doubt, were to ride round the morass, and ford the river at
a favorable spot so as to attack the vessel from the west, while the
others tried to reach it from the east with the aid of the palm-trunks.

On the right, or eastern shore, where the Arabs were constructing the
raft, spread solid ground-fields through which lay the road to Doomiat;
on the other shore, near which the boat was lying, the bog extended for
a long way. An interminable jungle of papyrus, sedge, and reeds, burnt
yellow by the heat of the sun and the extraordinary drought, covered
almost the whole of this parched and baked wilderness; and, when a stiff
morning breeze rose from the northeast, the captain was inspired with a
happy thought. The five men who had ridden forward would have to force
their way through the mass of scorched and dried up vegetation. If the
Christians could but set fire to it, on the further side of a canal
which must hinder their making a wide sweep to the north, the wind would
carry it towards the enemy; and, they would be fortunate if it did
not stifle them or compel them to jump into the river, where, when the
flames reached the morass, they must inevitably perish.

As soon as the helmsman's keen eyes had made sure, from the mast-head,
that the Arabs had forded the river at a point to the south, they set
fire to several places and it roared and flared up immediately. The wind
swept it southwards, and with it clouds of pale grey smoke through which
the rising sun shot shafts of light. The flames writhed and darted over
the baked earth like gigantic yellow and orange lizards, here shooting
upwards, there creeping low. Almost colorless in the ardent daylight,
they greedily consumed everything they approached, and white ashes
marked their track. Their breath added to the heat of the advancing day;
and though the smoke was borne southwards by the wind, a few cloudlets
came over to the boat, choking the sisters and their deliverers.

A large vessel now came towards them from Doomiat and found the narrow
channel barred by the other one. The captain was related to Setnau, and
when Setnau shouted to him that they were engaged in a struggle with
Arab robbers, his friend followed his advice, turned the boat's head
with considerable difficulty, and cast anchor at the nearest village to
warn other vessels southward bound not to get themselves involved in so
perilous an adventure. Any that were coming north would be checked by
the fire and smoke.

The six horsemen left on the eastern shore beheld the spreading
blaze with rage and dismay; however, they had by this time bound the
palm-trunks together, and were preparing by their aid to inflict condign
punishment on the refractory Christians. These, meanwhile, had not been
idle. Every man on board was armed, and one of the ship-wrights was sent
on shore with a sailor, to steal through the reeds, ford the river at
a point lower down and, as soon as the Arabs put out to the attack, to
slaughter their horses, or--if one of them should be left to go forward
on the road to Doomiat--to drag him from his steed.

The six men now laid hold of the slightly-constructed float, on which
they placed their bows and quivers; they pushed it before them, and
it supported them above the shallow water, while their feet only just
touched the oozy bottom. They were all thorough soldiers, true sons of
the desert and of their race--men whom nature seemed to have conceived
as a counterpart to the eagle, the master-piece of the winged creation.
Keen-eyed, strongly-knit though small-boned, bereft of every fibre
of superfluous flesh on their sinewy limbs, with bold brown faces and
sharply-cut features, suggesting the king of birds not merely by the
aquiline nose, they had also the eagle's courage, thirst for blood, and
greed of victory.

Each held on to the raft by one lean, wiry arm, carrying on the other
the round bucklers on which the arrows that came whistling from the
boat, fell and stuck as soon as they were within shot. They ground their
white teeth with fury and nothing within ken escaped their bright hawk's
eyes. They had come to fight, even if the boat had been defended by
fifty Egyptian soldiers instead of carrying a score or so of sailors and
artisans. Their brave hearts felt safe under their shirts of mail, and
their ready, fertile brains under their brazen helmets; and they marked
the dull rattle of the arrows against their metal shields with elation
and contempt. To deal death was the wish of their souls; to meet it
caused them no dread; for their glowing fancy painted an open Paradise
where beautiful women awaited them open-armed, and brimming goblets
promised to satisfy every desire.

Their keen ears heard their captain's whispered commands; when they
reached the ship's side, one caught hold of the sill of the cabin
window, their leader, as quick as thought, sprang on to his shoulders,
and from thence on to the deck, thrusting his lance through the body of
a sailor who tried to stop him with his axe. A second Arab was close
at his heels; two gleaming scimitars flashed in the sun, the shrill,
guttural, savage war-cry of the Moslems rent the air, and the captain
fell, the first victim to their blood-thirsty fury, with a deep cut
across the face and forehead; in a moment, however, a heavy spar sang
through the air down on the head of the Moslem leader and laid him low.
The helmsman, the brother of the fallen pilot, had wielded it with the
might of the avenger.

A fearful din, increased by the shrieks and wailing of the nuns, now
filled the vessel. The second Arab dealt death on all sides with the
courage and strength of desperation, and three of his fellows managed
to climb up the boat's side; but the last man was pushed back into the
water. By this time two of the shipwrights and five sailors had fallen.
Rufinus was kneeling by the captain, who was crying feebly for help,
bleeding profusely, though not mortally wounded. Setnau had spoken with
much anxiety of his wife and children, and Rufinus, hoping to save his
life for their sakes, was binding up the wounds, which were wide and
deep, when suddenly a sabre stroke came down on the back of his head
and neck, and a dark stream of blood rushed forth. But he, too, was soon
avenged: the old shipwright hewed down his foe with his heavy axe. On
the eastern shore, meanwhile, the men charged to kill the Arabs' horses
were doing their work, so as to prevent any who might escape from
returning to Fostat, or riding forward to Doormat and reporting what had
occurred.

On board silence now prevailed. All five Arabs were stretched on the
deck, and the insatiate boatmen were dealing a finishing stroke to those
who were only wounded. A sailor, who had taken refuge up a mast, could
see how the other five horsemen had plunged into the bog to avoid the
fire and had disappeared beneath the waters; so that none of the Moslems
had escaped alive--not even that one which Fate and romance love to save
as a bearer of the disastrous tidings.

By degrees the nuns ventured out on deck again.

Those who were skilled in tending the wounded gathered round them, and
opened their medicine cases; as they proceeded on their voyage, under
the guidance of the steersman, they had their hands full of work and the
zeal they gave to it mitigated the torment of the heat.

The bodies of the five Moslems and eight Christians--among these, two of
the Greek ship-wrights--were laid on the shore in groups apart, in the
neighborhood of a village; in the hand of one of them the abbess placed
a tablet with this inscription:

"These eight Christians met their death bravely fighting to defend a
party of pious and persecuted believers. Pray for them and bury them as
well as those who, in obedience to their duty and their commander, took
their lives."

Rufinus, lying with his head on the gardener's knee, and sheltered from
the sun under the abbess' umbrella, presently recovered his senses;
looking about him he said to himself in a low voice, as he saw the
captain lying by his side:

"I, too, had a wife and a dear child at home, and yet--Ah! how this
aches! We may well do all we can to soothe such pain. The only reality
here below is not pleasure, it is pain, vulgar, physical pain; and
though my head burns and aches more than enough.--Water, a drink of
water.--How comfortable I could be at this moment with my Joanna, in
our shady house.--But yet, but yet--we must heal or save, it is all the
same, any who need it.--A drink--wine and water, if it is to be had,
worthy Mother!"

The abbess had it at hand; as she put the cup to his lips she spoke her
warm and effusive thanks, and many words of comfort; then she asked him
what she could do for him and his, when they should be in safety.

"Love them truly," he said gently. "Pul will certainly never be quite
happy till she is in a convent. But she must not leave her mother--she
must stay with her; Joanna-Joanna...."

He repeated the name several times as if the sound pleased his ear
and heart. Then he shuddered again and again, and muttered to himself:
"Brrr!--a cold shiver runs all over me--it is of no use!--The cut in my
shoulder.--It is my head that hurts worst, but the other--it is bad luck
that it should have fallen on the left side. And yet, no; it is best so;
for if he--if it had damaged my right shoulder I could not write, and I
must--I must-before it is too late. A tablet and stylus; quick,
quick! And when I have written, good mother, close the tablet and seal
it--close and tight. Promise! Only one person may read it, he to whom it
must go.--Gibbus, do you hear, Gibbus?--It is for Philippus the leech.
Take it to him.--Your dream about a rose on your hump, if I read
rightly, means that peace and joy in Heaven blossom from our misery on
earth.--Yes, to Philippus. And listen my old school friend Christodorus,
a leech too, lives at Doomiat. Take my body to him--mind me now? He is
to pack it with sand which will preserve it, and have it buried by the
side of my mother at Alexandria. Joanna and the child--they can come and
visit me there. I have not much to leave; whatever that may cost...."

"That is my affair, or the convent's," cried the abbess.

"Matters are not so bad as that," said the old man smiling. "I can pay
for my own share of the business; your revenue belongs to the poor,
noble Mother.--You will find more than enough in this wallet, good
Gibbus. But now, quick, make haste--the tablets."

When he had one in his hand, and a stylus for writing with, he thought
for some time, and then wrote with trembling fingers, though exerting
all his strength. How acutely he was suffering could be seen in
his drawn mouth and sad eyes, but he would not allow himself to be
interrupted, often as the abbess and the gardener entreated him to lay
aside the stylus. At last, with a deep sigh of relief, he closed the
tablets, handed them to the abbess, and said:

"There! Close it fast.--To Philippus the physician; into his own hand:
You hear, Gibbus?"

Here he fainted; but after they had bathed his forehead and wounds he
came to himself, and softly murmured: "I was dreaming of Joanna and the
poor child. They brought me a comic mask. What can that mean? That I
have been a fool all my life for thinking of other folks' troubles and
forgetting myself and my own family? No, no, no! As surely as man is the
standard of all things--if it were so, then, then folly would be truth
and right.--I, I--my desire--the aim to which my life was devoted...."

He paused; then he suddenly raised himself, looked up with a bright
light in his eyes, and cried aloud with joy: "O Thou, most merciful
Saviour! Yes, yes--I see it all now. I thank thee--All that I strove for
and lived for, Thou, my Redeemer who art Love itself--Ah how good, how
comforting to think of that!--It is for this that Thou grantest me to
die!"

Again he lost consciousness; his head grew very hot, his breath came
hoarsely and his parched lips, though frequently moistened by careful
hands, could only murmur the names of those he loved best, and among
them that of Paula.

At about five hours after noon he fell back on the hunchback's knees;
he had ceased to suffer. A happy smile lighted up his features, and in
death the old man's calm face looked like that of a child.

The gardener felt as though he had lost his own father, and his lively
tongue remained speechless till he entered Doormat with the rescued
sisters, and proceeded to carry out his master's last orders. The
abbess' ship took the wounded captain Setnau on board, with his wife,
his children, his brother the steersman, and the surviving ship-wrights.

At the very hour when Rufinus closed his eyes, the town-watch of
Memphis, led by Bishop Plotinus, appeared to claim the Melchite convent
of St. Cecilia, and all the possessions of the sisterhood, in the name
of the patriarch and the Jacobite church. Next morning the bishop set
out for Upper Egypt to make his report to the prelate.




CHAPTER IX.

Philippus started up from the divan on which he had been reclining at
breakfast with his old friend. Before Horapollo was a half-empty plate;
he had swallowed his meal less rapidly than his companion, and looked
disapprovingly at the leech, who drank off his wine and water as he
stood, whereas he generally would sit and enjoy it as he talked to the
old man of matters light or grave. To the elder this was always the
pleasantest hour of the day; but now Philippus would hardly allow
himself more than just time enough to eat, even at their principal
evening meal.

Indeed, not he alone, but every physician in the city, had as much as he
could do with the utmost exertion. Nearly three weeks had elapsed
since the attack on the nuns, and the fearful heat had still gone on
in creasing. The river, instead of rising had sunk lower and lower;
the carrier-pigeons from Ethiopia, looked for day by day with growing
anxiety and excitement, brought no news of a rising stream even in the
upper Nile, and the shallow, stagnant and evil-smelling waters by the
banks began to be injurious, nay, fatal, to the health of the whole
population.

Close to the shore, especially, the water had a reddish tinge, and the
usually sweet, pure fluid in the canals was full of strange vegetable
growths and other foreign bodies putrid and undrinkable. The common
people usually shirked the trouble of filtering it, and it was among
them that the greater number died of a mortal and infectious pestilence,
till then unknown. The number of victims swelled daily, and the approach
of the comet kept pace with the growing misery of the town. Every one
connected it with the intense heat of the season, with the delay in the
inundation, and the appearance of the sickness; and the leech and his
friend often argued about these matters, for Philippus would not admit
that the meteor had any influence on human affairs, while Horapollo
believed that it had, and supported his view by a long series of
examples.

His antagonist would not accept them and asked for arguments; at the
same time he, like every one else, felt the influence of a vague dread
of some imminent and terrible disaster hanging over the earth and
humanity at large.

And, just as every heart in Memphis felt oppressed by such forebodings,
and by the weight of a calamity, which indeed no longer threatened them
but had actually come upon them, so the roads, the gardens, the palms
and sycamores by the way-side were covered by thick layers of dingy,
choking dust. The hedges of tamarisk and shrubs looked like decaying
walls of colorless, unburnt mud-bricks; even in the high-roads the
wayfarer walked in the midst of dense white clouds raised by his feet,
and if a chariot, or a horseman galloped down the scorching street,
fine, grey sand at once filled the air, compelling the foot-passengers
to shut their eyes and lips.

The town was so silent, so empty, so deserted! No one came out of doors
unless under pressure of business or piety. Every house was a furnace,
