carcase. I didn't tell you, did I, that the mob set on them as they
haled us here and pulled four wounded men and those who carried them to
bits? Oh! yes, they have paid a price, a very good price for a Frisian
boor and a Leyden burgher."

"God pardon their souls," murmured the unknown.

"That's as He likes," said Martin, "and no affair of mine; I had only to
do with their bodies and--" At this moment Foy groaned, sat up and asked
for something to drink.

Martin gave him water from the pitcher.

"Where am I?" he asked, and he told him.

"Martin, old fellow," said Foy in an uncertain voice, "we are in a very
bad way, but as we have lived through this"--here his characteristic
hopefulness asserted itself--"I believe, I believe that we shall live
through the rest."

"Yes, young sir," echoed the thin, faint notes out of the darkness
beyond the bars, "I believe, too, that you will live through the rest,
and I am praying that it may be so."

"Who is that?" asked Foy drowsily.

"Another prisoner," answered Martin.

"A prisoner who will soon be free," murmured the voice again through the
blackness, for by now night had fallen, and no light came from the hole
above.

Then Foy fell into sleep or stupor, and there was silence for a long
while, until they heard the bolts and bars of the door of the dungeon
creaking, and the glint of a lantern appeared floating on the gloom.
Several men tramped down the narrow gangway, and one of them, unlocking
their cage, entered, filled the jug of water from a leathern jack, and
threw down some loaves of black bread and pieces of stockfish, as food
is thrown to dogs. Having examined the pair of them he grunted and went
away, little knowing how near he had been to death, for the heart of
Martin was mad. But he let him go. Then the door of the next cell was
opened, and a man said, "Come out. It is time."

"It is time and I am ready," answered the thin voice. "Good-bye,
friends, God be with you."

"Good-bye, lady," answered Martin; "may you soon be with God." Then he
added, by an afterthought, "What is your name? I should like to know."

"Mary," she replied, and began to sing a hymn, and so, still singing the
hymn, she passed away to her death. They never saw her face, they never
learned who she might be, this poor girl who was but an item among the
countless victims of perhaps the most hideous tyranny that the world
has ever known--one of Alva's slaughtered sixty thousand. But many years
afterwards, when Foy was a rich man in a freer land, he built a church
and named it Mary's kirk.

The long night wore away in silence, broken only by the groans and
prayers of prisoners in dens upon the same floor, or with the solemn
rhythm of hymns sung by those above, till at length the light, creeping
through the dungeon lattices, told them that it was morning. At its
first ray Martin awoke much refreshed, for even there his health and
weariness had brought sleep to him. Foy also awoke, stiff and sore, but
in his right mind and very hungry. Then Martin found the loaves and the
stockfish, and they filled themselves, washing down the meal with water,
after which he dressed Foy's wounds, making a poultice for them out of
the crumb of the bread, and doctored his own bruises as best he could.

It must have been ten o'clock or later when again the doors were opened,
and men appeared who commanded that they should follow them.

"One of us can't walk," said Martin; "still, perhaps I can manage," and,
lifting Foy in his arms as though he had been a baby, he passed with the
jailers out of the den, down the stair, and into the court-room. Here,
seated behind a table, they found Ramiro and the little, squeaky-voiced,
red-faced Inquisitor.

"Heaven above us!" said the Inquisitor, "what a great hairy ruffian;
it makes me feel nervous to be in the same place with him. I beg you,
Governor Ramiro, instruct your soldiers to be watching and to stab him
at the first movement."

"Have no fear, noble sir," answered Ramiro, "the villain is quite
unarmed."

"I daresay, I daresay, but let us get on. Now what is the charge against
these people? Ah! I see, heresy like the last upon the evidence of--oh!
well, never mind. Well, we will take that as proved, and, of course, it
is enough. But what more? Ah! here it is. Escaped from The Hague with
the goods of a heretic, killed sundry of his Majesty's lieges, blew up
others on the Haarlemer Meer, and yesterday, as we know for ourselves,
committed a whole series of murders in resisting lawful arrest.
Prisoners, have you anything to say?"

"Plenty," answered Foy.

"Then save your trouble and my time, since nothing can excuse your
godless, rebellious, and damnable behaviour. Friend Governor, into your
hands I deliver them, and may God have mercy on their souls. See, by the
way, that you have a priest at hand to shrive them at last, if they will
be shriven, just for the sake of charity, but all the other details I
leave to you. Torment? Oh! of course if you think there is anything to
be gained by it, or that it will purify their souls. And now I will be
going on to Haarlem, for I tell you frankly, friend Governor, that I
don't think this town of Leyden safe for an honest officer of the law;
there are too many bad characters here, schismatics and resisters of
authority. What? The warrant not ready? Well, I will sign it in blank.
You can fill it in. There. God forgive you, heretics; may your souls
find peace, which is more, I fear, than your bodies will for the next
few hours. Bah! friend Governor, I wish that you had not made me assist
at the execution of that girl last night, especially as I understand she
leaves no property worth having; her white face haunts my mind, I can't
be rid of the look of those great eyes. Oh! these heretics, to what
sorrow do they put us orthodox people! Farewell, friend Governor; yes,
I think I will go out by the back way, some of those turbulent citizens
might be waiting in front. Farewell, and temper justice with mercy if
you can," and he was gone.

Presently Ramiro, who had accompanied him to the gate, returned. Seating
himself on the further side of the table, he drew his rapier and laid it
before him. Then, having first commanded them to bring a chair in which
Foy might sit, since he could not stand because of his wounded leg, he
told the guard to fall back out of hearing, but to be ready should he
need them.

"Not much dignity about that fellow," he said, addressing Martin and
Foy in a cheerful voice; "quite different from the kind of thing you
expected, I daresay. No hooded Dominican priests, no clerks taking
notes, no solemnities, nothing but a little red-faced wretch, perspiring
with terror lest the mob outside should catch him, as for my part I
hope they may. Well, gentlemen, what can you expect, seeing that, to my
knowledge, the man is a bankrupt tailor of Antwerp? However, it is the
substance we have to deal with, not the shadow, and that's real enough,
for his signature on a death warrant is as good as that of the Pope, or
his gracious Majesty King Philip, or, for the matter of that, of Alva
himself. Therefore, you are--dead men."

"As you would have been had I not been fool enough to neglect Martin's
advice out in the Haarlemer Meer and let you escape," answered Foy.

"Precisely, my young friend, but you see my guardian angel was too many
for you, and you did neglect that excellent counsel. But, as it happens,
it is just about the Haarlemer Meer that I want to have a word with
you."

Foy and Martin looked at each other, for now they understood exactly
why they were there, and Ramiro, watching them out of the corners of his
eyes, went on in a low voice:

"Let us drop this and come to business. You hid it, and you know where
it is, and I am in need of a competence for my old age. Now, I am not a
cruel man; I wish to put no one to pain or death; moreover, I tell you
frankly, I admire both of you very much. The escape with the treasure on
board of your boat _Swallow_, and the blowing up, were both exceedingly
well managed, with but one mistake which you, young sir, have pointed
out," and he bowed and smiled. "The fight that you made yesterday, too,
was splendid, and I have entered the details of it in my own private
diary, because they ought not to be forgotten."

Now it was Foy's turn to bow, while even on Martin's grim and impassive
countenance flickered a faint smile.

"Naturally," went on Ramiro, "I wish to save such men, I wish you to go
hence quite free and unharmed," and he paused.

"How can we after we have been condemned to death?" asked Foy.

"Well, it does not seem so difficult. My friend, the tailor--I mean the
Inquisitor--who, for all his soft words, _is_ a cruel man indeed, was in
a hurry to be gone, and--he signed a blank warrant, always an incautious
thing to do. Well, a judge can acquit as well as condemn, and this
one--is no exception. What is there to prevent me filling this paper in
with an order for your release?"

"And what is there to show us that you would release us after all?"
asked Foy.

"Upon the honour of a gentleman," answered Ramiro laying his hand on
his heart. "Tell me what I want to know, give me a week to make certain
necessary arrangements, and so soon as I am back you shall both of you
be freed."

"Doubtless," said Foy, angrily, "upon such honour as gentlemen learn in
the galleys, Senor Ramiro--I beg your pardon, Count Juan de Montalvo."

Ramiro's face grew crimson to the hair.

"Sir," he said, "were I a different sort of man, for those words you
should die in a fashion from which even the boldest might shrink. But
you are young and inexperienced, so I will overlook them. Now this
bargaining must come to a head. Which will you have, life and safety, or
the chance--which under the circumstances is no chance at all--that one
day, not you, of course, but somebody interested in it, may recover a
hoard of money and jewels?"

Then Martin spoke for the first time, very slowly and respectfully.

"Worshipful sir," he said, "we cannot tell you where the money is
because we do not know. To be frank with you, nobody ever knew except
myself. I took the stuff and sank it in the water in a narrow channel
between two islands, and I made a little drawing of them on a piece of
paper."

"Exactly, my good friend, and where is that piece of paper?"

"Alas! sir, when I was lighting the fuses on board the _Swallow_, I let
it fall in my haste, and it is--in exactly the same place as are all
your worship's worthy comrades who were on board that ship. I believe,
however, that if you will put yourself under my guidance I could show
your Excellency the spot, and this, as I do not want to be killed, I
should be most happy to do."

"Good, simple man," said Ramiro with a little laugh, "how charming is
the prospect that you paint of a midnight row with you upon those lonely
waters; the tarantula and the butterfly arm in arm! Mynheer van Goorl,
what have you to say?"

"Only that the story told by Martin here is true. I do not know where
the money is, as I was not present at its sinking, and the paper has
been lost."

"Indeed? I am afraid, then, that it will be necessary for me to refresh
your memory, but, first, I have one more argument, or rather two. Has
it struck you that another life may hang upon your answer? As a rule men
are loth to send their fathers to death."

Foy heard, and terrible as was the hint, yet it came to him as a relief,
for he had feared lest he was about to say "your mother" or "Elsa
Brant."

"That is my first argument, a good one, I think, but I have--another
which may appeal even more forcibly to a young man and prospective heir.
The day before yesterday you became engaged to Elsa Brant--don't look
surprised; people in my position have long ears, and you needn't
be frightened, the young lady will not be brought here; she is too
valuable."

"Be so good as to speak plainly," said Foy.

"With pleasure. You see this girl is the heiress, is she not? and
whether or no I find out the facts from you, sooner or later, in this
way or that, she will doubtless discover where her heritage is hidden.
Well, that fortune a husband would have the advantage of sharing. I
myself labour at present under no matrimonial engagements, and am in a
position to obtain an introduction--ah! my friend, are you beginning to
see that there are more ways of killing a dog than by hanging him?"

Weak and wounded as he was, Foy's heart sank in him at the words of this
man, this devil who had betrayed his mother with a mock marriage, and
who was the father of Adrian. The idea of making the heiress his wife
was one worthy of his evil ingenuity, and why should he not put it into
practice? Elsa, of course, would rebel, but Alva's officials in such
days had means of overcoming any maidenly reluctance, or at least of
forcing women to choose between death and degradation. Was it not common
for them even to dissolve marriages in order to give heretics to new
husbands who desired their wealth? There was no justice left in the
land; human beings were the chattels and slaves of their oppressors. Oh
God! what was there to do, except to trust in God? Why should they
be tortured, murdered, married against their wills, for the sake of a
miserable pile of pelf? Why not tell the truth and let the fellow take
the money? He had measured up his man, and believed that he could drive
a bargain with him. Ramiro wanted money, not lives. He was no fanatic;
horrors gave him no pleasure; he cared nothing about his victims' souls.
As he had betrayed his mother, Lysbeth, for cash, so he would be willing
to let them all go for cash. Why not make the exchange?

Then distinct, formidable, overwhelming, the answer rose up in Foy's
mind. Because he had sworn to his father that nothing which could be
imagined should induce him to reveal this secret and betray this trust.
And not only to his father, to Hendrik Brant also, who already had given
his own life to keep his treasure out of the hands of the Spaniards,
believing that in some unforeseen way it would advantage his own land
and countrymen. No, great as was the temptation, he must keep the letter
of his bond and pay its dreadful price. So again Foy answered,

"It is useless to try to bribe me, for I do not know where the money
is."

"Very well, Heer Foy van Goorl, now we have a plain issue before us,
but I will still try to protect you against yourself--the warrant shall
remain blank for a little while."

Then he called aloud, "Sergeant, ask the Professor Baptiste to be so
good as to step this way."



CHAPTER XXI

HOW MARTIN TURNED COWARD

The sergeant left the room and presently returned, followed by the
Professor, a tall hang-dog looking rogue, clad in rusty black, with
broad, horny hands, and nails bitten down to the quick.

"Good morning to you, Professor," said Ramiro. "Here are two subjects
for your gentle art. You will begin upon the big one, and from time to
time report progress, and be sure, if he becomes willing to reveal what
I want to know--never mind what it is, that is my affair--come to summon
me at once."

"What methods does your Excellency wish employed?"

"Man, I leave that to you. Am I a master of your filthy trade? Any
method, provided it is effective."

"I don't like the look of him," grumbled the Professor, gnawing at
his short nails. "I have heard about this mad brute; he is capable of
anything."

"Then take the whole guard with you; one naked wretch can't do much
against eight armed men. And, listen; take the young gentleman also, and
let him see what goes on; the experience may modify his views, but don't
touch him without telling me. I have reports to write, and shall stop
here."

"I don't like the look of him," repeated the Professor. "I say that he
makes me feel cold down the back--he has the evil eye; I'd rather begin
with the young one."

"Begone and do what I tell you," said Ramiro, glaring at him fiercely.
"Guard, attend upon the executioner Baptiste."

"Bring them along," grumbled the Professor.

"No need for violence, worthy sir," muttered Martin; "show the way and
we follow," and stooping down he lifted Foy from his chair.

Then the procession started. First went Baptiste and four soldiers, next
came Martin bearing Foy, and after them four more soldiers. They passed
out of the courtroom into the passage beneath the archway. Martin,
shuffling along slowly, glanced down it and saw that on the wall, among
some other weapons, hung his own sword, Silence. The big doors were
locked and barred, but at the wicket by the side of them stood a sentry,
whose office it was to let people in and out upon their lawful business.
Making pretence to shift Foy in his arms, Martin scanned this wicket as
narrowly as time would allow, and observed that it seemed to be secured
by means of iron bolts at the top and the bottom, but that it was
not locked, since the socket into which the tongue went was empty.
Doubtless, while he was on guard there, the porter did not think it
necessary to go to the pains of using the great key that hung at his
girdle.

The sergeant in charge of the victims opened a low and massive door,
which was almost exactly opposite to that of the court-room, by shooting
back a bolt and pushing it ajar. Evidently the place beyond at some time
or other had been used as a prison, which accounted for the bolt on
the outside. A few seconds later and they were locked into the
torture-chamber of the Gevangenhuis, which was nothing more than a
good-sized vault like that of a cellar, lit with lamps, for no light
of day was suffered to enter here, and by a horrid little fire that
flickered on the floor. The furnitures of the place may be guessed
at; those that are curious about such things can satisfy themselves by
examining the mediaeval prisons at The Hague and elsewhere. Let us pass
them over as unfit even for description, although these terrors, of
which we scarcely like to speak to-day, were very familiar to the sight
of our ancestors of but three centuries ago.

Martin sat Foy down upon some terrible engine that roughly resembled
a chair, and once more let his blue eyes wander about him. Amongst the
various implements was one leaning against the wall, not very far
from the door, which excited his especial interest. It was made for a
dreadful purpose, but Martin reflected only that it seemed to be a stout
bar of iron exactly suited to the breaking of anybody's head.

"Come," sneered the Professor, "undress that big gentleman while I make
ready his little bed."

So the soldiers stripped Martin, nor did they assault him with sneers
and insults, for they remembered the man's deeds of yesterday, and
admired his strength and endurance, and the huge, muscular frame beneath
their hands.

"Now he is ready if you are," said the sergeant.

The Professor rubbed his hands.

"Come on, my little man," he said.

Then Martin's nerve gave way, and he began to shiver and to shake.

"Oho!" laughed the Professor, "even in this stuffy place he is cold
without his clothes; well we must warm him--we must warm him."

"Who would have thought that a big fellow, who can fight well, too,
was such a coward at heart," said the sergeant of the guard to his
companions. "After all, he will give no more play than a Rhine salmon."

Martin heard the words, and was seized with such an intense access of
fear that he burst into a sweat all over his body.

"I can't bear it," he said, covering his eyes--which, however, he did
not shut--with his fingers. "The rack was always my nightmare, and now I
see why. I'll tell all I know."

"Oh! Martin, Martin," broke out Foy in a kind of wail, "I was doing my
best to keep my own courage; I never dreamt that you would turn coward."

"Every well has a bottom, master," whined Martin, "and mine is the rack.
Forgive me, but I can't abide the sight of it."

Foy stared at him open-mouthed. Could he believe his ears? And if Martin
was so horribly scared, why did his eye glint in that peculiar way
between his fingers? He had seen this light in it before, no later
indeed than the last afternoon just as the soldiers tried to rush the
stair. He gave up the problem as insoluble, but from that moment he
watched very narrowly.

"Do you hear what this young lady says, Professor Baptiste?" said the
sergeant. "She says" (imitating Martin's whine) "that she'll tell all
she knows."

"Then the great cur might have saved me this trouble. Stop here with
him. I must go and inform the Governor; those are my orders. No, no,
you needn't give him clothes yet--that cloth is enough--one can never be
sure."

Then he walked to the door and began to unlock it, as he went striking
Martin in the face with the back of his hand, and saying,

"Take that, cur." Whereat, as Foy observed, the cowed prisoner perspired
more profusely than before, and shrank away towards the wall.

God in Heaven! What had happened? The door of the torture den was
opened, and suddenly, uttering the words, "_To me, Foy!_" Martin made
a movement more quick than he could follow. Something flew up and fell
with a fearful thud upon the executioner in the doorway. The guard
sprang forward, and a great bar of iron, hurled with awful force into
their faces, swept two of them broken to the ground. Another instant,
and one arm was about his middle, the next they were outside the door,
Martin standing straddle-legged over the body of the dead Professor
Baptiste.

They were outside the door, but it was not shut, for now, on the other
side of it six men were pushing with all their might and main. Martin
dropped Foy. "Take his dagger and look out for the porter," he gasped as
he hurled himself against the door.

In a second Foy had drawn the weapon out of the belt of the dead man,
and wheeled round. The porter from the wicket was running on them sword
in hand. Foy forgot that he was wounded--for the moment his leg
seemed sound again. He doubled himself up and sprang at the man like
a wild-cat, as one springs who has the rack behind him. There was no
fight, yet in that thrust the skill which Martin had taught him so
patiently served him well, for the sword of the Spaniard passed over
his head, whereas Foy's long dagger went through the porter's throat.
A glance showed Foy that from him there was nothing more to fear, so he
turned.

"Help if you can," groaned Martin, as well he might, for with his naked
shoulder wedged against one of the cross pieces of the door he was
striving to press it to so that the bolt could be shot into its socket.

Heavens! what a struggle was that. Martin's blue eyes seemed to be
starting from his head, his tongue lolled out and the muscles of his
body rose in great knots. Foy hopped to him and pushed as well as he was
able. It was little that he could do standing upon one leg only, for now
the sinews of the other had given way again; still that little made
the difference, for let the soldiers on the further side strive as they
might, slowly, very slowly, the thick door quivered to its frame. Martin
glanced at the bolt, for he could not speak, and with his left hand Foy
slowly worked it forward. It was stiff with disuse, it caught upon the
edge of the socket.

"Closer," he gasped.

Martin made an effort so fierce that it was hideous to behold, for
beneath the pressure the blood trickled from his nostrils, but the door
went in the sixteenth of an inch and the rusty bolt creaked home into
its stone notch.

Martin stepped back, and for a moment stood swaying like a man about to
fall. Then, recovering himself, he leapt at the sword Silence which hung
upon the wall and passed its thong over his right wrist. Next he turned
towards the door of the court-room.

"Where are you going?" asked Foy.

"To bid _him_ farewell," hissed Martin.

"You're mad," said Foy; "let's fly while we can. That door may
give--they are shouting."

"Perhaps you are right," answered Martin doubtfully. "Come. On to my
back with you."

A few seconds later the two soldiers on guard outside the Gevangenhuis
were amazed to see a huge, red-bearded man, naked save for a loin-cloth,
and waving a great bare sword, who carried upon his back another man,
rush straight at them with a roar. They never waited his onset; they
were terrified and thought that he was a devil. This way and that they
sprang, and the man with his burden passed between them over the little
drawbridge down the street of the city, heading for the Morsch poort.

Finding their wits again the guards started in pursuit, but a voice from
among the passers-by cried out:

"It is Martin, Red Martin, and Foy van Goorl, who escape from the
Gevangenhuis," and instantly a stone flew towards the soldiers.

Then, bearing in mind the fate of their comrades on the yesterday, those
men scuttled back to the friendly shelter of the prison gate. When at
length Ramiro, growing weary of waiting, came out from an inner chamber
beyond the court-room, where he had been writing, to find the Professor
and the porter dead in the passage, and the yelling guard locked in his
own torture-chamber, why, then those sentries declared that they had
seen nothing at all of prisoners clothed or naked.

For a while he believed them, and mighty was the hunt from the
clock-tower of the Gevangenhuis down to the lowest stone of its cellars,
yes, and even in the waters of the moat. But when the Governor found out
the truth it went very ill with those soldiers, and still worse with the
guard from whom Martin had escaped in the torture-room like an eel out
of the hand of a fish-wife. For by this time Ramiro's temper was roused,
and he began to think that he had done ill to return to Leyden.

But he had still a card to play. In a certain room in the Gevangenhuis
sat another victim. Compared to the dreadful dens where Foy and Martin
had been confined this was quite a pleasant chamber upon the first
floor, being reserved, indeed, for political prisoners of rank, or
officers captured upon the field who were held to ransom. Thus it had
a real window, secured, however, by a double set of iron bars, which
overlooked the little inner courtyard and the gaol kitchen. Also it was
furnished after a fashion, and was more or less clean. This prisoner
was none other than Dirk van Goorl, who had been neatly captured as he
returned towards his house after making certain arrangements for the
flight of his family, and hurried away to the gaol. On that morning Dirk
also had been put upon his trial before the squeaky-voiced and agitated
ex-tailor. He also had been condemned to death, the method of his
end, as in the case of Foy and Martin, being left in the hands of the
Governor. Then they led him back to his room, and shot the bolts upon
him there.

Some hours later a man entered his cell, to the door of which he was
escorted by soldiers, bringing him food and drink. He was one of the
cooks and, as it chanced, a talkative fellow.

"What passes in this prison, friend?" asked Dirk looking up, "that I see
people running to and fro across the courtyard, and hear trampling and
shouts in the passages? Is the Prince of Orange coming, perchance, to
set all of us poor prisoners free?" and he smiled sadly.

"Umph!" grunted the man, "we have prisoners here who set themselves
free without waiting for any Prince of Orange. Magicians they must
be--magicians and nothing less."

Dirk's interest was excited. Putting his hand into his pocket he drew
out a gold piece, which he gave to the man.

"Friend," he said, "you cook my food, do you not, and look after me?
Well, I have a few of these about me, and if you prove kind they may as
well find their way into your pocket as into those of your betters. Do
you understand?"

The man nodded, took the money, and thanked him.

"Now," went on Dirk, "while you clean the room, tell me about this
escape, for small things amuse those who hear no tidings."

"Well, Mynheer," answered the man, "this is the tale of it so far as I
can gather. Yesterday they captured two fellows, heretics I suppose, who
made a good fight and did them much damage in a warehouse. I don't know
their names, for I am a stranger to this town, but I saw them brought
in; a young fellow, who seemed to be wounded in the leg and neck, and
a great red-bearded giant of a man. They were put upon their trial this
morning, and afterwards sent across, the two of them together, with
eight men to guard them, to call upon the Professor--you understand?"

Dirk nodded, for this Professor was well known in Leyden. "And then?" he
asked.

"And then? Why, Mother in Heaven! they came out, that's all--the big
man stripped and carrying the other on his back. Yes, they killed the
Professor with the branding iron, and out they came--like ripe peas from
a pod."

