to M. le Comte, was thus more in her confidence than we were. She told
us at last with a thousand thanks that she had resolved on offering her
services to the Princesses, and that she should send the children with
Madame Croquelebois into Anjou; where she thought they would be safer
than at Paris. We were sorry, but there was a determination now in our
little Cecile that made her quite an altered woman. So she repaired
to Montroud, where the younger Princess of Conde had retired, and was
acting by the advice of M. Lenet, the Prince's chief confidant.

The next thing we heard of her was astonishing enough. The Princess,
a delicate sickly woman, together with our little Countess, had left
Montroud in the night with fifty horses. The Princess rode on a pillion
behind M. de Coligny, Cecile in the same way, and the little Duke of
Enghien was on a little saddle in front of Vialas, his equerry. On they
went, day and night, avoiding towns and villages, and seldom halting
except in the fields. Happily it was the month of May, or those two
delicate beings never could have lived through it, but Cecile afterwards
told us that she had never felt so well in her life.

Near the town of Saint Cere they met the Dukes of Bouillon and La
Rochefoucauld, with eight hundred men, mostly gentlemen, who were ready
to take up their cause. The Princess, hitherto so shy, gracefully and
eagerly greeted and thanked them, and the little Duke made his little
speech. 'Indeed I am not afraid of Mazarin any more, since I see you
here with so may brave men. I only expect the liberty of my good papa
through their valour and yours.'

There were great acclamations at this pretty little address, and then
the boy rode with his mother through the eight squadrons in which the
troop was drawn up, saluting the officers like a true little Prince,
with his hat in his hand, while there were loud shouts of 'Vive le Roi!
Vivent les Prince!' and such a yell of 'Down with Mazarin!' as made
Cecile tremble.

She was expecting her own share in the matter all along, and presently
she had the delight of seeing twenty more men coming with Croquelebois
at their head, and by his side, on a little pony, her own little
Maurice, the Chevalier d'Aubepine. Was not Cecile a proud woman then? I
have a letter of hers in which she says (poor dear thing!) that he was
a perfect little Prince Charmant; and he really was a pretty little
fellow, and very well trained and good, adoring her as she deserved.

I will go on with her story, though only at second hand, before I
proceed with my own, which for a time took me from the scene of my
friend's troubles. This is written for her grandchildren as much as my
own and my sister's, and it is well they should know what a woman she
truly was, and how love gave her strength in her weakness.

The Prince of Conde, whose history and whose troubles were only too like
her own, already loved her extremely, and welcomed her little son as a
companion to the Duke of Enghien. The Duke of Bouillon took them to
his own fortress-town of Turenne, where they remained, while the little
bourg of Brive la Gaillarde was taken from the royal troops by the
Dukes. The regiment sent by the Cardinal to occupy the place was Prince
Thomas of Savoy's gendarmes, and as of course they loved such generals
as Turenne and Conde better than any one else, the loyalty of most of
them gave way, and they joined the Princess's little army.

The Duke of Bouillon entertained his guests splendidly, though his poor
Duchess was absent in the Bastille. The ladies had to dine every day
in the great hall with all the officers, and it was a regular banquet,
always beginning and ending with Conde's health. Great German goblets
were served out to everybody, servants and all, and the Duke of Bouillon
began by unsheathing his sword, and taking off his hat, while he vowed
to die in the service of the Princes, and never to return his sword
to the scabbard--in metaphor, I suppose--till it was over. Everybody
shouted in unison, waved the sword, flourished the hat, and then drank,
sometimes standing, sometimes on their knees. The two little boys, with
their tiny swords, were delighted to do the same, though their mothers
took care that there should be more water than wine in their great
goblets.

I afterwards asked Cecile, who was wont to shudder at the very sight of
a sword, how she endured all these naked weapons flourishing round her.
'Oh,' she said, 'did not I see my husband's liberty through them?'

The ladies were then escorted, partly on horseback, partly by boat, to
Limeuil, and that same day their Dukes gained a victory over the royal
troops, and captured all their baggage, treasure, and plate, so that
Cecile actually heard the sounds of battle, and her husband might say,
as the Prince did at Vincennes: 'A fine state of things that my wife
should be leading armies while I am watering pinks.'

The wives had their pinks too, for the whole road to Bordeaux was
scattered with flowers, and every one trooped out to bless the Princess
and her son. As she entered the city the 400 vessels in the port fired
all their guns three times over, and 30,000 men, escorting a splendid
carriage, in which she went along at a foot's pace, came forth to
welcome her. Her son was dressed in white taffety turned up with black
and white feathers. He was held in a gentleman's arms at the window, and
continually bowed, and held out his little hands to be kissed, saying
that his father and grandfather had been quite right to love people who
had such an affection for their house as these seemed to have. Maurice
d'Aubepine, at the opposite window, was nodding away with a good-will
at the people who were obliged to put up with him instead of the little
Duke.

They came to a handsome house, which had been appointed for the Prince's
gentleman, took great care of them, though the two Dukes remained
outside with their little army. The next day the Princess, attended
of course by Madame d'Aubepine, and a whole train of noblesse and
influential people, went to the Parliament of Bordeaux with her petition
for aid. She personally addressed each counsellor in the passage to
the great hall, and represented to them the cruelty and ingratitude of
Mazarin towards her husband, while her little son kissed and embraced
and begged them for his father's liberty.

When all had assembled in the great chamber, and they had begun to
deliberate, the Princess burst in on them, threw herself on her knees,
and began a speech. When she broke off, choked by tears, her little son
fell on his knees and exclaimed: 'Gentlemen, be instead of a father to
me; Cardinal Mazarin has taken away mine!'

Then there was a general weeping, and the Parliament promised the
Princess their protection. There was more hesitation about admitting the
two Dukes, but at last it was done. There were the headquarters of the
army that resisted the Crown. At least this was the principle on which
the Duke of Bouillon acted. His family had from the first tried to
maintain the privileges which the old feudal vassals attributed to
themselves, and he was following up their traditions, as well as
fighting for the deliverance of his wife from her captivity.

The Duke of Rochefoucauld was throughout more the lover of Madame de
Longueville then anything else, and the Princess of Conde simply thought
of obtaining her husband's release, and nothing else. She had no notions
of State policy nor anything else of the kind, any more than had Madame
d'Aubepine, who assisted daily at her little agitated court. They were
the two gentlest, simplest, weakest conspirators who ever rebelled
against the Crown, and it was all out of pure loyalty to the two
husbands who had never shown a spark of affection, scarcely of courtesy,
to either of them.

Well, the Queen herself and her son and all the Court came to reduce
Bordeaux, Mademoiselle and all, for she had been for the time detached
from the adoration of the Prince, by, of all things in the world, hopes
given her of marrying her little cousin, the King, though he was only
twelve and she was double that age. So Bordeaux was besieged, and held
out against the royal troops for some days, being encouraged by the
resolute demeanour of the Princess; but at last, when on the faubourgs
had been taken, the Parliament, uneasy in conscience at resisting the
Crown, decided on capitulating, and, to the bitter disappointment and
indignation of the ladies, made no stipulations as to the liberty of the
husband.

No attempt was made on the liberty of the lady herself, and she was
ordered to depart to Chantilly. Though unwell, she had visited every
counsellor in his own house, and done her utmost to prepare for the
renewal of the resistance in case her husband was not released; and she
was almost exhausted with fatigue when she went on board a vessel which
was to take her to Larmont, whence she meant to go to Coutras, where she
was to be permitted to stay for three days.

Many nobles and people of condition, and half the population of
Bordeaux, came down to the port with her, uttering lamentations,
benedictions on her and her boy, and curses on Mazarin.

While about to embark she met Marshal de la Meilleraye, who advised her
to go and see the Queen at Bourg, and she accordingly put herself under
his direction, Cecile of course accompanying her as her attendant. The
Duke of Damville came to fetch them in a carriage, and after alighting
at Marshal de la Meilleraye's quarters, kind messages of inquiry were
sent them by the Court, even by the King and Queen. By every one indeed
except Mademoiselle, who kept up her dislike.

My son, who was present, described all to me, and how his blood boiled
at the scornful airs of Mademoiselle and the stiffness of the Queen. He
said, however, that his aunt looked quite like a changed woman as she
entered, leading Maurice in the rear of the other mother and son.

The poor Princess had been bled the day before, and had her arm in a
scarf, and Mademoiselle actually tittered at the manner in which it was
put on, when this devoted wife was presented to the Queen, leading her
little son.

Falling on her knees before the Queen she made her a really touching
speech, begging her to excuse the attempts of a lady who had the honour
of being married to the first Prince of the blood, when she strove to
break his fetters. 'You see us on our knees, Madame, to beg for the
liberty of what is dearest to us. Grant it to the great actions the
Monsieur mon mari has performed for the glory of your Majesty, and the
life he has ventured so often in the service of the State, and do not
refuse our tears and humble prayers.'

The Queen answered coldly enough. Cecile told me afterwards that it was
like ice, dashing all her hopes, to see the stern, haughty dignity of
Anne of Austria unmoved by the tender, tearful, imploring form of Claire
Clemence de Breze, trembling all over with agitation, and worn down with
all she had attempted. 'I am glad, cousin,' said the Queen, 'that you
know your fault. You see you have taken a bed method of obtaining what
you ask. Now your conduct is to be different, I will see whether I can
give you what you desire.'

In spite of her fright and the Queen's chilly pride, Cecile, feeling
that this was her only chance, fell almost on her face before the Queen,
with Maurice by her side, and cried: 'Grace, grace, great Queen, for my
husband.'

My little Marquis, as he told me, could not bear to see them thus alone,
so he ran forward, and knelt on her other side, holding her hand. And
he heard a horrid little laugh, something about a new edition and an
imitation; but the Queen, who had forgotten all about her, asked who she
was and what her husband was.

Then, when it was explained that the Count d'Aubepine had drawn his
sword and tried to aid Boutteville, there was another smile. Perhaps
it was that the contrast might mortify the poor Princess, but the Queen
said:

'There! stand up, Madame la Comtesse! We will send orders that the Count
shall be released. He has expiated his own zeal, and will know better
another time.'

Can any one conceive our Cecile's joy? She rose up and embraced both the
boys passionately, and Gaspard could not refrain from congratulating her
with the words, scarcely complimentary: 'My aunt, is it not indeed the
lion and the mouse? Now my uncle must love you, as my papa loved my
mama.'

The Princess, always too sweet and gentle for envy, kissed and
congratulated Madame d'Aubepine, and left her on retiring to Milly. Nor
did Cecile quit the Court till she actually was the bearer of an order
for the release of her husband.




CHAPTER XXIV. -- FAMILY HONOUR



I have gone on with the d'Aubepine side of the story, but while these
two devoted wives were making exertions at Bordeaux so foreign to their
whole nature, which seemed changed for their husband's sake, I was far
away at the time, even from my son.

It was in March that we received a letter from my brother, Lord Walwyn,
bidding us adieu, being, when we received it, already on the high seas
with the Marquis of Montrose, to strike another blow for the King.
He said he could endure inaction no longer, and that his health had
improved so much that he should not be a drag on the expedition.
Moreover, it was highly necessary that the Marquis should be accompanied
by gentlemen of rank, birth, and experience, who could be entrusted with
commands, and when so many hung back it was the more needful for some
to go. It was a great stroke to us, for besides that Sir Andrew Macniven
went on reiterating that it was mere madness, and there was not a hope
of success--the idea of Eustace going to face the winds of spring in the
islands of Scotland was shocking enough.

'The hyperborean Orcades,' as the Abbe called them, made us think of
nothing but frost and ice and savages, and we could not believe Sir
Andrew when he told us that the Hebrides and all the west coast of
Scotland were warmer than Paris in the winter.

After this we heard nothing--nothing but the terrible tidings that the
Great Marquis, as the Cavaliers called him, had been defeated, taken by
treachery, and executed by hanging--yes, by hanging at Edinburgh! His
followers were said to be all dispersed and destroyed, and our hearts
died within us; but Annora said she neither would nor could believe that
all was over till she had more positive news, and put my mother in mind
how many times before they had heard of the deaths of men who appeared
alive and well immediately after. She declared that she daily expected
to see Eustace walk into the room, and she looked round for him whenever
the door was opened.

The door did open at last to let in tidings from the Hague, but not
brought by Eustace. It was Mr. Probyn, one of the King's gentlemen,
however, who told me he had been charged to put into my hands the
following letter from His Majesty himself:--


'Madame--If you were still my subject I should command you, as you are
ever my old playfellow. Meg, I entreat you to come without delay to
a true subject and old playfellow of mine, who, having already sorely
imperiled his neck and his health, and escaped, as they say, by the skin
of his teeth, would fain follow me into the same jeopardy again did
I not commit him to such safe warship as that of Madame de Bellaise.
Probyn will tell you further. He also bears a letter that will secure
you letters and passports from the Queen-Regent. When next you hear of
me it will be with one of my crowns on my head.

CHARLES R.'


Therewith was a brief note from Eustace himself:--


'Sweet Meg--Be not terrified at what they tell you of me. I have been
preserved by a miracle in the miserable destruction of our armament and
our noble leader. Would that my life could have gone for his! They take
such a passing ailment as I have often before shaken off for more than
it is worth, but I will write more from shipboard. Time presses at
present. With my loving and dutiful greetings to my mother, and all love
to my sister,                                    'Thine,
                                        'E. WALWYN AND RIBAUMONT.'


Mr. Probyn told us more, and very sad it was, though still we had cause
for joy. When Montrose's little troop was defeated and broken up at
the Pass of Invercharron my brother had fled with the Marquis, and had
shared his wanderings in Ross-shire for some days; but, as might only
too surely have been expected, the exposure brought back his former
illness, and he was obliged to take shelter in the cabin of a poor
old Scotchwoman. She--blessings be on her head!--was faithful and
compassionate, and would not deliver him up to his enemies, and thus his
sickness preserved him from being taken with his leader by the wretched
Macleod of Assynt.

Just as he grew a little better her son, who was a pedlar, arrived at
the hut. He too was a merciful man, and, moreover, was loyal in heart to
the King, and had fought in Montrose's first rising; and he undertook to
guide my brother safely across Scotland and obtain his passage in one
of the vessels that traded between Leith and Amsterdam. Happily Eustace
always had a tongue that could readily catch the trick of dialects, and
this excellent pedlar guarded him like his own brother, and took care
to help him through all pressing and perplexing circumstances.
Providentially, it was the height of summer, and the days were at their
longest and warmest, or I know not how he could have gone through it at
all; but at last he safely reached Leith, passing through Edinburgh with
a pack on his back the very day that the Marquis of Huntly was executed.
He was safely embarked on board at Dutch lugger, making large engagement
of payment, which were accepted when he was known to have estates in
France as well as in England; and thus he landed at Amsterdam, and made
his way to the Hague, where all was in full preparation for the King's
expedition to Scotland on the invitation of the nation.

So undaunted was my dear brother's spirit that, though he was manifestly
very ill from the effects of exposure and fatigue, and of a rough voyage
in a wretched vessel, he insisted that he should recover in a few days,
and would have embarked at once with the King had not absolute orders to
the contrary, on his duty as a subject, been laid upon him. Mr. Probyn
did not conceal from us that the learned Dutch physician, Doctor
Dirkius, though his condition very serious, and that only great care
could save his life.

Of course I made up my mind at once to set forth and travel as quickly
as I could--the King had kindly secured my permission--and to take
Tryphena with me, as she knew better than any one what to do for
Eustace. Annora besought permission to accompany me, and, to my
surprise, my mother consented, saying to me in confidence that she did
not like leaving her in Lady Ommaney's care while she herself was with
the Queen of England. Lady Ommaney was not of sufficient rank, and had
ideas. In effect, I believe my mother had begun to have her suspicions
about Clement Darpent, though separation a good thing, never guessing,
as I did, that one part of Nan's eagerness to be with her brother was in
order to confide in him, and to persuade him as she had never been able
to do by letter. There remained my son to be disposed of, but I had full
confidence in the Abbe, who had bred up his father so well, and my boy
would, I knew, always look up to him and obey him, so that I could leave
him in his care when not in waiting, and they were even to spend the
summer together in a little expedition to Nid de Merle. I wanted to see
my son love his country home as English gentlemen lover theirs; but
I fear that can never be, since what forms affection is the habit
of conferring benefits, and we are permitted to do so little for our
peasants.

Thus, then, it was settled. I went to Mademoiselle, who was always
good-natured where her vanity was not concerned, and who freely-granted
me permission to absent myself. The Queen-Regent had been prepared by
her nephew, and she made no difficulties, and thus my great traveling
carriage came again into requisition; but as an escort was necessary, we
asked Sir Andrew Macniven to accompany us, knowing that he would be glad
to be at the Hague in case it should be expedient to follow His English
Majesty to Scotland. We sent a courier to find my brother Solivet at
Amiens, that he might meet and come part of the way with us. As to M. de
Lamont, I was no longer in dread of him, as he had gone off to join the
troops which the Duke of Bouillon and Rochefoucauld were collecting
to compel the deliverance of the Princes; but the whole time was a
dangerous one, for disbanded soldiers and robbers might lurk anywhere,
and we were obliged to take six outriders armed to the teeth, besides
the servants upon the carriage, of all of whom Sir Andrew took the
command, for he could speak French perfectly, having studied in his
youth in the University of Leyden.

Thus we took leave of Paris and of my mother, many of our friends coming
out with us the first stage as far as St. Denys, where we all dined
together. I could have excused them, as I would fain have had my son all
to myself, and no doubt my sister felt the same, for Clement Darpent had
also come, for the Frondeurs, or those supposed to be Frondeurs, were at
this time courted by both parties, by the friends of the Prince in
order to gain their aid in his release, and by the Court in order to be
strengthened against the Prince's supporters; and thus the lawyers were
treated with a studied courtesy that for the time made it appear as if
they were to be henceforth, as in England, received as gentlemen, and
treated on terms more like equality; and thus Clement joined with those
who escorted us, and had a few minutes, though very few, of conversation
with my sister, in which he gave her a packet for my brother.

I was not obliged to be cautious about knowing anything now that I
should be out of reach of my mother, and all was to be laid before my
brother. I could say nothing on the road, for our women were in the
coach with us. the posts were not to be so much relied on as they are at
present, and we had to send relays of horses forward to await us at
each stage in order to have no delay, and he, who had made the journey
before, managed all this excellently for us.

At night we two sisters shared the same room, and then it was that I
asked Nan to tell me what was in her heart.

'What is the use?' she said; 'you have become one of these proud French
nobility who cannot see worth or manhood unless a man can count a
lineage of a hundred ancestors, half-ape, half-tiger.'

However, the poor child was glad enough to tell me all, even though I
argued with her that, deeply English as she was in faith and in habits
and modes of thought, it would hardly result in happiness even if she
did extort permission to wed one of a different nation and religion,
on whom, moreover, she would be entirely dependent for companionship;
since, though nothing could break the bonds of sisterly affection
between her and me, all the rest of the persons of her own rank would
throw her over, since even if M. Darpent could be ennobled, or would
purchase an estate bringing a title, hers would still be esteemed a
mesalliance, unworthy the daughter of Anselme de Ribaumont the Crusader,
and of the 'Bravest of Knights,' who gained the chaplet of pearls before
Calais.

'Crusader!' said Annora; 'I tell you that his is truly a holy war
against oppression and wrong-doing. Look at your own poor peasants, Meg,
and say if he, and those like him, are not doing their best to save this
country from a tyranny as foul as ever was the Saracen grasp on the Holy
Sepulchre!'

'He is very like to perish in it,' I said.

'Well,' said Nan, with a little shake in her voice, 'if they told those
who perished in the Crusades that they died gloriously and their souls
were safe, I am sure it may well be so with one who pleads the cause of
the poor, and I despite of his own danger never drew his sword against
his King.'

There was no denying, even if one was not in love, and a little tete
montee besides, like my poor Nan, that there was nobility of heart in
Clement Darpent, especially as he kept his hands clear of rebellion; and
I would not enter into the question of their differing religions. I left
that for Eustace. I was certain that Annora knew, even better than
I did, that the diversity between our parents had not been for the
happiness of their children. In my own mind I saw little chance for the
lovers, for I thought it inevitable that the Court and the Princes would
draw together again, and that whether Cardinal Mazarin were sacrificed
or not, the Frondeurs of Paris would be overthrown, and that Darpent,
