muttering sounds of the men to each other began to swell into a wild cry.

At this moment the sun, which was now risen above the horizon, dispelled
the mist. The vapours rose like a curtain, and showed the two armies in
the act of closing. The line of the regulars was formed directly fronting
the attack of the Highlanders; it glittered with the appointments of a
complete army, and was flanked by cavalry and artillery. But the sight
impressed no terror on the assailants.

'Forward, sons of Ivor,' cried their Chief, 'or the Camerons will draw
the first blood!' They rushed on with a tremendous yell.

The rest is well known. The horse, who were commanded to charge the
advancing Highlanders in the flank, received an irregular fire from their
fusees as they ran on and, seized with a disgraceful panic, wavered,
halted, disbanded, and galloped from the field. The artillery men,
deserted by the cavalry, fled after discharging their pieces, and the
Highlanders, who dropped their guns when fired and drew their
broadswords, rushed with headlong fury against the infantry.

It was at this moment of confusion and terror that Waverley remarked an
English officer, apparently of high rank, standing, alone and
unsupported, by a fieldpiece, which, after the flight of the men by whom
it was wrought, he had himself levelled and discharged against the clan
of Mac-Ivor, the nearest group of Highlanders within his aim. Struck with
his tall, martial figure, and eager to save him from inevitable
destruction, Waverley outstripped for an instant even the speediest of
the warriors, and, reaching the spot first, called to him to surrender.
The officer replied by a thrust with his sword, which Waverley received
in his target, and in turning it aside the Englishman's weapon broke. At
the same time the battle-axe of Dugald Mahony was in the act of
descending upon the officer's head. Waverley intercepted and prevented
the blow, and the officer, perceiving further resistance unavailing, and
struck with Edward's generous anxiety for his safety, resigned the
fragment of his sword, and was committed by Waverley to Dugald, with
strict charge to use him well, and not to pillage his person, promising
him, at the same time, full indemnification for the spoil.

On Edward's right the battle for a few minutes raged fierce and thick.
The English infantry, trained in the wars in Flanders, stood their ground
with great courage. But their extended files were pierced and broken in
many places by the close masses of the clans; and in the personal
struggle which ensued the nature of the Highlanders' weapons, and their
extraordinary fierceness and activity, gave them a decided superiority
over those who had been accustomed to trust much to their array and
discipline, and felt that the one was broken and the other useless.
Waverley, as he cast his eyes towards this scene of smoke and slaughter,
observed Colonel Gardiner, deserted by his own soldiers in spite of all
his attempts to rally them, yet spurring his horse through the field to
take the command of a small body of infantry, who, with their backs
arranged against the wall of his own park (for his house was close by the
field of battle), continued a desperate and unavailing resistance.
Waverley could perceive that he had already received many wounds, his
clothes and saddle being marked with blood. To save this good and brave
man became the instant object of his most anxious exertions. But he could
only witness his fall. Ere Edward could make his way among the
Highlanders, who, furious and eager for spoil, now thronged upon each
other, he saw his former commander brought from his horse by the blow of
a scythe, and beheld him receive, while on the ground, more wounds than
would have let out twenty lives. When Waverley came up, however,
perception had not entirely fled. The dying warrior seemed to recognize
Edward, for he fixed his eye upon him with an upbraiding, yet sorrowful,
look, and appeared to struggle, for utterance. But he felt that death was
dealing closely with him, and resigning his purpose, and folding his
hands as if in devotion, he gave up his soul to his Creator. The look
with which he regarded Waverley in his dying moments did not strike him
so deeply at that crisis of hurry and confusion as when it recurred to
his imagination at the distance of some time. [Footnote: See Note 33.]





Loud shouts of triumph now echoed over the whole field. The battle was
fought and won, and the whole baggage, artillery, and military stores of
the regular army remained in possession of the victors. Never was a
victory more complete. Scarce any escaped from the battle, excepting the
cavalry, who had left it at the very onset, and even these were broken
into different parties and scattered all over the country. So far as our
tale is concerned, we have only to relate the fate of Balmawhapple, who,
mounted on a horse as headstrong and stiff-necked as his rider, pursued
the flight of the dragoons above four miles from the field of battle,
when some dozen of the fugitives took heart of grace, turned round, and
cleaving his skull with their broadswords, satisfied the world that the
unfortunate gentleman had actually brains, the end of his life thus
giving proof of a fact greatly doubted during its progress. His death was
lamented by few. Most of those who knew him agreed in the pithy
observation of Ensign Maccombich, that there 'was mair tint (lost) at
Sheriff-Muir.' His friend, Lieutenant Jinker, bent his eloquence only to
exculpate his favourite mare from any share in contributing to the
catastrophe. 'He had tauld the laird a thousand times,' he said, 'that it
was a burning shame to put a martingale upon the puir thing, when he
would needs ride her wi' a curb of half a yard lang; and that he could na
but bring himsell (not to say her) to some mischief, by flinging her
down, or otherwise; whereas, if he had had a wee bit rinnin ring on the
snaffle, she wad ha' rein'd as cannily as a cadger's pownie.'

Such was the elegy of the Laird of Balmawhapple. [Footnote: See Note 34.]




CHAPTER XIX

AN UNEXPECTED EMBARRASSMENT


When the battle was over, and all things coming into order, the Baron of
Bradwardine, returning from the duty of the day, and having disposed
those under his command in their proper stations, sought the Chieftain of
Glennaquoich and his friend Edward Waverley. He found the former busied
in determining disputes among his clansmen about points of precedence and
deeds of valour, besides sundry high and doubtful questions concerning
plunder. The most important of the last respected the property of a gold
watch, which had once belonged to some unfortunate English officer. The
party against whom judgment was awarded consoled himself by observing,
'She (i.e. the watch, which he took for a living animal) died the very
night Vich lan Vohr gave her to Murdoch'; the machine, having, in fact,
stopped for want of winding up.

It was just when this important question was decided that the Baron of
Bradwardine, with a careful and yet important expression of countenance,
joined the two young men. He descended from his reeking charger, the care
of which he recommended to one of his grooms. 'I seldom ban, sir,' said
he to the man; 'but if you play any of your hound's-foot tricks, and
leave puir Berwick before he's sorted, to rin after spuilzie, deil be wi'
me if I do not give your craig a thraw.' He then stroked with great
complacency the animal which had borne him through the fatigues of the
day, and having taken a tender leave of him--' Weel, my good young
friends, a glorious and decisive victory,' said he; 'but these loons of
troopers fled ower soon. I should have liked to have shown you the true
points of the pralium equestre, or equestrian combat, whilk their
cowardice has postponed, and which I hold to be the pride and terror of
warfare. Weel--I have fought once more in this old quarrel, though I
admit I could not be so far BEN as you lads, being that it was my point
of duty to keep together our handful of horse. And no cavalier ought in
any wise to begrudge honour that befalls his companions, even though they
are ordered upon thrice his danger, whilk, another time, by the blessing
of God, may be his own case. But, Glennaquoich, and you, Mr. Waverley, I
pray ye to give me your best advice on a matter of mickle weight, and
which deeply affects the honour of the house of Bradwardine. I crave your
pardon, Ensign Maccombich, and yours, Inveraughlin, and yours,
Edderalshendrach, and yours, sir.'

The last person he addressed was Ballenkeiroch, who, remembering the
death of his son, loured on him with a look of savage defiance. The
Baron, quick as lightning at taking umbrage, had already bent his brow
when Glennaquoich dragged his major from the spot, and remonstrated with
him, in the authoritative tone of a chieftain, on the madness of reviving
a quarrel in such a moment.

'The ground is cumbered with carcasses,' said the old mountaineer,
turning sullenly away; 'ONE MORE would hardly have been kenn'd upon it;
and if it wasna for yoursell, Vich lan Vohr, that one should be
Bradwardine's or mine.'

The Chief soothed while he hurried him away; and then returned to the
Baron. 'It is Ballenkeiroch,' he said, in an under and confidential
voice, 'father of the young man who fell eight years since in the unlucky
affair at the mains.'

'Ah!' said the Baron, instantly relaxing the doubtful sternness of his
features, 'I can take mickle frae a man to whom I have unhappily
rendered sic a displeasure as that. Ye were right to apprise me,
Glennaquoich; he may look as black as midnight at Martinmas ere Cosmo
Comyne Bradwardine shall say he does him wrang. Ah! I have nae male
lineage, and I should bear with one I have made childless, though you are
aware the blood-wit was made up to your ain satisfaction by assythment,
and that I have since expedited letters of slains. Weel, as I have said,
I have no male issue, and yet it is needful that I maintain the honour of
my house; and it is on that score I prayed ye for your peculiar and
private attention.'

The two young men awaited to hear him, in anxious curiosity.

'I doubt na, lads,' he proceeded, 'but your education has been sae seen
to that ye understand the true nature of the feudal tenures?'

Fergus, afraid of an endless dissertation, answered, 'Intimately, Baron,'
and touched Waverley as a signal to express no ignorance.

'And ye are aware, I doubt not, that the holding of the barony of
Bradwardine is of a nature alike honourable and peculiar, being blanch
(which Craig opines ought to be Latinated blancum, or rather francum, a
free holding) pro servitio detrahendi, seu exuendi, caligas regis post
battalliam.' Here Fergus turned his falcon eye upon Edward, with an
almost imperceptible rise of his eyebrow, to which his shoulders
corresponded in the same degree of elevation. 'Now, twa points of
dubitation occur to me upon this topic. First, whether this service, or
feudal homage, be at any event due to the person of the Prince, the words
being, per expressum, caligas REGIS, the boots of the king himself; and I
pray your opinion anent that particular before we proceed farther.'

'Why, he is Prince Regent,' answered Mac-Ivor, with laudable composure of
countenance; 'and in the court of France all the honours are rendered to
the person of the Regent which are due to that of the King. Besides, were
I to pull off either of their boots, I would render that service to the
young Chevalier ten times more willingly than to his father.'

'Ay, but I talk not of personal predilections. However, your authority
is of great weight as to the usages of the court of France; and doubtless
the Prince, as alter ego, may have a right to claim the homagium of the
great tenants of the crown, since all faithful subjects are commanded, in
the commission of regency, to respect him as the King's own person. Far,
therefore, be it from me to diminish the lustre of his authority by
withholding this act of homage, so peculiarly calculated to give it
splendour; for I question if the Emperor of Germany hath his boots taken
off by a free baron of the empire. But here lieth the second
difficulty--the Prince wears no boots, but simply brogues and trews.'

This last dilemma had almost disturbed Fergus's gravity.

'Why,' said he, 'you know, Baron, the proverb tells us, "It's ill taking
the breeks off a Highlandman," and the boots are here in the same
predicament.'

'The word caligae, however,' continued the Baron, 'though I admit that,
by family tradition, and even in our ancient evidents, it is explained
"lie-boots," means, in its primitive sense, rather sandals; and Caius
Caesar, the nephew and successor of Caius Tiberius, received the agnomen
of Caligula, a caligulis sine caligis levioribus, quibus adolescentior
usus fuerat in exercitu Germanici patris sui. And the caligae were also
proper to the monastic bodies; for we read in an ancient glossarium upon
the rule of Saint Benedict, in the Abbey of Saint Amand, that caligae
were tied with latchets.'

'That will apply to the brogues,' said Fergus.

'It will so, my dear Glennaquoich, and the words are express: Caligae,
dicta sunt quia ligantur; nam socci non ligantur, sed tantum
intromittuntur; that is, caligae are denominated from the ligatures
wherewith they are bound; whereas socci, which may be analogous to our
mules, whilk the English denominate slippers, are only slipped upon the
feet. The words of the charter are also alternative, exuere seu
detrahere; that is, to undo, as in the case of sandals or brogues, and to
pull of, as we say vernacularly concerning boots. Yet I would we had more
light; but I fear there is little chance of finding hereabout any erudite
author de re vestiaria.'

'I should doubt it very much,' said the Chieftain, looking around on the
straggling Highlanders, who were returning loaded with spoils of the
slain,'though the res vestiaria itself seems to be in some request at
present.'

This remark coming within the Baron's idea of jocularity, he honoured it
with a smile, but immediately resumed what to him appeared very serious
business.

'Bailie Macwheeble indeed holds an opinion that this honorary service is
due, from its very nature, si petatur tantum; only if his Royal Highness
shall require of the great tenant of the crown to perform that personal
duty; and indeed he pointed out the case in Dirleton's Doubts and
Queries, Grippit versus Spicer, anent the eviction of an estate ob non
solutum canonem; that is, for non-payment of a feu-duty of three
pepper-corns a year, whilk were taxt to be worth seven-eighths of a penny
Scots, in whilk the defender was assoilzied. But I deem it safest, wi'
your good favour, to place myself in the way of rendering the Prince this
service, and to proffer performance thereof; and I shall cause the Bailie
to attend with a schedule of a protest, whilk he has here prepared
(taking out a paper), intimating, that if it shall be his Royal
Highness's pleasure to accept of other assistance at pulling off his
caligae (whether the same shall be rendered boots or brogues) save that
of the said Baron of Bradwardine, who is in presence ready and willing to
perform the same, it shall in no wise impinge upon or prejudice the right
of the said Cosmo Comyne Bradwardine to perform the said service in
future; nor shall it give any esquire, valet of the chamber, squire, or
page, whose assistance it may please his Royal Highness to employ, any
right, title, or ground for evicting from the said Cosmo Comyne
Bradwardine the estate and barony of Bradwardine, and others held as
aforesaid, by the due and faithful performance thereof.'

Fergus highly applauded this arrangement; and the Baron took a friendly
leave of them, with a smile of contented importance upon his visage.

'Long live our dear friend the Baron,' exclaimed the Chief, as soon as he
was out of hearing, 'for the most absurd original that exists north of
the Tweed! I wish to heaven I had recommended him to attend the circle
this evening with a boot-ketch under his arm. I think he might have
adopted the suggestion if it had been made with suitable gravity.'

'And how can you take pleasure in making a man of his worth so
ridiculous?'

'Begging pardon, my dear Waverley, you are as ridiculous as he. Why, do
you not see that the man's whole mind is wrapped up in this ceremony? He
has heard and thought of it since infancy as the most august privilege
and ceremony in the world; and I doubt not but the expected pleasure of
performing it was a principal motive with him for taking up arms. Depend
upon it, had I endeavoured to divert him from exposing himself he would
have treated me as an ignorant, conceited coxcomb, or perhaps might have
taken a fancy to cut my throat; a pleasure which he once proposed to
himself upon some point of etiquette not half so important, in his eyes,
as this matter of boots or brogues, or whatever the caliga shall finally
be pronounced by the learned. But I must go to headquarters, to prepare
the Prince for this extraordinary scene. My information will be well
taken, for it will give him a hearty laugh at present, and put him on his
guard against laughing when it might be very mal-a-propos. So, au revoir,
my dear Waverley.'




CHAPTER VII

THE ENGLISH PRISONER


The first occupation of Waverley, after he departed from the Chieftain,
was to go in quest of the officer whose life he had saved. He was
guarded, along with his companions in misfortune, who were very numerous,
in a gentleman's house near the field of battle.

On entering the room where they stood crowded together, Waverley easily
recognised the object of his visit, not only by the peculiar dignity of
his appearance, but by the appendage of Dugald Mahony, with his
battleaxe, who had stuck to him from the moment of his captivity as if he
had been skewered to his side. This close attendance was perhaps for the
purpose of securing his promised reward from Edward, but it also operated
to save the English gentleman from being plundered in the scene of
general confusion; for Dugald sagaciously argued that the amount of the
salvage which he might be allowed would be regulated by the state of the
prisoner when he should deliver him over to Waverley. He hastened to
assure Waverley, therefore, with more words than he usually employed,
that he had 'keepit ta sidier roy haill, and that he wasna a plack the
waur since the fery moment when his honour forbad her to gie him a bit
clamhewit wi' her Lochaber-axe.'

Waverley assured Dugald of a liberal recompense, and, approaching the
English officer, expressed his anxiety to do anything which might
contribute to his convenience under his present unpleasant circumstances.

'I am not so inexperienced a soldier, sir,' answered the Englishman, 'as
to complain of the fortune of war. I am only grieved to see those scenes
acted in our own island which I have often witnessed elsewhere with
comparative indifference.'

'Another such day as this,' said Waverley, 'and I trust the cause of your
regrets will be removed, and all will again return to peace and order.'

The officer smiled and shook his head. 'I must not forget my situation so
far as to attempt a formal confutation of that opinion; but,
notwithstanding your success and the valour which achieved it, you have
undertaken a task to which your strength appears wholly inadequate.'

At this moment Fergus pushed into the press.

'Come, Edward, come along; the Prince has gone to Pinkie House for the
night; and we must follow, or lose the whole ceremony of the caligae.
Your friend, the Baron, has been guilty of a great piece of cruelty; he
has insisted upon dragging Bailie Macwheeble out to the field of battle.
Now, you must know, the Bailie's greatest horror is an armed Highlander
or a loaded gun; and there he stands, listening to the Baron's
instructions concerning the protest, ducking his head like a sea-gull at
the report of every gun and pistol that our idle boys are firing upon the
fields, and undergoing, by way of penance, at every symptom of flinching
a severe rebuke from his patron, who would not admit the discharge of a
whole battery of cannon, within point-blank distance, as an apology for
neglecting a discourse in which the honour of his family is interested.'

'But how has Mr. Bradwardine got him to venture so far?' said Edward.

'Why, he had come as far as Musselburgh, I fancy, in hopes of making some
of our wills; and the peremptory commands of the Baron dragged him
forward to Preston after the battle was over. He complains of one or two
of our ragamuffins having put him in peril of his life by presenting
their pieces at him; but as they limited his ransom to an English penny,
I don't think we need trouble the provost-marshal upon that subject. So
come along, Waverley.'

'Waverley!' said the English officer, with great emotion;' the nephew of
Sir Everard Waverley, of----shire?'

'The same, sir,' replied our hero, somewhat surprised at the tone in
which he was addressed.

'I am at once happy and grieved,' said the prisoner, 'to have met with
you.'

'I am ignorant, sir,' answered Waverley, 'how I have deserved so much
interest.'

'Did your uncle never mention a friend called Talbot?'

'I have heard him talk with great regard of such a person,' replied
Edward; 'a colonel, I believe, in the army, and the husband of Lady Emily
Blandeville; but I thought Colonel Talbot had been abroad.'

'I am just returned,' answered the officer; 'and being in Scotland,
thought it my duty to act where my services promised to be useful. Yes,
Mr. Waverley, I am that Colonel Talbot, the husband of the lady you have
named; and I am proud to acknowledge that I owe alike my professional
rank and my domestic happiness to your generous and noble-minded
relative. Good God! that I should find his nephew in such a dress, and
engaged in such a cause!'

'Sir,' said Fergus, haughtily, 'the dress and cause are those of men of
birth and honour.'

'My situation forbids me to dispute your assertion,' said Colonel Talbot;
'otherwise it were no difficult matter to show that neither courage nor
pride of lineage can gild a bad cause. But, with Mr. Waverley's
permission and yours, sir, if yours also must be asked, I would willingly
speak a few words with him on affairs connected with his own family.'

'Mr. Waverley, sir, regulates his own motions. You will follow me, I
suppose, to Pinkie,' said Fergus, turning to Edward, 'when you have
finished your discourse with this new acquaintance?' So saying, the Chief
of Glennaquoich adjusted his plaid with rather more than his usual air of
haughty assumption and left the apartment.

The interest of Waverley readily procured for Colonel Talbot the freedom
of adjourning to a large garden belonging to his place of confinement.
They walked a few paces in silence, Colonel Talbot apparently studying
how to open what he had to say; at length he addressed Edward.

'Mr. Waverley, you have this day saved my life; and yet I would to God
that I had lost it, ere I had found you wearing the uniform and cockade
of these men.'

'I forgive your reproach, Colonel Talbot; it is well meant, and your
education and prejudices render it natural. But there is nothing
extraordinary in finding a man whose honour has been publicly and
unjustly assailed in the situation which promised most fair to afford him
satisfaction on his calumniators.'

'I should rather say, in the situation most likely to confirm the reports
which they have circulated,' said Colonel Talbot, 'by following the very
line of conduct ascribed to you. Are you aware, Mr. Waverley, of the
infinite distress, and even danger, which your present conduct has
occasioned to your nearest relatives?'

'Danger!'

'Yes, sir, danger. When I left England your uncle and father had been
obliged to find bail to answer a charge of treason, to which they were
only admitted by the exertion of the most powerful interest. I came down
to Scotland with the sole purpose of rescuing you from the gulf into
which you have precipitated yourself; nor can I estimate the consequences
to your family of your having openly joined the rebellion, since the very
suspicion of your intention was so perilous to them. Most deeply do I
regret that I did not meet you before this last and fatal error.'

'I am really ignorant,' said Waverley, in a tone of reserve, 'why Colonel
Talbot should have taken so much trouble on my account.'

'Mr. Waverley,' answered Talbot, 'I am dull at apprehending irony; and
therefore I shall answer your words according to their plain meaning. I
am indebted to your uncle for benefits greater than those which a son
owes to a father. I acknowledge to him the duty of a son; and as I know
there is no manner in which I can requite his kindness so well as by
serving you, I will serve you, if possible, whether you will permit me or
no. The personal obligation which you have this day laid me under
(although, in common estimation, as great as one human being can bestow
on another) adds nothing to my zeal on your behalf; nor can that zeal be
abated by any coolness with which you may please to receive it.'

'Your intentions may be kind, sir,' said Waverley, drily; 'but your
language is harsh, or at least peremptory.'

'On my return to England,' continued Colonel Talbot, 'after long absence,
I found your uncle, Sir Everard Waverley, in the custody of a king's
messenger, in consequence of the suspicion brought upon him by your
conduct. He is my oldest friend--how often shall I repeat it?--my best
benefactor! he sacrificed his own views of happiness to mine; he never
uttered a word, he never harboured a thought, that benevolence itself
might not have thought or spoken. I found this man in confinement,
rendered harsher to him by his habits of life, his natural dignity of
feeling, and--forgive me, Mr. Waverley--by the cause through which this
calamity had come upon him. I cannot disguise from you my feelings upon
this occasion; they were most painfully unfavorable to you. Having by my
family interest, which you probably know is not inconsiderable, succeeded
in obtaining Sir Everard's release, I set out for Scotland. I saw Colonel
Gardiner, a man whose fate alone is sufficient to render this
insurrection for ever execrable. In the course of conversation with him I
found that, from late circumstances, from a reexamination of the persons
engaged in the mutiny, and from his original good opinion of your
character, he was much softened towards you; and I doubted not that, if I
could be so fortunate as to discover you, all might yet be well. But this
unnatural rebellion has ruined all. I have, for the first time in a long
and active military life, seen Britons disgrace themselves by a panic
flight, and that before a foe without either arms or discipline. And now
I find the heir of my dearest friend--the son, I may say, of his
affections--sharing a triumph for which he ought the first to have
blushed. Why should I lament Gardiner? his lot was happy compared to
mine!'

There was so much dignity in Colonel Talbot's manner, such a mixture of
military pride and manly sorrow, and the news of Sir Everard's
imprisonment was told in so deep a tone of feeling, that Edward stood
mortified, abashed, and distressed in presence of the prisoner who owed
to him his life not many hours before. He was not sorry when Fergus
interrupted their conference a second time.

'His Royal Highness commands Mr. Waverley's attendance.' Colonel Talbot
threw upon Edward a reproachful glance, which did not escape the quick
eye of the Highland Chief. 'His immediate attendance,' he repeated, with
considerable emphasis. Waverley turned again towards the Colonel.

'We shall meet again,' he said; 'in the meanwhile, every possible
accommodation--'

'I desire none,' said the Colonel; 'let me fare like the meanest of those
brave men who, on this day of calamity, have preferred wounds and
captivity to flight; I would almost exchange places with one of those who
have fallen to know that my words have made a suitable impression on your
mind.'

'Let Colonel Talbot be carefully secured,' said Fergus to the Highland
officer who commanded the guard over the prisoners; 'it is the Prince's
particular command; he is a prisoner of the utmost importance.'

'But let him want no accommodation suitable to his rank,' said Waverley.
'Consistent always with secure custody,' reiterated Fergus. The officer
signified his acquiescence in both commands, and Edward followed Fergus
to the garden-gate, where Callum Beg, with three saddle-horses, awaited
them. Turning his head, he saw Colonel Talbot reconducted to his place of
confinement by a file of Highlanders; he lingered on the threshold of the
door and made a signal with his hand towards Waverley, as if enforcing
the language he had held towards him.

'Horses,' said Fergus, as he mounted, 'are now as plenty as blackberries;
every man may have them for the catching. Come, let Callum adjust your
stirrups and let us to Pinkie House [Footnote: Charles Edward took up his
quarters after the battle at Pinkie House, adjoining to Musselburgh.] as
fast as these ci-devant dragoon-horses choose to carry us.'




CHAPTER XXI

RATHER UNIMPORTANT


'I was turned back,' said Fergus to Edward, as they galloped from Preston
to Pinkie House, 'by a message from the Prince. But I suppose you know
the value of this most noble Colonel Talbot as a prisoner. He is held one
of the best officers among the red-coats, a special friend and favourite
of the Elector himself, and of that dreadful hero, the Duke of
Cumberland, who has been summoned from his triumphs at Fontenoy to come
over and devour us poor Highlanders alive. Has he been telling you how
the bells of St. James's ring? Not "turn again, Whittington," like those
of Bow, in the days of yore?'

'Fergus!' said Waverley, with a reproachful look.

'Nay, I cannot tell what to make of you,' answered the Chief of Mac-Ivor,
'you are blown about with every wind of doctrine. Here have we gained a
victory unparalleled in history, and your behaviour is praised by every
living mortal to the skies, and the Prince is eager to thank you in
person, and all our beauties of the White Rose are pulling caps for
you;--and you, the preux chevalier of the day, are stooping on your
horse's neck like a butter-woman riding to market, and looking as black
as a funeral!'

'I am sorry for poor Colonel Gardiner's death; he was once very kind to
me.'

'Why, then, be sorry for five minutes, and then be glad again; his chance
to-day may be ours to-morrow; and what does it signify? The next best
thing to victory is honourable death; but it is a PIS-ALLER, and one
would rather a foe had it than one's self.'

'But Colonel Talbot has informed me that my father and uncle are both
imprisoned by government on my account.'

'We'll put in bail, my boy; old Andrew Ferrara [Footnote: See Note 10.]
shall lodge his security; and I should like to see him put to justify it
in Westminster Hall!'

'Nay, they are already at liberty, upon bail of a more civic
disposition.'

'Then why is thy noble spirit cast down, Edward? Dost think that the
Elector's ministers are such doves as to set their enemies at liberty at
this critical moment if they could or durst confine and punish them?
Assure thyself that either they have no charge against your relations on
which they can continue their imprisonment, or else they are afraid of
our friends, the jolly Cavaliers of old England. At any rate, you need
not be apprehensive upon their account; and we will find some means of
conveying to them assurances of your safety.'

Edward was silenced but not satisfied with these reasons. He had now been
more than once shocked at the small degree of sympathy which Fergus
exhibited for the feelings even of those whom he loved, if they did not
correspond with his own mood at the time, and more especially if they
thwarted him while earnest in a favourite pursuit. Fergus sometimes
indeed observed that he had offended Waverley, but, always intent upon
some favourite plan or project of his own, he was never sufficiently
aware of the extent or duration of his displeasure, so that the
reiteration of these petty offences somewhat cooled the volunteer's
extreme attachment to his officer.

The Chevalier received Waverley with his usual favour, and paid him many
compliments on his distinguished bravery. He then took him apart, made
many inquiries concerning Colonel Talbot, and when he had received all
the information which Edward was able to give concerning him and his
connexions, he proceeded--'I cannot but think, Mr. Waverley, that since
this gentleman is so particularly connected with our worthy and excellent
friend, Sir Everard Waverley, and since his lady is of the house of
Blandeville, whose devotion to the true and loyal principles of the
Church of England is so generally known, the Colonel's own private
sentiments cannot be unfavorable to us, whatever mask he may have assumed
to accommodate himself to the times.'

'If I am to judge from the language he this day held to me, I am under
the necessity of differing widely from your Royal Highness.'

'Well, it is worth making a trial at least. I therefore entrust you with
the charge of Colonel Talbot, with power to act concerning him as you
think most advisable; and I hope you will find means of ascertaining what
are his real dispositions towards our Royal Father's restoration.'

'I am convinced,' said Waverley, bowing, 'that if Colonel Talbot chooses
to grant his parole, it may be securely depended upon; but if he refuses
it, I trust your Royal Highness will devolve on some other person than
the nephew of his friend the task of laying him under the necessary
restraint.'

'I will trust him with no person but you,' said the Prince, smiling, but
peremptorily repeating his mandate; 'it is of importance to my service
that there should appear to be a good intelligence between you, even if
you are unable to gain his confidence in earnest. You will therefore
receive him into your quarters, and in case he declines giving his
parole, you must apply for a proper guard. I beg you will go about this
directly. We return to Edinburgh tomorrow.'

Being thus remanded to the vicinity of Preston, Waverley lost the Baron
of Bradwardine's solemn act of homage. So little, however, was he at this
time in love with vanity, that he had quite forgotten the ceremony in
which Fergus had laboured to engage his curiosity. But next day a formal
'Gazette' was circulated, containing a detailed account of the battle of
Gladsmuir, as the Highlanders chose to denominate their victory. It
concluded with an account of the court afterwards held by the Chevalier
at Pinkie House, which contained this among other high-flown descriptive
paragraphs:--

'Since that fatal treaty which annihilates Scotland as an independent
nation, it has not been our happiness to see her princes receive, and her
nobles discharge, those acts of feudal homage which, founded upon the
splendid actions of Scottish valour, recall the memory of her early
history, with the manly and chivalrous simplicity of the ties which
united to the Crown the homage of the warriors by whom it was repeatedly
upheld and defended. But on the evening of the 20th our memories were
refreshed with one of those ceremonies which belong to the ancient days
of Scotland's glory. After the circle was formed, Cosmo Comyne
Bradwardine of that ilk, colonel in the service, etc., etc., etc., came
before the Prince, attended by Mr. D. Macwheeble, the Bailie of his
ancient barony of Bradwardine (who, we understand, has been lately named
a commissary), and, under form of instrument, claimed permission to
perform to the person of his Royal Highness, as representing his father,
the service used and wont, for which, under a charter of Robert Bruce (of
which the original was produced and inspected by the Masters of his Royal
Highness's Chancery for the time being), the claimant held the barony of
Bradwardine and lands of Tully-Veolan. His claim being admitted and
registered, his Royal Highness having placed his foot upon a cushion, the
Baron of Bradwardine, kneeling upon his right knee, proceeded to undo the
latchet of the brogue, or low-heeled Highland shoe, which our gallant
young hero wears in compliment to his brave followers. When this was
performed, his Royal Highness declared the ceremony completed; and,
embracing the gallant veteran, protested that nothing but compliance with
an ordinance of Robert Bruce could have induced him to receive even the
symbolical performance of a menial office from hands which had fought so
bravely to put the crown upon the head of his father. The Baron of
Bradwardine then took instruments in the hands of Mr. Commissary
Macwheeble, bearing that all points and circumstances of the act of
homage had been rite et solenniter acta et peracta; and a corresponding
entry was made in the protocol of the Lord High Chamberlain and in the
record of Chancery. We understand that it is in contemplation of his
Royal Highness, when his Majesty's pleasure can be known, to raise
Colonel Bradwardine to the peerage, by the title of Viscount Bradwardine
of Bradwardine and Tully-Veolan, and that, in the meanwhile, his Royal
Highness, in his father's name and authority, has been pleased to grant
him an honourable augmentation to his paternal coat of arms, being a
budget or boot-jack, disposed saltier-wise with a naked broadsword, to be
borne in the dexter cantle of the shield; and, as an additional motto, on
a scroll beneath, the words, "Draw and draw off."'

'Were it not for the recollection of Fergus's raillery,' thought Waverley
to himself, when he had perused this long and grave document, how very
tolerably would all this sound, and how little should I have thought of
connecting it with any ludicrous idea! Well, after all, everything has
its fair as well as its seamy side; and truly I do not see why the
Baron's boot-jack may not stand as fair in heraldry as the water-buckets,
waggons, cart-wheels, plough-socks, shuttles, candlesticks, and other
ordinaries, conveying ideas of anything save chivalry, which appear in
the arms of some of our most ancient gentry.'

This, however, is an episode in respect to the principal story.

When Waverley returned to Preston and rejoined Colonel Talbot, he found
him recovered from the strong and obvious emotions with which a
concurrence of unpleasing events had affected him. He had regained his
natural manner, which was that of an English gentleman and soldier,
manly, open and generous, but not unsusceptible of prejudice against
those of a different country, or who opposed him in political tenets.
When Waverley acquainted Colonel Talbot with the Chevalier's purpose to
commit him to his charge, 'I did not think to have owed so much
obligation to that young gentleman,' he said, 'as is implied in this
destination. I can at least cheerfully join in the prayer of the honest
Presbyterian clergyman, that, as he has come among us seeking an earthly
crown, his labours may be speedily rewarded with a heavenly one.
[Footnote: The clergyman's name was Mac-Vicar. Protected by the cannon of
the Castle, he preached every Sunday in the West Kirk while the
Highlanders were in possession of Edinburgh, and it was in presence of
some of the Jacobites that he prayed for Prince Charles Edward in the
terms quoted in the text.] I shall willingly give my parole not to
attempt an escape without your knowledge, since, in fact, it was to meet
you that I came to Scotland; and I am glad it has happened even under
this predicament. But I suppose we shall be but a short time together.
Your Chevalier (that is a name we may both give to him), with his plaids
and blue caps, will, I presume, be continuing his crusade southward?'

'Not as I hear; I believe the army makes some stay in Edinburgh to
collect reinforcements.'

'And to besiege the Castle?' said Talbot, smiling sarcastically. 'Well,
unless my old commander, General Preston, turn false metal, or the Castle
sink into the North Loch, events which I deem equally probable, I think
we shall have some time to make up our acquaintance. I have a guess that
this gallant Chevalier has a design that I should be your proselyte; and,
as I wish you to be mine, there cannot be a more fair proposal than to
afford us fair conference together. But, as I spoke today under the
influence of feelings I rarely give way to, I hope you will excuse my
entering again upon controversy till we are somewhat better acquainted.'




CHAPTER XXII

INTRIGUES OF LOVE AND POLITICS


It is not necessary to record in these pages the triumphant entrance of
the Chevalier into Edinburgh after the decisive affair at Preston. One
circumstance, however, may be noticed, because it illustrates the high
spirit of Flora Mac-Ivor. The Highlanders by whom the Prince was
surrounded, in the license and extravagance of this joyful moment, fired
their pieces repeatedly, and one of these having been accidentally loaded
with ball, the bullet grazed the young lady's temple as she waved her
handkerchief from a balcony. [Footnote: See Note 11.] Fergus, who beheld
the accident, was at her side in an instant; and, on seeing that the
wound was trifling, he drew his broadsword with the purpose of rushing
down upon the man by whose carelessness she had incurred so much danger,
when, holding him by the plaid, 'Do not harm the poor fellow,' she cried;
'for Heaven's sake, do not harm him! but thank God with me that the
accident happened to Flora Mac-Ivor; for had it befallen a Whig, they
would have pretended that the shot was fired on purpose.'

Waverley escaped the alarm which this accident would have occasioned to
him, as he was unavoidably delayed by the necessity of accompanying
Colonel Talbot to Edinburgh.

They performed the journey together on horseback, and for some time, as
if to sound each other's feelings and sentiments, they conversed upon
general and ordinary topics.

When Waverley again entered upon the subject which he had most at heart,
the situation, namely, of his father and his uncle, Colonel Talbot seemed
now rather desirous to alleviate than to aggravate his anxiety. This
appeared particularly to be the case when he heard Waverley's history,
which he did not scruple to confide to him.
