dear to you; and your rashness has nearly occasioned the death of a young
man of the highest worth and honour. Must I say more? must I add that I
have been myself very ill in consequence of your violence and its
effects? And, alas! need I say still farther, that I have thought
anxiously upon them as they are likely to affect you, although you have
given me such slight cause to do so? The C. is gone from home for several
days, Mr. H. is almost quite recovered, and I have reason to think that
the blame is laid in a quarter different from that where it is deserved.
Yet do not think of venturing here. Our fate has been crossed by
accidents of a nature too violent and terrible to permit me to think of
renewing a correspondence which has so often threatened the most dreadful
catastrophe. Farewell, therefore, and believe that no one can wish your
happiness more sincerely than

'J. M.'

This letter contained that species of advice which is frequently given
for the precise purpose that it may lead to a directly opposite conduct
from that which it recommends. At least so thought Brown, who immediately
asked the young fisherman if he came from Portanferry.

'Ay,' said the lad; 'I am auld Willie Johnstone's son, and I got that
letter frae my sister Peggy, that's laundry maid at Woodbourne.'

'My good friend, when do you sail?'

'With the tide this evening.'

'I'll return with you; but, as I do not desire to go to Portanferry, I
wish you could put me on shore somewhere on the coast.'

'We can easily do that,' said the lad.

Although the price of provisions, etc., was then very moderate, the
discharging his lodgings, and the expense of his living, together with
that of a change of dress, which safety as well as a proper regard to his
external appearance rendered necessary, brought Brown's purse to a very
low ebb. He left directions at the post-office that his letters should be
forwarded to Kippletringan, whither he resolved to proceed and reclaim
the treasure which he had deposited in the hands of Mrs. MacCandlish. He
also felt it would be his duty to assume his proper character as soon as
he should receive the necessary evidence for supporting it, and, as an
officer in the king's service, give and receive every explanation which
might be necessary with young Hazlewood. 'If he is not very wrong-headed
indeed,' he thought, 'he must allow the manner in which I acted to have
been the necessary consequence of his own overbearing conduct.'

And now we must suppose him once more embarked on the Solway Firth. The
wind was adverse, attended by some rain, and they struggled against it
without much assistance from the tide. The boat was heavily laden with
goods (part of which were probably contraband), and laboured deep in the
sea. Brown, who had been bred a sailor, and was indeed skilled in most
athletic exercises, gave his powerful and effectual assistance in rowing,
or occasionally in steering the boat, and his advice in the management,
which became the more delicate as the wind increased, and, being opposed
to the very rapid tides of that coast, made the voyage perilous. At
length, after spending the whole night upon the firth, they were at
morning within sight of a beautiful bay upon the Scottish coast. The
weather was now more mild. The snow, which had been for some time waning,
had given way entirely under the fresh gale of the preceding night. The
more distant hills, indeed, retained their snowy mantle, but all the open
country was cleared, unless where a few white patches indicated that it
had been drifted to an uncommon depth. Even under its wintry appearance
the shore was highly interesting. The line of sea-coast, with all its
varied curves, indentures, and embayments, swept away from the sight on
either hand, in that varied, intricate, yet graceful and easy line which
the eye loves so well to pursue. And it was no less relieved and varied
in elevation than in outline by the different forms of the shore, the
beach in some places being edged by steep rocks, and in others rising
smoothly from the sands in easy and swelling slopes. Buildings of
different kinds caught and reflected the wintry sunbeams of a December
morning, and the woods, though now leafless, gave relief and variety to
the landscape. Brown felt that lively and awakening interest which taste
and sensibility always derive from the beauties of nature when opening
suddenly to the eye after the dulness and gloom of a night voyage.
Perhaps--for who can presume to analyse that inexplicable feeling which
binds the person born in a mountainous country to, his native
hills--perhaps some early associations, retaining their effect long after
the cause was forgotten, mingled in the feelings of pleasure with which
he regarded the scene before him.







'And what,' said Brown to the boatman, 'is the name of that fine cape
that stretches into the sea with its sloping banks and hillocks of wood,
and forms the right side of the bay?'

'Warroch Point,' answered the lad.

'And that old castle, my friend, with the modern house situated just
beneath it? It seems at this distance a very large building.'

'That's the Auld Place, sir; and that's the New Place below it. We'll
land you there if you like.'

'I should like it of all things. I must visit that ruin before I continue
my journey.'

'Ay, it's a queer auld bit,' said the fisherman; 'and that highest tower
is a gude landmark as far as Ramsay in Man and the Point of Ayr; there
was muckle fighting about the place lang syne.'

Brown would have inquired into farther particulars, but a fisherman is
seldom an antiquary. His boatman's local knowledge was summed up in the
information already given, 'that it was a grand landmark, and that there
had been muckle fighting about the bit lang syne.'

'I shall learn more of it,' said Brown to himself, 'when I get ashore.'

The boat continued its course close under the point upon which the castle
was situated, which frowned from the summit of its rocky site upon the
still agitated waves of the bay beneath. 'I believe,' said the steersman,
'ye'll get ashore here as dry as ony gate. There's a place where their
berlins and galleys, as they ca'd them, used to lie in lang syne, but
it's no used now, because it's ill carrying gudes up the narrow stairs or
ower the rocks. Whiles of a moonlight night I have landed articles there,
though.'

While he thus spoke they pulled round a point of rock, and found a very
small harbour, partly formed by nature, partly by the indefatigable
labour of the ancient inhabitants of the castle, who, as the fisherman
observed, had found it essential for the protection of their boats and
small craft, though it could not receive vessels of any burden. The two
points of rock which formed the access approached each other so nearly
that only one boat could enter at a time. On each side were still
remaining two immense iron rings, deeply morticed into the solid rock.
Through these, according to tradition, there was nightly drawn a huge
chain, secured by an immense padlock, for the protection of the haven and
the armada which it contained. A ledge of rock had, by the assistance of
the chisel and pickaxe, been formed into a sort of quay. The rock was of
extremely hard consistence, and the task so difficult that, according to
the fisherman, a labourer who wrought at the work might in the evening
have carried home in his bonnet all the shivers which he had struck from
the mass in the course of the day. This little quay communicated with a
rude staircase, already repeatedly mentioned, which descended from the
old castle. There was also a communication between the beach and the
quay, by scrambling over the rocks.

'Ye had better land here,' said the lad, 'for the surf's running high at
the Shellicoat Stane, and there will no be a dry thread amang us or we
get the cargo out. Na! na! (in answer to an offer of money) ye have
wrought for your passage, and wrought far better than ony o' us. Gude day
to ye; I wuss ye weel.'

So saying, he pushed oil in order to land his cargo on the opposite side
of the bay; and Brown, with a small bundle in his hand, containing the
trifling stock of necessaries which he had been obliged to purchase at
Allonby, was left on the rocks beneath the ruin.

And thus, unconscious as the most absolute stranger, and in circumstances
which, if not destitute, were for the present highly embarrassing,
without the countenance of a friend within the circle of several hundred
miles, accused of a heavy crime, and, what was as bad as all the rest,
being nearly penniless, did the harassed wanderer for the first time
after the interval of so many years approach the remains of the castle
where his ancestors had exercised all but regal dominion.






CHAPTER XII
          Yes ye moss-green walls,
     Ye towers defenceless, I revisit ye
     Shame-stricken! Where are all your trophies now?
     Your thronged courts, the revelry, the tumult,
     That spoke the grandeur of my house, the homage
     Of neighbouring barons?

          Mysterious Mother.


Entering the castle of Ellangowan by a postern doorway which showed
symptoms of having been once secured with the most jealous care, Brown
(whom, since he has set foot upon the property of his fathers, we shall
hereafter call by his father's name of Bertram) wandered from one ruined
apartment to another, surprised at the massive strength of some parts of
the building, the rude and impressive magnificence of others, and the
great extent of the whole. In two of these rooms, close beside each
other, he saw signs of recent habitation. In one small apartment were
empty bottles, half-gnawed bones, and dried fragments of bread. In the
vault which adjoined, and which was defended by a strong door, then left
open, he observed a considerable quantity of straw, and in both were the
relics of recent fires. How little was it possible for Bertram to
conceive that such trivial circumstances were closely connected with
incidents affecting his prosperity, his honour, perhaps his life!

After satisfying his curiosity by a hasty glance through the interior of
the castle, Bertram now advanced through the great gateway which opened
to the land, and paused to look upon the noble landscape which it
commanded. Having in vain endeavoured to guess the position of
Woodbourne, and having nearly ascertained that of Kippletringan, he
turned to take a parting look at the stately ruins which he had just
traversed. He admired the massive and picturesque effect of the huge
round towers, which, flanking the gateway, gave a double portion of depth
and majesty to the high yet gloomy arch under which it opened. The carved
stone escutcheon of the ancient family, bearing for their arms three
wolves' heads, was hung diagonally beneath the helmet and crest, the
latter being a wolf couchant pierced with an arrow. On either side stood
as supporters, in full human size or larger, a salvage man PROPER, to use
the language of heraldry, WREATHED AND CINCTURED, and holding in his hand
an oak tree ERADICATED, that is, torn up by the roots.

'And the powerful barons who owned this blazonry,' thought Bertram,
pursuing the usual train of ideas which flows upon the mind at such
scenes--'do their posterity continue to possess the lands which they had
laboured to fortify so strongly? or are they wanderers, ignorant perhaps
even of the fame or power of their fore-fathers, while their hereditary
possessions are held by a race of strangers? Why is it,' he thought,
continuing to follow out the succession of ideas which the scene
prompted--'why is it that some scenes awaken thoughts which belong as it
were to dreams of early and shadowy recollection, such as my old Brahmin
moonshie would have ascribed to a state of previous existence? Is it the
visions of our sleep that float confusedly in our memory, and are
recalled by the appearance of such real objects as in any respect
correspond to the phantoms they presented to our imagination? How often
do we find ourselves in society which we have never before met, and yet
feel impressed with a mysterious and ill-defined consciousness that
neither the scene, the speakers, nor the subject are entirely new; nay,
feel as if we could anticipate that part of the conversation which has
not yet taken place! It is even so with me while I gaze upon that ruin;
nor can I divest myself of the idea that these massive towers and that
dark gateway, retiring through its deep-vaulted and ribbed arches, and
dimly lighted by the courtyard beyond, are not entirely strange to me.
Can it be that they have been familiar to me in infancy, and that I am to
seek in their vicinity those friends of whom my childhood has still a
tender though faint remembrance, and whom I early exchanged for such
severe task-masters? Yet Brown, who, I think, would not have deceived me,
always told me I was brought off from the eastern coast, after a skirmish
in which my father was killed; and I do remember enough of a horrid scene
of violence to strengthen his account.'

It happened that the spot upon which young Bertram chanced to station
himself for the better viewing the castle was nearly the same on which
his father had died. It was marked by a large old oak-tree, the only one
on the esplanade, and which, having been used for executions by the
barons of Ellangowan, was called the Justice Tree. It chanced, and the
coincidence was remarkable, that Glossin was this morning engaged with a
person whom he was in the habit of consulting in such matters concerning
some projected repairs and a large addition to the house of Ellangowan,
and that, having no great pleasure in remains so intimately connected
with the grandeur of the former inhabitants, he had resolved to use the
stones of the ruinous castle in his new edifice. Accordingly he came up
the bank, followed by the land-surveyor mentioned on a former occasion,
who was also in the habit of acting as a sort of architect in case of
necessity. In drawing the plans, etc., Glossin was in the custom of
relying upon his own skill. Bertram's back was towards them as they came
up the ascent, and he was quite shrouded by the branches of the large
tree, so that Glossin was not aware of the presence of the stranger till
he was close upon him.

'Yes, sir, as I have often said before to you, the Old Place is a perfect
quarry of hewn stone, and it would be better for the estate if it were
all down, since it is only a den for smugglers.' At this instant Bertram
turned short round upon Glossin at the distance of two yards only, and
said--'Would you destroy this fine old castle, sir?'

His face, person, and voice were so exactly those of his father in his
best days, that Glossin, hearing his exclamation, and seeing such a
sudden apparition in the shape of his patron, and on nearly the very spot
where he had expired, almost thought the grave had given up its dead! He
staggered back two or three paces, as if he had received a sudden and
deadly wound. He instantly recovered, however, his presence of mind,
stimulated by the thrilling reflection that it was no inhabitant of the
other world which stood before him, but an injured man whom the slightest
want of dexterity on his part might lead to acquaintance with his rights,
and the means of asserting them to his utter destruction. Yet his ideas
were so much confused by the shock he had received that his first
question partook of the alarm.

'In the name of God, how came you here?' said Glossin.

'How came I here?' repeated Bertram, surprised at the solemnity of the
address; 'I landed a quarter of an hour since in the little harbour
beneath the castle, and was employing a moment's leisure in viewing these
fine ruins. I trust there is no intrusion?'

'Intrusion, sir? No, sir,' said Glossin, in some degree recovering his
breath, and then whispered a few words into his companion's ear, who
immediately left him and descended towards the house. 'Intrusion, sir?
no, sir; you or any gentleman are welcome to satisfy your curiosity.'

'I thank you, sir,' said Bertram. 'They call this the Old Place, I am
informed?'

'Yes, sir; in distinction to the New Place, my house there below.'

Glossin, it must be remarked, was, during the following dialogue, on the
one hand eager to learn what local recollections young Bertram had
retained of the scenes of his infancy, and on the other compelled to be
extremely cautious in his replies, lest he should awaken or assist, by
some name, phrase, or anecdote, the slumbering train of association. He
suffered, indeed, during the whole scene the agonies which he so richly
deserved; yet his pride and interest, like the fortitude of a North
American Indian, manned him to sustain the tortures inflicted at once by
the contending stings of a guilty conscience, of hatred, of fear, and of
suspicion.

'I wish to ask the name, sir,' said Bertram, 'of the family to whom this
stately ruin belongs.'

'It is my property, sir; my name is Glossin.'

'Glossin--Glossin?' repeated Bertram, as if the answer were somewhat
different from what he expected. 'I beg your pardon, Mr. Glossin; I am
apt to be very absent. May I ask if the castle has been long in your
family?'

'It was built, I believe, long ago by a family called Mac-Dingawaie,'
answered Glossin, suppressing for obvious reasons the more familiar sound
of Bertram, which might have awakened the recollections which he was
anxious to lull to rest, and slurring with an evasive answer the question
concerning the endurance of his own possession.

'And how do you read the half-defaced motto, sir,' said Bertram, 'which
is upon that scroll above the entablature with the arms?'

'I--I--I really do not exactly know,' replied Glossin.

'I should be apt to make it out, OUR RIGHT MAKES OUR MIGHT.'

'I believe it is something of that kind,' said Glossin.

'May I ask, sir,' said the stranger, 'if it is your family motto?'

'N--n--no--no--not ours. That is, I believe, the motto of the former
people; mine is--mine is--in fact, I have had some correspondence with
Mr. Cumming of the Lyon Office in Edinburgh about mine. He writes me the
Glossins anciently bore for a motto, "He who takes it, makes it."'

'If there be any uncertainty, sir, and the case were mine,' said Bertram,
'I would assume the old motto, which seems to me the better of the two.'

Glossin, whose tongue by this time clove to the roof of his mouth, only
answered by a nod.

'It is odd enough,' said Bertram, fixing his eye upon the arms and
gateway, and partly addressing Glossin, partly as it were thinking
aloud--'it is odd the tricks which our memory plays us. The remnants of
an old prophecy, or song, or rhyme of some kind or other, return to my
recollection on hearing that motto; stay--it is a strange jingle of
sounds:--

The dark shall be light, And the wrong made right, When Bertram's right
and Bertram's might Shall meet on---

I cannot remember the last line--on some particular height; HEIGHT is the
rhyme, I am sure; but I cannot hit upon the preceding word.'

'Confound your memory,' muttered Glossin, 'you remember by far too much
of it!'

'There are other rhymes connected with these early recollections,'
continued the young man. 'Pray, sir, is there any song current in this
part of the world respecting a daughter of the King of the Isle of Man
eloping with a Scottish knight?'

'I am the worst person in the world to consult upon legendary
antiquities,' answered Glossin.

'I could sing such a ballad,' said Bertram, 'from one end to another when
I was a boy. You must know I left Scotland, which is my native country,
very young, and those who brought me up discouraged all my attempts to
preserve recollection of my native land, on account, I believe, of a
boyish wish which I had to escape from their charge.'

'Very natural,' said Glossin, but speaking as if his utmost efforts were
unable to unseal his lips beyond the width of a quarter of an inch, so
that his whole utterance was a kind of compressed muttering, very
different from the round, bold, bullying voice with which he usually
spoke. Indeed, his appearance and demeanour during all this conversation
seemed to diminish even his strength and stature; so that he appeared to
wither into the shadow of himself, now advancing one foot, now the other,
now stooping and wriggling his shoulders, now fumbling with the buttons
of his waistcoat, now clasping his hands together; in short, he was the
picture of a mean-spirited, shuffling rascal in the very agonies of
detection. To these appearances Bertram was totally inattentive, being
dragged on as it were by the current of his own associations. Indeed,
although he addressed Glossin, he was not so much thinking of him as
arguing upon the embarrassing state of his own feelings and recollection.
'Yes,' he said, 'I preserved my language among the sailors, most of whom
spoke English, and when I could get into a corner by myself I used to
sing all that song over from beginning to end; I have forgot it all now,
but I remember the tune well, though I cannot guess what should at
present so strongly recall it to my memory.'

He took his flageolet from his pocket and played a simple melody.
Apparently the tune awoke the corresponding associations of a damsel who,
close beside a fine spring about halfway down the descent, and which had
once supplied the castle with water, was engaged in bleaching linen. She
immediately took up the song:--

     'Are these the Links of Forth, she said,
       Or are they the crooks of Dee,
     Or the bonnie woods of Warroch Head
       That I so fain would see?'

'By heaven,' said Bertram, 'it is the very ballad! I must learn these
words from the girl.'

'Confusion!' thought Glossin; 'if I cannot put a stop to this all will be
out. O the devil take all ballads and ballad-makers and ballad-singers!
and that d--d jade too, to set up her pipe!'--'You will have time enough
for this on some other occasion,' he said aloud; 'at present' (for now he
saw his emissary with two or three men coming up the bank)--'at present
we must have some more serious conversation together.'

'How do you mean, sir?' said Bertram, turning short upon him, and not
liking the tone which he made use of.

'Why, sir, as to that--I believe your name is Brown?' said Glossin. 'And
what of that, sir?'

Glossin looked over his shoulder to see how near his party had
approached; they were coming fast on. 'Vanbeest Brown? if I mistake not.'

'And what of that, sir?' said Bertram, with increasing astonishment and
displeasure.

'Why, in that case,' said Glossin, observing his friends had now got upon
the level space close beside them--'in that case you are my prisoner in
the king's name!' At the same time he stretched his hand towards
Bertram's collar, while two of the men who had come up seized upon his
arms; he shook himself, however, free of their grasp by a violent effort,
in which he pitched the most pertinacious down the bank, and, drawing his
cutlass, stood on the defensive, while those who had felt his strength
recoiled from his presence and gazed at a safe distance. 'Observe,' he
called out at the same time, 'that I have no purpose to resist legal
authority; satisfy me that you have a magistrate's warrant, and are
authorised to make this arrest, and I will obey it quietly; but let no
man who loves his life venture to approach me till I am satisfied for
what crime, and by whose authority, I am apprehended.'

Glossin then caused one of the officers show a warrant for the
apprehension of Vanbeest Brown, accused of the crime of wilfully and
maliciously shooting at Charles Hazlewood, younger of Hazlewood, with an
intent to kill, and also of other crimes and misdemeanours, and which
appointed him, having been so apprehended, to be brought before the next
magistrate for examination. The warrant being formal, and the fact such
as he could not deny, Bertram threw down his weapon and submitted himself
to the officers, who, flying on him with eagerness corresponding to their
former pusillanimity, were about to load him with irons, alleging the
strength and activity which he had displayed as a justification of this
severity. But Glossin was ashamed or afraid to permit this unnecessary
insult, and directed the prisoner to be treated with all the decency, and
even respect, that was consistent with safety. Afraid, however, to
introduce him into his own house, where still further subjects of
recollection might have been suggested, and anxious at the same time to
cover his own proceedings by the sanction of another's authority, he
ordered his carriage (for he had lately set up a carriage) to be got
ready, and in the meantime directed refreshments to be given to the
prisoner and the officers, who were consigned to one of the rooms in the
old castle, until the means of conveyance for examination before a
magistrate should be provided.






CHAPTER XIII
     Bring in the evidence.
     Thou robed man of justice, take thy place,
     And thou, his yoke-fellow of equity,
     Bench by his side; you are of the commission,
     Sit you too.

          King Lear.


While the carriage was getting ready, Glossin had a letter to compose,
about which he wasted no small time. It was to his neighbour, as he was
fond of calling him, Sir Robert Hazlewood of Hazlewood, the head of an
ancient and powerful interest in the county, which had in the decadence
of the Ellangowan family gradually succeeded to much of their authority
and influence. The present representative of the family was an elderly
man, dotingly fond of his own family, which was limited to an only son
and daughter, and stoically indifferent to the fate of all mankind
besides. For the rest, he was honourable in his general dealings because
he was afraid to suffer the censure of the world, and just from a better
motive. He was presumptuously over-conceited on the score of family pride
and importance, a feeling considerably enhanced by his late succession to
the title of a Nova Scotia baronet; and he hated the memory of the
Ellangowan family, though now a memory only, because a certain baron of
that house was traditionally reported to have caused the founder of the
Hazlewood family hold his stirrup until he mounted into his saddle. In
his general deportment he was pompous and important, affecting a species
of florid elocution, which often became ridiculous from his misarranging
the triads and quaternions with which he loaded his sentences.

To this personage Glossin was now to write in such a conciliatory style
as might be most acceptable to his vanity and family pride, and the
following was the form of his note:--

'Mr. Gilbert Glossin' (he longed to add of Ellangowan, but prudence
prevailed, and he suppressed that territorial designation)--'Mr. Gilbert
Glossin has the honour to offer his most respectful compliments to Sir
Robert Hazlewood, and to inform him that he has this morning been
fortunate enough to secure the person who wounded Mr. C. Hazlewood. As
Sir Robert Hazlewood may probably choose to conduct the examination of
this criminal himself, Mr. G. Glossin will cause the man to be carried to
the inn at Kippletringan or to Hazlewood House, as Sir Robert Hazlewood
may be pleased to direct. And, with Sir Robert Hazlewood's permission,
Mr. G. Glossin will attend him at either of these places with the proofs
and declarations which he has been so fortunate as to collect respecting
this atrocious business.'

Addressed,

'Sir ROBERT HAZLEWOOD of Hazlewood, Bart. 'Hazlewood House, etc. etc.

'ELLN GN.

'Tuesday.'

This note he despatched by a servant on horseback, and having given the
man some time to get ahead, and desired him to ride fast, he ordered two
officers of justice to get into the carriage with Bertram; and he
himself, mounting his horse, accompanied them at a slow pace to the point
where the roads to Kippletringan and Hazlewood House separated, and there
awaited the return of his messenger, in order that his farther route
might be determined by the answer he should receive from the Baronet. In
about half an hour, his servant returned with the following answer,
handsomely folded, and sealed with the Hazlewood arms, having the Nova
Scotia badge depending from the shield:--

'Sir Robert Hazlewood of Hazlewood returns Mr. G. Glossin's compliments,
and thanks him for the trouble he has taken in a matter affecting the
safety of Sir Robert's family. Sir R.H. requests Mr. G.G. will have the
goodness to bring the prisoner to Hazlewood House for examination, with
the other proofs or declarations which he mentions. And after the
business is over, in case Mr. G.G. is not otherwise engaged, Sir R. and
Lady Hazlewood request his company to dinner.'

Addressed,

'Mr. GILBERT GLOSSIN, etc. 'HAZLEWOOD HOUSE, Tuesday.'

'Soh!' thought Mr. Glossin, 'here is one finger in at least, and that I
will make the means of introducing my whole hand. But I must first get
clear of this wretched young fellow. I think I can manage Sir Robert. He
is dull and pompous, and will be alike disposed to listen to my
suggestions upon the law of the case and to assume the credit of acting
upon them as his own proper motion. So I shall have the advantage of
being the real magistrate, without the odium of responsibility.'

As he cherished these hopes and expectations, the carriage approached
Hazlewood House through a noble avenue of old oaks, which shrouded the
ancient abbey-resembling building so called. It was a large edifice,
built at different periods, part having actually been a priory, upon the
suppression of which, in the time of Queen Mary, the first of the family
had obtained a gift of the house and surrounding lands from the crown. It
was pleasantly situated in a large deer-park, on the banks of the river
we have before mentioned. The scenery around was of a dark, solemn, and
somewhat melancholy cast, according well with the architecture of the
house. Everything appeared to be kept in the highest possible order, and
announced the opulence and rank of the proprietor.

As Mr. Glossin's carriage stopped at the door of the hall, Sir Robert
reconnoitred the new vehicle from the windows. According to his
aristocratic feelings, there was a degree of presumption in this novus
homo, this Mr. Gilbert Glossin, late writer in---, presuming to set up
such an accommodation at all; but his wrath was mitigated when he
observed that the mantle upon the panels only bore a plain cipher of G.G.
This apparent modesty was indeed solely owing to the delay of Mr. Gumming
of the Lyon Office, who, being at that time engaged in discovering and
matriculating the arms of two commissaries from North America, three
English-Irish peers, and two great Jamaica traders, had been more slow
than usual in finding an escutcheon for the new Laird of Ellangowan. But
his delay told to the advantage of Glossin in the opinion of the proud
Baronet.

While the officers of justice detained their prisoner in a sort of
steward's room, Mr. Glossin was ushered into what was called the great
oak-parlour, a long room, panelled with well-varnished wainscot, and
adorned with the grim portraits of Sir Robert Hazlewood's ancestry. The
visitor, who had no internal consciousness of worth to balance that of
meanness of birth, felt his inferiority, and by the depth of his bow and
the obsequiousness of his demeanour showed that the Laird of Ellangowan
was sunk for the time in the old and submissive habits of the quondam
retainer of the law. He would have persuaded himself, indeed, that he was
only humouring the pride of the old Baronet for the purpose of turning it
to his own advantage, but his feelings were of a mingled nature, and he
felt the influence of those very prejudices which he pretended to
flatter.

The Baronet received his visitor with that condescending parade which was
meant at once to assert his own vast superiority, and to show the
generosity and courtesy with which he could waive it, and descend to the
level of ordinary conversation with ordinary men. He thanked Glossin for
his attention to a matter in which 'young Hazlewood' was so intimately
concerned, and, pointing to his family pictures, observed, with a
gracious smile, 'Indeed, these venerable gentlemen, Mr. Glossin, are as
much obliged as I am in this case for the labour, pains, care, and
trouble which you have taken in their behalf; and I have no doubt, were
they capable of expressing themselves, would join me, sir, in thanking
you for the favour you have conferred upon the house of Hazlewood by
taking care, and trouble, sir, and interest in behalf of the young
gentleman who is to continue their name and family.'

Thrice bowed Glossin, and each time more profoundly than before; once in
honour of the knight who stood upright before him, once in respect to the
quiet personages who patiently hung upon the wainscot, and a third time
in deference to the young gentleman who was to carry on the name and
family. Roturier as he was, Sir Robert was gratified by the homage which
he rendered, and proceeded in a tone of gracious familiarity: 'And now,
Mr. Glossin, my exceeding good friend, you must allow me to avail myself
of your knowledge of law in our proceedings in this matter. I am not much
in the habit of acting as a justice of the peace; it suits better with
other gentlemen, whose domestic and family affairs require less constant
superintendence, attention, and management than mine.'

Of course, whatever small assistance Mr. Glossin could render was
entirely at Sir Robert Hazlewood's service; but, as Sir Robert
Hazlewood's name stood high in the list of the faculty, the said Mr.
Glossin could not presume to hope it could be either necessary or useful.

'Why, my good sir, you will understand me only to mean that I am
something deficient in the practical knowledge of the ordinary details of
justice business. I was indeed educated to the bar, and might boast
perhaps at one time that I had made some progress in the speculative and
abstract and abstruse doctrines of our municipal code; but there is in
the present day so little opportunity of a man of family and fortune
rising to that eminence at the bar which is attained by adventurers who
are as willing to plead for John a' Nokes as for the first noble of the
land, that I was really early disgusted with practice. The first case,
indeed, which was laid on my table quite sickened me: it respected a
bargain, sir, of tallow between a butcher and a candlemaker; and I found
it was expected that I should grease my mouth not only with their vulgar
names, but with all the technical terms and phrases and peculiar language
of their dirty arts. Upon my honour, my good sir, I have never been able
to bear the smell of a tallow-candle since.'

Pitying, as seemed to be expected, the mean use to which the Baronet's
faculties had been degraded on this melancholy occasion, Mr. Glossin
offered to officiate as clerk or assessor, or in any way in which he
could be most useful. 'And with a view to possessing you of the whole
business, and in the first place, there will, I believe, be no difficulty
in proving the main fact, that this was the person who fired the unhappy
piece. Should he deny it, it can be proved by Mr. Hazlewood, I presume?'

'Young Hazlewood is not at home to-day, Mr. Glossin.'

'But we can have the oath of the servant who attended him,' said the
ready Mr. Glossin; 'indeed, I hardly think the fact will be disputed. I
am more apprehensive that, from the too favourable and indulgent manner
in which I have understood that Mr. Hazlewood has been pleased to
represent the business, the assault may be considered as accidental, and
the injury as unintentional, so that the fellow may be immediately set at
liberty to do more mischief.'
