the burghers.

"I must know it, by Jove, you have made them glitter enough before my
eyes; but I beg you to observe also that we on our side have pistols,
that the pistol carries admirably to a distance of fifty yards, and that
you are only twenty-five from us."

"Death to the traitors!" cried the exasperated burghers.

"Go along with you," growled the officer, "you always cry the same thing
over again. It is very tiresome."

With this, he took his post at the head of his troops, whilst the tumult
grew fiercer and fiercer about the Buytenhof.

And yet the fuming crowd did not know that, at that very moment when
they were tracking the scent of one of their victims, the other, as
if hurrying to meet his fate, passed, at a distance of not more than a
hundred yards, behind the groups of people and the dragoons, to betake
himself to the Buytenhof.

John de Witt, indeed, had alighted from his coach with his servant, and
quietly walked across the courtyard of the prison.

Mentioning his name to the turnkey, who however knew him, he said,--

"Good morning, Gryphus; I am coming to take away my brother, who, as you
know, is condemned to exile, and to carry him out of the town."

Whereupon the jailer, a sort of bear, trained to lock and unlock the
gates of the prison, had greeted him and admitted him into the building,
the doors of which were immediately closed again.

Ten yards farther on, John de Witt met a lovely young girl, of about
seventeen or eighteen, dressed in the national costume of the Frisian
women, who, with pretty demureness, dropped a curtesy to him. Chucking
her under the chin, he said to her,--

"Good morning, my good and fair Rosa; how is my brother?"

"Oh, Mynheer John!" the young girl replied, "I am not afraid of the harm
which has been done to him. That's all over now."

"But what is it you are afraid of?"

"I am afraid of the harm which they are going to do to him."

"Oh, yes," said De Witt, "you mean to speak of the people down below,
don't you?"

"Do you hear them?"

"They are indeed in a state of great excitement; but when they see us
perhaps they will grow calmer, as we have never done them anything but
good."

"That's unfortunately no reason, except for the contrary," muttered the
girl, as, on an imperative sign from her father, she withdrew.

"Indeed, child, what you say is only too true."

Then, in pursuing his way, he said to himself,--

"Here is a damsel who very likely does not know how to read, who
consequently has never read anything, and yet with one word she has just
told the whole history of the world."

And with the same calm mien, but more melancholy than he had been on
entering the prison, the Grand Pensionary proceeded towards the cell of
his brother.




Chapter 2. The Two Brothers


As the fair Rosa, with foreboding doubt, had foretold, so it happened.
Whilst John de Witt was climbing the narrow winding stairs which led to
the prison of his brother Cornelius, the burghers did their best to have
the troop of Tilly, which was in their way, removed.

Seeing this disposition, King Mob, who fully appreciated the laudable
intentions of his own beloved militia, shouted most lustily,--

"Hurrah for the burghers!"

As to Count Tilly, who was as prudent as he was firm, he began to parley
with the burghers, under the protection of the cocked pistols of his
dragoons, explaining to the valiant townsmen, that his order from the
States commanded him to guard the prison and its approaches with three
companies.

"Wherefore such an order? Why guard the prison?" cried the Orangists.

"Stop," replied the Count, "there you at once ask me more than I
can tell you. I was told, 'Guard the prison,' and I guard it. You,
gentlemen, who are almost military men yourselves, you are aware that an
order must never be gainsaid."

"But this order has been given to you that the traitors may be enabled
to leave the town."

"Very possibly, as the traitors are condemned to exile," replied Tilly.

"But who has given this order?"

"The States, to be sure!"

"The States are traitors."

"I don't know anything about that!"

"And you are a traitor yourself!"

"I?"

"Yes, you."

"Well, as to that, let us understand each other gentlemen. Whom should
I betray? The States? Why, I cannot betray them, whilst, being in their
pay, I faithfully obey their orders."

As the Count was so indisputably in the right that it was impossible
to argue against him, the mob answered only by redoubled clamour and
horrible threats, to which the Count opposed the most perfect urbanity.

"Gentlemen," he said, "uncock your muskets, one of them may go off by
accident; and if the shot chanced to wound one of my men, we should
knock over a couple of hundreds of yours, for which we should, indeed,
be very sorry, but you even more so; especially as such a thing is
neither contemplated by you nor by myself."

"If you did that," cried the burghers, "we should have a pop at you,
too."

"Of course you would; but suppose you killed every man Jack of us, those
whom we should have killed would not, for all that, be less dead."

"Then leave the place to us, and you will perform the part of a good
citizen."

"First of all," said the Count, "I am not a citizen, but an officer,
which is a very different thing; and secondly, I am not a Hollander, but
a Frenchman, which is more different still. I have to do with no one but
the States, by whom I am paid; let me see an order from them to leave
the place to you, and I shall only be too glad to wheel off in an
instant, as I am confoundedly bored here."

"Yes, yes!" cried a hundred voices; the din of which was immediately
swelled by five hundred others; "let us march to the Town-hall; let us
go and see the deputies! Come along! come along!"

"That's it," Tilly muttered between his teeth, as he saw the most
violent among the crowd turning away; "go and ask for a meanness at
the Town-hall, and you will see whether they will grant it; go, my fine
fellows, go!"

The worthy officer relied on the honour of the magistrates, who, on
their side, relied on his honour as a soldier.

"I say, Captain," the first lieutenant whispered into the ear of the
Count, "I hope the deputies will give these madmen a flat refusal;
but, after all, it would do no harm if they would send us some
reinforcement."

In the meanwhile, John de Witt, whom we left climbing the stairs, after
the conversation with the jailer Gryphus and his daughter Rosa, had
reached the door of the cell, where on a mattress his brother Cornelius
was resting, after having undergone the preparatory degrees of the
torture. The sentence of banishment having been pronounced, there was no
occasion for inflicting the torture extraordinary.

Cornelius was stretched on his couch, with broken wrists and crushed
fingers. He had not confessed a crime of which he was not guilty; and
now, after three days of agony, he once more breathed freely, on being
informed that the judges, from whom he had expected death, were only
condemning him to exile.

Endowed with an iron frame and a stout heart, how would he have
disappointed his enemies if they could only have seen, in the dark cell
of the Buytenhof, his pale face lit up by the smile of the martyr, who
forgets the dross of this earth after having obtained a glimpse of the
bright glory of heaven.

The warden, indeed, had already recovered his full strength, much more
owing to the force of his own strong will than to actual aid; and he was
calculating how long the formalities of the law would still detain him
in prison.

This was just at the very moment when the mingled shouts of the
burgher guard and of the mob were raging against the two brothers, and
threatening Captain Tilly, who served as a rampart to them. This noise,
which roared outside of the walls of the prison, as the surf dashing
against the rocks, now reached the ears of the prisoner.

But, threatening as it sounded, Cornelius appeared not to deem it worth
his while to inquire after its cause; nor did he get up to look out
of the narrow grated window, which gave access to the light and to the
noise of the world without.

He was so absorbed in his never-ceasing pain that it had almost become a
habit with him. He felt with such delight the bonds which connected his
immortal being with his perishable frame gradually loosening, that it
seemed to him as if his spirit, freed from the trammels of the body,
were hovering above it, like the expiring flame which rises from the
half-extinguished embers.

He also thought of his brother; and whilst the latter was thus vividly
present to his mind the door opened, and John entered, hurrying to the
bedside of the prisoner, who stretched out his broken limbs and his
hands tied up in bandages towards that glorious brother, whom he now
excelled, not in services rendered to the country, but in the hatred
which the Dutch bore him.

John tenderly kissed his brother on the forehead, and put his sore hands
gently back on the mattress.

"Cornelius, my poor brother, you are suffering great pain, are you not?"

"I am suffering no longer, since I see you, my brother."

"Oh, my poor dear Cornelius! I feel most wretched to see you in such a
state."

"And, indeed, I have thought more of you than of myself; and whilst they
were torturing me, I never thought of uttering a complaint, except once,
to say, 'Poor brother!' But now that you are here, let us forget all.
You are coming to take me away, are you not?"

"I am."

"I am quite healed; help me to get up, and you shall see how I can
walk."

"You will not have to walk far, as I have my coach near the pond, behind
Tilly's dragoons."

"Tilly's dragoons! What are they near the pond for?"

"Well," said the Grand Pensionary with a melancholy smile which was
habitual to him, "the gentlemen at the Town-hall expect that the
people at the Hague would like to see you depart, and there is some
apprehension of a tumult."

"Of a tumult?" replied Cornelius, fixing his eyes on his perplexed
brother; "a tumult?"

"Yes, Cornelius."

"Oh! that's what I heard just now," said the prisoner, as if speaking to
himself. Then, turning to his brother, he continued,--

"Are there many persons down before the prison."

"Yes, my brother, there are."

"But then, to come here to me----"

"Well?"

"How is it that they have allowed you to pass?"

"You know well that we are not very popular, Cornelius," said the Grand
Pensionary, with gloomy bitterness. "I have made my way through all
sorts of bystreets and alleys."

"You hid yourself, John?"

"I wished to reach you without loss of time, and I did what people will
do in politics, or on the sea when the wind is against them,--I tacked."

At this moment the noise in the square below was heard to roar with
increasing fury. Tilly was parleying with the burghers.

"Well, well," said Cornelius, "you are a very skilful pilot, John; but I
doubt whether you will as safely guide your brother out of the Buytenhof
in the midst of this gale, and through the raging surf of popular
hatred, as you did the fleet of Van Tromp past the shoals of the Scheldt
to Antwerp."

"With the help of God, Cornelius, we'll at least try," answered John;
"but, first of all, a word with you."

"Speak!"

The shouts began anew.

"Hark, hark!" continued Cornelius, "how angry those people are! Is it
against you, or against me?"

"I should say it is against us both, Cornelius. I told you, my dear
brother, that the Orange party, while assailing us with their absurd
calumnies, have also made it a reproach against us that we have
negotiated with France."

"What blockheads they are!"

"But, indeed, they reproach us with it."

"And yet, if these negotiations had been successful, they would have
prevented the defeats of Rees, Orsay, Wesel, and Rheinberg; the Rhine
would not have been crossed, and Holland might still consider herself
invincible in the midst of her marshes and canals."

"All this is quite true, my dear Cornelius, but still more certain
it is, that if at this moment our correspondence with the Marquis de
Louvois were discovered, skilful pilot as I am, I should not be able to
save the frail barque which is to carry the brothers De Witt and their
fortunes out of Holland. That correspondence, which might prove to
honest people how dearly I love my country, and what sacrifices I have
offered to make for its liberty and glory, would be ruin to us if it
fell into the hands of the Orange party. I hope you have burned the
letters before you left Dort to join me at the Hague."

"My dear brother," Cornelius answered, "your correspondence with M. de
Louvois affords ample proof of your having been of late the greatest,
most generous, and most able citizen of the Seven United Provinces. I
rejoice in the glory of my country; and particularly do I rejoice
in your glory, John. I have taken good care not to burn that
correspondence."

"Then we are lost, as far as this life is concerned," quietly said the
Grand Pensionary, approaching the window.

"No, on the contrary, John, we shall at the same time save our lives and
regain our popularity."

"But what have you done with these letters?"

"I have intrusted them to the care of Cornelius van Baerle, my godson,
whom you know, and who lives at Dort."

"Poor honest Van Baerle! who knows so much, and yet thinks of nothing
but of flowers and of God who made them. You have intrusted him with
this fatal secret; it will be his ruin, poor soul!"

"His ruin?"

"Yes, for he will either be strong or he will be weak. If he is
strong, he will, when he hears of what has happened to us, boast of
our acquaintance; if he is weak, he will be afraid on account of his
connection with us: if he is strong, he will betray the secret by his
boldness; if he is weak, he will allow it to be forced from him. In
either case he is lost, and so are we. Let us, therefore, fly, fly, as
long as there is still time."

Cornelius de Witt, raising himself on his couch, and grasping the
hand of his brother, who shuddered at the touch of his linen bandages,
