


CHAPTER XXIX--ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE SIXTH


Henry the Eighth had made a will, appointing a council of sixteen to
govern the kingdom for his son while he was under age (he was now only
ten years old), and another council of twelve to help them.  The most
powerful of the first council was the EARL OF HERTFORD, the young King's
uncle, who lost no time in bringing his nephew with great state up to
Enfield, and thence to the Tower.  It was considered at the time a
striking proof of virtue in the young King that he was sorry for his
father's death; but, as common subjects have that virtue too, sometimes,
we will say no more about it.

There was a curious part of the late King's will, requiring his executors
to fulfil whatever promises he had made.  Some of the court wondering
what these might be, the Earl of Hertford and the other noblemen
interested, said that they were promises to advance and enrich _them_.
So, the Earl of Hertford made himself DUKE OF SOMERSET, and made his
brother EDWARD SEYMOUR a baron; and there were various similar
promotions, all very agreeable to the parties concerned, and very
dutiful, no doubt, to the late King's memory.  To be more dutiful still,
they made themselves rich out of the Church lands, and were very
comfortable.  The new Duke of Somerset caused himself to be declared
PROTECTOR of the kingdom, and was, indeed, the King.

As young Edward the Sixth had been brought up in the principles of the
Protestant religion, everybody knew that they would be maintained.  But
Cranmer, to whom they were chiefly entrusted, advanced them steadily and
temperately.  Many superstitious and ridiculous practices were stopped;
but practices which were harmless were not interfered with.

The Duke of Somerset, the Protector, was anxious to have the young King
engaged in marriage to the young Queen of Scotland, in order to prevent
that princess from making an alliance with any foreign power; but, as a
large party in Scotland were unfavourable to this plan, he invaded that
country.  His excuse for doing so was, that the Border men--that is, the
Scotch who lived in that part of the country where England and Scotland
joined--troubled the English very much.  But there were two sides to this
question; for the English Border men troubled the Scotch too; and,
through many long years, there were perpetual border quarrels which gave
rise to numbers of old tales and songs.  However, the Protector invaded
Scotland; and ARRAN, the Scottish Regent, with an army twice as large as
his, advanced to meet him.  They encountered on the banks of the river
Esk, within a few miles of Edinburgh; and there, after a little skirmish,
the Protector made such moderate proposals, in offering to retire if the
Scotch would only engage not to marry their princess to any foreign
prince, that the Regent thought the English were afraid.  But in this he
made a horrible mistake; for the English soldiers on land, and the
English sailors on the water, so set upon the Scotch, that they broke and
fled, and more than ten thousand of them were killed.  It was a dreadful
battle, for the fugitives were slain without mercy.  The ground for four
miles, all the way to Edinburgh, was strewn with dead men, and with arms,
and legs, and heads.  Some hid themselves in streams and were drowned;
some threw away their armour and were killed running, almost naked; but
in this battle of Pinkey the English lost only two or three hundred men.
They were much better clothed than the Scotch; at the poverty of whose
appearance and country they were exceedingly astonished.

A Parliament was called when Somerset came back, and it repealed the whip
with six strings, and did one or two other good things; though it
unhappily retained the punishment of burning for those people who did not
make believe to believe, in all religious matters, what the Government
had declared that they must and should believe.  It also made a foolish
law (meant to put down beggars), that any man who lived idly and loitered
about for three days together, should be burned with a hot iron, made a
slave, and wear an iron fetter.  But this savage absurdity soon came to
an end, and went the way of a great many other foolish laws.

The Protector was now so proud that he sat in Parliament before all the
nobles, on the right hand of the throne.  Many other noblemen, who only
wanted to be as proud if they could get a chance, became his enemies of
course; and it is supposed that he came back suddenly from Scotland
because he had received news that his brother, LORD SEYMOUR, was becoming
dangerous to him.  This lord was now High Admiral of England; a very
handsome man, and a great favourite with the Court ladies--even with the
young Princess Elizabeth, who romped with him a little more than young
princesses in these times do with any one.  He had married Catherine
Parr, the late King's widow, who was now dead; and, to strengthen his
power, he secretly supplied the young King with money.  He may even have
engaged with some of his brother's enemies in a plot to carry the boy
off.  On these and other accusations, at any rate, he was confined in the
Tower, impeached, and found guilty; his own brother's name
being--unnatural and sad to tell--the first signed to the warrant of his
execution.  He was executed on Tower Hill, and died denying his treason.
One of his last proceedings in this world was to write two letters, one
to the Princess Elizabeth, and one to the Princess Mary, which a servant
of his took charge of, and concealed in his shoe.  These letters are
supposed to have urged them against his brother, and to revenge his
death.  What they truly contained is not known; but there is no doubt
that he had, at one time, obtained great influence over the Princess
Elizabeth.

All this while, the Protestant religion was making progress.  The images
which the people had gradually come to worship, were removed from the
churches; the people were informed that they need not confess themselves
to priests unless they chose; a common prayer-book was drawn up in the
English language, which all could understand, and many other improvements
were made; still moderately.  For Cranmer was a very moderate man, and
even restrained the Protestant clergy from violently abusing the
unreformed religion--as they very often did, and which was not a good
example.  But the people were at this time in great distress.  The
rapacious nobility who had come into possession of the Church lands, were
very bad landlords.  They enclosed great quantities of ground for the
feeding of sheep, which was then more profitable than the growing of
crops; and this increased the general distress.  So the people, who still
understood little of what was going on about them, and still readily
believed what the homeless monks told them--many of whom had been their
good friends in their better days--took it into their heads that all this
was owing to the reformed religion, and therefore rose, in many parts of
the country.

The most powerful risings were in Devonshire and Norfolk.  In Devonshire,
the rebellion was so strong that ten thousand men united within a few
days, and even laid siege to Exeter.  But LORD RUSSELL, coming to the
assistance of the citizens who defended that town, defeated the rebels;
and, not only hanged the Mayor of one place, but hanged the vicar of
another from his own church steeple.  What with hanging and killing by
the sword, four thousand of the rebels are supposed to have fallen in
that one county.  In Norfolk (where the rising was more against the
enclosure of open lands than against the reformed religion), the popular
leader was a man named ROBERT KET, a tanner of Wymondham.  The mob were,
in the first instance, excited against the tanner by one JOHN FLOWERDEW,
a gentleman who owed him a grudge: but the tanner was more than a match
for the gentleman, since he soon got the people on his side, and
established himself near Norwich with quite an army.  There was a large
oak-tree in that place, on a spot called Moushold Hill, which Ket named
the Tree of Reformation; and under its green boughs, he and his men sat,
in the midsummer weather, holding courts of justice, and debating affairs
of state.  They were even impartial enough to allow some rather tiresome
public speakers to get up into this Tree of Reformation, and point out
their errors to them, in long discourses, while they lay listening (not
always without some grumbling and growling) in the shade below.  At last,
one sunny July day, a herald appeared below the tree, and proclaimed Ket
and all his men traitors, unless from that moment they dispersed and went
home: in which case they were to receive a pardon.  But, Ket and his men
made light of the herald and became stronger than ever, until the Earl of
Warwick went after them with a sufficient force, and cut them all to
pieces.  A few were hanged, drawn, and quartered, as traitors, and their
limbs were sent into various country places to be a terror to the people.
Nine of them were hanged upon nine green branches of the Oak of
Reformation; and so, for the time, that tree may be said to have withered
away.

The Protector, though a haughty man, had compassion for the real
distresses of the common people, and a sincere desire to help them.  But
he was too proud and too high in degree to hold even their favour
steadily; and many of the nobles always envied and hated him, because
they were as proud and not as high as he.  He was at this time building a
great Palace in the Strand: to get the stone for which he blew up church
steeples with gunpowder, and pulled down bishops' houses: thus making
himself still more disliked.  At length, his principal enemy, the Earl of
Warwick--Dudley by name, and the son of that Dudley who had made himself
so odious with Empson, in the reign of Henry the Seventh--joined with
seven other members of the Council against him, formed a separate
Council; and, becoming stronger in a few days, sent him to the Tower
under twenty-nine articles of accusation.  After being sentenced by the
Council to the forfeiture of all his offices and lands, he was liberated
and pardoned, on making a very humble submission.  He was even taken back
into the Council again, after having suffered this fall, and married his
daughter, LADY ANNE SEYMOUR, to Warwick's eldest son.  But such a
reconciliation was little likely to last, and did not outlive a year.
Warwick, having got himself made Duke of Northumberland, and having
advanced the more important of his friends, then finished the history by
causing the Duke of Somerset and his friend LORD GREY, and others, to be
arrested for treason, in having conspired to seize and dethrone the King.
They were also accused of having intended to seize the new Duke of
Northumberland, with his friends LORD NORTHAMPTON and LORD PEMBROKE; to
murder them if they found need; and to raise the City to revolt.  All
this the fallen Protector positively denied; except that he confessed to
having spoken of the murder of those three noblemen, but having never
designed it.  He was acquitted of the charge of treason, and found guilty
of the other charges; so when the people--who remembered his having been
their friend, now that he was disgraced and in danger, saw him come out
from his trial with the axe turned from him--they thought he was
altogether acquitted, and sent up a loud shout of joy.

But the Duke of Somerset was ordered to be beheaded on Tower Hill, at
eight o'clock in the morning, and proclamations were issued bidding the
citizens keep at home until after ten.  They filled the streets, however,
and crowded the place of execution as soon as it was light; and, with sad
faces and sad hearts, saw the once powerful Protector ascend the scaffold
to lay his head upon the dreadful block.  While he was yet saying his
last words to them with manly courage, and telling them, in particular,
how it comforted him, at that pass, to have assisted in reforming the
national religion, a member of the Council was seen riding up on
horseback.  They again thought that the Duke was saved by his bringing a
reprieve, and again shouted for joy.  But the Duke himself told them they
were mistaken, and laid down his head and had it struck off at a blow.

Many of the bystanders rushed forward and steeped their handkerchiefs in
his blood, as a mark of their affection.  He had, indeed, been capable of
many good acts, and one of them was discovered after he was no more.  The
Bishop of Durham, a very good man, had been informed against to the
Council, when the Duke was in power, as having answered a treacherous
letter proposing a rebellion against the reformed religion.  As the
answer could not be found, he could not be declared guilty; but it was
now discovered, hidden by the Duke himself among some private papers, in
his regard for that good man.  The Bishop lost his office, and was
deprived of his possessions.

It is not very pleasant to know that while his uncle lay in prison under
sentence of death, the young King was being vastly entertained by plays,
and dances, and sham fights: but there is no doubt of it, for he kept a
journal himself.  It is pleasanter to know that not a single Roman
Catholic was burnt in this reign for holding that religion; though two
wretched victims suffered for heresy.  One, a woman named JOAN BOCHER,
for professing some opinions that even she could only explain in
unintelligible jargon.  The other, a Dutchman, named VON PARIS, who
practised as a surgeon in London.  Edward was, to his credit, exceedingly
unwilling to sign the warrant for the woman's execution: shedding tears
before he did so, and telling Cranmer, who urged him to do it (though
Cranmer really would have spared the woman at first, but for her own
determined obstinacy), that the guilt was not his, but that of the man
who so strongly urged the dreadful act.  We shall see, too soon, whether
the time ever came when Cranmer is likely to have remembered this with
sorrow and remorse.

Cranmer and RIDLEY (at first Bishop of Rochester, and afterwards Bishop
of London) were the most powerful of the clergy of this reign.  Others
were imprisoned and deprived of their property for still adhering to the
unreformed religion; the most important among whom were GARDINER Bishop
of Winchester, HEATH Bishop of Worcester, DAY Bishop of Chichester, and
BONNER that Bishop of London who was superseded by Ridley.  The Princess
Mary, who inherited her mother's gloomy temper, and hated the reformed
religion as connected with her mother's wrongs and sorrows--she knew
nothing else about it, always refusing to read a single book in which it
was truly described--held by the unreformed religion too, and was the
only person in the kingdom for whom the old Mass was allowed to be
performed; nor would the young King have made that exception even in her
favour, but for the strong persuasions of Cranmer and Ridley.  He always
viewed it with horror; and when he fell into a sickly condition, after
having been very ill, first of the measles and then of the small-pox, he
was greatly troubled in mind to think that if he died, and she, the next
heir to the throne, succeeded, the Roman Catholic religion would be set
up again.

This uneasiness, the Duke of Northumberland was not slow to encourage:
for, if the Princess Mary came to the throne, he, who had taken part with
the Protestants, was sure to be disgraced.  Now, the Duchess of Suffolk
was descended from King Henry the Seventh; and, if she resigned what
little or no right she had, in favour of her daughter LADY JANE GREY,
that would be the succession to promote the Duke's greatness; because
LORD GUILFORD DUDLEY, one of his sons, was, at this very time, newly
married to her.  So, he worked upon the King's fears, and persuaded him
to set aside both the Princess Mary and the Princess Elizabeth, and
assert his right to appoint his successor.  Accordingly the young King
handed to the Crown lawyers a writing signed half a dozen times over by
himself, appointing Lady Jane Grey to succeed to the Crown, and requiring
them to have his will made out according to law.  They were much against
it at first, and told the King so; but the Duke of Northumberland--being
so violent about it that the lawyers even expected him to beat them, and
hotly declaring that, stripped to his shirt, he would fight any man in
such a quarrel--they yielded.  Cranmer, also, at first hesitated;
pleading that he had sworn to maintain the succession of the Crown to the
Princess Mary; but, he was a weak man in his resolutions, and afterwards
signed the document with the rest of the council.

It was completed none too soon; for Edward was now sinking in a rapid
decline; and, by way of making him better, they handed him over to a
woman-doctor who pretended to be able to cure it.  He speedily got worse.
On the sixth of July, in the year one thousand five hundred and fifty-
three, he died, very peaceably and piously, praying God, with his last
breath, to protect the reformed religion.

This King died in the sixteenth year of his age, and in the seventh of
his reign.  It is difficult to judge what the character of one so young
might afterwards have become among so many bad, ambitious, quarrelling
nobles.  But, he was an amiable boy, of very good abilities, and had
nothing coarse or cruel or brutal in his disposition--which in the son of
such a father is rather surprising.




CHAPTER XXX--ENGLAND UNDER MARY


The Duke of Northumberland was very anxious to keep the young King's
death a secret, in order that he might get the two Princesses into his
power.  But, the Princess Mary, being informed of that event as she was
on her way to London to see her sick brother, turned her horse's head,
and rode away into Norfolk.  The Earl of Arundel was her friend, and it
was he who sent her warning of what had happened.

As the secret could not be kept, the Duke of Northumberland and the
council sent for the Lord Mayor of London and some of the aldermen, and
made a merit of telling it to them.  Then, they made it known to the
people, and set off to inform Lady Jane Grey that she was to be Queen.

She was a pretty girl of only sixteen, and was amiable, learned, and
clever.  When the lords who came to her, fell on their knees before her,
and told her what tidings they brought, she was so astonished that she
fainted.  On recovering, she expressed her sorrow for the young King's
death, and said that she knew she was unfit to govern the kingdom; but
that if she must be Queen, she prayed God to direct her.  She was then at
Sion House, near Brentford; and the lords took her down the river in
state to the Tower, that she might remain there (as the custom was) until
she was crowned.  But the people were not at all favourable to Lady Jane,
considering that the right to be Queen was Mary's, and greatly disliking
the Duke of Northumberland.  They were not put into a better humour by
the Duke's causing a vintner's servant, one Gabriel Pot, to be taken up
for expressing his dissatisfaction among the crowd, and to have his ears
nailed to the pillory, and cut off.  Some powerful men among the nobility
declared on Mary's side.  They raised troops to support her cause, had
her proclaimed Queen at Norwich, and gathered around her at the castle of
Framlingham, which belonged to the Duke of Norfolk.  For, she was not
considered so safe as yet, but that it was best to keep her in a castle
on the sea-coast, from whence she might be sent abroad, if necessary.

The Council would have despatched Lady Jane's father, the Duke of
Suffolk, as the general of the army against this force; but, as Lady Jane
implored that her father might remain with her, and as he was known to be
but a weak man, they told the Duke of Northumberland that he must take
the command himself.  He was not very ready to do so, as he mistrusted
the Council much; but there was no help for it, and he set forth with a
heavy heart, observing to a lord who rode beside him through Shoreditch
at the head of the troops, that, although the people pressed in great
numbers to look at them, they were terribly silent.

And his fears for himself turned out to be well founded.  While he was
waiting at Cambridge for further help from the Council, the Council took
it into their heads to turn their backs on Lady Jane's cause, and to take
up the Princess Mary's.  This was chiefly owing to the before-mentioned
Earl of Arundel, who represented to the Lord Mayor and aldermen, in a
second interview with those sagacious persons, that, as for himself, he
did not perceive the Reformed religion to be in much danger--which Lord
Pembroke backed by flourishing his sword as another kind of persuasion.
The Lord Mayor and aldermen, thus enlightened, said there could be no
doubt that the Princess Mary ought to be Queen.  So, she was proclaimed
at the Cross by St. Paul's, and barrels of wine were given to the people,
and they got very drunk, and danced round blazing bonfires--little
thinking, poor wretches, what other bonfires would soon be blazing in
Queen Mary's name.

After a ten days' dream of royalty, Lady Jane Grey resigned the Crown
with great willingness, saying that she had only accepted it in obedience
to her father and mother; and went gladly back to her pleasant house by
the river, and her books.  Mary then came on towards London; and at
Wanstead in Essex, was joined by her half-sister, the Princess Elizabeth.
They passed through the streets of London to the Tower, and there the new
Queen met some eminent prisoners then confined in it, kissed them, and
gave them their liberty.  Among these was that Gardiner, Bishop of
Winchester, who had been imprisoned in the last reign for holding to the
unreformed religion.  Him she soon made chancellor.

The Duke of Northumberland had been taken prisoner, and, together with
his son and five others, was quickly brought before the Council.  He, not
unnaturally, asked that Council, in his defence, whether it was treason
to obey orders that had been issued under the great seal; and, if it
were, whether they, who had obeyed them too, ought to be his judges?  But
they made light of these points; and, being resolved to have him out of
the way, soon sentenced him to death.  He had risen into power upon the
death of another man, and made but a poor show (as might be expected)
when he himself lay low.  He entreated Gardiner to let him live, if it
were only in a mouse's hole; and, when he ascended the scaffold to be
beheaded on Tower Hill, addressed the people in a miserable way, saying
that he had been incited by others, and exhorting them to return to the
unreformed religion, which he told them was his faith.  There seems
reason to suppose that he expected a pardon even then, in return for this
confession; but it matters little whether he did or not.  His head was
struck off.

Mary was now crowned Queen.  She was thirty-seven years of age, short and
thin, wrinkled in the face, and very unhealthy.  But she had a great
liking for show and for bright colours, and all the ladies of her Court
were magnificently dressed.  She had a great liking too for old customs,
without much sense in them; and she was oiled in the oldest way, and
blessed in the oldest way, and done all manner of things to in the oldest
way, at her coronation.  I hope they did her good.

She soon began to show her desire to put down the Reformed religion, and
put up the unreformed one: though it was dangerous work as yet, the
people being something wiser than they used to be.  They even cast a
shower of stones--and among them a dagger--at one of the royal chaplains
who attacked the Reformed religion in a public sermon.  But the Queen and
her priests went steadily on.  Ridley, the powerful bishop of the last
reign, was seized and sent to the Tower.  LATIMER, also celebrated among
the Clergy of the last reign, was likewise sent to the Tower, and Cranmer
speedily followed.  Latimer was an aged man; and, as his guards took him
through Smithfield, he looked round it, and said, 'This is a place that
hath long groaned for me.'  For he knew well, what kind of bonfires would
soon be burning.  Nor was the knowledge confined to him.  The prisons
were fast filled with the chief Protestants, who were there left rotting
in darkness, hunger, dirt, and separation from their friends; many, who
had time left them for escape, fled from the kingdom; and the dullest of
the people began, now, to see what was coming.

It came on fast.  A Parliament was got together; not without strong
suspicion of unfairness; and they annulled the divorce, formerly
pronounced by Cranmer between the Queen's mother and King Henry the
Eighth, and unmade all the laws on the subject of religion that had been
made in the last King Edward's reign.  They began their proceedings, in
violation of the law, by having the old mass said before them in Latin,
and by turning out a bishop who would not kneel down.  They also declared
guilty of treason, Lady Jane Grey for aspiring to the Crown; her husband,
for being her husband; and Cranmer, for not believing in the mass
aforesaid.  They then prayed the Queen graciously to choose a husband for
herself, as soon as might be.

Now, the question who should be the Queen's husband had given rise to a
great deal of discussion, and to several contending parties.  Some said
Cardinal Pole was the man--but the Queen was of opinion that he was _not_
the man, he being too old and too much of a student.  Others said that
the gallant young COURTENAY, whom the Queen had made Earl of Devonshire,
was the man--and the Queen thought so too, for a while; but she changed
her mind.  At last it appeared that PHILIP, PRINCE OF SPAIN, was
certainly the man--though certainly not the people's man; for they
detested the idea of such a marriage from the beginning to the end, and
murmured that the Spaniard would establish in England, by the aid of
foreign soldiers, the worst abuses of the Popish religion, and even the
terrible Inquisition itself.

These discontents gave rise to a conspiracy for marrying young Courtenay
to the Princess Elizabeth, and setting them up, with popular tumults all
over the kingdom, against the Queen.  This was discovered in time by
Gardiner; but in Kent, the old bold county, the people rose in their old
bold way.  SIR THOMAS WYAT, a man of great daring, was their leader.  He
raised his standard at Maidstone, marched on to Rochester, established
himself in the old castle there, and prepared to hold out against the
Duke of Norfolk, who came against him with a party of the Queen's guards,
and a body of five hundred London men.  The London men, however, were all
for Elizabeth, and not at all for Mary.  They declared, under the castle
walls, for Wyat; the Duke retreated; and Wyat came on to Deptford, at the
head of fifteen thousand men.

But these, in their turn, fell away.  When he came to Southwark, there
were only two thousand left.  Not dismayed by finding the London citizens
in arms, and the guns at the Tower ready to oppose his crossing the river
there, Wyat led them off to Kingston-upon-Thames, intending to cross the
bridge that he knew to be in that place, and so to work his way round to
Ludgate, one of the old gates of the City.  He found the bridge broken
down, but mended it, came across, and bravely fought his way up Fleet
Street to Ludgate Hill.  Finding the gate closed against him, he fought
his way back again, sword in hand, to Temple Bar.  Here, being
overpowered, he surrendered himself, and three or four hundred of his men
were taken, besides a hundred killed.  Wyat, in a moment of weakness (and
perhaps of torture) was afterwards made to accuse the Princess Elizabeth
as his accomplice to some very small extent.  But his manhood soon
returned to him, and he refused to save his life by making any more false
confessions.  He was quartered and distributed in the usual brutal way,
and from fifty to a hundred of his followers were hanged.  The rest were
led out, with halters round their necks, to be pardoned, and to make a
parade of crying out, 'God save Queen Mary!'

In the danger of this rebellion, the Queen showed herself to be a woman
of courage and spirit.  She disdained to retreat to any place of safety,
and went down to the Guildhall, sceptre in hand, and made a gallant
speech to the Lord Mayor and citizens.  But on the day after Wyat's
defeat, she did the most cruel act, even of her cruel reign, in signing
the warrant for the execution of Lady Jane Grey.

They tried to persuade Lady Jane to accept the unreformed religion; but
she steadily refused.  On the morning when she was to die, she saw from
her window the bleeding and headless body of her husband brought back in
a cart from the scaffold on Tower Hill where he had laid down his life.
But, as she had declined to see him before his execution, lest she should
be overpowered and not make a good end, so, she even now showed a
constancy and calmness that will never be forgotten.  She came up to the
scaffold with a firm step and a quiet face, and addressed the bystanders
in a steady voice.  They were not numerous; for she was too young, too
innocent and fair, to be murdered before the people on Tower Hill, as her
husband had just been; so, the place of her execution was within the
Tower itself.  She said that she had done an unlawful act in taking what
was Queen Mary's right; but that she had done so with no bad intent, and
that she died a humble Christian.  She begged the executioner to despatch
her quickly, and she asked him, 'Will you take my head off before I lay
me down?'  He answered, 'No, Madam,' and then she was very quiet while
they bandaged her eyes.  Being blinded, and unable to see the block on
which she was to lay her young head, she was seen to feel about for it
with her hands, and was heard to say, confused, 'O what shall I do!  Where
is it?'  Then they guided her to the right place, and the executioner
struck off her head.  You know too well, now, what dreadful deeds the
executioner did in England, through many, many years, and how his axe
descended on the hateful block through the necks of some of the bravest,
wisest, and best in the land.  But it never struck so cruel and so vile a
blow as this.

The father of Lady Jane soon followed, but was little pitied.  Queen
Mary's next object was to lay hold of Elizabeth, and this was pursued
with great eagerness.  Five hundred men were sent to her retired house at
Ashridge, by Berkhampstead, with orders to bring her up, alive or dead.
They got there at ten at night, when she was sick in bed.  But, their
leaders followed her lady into her bedchamber, whence she was brought out
betimes next morning, and put into a litter to be conveyed to London.  She
was so weak and ill, that she was five days on the road; still, she was
so resolved to be seen by the people that she had the curtains of the
litter opened; and so, very pale and sickly, passed through the streets.
She wrote to her sister, saying she was innocent of any crime, and asking
why she was made a prisoner; but she got no answer, and was ordered to
the Tower.  They took her in by the Traitor's Gate, to which she
objected, but in vain.  One of the lords who conveyed her offered to
cover her with his cloak, as it was raining, but she put it away from
her, proudly and scornfully, and passed into the Tower, and sat down in a
court-yard on a stone.  They besought her to come in out of the wet; but
