the scene, the wall of faces and the roar of applause, for these
things are apt to shake the nerves of one unaccustomed to them."

Beric smiled. "After meeting the Romans twenty times in battle,
Scopus, the noise of a crowd would no more affect me than the roar
of the wind over the treetops. Still I want to see it; and more,
I want to see how the people of this new sect face death. British
women do not fear to die, and often slay themselves rather than
fall into the hands of the Romans, knowing well that they will go
straight to the Happy Island and have no more trouble. Are these
Christians as brave?"

Scopus shrugged his shoulders. "Yes, they die bravely enough. But
who fears death? Among all the peoples Rome has conquered where has
she met with cowards? Everywhere the women are found ready to fall
by their husbands' swords rather than become captives; to leap from
precipices, or cast themselves into blazing pyres. Is man anywhere
lower than the wild beast, who will face his assailants till the
last? I have seen men of every tribe and people fight in the arena.
If conquered, they raise their hand in order to live to conquer
another day; but not once, when the thumbs have been turned down,
have I seen one flinch from the fatal stroke."

"That is true enough," Beric said; "but methinks it is one thing
to court death in the hour of defeat, when all your friends have
fallen round you, and all hope is lost, and quite another to stand
alone and friendless with the eyes of a multitude fixed on you.
Still I would see it."

The next day Beric stood beside Scopus among a group of guards and
attendants of the arena at one of the doors leading from it. Above,
every seat of the vast circle was crowded with spectators. In the
centre of the lower tier sat the emperor; near him were the members
of his council and court. The lower tiers round the arena were
filled by the senators and equities, with their wives and daughters.
Above these were the seats of officials and others having a right
to special seats, and then came, tier above tier to the uppermost
seats, the vast concourse of people. When the great door of the
arena opened a procession entered, headed by Cneius Spado, the
senator at whose expense the games were given. Then, two and two,
marched the gladiators who were to take part in it, accompanied by
their lanistae or teachers. Scopus, after seeing Beric well placed,
had left him to accompany Porus and Lupus.

The gladiators were variously armed. There were the hoplomachi,
who fought in complete suits of armour; the laqueatores, who used
a noose to catch their adversaries; the retiarii, with their net
and trident, and wearing neither armour nor helmet; the mirmillones,
armed like the Gauls; the Samni, with oblong shields; and the
Thracians, with round ones. With the exception of the retiarii
all wore helmets, and their right arms were covered with armour,
the left being protected by the shield. The gladiators saluted
the emperor and people, and the procession then left the arena,
the first two matched against each other again entering, each
accompanied by his lanista. Both the gladiators were novices, the
men who had frequently fought and conquered being reserved for the
later contests, as the excitement of the audience became roused.
One of the combatants was armed as a Gaul, the other as a Thracian.

The combat was not a long one. The men fought for a short time
cautiously, and then closing exchanged fierce and rapid blows
until one fell mortally wounded. A murmur of discontent rose from
the spectators, there had not been a sufficient exhibition of skill
to satisfy them. Eight or ten pairs of gladiators fought one after
the other, the excitement of the audience rising with each conflict,
as men of noted skill now contended. The victors were hailed
with shouts of applause, and the vanquished were spared, a proof
that the spectators were in a good temper and satisfied with the
entertainment. Beric looked on with interest. In the age in which
he lived feelings of compassion scarcely existed. War was the normal
state of existence. Tribal wars were of constant occurrence, and
the vanquished were either slain or enslaved. Men fought out their
private quarrels to the death; and Beric, being by birth Briton
and by education Roman, felt no more compunction at the sight of
blood than did either Briton or Roman.

To him the only unnatural feature in the contest was that there
existed neither personal nor tribal hostility between the combatants,
and that they fought solely for the amusement of the spectators.
Otherwise he was no more moved by the scenes that passed before
his eyes than is a Briton of the present day by a friendly boxing
match. He was more interested when Porus entered the arena, accompanied
by Scopus. He liked Porus, who, although quick and fiery in temper,
was good natured and not given to brawling. He had often practised
against him, and knew exactly his strength and skill. He was
clever in the management of his net, but failed sometimes from his
eagerness to use his trident. He was received with loud applause
when he entered, and justified the good opinion of the spectators
by defeating his antagonist, who was armed as a Samnite, the
spectators expressing their dissatisfaction at the clumsiness of
the latter by giving the hostile signal, when the Gaul--for the
vanquished belonged to that nationality--instead of waiting for
the approach of Porus, at once stabbed himself with his own sword.

The last pair to fight were Lupus and one of the Britons. He had
not been trained in the school of Scopus, but in one of the other
ludi, and as he was the first of those brought over by Suetonius
to appear in the arena, he was greeted with acclamation as loud as
those with which Lupus was received. Tall as Lupus was, the Briton
far exceeded him in stature, and the interest of the spectators
was aroused by the question whether the strength of the newcomer
would render him a fair match for the well known skill of Lupus. A
buzz went round the amphitheatre as bets were made on the result.
Beric felt a thrill of excitement, for the Briton was one of the
youngest and most active of his followers, and had often fought
side by side with him against the Romans.

How well he had been trained Beric knew not, but as he knew that
he himself was superior in swordmanship to Lupus, he felt that his
countryman's chances of success were good. It was not long, however,
before he saw that the teaching the Briton had received had been
very inferior to that given at the school of Scopus, and although
he twice nearly beat Lupus to the ground by the sheer weight of
his blows, the latter thrice wounded him without himself receiving
a scratch. Warned, however, of the superior strength of the Briton
Lupus still fought cautiously, avoiding his blows, and trying to
tire him out. For a long time the conflict continued, then, thinking
that his opponent was now weakened by his exertions and by loss of
blood, Lupus took the offensive and hotly pressed his antagonist,
and presently inflicted a fourth and more severe wound than those
previously given.

A shout rose from the spectators, "Lupus wins!" when the Briton,
with a sudden spring, threw himself upon his opponent. Their shields
clashed together as they stood breast to breast. Lupus shortened his
sword to thrust it in below the Briton's buckler, when the latter
smote with the hilt of his sword with all his strength full upon
his assailant's helmet, and so tremendous was the blow that Lupus
fell an inert mass upon the ground, while a tremendous shout rose
from the audience at this unexpected termination of the contest.
Scopus leaned over the fallen man. He was insensible but breathed,
being simply stunned by the weight of the blow. Scopus held up his
own hand, and the unanimous upturning of the thumbs showed that
the spectators were well satisfied with the skill and courage with
which Lupus had fought.



CHAPTER XV: THE CHRISTIANS TO THE LIONS


After the contest in which Lupus had been defeated there was a
pause. The gladiatorial part of the show was now over, but there
was greater excitement still awaiting the audience, for they knew
Nero had ordered that some of the Christians were to be given to
the lions. There was a hush of expectation as the door was opened,
and a procession, consisting of a priest of Jupiter and several
attendants of the temple, followed by four guards conducting
an elderly man with his two sons, lads of seventeen or eighteen,
entered. They made their way across the arena and stopped before the
emperor. The priest approached the prisoners, holding out a small
image of the god, and offered them their lives if they would pay
the customary honours to it. All refused. They were then conducted
back to the centre of the arena, and the rest, leaving them there,
filed out through the door. The old man laid his hands on the
shoulders of his sons and began singing a hymn, in which they both
joined. Their voices rose loud and clear in the silence of the
amphitheatre, and there was neither pause nor waver in the tone
as the entrance to one of the cages at the other end of the arena
was opened, and a lion and a lioness appeared. The animals stood
hesitating as they looked round at the sea of faces, then, encouraged
by the silence, they stepped out, and side by side made the circuit
of the arena, stopping and uttering a loud roar as they came upon
the track along which the bleeding bodies of those who had fallen
had been dragged. When they had completed the circle they again
paused, and now for the first time turned their attention to
the three figures standing in its centre. For a minute they stood
irresolute, and then crouching low crawled towards them.

Beric turned his head. He could view without emotion a contest
of armed men, but he could not, like the population of Rome, see
unarmed and unresisting men pulled down by wild beasts. There was
a dead stillness in the crowded amphitheatre, then there was a low
sound as of gasping breath. One voice alone continued the hymn, and
soon that too ceased suddenly. The tragedy was over, and the buzz
of conversation and comment again broke out among the spectators.
Certainly these Christians knew how to die. They were bad citizens,
they had doubtless assisted to burn Rome, but they knew how to die.

A strong body of guards provided with torches now entered. The
lions were driven back to their dens, the bodies being left lying
where they had fallen. Four batches of prisoners who were brought
out one after another met with a similar fate. Then there was
another pause. It was known that a girl of noble family was to be
the last victim, and all eyes were turned to Norbanus, who, with
his wife and Aemilia, sat in the front row near Nero, with two
Praetorian guards standing beside them. Norbanus was deadly pale,
but the pride of noble blood, the stoicism of the philosopher, and
the knowledge of his own utter helplessness combined to prevent his
showing any other sign of emotion. Lesbia sat upright and immovable
herself. She was not one to show her emotion before the gaze of
the common people.

Aemilia, half insensible, would have fallen had not the guard beside
her supported her. She had seen nothing of what had passed in the
arena, but had sat frozen with horror beside her mother. Again the
doors opened, a priest of Diana, followed by a procession of white
robed attendants, and six virgins from the temple of Diana, entered,
followed by Ennia between the attendants of the temple, while a band
of lictors brought up the rear. Even the hardened hearts of the
spectators were moved by the youth and beauty of the young girl,
who, dressed in white, advanced calmly between her guards, with
a gentle modest expression on her features. When the procession
formed up before the emperor, she saluted him. The priest and the
virgins surrounded her, and urged her to pay reverence to the statue
of Diana.

Pointing to her parents, they implored her for their sake to recant.
Pale as death, and with tears streaming down her cheeks, she shook
her head quietly. "I cannot deny the Lord who died for me," she
said.

Nero himself rose from his seat. "Maiden," he said, "if not for your
own sake, for the sake of those who love you, I pray you to cease
from your obstinacy. How can a child like you know more than the
wisest heads of Rome? How can you deny the gods who have protected
and given victory to your country? I would fain spare you."

"I am but a child, as you say, Caesar," Ennia replied. "I have no
strength of my own, but I am strong in the strength of Him I worship.
He gave His life for me--it is not much that I should give mine
for Him."

Nero sank back on his seat with an angry wave of his hand. He saw
that the sympathy of the audience was with the prisoner, and would
willingly have gained their approval by extending his clemency
towards her. The procession now returned to the centre of the arena,
where the girls, weeping, took leave of Ennia, who soon stood alone
a slight helpless figure in the sight of the great silent multitude.
Nero had spoken in a low tone to one of his attendants. The door of
another cage was opened, and a lion, larger in bulk than any that
had previously appeared, entered the arena, saluting the audience
with a deep roar. As it did so a tall figure, naked to the waist,
sprang forward from the group of attendants behind a strong barrier
at the other end of the arena. He was armed only with a sword which
he had snatched from a soldier standing next to him. Deep murmurs
of surprise rose from the spectators. The master of ceremonies
exchanged a few words with the emperor, and a body of men with
torches and trumpets ran forward and drove the lion back into its
den. Then Beric, who had been standing in front of Ennia, advanced
towards the emperor.

"Who are you?" Nero asked.

"I am Beric, once chief of the Iceni, now a British captive. I
received great kindness on my way hither from Norbanus, the father
of this maid. As we Britons are not ungrateful I am ready to
defend her to the death, and I crave as a boon, Caesar, that you
will permit me to battle against the lion with such arms as you
may decide."

"Are you a Christian?" the emperor asked coldly.

"I am not. I am of the religion of my nation, and Rome has always
permitted the people that have been subdued to worship in their
own fashion. I know nought of the Christian doctrines, but I know
that this damsel at least can have had nought to do with the burning
of Rome, and that though she may have forsaken the gods of Rome,
in this only can she have offended. I pray you, and I pray this
assembly, to let me stand as her champion against the beasts."

A burst of applause rose from the spectators. This was a novelty,
and an excitement beyond what they had bargained for. They had been
moved by the youth of the victim, and now the prospects of something
even more exciting than the rending to pieces of a defenceless
girl enlisted them in favour of the applicant. Moreover the Romans
intensely admired feats of bravery, and that this captive should
offer to face single handed an animal that was known to be one of
the most powerful of those in the amphitheatre filled them with
admiration. Accustomed as they were to gaze at athletes, they were
struck with the physique and strength of this young Briton, with
the muscles standing up massive and knotted through the white skin.

"Granted, granted!" they shouted; "let him fight."

Nero waited till the acclamation ceased, and then said: "The people
have spoken, let their will be done. But we must not be unfair
to the lion; as the maiden was unarmed so shall you stand unarmed
before the lion."

The decision was received in silence by the spectators. It was a
sentence of death to the young Briton, and the silence was succeeded
by a low murmur of disapproval. Beric turned a little pale, but he
showed no other sign of emotion.

"Thanks, Caesar, for so much of a boon," he said in a loud, steady
voice; "I accept the conditions, it being understood that should
the gods of my country, and of this maiden, defend me against the
lion, the damsel shall be free from all pain and penalty, and shall
be restored to her parents."

"That is understood," Nero replied.

With an inclination of his head to the emperor and a wave of his
hand to the audience in general, Beric turned and walked across
the arena to the barrier. Scopus was standing there.

"You are mad, Beric. I grieve for you. You were my favourite pupil,
and I looked for great things from you, and now it has come to
this, and all is over."

"All is not quite over yet, Scopus. I will try to do credit to
your training; give me my cloak." He wrapped himself in its ample
folds, and then walked quietly back to the centre of the arena. A
murmur of surprise rose from the spectators. Why should the Briton
cumber his limbs with this garment?

On reaching his position Beric again threw off the cloak, and stood
in the short skirt reaching scarce to the knees. "I am unarmed,"
he cried in a loud voice. "You see I have not as much as a dagger."
Then he tore off two broad strips from the edge of the garment and
twisted them into ropes, forming a running noose in each, threw
the cloak, which was composed of the stout cloth used by the common
people, over his arm, and signed to the attendants at the cage to
open the door.

"Oh, Beric, why have you thrown away your life in a useless attempt
to save mine?" Ennia said as he stood before her.

"It may not be useless, Ennia. My god has protected me through
many dangers, and your God will surely assist me now. Do you pray
to Him for aid."

Then as the door of the den opened he stepped a few paces towards
it. A roar of applause rose from the vast audience. They had appreciated
his action in making the ropes, and guessed that he meant to use
his cloak as a retiarius used his net; there would then be a contest
and not a massacre. Enraged at its former treatment the lion dashed
out of its den with a sudden spring, made three or four leaps
forward, and then paused with its eyes fixed on the man standing
in front of it, still immovable, in an easy pose, ready for instant
action. Then it sank till its belly nearly touched the ground, and
began to crawl with a stealthy gliding motion towards him. More
and more slowly it went, till it paused at a distance of some ten
yards.

For a few seconds it crouched motionless, save for a slow waving
motion of its tail; then with a sharp roar it sprang through the
air. With a motion as quick Beric leaped aside, and as it touched
the ground he sprang across its loins, at the same moment wrapping
his cloak in many folds round its head, and knotting the ends
tightly. Then as the lion, recovering from its first surprise,
sprang to its feet with a roar of anger and disgust, Beric was on
his feet beside it.

For a moment it strove to tear away the strange substance which
enveloped its head, but Beric dropped the end of a noose over one
of its forepaws, drew it tight, and with a sudden pull jerked the
animal over on its back. As it sprang up again the other forepaw
was noosed, and it was again thrown over. This time, as it sprang
to its feet, Beric struck it a tremendous blow on the nose. The
unexpected assault for a moment brought it down, but mad with rage
it sprang up and struck out in all directions at its invisible foe,
leaping and bounding hither and thither. Beric easily avoided the
onslaught, and taking every opportunity struck it three or four
times with all his force on the ear, each time rolling it over and
over. The last of these blows seemed almost to stun it, and it lay
for a moment immovable.

Again Beric leaped upon it, coming down astride of its loins with
all his weight, and seizing at once the two ropes. The lion uttered
a roar of dismay and pain, and struck at him first with one paw
and then with the other. By his coolness and quickness, however,
he escaped all the blows, and then, when the lion seemed exhausted,
he jerked tightly the cords, twisting them behind the lion's back
and with rapid turns fastening them together. The lion was helpless
now. Had Beric attempted to pull the cords in any other position
it would have snapped them like pack thread, but in this position
it had no strength, the pads of the feet being fastened together
and the limbs almost dislocated. As the animal rolled over and
over uttering roars of vain fury, Beric snatched the cloth from its
head, tore off another strip, twisted it, and without difficulty
bound its hind legs together. Then he again wrapped it round the
lion's head, and standing up bowed to the spectators.

A mighty shout shook the building. Never had such a feat been seen
in the arena before, and men and women alike standing up waved their
hands with frantic enthusiasm. Beric had not escaped altogether
unhurt, for as the lion struck out at him it had torn away a piece
of flesh from his side, and the blood was streaming down over
his white skirt. Then he went up to Ennia, who was standing with
closed eyes and hands clasped in prayer. She had seen nothing of
the conflict, and had believed that Beric's death and her own were
inevitable.

"Ennia," he said, "our gods have saved me; the lion is helpless."
Then she sank down insensible. He raised her on his shoulder, walked
across the arena, passed the barrier, and, ascending the steps,
walked along before the first row of spectators and handed her over
to her mother. Then he descended again, and bowed deeply, first to
the emperor and then to the still shouting people.

The giver of the games advanced and placed on his head a crown of
bay leaves, and handed to him a heavy purse of gold, which Beric
placed in his girdle, and, again saluting the audience, rejoined
Scopus, who was in a state of enthusiastic delight at the prowess
of his pupil.

"You have proved yourself the first gladiator in Rome," he said.
"Henceforth the school of Scopus is ahead of all its rivals. Now
we must get your side dressed. Another inch or two, Beric, and the
conflict would not have ended as it did."

"Yes, if the lion had not been in such a hurry to strike, and had
stretched its paw to the fullest, it would have fared badly with
me," Beric said; "but it was out of breath and spiteful, and had
not recovered from the blow and from the shock of my jumping on it,
which must have pretty nearly broken its back. I knew it was a risk,
but it was my only chance of getting its paws in that position, and
in no other would my ropes have been strong enough to hold them."

"But how came you to think of fighting in that way?" Scopus asked,
after the leech, who was always in attendance to dress the wounds
of the gladiators, had bandaged up his side.

"I never expected to have to fight the beasts unarmed," Beric said,
"but I had sometimes thought what should be done in such a case,
and I thought that if one could but wrap one's cloak round a lion's
head the beast would be at one's mercy. Had I had but a caestus
I could have beaten its skull in, but without that I saw that the
only plan was to noose its limbs. Surely a man ought to be able to
overcome a blinded beast."

"I would not try it for all the gold in Rome, Beric, even now
that I have seen you do it. Did you mark Caesar? There is no one
appreciates valiant deeds more than he does. At first his countenance
was cold--I marked him narrowly--but he half rose to his feet
and his countenance changed when you first threw yourself on the
lion, and none applauded more warmly than he did when your victory
was gained. Listen to them; they are shouting for you again. You
must go. Never before did I know them to linger after a show was
over. They will give you presents."

"I care not for them," Beric said.

"You must take them," Scopus said, "or you will undo the favourable
impression you have made, which will be useful to you should you
ever enter the arena again and be conquered. Go, go!"

Beric again entered the arena, and the attendants led him up to
the emperor, who presented him with a gold bracelet, saying:

"I will speak to you again, Beric. I had wondered that you and
your people should have resisted Suetonius so long, but I wonder
no longer."

Then Beric was led round the arena. Ladies threw down rings and
bracelets to him. These were gathered up by the attendants and handed
to him as he bowed to the givers. Norbanus, his wife, and daughter
had already left their seats, surrounded by friends congratulating
them, and bearing with them the still insensible girl. Having made
the tour of the arena Beric again saluted the audience and retired.
One of the imperial attendants met them as they left the building.

"The emperor bids me say, Scopus, that when Beric is recovered from
his wound he is to attend at the palace."

"I thought the emperor meant well towards you," Scopus said. "You
will in any case fight no more in the arena."

"How is that?" Beric asked in surprise.

"Did you not hear the shouts of the people the last time you entered,
Beric?"

"I heard a great confused roar, but in truth I was feeling somewhat
faint from loss of blood, and did not catch any particular sounds."

"They shouted that you were free from the arena henceforth. It
is their custom when a gladiator greatly distinguishes himself to
declare him free, though I have never known one before freed on
his first appearance. The rule is that a gladiator remains for two
years in the ring, but that period is shortened should the people
deem that he has earned his life by his courage and skill. For a
moment I was sorry when I heard it, but perhaps it is better as it
is. Did you remain for two years, and fight and conquer at every
show, you could gain no more honour than you have done. Now I will
get a lectica and have you carried out to the hills. You are not
fit to walk."

They were joined outside by Porus and Lupus. The former was warm
in his congratulation.

"By the gods, Beric, though I knew well that you would gain a great
triumph in the arena when your time came, I never thought to see
you thus fighting with the beasts unarmed. Why, Milo himself was
not stronger, and he won thirteen times at the Olympian and Pythian
games. He would have won more, but no one would venture to enter
against him. Why, were you to go on practising for another five years,
you would be as strong as he was, and as you are as skilful as you
are strong it would go hard with any that met you. I congratulated
myself, I can tell you, when I heard the people shout that you were
free of the arena, for if by any chance we had been drawn against
each other, I might as well have laid down my net and asked you to
finish me at once without trouble."

"It was but a happy thought, Porus: if a man could be caught in
a net, why not a lion blinded in a cloak? That once done the rest
was easy."

"Well, I don't want any easy jobs of that sort," Porus said. "But
