eighteenth century, however, there were no flying machines and it was
the British navy which gained for England her vast American and Indian
and African colonies.

The series of naval wars between England and Holland in the seventeenth
century does not interest us here. It ended as all such encounters
between hopelessly ill-matched powers will end. But the warfare between
England and France (her other rival) is of greater importance to us, for
while the superior British fleet in the end defeated the French navy,
a great deal of the preliminary fighting was done on our own American
continent. In this vast country, both France and England claimed
everything which had been discovered and a lot more which the eye of no
white man had ever seen. In 1497 Cabot had landed in the northern part
of America and twenty-seven years later, Giovanni Verrazano had visited
these coasts. Cabot had flown the English flag. Verrazano had sailed
under the French flag. Hence both England and France proclaimed
themselves the owners of the entire continent.

During the seventeenth century, some ten small English colonies had been
founded between Maine and the Carolinas. They were usually a haven
of refuge for some particular sect of English dissenters, such as the
Puritans, who in the year 1620 went to New England, or the Quakers, who
settled in Pennsylvania in 1681. They were small frontier communities,
nestling close to the shores of the ocean, where people had gathered to
make a new home and begin life among happier surroundings, far away from
royal supervision and interference.

The French colonies, on the other hand, always remained a possession of
the crown. No Huguenots or Protestants were allowed in these colonies
for fear that they might contaminate the Indians with their dangerous
Protestant doctrines and would perhaps interfere with the missionary
work of the Jesuit fathers. The English colonies, therefore, had been
founded upon a much healthier basis than their French neighbours and
rivals. They were an expression of the commercial energy of the English
middle classes, while the French settlements were inhabited by people
who had crossed the ocean as servants of the king and who expected to
return to Paris at the first possible chance.

Politically, however, the position of the English colonies was far from
satisfactory. The French had discovered the mouth of the Saint Lawrence
in the sixteenth century. From the region of the Great Lakes they had
worked their way southward, had descended the Mississippi and had built
several fortifications along the Gulf of Mexico. After a century
of exploration, a line of sixty French forts cut off the English
settlements along the Atlantic seaboard from the interior.

The English land grants, made to the different colonial companies had
given them "all land from sea to sea." This sounded well on paper,
but in practice, British territory ended where the line of French
fortifications began. To break through this barrier was possible but it
took both men and money and caused a series of horrible border wars in
which both sides murdered their white neighbours, with the help of the
Indian tribes.

As long as the Stuarts had ruled England there had been no danger of
war with France. The Stuarts needed the Bourbons in their attempt to
establish an autocratic form of government and to break the power of
Parliament. But in 1689 the last of the Stuarts had disappeared from
British soil and Dutch William, the great enemy of Louis XIV succeeded
him. From that time on, until the Treaty of Paris of 1763, France and
England fought for the possession of India and North America.

During these wars, as I have said before, the English navies invariably
beat the French. Cut off from her colonies, France lost most of her
possessions, and when peace was declared, the entire North American
continent had fallen into British hands and the great work of
exploration of Cartier, Champlain, La Salle, Marquette and a score of
others was lost to France.

Only a very small part of this vast domain was inhabited. From
Massachusetts in the north, where the Pilgrims (a sect of Puritans who
were very intolerant and who therefore had found no happiness either in
Anglican England or Calvinist Holland) had landed in the year 1620, to
the Carolinas and Virginia (the tobacco-raising provinces which had
been founded entirely for the sake of profit), stretched a thin line of
sparsely populated territory. But the men who lived in this new land of
fresh air and high skies were very different from their brethren of
the mother country. In the wilderness they had learned independence and
self-reliance. They were the sons of hardy and energetic ancestors. Lazy
and timourous people did not cross the ocean in those days. The American
colonists hated the restraint and the lack of breathing space which had
made their lives in the old country so very unhappy. They meant to be
their own masters. This the ruling classes of England did not seem to
understand. The government annoyed the colonists and the colonists, who
hated to be bothered in this way, began to annoy the British government.

Bad feeling caused more bad feeling. It is not necessary to repeat here
in detail what actually happened and what might have been avoided if the
British king had been more intelligent than George III or less given to
drowsiness and indifference than his minister, Lord North. The British
colonists, when they understood that peaceful arguments would not settle
the difficulties, took to arms. From being loyal subjects, they turned
rebels, who exposed themselves to the punishment of death when they were
captured by the German soldiers, whom George hired to do his fighting
after the pleasant custom of that day, when Teutonic princes sold whole
regiments to the highest bidder.

The war between England and her American colonies lasted seven years.
During most of that time, the final success of the rebels seemed very
doubtful. A great number of the people, especially in the cities, had
remained loyal to their king. They were in favour of a compromise,
and would have been willing to sue for peace. But the great figure of
Washington stood guard over the cause of the colonists.

Ably assisted by a handful of brave men, he used his steadfast but badly
equipped armies to weaken the forces of the king. Time and again when
defeat seemed unavoidable, his strategy turned the tide of battle. Often
his men were ill-fed. During the winter they lacked shoes and coats
and were forced to live in unhealthy dug-outs. But their trust in their
great leader was absolute and they stuck it out until the final hour of
victory.

But more interesting than the campaigns of Washington or the diplomatic
triumphs of Benjamin Franklin who was in Europe getting money from the
French government and the Amsterdam bankers, was an event which occurred
early in the revolution. The representatives of the different colonies
had gathered in Philadelphia to discuss matters of common importance. It
was the first year of the Revolution. Most of the big towns of the
sea coast were still in the hands of the British. Reinforcements
from England were arriving by the ship load. Only men who were deeply
convinced of the righteousness of their cause would have found the
courage to take the momentous decision of the months of June and July of
the year 1776.

In June, Richard Henry Lee of Virginia proposed a motion to the
Continental Congress that "these united colonies are, and of right ought
to be, free and independent states, that they are absolved from all
allegiance to the British crown, and that all political connection
between them and the state of Great Britain is and ought to be, totally
dissolved."

The motion was seconded by John Adams of Massachusetts. It was carried
on July the second and on July fourth, it was followed by an official
Declaration of Independence, which was the work of Thomas Jefferson, a
serious and exceedingly capable student of both politics and government
and destined to be one of the most famous of out American presidents.

When news of this event reached Europe, and was followed by the final
victory of the colonists and the adoption of the famous Constitution of
the year 1787 (the first of all written constitutions) it caused great
interest. The dynastic system of the highly centralised states which had
been developed after the great religious wars of the seventeenth century
had reached the height of its power. Everywhere the palace of the king
had grown to enormous proportions, while the cities of the royal realm
were being surrounded by rapidly growing acres of slums. The inhabitants
of those slums were showing signs of restlessness. They were quite
helpless. But the higher classes, the nobles and the professional men,
they too were beginning to have certain doubts about the economic and
political conditions under which they lived. The success of the American
colonists showed them that many things were possible which had been held
impossible only a short time before.

According to the poet, the shot which opened the battle of Lexington was
"heard around the world." That was a bit of an exaggeration. The Chinese
and the Japanese and the Russians (not to speak of the Australians, who
had just been re-discovered by Captain Cook, whom they killed for his
trouble,) never heard of it at all. But it carried across the Atlantic
Ocean. It landed in the powder house of European discontent and in
France it caused an explosion which rocked the entire continent from
Petrograd to Madrid and buried the representatives of the old statecraft
and the old diplomacy under several tons of democratic bricks.




THE FRENCH REVOLUTION

THE GREAT FRENCH REVOLUTION PROCLAIMS THE PRINCIPLES OF LIBERTY,
FRATERNITY AND EQUALITY UNTO ALL THE PEOPLE OF THE EARTH


BEFORE we talk about a revolution it is just as well that we explain
just what this word means. In the terms of a great Russian writer (and
Russians ought to know what they are talking about in this field) a
revolution is "a swift overthrow, in a few years, of institutions
which have taken centuries to root in the soil, and seem so fixed and
immovable that even the most ardent reformers hardly dare to attack them
in their writings. It is the fall, the crumbling away in a brief
period, of all that up to that time has composed the essence of social,
religious, political and economic life in a nation."

Such a revolution took place in France in the eighteenth century when
the old civilisation of the country had grown stale. The king in the
days of Louis XIV had become EVERYTHING and was the state. The Nobility,
formerly the civil servant of the federal state, found itself without
any duties and became a social ornament of the royal court.

This French state of the eighteenth century, however, cost incredible
sums of money. This money had to be produced in the form of taxes.
Unfortunately the kings of France had not been strong enough to force
the nobility and the clergy to pay their share of these taxes. Hence
the taxes were paid entirely by the agricultural population. But the
peasants living in dreary hovels, no longer in intimate contact with
their former landlords, but victims of cruel and incompetent land
agents, were going from bad to worse. Why should they work and exert
themselves? Increased returns upon their land merely meant more taxes
and nothing for themselves and therefore they neglected their fields as
much as they dared.

Hence we have a king who wanders in empty splendour through the vast
halls of his palaces, habitually followed by hungry office seekers, all
of whom live upon the revenue obtained from peasants who are no better
than the beasts of the fields. It is not a pleasant picture, but it
is not exaggerated. There was, however, another side to the so-called
"Ancien Regime" which we must keep in mind.

A wealthy middle class, closely connected with the nobility (by the
usual process of the rich banker's daughter marrying the poor baron's
son) and a court composed of all the most entertaining people of
France, had brought the polite art of graceful living to its highest
development. As the best brains of the country were not allowed to
occupy themselves with questions of political economics, they spent
their idle hours upon the discussion of abstract ideas.

As fashions in modes of thought and personal behaviour are quite as
likely to run to extremes as fashion in dress, it was natural that the
most artificial society of that day should take a tremendous interest
in what they considered "the simple life." The king and the queen, the
absolute and unquestioned proprietors of this country galled France,
together with all its colonies and dependencies, went to live in funny
little country houses all dressed up as milk-maids and stable-boys and
played at being shepherds in a happy vale of ancient Hellas. Around
them, their courtiers danced attendance, their court-musicians composed
lovely minuets, their court barbers devised more and more elaborate and
costly headgear, until from sheer boredom and lack of real jobs, this
whole artificial world of Versailles (the great show place which Louis
XIV had built far away from his noisy and restless city) talked of
nothing but those subjects which were furthest removed from their own
lives, just as a man who is starving will talk of nothing except food.

When Voltaire, the courageous old philosopher, playwright, historian and
novelist, and the great enemy of all religious and political tyranny,
began to throw his bombs of criticism at everything connected with the
Established Order of Things, the whole French world applauded him and
his theatrical pieces played to standing room only. When Jean
Jacques Rousseau waxed sentimental about primitive man and gave his
contemporaries delightful descriptions of the happiness of the original
inhabitants of this planet, (about whom he knew as little as he
did about the children, upon whose education he was the recognised
authority,) all France read his "Social Contract" and this society in
which the king and the state were one, wept bitter tears when they
heard Rousseau's appeal for a return to the blessed days when the real
sovereignty had lain in the hands of the people and when the king had
been merely the servant of his people.

When Montesquieu published his "Persian Letters" in which two
distinguished Persian travellers turn the whole existing society of
France topsy-turvy and poke fun at everything from the king down to
the lowest of his six hundred pastry cooks, the book immediately went
through four editions and assured the writer thousands of readers for
his famous discussion of the "Spirit of the Laws" in which the noble
Baron compared the excellent English system with the backward system of
France and advocated instead of an absolute monarchy the establishment
of a state in which the Executive, the Legislative and the Judicial
powers should be in separate hands and should work independently of each
other. When Lebreton, the Parisian book-seller, announced that Messieurs
Diderot, d'Alembert, Turgot and a score of other distinguished writers
were going to publish an Encyclopaedia which was to contain "all the new
ideas and the new science and the new knowledge," the response from
the side of the public was most satisfactory, and when after twenty-two
years the last of the twenty-eight volumes had been finished, the
somewhat belated interference of the police could not repress the
enthusiasm with which French society received this most important but
very dangerous contribution to the discussions of the day.

Here, let me give you a little warning. When you read a novel about
the French revolution or see a play or a movie, you will easily get the
impression that the Revolution was the work of the rabble from the
Paris slums. It was nothing of the kind. The mob appears often upon the
revolutionary stage, but invariably at the instigation and under the
leadership of those middle-class professional men who used the hungry
multitude as an efficient ally in their warfare upon the king and
his court. But the fundamental ideas which caused the revolution were
invented by a few brilliant minds, and they were at first introduced
into the charming drawing-rooms of the "Ancien Regime" to provide
amiable diversion for the much-bored ladies and gentlemen of his
Majesty's court. These pleasant but careless people played with the
dangerous fireworks of social criticism until the sparks fell through
the cracks of the floor, which was old and rotten just like the rest of
the building. Those sparks unfortunately landed in the basement where
age-old rubbish lay in great confusion. Then there was a cry of fire.
But the owner of the house who was interested in everything except the
management of his property, did not know how to put the small blaze
out. The flame spread rapidly and the entire edifice was consumed by the
conflagration, which we call the Great French Revolution.

For the sake of convenience, we can divide the French Revolution into
two parts. From 1789 to 1791 there was a more or less orderly attempt to
introduce a constitutional monarchy. This failed, partly through lack
of good faith and stupidity on the part of the monarch himself, partly
through circumstances over which nobody had any control.

From 1792 to 1799 there was a Republic and a first effort to establish
a democratic form of government. But the actual outbreak of violence had
been preceded by many years of unrest and many sincere but ineffectual
attempts at reform.

When France had a debt of 4000 million francs and the treasury was
always empty and there was not a single thing upon which new taxes could
be levied, even good King Louis (who was an expert locksmith and a great
hunter but a very poor statesman) felt vaguely that something ought to
be done. Therefore he called for Turgot, to be his Minister of Finance.
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, Baron de l'Aulne, a man in the early
sixties, a splendid representative of the fast disappearing class of
landed gentry, had been a successful governor of a province and was
an amateur political economist of great ability. He did his best.
Unfortunately, he could not perform miracles. As it was impossible to
squeeze more taxes out of the ragged peasants, it was necessary to get
the necessary funds from the nobility and clergy who had never paid a
centime. This made Turgot the best hated man at the court of Versailles.
Furthermore he was obliged to face the enmity of Marie Antoinette, the
queen, who was against everybody who dared to mention the word "economy"
within her hearing. Soon Turgot was called an "unpractical visionary"
and a "theoretical-professor" and then of course his position became
untenable. In the year 1776 he was forced to resign.

After the "professor" there came a man of Practical Business Sense. He
was an industrious Swiss by the name of Necker who had made himself rich
as a grain speculator and the partner in an international banking house.
His ambitious wife had pushed him into the government service that she
might establish a position for her daughter who afterwards as the
wife of the Swedish minister in Paris, Baron de Stael, became a famous
literary figure of the early nineteenth century.

Necker set to work with a fine display of zeal just as Turgot had done.
In 1781 he published a careful review of the French finances. The king
understood nothing of this "Compte Rendu." He had just sent troops to
America to help the colonists against their common enemies, the English.
This expedition proved to be unexpectedly expensive and Necker was
asked to find the necessary funds. When instead of producing revenue, he
published more figures and made statistics and began to use the dreary
warning about "necessary economies" his days were numbered. In the year
1781 he was dismissed as an incompetent servant.

After the Professor and the Practical Business Man came the delightful
type of financier who will guarantee everybody 100 per cent. per month
on their money if only they will trust his own infallible system.

He was Charles Alexandre de Calonne, a pushing official, who had made
his career both by his industry and his complete lack of honesty and
scruples. He found the country heavily indebted, but he was a clever
man, willing to oblige everybody, and he invented a quick remedy. He
paid the old debts by contracting new ones. This method is not new. The
result since time immemorial has been disastrous. In less than three
years more than 800,000,000 francs had been added to the French debt by
this charming Minister of Finance who never worried and smilingly signed
his name to every demand that was made by His Majesty and by his lovely
Queen, who had learned the habit of spending during the days of her
youth in Vienna.

At last even the Parliament of Paris (a high court of justice and not
a legislative body) although by no means lacking in loyalty to their
sovereign, decided that something must be done. Calonne wanted to borrow
another 80,000,000 francs. It had been a bad year for the crops and
the misery and hunger in the country districts were terrible. Unless
something sensible were done, France would go bankrupt. The King as
always was unaware of the seriousness of the situation. Would it not be
a good idea to consult the representatives of the people? Since 1614
no Estates General had been called together. In view of the threatening
panic there was a demand that the Estates be convened. Louis XVI
however, who never could take a decision, refused to go as far as that.

To pacify the popular clamour he called together a meeting of the
Notables in the year 1787. This merely meant a gathering of the best
families who discussed what could and should be done, without touching
their feudal and clerical privilege of tax-exemption. It is unreasonable
to expect that a certain class of society shall commit political and
economic suicide for the benefit of another group of fellow-citizens.
The 127 Notables obstinately refused to surrender a single one of their
ancient rights. The crowd in the street, being now exceedingly hungry,
demanded that Necker, in whom they had confidence, be reappointed. The
Notables said "No." The crowd in the street began to smash windows and
do other unseemly things. The Notables fled. Calonne was dismissed.

A new colourless Minister of Finance, the Cardinal Lomenie de Brienne,
was appointed and Louis, driven by the violent threats of his starving
subjects, agreed to call together the old Estates General as "soon as
practicable." This vague promise of course satisfied no one.

No such severe winter had been experienced for almost a century. The
crops had been either destroyed by floods or had been frozen to death in
the fields. All the olive trees of the Provence had been killed. Private
charity tried to do some-thing but could accomplish little for eighteen
million starving people. Everywhere bread riots occurred. A generation
before these would have been put down by the army. But the work of
the new philosophical school had begun to bear fruit. People began to
understand that a shotgun is no effective remedy for a hungry stomach
and even the soldiers (who came from among the people) were no longer
to be depended upon. It was absolutely necessary that the king should
do something definite to regain the popular goodwill, but again he
hesitated.

Here and there in the provinces, little independent Republics were
established by followers of the new school. The cry of "no taxation
without representation" (the slogan of the American rebels a quarter of
a century before) was heard among the faithful middle classes. France
was threatened with general anarchy. To appease the people and to
increase the royal popularity, the government unexpectedly suspended the
former very strict form of censorship of books. At once a flood of
ink descended upon France. Everybody, high or low, criticised and was
criticised. More than 2000 pamphlets were published. Lomenie de Brienne
was swept away by a storm of abuse. Necker was hastily called back to
placate, as best he could, the nation-wide unrest. Immediately the stock
market went up thirty per cent. And by common consent, people suspended
judgment for a little while longer. In May of 1789 the Estates General
were to assemble and then the wisdom of the entire nation would speedily
solve the difficult problem of recreating the kingdom of France into a
healthy and happy state.

This prevailing idea, that the combined wisdom of the people would be
able to solve all difficulties, proved disastrous. It lamed all personal
effort during many important months. Instead of keeping the government
in his own hands at this critical moment, Necker allowed everything to
drift. Hence there was a new outbreak of the acrimonious debate upon the
best ways to reform the old kingdom. Everywhere the power of the police
weakened. The people of the Paris suburbs, under the leadership of
professional agitators, gradually began to discover their strength, and
commenced to play the role which was to be theirs all through the years
of the great unrest, when they acted as the brute force which was used
by the actual leaders of the Revolution to secure those things which
could not be obtained in a legitimate fashion.

As a sop to the peasants and the middle class, Necker de-cided that they
should be allowed a double representation in the Estates General. Upon
this subject, the Abbe Sieyes then wrote a famous pamphlet, "To what
does the Third Estate Amount?" in which he came to the conclusion that
the Third Estate (a name given to the middle class) ought to amount to
everything, that it had not amounted to anything in the past, and that
it now desired to amount to something. He expressed the sentiment of the
great majority of the people who had the best interests of the country
at heart.

Finally the elections took place under the worst conditions imaginable.
When they were over, 308 clergymen, 285 noblemen and 621 representatives
of the Third Estate packed their trunks to go to Versailles. The Third
Estate was obliged to carry additional luggage. This consisted of
voluminous reports called "cahiers" in which the many complaints and
grievances of their constituents had been written down. The stage was
set for the great final act that was to save France.

The Estates General came together on May 5th, 1789. The king was in a
bad humour. The Clergy and the Nobility let it be known that they were
unwilling to give up a single one of their privileges. The king ordered
the three groups of representatives to meet in different rooms and
discuss their grievances separately. The Third Estate refused to obey
