another effort he was on his feet and the two champions stood confronting
each other, neither very eager to renew the combat.  But on foot, Muza,
daring and rash as he was, could not but recognise his disadvantage
against the enormous strength and impenetrable armour of the Christian.
He drew back, whistled to his barb, that, piercing the ranks of the
horsemen, was by his side on the instant, remounted, and was in the midst
of the foe, almost ere the slower Spaniard was conscious of his
disappearance.

But Hernando was not delivered from his enemy.  Clearing a space around
him, as three knights, mortally wounded, fell beneath his sabre, Muza now
drew from behind his shoulder his short Arabian bow, and shaft after
shaft came rattling upon the mail of the dismounted Christian with so
marvellous a celerity, that, encumbered as he was with his heavy
accoutrements, he was unable either to escape from the spot, or ward off
that arrowy rain; and felt that nothing but chance, or Our Lady, could
prevent the death which one such arrow would occasion, if it should find
the opening of the visor, or the joints of the hauberk.

"Mother of Mercy," groaned the knight, perplexed and enraged, "let not
thy servant be shot down like a hart, by this cowardly warfare; but, if I
must fall, be it with mine enemy, grappling hand to hand."

While yet muttering this short invocation, the war-cry of Spain was heard
hard by, and the gallant company of Villena was seen scouring across the
plain to the succour of their comrades.  The deadly attention of Muza was
distracted from individual foes, however eminent; he wheeled round,
re-collected his men, and, in a serried charge, met the new enemy in
midway.

While the contest thus fared in that part of the field, the scheme of
Ferdinand had succeeded so far as to break up the battle in detached
sections.  Far and near, plain, grove, garden, tower, presented each the
scene of obstinate and determined conflict.  Boabdil, at the head of his
chosen guard, the flower of the haughtier tribe of nobles who were
jealous of the fame and blood of the tribe of Muza, and followed also by
his gigantic Ethiopians, exposed his person to every peril, with the
desperate valour of a man who feels his own stake is greatest in the
field.  As he most distrusted the infantry, so amongst the infantry he
chiefly bestowed his presence; and wherever he appeared, he sufficed, for
the moment, to turn the changes of the engagement.  At length, at mid-day
Ponce de Leon led against the largest detachment of the Moorish foot a
strong and numerous battalion of the best-disciplined and veteran
soldiery of Spain.  He had succeeded in winning a fortress, from which
his artillery could play with effect; and the troops he led were
composed, partly of men flushed with recent triumph, and partly of a
fresh reserve, now first brought into the field.  A comely and a
breathless spectacle it was to behold this Christian squadron emerging
from a blazing copse, which they fired on their march; the red light
gleaming on their complete armour, as, in steady and solemn order, they
swept on to the swaying and clamorous ranks of the Moorish infantry.
Boabdil learned the danger from his scouts; and hastily quitting a tower
from which he had for a while repulsed a hostile legion, he threw himself
into the midst of the battalions menaced by the skilful Ponce de Leon.
Almost at the same moment, the wild and ominous apparition of Almamen,
long absent from the eyes of the Moors, appeared in the same quarter, so
suddenly and unexpectedly, that none knew whence he had emerged; the
sacred standard in his left hand--his sabre, bared and dripping gore, in
his right--his face exposed, and its powerful features working with an
excitement that seemed inspired; his abrupt presence breathed a new soul
into the Moors.

"They come! they come!" he shrieked aloud.  "The God of the East hath
delivered the Goth into your hands!"  From rank to rank--from line to
line--sped the santon; and, as the mystic banner gleamed before the
soldiery, each closed his eyes and muttered an "amen" to his adjurations.
And now, to the cry of "Spain and St. Iago," came trampling down the
relentless charge of the Christian war.  At the same instant, from the
fortress lately taken by Ponce de Leon, the artillery opened upon the
Moors, and did deadly havoc.  The Moslems wavered a moment when before
them gleamed the white banner of Almamen; and they beheld him rushing,
alone and on foot, amidst the foe.  Taught to believe the war itself
depended on the preservation of the enchanted banner, the Paynims could
not see it thus rashly adventured without anxiety and shame: they
rallied, advanced firmly, and Boabdil himself, with waving cimiter and
fierce exclamations, dashed impetuously at the head of his guards and
Ethiopians into the affray.  The battle became obstinate and bloody.
Thrice the white banner disappeared amidst the closing ranks; and thrice,
like a moon from the clouds, it shone forth again--the light and guide of
the Pagan power.

The day ripened; and the hills already cast lengthening shadows over the
blazing groves and the still Darro, whose waters, in every creek where
the tide was arrested, ran red with blood, when Ferdinand, collecting his
whole reserve, descended from the eminence on which hitherto he had
posted himself.  With him moved three thousand foot and a thousand horse,
fresh in their vigour, and panting for a share in that glorious day.  The
king himself, who, though constitutionally fearless, from motives of
policy rarely perilled his person, save on imminent occasions, was
resolved not to be outdone by Boabdil; and armed cap-a-pied in mail, so
wrought with gold that it seemed nearly all of that costly metal, with
his snow-white plumage waving above a small diadem that surmounted his
lofty helm, he seemed a fit leader to that armament of heroes.  Behind
him flaunted the great gonfanon of Spain, and trump and cymbal heralded
his approach.  The Count de Tendilla rode by his side.

"Senor," said Ferdinand, "the infidels fight hard; but they are in the
snare--we are about to close the nets upon them.  But what cavalcade is
this?"

The group that thus drew the king's attention consisted of six squires,
bearing, on a martial litter, composed of shields, the stalwart form of
Hernando del Pulgar.

"Ah, the dogs!" cried the king, as he recognised the pale features of the
darling of the army,--"have they murdered the bravest knight that ever
fought for Christendom?"

"Not that, your majesty," quoth he of the Exploits, faintly, "but I am
sorely stricken."

"It must have been more than man who struck thee down," said the king.

"It was the mace of Muza Ben Abil Gazan, an please you, sire," said one
of the squires; "but it came on the good knight unawares, and long after
his own arm had seemingly driven away the Pagan."

"We will avenge thee well," said the king, setting his teeth: "let our
own leeches tend thy wounds.  Forward, sir knights!  St. Iago and Spain!"

The battle had now gathered to a vortex; Muza and his cavalry had joined
Boabdil and the Moorish foot.  On the other hand, Villena had been
reinforced by detachments that in almost every other quarter of the field
had routed the foe.  The Moors had been driven back, though inch by inch;
they were now in the broad space before the very walls of the city, which
were still crowded by the pale and anxious faces of the aged and the
women: and, at every pause in the artillery, the voices that spoke of
HOME were borne by that lurid air to the ears of the infidels.  The shout
that rang through the Christian force as Ferdinand now joined it struck
like a death-knell upon the last hope of Boabdil.  But the blood of his
fierce ancestry burned in his veins, and the cheering voice of Almamen,
whom nothing daunted, inspired him with a kind of superstitious frenzy.

"King against king--so be it!  Let Allah decide between us!" cried the
Moorish monarch.  "Bind up this wound 'tis well!  A steed for the santon!
Now, my prophet and my friend, mount by the side of thy king--let us, at
least, fall together.  Lelilies!  Lelilies!"

Throughout the brave Christian ranks went a thrill of reluctant
admiration, as they beheld the Paynim king, conspicuous by his fair beard
and the jewels of his harness, lead the scanty guard yet left to him once
more into the thickest of their lines.  Simultaneously Muza and his
Zegris made their fiery charge; and the Moorish infantry, excited by the
example of their leaders, followed with unslackened and dogged zeal.  The
Christians gave way--they were beaten back: Ferdinand spurred forward;
and, ere either party were well aware of it, both kings met in the same
melee: all order and discipline, for the moment, lost, general and
monarch were, as common soldiers, fighting hand to hand.  It was then
that Ferdinand, after bearing down before his lance Naim Reduon, second
only to Muza in the songs of Granada, beheld opposed to him a strange
form, that seemed to that royal Christian rather fiend than man: his
raven hair and beard, clotted with blood, hung like snakes about a
countenance whose features, naturally formed to give expression to the
darkest passions, were distorted with the madness of despairing rage.
Wounded in many places, the blood dabbled his mail; while, over his head,
he waved the banner wrought with mystic characters, which Ferdinand had
already been taught to believe the workmanship of demons.

"Now, perjured king of the Nazarenes!" shouted this formidable champion,
"we meet at last!--no longer host and guest, monarch and dervise, but man
to man!  I am Almamen!  Die!"

He spoke; and his sword descended so fiercely on that anointed head that
Ferdinand bent to his saddle-bow.  But the king quickly recovered his
seat, and gallantly met the encounter; it was one that might have tasked
to the utmost the prowess of his bravest knight.  Passions which, in
their number, their nature, and their excess, animated no other champion
on either side, gave to the arm of Almamen the Israelite a preternatural
strength; his blows fell like rain upon the harness of the king; and the
fiery eyes, the gleaming banner of the mysterious sorcerer, who had
eluded the tortures of his Inquisition,--who had walked unscathed through
the midst of his army,--whose single hand had consumed the encampment of
a host, filled the stout heart of a king with a belief that he
encountered no earthly foe.  Fortunately, perhaps, for Ferdinand and
Spain, the contest did not last long.  Twenty horsemen spurred into the
melee to the rescue of the plumed diadem:  Tendilla arrived the first;
with a stroke of his two-handed sword, the white banner was cleft from
its staff, and fell to the earth.  At that sight the Moors round broke
forth in a wild and despairing cry: that cry spread from rank to rank,
from horse to foot; the Moorish infantry, sorely pressed on all sides,
no sooner learned the disaster than they turned to fly: the rout was as
fatal as it was sudden.  The Christian reserve, just brought into the
field, poured down upon them with a simultaneous charge.  Boabdil, too
much engaged to be the first to learn the downfall of the sacred
insignia, suddenly saw himself almost alone, with his diminished
Ethiopians and a handful of his cavaliers.

"Yield thee, Boabdil el Chico!" cried Tendilla, from his rear, "or thou
canst not be saved."

"By the Prophet, never!" exclaimed the king: and he dashed his barb
against the wall of spears behind him; and with but a score or so of his
guard, cut his way through the ranks that were not unwilling, perhaps, to
spare so brave a foe.  As he cleared the Spanish battalions, the
unfortunate monarch checked his horse for a moment and gazed along the
plain: he beheld his army flying in all directions, save in that single
spot where yet glittered the turban of Muza Ben Abil Gazan.  As he gazed,
he heard the panting nostrils of the chargers behind, and saw the
levelled spears of a company despatched to take him, alive or dead, by
the command of Ferdinand.  He laid the reins upon his horse's neck and
galloped into the city--three lances quivered against the portals as he
disappeared through the shadows of the arch.  But while Muza remained,
all was not yet lost: he perceived the flight of the infantry and the
king, and with his followers galloped across the plain: he came in time
to encounter and slay, to a man, the pursuers of Boabdil; he then threw
himself before the flying Moors:

"Do ye fly in the sight of your wives and daughters?  Would ye not rather
they beheld ye die?"

A thousand voices answered him.  "The banner is in the hands of the
infidel--all is lost!"  They swept by him, and stopped not till they
gained the gates.

But still a small and devoted remnant of the Moorish cavaliers remained
to shed a last glory over defeat itself.  With Muza, their soul and
centre, they fought every atom of ground: it was, as the chronicler
expresses it, as if they grasped the soil with their arms.  Twice they
charged into the midst of the foe: the slaughter they made doubled their
