of this dagger that thou wilt lay aside all scheme and plot for this
rebellion, all aid and share in civil broil and dissension, and thy life
and liberty are restored to thee. In that intent, I have summoned my own
kinsman, Marmaduke Nevile. He waits without the door; he shall conduct
thee safely to the seashore; thou shalt gain in peace my government
of Calais, and my seneschal there shall find thee all thou canst
need,--meat for thy hunger and moneys for thy pastime. Accept my mercy,
take the oath, and begone."

"My lord," answered Hilyard, much touched and affected, "blame not
thyself if this carcass feed the crows--my blood be on mine own head!
I cannot take this oath; I cannot live in peace; strife and broil are
grown to me food and drink. Oh, my lord! thou knowest not what dark and
baleful memories made me an agent in God's hand against this ruthless
Edward!" and then passionately, with whitening lips and convulsive
features, Hilyard recounted to the startled Warwick the same tale which
had roused the sympathy of Adam Warner.

The earl, whose affections were so essentially homely and domestic, was
even more shocked than the scholar by the fearful narrative.

"Unhappy man!" he said with moistened eyes, "from the core of my heart
I pity thee. But thou, the scathed sufferer from civil war, wilt thou be
now its dread reviver?"

"If Edward had wronged thee, great earl, as me, poor franklin, what
would be thine answer? In vain moralize to him whom the spectre of a
murdered child and the shriek of a maniac wife haunt and hound on to
vengeance! So send me to rack and halter. Be there one curse more on the
soul of Edward!"

"Thou shalt not die through my witness," said the earl, abruptly; and he
quitted the chamber.

Securing the door by a heavy bolt on the outside, he gave orders to his
squire to attend to the comforts of the prisoner; and then turning into
his closet with Marmaduke, said: "I sent for thee, young cousin, with
design to commit to thy charge one whose absence from England I deemed
needful--that design I must abandon. Go back to the palace, and see,
if thou canst, the king before he sleeps; say that this rising
in Lincolnshire is more than a riot,--it is the first burst of a
revolution! that I hold council here to-night, and every shire, ere
the morrow, shall have its appointed captain. I will see the king at
morning. Yet stay--gain sight of my child Anne; she will leave the court
to-morrow. I will come for her; bid her train be prepared; she and the
countess must away to Calais,--England again hath ceased to be a home
for women! What to do with this poor rebel?" muttered the earl, when
alone; "release him I cannot; slay him I will not. Hum, there is space
enough in these walls to inclose a captive."




CHAPTER VII. THE FEAR AND THE FLIGHT.

King Edward feasted high, and Sibyll sat in her father's chamber,--she
silent with thought of love, Adam silent in the toils of science. The
Eureka was well-nigh finished, rising from its ruins more perfect, more
elaborate, than before. Maiden and scholar, each seeming near to the
cherished goal,--one to love's genial altar, the other to fame's lonely
shrine.

Evening advanced, night began, night deepened. King Edward's feast was
over, but still in his perfumed chamber the wine sparkled in the golden
cup. It was announced to him that Sir Marmaduke Nevile, just arrived
from the earl's house, craved an audience. The king, pre-occupied in
deep revery, impatiently postponed it till the morrow.

"To-morrow," said the gentleman in attendance, "Sir Marmaduke bids me
say, fearful that the late hour would forbid his audience, that
Lord Warwick himself will visit your Grace. I fear, sire, that the
disturbances are great indeed, for the squires and gentlemen in Lady
Anne's train have orders to accompany her to Calais to-morrow."

"To-morrow, to-morrow!" repeated the king--"well, sir, you are
dismissed."

The Lady Anne (to whom Sibyll had previously communicated the king's
kindly consideration for Master Warner) had just seen Marmaduke, and
learned the new dangers that awaited the throne and the realm. The
Lancastrians were then openly in arms for the prince of her love, and
against her mighty father!

The Lady Anne sat a while, sorrowful and musing, and then, before yon
crucifix, the Lady Anne knelt in prayer. Sir Marmaduke Nevile descends
to the court below, and some three or four busy, curious gentlemen, not
yet a-bed, seize him by the arm, and pray him to say what storm is in
the wind.

The night deepened still. The wine is drained in King Edward's goblet;
King Edward has left his chamber; and Sibyll, entreating her father, but
in vain, to suspend his toil, has kissed the damps from his brow, and
is about to retire to her neighbouring room. She has turned to the
threshold, when, hark! a faint--a distant cry, a woman's shriek, the
noise of a clapping door! The voice--it is the voice of Anne! Sibyll
passed the threshold, she is in the corridor; the winter moon shines
through the open arches, the air is white and cold with frost. Suddenly
the door at the farther end is thrown wide open, a form rushes into the
corridor, it passes Sibyll, halts, turns round. "Oh, Sibyll!" cried the
Lady Anne, in a voice wild with horror, "save me--aid--help! Merciful
Heaven, the king!"

Instinctively, wonderingly, tremblingly, Sibyll drew Anne into the
chamber she had just quitted, and as they gained its shelter, as Anne
sank upon the floor, the gleam of cloth-of-gold flashed through the dim
atmosphere, and Edward, yet in the royal robe in which he had dazzled
all the eyes at his kingly feast, stood within the chamber. His
countenance was agitated with passion, and its clear hues flushed red
with wine. At his entrance Anne sprang from the floor, and rushed to
Warner, who, in dumb bewilderment, had suspended his task, and stood
before the Eureka, from which steamed and rushed the dark, rapid smoke,
while round and round, labouring and groaning, rolled its fairy wheels.
[The gentle reader will doubtless bear in mind that Master Warner's
complicated model had but little resemblance to the models of the
steam-engine in our own day, and that it was usually connected with
other contrivances, for the better display of the principle it was
intended to illustrate.]

"Sir," cried Anne, clinging to him convulsively, "you are a father; by
your child's soul, protect Lord Warwick's daughter!"

Roused from his abstraction by this appeal, the poor scholar wound
his arm round the form thus clinging to him, and raising his head with
dignity, replied, "Thy name, youth, and sex protect thee!"

"Unhand that lady, vile sorcerer," exclaimed the king, "I am her
protector. Come, Anne, sweet Anne, fair lady, thou mistakest,--come!" he
whispered. "Give not to these low natures matter for guesses that do but
shame thee. Let thy king and cousin lead thee back to thy sweet rest."

He sought, though gently, to loosen the arms that wound themselves
round the old man; but Anne, not heeding, not listening, distracted by
a terror that seemed to shake her whole frame and to threaten her very
reason, continued to cry out loudly upon her father's name,--her great
father, wakeful, then, for the baffled ravisher's tottering throne!

Edward had still sufficient possession of his reason to be alarmed lest
some loiterer or sentry in the outer court might hear the cries which
his attempts to soothe but the more provoked. Grinding his teeth, and
losing patience, he said to Adam, "Thou knowest me, friend,--I am thy
king. Since the Lady Anne, in her bewilderment, prefers thine aid to
mine, help to bear her back to her apartment; and thou, young mistress,
lend thine arm. This wizard's den is no fit chamber for our high-born
guest."

"No, no; drive me not hence, Master Warner--that man--that king--give me
not up to his--his--"

"Beware!" exclaimed the king.

It was not till now that Adam's simple mind comprehended the true cause
of Anne's alarm, which Sibyll still conjectured not, but stood trembling
by her friend's side, and close to her father.

"Do not fear, maiden;" said Adam Warner, laying his hand upon the
loosened locks that swept over his bosom, "for though I am old and
feeble, God and his angels are in every spot where virtue trembles and
resists. My lord king, thy sceptre extends not over a human soul!"

"Dotard, prate not to me!" said Edward, laying his hand on his dagger.
Sibyll saw the movement, and instinctively placed herself between her
father and the king. That slight form, those pure, steadfast eyes, those
features, noble at once and delicate, recalled to Edward the awe which
had seized him in his first dark design; and again that awe came over
him. He retreated.

"I mean harm to none," said he, almost submissively; "and if I am so
unhappy as to scare with my presence the Lady Anne, I will retire,
praying you, donzell, to see to her state, and lead her back to her
chamber when it so pleases herself. Saying this much, I command you, old
man, and you, maiden, to stand back while I but address one sentence to
the Lady Anne."

With these words he gently advanced to Anne, and took her hand; but,
snatching it from him, the poor lady broke from Adam, rushed to the
casement, opened it, and seeing some figures indistinct and distant in
the court below, she called out in a voice of such sharp agony that it
struck remorse and even terror into Edward's soul.

"Alas!" he muttered, "she will not listen to me! her mind is distraught!
What frenzy has been mine! Pardon--pardon, Anne,--oh, pardon!"

Adam Warner laid his hand on the king's arm, and he drew the imperious
despot away as easily as a nurse leads a docile child.

"King!" said the brave old man, "may God pardon thee; for if the last
evil hath been wrought upon this noble lady, David sinned not more
heavily than thou."

"She is pure, inviolate,--I swear it!" said the king, humbly. "Anne,
only say that I am forgiven."

But Anne spoke not: her eyes were fixed, her lips had fallen; she was
insensible as a corpse,--dumb and frozen with her ineffable dread.
Suddenly steps were heard upon the stairs; the door opened, and
Marmaduke Nevile entered abruptly.

"Surely I heard my lady's voice,--surely! What marvel this?--the king!
Pardon, my liege!" and he bent his knee.

The sight of Marmaduke dissolved the spell of awe and repentant
humiliation which had chained a king's dauntless heart. His wonted guile
returned to him with his self-possession.

"Our wise craftsman's strange and weird invention"--and Edward pointed
to the Eureka--"has scared our fair cousin's senses, as, by sweet Saint
George, it well might! Go back, Sir Marmaduke, we will leave Lady Anne
for the moment to the care of Mistress Sibyll. Donzell, remember my
command. Come, sir"--(and he drew the wondering Marmaduke from the
chamber); but as soon as he had seen the knight descend the stairs and
regain the court, he returned to the room, and in a low, stern voice,
said, "Look you, Master Warner, and you, damsel, if ever either of
ye breathe one word of what has been your dangerous fate to hear and
witness, kings have but one way to punish slanderers, and silence but
one safeguard!--trifle not with death!"

He then closed the door, and resought his own chamber. The Eastern
spices, which were burned in the sleeping-rooms of the great, still made
the air heavy with their feverish fragrance. The king seated himself,
and strove to recollect his thoughts, and examine the peril he had
provoked. The resistance and the terror of Anne had effectually banished
from his heart the guilty passion it had before harboured; for emotions
like his, and in such a nature, are quick of change. His prevailing
feeling was one of sharp repentance and reproachful shame. But as he
roused himself from a state of mind which light characters ever seek
to escape, the image of the dark-browed earl rose before him, and fear
succeeded to mortification; but even this, however well-founded, could
not endure long in a disposition so essentially scornful of all danger.
Before morning the senses of Anne must return to her. So gentle a bosom
could be surely reasoned out of resentment, or daunted, at least, from
betraying to her stern father a secret that, if told, would smear the
sward of England with the gore of thousands. What woman will provoke war
and bloodshed? And for an evil not wrought, for a purpose not fulfilled?
The king was grateful that his victim had escaped him. He would see Anne
before the earl could, and appease her anger, obtain her silence! For
Warner and for Sibyll, they would not dare to reveal; and, if they did,
the lips that accuse a king soon belie themselves, while a rack can
torture truth, and the doomsman be the only judge between the subject
and the head that wears a crown.

Thus reasoning with himself, his soul faced the solitude. Meanwhile
Marmaduke regained the courtyard, where, as we have said, he had been
detained in conferring with some of the gentlemen in the king's service,
who, hearing that he brought important tidings from the earl, had
abstained from rest till they could learn if the progress of the new
rebellion would bring their swords into immediate service. Marmaduke,
pleased to be of importance, had willingly satisfied their curiosity,
as far as he was able, and was just about to retire to his own chamber,
when the cry of Anne had made him enter the postern-door which led up
the stairs to Adam's apartment, and which was fortunately not locked;
and now, on returning, he had again a new curiosity to allay. Having
briefly said that Master Warner had taken that untoward hour to frighten
the women with a machine that vomited smoke and howled piteously,
Marmaduke dismissed the group to their beds, and was about to seek his
own, when, looking once more towards the casement, he saw a white hand
gleaming in the frosty moonlight, and beckoning to him.

The knight crossed himself, and reluctantly ascended the stairs, and
re-entered the wizard's den.

The Lady Anne had so far recovered herself, that a kind of unnatural
calm had taken possession of her mind, and changed her ordinary sweet
and tractable nature into one stern, obstinate resolution,--to escape,
if possible, that unholy palace. And as soon as Marmaduke re-entered,
Anne met him at the threshold, and laying her hand convulsively on his
arm, said, "By the name you bear, by your love to my father, aid me to
quit these walls."

In great astonishment, Marmaduke stared, without reply. "Do you deny me,
sir?" said Anne, almost sternly.

"Lady and mistress mine," answered Marmaduke, "I am your servant in all
things. Quit these walls, the palace!--How?--the gates are closed. Nay,
and what would my lord say, if at night--"

"If at night!" repeated Anne, in a hollow voice; and then pausing, burst
into a terrible laugh. Recovering herself abruptly, she moved to the
door, "I will go forth alone, and trust in God and Our Lady."

Sibyll sprang forward to arrest her steps, and Marmaduke hastened to
Adam, and whispered, "Poor lady, is her mind unsettled? Hast thou, in
truth, distracted her with thy spells and glamour?"

"Hush!" answered the old man; and he whispered in Nevile's ear.

Scarcely had the knight caught the words, than his cheek paled, his
eyes flashed fire. "The great earl's daughter!" he exclaimed.
"Infamy--horror--she is right!" He broke from the student, approached
Anne, who still struggled with Sibyll, and kneeling before her, said, in
a voice choked with passions at once fierce and tender,--

"Lady, you are right. Unseemly it may be for one of your quality and
sex to quit this place with me, and alone; but at least I have a man's
heart, a knight's honour. Trust to me your safety, noble maiden, and
I will cut your way, even through yon foul king's heart, to your great
father's side!"

Anne did not seem quite to understand his words; but she smiled on him
as he knelt, and gave him her hand. The responsibility he had assumed
quickened all the intellect of the young knight. As he took and kissed
the hand extended to him, he felt the ring upon his finger,--the ring
intrusted to him by Alwyn, the king's signet-ring, before which would
fly open every gate. He uttered a joyous exclamation, loosened his long
night-cloak, and praying Anne to envelop her form in its folds, drew
the hood over her head; he was about to lead her forth when he halted
suddenly.

"Alack," said he, turning to Sibyll, "even though we may escape the
Tower, no boatman now can be found on the river. The way through the
streets is dark and perilous, and beset with midnight ruffians."

"Verily," said Warner, "the danger is past now. Let the noble demoiselle
rest here till morning. The king dare not again--"

"Dare not!" interrupted Marmaduke. "Alas! you little know King Edward."

At that name Anne shuddered, opened the door, and hurried down the
stairs; Sibyll and Marmaduke followed her.

"Listen, Sir Marmaduke," said Sibyll. "Close without the Tower is the
house of a noble lady, the dame of Longueville, where Anne may rest
in safety, while you seek Lord Warwick. I will go with you, if you can
obtain egress for us both."

"Brave damsel!" said Marmaduke, with emotion; "but your own safety--the
king's anger--no--besides a third, your dress not concealed, would
create the warder's suspicion. Describe the house."

"The third to the left, by the river's side, with an arched porch, and
the fleur-de-lis embossed on the walls."

"It is not so dark but we shall find it. Fare you well, gentle
mistress."

While they yet spoke, they had both reached the side of Anne. Sibyll
still persisted in the wish to accompany her friend; but Marmaduke's
representation of the peril to life itself that might befall her father,
if Edward learned she had abetted Anne's escape, finally prevailed. The
knight and his charge gained the outer gate.

"Haste, haste, Master Warder!" he cried, beating at the door with his
dagger till it opened jealously,--"messages of importance to the Lord
Warwick. We have the king's signet. Open!"

The sleepy warder glanced at the ring; the gates were opened; they were
without the fortress, they hurried on. "Cheer up, noble lady; you are
safe, you shall be avenged!" said Marmaduke, as he felt the steps of
his companion falter. But the reaction had come. The effort Anne had
hitherto made was for escape, for liberty; the strength ceased, the
object gained; her head drooped, she muttered a few incoherent words,
and then sense and life left her. Marmaduke paused in great perplexity
and alarm. But lo, a light in a house before him! That house the third
to the river,--the only one with the arched porch described by Sibyll.
He lifted the light and holy burden in his strong arms, he gained the
door; to his astonishment it was open; a light burned on the stairs; he
heard, in the upper room, the sound of whispered voices, and quick, soft
footsteps hurrying to and fro. Still bearing the insensible form of
his companion, he ascended the staircase, and entered at once upon
a chamber, in which, by a dim lamp, he saw some two or three persons
assembled round a bed in the recess. A grave man advanced to him, as he
paused at the threshold.

"Whom seek you?"

"The Lady Longueville."

"Hush?"

"Who needs me?" said a faint voice, from the curtained recess.

"My name is Nevile," answered Marmaduke, with straightforward brevity.
"Mistress Sibyll Warner told me of this house, where I come for an
hour's shelter to my companion, the Lady Anne, daughter of the Earl of
Warwick."

Marmaduke resigned his charge to an old woman, who was the nurse in that
sick-chamber, and who lifted the hood and chafed the pale, cold hands
of the young maiden; the knight then strode to the recess. The Lady of
Longueville was on the bed of death--an illness of two days had brought
her to the brink of the grave; but there was in her eye and countenance
a restless and preternatural animation, and her voice was clear and
shrill, as she said,--

"Why does the daughter of Warwick, the Yorkist, seek refuge in the house
of the fallen and childless Lancastrian?"

"Swear by thy hopes in Christ that thou will tend and guard her while I
seek the earl, and I reply."

"Stranger, my name is Longueville, my birth noble,--those pledges of
hospitality and trust are stronger than hollow oaths. Say on!"

"Because, then," whispered the knight, after waving the bystanders
from the spot, "because the earl's daughter flies dishonour in a king's
palace, and her insulter is the king!"

Before the dying woman could reply, Anne, recovered by the cares of the
experienced nurse, suddenly sprang to the recess, and kneeling by the
bedside, exclaimed wildly,--"Save me! bide me! save me!"

"Go and seek the earl, whose right hand destroyed my house and his
lawful sovereign's throne,--go! I will live till he arrives!" said
the childless widow, and a wild gleam of triumph shot over her haggard
features.




CHAPTER VIII. THE GROUP ROUND THE DEATH-BED OF THE LANCASTRIAN WIDOW.

The dawning sun gleamed through gray clouds upon a small troop of men,
armed in haste, who were grouped round a covered litter by the outer
door of the Lady Longueville's house; while in the death-chamber, the
Earl of Warwick, with a face as pale as the dying woman's, stood beside
the bed, Anne calmly leaning on his breast, her eyes closed, and tears
yet moist on her long fringes.

"Ay, ay, ay!" said the Lancastrian noblewoman, "ye men of wrath and
turbulence should reap what ye have sown! This is the king for whom ye
dethroned the sainted Henry! this the man for whom ye poured forth the
blood of England's best! Ha! ha! Look down from heaven, my husband, my
martyr-sons! The daughter of your mightiest foe flies to this lonely
hearth,--flies to the death-bed of the powerless woman for refuge from
the foul usurper whom that foe placed upon the throne!"

"Spare me," muttered Warwick, in a low voice, and between his grinded
teeth. The room had been cleared, and Dr. Godard (the grave man who had
first accosted Marmaduke, and who was the priest summoned to the dying)
alone--save the scarce conscious Anne herself--witnessed the ghastly and
awful conference.

"Hush, daughter," said the man of peace, lifting the solemn
crucifix,--"calm thyself to holier thoughts."

The lady impatiently turned from the priest, and grasping the strong
right arm of Warwick with her shrivelled and trembling fingers, resumed
in a voice that struggled to repress the gasps which broke its breath,--

"But thou--oh, thou wilt bear this indignity! thou, the chief of
England's barons, wilt see no dishonour in the rank love of the vilest
of England's kings! Oh, yes, ye Yorkists have the hearts of varlets, not
of men and fathers!"

"By the symbol from which thou turnest, woman!" exclaimed the earl,
giving vent to the fury which the presence of death had before
suppressed, "by Him to whom, morning and night, I have knelt in grateful
blessing for the virtuous life of this beloved child, I will have such
revenge on the recreant whom I kinged, as shall live in the rolls of
England till the trump of the Judgment Angel!"

"Father," said Anne, startled by her father's vehemence from her
half-swoon, half-sleep--"Father, think no more of the past,--take me to
my mother! I want the clasp of my mother's arms!"

"Leave us,--leave the dying, Sir Earl and son," said Godard. "I too
am Lancastrian; I too would lay down my life for the holy Henry; but I
shudder, in the hour of death, to hear yon pale lips, that should pray
for pardon, preach to thee of revenge."

"Revenge!" shrieked out the dame of Longueville, as, sinking fast and
fast, she caught the word--"revenge! Thou hast sworn revenge on Edward
of York, Lord Warwick,--sworn it in the chamber of death, in the ear of
one who will carry that word to the hero-dead of a hundred battlefields!
Ha! the sun has risen! Priest--Godard--thine arms--support--raise--bear
me to the casement! Quick--quick! I would see my king once more!
Quick--quick! and then--then--I will hear thee pray!"

The priest, half chiding, yet half in pity, bore the dying woman to the
casement. She motioned to him to open it; he obeyed. The sun, just above
the welkin, shone over the lordly Thames, gilded the gloomy fortress of
the Tower, and glittered upon the window of Henry's prison.

"There--there! It is he,--it is my king! Hither,--lord, rebel
earl,--hither. Behold your sovereign. Repent, revenge!"

With her livid and outstretched hand, the Lancastrian pointed to the
huge Wakefield tower. The earl's dark eye beheld in the dim distance
a pale and reverend countenance, recognized even from afar. The dying
woman fixed her glazing eyes upon the wronged and mighty baron, and
suddenly her arm fell to her side, the face became set as into stone,
the last breath of life gurgled within, and fled; and still those
glazing eyes were fixed on the earl's hueless face, and still in his
ear, and echoed by a thousand passions in his heart, thrilled the
word which had superseded prayer, and in which the sinner's soul had
flown,--REVENGE!




BOOK IX. THE WANDERERS AND THE EXILES.




CHAPTER I. HOW THE GREAT BARON BECOMES AS GREAT A REBEL.

Hilyard was yet asleep in the chamber assigned to him as his prison,
when a rough grasp shook off his slumbers, and he saw the earl before
him, with a countenance so changed from its usual open majesty, so dark
and sombre, that he said involuntarily, "You send me to the doomsman,--I
am ready!"

"Hist, man! Thou hatest Edward of York?"

"An it were my last word, yes!"

"Give me thy hand--we are friends! Stare not at me with those eyes of
wonder, ask not the why nor wherefore! This last night gave Edward a
rebel more in Richard Nevile! A steed waits thee at my gates; ride fast
to young Sir Robert Welles with this letter. Bid him not be dismayed;
bid him hold out, for ere many days are past, Lord Warwick, and it may
be also the Duke of Clarence, will join their force with his. Mark, I
say not that I am for Henry of Lancaster,--I say only that I am against
Edward of York. Farewell, and when we meet again, blessed be the arm
that first cuts its way to a tyrant's heart!"

Without another word, Warwick left the chamber. Hilyard at first could
not believe his senses; but as he dressed himself in haste, he pondered
over all those causes of dissension which had long notoriously subsisted
between Edward and the earl, and rejoiced that the prophecy that he had
long so shrewdly hazarded was at last fulfilled. Descending the stairs
he gained the gate, where Marmaduke awaited him, while a groom held
a stout haquenee (as the common riding-horse was then called), whose
points and breeding promised speed and endurance.

"Mount, Master Robin," said Marmaduke; "I little thought we should ever
ride as friends together! Mount!--our way for some miles out of London
is the same. You go into Lincolnshire, I into the shire of Hertford."

"And for the same purpose?" asked Hilyard, as he sprang upon his horse,
and the two men rode briskly on.

"Yes!"

"Lord Warwick is changed at last?"

"At last!"

"For long?"

"Till death!"

"Good, I ask no more!"

A sound of hoofs behind made the franklin turn his head, and he saw
a goodly troop, armed to the teeth, emerge from the earl's house and
follow the lead of Marmaduke. Meanwhile Warwick was closeted with
Montagu.

Worldly as the latter was, and personally attached to Edward, he was
still keenly alive to all that touched the honour of his House; and
his indignation at the deadly insult offered to his niece was even more
loudly expressed than that of the fiery earl.

"To deem," he exclaimed, "to deem Elizabeth Woodville worthy of his
throne, and to see in Anne Nevile the only worthy to be his leman!"

"Ay!" said the earl, with a calmness perfectly terrible, from its
unnatural contrast to his ordinary heat, when but slightly chafed, "ay!
thou sayest it! But be tranquil; cold,--cold as iron, and as hard! We
must scheme now, not storm and threaten--I never schemed before! You are
right,--honesty is a fool's policy! Would I had known this but an hour
before the news reached me! I have already dismissed our friends to
their different districts, to support King Edward's cause--he is still
king,--a little while longer king! Last night, I dismissed them--last
night, at the very hour when--O God, give me patience!" He paused, and
added in a low voice, "Yet--yet--how long the moments are how long! Ere
the sun sets, Edward, I trust, will be in my power!"

"How?"

"He goes, to-day, to the More,--he will not go the less for what
hath chanced; he will trust to the archbishop to make his peace with
me,--churchmen are not fathers! Marmaduke Nevile hath my orders; a
hundred armed men, who would march against the fiend himself, if I said
the word, will surround the More, and seize the guest!"

"But what then? Who, if Edward, I dare not say the word--who is to
succeed him?"

"Clarence is the male heir."

"But with what face to the people proclaim--"

"There--there it is!" interrupted Warwick. "I have thought of that,--I
have thought of all things; my mind seems to have traversed worlds since
daybreak! True! all commotion to be successful must have a cause that
men can understand. Nevertheless, you, Montagu--you have a smoother
tongue than I; go to our friends--to those who hate Edward--seek them,
sound them!"

"And name to them Edward's infamy?"

"'S death, dost thou think it? Thou, a Monthermer and Montagu: proclaim
to England the foul insult to the hearth of an English gentleman and
peer! feed every ribald Bourdour with song and roundel of Anne's virgin
shame! how King Edward stole to her room at the dead of night, and wooed
and pressed, and swore, and--God of Heaven, that this hand were on his
throat! No, brother, no! there are some wrongs we may not tell,--tumours
and swellings of the heart which are eased not till blood can flow!"

During this conference between the brothers, Edward, in his palace, was
seized with consternation and dismay on hearing that the Lady Anne could
not be found in her chamber. He sent forthwith to summon Adam Warner to
his presence, and learned from the simple sage, who concealed nothing,
the mode in which Anne had fled from the Tower. The king abruptly
dismissed Adam, after a few hearty curses and vague threats; and awaking
to the necessity of inventing some plausible story, to account to the
wonder of the court for the abrupt disappearance of his guest, he saw
that the person who could best originate and circulate such a tale was
the queen; and he sought her at once, with the resolution to choose his
confidant in the connection most rarely honoured by marital trust in
similar offences. He, however, so softened his narrative as to leave it
but a venial error. He had been indulging over-freely in the wine-cup,
he had walked into the corridor for the refreshing coolness of the air,
he had seen the figure of a female whom he did not recognize; and a
few gallant words, he scarce remembered what, had been misconstrued. On
perceiving whom he had thus addressed, he had sought to soothe the anger
or alarm of the Lady Anne; but still mistaking his intention, she had
hurried into Warner's chamber; he had followed her thither, and now she
had fled the palace. Such was his story, told lightly and laughingly,
but ending with a grave enumeration of the dangers his imprudence had
incurred.

Whatever Elizabeth felt, or however she might interpret the confession,
she acted with her customary discretion; affected, after a few tender
reproaches, to place implicit credit in her lord's account, and
volunteered to prevent all scandal by the probable story that the
earl, being prevented from coming in person for his daughter, as he
had purposed, by fresh news of the rebellion which might call him from
London with the early day, had commissioned his kinsman Marmaduke to
escort her home. The quick perception of her sex told her that, whatever
license might have terrified Anne into so abrupt a flight, the haughty
earl would shrink no less than Edward himself from making public an
insult which slander could well distort into the dishonour of his
daughter; and that whatever pretext might be invented, Warwick would not
deign to contradict it. And as, despite Elizabeth's hatred to the earl,
and desire of permanent breach between Edward and his minister, she
could not, as queen, wife, and woman, but be anxious that some cause
more honourable in Edward, and less odious to the people, should be
assigned for quarrel, she earnestly recommended the king to repair at
once to the More, as had been before arranged, and to spare no pains,
disdain no expressions of penitence and humiliation, to secure the
mediation of the archbishop. His mind somewhat relieved by this
interview and counsel, the king kissed Elizabeth with affectionate
gratitude, and returned to his chamber to prepare for his departure
to the archbishop's palace. But then, remembering that Adam and Sibyll
possessed his secret, he resolved at once to banish them from the Tower.
For a moment he thought of the dungeons of his fortress, of the rope of
his doomsman; but his conscience at that hour was sore and vexed. His
fierceness humbled by the sense of shame, he shrank from a new crime;
and, moreover, his strong common-sense assured him that the testimony of
a shunned and abhorred wizard ceased to be of weight the moment it was
deprived of the influence it took from the protection of a king. He gave
orders for a boat to be in readiness by the gate of St. Thomas, again
summoned Adam into his presence, and said briefly, "Master Warner, the
London mechanics cry so loudly against thine invention for lessening
labour and starving the poor, the sailors on the wharfs are so mutinous
at the thought of vessels without rowers, that, as a good king is bound,
I yield to the voice of my people. Go home, then, at once; the queen
dispenses with thy fair daughter's service, the damsel accompanies thee.
A boat awaits ye at the stairs; a guard shall attend ye to your house.
Think what has passed within these walls has been a dream,--a dream
that, if told, is deathful, if concealed and forgotten hath no portent!"

Without waiting a reply, the king called from the anteroom one of his
gentlemen, and gave him special directions as to the departure and
conduct of the worthy scholar and his gentle daughter. Edward next
summoned before him the warder of the gate, learned that he alone was
privy to the mode of his guest's flight, and deeming it best to leave
at large no commentator on the tale he had invented, sentenced the
astonished warder to three months' solitary imprisonment,--for appearing
before him with soiled hosen! An hour afterwards, the king, with a small
though gorgeous retinue, was on his way to the More.

The archbishop had, according to his engagement, assembled in his palace
the more powerful of the discontented seigneurs; and his eloquence had
so worked upon them, that Edward beheld, on entering the hall, only
countenances of cheerful loyalty and respectful welcome. After the first
greetings, the prelate, according to the custom of the day, conducted
Edward into a chamber, that he might refresh himself with a brief rest
and the bath, previous to the banquet.

Edward seized the occasion, and told his tale; but however softened,
enough was left to create the liveliest dismay in his listener. The
lofty scaffolding of hope upon which the ambitious prelate was to mount
to the papal throne seemed to crumble into the dust. The king and the
earl were equally necessary to the schemes of George Nevile. He chid the
royal layman with more than priestly unction for his offence; but Edward
so humbly confessed his fault, that the prelate at length relaxed his
brow, and promised to convey his penitent assurances to the earl.

"Not an hour should be lost," he said; "the only one who can soothe
his wrath is your Highness's mother, our noble kinswoman. Permit me to
despatch to her grace a letter, praying her to seek the earl, while I
write by the same courier to himself."

"Be it all as you will," said Edward, doffing his surcoat, and dipping
his hands in a perfumed ewer; "I shall not know rest till I have knelt
to the Lady Anne, and won her pardon."

The prelate retired, and scarcely had he left the room when Sir John
Ratcliffe, [Afterwards Lord Fitzwalter. See Lingard (note, vol. iii. p.
507, quarto edition), for the proper date to be assigned to this royal
visit to the More,--a date we have here adopted, not, as Sharon Turner
and others place (namely, upon the authority of Hearne's Fragm., 302,
which subsequent events disprove), after the open rebellion of Warwick,
but just before it; that is, not after Easter, but before Lent.] one of
the king's retinue, and in waiting on his person, entered the chamber,
pale and trembling.

"My liege," he said, in a whisper, "I fear some deadly treason awaits
you. I have seen, amongst the trees below this tower, the gleam of
steel; I have crept through the foliage, and counted no less than a
hundred armed men,--their leader is Sir Marmaduke Nevile, Earl Warwick's
kinsman!"

"Ha!" muttered the king, and his bold face fell, "comes the earl's
revenge so soon?"

"And," continued Ratcliffe, "I overheard Sir Marmaduke say, 'The door of
the Garden Tower is unguarded,--wait the signal!' Fly, my liege! Hark!
even now I hear the rattling of arms!"

The king stole to the casement; the day was closing; the foliage grew
thick and dark around the wall; he saw an armed man emerge from the
shade,--a second, and a third.

"You are right, Ratcliffe! Flight--but how?"

"This way, my liege. By the passage I entered, a stair winds to a door
on the inner court; there I have already a steed in waiting. Deign, for
precaution, to use my hat and manteline."

The king hastily adopted the suggestion, followed the noiseless steps
of Ratcliffe, gained the door, sprang upon his steed, and dashing
right through a crowd assembled by the gate, galloped alone and fast,
untracked by human enemy, but goaded by the foe that mounts the rider's
steed, over field, over fell, over dyke, through hedge, and in the dead
of night reined in at last before the royal towers of Windsor.




CHAPTER II. MANY THINGS BRIEFLY TOLD.

The events that followed the king's escape were rapid and startling. The
barons assembled at the More, enraged at Edward's seeming distrust of
them, separated in loud anger. The archbishop learned the cause from one
of his servitors, who detected Marmaduke's ambush, but he was too wary
to make known a circumstance suspicious to himself. He flew to London,
and engaged the mediation of the Duchess of York to assist his own.
[Lingard. See for the dates, Fabyan, 657.]

The earl received their joint overtures with stern and ominous coldness,
and abruptly repaired to Warwick, taking with him the Lady Anne. There
he was joined, the same day, by the Duke and Duchess of Clarence.

The Lincolnshire rebellion gained head: Edward made a dexterous feint
in calling, by public commission, upon Clarence and Warwick to aid in
dispersing it; if they refused, the odium of first aggression would
seemingly rest with them. Clarence, more induced by personal ambition
than sympathy with Warwick's wrong, incensed by his brother's recent
slights, looking to Edward's resignation and his own consequent
accession to the throne, and inflamed by the ambition and pride of a
wife whom he at once feared and idolized, went hand in heart with the
earl; but not one lord and captain whom Montagu had sounded lent favour
to the deposition of one brother for the advancement of the next.
Clarence, though popular, was too young to be respected: many there were
who would rather have supported the earl, if an aspirant to the throne;
but that choice forbidden by the earl himself, there could be but two
parties in England,--the one for Edward IV., the other for Henry VI.
Lord Montagu had repaired to Warwick Castle to communicate in person
this result of his diplomacy. The earl, whose manner was completely
changed, no longer frank and hearty, but close and sinister, listened in
gloomy silence.

"And now," said Montagu, with the generous emotion of a man whose nobler
nature was stirred deeply, "if you resolve on war with Edward, I am
willing to renounce my own ambition, the hand of a king's daughter for
my son, so that I may avenge the honour of our common name. I confess
that I have so loved Edward that I would fain pray you to pause, did I
not distrust myself, lest in such delay his craft should charm me back
to the old affection. Nathless, to your arm and your great soul I have
owed all, and if you are resolved to strike the blow, I am ready to
share the hazard."

The earl turned away his face, and wrung his brother's hand.

"Our father, methinks, hears thee from the grave!" said he, solemnly,
and there was a long pause. At length Warwick resumed: "Return to
London; seem to take no share in my actions, whatever they be; if I
fail, why drag thee into my ruin?--and yet, trust me, I am rash and
fierce no more. He who sets his heart on a great object suddenly becomes
wise. When a throne is in the dust, when from St. Paul's Cross a voice
goes forth to Carlisle and the Land's End, proclaiming that the reign of
Edward the Fourth is past and gone, then, Montagu, I claim thy promise
of aid and fellowship,--not before!"

Meanwhile, the king, eager to dispel thought in action, rushed in person
against the rebellious forces. Stung by fear into cruelty, he beheaded,
against all kingly faith, his hostages, Lord Welles and Sir Thomas
Dymoke, summoned Sir Robert Welles, the leader of the revolt, to
surrender; received for answer, that Sir Robert Welles would not trust
the perfidy of the man who had murdered his father!--pushed on to
Erpingham, defeated the rebels in a signal battle, and crowned his
victory by a series of ruthless cruelties, committed to the fierce and
learned Earl of Worcester, "Butcher of England." [Stowe. "Warkworth
Chronicle"--Cont. Croyl. Lord Worcester ordered Clapham (a squire to
Lord Warwick) and nineteen others, gentlemen and yeomen, to be impaled,
and from the horror the spectacle inspired, and the universal odium
it attached to Worcester, it is to be feared that the unhappy men were
still sensible to the agony of this infliction, though they appear first
to have been drawn, and partially hanged,--outrage confined only to the
dead bodies of rebels being too common at that day to have excited the
indignation which attended the sentence Worcester passed on his victims.
It is in vain that some writers would seek to cleanse the memory of this
learned nobleman from the stain of cruelty by rhetorical remarks on
the improbability that a cultivator of letters should be of a ruthless
disposition. The general philosophy of this defence is erroneous. In
ignorant ages a man of superior acquirements is not necessarily made
humane by the cultivation of his intellect, on the contrary, he too
often learns to look upon the uneducated herd as things of another clay.
Of this truth all history is pregnant,--witness the accomplished tyrants
of Greece, the profound and cruel intellect of the Italian Borgias.
Richard III. and Henry VIII. were both highly educated for their age.
But in the case of Tiptoft, Lord Worcester, the evidence of his cruelty
is no less incontestable than that which proves his learning--the
Croyland historian alone is unimpeachable. Worcester's popular name of
"the Butcher" is sufficient testimony in itself. The people are often
mistaken, to be sure, but can scarcely be so upon the one point, whether
a man who has sat in judgment on themselves be merciful or cruel.]

With the prompt vigour and superb generalship which Edward ever
displayed in war, he then cut his gory way to the force which Clarence
and Warwick (though their hostility was still undeclared) had levied,
with the intent to join the defeated rebels. He sent his herald, Garter
King-at-arms, to summon the earl and the duke to appear before him
within a certain day. The time expired; he proclaimed them traitors, and
offered rewards for their apprehension. [One thousand pounds in money,
or one hundred pounds a year in land; an immense reward for that day.]

So sudden had been Warwick's defection, so rapid the king's movements,
that the earl had not time to mature his resources, assemble his
vassals, consolidate his schemes. His very preparations, upon the night
on which Edward had repaid his services by such hideous ingratitude, had
manned the country with armies against himself. Girt but with a scanty
force collected in haste (and which consisted merely of his retainers in
the single shire of Warwick), the march of Edward cut him off from the
counties in which his name was held most dear, in which his trumpet
could raise up hosts. He was disappointed in the aid he had expected
from his powerful but self-interested brother-in-law, Lord Stanley.
Revenge had become more dear to him than life: life must not be
hazarded, lest revenge be lost. On still marched the king; and the day
that his troops entered Exeter, Warwick, the females of his family,
with Clarence, and a small but armed retinue, took ship from Dartmouth,
sailed for Calais (before which town, while at anchor, Isabel was
confined of her first-born). To the earl's rage and dismay his deputy
Vauclerc fired upon his ships. Warwick then steered on towards Normandy,
captured some Flemish vessels by the way, in token of defiance to the
earl's old Burgundian foe, and landed at Harfleur, where he and his
companions were received with royal honours by the Admiral of France,
and finally took their way to the court of Louis XI. at Amboise.

"The danger is past forever!" said King Edward, as the wine sparkled in
his goblet. "Rebellion hath lost its head,--and now, indeed, and for the
first time, a monarch I reign alone!" [Before leaving England, Warwick
and Clarence are generally said to have fallen in with Anthony Woodville
and Lord Audley, and ordered them to execution, from which they were
saved by a Dorsetshire gentleman. Carte, who, though his history is
not without great mistakes, is well worth reading by those whom the
character of Lord Warwick may interest, says, that the earl had "too
much magnanimity to put them to death immediately, according to the
common practice of the times, and only imprisoned them in the castle
of Wardour, from whence they were soon rescued by John Thornhill,
a gentleman of Dorsetshire." The whole of this story is, however,
absolutely contradicted by the "Warkworth Chronicle" (p. 9, edited by
Mr. Halliwell), according to which authority Anthony Woodville was at
that time commanding a fleet upon the Channel, which waylaid Warwick on
his voyage; but the success therein attributed to the gallant Anthony,
in dispersing or seizing all the earl's ships, save the one that bore
the earl himself and his family, is proved to be purely fabulous, by the
earl's well-attested capture of the Flemish vessels, as he passed
from Calais to the coasts of Normandy, an exploit he could never have
performed with a single vessel of his own. It is very probable that the
story of Anthony Woodville's capture and peril at this time originates
in a misadventure many years before, and recorded in the "Paston
Letters," as well as in the "Chronicles."--In the year 1459, Anthony
Woodville and his father, Lord Rivers (then zealous Lancastrians),
really did fall into the hands of the Earl of March (Edward IV.),
Warwick and Salisbury, and got off with a sound "rating" upon the rude
language which such "knaves' sons" and "little squires" had held to
those "who were of king's blood."]




CHAPTER III. THE PLOT OF THE HOSTELRY--THE MAID AND THE SCHOLAR IN THEIR
HOME.

The country was still disturbed, and the adherents, whether of Henry or
the earl, still rose in many an outbreak, though prevented from swelling
into one common army by the extraordinary vigour not only of Edward,
but of Gloucester and Hastings,--when one morning, just after the events
thus rapidly related, the hostelry of Master Sancroft, in the suburban
parish of Marybone, rejoiced in a motley crowd of customers and topers.

Some half-score soldiers, returned in triumph from the royal camp, sat
round a table placed agreeably enough in the deep recess made by the
large jutting lattice; with them were mingled about as many women,
strangely and gaudily clad. These last were all young; one or two,
indeed, little advanced from childhood. But there was no expression of
youth in their hard, sinister features: coarse paint supplied the place
of bloom; the very youngest had a wrinkle on her brow; their forms
wanted the round and supple grace of early years. Living principally in
