me gage my royal word against that of an abject recreant? Let those who
can believe the son of their sovereign, the descendant of Bruce, capable
of laying ambush for the life of a poor mechanic, enjoy the pleasure of
thinking the villain's tale true."

"That will not I for one," said the smith, bluntly. "I never did aught
but what was in honour towards his royal Grace the Duke of Rothsay, and
never received unkindness from him in word, look, or deed; and I cannot
think he would have given aim to such base practice."

"Was it in honour that you threw his Highness from the ladder in Curfew
Street upon Fastern's [St. Valentine's] Even?" said Bonthron; "or think
you the favour was received kindly or unkindly?"

This was so boldly said, and seemed so plausible, that it shook the
smith's opinion of the Prince's innocence.

"Alas, my lord," said he, looking sorrowfully towards Rothsay, "could
your Highness seek an innocent fellow's life for doing his duty by a
helpless maiden? I would rather have died in these lists than live to
hear it said of the Bruce's heir!"

"Thou art a good fellow, Smith," said the Prince; "but I cannot expect
thee to judge more wisely than others. Away with that convict to the
gallows, and gibbet him alive an you will, that he may speak falsehood
and spread scandal on us to the last prolonged moment of his existence!"

So saying, the Prince turned away from the lists, disdaining to notice
the gloomy looks cast towards him, as the crowd made slow and reluctant
way for him to pass, and expressing neither surprise nor displeasure at
a deep, hollow murmur, or groan, which accompanied his retreat. Only a
few of his own immediate followers attended him from the field, though
various persons of distinction had come there in his train. Even the
lower class of citizens ceased to follow the unhappy Prince, whose
former indifferent reputation had exposed him to so many charges of
impropriety and levity, and around whom there seemed now darkening
suspicions of the most atrocious nature.

He took his slow and thoughtful way to the church of the Dominicans; but
the ill news, which flies proverbially fast, had reached his father's
place of retirement before he himself appeared. On entering the palace
and inquiring for the King, the Duke of Rothsay was surprised to be
informed that he was in deep consultation with the Duke of Albany, who,
mounting on horseback as the Prince left the lists, had reached the
convent before him. He was about to use the privilege of his rank and
birth to enter the royal apartment, when MacLouis, the commander of
the guard of Brandanes, gave him to understand, in the most respectful
terms, that he had special instructions which forbade his admittance.

"Go at least, MacLouis, and let them know that I wait their pleasure,"
said the Prince. "If my uncle desires to have the credit of shutting the
father's apartment against the son, it will gratify him to know that I
am attending in the outer hall like a lackey."

"May it please you," said MacLouis, with hesitation, "if your Highness
would consent to retire just now, and to wait awhile in patience, I will
send to acquaint you when the Duke of Albany goes; and I doubt not that
his Majesty will then admit your Grace to his presence. At present, your
Highness must forgive me, it is impossible you can have access."

"I understand you, MacLouis; but go, nevertheless, and obey my
commands."

The officer went accordingly, and returned with a message that the King
was indisposed, and on the point of retiring to his private chamber;
but that the Duke of Albany would presently wait upon the Prince of
Scotland.

It was, however, a full half hour ere the Duke of Albany appeared--a
period of time which Rothsay spent partly in moody silence, and
partly in idle talk with MacLouis and the Brandanes, as the levity or
irritability of his temper obtained the ascendant.

At length the Duke came, and with him the lord High Constable, whose
countenance expressed much sorrow and embarrassment.

"Fair kinsman," said the Duke of Albany, "I grieve to say that it is
my royal brother's opinion that it will be best, for the honour of the
royal family, that your Royal Highness do restrict yourself for a time
to the seclusion of the High Constable's lodgings, and accept of the
noble Earl here present for your principal, if not sole, companion until
the scandals which have been this day spread abroad shall be refuted or
forgotten."

"How is this, my lord of Errol?" said the Prince in astonishment. "Is
your house to be my jail, and is your lordship to be my jailer?"

"The saints forbid, my lord," said the Earl of Errol "but it is my
unhappy duty to obey the commands of your father, by considering your
Royal Highness for some time as being under my ward."

"The Prince--the heir of Scotland, under the ward of the High Constable!
What reason can be given for this? is the blighting speech of
a convicted recreant of strength sufficient to tarnish my royal
escutcheon?"

"While such accusations are not refuted and denied, my kinsman," said
the Duke of Albany, "they will contaminate that of a monarch."

"Denied, my lord!" exclaimed the Prince; "by whom are they asserted,
save by a wretch too infamous, even by his own confession, to be
credited for a moment, though a beggar's character, not a prince's, were
impeached? Fetch him hither, let the rack be shown to him; you will soon
hear him retract the calumny which he dared to assert!"

"The gibbet has done its work too surely to leave Bonthron sensible
to the rack," said the Duke of Albany. "He has been executed an hour
since."

"And why such haste, my lord?" said the Prince; "know you it looks as if
there were practice in it to bring a stain on my name?"

"The custom is universal, the defeated combatant in the ordeal of battle
is instantly transferred from the lists to the gallows. And yet, fair
kinsman," continued the Duke of Albany, "if you had boldly and strongly
denied the imputation, I would have judged right to keep the wretch
alive for further investigation; but as your Highness was silent, I
deemed it best to stifle the scandal in the breath of him that uttered
it."

"St. Mary, my lord, but this is too insulting! Do you, my uncle and
kinsman, suppose me guilty of prompting such an useless and unworthy
action as that which the slave confessed?"

"It is not for me to bandy question with your Highness, otherwise I
would ask whether you also mean to deny the scarce less unworthy, though
less bloody, attack upon the house in Couvrefew Street? Be not angry
with me, kinsman; but, indeed, your sequestering yourself for some brief
space from the court, were it only during the King's residence in this
city, where so much offence has been given, is imperiously demanded."

Rothsay paused when he heard this exhortation, and, looking at the Duke
in a very marked manner, replied:

"Uncle, you are a good huntsman. You have pitched your toils with much
skill, but you would have been foiled, not withstanding, had not the
stag rushed among the nets of free will. God speed you, and may you have
the profit by this matter which your measures deserve. Say to my father,
I obey his arrest. My Lord High Constable, I wait only your pleasure to
attend you to your lodgings. Since I am to lie in ward, I could not have
desired a kinder or more courteous warden."

The interview between the uncle and nephew being thus concluded, the
Prince retired with the Earl of Errol to his apartments; the citizens
whom they met in the streets passing to the further side when they
observed the Duke of Rothsay, to escape the necessity of saluting
one whom they had been taught to consider as a ferocious as well as
unprincipled libertine. The Constable's lodgings received the owner and
his princely guest, both glad to leave the streets, yet neither feeling
easy in the situation which they occupied with regard to each other
within doors.

We must return to the lists after the combat had ceased, and when the
nobles had withdrawn. The crowds were now separated into two distinct
bodies. That which made the smallest in number was at the same time the
most distinguished for respectability, consisting of the better class
of inhabitants of Perth, who were congratulating the successful champion
and each other upon the triumphant conclusion to which they had brought
their feud with the courtiers. The magistrates were so much elated on
the occasion, that they entreated Sir Patrick Charteris's acceptance of
a collation in the town hall. To this Henry, the hero of the day, was of
course invited, or he was rather commanded to attend. He listened to
the summons with great embarrassment, for it may be readily believed
his heart was with Catharine Glover. But the advice of his father Simon
decided him. That veteran citizen had a natural and becoming deference
for the magistracy of the Fair City; he entertained a high estimation
of all honours which flowed from such a source, and thought that his
intended son in law would do wrong not to receive them with gratitude.

"Thou must not think to absent thyself from such a solemn occasion, son
Henry," was his advice. "Sir Patrick Charteris is to be there himself,
and I think it will be a rare occasion for thee to gain his goodwill. It
is like he may order of thee a new suit of harness; and I myself heard
worthy Bailie Craigdallie say there was a talk of furbishing up the
city's armoury. Thou must not neglect the good trade, now that thou
takest on thee an expensive family."

"Tush, father Glover," answered the embarrassed victor, "I lack no
custom; and thou knowest there is Catharine, who may wonder at my
absence, and have her ear abused once more by tales of glee maidens and
I wot not what."

"Fear not for that," said the glover, "but go, like an obedient burgess,
where thy betters desire to have thee. I do not deny that it will cost
thee some trouble to make thy peace with Catharine about this duel; for
she thinks herself wiser in such matters than king and council, kirk
and canons, provost and bailies. But I will take up the quarrel with
her myself, and will so work for thee, that, though she may receive
thee tomorrow with somewhat of a chiding, it shall melt into tears and
smiles, like an April morning, that begins with a mild shower. Away with
thee, then, my son, and be constant to the time, tomorrow morning after
mass."

The smith, though reluctantly, was obliged to defer to the reasoning of
his proposed father in law, and, once determined to accept the honour
destined for him by the fathers of the city, he extricated himself from
the crowd, and hastened home to put on his best apparel; in which he
presently afterwards repaired to the council house, where the ponderous
oak table seemed to bend under the massy dishes of choice Tay salmon
and delicious sea fish from Dundee, being the dainties which the fasting
season permitted, whilst neither wine, ale, nor metheglin were wanting
to wash them down. The waits, or minstrels of the burgh, played during
the repast, and in the intervals of the music one of them recited With
great emphasis a long poetical account of the battle of Blackearnside,
fought by Sir William Wallace and his redoubted captain and friend,
Thomas of Longueville, against the English general Seward--a theme
perfectly familiar to all the guests, who, nevertheless, more tolerant
than their descendants, listened as if it had all the zest of novelty.
It was complimentary to the ancestor of the Knight of Kinfauns,
doubtless, and to other Perthshire families, in passages which the
audience applauded vociferously, whilst they pledged each other in
mighty draughts to the memory of the heroes who had fought by the side
of the Champion of Scotland. The health of Henry Wynd was quaffed
with repeated shouts, and the provost announced publicly, that the
magistrates were consulting how they might best invest him with some
distinguished privilege or honorary reward, to show how highly his
fellow citizens valued his courageous exertions.

"Nay, take it not thus, an it like your worships," said the smith, with
his usual blunt manner, "lest men say that valour must be rare in Perth
when they reward a man for fighting for the right of a forlorn widow.
I am sure there are many scores of stout burghers in the town who would
have done this day's dargue as well or better than I. For, in good
sooth, I ought to have cracked yonder fellow's head piece like an
earthen pipkin--ay, and would have done it, too, if it had not been
one which I myself tempered for Sir John Ramorny. But, an the Fair
City think my service of any worth, I will conceive it far more than
acquitted by any aid which you may afford from the common good to the
support of the widow Magdalen and her poor orphans."

"That may well be done," said Sir Patrick Charteris, "and yet leave the
Fair City rich enough to pay her debts to Henry Wynd, of which every man
of us is a better judge than him self, who is blinded with an unavailing
nicety, which men call modesty. And if the burgh be too poor for this,
the provost will bear his share. The Rover's golden angels have not all
taken flight yet."

The beakers were now circulated, under the name of a cup of comfort to
the widow, and anon flowed around once more to the happy memory of the
murdered Oliver, now so bravely avenged. In short, it was a feast so
jovial that all agreed nothing was wanting to render it perfect but the
presence of the bonnet maker himself, whose calamity had occasioned the
meeting, and who had usually furnished the standing jest at such festive
assemblies. Had his attendance been possible, it was drily observed by
Bailie Craigdallie, he would certainly have claimed the success of the
day, and vouched himself the avenger of his own murder.

At the sound of the vesper bell the company broke up, some of the graver
sort going to evening prayers, where, with half shut eyes and shining
countenances, they made a most orthodox and edifying portion of a Lenten
congregation; others to their own homes, to tell over the occurrences of
the fight and feast, for the information of the family circle; and some,
doubtless, to the licensed freedoms of some tavern, the door of which
Lent did not keep so close shut as the forms of the church required.
Henry returned to the wynd, warm with the good wine and the applause of
his fellow citizens, and fell asleep to dream of perfect happiness and
Catharine Glover.

We have said that, when the combat was decided, the spectators were
divided into two bodies. Of these, when the more respectable portion
attended the victor in joyous procession, much the greater number, or
what might be termed the rabble, waited upon the subdued and sentenced
Bonthron, who was travelling in a different direction, and for a very
opposite purpose. Whatever may be thought of the comparative attractions
of the house of mourning and of feasting under other circumstances,
there can be little doubt which will draw most visitors, when the
question is, whether we would witness miseries which we are not to
share, or festivities of which we are not to partake. Accordingly, the
tumbril in which the criminal was conveyed to execution was attended by
far the greater proportion of the inhabitants of Perth.

A friar was seated in the same car with the murderer, to whom he did
not hesitate to repeat, under the seal of confession, the same false
asseveration which he had made upon the place of combat, which charged
the Duke of Rothsay with being director of the ambuscade by which
the unfortunate bonnet maker had suffered. The same falsehood he
disseminated among the crowd, averring, with unblushing effrontery, to
those who were nighest to the car, that he owed his death to his having
been willing to execute the Duke of Rothsay's pleasure. For a time
he repeated these words, sullenly and doggedly, in the manner of one
reciting a task, or a liar who endeavours by reiteration to obtain
a credit for his words which he is internally sensible they do not
deserve. But when he lifted up his eyes, and beheld in the distance the
black outline of a gallows, at least forty feet high, with its ladder
and its fatal cord, rising against the horizon, he became suddenly
silent, and the friar could observe that he trembled very much.

"Be comforted, my son," said the good priest, "you have confessed
the truth, and received absolution. Your penitence will be accepted
according to your sincerity; and though you have been a man of bloody
hands and cruel heart, yet, by the church's prayers, you shall be in due
time assoilzied from the penal fires of purgatory."

These assurances were calculated rather to augment than to diminish
the terrors of the culprit, who was agitated by doubts whether the
mode suggested for his preservation from death would to a certainty be
effectual, and some suspicion whether there was really any purpose of
employing them in his favour, for he knew his master well enough to be
aware of the indifference with which he would sacrifice one who might on
some future occasion be a dangerous evidence against him.

His doom, however, was sealed, and there was no escaping from it. They
slowly approached the fatal tree, which was erected on a bank by the
river's side, about half a mile from the walls of the city--a site
chosen that the body of the wretch, which was to remain food for the
carrion crows, might be seen from a distance in every direction.
Here the priest delivered Bonthron to the executioner, by whom he was
assisted up the ladder, and to all appearance despatched according to
the usual forms of the law. He seemed to struggle for life for a
minute, but soon after hung still and inanimate. The executioner, after
remaining upon duty for more than half an hour, as if to permit the
last spark of life to be extinguished, announced to the admirers of such
spectacles that the irons for the permanent suspension of the carcass
not having been got ready, the concluding ceremony of disembowelling the
dead body and attaching it finally to the gibbet would be deferred till
the next morning at sunrise.

Notwithstanding the early hour which he had named, Master Smotherwell
had a reasonable attendance of rabble at the place of execution, to
see the final proceedings of justice with its victim. But great was the
astonishment and resentment of these amateurs to find that the dead body
had been removed from the gibbet. They were not, however, long at a loss
to guess the cause of its disappearance. Bonthron had been the follower
of a baron whose estates lay in Fife, and was himself a native of that
province. What was more natural than that some of the Fife men, whose
boats were frequently plying on the river, should have clandestinely
removed the body of their countryman from the place of public shame? The
crowd vented their rage against Smotherwell for not completing his
job on the preceding evening; and had not he and his assistant betaken
themselves to a boat, and escaped across the Tay, they would have run
some risk of being pelted to death. The event, however, was too much in
the spirit of the times to be much wondered at. Its real cause we shall
explain in the following chapter.



CHAPTER XXIV.

     Let gallows gape for dogs, let men go free.

     Henry V.


The incidents of a narrative of this kind must be adapted to each other,
as the wards of a key must tally accurately with those of the lock to
which it belongs. The reader, however gentle, will not hold himself
obliged to rest satisfied with the mere fact that such and such
occurrences took place, which is, generally speaking, all that in
ordinary life he can know of what is passing around him; but he is
desirous, while reading for amusement, of knowing the interior movements
occasioning the course of events. This is a legitimate and reasonable
curiosity; for every man hath a right to open and examine the mechanism
of his own watch, put together for his proper use, although he is not
permitted to pry into the interior of the timepiece which, for general
information, is displayed on the town steeple.

It would be, therefore, uncourteous to leave my readers under any doubt
concerning the agency which removed the assassin Bonthron from the
gallows--an event which some of the Perth citizens ascribed to the foul
fiend himself, while others were content to lay it upon the natural
dislike of Bonthron's countrymen of Fife to see him hanging on the river
side, as a spectacle dishonourable to their province.

About midnight succeeding the day when the execution had taken place,
and while the inhabitants of Perth were deeply buried in slumber, three
men muffled in their cloaks, and bearing a dark lantern, descended the
alleys of a garden which led from the house occupied by Sir John Ramorny
to the banks of the Tay, where a small boat lay moored to a landing
place, or little projecting pier. The wind howled in a low and
melancholy manner through the leafless shrubs and bushes; and a pale
moon "waded," as it is termed in Scotland, amongst drifting clouds,
which seemed to threaten rain. The three individuals entered the boat
with great precaution to escape observation. One of them was a tall,
powerful man; another short and bent downwards; the third middle sized,
and apparently younger than his companions, well made, and active. Thus
much the imperfect light could discover. They seated themselves in the
boat and unmoored it from the pier.

"We must let her drift with the current till we pass the bridge, where
the burghers still keep guard; and you know the proverb, 'A Perth
arrow hath a perfect flight,'" said the most youthful of the party, who
assumed the office of helmsman, and pushed the boat off from the pier;
whilst the others took the oars, which were muffled, and rowed with all
precaution till they attained the middle of the river; they then ceased
their efforts, lay upon their oars, and trusted to the steersman for
keeping her in mid channel.

In this manner they passed unnoticed or disregarded beneath the stately
Gothic arches of the old bridge, erected by the magnificent patronage
of Robert Bruce in 1329, and carried away by an inundation in 1621.
Although they heard the voices of a civic watch, which, since these
disturbances commenced, had been nightly maintained in that important
pass, no challenge was given; and when they were so far down the stream
as to be out of hearing of these guardians of the night, they began to
row, but still with precaution, and to converse, though in a low tone.

"You have found a new trade, comrade, since I left you," said one of the
rowers to the other. "I left you engaged in tending a sick knight, and I
find you employed in purloining a dead body from the gallows."

"A living body, so please your squirehood, Master Buncle, or else my
craft hath failed of its purpose."

"So I am told, Master Pottercarrier; but, saving your clerkship, unless
you tell me your trick, I will take leave to doubt of its success."

"A simple toy, Master Buncle, not likely to please a genius so acute as
that of your valiancie. Marry, thus it is. This suspension of the human
body, which the vulgar call hanging, operates death by apoplexia--that
is, the blood being unable to return to the heart by the compression
of the veins, it rushes to the brain, and the man dies. Also, and as an
additional cause of dissolution, the lungs no longer receive the needful
supply of the vital air, owing to the ligature of the cord around the
thorax; and hence the patient perishes."

"I understand that well enough. But how is such a revulsion of blood to
the brain to be prevented, sir mediciner?" said the third person, who
was no other than Ramorny's page, Eviot.

"Marry, then," replied Dwining, "hang me the patient up in such fashion
that the carotid arteries shall not be compressed, and the blood will
not determine to the brain, and apoplexia will not take place; and
again, if there be no ligature around the thorax, the lungs will be
supplied with air, whether the man be hanging in the middle heaven or
standing on the firm earth."

"All this I conceive," said Eviot; "but how these precautions can be
reconciled with the execution of the sentence of hanging is what my dull
brain cannot comprehend."

"Ah! good youth, thy valiancie hath spoiled a fair wit. Hadst thou
studied with me, thou shouldst have learned things more difficult than
this. But here is my trick. I get me certain bandages, made of the same
substance with your young valiancie's horse girths, having especial care
that they are of a kind which will not shrink on being strained, since
that would spoil my experiment. One loop of this substance is drawn
under each foot, and returns up either side of the leg to a cincture,
with which it is united; these cinctures are connected by divers straps
down the breast and back, in order to divide the weight. And there are
sundry other conveniences for easing the patient, but the chief is this:
the straps, or ligatures, are attached to a broad steel collar, curving
outwards, and having a hook or two, for the better security of the
halter, which the friendly executioner passes around that part of the
machine, instead of applying it to the bare throat of the patient.
Thus, when thrown off from the ladder, the sufferer will find himself
suspended, not by his neck, if it please you, but by the steel circle,
which supports the loops in which his feet are placed, and on which his
weight really rests, diminished a little by similar supports under each
arm. Thus, neither vein nor windpipe being compressed, the man will
breathe as free, and his blood, saving from fright and novelty of
situation, will flow as temperately as your valiancie's when you stand
up in your stirrups to view a field of battle."

"By my faith, a quaint and rare device!" quoth Buncle.

"Is it not?" pursued the leech, "and well worth being known to such
mounting spirits as your valiancies, since there is no knowing to what
height Sir John Ramorny's pupils may arrive; and if these be such that
it is necessary to descend from them by a rope, you may find my mode of
management more convenient than the common practice. Marry, but you must
be provided with a high collared doublet, to conceal the ring of steel,
and, above all, such a bonus socius as Smother well to adjust the
noose."

"Base poison vender," said Eviot, "men of our calling die on the field
of battle."

"I will save the lesson, however," replied Buncle, "in case of some
pinching occasion. But what a night the bloody hangdog Bonthron must
have had of it, dancing a pavise in mid air to the music of his own
shackles, as the night wind swings him that way and this!"

"It were an alms deed to leave him there," said Eviot; "for his descent
from the gibbet will but encourage him to new murders. He knows but two
elements--drunkenness and bloodshed."

"Perhaps Sir John Ramorny might have been of your opinion," said
Dwining; "but it would first have been necessary to cut out the rogue's
tongue, lest he had told strange tales from his airy height. And there
are other reasons that it concerns not your valiancies to know. In
truth, I myself have been generous in serving him, for the fellow is
built as strong as Edinburgh Castle, and his anatomy would have matched
any that is in the chirurgical hall of Padua. But tell me, Master
Buncle, what news bring you from the doughty Douglas?"

"They may tell that know," said Buncle. "I am the dull ass that bears
the message, and kens nought of its purport. The safer for myself,
perhaps. I carried letters from the Duke of Albany and from Sir John
Ramorny to the Douglas, and he looked black as a northern tempest when
he opened them. I brought them answers from the Earl, at which they
smiled like the sun when the harvest storm is closing over him. Go to
your ephemerides, leech, and conjure the meaning out of that."

"Methinks I can do so without much cost of wit," said the chirurgeon;
"but yonder I see in the pale moonlight our dead alive. Should he have
screamed out to any chance passenger, it were a curious interruption
to a night journey to be hailed from the top of such a gallows as that.
Hark, methinks I do hear his groans amid the whistling of the wind and
the creaking of the chains. So--fair and softly; make fast the boat
with the grappling, and get out the casket with my matters, we would be
better for a little fire, but the light might bring observation on
us. Come on, my men of valour, march warily, for we are bound for the
gallows foot. Follow with the lantern; I trust the ladder has been left.

     "Sing, three merry men, and three merry men,
     And three merry men are we,
     Thou on the land, and I on the sand,
     And Jack on the gallows tree."

As they advanced to the gibbet, they could plainly hear groans, though
uttered in a low tone. Dwining ventured to give a low cough once or
twice, by way of signal; but receiving no answer, "We had best make
haste," said he to his companions, "for our friend must be in extremis,
as he gives no answer to the signal which announces the arrival of help.
Come, let us to the gear. I will go up the ladder first and cut the
rope. Do you two follow, one after another, and take fast hold of the
body, so that he fall not when the halter is unloosed. Keep sure gripe,
for which the bandages will afford you convenience. Bethink you that,
though he plays an owl's part tonight, he hath no wings, and to fall out
of a halter may be as dangerous as to fall into one."

While he spoke thus with sneer and gibe, he ascended the ladder, and
having ascertained that the men at arms who followed him had the body in
their hold, he cut the rope, and then gave his aid to support the almost
lifeless form of the criminal.

By a skilful exertion of strength and address, the body of Bonthron was
placed safely on the ground; and the faint yet certain existence of life
having been ascertained, it was thence transported to the river side,
where, shrouded by the bank, the party might be best concealed from
observation, while the leech employed himself in the necessary means of
recalling animation, with which he had taken care to provide himself.

For this purpose he first freed the recovered person from his shackles,
which the executioner had left unlocked on purpose, and at the same time
disengaged the complicated envelopes and bandages by which he had been
suspended. It was some time ere Dwining's efforts succeeded; for, in
despite of the skill with which his machine had been constructed, the
straps designed to support the body had stretched so considerably as to
occasion the sense of suffocation becoming extremely overpowering. But
the address of the surgeon triumphed over all obstacles; and, after
sneezing and stretching himself, with one or two brief convulsions,
Bonthron gave decided proofs of reanimation, by arresting the hand
of the operator as it was in the act of dropping strong waters on his
breast and throat, and, directing the bottle which contained them to his
lips, he took, almost perforce, a considerable gulp of the contents.

"It is spiritual essence double distilled," said the astonished
operator, "and would blister the throat and burn the stomach of any
other man. But this extraordinary beast is so unlike all other human
creatures, that I should not wonder if it brought him to the complete
possession of his faculties."

Bonthron seemed to confirm this: he started with a strong convulsion,
sat up, stared around, and indicated some consciousness of existence.

"Wine--wine," were the first words which he articulated.

The leech gave him a draught of medicated wine, mixed with water. He
rejected it, under the dishonourable epithet of "kennel washings," and
again uttered the words, "Wine--wine."

"Nay, take it to thee, i' the devil's name," said the leech, "since none
but he can judge of thy constitution."

A draught, long and deep enough to have discomposed the intellects of
any other person, was found effectual in recalling those of Bonthron to
a more perfect state; though he betrayed no recollection of where he was
or what had befallen him, and in his brief and sullen manner asked why
he was brought to the river side at this time of night.

"Another frolic of the wild Prince, for drenching me as he did before.
Nails and blood, but I would--"

"Hold thy peace," interrupted Eviot, "and be thankful, I pray you, if
you have any thankfulness in you, that thy body is not crow's meat and
thy soul in a place where water is too scarce to duck thee."

"I begin to bethink me," said the ruffian; and raising the flask to his
mouth, which he saluted with a long and hearty kiss, he set the empty
bottle on the earth, dropped his head on his bosom, and seemed to muse
for the purpose of arranging his confused recollections.

"We can abide the issue of his meditations no longer," said Dwining; "he
will be better after he has slept. Up, sir! you have been riding the air
these some hours; try if the water be not an easier mode of conveyance.
Your valours must lend me a hand. I can no more lift this mass than I
could raise in my arms a slaughtered bull."

"Stand upright on thine own feet, Bonthron, now we have placed thee upon
them," said Eviot.

"I cannot," answered the patient. "Every drop of blood tingles in my
veins as if it had pinpoints, and my knees refuse to bear their burden.
What can be the meaning of all this? This is some practice of thine,
thou dog leech!"

"Ay--ay, so it is, honest Bonthron," said Dwining--"a practice thou
shalt thank me for when thou comest to learn it. In the mean while,
stretch down in the stern of that boat, and let me wrap this cloak about
thee."

Assisted into the boat accordingly, Bonthron was deposited there as
conveniently as things admitted of. He answered their attentions with
one or two snorts resembling the grunt of a boar who has got some food
particularly agreeable to him.

"And now, Buncle," said the chirurgeon, "your valiant squireship
knows your charge. You are to carry this lively cargo by the river to
Newburgh, where you are to dispose of him as you wot of; meantime,
here are his shackles and bandages, the marks of his confinement and
liberation. Bind them up together, and fling them into the deepest pool
you pass over; for, found in your possession, they might tell tales
against us all. This low, light breath of wind from the west will permit
you to use a sail as soon as the light comes in and you are tired of
rowing. Your other valiancie, Master Page Eviot, must be content to
return to Perth with me afoot, for here severs our fair company. Take
with thee the lantern, Buncle, for thou wilt require it more than we,
and see thou send me back my flasket."

As the pedestrians returned to Perth, Eviot expressed his belief that
Bonthron's understanding would never recover the shock which terror had
inflicted upon it, and which appeared to him to have disturbed all the
faculties of his mind, and in particular his memory.

"It is not so, an it please your pagehood," said the leech. "Bonthron's
intellect, such as it is, hath a solid character: it Will but vacillate
to and fro like a pendulum which hath been put in motion, and then will
rest in its proper point of gravity. Our memory is, of all our powers of
mind, that which is peculiarly liable to be suspended. Deep intoxication
or sound sleep alike destroy it, and yet it returns when the drunkard
becomes sober or the sleeper is awakened. Terror sometimes produces the
same effect. I knew at Paris a criminal condemned to die by the halter,
who suffered the sentence accordingly, showing no particular degree of
timidity upon the scaffold, and behaving and expressing himself as men
in the same condition are wont to do. Accident did for him what a little
ingenious practice hath done for our amiable friend from whom we but
now parted. He was cut down and given to his friends before life was
extinct, and I had the good fortune to restore him. But, though he
recovered in other particulars, he remembered but little of his trial
and sentence. Of his confession on the morning of his execution--he!
he! he! (in his usual chuckling manner)--he remembered him not a word.
Neither of leaving the prison, nor of his passage to the Greve, where
he suffered, nor of the devout speeches with which he--he! he!
he!--edified--he! he! he!--so many good Christians, nor of ascending the
fatal tree, nor of taking the fatal leap, had my revenant the slightest
recollection.' But here we reach the point where we must separate;
for it were unfit, should we meet any of the watch, that we be found
together, and it were also prudent that we enter the city by different
gates. My profession forms an excuse for my going and coming at all
times. Your valiant pagehood will make such explanation as may seem
