
"General Lambert said the same thing," George confessed, turning rather
red; "and I see now that I was wrong. But you must please remember that
I had never seen a court before, and I suppose I am scarce likely to
shine in one."

"I think possibly not, my good nephew," says the aunt, taking snuff.

"And what then?" asked George. "I never had ambition for that kind
of glory, and can make myself quite easy without it. When his Royal
Highness spoke to me--most kindly, as I own--my thought was, I shall
make a very bad soldier, and my brother would be a very good one. He has
a hundred good qualities for the profession, in which I am deficient;
and would have served a Commanding Officer far better than I ever could.
Say the Duke is in battle, and his horse is shot, as my poor chief's
was at home, would he not be better for a beast that had courage and
strength to bear him anywhere, than with one that could not carry his
weight?"

"Au fait. His Royal Highness's charger must be a strong one, my dear!"
says the old lady.

"Expende Hannibalem," mutters George, with a shrug. "Our Hannibal weighs
no trifle."

"I don't quite follow you, sir, and your Hannibal," the Baroness
remarks.

"When Mr. Wolfe and Mr. Lambert remonstrated with me as you have done,
madam," George rejoins, with a laugh, "I made this same defence which I
am making to you. I said I offered to the Prince the best soldier in the
family, and the two gentlemen allowed that my blunder at least had
some excuse. Who knows but that they may set me right with his Royal
Highness? The taste I have had of battles has shown me how little my
genius inclines that way. We saw the Scotch play which everybody is
talking about t'other night. And when the hero, young Norval, said how
he longed to follow to the field some warlike lord, I thought to myself,
'how like my Harry is to him, except that he doth not brag.' Harry is
pining now for a red coat, and if we don't mind, will take the shilling.
He has the map of Germany for ever under his eyes, and follows the King
of Prussia everywhere. He is not afraid of men or gods. As for me, I
love my books and quiet best, and to read about battles in Homer or
Lucan."

"Then what made a soldier of you at all, my dear? And why did you not
send Harry with Mr. Braddock, instead of going yourself?" asked Madame
de Bernstein.

"My mother loved her younger son the best," said George, darkly.
"Besides, with the enemy invading our country, it was my duty, as the
head of our family, to go on the campaign. Had I been a Scotchman twelve
years ago, I should have been a----"

"Hush, sir! or I shall be more angry than ever!" said the old lady, with
a perfectly pleased face.

George's explanation might thus appease Madame de Bernstein, an old
woman whose principles we fear were but loose: but to the loyal heart of
Sir Miles Warrington and his lady, the young man's conduct gave a severe
blow indeed! "I should have thought," her ladyship said, "from my sister
Esmond Warrington's letter, that my brother's widow was a woman of good
sense and judgment, and that she had educated her sons in a becoming
manner. But what, Sir Miles, what, my dear Thomas Claypool, can we think
of an education which has resulted so lamentably for both these young
men?"

"The elder seems to know a power of Latin, though, and speaks the
French and the German too. I heard him with the Hanover Envoy, at the
Baroness's rout," says Mr. Claypool. "The French he jabbered quite easy:
and when he was at a loss for the High Dutch, he and the Envoy began in
Latin, and talked away till all the room stared."

"It is not language, but principles, Thomas Claypool!" exclaims the
virtuous matron. "What must Mr. Warrington's principles be, when he
could reject an offer made him by his Prince? Can he speak the High
Dutch? So much the more ought he to have accepted his Royal Highness's
condescension, and made himself useful in the campaign! Look at our son,
look at Miles!"

"Hold up thy head, Miley, my boy!" says papa.

"I trust, Sir Miles, that, as a member of the House of Commons, as an
English gentleman, you will attend his Royal Highness's levee to-morrow,
and say, if such an offer had been made to us for that child, we would
have taken it, though our boy is but ten years of age."

"Faith, Miley, thou wouldst make a good little drummer or fifer!" says
papa. "Shouldst like to be a little soldier, Miley?"

"Anything, sir, anything! a Warrington ought to be ready at any moment
to have himself cut in pieces for his sovereign!" cries the matron,
pointing to the boy; who, as soon as he comprehended his mother's
proposal, protested against it by a loud roar, in the midst of which he
was removed by Screwby. In obedience to the conjugal orders, Sir Miles
went to his Royal Highness's levee the next day, and made a protest of
his love and duty, which the Prince deigned to accept, saying:

"Nobody ever supposed that Sir Miles Warrington would ever refuse any
place offered to him."

A compliment gracious indeed, and repeated everywhere by Lady
Warrington, as showing how implicitly the august family on the throne
could rely on the loyalty of the Warringtons.

Accordingly, when this worthy couple saw George, they received him with
a ghastly commiseration, such as our dear relatives or friends will
sometimes extend to us when we have done something fatal or clumsy in
life; when we have come badly out of our lawsuit; when we enter the room
just as the company has been abusing us; when our banker has broke; or
we for our sad part have had to figure in the commercial columns of the
London Gazette;--when, in a word, we are guilty of some notorious fault,
or blunder, or misfortune. Who does not know that face of pity? Whose
dear relations have not so deplored him, not dead, but living? Not
yours? Then, sir, if you have never been in scrapes; if you have never
sowed a handful of wild oats or two; if you have always been fortunate,
and good, and careful, and butter has never melted in your mouth, and
an imprudent word has never come out of it; if you have never sinned and
repented, and been a fool and been sorry--then, sir, you are a wiseacre
who won't waste your time over an idle novel, and it is not de te that
the fable is narrated at all.

Not that it was just on Sir Miles's part to turn upon George, and be
angry with his nephew for refusing the offer of promotion made by his
Royal Highness, for Sir Miles himself had agreed in George's view of
pursuing quite other than a military career, and it was in respect to
this plan of her son's that Madam Esmond had written from Virginia
to Sir Miles Warrington. George had announced to her his intention of
entering at the Temple, and qualifying himself for the magisterial
and civil duties which, in the course of nature, he would be called to
fulfil; nor could any one applaud his resolution more cordially than his
uncle Sir Miles, who introduced George to a lawyer of reputation, under
whose guidance we may fancy the young gentleman reading leisurely.
Madam Esmond from home signified her approval of her son's course, fully
agreeing with Sir Miles (to whom and his lady she begged to send her
grateful remembrances) that the British Constitution was the envy of
the world, and the proper object of every English gentleman's admiring
study. The chief point to which George's mother objected was the notion
that Mr. Warrington should have to sit down in the Temple dinner-ball,
and cut at a shoulder of mutton, and drink small-beer out of tin
pannikins, by the side of rough students who wore gowns like the
parish-clerk. George's loyal younger brother shared too this repugnance.
Anything was good enough for him, Harry said; he was a younger son, and
prepared to rough it; but George, in a gown, and dining in a mess with
three nobody's sons off dirty pewter platters! Harry never could relish
this condescension on his brother's part, or fancy George in his proper
place at any except the high table; and was sorry that a plan Madam
Esmond hinted at in her letters was not feasible--viz., that an
application should be made to the Master of the Temple, who should be
informed that Mr. George Warrington was a gentleman of most noble birth,
and of great property in America, and ought only to sit with the very
best company in the Hall. Rather to Harry's discomfiture, when he
communicated his own and his mother's ideas to the gentlemen's new
coffee-house friend, Mr. Spencer, Mr. Spencer received the proposal with
roars of laughter; and I cannot learn, from the Warrington papers, that
any application was made to the Master of the Temple on this subject.
Besides his literary and historical pursuits, which were those he
most especially loved, Mr. Warrington studied the laws of his country,
attended the courts at Westminster, where he heard a Henley, a Pratt,
a Murray, and those other great famous schools of eloquence and
patriotism, the two houses of parliament.

Gradually Mr. Warrington made acquaintance with some of the members of
the House and the Bar; who, when they came to know him, spoke of him
as a young gentleman of good parts and good breeding, and in terms so
generally complimentary, that his good uncle's heart relented towards
him, and Dora and Flora began once more to smile upon him. This
reconciliation dated from the time when his Royal Highness the Duke,
after having been defeated by the French, in the affair of Hastenbeck,
concluded the famous capitulation with the French, which his Majesty
George II. refused to ratify. His Royal Highness, as 'tis well known,
flung up his commissions after this disgrace, laid down his commander's
baton--which, it must be confessed, he had not wielded with much luck or
dexterity--and never again appeared at the head of armies or in public
life. The stout warrior would not allow a word of complaint against his
father and sovereign to escape his lips; but, as he retired with his
wounded honour, and as he would have no interest or authority more, nor
any places to give, it may be supposed that Sir Miles Warrington's anger
against his nephew diminished as his respect for his Royal Highness
diminished.

As our two gentlemen were walking in St. James's Park, one day, with
their friend Mr. Lambert, they met his Royal Highness in plain clothes
and without a star, and made profound bows to the Prince, who was
pleased to stop and speak to them.

He asked Mr. Lambert how he liked my Lord Ligonier, his new chief at
the Horse Guards, and the new duties there in which he was engaged? And,
recognising the young men, with that fidelity of memory for which his
Royal race hath ever been remarkable, he said to Mr. Warrington:

"You did well, sir, not to come with me when I asked you in the spring."

"I was sorry, then, sir," Mr. Warrington said, making a very low
reverence, "but I am more sorry now."

On which the Prince said, "Thank you, sir," and, touching his hat,
walked away. And the circumstances of this interview, and the discourse
which passed at it, being related to Mrs. Esmond Warrington in a letter
from her younger son, created so deep an impression in that lady's mind,
that she narrated the anecdote many hundreds of times until all her
friends and acquaintances knew and, perhaps, were tired of it.

Our gentlemen went through the Park, and so towards the Strand, where
they had business. And Mr. Lambert, pointing to the lion on the top of
the Earl of Northumberland's house at Charing Cross, says:

"Harry Warrington! your brother is like yonder lion."

"Because he is as brave as one," says Harry.

"Because I respect virgins!" says George, laughing.

"Because you are a stupid lion. Because you turn your back on the East,
and absolutely salute the setting sun. Why, child, what earthly good can
you get by being civil to a man in hopeless dudgeon and disgrace? Your
uncle will be more angry with you than ever--and so am I, sir." But Mr.
Lambert was always laughing in his waggish way, and, indeed, he did not
look the least angry.




CHAPTER LXII. Arma Virumque


Indeed, if Harry Warrington had a passion for military pursuits and
studies, there was enough of war stirring in Europe, and enough talk in
all societies which he frequented in London, to excite and inflame him.
Though our own gracious Prince of the house of Hanover had been beaten,
the Protestant Hero, the King of Prussia, was filling the world with
his glory, and winning those astonishing victories in which I deem it
fortunate on my own account that my poor Harry took no part; for
then his veracious biographer would have had to narrate battles the
description whereof has been undertaken by another pen. I am glad, I
say, that Harry Warrington was not at Rossbach on that famous Gunpowder
Fete-day, on the 5th of November, in the year 1757; nor at that
tremendous slaughtering-match of Leuthen, which the Prussian king played
a month afterwards; for these prodigious actions will presently be
narrated in other volumes, which I and all the world are eager to
behold. Would you have this history compete with yonder book? Could
my jaunty, yellow park-phaeton run counter to that grim chariot of
thundering war? Could my meek little jog-trot Pegasus meet the shock of
yon steed of foaming bit and flaming nostril? Dear, kind reader (with
whom I love to talk from time to time, stepping down from the stage
where our figures are performing, attired in the habits and using the
parlance of past ages),--my kind, patient reader! it is a mercy for both
of us that Harry Warrington did not follow the King of the Borussians,
as he was minded to do, for then I should have had to describe battles
which Carlyle is going to paint; and I don't wish you should make odious
comparisons between me and that master.

Harry Warrington not only did not join the King of the Borussians, but
he pined and chafed at not going. He led a sulky useless life, that is
the fact. He dangled about the military coffee-houses. He did not care
for reading anything save a newspaper. His turn was not literary. He
even thought novels were stupid; and, as for the ladies crying their
eyes out over Mr. Richardson, he could not imagine how they could be
moved by any such nonsense. He used to laugh in a very hearty jolly
way, but a little late, and some time after the joke was over. Pray, why
should all gentlemen have a literary turn? And do we like some of our
friends the worse because they never turned a couplet in their lives?
Ruined, perforce idle, dependent on his brother for supplies, if he read
a book falling asleep over it, with no fitting work for his great strong
hands to do--how lucky it is that he did not get into more trouble! Why,
in the case of Achilles himself, when he was sent by his mamma to the
court of King What-d'ye-call-'em in order to be put out of harm's reach,
what happened to him amongst a parcel of women with whom he was made to
idle his life away? And how did Pyrrhus come into the world? A powerful
mettlesome young Achilles ought not to be leading-stringed by women too
much; is out of his place dawdling by distaffs or handing coffee-cups;
and when he is not fighting, depend on it, is likely to fall into much
worse mischief.

Those soft-hearted women, the two elder ladies of the Lambert family,
with whom he mainly consorted, had an untiring pity and kindness for
Harry, such as women only--and only a few of those--can give. If a man
is in grief, who cheers him; in trouble, who consoles him; in wrath,
who soothes him; in joy, who makes him doubly happy; in prosperity, who
rejoices; in disgrace, who backs him against the world, and dresses
with gentle unguents and warm poultices the rankling wounds made by the
slings and arrows of outrageous Fortune? Who but woman, if you please?
You who are ill and sore from the buffets of Fate, have you one or two
of these sweet physicians? Return thanks to the gods that they have
left you so much of consolation. What gentleman is not more or less a
Prometheus? Who has not his rock (ai, ai), his chain (ea, ea), and his
liver in a deuce of a condition? But the sea-nymphs come--the gentle,
the sympathising; they kiss our writhing feet; they moisten our parched
lips with their tears; they do their blessed best to console us Titans;
they don't turn their backs upon us after our overthrow.

Now Theo and her mother were full of pity for Harry; but Hetty's heart
was rather hard and seemingly savage towards him. She chafed that
his position was not more glorious; she was angry that he was still
dependent and idle. The whole world was in arms, and could he not carry
a musket? It was harvest-time, and hundreds of thousands of reapers were
out with their flashing sickles; could he not use his, and cut down his
sheaf or two of glory?

"Why, how savage the little thing is with him!" says papa, after a scene
in which, according to her wont, Miss Hetty had been firing little
shots into that quivering target which came and set itself up in Mrs.
Lambert's drawing-room every day.

"Her conduct is perfectly abominable!" cries mamma; "she deserves to be
whipped, and sent to bed."

"Perhaps, mother, it is because she likes him better than any of us do,"
says Theo, "and it is for his sake that Hetty is angry. If I were fond
of--of some one, I should like to be able to admire and respect him
always--to think everything he did right--and my gentleman better than
all the gentlemen in the world."

"The truth is, my dear," answers Mrs. Lambert, "that your father is so
much better than all the world, he has spoiled us. Did you ever see any
one to compare with him?"

"Very few, indeed," owns Theo, with a blush.

"Very few. Who is so good-tempered?"

"I think nobody, mamma," Theo acknowledges.

"Or so brave?"

"Why, I dare say Mr. Wolfe, or Harry, or Mr. George, are very brave."

"Or so learned and witty?"

"I am sure Mr. George seems very learned, and witty too, in his way,"
says Theo; "and his manners are very fine--you own they are. Madame de
Bernstein says they are, and she hath seen the world. Indeed, Mr. George
has a lofty way with him, which I don't see in other people; and, in
reading books, I find he chooses the fine noble things always, and loves
them in spite of all his satire. He certainly is of a satirical turn,
but then he is only bitter against mean things and people. No gentleman
hath a more tender heart I am sure; and but yesterday, after he had been
talking so bitterly as you said, I happened to look out of window, and
saw him stop and treat a whole crowd of little children to apples at the
stall at the corner. And the day before yesterday, when he was coming
and brought me the Moliere, he stopped and gave money to a beggar, and
how charmingly, sure, he reads the French! I agree with him though about
Tartuffe, though 'tis so wonderfully clever and lively, that a mere
villain and hypocrite is a figure too mean to be made the chief of a
great piece. Iago, Mr. George said, is near as great a villain; but then
he is not the first character of the tragedy, which is Othello, with
his noble weakness. But what fine ladies and gentlemen Moliere
represents--so Mr. George thinks--and--but oh, I don't dare to repeat
the verses after him."

"But you know them by heart, my dear?" asks Mrs. Lambert.

And Theo replies, "Oh yes, mamma! I know them by... Nonsense!"

I here fancy osculations, palpitations, and exit Miss Theo, blushing
like a rose. Why had she stopped in her sentence? Because mamma was
looking at her so oddly. And why was mamma looking at her so oddly? And
why had she looked after Mr. George when he was going away, and looked
for him when he was coming? Ah, and why do cheeks blush, and why do
roses bloom? Old Time is still a-flying. Old spring and bud time; old
summer and bloom time; old autumn and seed time; old winter time, when
the cracking, shivering old tree-tops are bald or covered with snow.

A few minutes after George arrived, Theo would come downstairs with
a fluttering heart, may be, and a sweet nosegay in her cheeks, just
culled, as it were, fresh in his honour; and I suppose she must have
been constantly at that window which commanded the street, and whence
she could espy his generosity to the sweep, or his purchases from the
apple-woman. But if it was Harry who knocked, she remained in her own
apartment with her work or her books, sending her sister to receive
the young gentleman, or her brothers when the elder was at home from
college, or Doctor Crusius from the Chartreux gave the younger leave
to go home. And what good eyes Theo must have had--and often in the
evening, too--to note the difference between Harry's yellow hair and
George's dark locks--and between their figures, though they were so like
that people continually were mistaking one for the other brother. Now it
is certain that Theo never mistook one or t'other; and that Hetty, for
her part, was not in the least excited, or rude, or pert, when she found
the black-haired gentleman in her mother's drawing-room.

Our friends could come when they liked to Mr. Lambert's house, and stay
as long as they chose; and, one day, he of the golden locks was sitting
on a couch there, in an attitude of more than ordinary idleness and
despondency, when who should come down to him but Miss Hetty? I say it
was a most curious thing (though the girls would have gone to the rack
rather than own any collusion), that when Harry called, Hetty appeared;
when George arrived, Theo somehow came; and so, according to the usual
dispensation, it was Miss Lambert, junior, who now arrived to entertain
the younger Virginian.

After usual ceremonies and compliments we may imagine that the lady says
to the gentleman:

"And pray, sir, what makes your honour look so glum this morning?"

"Ah, Hetty!" says he, "I have nothing else to do but to look glum. I
remember when we were boys--and I a rare idle one, you may be sure--I
would always be asking my tutor for a holiday, which I would pass very
likely swinging on a gate, or making ducks and drakes over the pond, and
those do-nothing days were always the most melancholy. What have I got
to do now from morning till night?"

"Breakfast, walk--dinner, walk--tea, supper, I suppose; and a pipe of
your Virginia," says Miss Hetty, tossing her head.

"I tell you what, when I went back with Charley to the Chartreux,
t'other night, I had a mind to say to the master, 'Teach me, sir. Here's
a boy knows a deal more Latin and Greek, at thirteen, than I do, who
am ten years older. I have nothing to do from morning till night, and I
might as well go to my books again, and see if I can repair my idleness
as a boy.' Why do you laugh, Hetty?"

"I laugh to fancy you at the head of a class, and called up by the
master!" cries Hetty.

"I shouldn't be at the head of the class," Harry says, humbly. "George
might be at the head of any class, but I am not a bookman, you see; and
when I was young neglected myself, and was very idle. We would not let
our tutors cane us much at home, but, if we had, it might have done me
good."

Hetty drubbed with her little foot, and looked at the young man sitting
before her--strong, idle, melancholy.

"Upon my word, it might do you good now!" she was minded to say. "What
does Tom say about the caning at school? Does his account of it set you
longing for it, pray?" she asked.

"His account of his school," Harry answered simply, "makes me see that I
have been idle when I ought to have worked, and that I have not a genius
for books, and for what am I good? Only to spend my patrimony when I
come abroad, or to lounge at coffee-houses or racecourses, or to gallop
behind dogs when I am at home. I am good for nothing, I am."

"What, such a great, brave, strong fellow as you good for nothing?"
cries Het. "I would not confess as much to any woman, if I were twice as
good for nothing!"

"What am I to do? I ask for leave to go into the army, and Madam Esmond
does not answer me. 'Tis the only thing I am fit for. I have no money to
buy. Having spent all my own, and so much of my brother's, I cannot and
won't ask for more. If my mother would but send me to the army, you know
I would jump to go."

"Eh! A gentleman of spirit does not want a woman to buckle his sword on
for him or to clean his firelock! What was that our papa told us of the
young gentleman at court yesterday?--Sir John Armytage----"

"Sir John Armytage? I used to know him when I frequented White's and
the club-houses--a fine, noble young gentleman, of a great estate in the
North."

"And engaged to be married to a famous beauty, too--Miss Howe, my Lord
Howe's sister--but that, I suppose, is not an obstacle to gentlemen?"

"An obstacle to what?" asks the gentleman.

"An obstacle to glory!" says Miss Hetty. "I think no woman of spirit
would say 'Stay!' though she adored her lover ever so much, when his
country said 'Go!' Sir John had volunteered for the expedition which is
preparing, and being at court yesterday his Majesty asked him when he
would be ready to go? 'Tomorrow, please your Majesty,' replies Sir John,
and the king said, that was a soldier's answer. My father himself is
longing to go, though he has mamma and all us brats at home. Oh dear,
oh dear! Why wasn't I a man myself? Both my brothers are for the Church;
but, as for me, I know I should have made a famous little soldier!" And,
so speaking, this young person strode about the room, wearing a most
courageous military aspect, and looking as bold as Joan of Arc.

Harry beheld her with a tender admiration. "I think," says he, "I would
hardly like to see a musket on that little shoulder, nor a wound on that
pretty face, Hetty."

"Wounds! who fears wounds?" cries the little maid. "Muskets? If I could
carry one, I would use it. You men fancy that we women are good for
nothing but to make puddings or stitch samplers. Why wasn't I a man, I
say? George was reading to us yesterday out of Tasso--look, here it is,
and I thought the verses applied to me. See! Here is the book, with the
mark in it where we left off."

"With the mark in it?" says Harry dutifully.

"Yes! it is about a woman who is disappointed because--because her
brother does not go to war, and she says of herself--

    "'Alas! why did not Heaven these members frail
      With lively force and vigour strengthen, so
      That I this silken gown...'"

"Silken gown?" says downright Harry, with a look of inquiry.

"Well, sir, I know 'tis but Calimanco;--but so it is in the book--

       "'... this silken gown and slender veil
     Might for a breastplate and a helm forgo;
     Then should not heat, nor cold, nor rain, nor hail,
     Nor storms that fall, nor blust'ring winds that blow,
        Withhold me; but I would, both day and night,
        In pitched field or private combat, fight--'

"Fight? Yes, that I would! Why are both my brothers to be parsons, I
say? One of my papa's children ought to be a soldier!"

Harry laughed, a very gentle, kind laugh, as he looked at her. He felt
that he would not like much to hit such a tender little warrior as that.

"Why," says he, holding a finger out, "I think here is a finger nigh as
big as your arm. How would you stand up before a great, strong man? I
should like to see a man try and injure you, though; I should just like
to see him! You little, delicate, tender creature! Do you suppose any
scoundrel would dare to do anything unkind to you?" And, excited by this
flight of his imagination, Harry fell to walking up and down the room,
too, chafing at the idea of any rogue of a Frenchman daring to be rude
to Miss Hester Lambert.

It was a belief in this silent courage of his which subjugated Hetty,
and this quality which she supposed him to possess, which caused her
specially to admire him. Miss Hetty was no more bold, in reality, than
Madam Erminia, whose speech she had been reading out of the book, and
about whom Mr. Harry Warrington never heard one single word. He may have
been in the room when brother George was reading his poetry out to the
ladies, but his thoughts were busy with his own affairs, and he was
entirely bewildered with your Clotildas and Erminias, and giants, and
enchanters, and nonsense. No, Miss Hetty, I say and believe, had nothing
of the virago in her composition; else, no doubt, she would have taken
a fancy to a soft young fellow with a literary turn, or a genius for
playing the flute, according to the laws of contrast and nature provided
in those cases; and who has not heard how great, strong men have an
affinity for frail, tender little women; how tender little women are
attracted by great, honest, strong men; and how your burly heroes and
champions of war are constantly henpecked? If Mr. Harry Warrington falls
in love with a woman who is like Miss Lambert in disposition, and if he
marries her--without being conjurers, I think we may all see what the
end will be.

So, whilst Hetty was firing her little sarcasms into Harry, he for a
while scarcely felt that they were stinging him, and let her shoot on
without so much as taking the trouble to shake the little arrows out of
his hide. Did she mean by her sneers and innuendoes to rouse him into
action? He was too magnanimous to understand such small hints. Did she
mean to shame him by saying that she, a weak woman, would don the casque
and breastplate? The simple fellow either melted at the idea of her
being in danger, or at the notion of her fighting fell a-laughing.

"Pray what is the use of having a strong hand if you only use it to hold
a skein of silk for my mother?" cries Miss Hester; "and what is the good
of being ever so strong in a drawing-room? Nobody wants you to throw
anybody out of window, Harry! A strong man, indeed! I suppose there's a
stronger at Bartholomew Fair. James Wolfe is not a strong man. He seems
quite weakly and ill. When he was here last he was coughing the whole
time, and as pale as if he had seen a ghost."

"I never could understand why a man should be frightened at a ghost,"
says Harry.

"Pray, have you seen one, sir?" asks the pert young lady.

"No. I thought I did once at home--when we were boys; but it was only
Nathan in his night-shirt; but I wasn't frightened when I thought he
was a ghost. I believe there's no such things. Our nurses tell a pack of
lies about 'em," says Harry, gravely. "George was a little frightened;
but then he's----" Here he paused.

"Then George is what?" asked Hetty.

"George is different from me, that's all. Our mother's a bold woman as
ever you saw, but she screams at seeing a mouse--always does--can't help
it. It's her nature. So, you see, perhaps my brother can't bear ghosts.
I don't mind 'em."

"George always says you would have made a better soldier than he."

"So I think I should, if I had been allowed to try. But he can do a
thousand things better than me, or anybody else in the world. Why didn't
he let me volunteer on Braddock's expedition? I might have got knocked
on the head, and then I should have been pretty much as useful as I
am now, and then I shouldn't have ruined myself, and brought people to
point at me and say that I had disgraced the name of Warrington. Why
mayn't I go on this expedition, and volunteer like Sir John Armytage?
Oh, Hetty! I'm a miserable fellow--that's what I am," and the miserable
fellow paced the room at double quick time. "I wish I had never come to
Europe," he groaned out.

"What a compliment to us! Thank you, Harry!" But presently, on an
appealing look from the gentleman, she added, "Are you--are you thinking
of going home?"

"And have all Virginia jeering at me! There's not a gentleman there
that wouldn't, except one, and him my mother doesn't like. I should
be ashamed to go home now, I think. You don't know my mother, Hetty. I
ain't afraid of most things; but, somehow, I am of her. What shall I say
to her, when she says, 'Harry, where's your patrimony?' 'Spent, mother,'
I shall have to say. 'What have you done with it?' 'Wasted it, mother,
and went to prison after.' 'Who took you out of prison?' 'Brother
George, ma'am, he took me out of prison; and now I'm come back,
having done no good for myself, with no profession, no prospects, no
nothing--only to look after negroes, and be scolded at home; or to go to
sleep at sermons; or to play at cards, and drink, and fight cocks at the
taverns about.' How can I look the gentlemen of the country in the face?
I'm ashamed to go home in this way, I say. I must and will do something!
What shall I do, Hetty? Ah! what shall I do?"

"Do? What did Mr. Wolfe do at Louisbourg? Ill as he was, and in love as
we knew him to be, he didn't stop to be nursed by his mother, Harry, or
to dawdle with his sweetheart. He went on the King's service, and hath
come back covered with honour. If there is to be another great campaign
in America, papa says he is sure of a great command."

"I wish he would take me with him, and that a ball would knock me on the
head and finish me," groaned Harry. "You speak to me, Hetty, as though
it were my fault that I am not in the army, when you know I would
give--give, forsooth, what have I to give?--yes! my life to go on
service!"

"Life indeed!" says Miss Hetty, with a shrug of her shoulders.

"You don't seem to think that of much value, Hetty," remarked Harry,
sadly. "No more it is--to anybody. I'm a poor useless fellow. I'm not
even free to throw it away as I would like, being under orders here and
at home."

"Orders indeed! Why under orders?" cries Miss Hetty. "Aren't you tall
enough, and old enough, to act for yourself, and must you have George
for a master here, and your mother for a schoolmistress at home? If
I were a man, I would do something famous before I was two-and-twenty
years old, that I would! I would have the world speak of me. I wouldn't
dawdle at apron-strings. I wouldn't curse my fortune--I'd make it. I vow
and declare I would!"

Now, for the first time, Harry began to wince at the words of his young
lecturer.

"No negro on our estate is more a slave than I am, Hetty," he said,
turning very red as he addressed her; "but then, Miss Lambert, we don't
reproach the poor fellow for not being free. That isn't generous. At
least, that isn't the way I understand honour. Perhaps with women it's
different, or I may be wrong, and have no right to be hurt at a young
girl telling me what my faults are. Perhaps my faults are not my
faults--only my cursed luck. You have been talking ever so long about
this gentleman volunteering, and that man winning glory, and cracking up
their courage as if I had none of my own. I suppose, for the matter of
that, I'm as well provided as other gentlemen. I don't brag but I'm not
afraid of Mr. Wolfe, nor of Sir John Armytage, nor of anybody else that
ever I saw. How can I buy a commission when I've spent my last shilling,
or ask my brother for more who has already halved with me? A gentleman
of my rank can't go a common soldier--else, by Jupiter, I would! And if
a ball finished me, I suppose Miss Hetty Lambert wouldn't be very sorry.
It isn't kind, Hetty--I didn't think it of you."

"What is it I have said?" asks the young lady. "I have only said Sir
John Armytage has volunteered, and Mr. Wolfe has covered himself with
honour, and you begin to scold me! How can I help it if Mr. Wolfe is
brave and famous? Is that any reason you should be angry, pray?"

"I didn't say angry," said Harry, gravely. "I said I was hurt."

"Oh, indeed! I thought such a little creature as I am couldn't hurt
anybody! I'm sure 'tis mighty complimentary to me to say that a young
lady whose arm is no bigger than your little finger can hurt such a
great strong man as you!"

"I scarce thought you would try, Hetty," the young man said. You see,
I'm not used to this kind of welcome in this house."

"What is it, my poor boy?" asks kind Mrs. Lambert, looking in at
the door at this juncture, and finding the youth with a very woeworn
countenance.

"Oh, we have heard the story before, mamma!" says Hetty, hurriedly.
"Harry is making his old complaint of having nothing to do. And he is
quite unhappy; and he is telling us so over and over again, that's all."

"So are you hungry over and over again, my dear! Is that a reason why
your papa and I should leave off giving you dinner?" cries mamma, with
some emotion. "Will you stay and have ours, Harry? 'Tis just three
o'clock!" Harry agreed to stay, after a few faint negations. "My husband
dines abroad. We are but three women, so you will have a dull dinner,"
remarks Mrs. Lambert.

"We shall have a gentleman to enliven us, mamma, I dare say!" says Madam
Pert, and then looked in mamma's face with that admirable gaze of
blank innocence which Madam Pert knows how to assume when she has been
specially and successfully wicked.

When the dinner appeared. Miss Hetty came downstairs, and was
exceedingly chatty, lively, and entertaining. Theo did not know that any
little difference had occurred (such, alas, my Christian friends,
will happen in the most charming families), did not know, I say, that
anything had happened until Hetty's uncommon sprightliness and
gaiety roused her suspicions. Hetty would start a dozen subjects of
conversation--the King of Prussia, and the news from America; the last
masquerade, and the highwayman shot near Barnet; and when her sister,
admiring this volubility, inquired the reason of it, with her eyes,--

"Oh, my dear, you need not nod and wink at me!" cries Hetty. "Mamma
asked Harry on purpose to enliven us, and I am talking until he begins,
just like the fiddles at the playhouse, you know, Theo! First the
fiddles. Then the play. Pray begin, Harry!"

"Hester!" cries mamma.

"I merely asked Harry to entertain us. You said yourself, mother, that
we were only three women, and the dinner would be dull for a gentleman;
unless, indeed, he chose to be very lively."

"I'm not that on most days--and, Heaven knows, on this day less than
most," says poor Harry.

"Why on this day less than another? Tuesday is as good a day to be
lively as Wednesday. The only day when we mustn't be lively is Sunday.
Well, you know it is, ma'am! We mustn't sing, nor dance, nor do anything
on Sunday."

And in this naughty way the young woman went on for the rest of the
evening, and was complimented by her mother and sister when poor Harry
took his leave. He was not ready of wit, and could not fling back the
taunts which Hetty cast against him. Nay, had he been able to retort, he
would have been silent. He was too generous to engage in that small war,
and chose to take all Hester's sarcasms without an attempt to parry
or evade them. Very likely the young lady watched and admired that
magnanimity, while she tried it so cruelly. And after one of her fits of
ill-behaviour, her parents and friends had not the least need to scold
her, as she candidly told them, because she suffered a great deal more
than they would ever have had her, and her conscience punished her a
great deal more severely than her kind elders would have thought of
doing. I suppose she lies awake all that night, and tosses and tumbles
in her bed. I suppose she wets her pillow with tears, and should not
mind about her sobbing: unless it kept her sister awake; unless she was
unwell the next day, and the doctor had to be fetched; unless the whole
family is to be put to discomfort; mother to choke over her dinner in
flurry and indignation; father to eat his roast-beef in silence and with
bitter sauce; everybody to look at the door each time it opens, with a
vague hope that Harry is coming in. If Harry does not come, why at least
does not George come? thinks Miss Theo.

Some time in the course of the evening comes a billet from George
Warrington, with a large nosegay of lilacs, per Mr. Gumbo. "'I send my
best duty and regards to Mrs. Lambert and the ladies,'" George says,
"'and humbly beg to present to Miss Theo this nosegay of lilacs, which
she says she loves in the early spring. You must not thank me for them,
please, but the gardener of Bedford House, with whom I have made great
friends by presenting him with some dried specimens of a Virginian plant
which some ladies don't think as fragrant as lilacs.

"'I have been in the garden almost all the day. It is alive with
sunshine and spring; and I have been composing two scenes of you know
what, and polishing the verses which the Page sings in the fourth act,
under Sybilla's window, which she cannot hear, poor thing, because she
has just had her head off.'"

"Provoking! I wish he would not always sneer and laugh! The verses are
beautiful," says Theo.

"You really think so, my dear? How very odd!" remarks papa.

Little Het looks up from her dismal corner with a faint smile of humour.
Theo's secret is a secret for nobody in the house, it seems. Can any
young people guess what it is? Our young lady continues to read:

"'Spencer has asked the famous Mr. Johnson to breakfast to-morrow,
who condescends to hear the play, and who won't, I hope, be too angry
because my heroine undergoes the fate of his in Irene. I have heard he
came up to London himself as a young man with only his tragedy in his
wallet. Shall I ever be able to get mine played? Can you fancy the
catcall music beginning, and the pit hissing at that perilous part of
the fourth act, where my executioner comes out from the closet with his
great sword, at the awful moment when he is called upon to amputate?
They say Mr. Fielding, when the pit hissed at a part of one of his
pieces, about which Mr. Garrick had warned him, said, 'Hang them, they
have found it out, have they?' and finished his punch in tranquillity.
I suppose his wife was not in the boxes. There are some women to whom I
would be very unwilling to give pain, and there are some to whom I would
give the best I have.'"

"Whom can he mean? The letter is to you, my dear. I protest he is making
love to your mother before my face!" cries papa to Hetty, who only gives
a little sigh, puts her hand in her father's hand, and then withdraws
it.

"'To whom I would give the best I have. To-day it is only a bunch of
lilacs. To-morrow it may be what?--a branch of rue--a sprig of bays,
perhaps--anything, so it be my best and my all.

"'I have had a fine long day, and all to myself. What do you think of
Harry playing truant?'" (Here we may imagine, what they call in France,
or what they used to call, when men dared to speak or citizens to hear,
sensation dans l'auditoire.)

"'I suppose Carpezan wearied the poor fellow's existence out. Certain it
is he has been miserable for weeks past; and a change of air and scene
may do him good. This morning, quite early, he came to my room, and told
me he had taken a seat in the Portsmouth machine, and proposed to go to
the Isle of Wight, to the army there.'"

The army! Hetty looks very pale at this announcement, and her mother
continues:

"'And a little portion of it, namely, the thirty-second regiment, is
commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Richmond Webb--the nephew of the famous
old General under whom my grandfather Esmond served in the great wars of
Marlborough. Mr. Webb met us at our uncle's, accosting us very politely,
and giving us an invitation to visit him at his regiment. Let my poor
brother go and listen to his darling music of fife and drum! He bade me
tell the ladies that they should hear from him. I kiss their hands, and
go to dress for dinner, at the Star and Garter, in Pall Mall. We are to
have Mr. Soame Jenyns, Mr. Cambridge, Mr. Walpole, possibly, if he is
not too fine to dine in a tavern; a young Irishman, a Mr. Bourke, who
they say is a wonder of eloquence and learning--in fine, all the wits of
Mr. Dodsley's shop. Quick, Gumbo, a coach, and my French grey suit! And
if gentlemen ask me, 'Who gave you that sprig of lilac you wear on your
heart-side?' I shall call a bumper, and give Lilac for a toast.'"

I fear there is no more rest for Hetty on this night than on the
previous one, when she had behaved so mutinously to poor Harry
Warrington. Some secret resolution must have inspired that gentleman,
for, after leaving Mr. Lambert's table, he paced the streets for
a while, and appeared at a late hour in the evening at Madame de
Bernstein's house in Clarges Street. Her ladyship's health had been
somewhat ailing of late, so that even her favourite routs were denied
her, and she was sitting over a quiet game of ecarte, with a divine of
whom our last news were from a lock-up house hard by that in which Harry
Warrington had been himself confined. George, at Harry's request, had
paid the little debt under which Mr. Sampson had suffered temporarily.
He had been at his living for a year. He may have paid and contracted
ever so many debts, have been in and out of jail many times since we saw
him. For some time past he had been back in London stout and hearty
as usual, and ready for any invitation to cards or claret. Madame de
Bernstein did not care to have her game interrupted by her nephew, whose
conversation had little interest now for the fickle old woman. Next to
the very young, I suppose the very old are the most selfish. Alas, the
heart hardens as the blood ceases to run. The cold snow strikes down
from the head, and checks the glow of feeling. Who wants to survive
into old age after abdicating all his faculties one by one, and be sans
teeth, sans eyes, sans memory, sans hope, sans sympathy? How fared it
with those patriarchs of old who lived for their nine centuries, and
when were life's conditions so changed that, after threescore years and
ten, it became but a vexation and a burden?

Getting no reply but Yes and No to his brief speeches, poor Harry sat a
while on a couch opposite his aunt, who shrugged her shoulders, had her
back to her nephew, and continued her game with the chaplain. Sampson
sat opposite Mr. Warrington, and could see that something disturbed him.
His face was very pale, and his countenance disturbed and full of gloom.
"Something has happened to him, ma'am," he whispered to the Baroness.

"Bah!" She shrugged her shoulders again, and continued to deal her
cards. "What is the matter with you, sir," she at last said, at a pause
in the game, "that you have such a dismal countenance? Chaplain, that
last game makes us even, I think!"

Harry got up from his place. "I am going on a journey: I am come to bid
you good-bye, aunt," he said, in a very tragical voice.

"On a journey! Are you going home to America? I mark the king, Chaplain,
and play him."

No, Harry said: he was not going to America yet going to the Isle of
Wight for the present.

"Indeed!--a lovely spot!" says the Baroness. "Bon jour, mon ami, et bon
voyage!" And she kissed a hand to her nephew.

"I mayn't come back for some time, aunt," he groaned out.

"Indeed! We shall be inconsolable without you! Unless you have a spade,
Mr. Sampson, the game is mine. Good-bye, my child! No more about your
journey at present: tell us about it when you come back!" And she gaily
bade him farewell. He looked for a moment piteously at her, and was
gone.

"Something grave has happened, madam," says the chaplain.

"Oh! The boy is always getting into scrapes! I suppose he has been
falling in love with one of those country girls--what are their names,
Lamberts?--with whom he is ever dawdling about. He has been doing no
good here for some time. I am disappointed in him, really quite grieved
about him--I will take two cards, if you please--again?--quite grieved.
What do you think they say of his cousin--the Miss Warrington who made
eyes at him when she thought he was a prize--they say the King has
remarked her, and the Yarmouth is creving with rage. He, be!--those
methodistical Warringtons! They are not a bit less worldly than
their neighbours; and, old as he is, if the Grand Seignior throws his
pocket-handkerchief, they will jump to catch it!"

"Ah, madam; how your ladyship knows the world!" sighs the chaplain. "I
propose, if you please!"

"I have lived long enough in it, Mr. Sampson, to know something of
it. 'Tis sadly selfish, my dear sir, sadly selfish; and everybody is
struggling to pass his neighbour! No, I can't give you any more cards.
You haven't the king? I play queen, knave, and a ten,--a sadly selfish
world, indeed. And here comes my chocolate!"

The more immediate interest of the cards entirely absorbs the old woman.
The door shuts out her nephew and his cares. Under his hat, he bears
them into the street, and paces the dark town for a while.

"Good God!" he thinks, "what a miserable fellow I am, and what a
spendthrift of my life I have been! I sit silent with George and his
friends. I am not clever and witty as he is. I am only a burthen to
him; and, if I would help him ever so much, don't know how. My dear Aunt
Lambert's kindness never tires, but I begin to be ashamed of trying it.
Why, even Hetty can't help turning on me; and when she tells me I am
idle and should be doing something, ought I to be angry? The rest have
left me. There's my cousins and uncle and my lady my aunt, they have
shown me the cold shoulder this long time. They didn't even ask me to
Norfolk when they went down to the country, and offer me so much as
a day's partridge-shooting. I can't go to Castlewood--after what has
happened; I should break that scoundrel William's bones; and, faith, am
well out of the place altogether."

He laughs a fierce laugh as he recalls his adventures since he has been
in Europe. Money, friends, pleasure, all have passed away, and he feels
the past like a dream. He strolls into White's Chocolate-House, where
the waiters have scarce seen him for a year. The parliament is up.
Gentlemen are away; there is not even any play going on:--not that he
would join it, if there were.

He has but a few pieces in his pocket; George's drawer is open, and he
may take what money he likes thence; but very, very sparingly will he
avail himself of his brother's repeated invitation. He sits and drinks
his glass in moody silence. Two or three officers of the Guards enter
from St. James's. He knew them in former days, and the young men, who
have been already dining and drinking on guard, insist on more drink at
the club. The other battalion of their regiment is at Winchester: it is
going on this great expedition, no one knows whither, which everybody
is talking about. Cursed fate that they do not belong to the other
battalion; and must stay and do duty in London and at Kensington! There
is Webb, who was of their regiment: he did well to exchange his company
in the Coldstreams for the lieutenant-colonelcy of the thirty-second.
He will be of the expedition. Why, everybody is going; and the young
gentlemen mention a score of names of men of the first birth and fashion
who have volunteered. "It ain't Hanoverians this time, commanded by the
big Prince," says one young gentleman (whose relatives may have been
Tories forty years ago)--"it's Englishmen, with the Guards at the head
of 'em, and a Marlborough for a leader! Will the Frenchmen ever stand
against them? No, by George, they are irresistible." And a fresh bowl is
called, and loud toasts are drunk to the success of the expedition.

Mr. Warrington, who is a cup too low, the young Guardsmen say, walks
away when they are not steady enough to be able to follow him, thinks
over the matter on his way to his lodgings, and lies thinking of it all
through the night.

"What is it, my boy?" asks George Warrington of his brother, when the
latter enters his chamber very early on a blushing May morning.

"I want a little money out of the drawer," says Harry, looking at his
brother. "I am sick and tired of London."

"Good heavens! Can anybody be tired of London?" George asks, who has
reasons for thinking it the most delightful place in the world.

"I am for one. I am sick and ill," says Harry.

"You and Hetty have been quarrelling?"

"She don't care a penny-piece about me, nor I for her neither," says
Harry, nodding his head. "But I am ill, and a little country air will
do me good," and he mentions how he thinks of going to visit Mr. Webb in
the Isle of Wight, and how a Portsmouth coach starts from Holborn.

"There's the till, Harry," says George, pointing from his bed. "Put your
hand in, and take what you will. What a lovely morning, and how fresh
the Bedford House garden looks!"

"God bless you, brother!" Harry says.

"Have a good time, Harry!" and down goes George's head on the pillow
again, and he takes his pencil and notebook from under his bolster,
and falls to polishing his verses, as Harry, with his cloak over his
shoulder and a little valise in his hand, walks to the inn in Holborn
whence the Portsmouth machine starts.




CHAPTER LXIII. Melpomene


George Warrington by no means allowed his legal studies to obstruct
his comfort and pleasures, or interfere with his precious health. Madam
Esmond had pointed out to him in her letters that though he wore
a student's gown, and sate down with a crowd of nameless people to
hall-commons, he had himself a name, and a very ancient one, to support,
and could take rank with the first persons at home or in his own
country; and desired that he would study as a gentleman, not a mere
professional drudge. With this injunction the young man complied
obediently enough: so that he may be said not to have belonged to the
rank and file of the law, but may be considered to have been a volunteer
in her service, like some young gentlemen of whom we have just heard.
Though not so exacting as she since has become--though she allowed her
disciples much more leisure, much more pleasure, much more punch, much
more frequenting of coffee-houses and holiday-making, than she admits
nowadays, when she scarce gives her votaries time for amusement,
recreation, instruction, sleep, or dinner--the law a hundred years ago
was still a jealous mistress, and demanded a pretty exclusive attention.
Murray, we are told, might have been an Ovid, but he preferred to be
Lord Chief Justice, and to wear ermine instead of bays. Perhaps Mr.
Warrington might have risen to a peerage and the woolsack, had he
studied very long and assiduously,--had he been a dexterous courtier,
and a favourite of attorneys: had he been other than he was, in a word.
He behaved to Themis with a very decent respect and attention; but he
loved letters more than law always; and the black-letter of Chaucer was
infinitely more agreeable to him than the Gothic pages of Hale and Coke.

Letters were loved indeed in those quaint times, and authors were
actually authorities. Gentlemen appealed to Virgil or Lucan in the
Courts or the House of Commons. What said Statius, Juvenal--let alone
Tully or Tacitus--on such and such a point? Their reign is over now, the
good old Heathens: the worship of Jupiter and Juno is not more out
of mode than the cultivation of Pagan poetry or ethics. The age of
economists and calculators has succeeded, and Tooke's Pantheon is
deserted and ridiculous. Now and then, perhaps, a Stanley kills a kid,
a Gladstone bangs up a wreath, a Lytton burns incense, in honour of
the Olympians. But what do they care at Lambeth, Birmingham, the Tower
Hamlets, for the ancient rites, divinities, worship? Who the plague are
the Muses, and what is the use of all that Greek and Latin rubbish? What
is Elicon, and who cares? Who was Thalia, pray, and what is the length
of her i? Is Melpomene's name in three syllables or four? And do you
know from whose design I stole that figure of Tragedy which adorns the
initial G of this chapter?

Now, it has been said how Mr. George in his youth, and in the long
leisure which he enjoyed at home, and during his imprisonment in the
French fort on the banks of Monongahela, had whiled away his idleness by
paying court to Melpomene; and the result of their union was a tragedy,
which has been omitted in Bell's Theatre, though I dare say it is no
worse than some of the pieces printed there. Most young men pay their
respects to the Tragic Muse first, as they fall in love with women who
are a great deal older than themselves. Let the candid reader own, if
ever he had a literary turn, that his ambition was of the very
highest, and that however, in his riper age, he might come down in his
pretensions, and think that to translate an ode of Horace, or to turn a
song of Waller or Prior into decent alcaics or sapphics, was about the
utmost of his capability, tragedy and epic only did his green unknowing
youth engage, and no prize but the highest was fit for him.

George Warrington, then, on coming to London, attended the theatrical
performances at both houses, frequented the theatrical coffee-houses,
and heard the opinions of the critics, and might be seen at the Bedford
between the plays, or supping at the Cecil along with the wits and
actors when the performances were over. Here he gradually became
acquainted with the players and such of the writers and poets as were
known to the public. The tough old Macklin, the frolicsome Foote,
the vivacious Hippisley, the sprightly Mr. Garrick himself, might
occasionally be seen at these houses of entertainment; and our
gentleman, by his wit and modesty, as well, perhaps, as for the high
character for wealth which he possessed, came to be very much liked in
the coffee-house circles, and found that the actors would drink a
bowl of punch with him, and the critics sup at his expense with great
affability. To be on terms of intimacy with an author or an actor has
been an object of delight to many a young man; actually to hob and nob
with Bobadil or Henry the Fifth or Alexander the Great, to accept a
pinch out of Aristarchus's own box, to put Juliet into her coach, or
hand Monimia to her chair, are privileges which would delight most young
men of a poetic turn; and no wonder George Warrington loved the theatre.
Then he had the satisfaction of thinking that his mother only half
approved of plays and playhouses, and of feasting on fruit forbidden at
home. He gave more than one elegant entertainment to the players, and it
was even said that one or two distinguished geniuses had condescended to
borrow money of him.

And as he polished and added new beauties to his masterpiece, we may be
sure that he took advice of certain friends of his, and that they gave
him applause and counsel. Mr. Spencer, his new acquaintance, of the
Temple, gave a breakfast at his chambers in Fig Tree Court, when Mr.
Warrington read part of his play, and the gentlemen present pronounced
that it had uncommon merit. Even the learned Mr. Johnson, who was
invited, was good enough to say that the piece had showed talent. It
warred against the unities, to be sure; but these had been violated
by other authors, and Mr. Warrington might sacrifice them as well as
another. There was in Mr. W.'s tragedy a something which reminded him
both of Coriolanus and Othello. "And two very good things too, sir!" the
author pleaded. "Well, well, there was no doubt on that point; and 'tis
certain your catastrophe is terrible, just, and being in part true, is
not the less awful," remarks Mr. Spencer.

Now the plot of Mr. Warrington's tragedy was quite full indeed of battle
and murder. A favourite book of his grandfather had been the life of old
George Frundsberg of Mindelheim, a colonel of foot-folk in the Imperial
service at Pavia fight, and during the wars of the Constable Bourbon:
and one of Frundsberg's military companions was a certain Carpzow, or
Carpezan, whom our friend selected as his tragedy hero. His first
act, as it at present stands in Sir George Warrington's manuscript,
is supposed to take place before a convent on the Rhine, which the
Lutherans, under Carpezan, are besieging. A godless gang these Lutherans
are. They have pulled the beards of Roman friars, and torn the veils of
hundreds of religious women. A score of these are trembling within the
walls of the convent yonder, of which the garrison, unless the expected
succours arrive before midday, has promised to surrender. Meanwhile
there is armistice, and the sentries within look on with hungry eyes, as
the soldiers and camp people gamble on the grass before the gate. Twelve
o'clock, ding, ding, dong! it sounds upon the convent bell. No succours
have arrived. Open gates, warder! and give admission to the famous
Protestant hero, the terror of Turks on the Danube, and Papists in the
Lombard plains--Colonel Carpezan! See, here he comes, clad in complete
steel, his hammer of battle over his shoulder, with which he has
battered so many infidel sconces, his flags displayed, his trumpets
blowing. "No rudeness, my men," says Carpezan; "the wine is yours,
and the convent larder and cellar are good: the church plate shall
be melted: any of the garrison who choose to take service with Gaspar
Carpezan are welcome, and shall have good pay. No insult to the
religious ladies! I have promised them a safe-conduct, and he who lays a
finger on them, hangs! Mind that Provost Marshal!" The Provost Marshal,
a huge fellow in a red doublet, nods his head.

"We shall see more of that Provost Marshal, or executioner," Mr. Spencer
explains to his guests.

"A very agreeable acquaintance, I am sure,--shall be delighted to meet
the gentleman again!" says Mr. Johnson, wagging his head over his tea.
"This scene of the mercenaries, the camp followers, and their wild
sports, is novel and stirring, Mr. Warrington, and I make you my
compliments on it. The Colonel has gone into the convent, I think? Now
let us hear what he is going to do there."

The Abbess, and one or two of her oldest ladies, make their appearance
before the conqueror. Conqueror as he is, they heard him in their
sacred halls. They have heard of his violent behaviour in conventual
establishments before. That hammer, which he always carries in action,
has smashed many sacred images in religious houses. Pounds and pounds of
convent plate is he known to have melted, the sacrilegious plunderer! No
wonder the Abbess-Princess of St. Mary's, a lady of violent prejudices,
free language, and noble birth, has a dislike to the lowborn heretic who
lords it in her convent, and tells Carpezan a bit of her mind, as the
phrase is. This scene, in which the lady gets somewhat better of the
Colonel, was liked not a little by Mr. Warrington's audience at the
Temple. Terrible as he might be in war, Carpezan was shaken at first by
the Abbess's brisk opening charge of words; and, conqueror as he was,
seemed at first to be conquered by his actual prisoner. But such an old
soldier was not to be beaten ultimately by any woman. "Pray, madam,"
says he, "how many ladies are there in your convent, for whom my people
shall provide conveyance?" The Abbess, with a look of much trouble and
anger, says that, "besides herself, the noble sisters of Saint Mary's
House are twenty--twenty-three." She was going to say twenty-four, and
now says twenty-three? "Ha! why this hesitation?" asks Captain Ulric,
one of Carpezan's gayest officers.

The dark chief pulls a letter from his pocket. "I require from you,
madam," he says sternly to the Lady Abbess, "the body of the noble lady
Sybilla of Hoya. Her brother was my favourite captain, slain by my side,
in the Milanese. By his death, she becomes heiress of his lands. 'Tis
said a greedy uncle brought her hither; and fast immured the lady
against her will. The damsel shall herself pronounce her fate--to stay a
cloistered sister of Saint Mary's, or to return to home and liberty, as
Lady Sybil, Baroness of ------." Ha! The Abbess was greatly disturbed
by this question. She says, haughtily: "There is no Lady Sybil in this
house: of which every inmate is under your protection, and sworn to go
free. The Sister Agnes was a nun professed, and what was her land and
wealth revert to this Order."

"Give me straightway the body of the Lady Sybil of Hoya!" roars
Carpezan, in great wrath. "If not, I make a signal to my Reiters, and
give you and your convent up to war."

"Faith, if I lead the storm, and have my right, 'tis not my Lady Abbess
that I'll choose," says Captain Ulric, "but rather some plump, smiling,
red-lipped maid like--like----" Here, as he, the sly fellow, is looking
under the veils of the two attendant nuns, the stern Abbess cries,
"Silence, fellow, with thy ribald talk! The lady, warrior, whom you ask
of me is passed away from sin, temptation, vanity, and three days since
our Sister Agnes--died."

At this announcement Carpezan is immensely agitated. The Abbess calls
upon the chaplain to confirm her statement. Ghastly and pale, the old
man has to own that three days since the wretched Sister Agnes was
buried.

This is too much! In the pocket of his coat of mail Carpezan has a
letter from Sister Agnes herself, in which she announces that she is
going to be buried indeed, but in an oubliette of the convent, where
she may either be kept on water and bread, or die starved outright. He
seizes the unflinching Abbess by the arm, whilst Captain Ulric lays hold
of the chaplain by the throat. The Colonel blows a blast upon his horn:
in rush his furious Lanzknechts from without. Crash, bang! They knock
the convent walls about. And in the midst of flames, screams, and
slaughter, who is presently brought in by Carpezan himself, and fainting
on his shoulder, but Sybilla herself? A little sister nun (that gay one
with the red lips) had pointed out to the Colonel and Ulric the way to
Sister Agnes's dungeon, and, indeed, had been the means of making her
situation known to the Lutheran chief.

"The convent is suppressed with a vengeance," says Mr. Warrington. "We
end our first act with the burning of the place, the roars of triumph
of the soldiery, and the outcries of the nuns. They had best go change
their dresses immediately, for they will have to be court ladies in the
