



CHAPTER II


OUR EARLIEST TEACHERS

ANCIENT CITIES THAT STILL EXIST. In Ancient Times the most
  important peoples lived on the shores of the Mediterranean. The
  northern shore turns and twists around four peninsulas. The first is
  Spain, which separates the Mediterranean Sea from the Atlantic Ocean;
  the second, shaped like a boot, is Italy; and the third, the end of
  which looks like a mulberry leaf, is Greece. Beyond Greece is Asia
  Minor, the part of Asia which lies between the Mediterranean Sea and
  the Black Sea.

  The Italians now live in Italy, but the Romans lived there in Ancient
  Times. The people who live in Greece are called Greeks, just as they
  were more than two thousand years ago. Many of the cities that the
  Greeks and Romans built are still standing. Alexandria was founded by
  the great conqueror Alexander. Constantinople used to be the Greek
  city of Byzantium. Another Greek city, Massilia, has become the modern
  French city of Marseilles. Rome had the same name in Ancient Times,
  except that it was spelled Roma. The Romans called Paris by the name
  of Lutetia, and London they called Lugdunum.

RUINS WHICH SHOW HOW THE ANCIENTS LIVED. In many of these cities
  are ancient buildings or ruins of buildings, bits of carving, vases,
  mosaics, sometimes even wall paintings, which we may see and from
  which we may learn how the Greeks and Romans lived. Near Naples are
  the ruins of Pompeii, a Roman city suddenly destroyed during an
  eruption of the volcano Vesuvius.

  For hundreds of years the city lay buried under fifteen or twenty feet
  of ashes. When these were taken away, the old streets and the walls of
  the houses could be seen. No roofs were left and the walls in many
  places were only partly standing, but things which in other ancient
  cities had entirely disappeared were kept safe in Pompeii under the
  volcanic ashes.

  The traveler who walks to-day along the ruined streets can see how its
  inhabitants lived two thousand years ago. He can visit their public
  buildings and their private houses, can handle their dishes and can
  look at the paintings on their walls or the mosaics in the floors. But
  interesting as Pompeii is, we must not think that its ruins teach us
  more than the ruins of Rome or Athens or many other ancient cities.
  Each has something important to tell us of the people who lived long
  ago.

ANCIENT WORDS STILL IN USE. The ancient Greeks and Romans have left
  us some things more useful than the ruins of their buildings. These
  are the words in our language which once were theirs, and which we use
  with slight changes in spelling. Most of our words came in the
  beginning from Germany, where our English forefathers lived before
  they settled in England. To the words they took over from Germany they
  added words borrowed from other peoples, just as we do now. We have
  recently borrowed several words from the French, such as tonneau and
  limousine, words used to describe parts of an automobile, besides the
  name automobile itself, which is made up of a Latin and a Greek word.

  [Illustration: RUINS OF A HOUSE AT POMPEII The houses of the
  better sort were built with an open court in the center]

  In this way, for hundreds of years, words have been coming into our
  language from other languages. Several thousand have come from Latin,
  the language of the Romans; several hundred from Greek, either
  directly or passed on to us by the Romans or the French. The word
  school is Greek, and the word arithmetic was borrowed from the French,
  who took it from the Greeks. Geography is another word which came,
  through French and Latin, from the Greeks, to whom it meant that which
  is written about the earth. The word grammar came in the same way. The
  word alphabet is made by joining together the names of the first two
  Greek letters, alpha and beta.

  Many words about religion are borrowed from the Greeks, and this is
  not strange, for the New Testament was written in Greek. Some of these
  are Bible, church, bishop, choir, angel, devil, apostle, and martyr.
  The Greeks have handed down to us many words about government,
  including the word itself, which in the beginning meant "to steer."
  Politics meant having to do with a _polis_ or city. Several of the
  words most recently made up of Greek words are telegraph, telephone,
  phonograph, and thermometer.

MANY WORDS BORROWED FROM THE ROMANS. Nearly ten times as many of
  our words are borrowed from the Romans as from the Greeks, and it is
  not strange, because at one time the Romans ruled over all the country
  now occupied by the Italians, the French, the Spaniards, a part of the
  Germans, and the English, so that these peoples naturally learned the
  words used by their conquerors and governors.

INTERESTING ANCIENT STORIES. In the poems and tales which we learn
  at home or at school are stories which Greek and Roman parents and
  teachers taught their children many hundred years ago. We learn them
  partly because they are interesting, and because they please or amuse
  us, and partly because they appear so often in our books that it is
  necessary to know them if we would understand our own books and
  language. Who has not heard of Hercules and his Labors, of the Search
  for the Golden Fleece, the Siege of Troy, or the Wanderings of
  Ulysses? We love modern fairy stories and tales of adventure, but they
  are not more pleasing than these ancient stories.

  [Illustration: THE PLAIN OF MARATHON]

THE STORY OF THE GREEKS. Our language and our books are full of
  memories of Greek and Roman deeds of courage. The story of the Greeks
  comes before the story of the Romans, for the Greeks were living in
  beautiful cities, with temples and theaters, while the Romans were
  still an almost unknown people dwelling on the hills that border the
  river Tiber.

MEMORIES OF GREEK COURAGE. The most heroic deeds of the Greeks took
  place in a great war between the Greek cities and the kingdom of
  Persia about five hundred years before Christ. In those days there was
  no kingdom called Greece, such as the geographies now describe.
  Instead there were cities, a few of which were ruled by kings, others
  by the citizens themselves. These cities banded together when any
  danger threatened them. Sometimes one city turned traitor and helped
  the enemy against the others. The most dangerous enemy the Greeks had,
  until the Romans attacked them, was the kingdom of Persia, which
  stretched from the Aegean Sea far into Asia. In the war with the
  Persians the Greeks fought three famous battles, at Marathon,
  Thermopylae, and Salamis, the stories of which men have always liked
  to hear and remember.

PREPARING FOR MARATHON, 490 B.C. To the Athenians belong the
  glories of Marathon. They lived where the modern city of Athens now
  stands. The ruins of their temples and theaters still attract students
  and travelers to Greece. The plain of Marathon lay more than twenty
  miles to the northeast, and the roads to it led through mountain
  passes. When the Athenians heard that the hosts of the Great King of
  Persia were approaching, they sent a runner, Pheidippides by name, to
  ask aid of Sparta, a city one hundred and forty miles away, in the
  peninsula now called the Morea, where dwelt the sturdiest fighters of
  Greece. This runner reached Sparta on the second day, but the Spartans
  said it would be against their religious custom to march before the
  moon was full. The Athenians saw that they must meet the enemy
  alone--one small city against a mighty empire. They called their ten
  thousand men together and set out. On the way they were joined by a
  thousand more, the whole army of the brave little town of Plataea.

  [Illustration: GREEK SOLDIERS IN ARMS From a Greek vase of
  about the time of the battle of Marathon]

HOW THE ATHENIANS WERE ARMED. Although the Persians had six times
  as many soldiers as the Athenians, they were not so well armed for
  hand to hand fighting. Their principal weapon was the bow and arrow,
  while the Greeks used the lance and a short sword. The Greek soldier
  was protected by his bronze helmet, solid across the forehead and over
  the nose; by his breastplate, a leathern or linen tunic covered with
  small metal scales, with flaps hanging below his hips; and by greaves
  or pieces of metal in front of his knees and shins. He was also
  protected by a shield, often long enough to reach from his face to his
  knees. According to a strange custom the Athenians were led by ten
  generals, each commanding one day in turn.

THE BATTLE-GROUND. Marathon was a plain about two miles wide, lying
  between the mountains and the sea. From it two roads ran toward
  Athens, one along the shore where the hills almost reached the sea,
  the other up a narrow valley and over the mountains. The Athenians
  were encamped in this valley, where they could attack the Persians if
  they tried to follow the shore road.

  The Persians landed from their ships and filled the plain near the
  shore. They wanted to fight in the open plain because they had so many
  more soldiers than the Athenians and because they meant to use their
  horsemen. For some time the Athenians watched the Persians, not
  knowing what it was best to do. Half the generals did not wish to risk
  a battle, but Miltiades was eager to fight, for he feared that delay
  would lead timid citizens or traitors to yield to the Persians. He
  finally gained his wish, and on his day of command the battle was
  ordered.

THE BATTLE. The Persians by this time had decided to sail around to
  the harbor of Athens and had taken their horsemen on board their
  ships. When they saw the Greeks coming they drew up their
  foot-soldiers in deep masses. The Athenians and their comrades--the
  Plataeans--soon began to move forward on the run. The Persians thought
  this madness, because the Greeks had no archers or horsemen. But the
  Greeks saw that if they moved forward slowly the Persians would have
  time to shoot arrows at them again and again.

  When the Greeks rushed upon the Persians the soldiers at the two ends
  of the Persian line gave way and fled towards the shore. In the
  center, where the best Persian soldiers stood, the Greeks were not at
  first successful, and were forced to retreat. But those who had been
  victorious came to their rescue, attacked the Persians in the rear,
  and finally drove them off. The Persians ran into the sea to reach the
  ships, and the Athenians followed them. Some of the Greeks were so
  eager in the fight that they seized the sides of the ships and tried
  to keep them from being rowed away, but the Persians cut at their
  hands and made them let go.

  [Illustration: THE STRAITS OF SALAMIS Where a great sea-fight
  between Greeks and Persians took place]

THE NEWS OF THE VICTORY. The Athenians had won a victory of which
  they were so proud that they meant it never should be forgotten. Their
  city had suddenly become great through the courage and self-sacrifice
  of her citizens. One hundred and ninety-two Greeks had fallen, and on
  the battle-field their comrades raised over their bodies a mound of
  earth which still marks their tomb. The victors sent the runner
  Pheidippides to bear the news to Athens. Over the hills he ran until
  he reached the market place, and there, with the message of triumph on
  his lips, he fell dead.

OTHER VICTORIES OF THE GREEKS. Marathon was only the beginning of
  Greek victories over the Persians, only the first struggle in the long
  wars between Europe and Asia. Ten years after Marathon the Spartans
  won everlasting glory by their heroic stand at the Pass of Thermopylae
--three hundred Greeks against the mighty army of the Persian king
  Xerxes. The barbarian hordes passed over their bodies, took the road
  to Athens, burned the city, but were soon beaten in the sea-fight
  which took place on the waters lying between the mainland of Athenian
  territory and the island of Salamis. This victory was also due to
  Athenian courage and leadership, for the Athenians and their leader,
  Themistocles, were resolved to stay and fight, although the other
  Greeks wanted to sail away.

WHY MARATHON IS REMEMBERED. The victories of Marathon and Salamis
  were great not only because small armies of Greeks put to flight the
  hosts of Persia, they were great because they saved the independence
  of Greece. If the Greeks had become the subjects and slaves of Persia,
  they would not have built the wonderful buildings, or carved the
  beautiful statues, or written the books which we study and admire.
  When we think of the Greeks as our first teachers we feel as proud of
  their victories as if they were our own victories.

THE WARS OF THE GREEK CITIES. The Athenians had done the most in
  winning the victory over the Persians, and therefore Athens was for
  many years the most powerful city in Greece. The Spartans were always
  jealous of the Athenians, and in less than a century after the victory
  of Marathon they conquered and humbled Athens. The worst faults of the
  Greeks were such jealousies and the desire to lord it over one
  another. Greek history is full of wars of city against city, Sparta
  against Athens, Corinth against Athens, and Thebes against Sparta. In
  these wars many heroic deeds were done, of which we like to read, but
  it is more important for us to understand how the Greeks lived.


    QUESTIONS

    1. What ancient cities still exist? Find them on the map.
    (For each difficult name find the pronunciation in the index.)

    2. What things do we find in the ruins of ancient cities which tell
    us how the people lived?

    3. From what country did most of our words come in the beginning?
    Why are they now called English? What peoples used the word
    geography before we did? About how many words do we get from the
    Greeks, and how many from the Romans?

    4. Which people became famous earlier, the Greeks or the Romans?
    Point out on the map the peninsula where each lived.

    5. Why do we like to remember the brave deeds of the Greeks?

    6. Find the city of Athens on the map. Find Sparta. Where
    was Marathon? What city won glory at Marathon?

    7. What were the worst faults of the Greeks?

    EXERCISES

    1. Collect pictures of ruined cities in Italy, Greece, and Asia
    Minor, from illustrated papers, magazines, or advertising folders.
    Collect postal cards giving such pictures.

    2. Choose the best one of the Greek stories mentioned in Chapter II,
    and tell it.

    3. Find out how differently soldiers now are clothed and armed from
    the way the Greek soldiers were.

    4. Find out why a long distance run is now called a "Marathon."




CHAPTER III


HOW THE GREEKS LIVED

THE GREEK CITIES. The Greeks lived in cities so much of the time that
  we do not often think of them as ever living in the country. The
  reason for this was that their government and everything else
  important was carried on in the city. The cities were usually
  surrounded by high, thick stone walls, which made them safe from
  sudden attack. Within or beside the city there was often a lofty hill,
  which we should call a fort or citadel, but which they called the
  upper city or acropolis. There the people lived at first when they
  were few in number, and thither they fled if the walls of their city
  were broken down by enemies.

  In Athens such a hill rose two hundred feet above the plain. Its top
  was a thousand feet long, and all the sides except one were steep
  cliffs. On it the Athenians built their most beautiful temples.

PRIVATE HOUSES. Unlike people nowadays the Greeks did not spend much
  money on their dwelling-houses. To us these houses would seem small,
  badly ventilated, and very uncomfortable. But what their houses lacked
  was more than made up by the beauty and splendor of the public
  buildings, halls, theaters, porticoes, and especially the temples.

TEMPLES. The temples were not intended to hold hundreds of worshipers
  like the large churches of Europe and America to-day. Religious
  ceremonies were most often carried on in the open air. The Parthenon,
  the most famous temple of Ancient Times, was small. Its principal room
  measured less than one hundred feet in length. Part of this room was
  used for an altar and for the ivory and gold statue of the goddess
  Athena.

  [Illustration: THE ACROPOLIS AT ATHENS AS IT IS TO-DAY]

THE PARTHENON. In a picture of the Parthenon, or of a similar temple,
  we notice the columns in front and along the sides. The Parthenon had
  eight at each end and seventeen on each side. They were thirty-four
  feet high. A few feet within the columns on the sides was the wall of
  the temple. Before the vestibule and entrances at the front and at the
  rear stood six more columns. The beauty of the marble from which
  stones and columns were cut might have seemed enough, but the builders
  carved groups of figures in the three-cornered space (called the
  pediment) in front between the roof and the stones resting upon the
  columns. The upper rows of stones beneath the roof and above the
  columns were also carved, and continuous carvings (called a frieze)
  ran around the top of the temple wall on the outside. The temple was
  not left a glistening white, but parts of it were painted in blue, or
  red, or gilt, or orange.

  [Illustration: THE TOP OF THE ACROPOLIS 2000 YEARS AGO The
  Parthenon is the large temple on the right]

OTHER GREEK TEMPLES. This beautiful temple is now partly ruined. Ruins
  of other temples are on the Acropolis, and one better preserved,
  called the Theseum, stands on a lower hill. There are also similar
  ruins in many places along the shores of the Mediterranean. The most
  interesting are at Paestum in Italy, and at Girgenti in Sicily. Long
  before these temples were ruined they had taught the Romans how to
  construct one of the most beautiful kinds of buildings, and this the
  Romans later taught the peoples of western Europe.

GREEK METHODS OF BUILDING STILL USED. If we look at our large
  buildings, we shall see much to remind us of the Greek buildings.
  Sometimes the exact form of the Greek building is imitated; sometimes
  this form is changed as the Romans changed it, or as it was changed by
  builders who lived after the time of the Romans. If the model of the
  whole building is not used, there are similar pillars, or gables, or
  the sculpture in the pediment and the frieze is imitated. The Greeks
  had three kinds of pillars, named Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian. The
  Doric is simple and solid, the Ionic shows in its capital, or top,
  delicate and beautiful curves, while the Corinthian is adorned with
  leaves springing gracefully from the top of the pillar.

  [Illustration: Doric Ionic Corinthian GREEK ORDERS OF
  ARCHITECTURE]

  [Illustration: RUINS OF THE GREEK THEATER AT EPIDAURUS]

THEATERS. The first Greek theater was only a smooth open space near a
  hillside, with a tent, called a _skene_, or scene, in which the
  actors dressed. Later an amphitheater of stone seats was constructed
  on the hillside, and across the open end was placed the _scene_,
