

Chapter XXVI. Of the Strife in the Council

King Monmouth's council was assembled at the time of my coming, and my
entrance caused the utmost surprise and joy, as they had just heard news
of my sore danger. Even the royal presence could not prevent several
members, among whom were the old Mayor and the two soldiers of fortune,
from springing to their feet and shaking me warmly by the hand. Monmouth
himself said a few gracious words, and requested that I should be seated
at the board with the others.

'You have earned the right to be of our council,' said he; 'and lest
there should be a jealousy amongst other captains that you should come
among us, I do hereby confer upon you the special title of Scout-master,
which, though it entail few if any duties in the present state of our
force, will yet give you precedence over your fellows. We had heard that
your greeting from Beaufort was of the roughest, and that you were in
sore straits in his dungeons. But you have happily come yourself on the
very heels of him who bore the tidings. Tell us then from the beginning
how things have fared with you.'

I should have wished to have limited my story to Beaufort and his
message, but as the council seemed to be intent upon hearing a full
account of my journey, I told in as short and simple speech as I
could the various passages which had befallen me--the ambuscado of
the smugglers, the cave, the capture of the gauger, the journey in the
lugger, the acquaintance with Farmer Brown, my being cast into prison,
with the manner of my release and the message wherewith I had been
commissioned. To all of this the council hearkened with the uttermost
attention, while a muttered oath ever and anon from a courtier or a
groan and prayer from a Puritan showed how keenly they followed the
various phases of my fortunes. Above all, they gave the greatest heed
to Beaufort's words, and stopped me more than once when I appeared to be
passing over any saying or event before they had due time to weigh
it. When I at last finished they all sat speechless, looking into each
other's faces and waiting for an expression of opinion.

'On my word,' said Monmouth at last, 'this is a young Ulysses, though
his Odyssey doth but take three days in the acting. Scudery might not be
so dull were she to take a hint from these smugglers' caves and sliding
panels. How say you, Grey?'

'He hath indeed had his share of adventure,' the nobleman answered, 'and
hath also performed his mission like a fearless and zealous messenger.
You say that Beaufort gave you nought in writing?'

'Not a word, my lord,' I replied.

'And his private message was that he wished us well, and would join us
if we were in his country?'

'That was the effect, my lord.'

'Yet in his council, as I understand, he did utter bitter things against
us, putting affronts upon the King, and making light of his just claims
upon the fealty of his nobility?'

'He did,' I answered.

'He would fain stand upon both sides of the hedge at once,' said King
Monmouth. 'Such a man is very like to find himself on neither side, but
in the very heart of the briars. It may be as well, however, that we
should move his way, so as to give him the chance of declaring himself.'

'In any case, as your Majesty remembers,' said Saxon, 'we had determined
to march Bristolwards and attempt the town.'

'The works are being strengthened,' said I, 'and there are five thousand
of the Gloucestershire train-bands assembled within. I saw the labourers
at work upon the ramparts as I passed.'

'If we gain Beaufort we shall gain the town,' quoth Sir Stephen
Timewell. 'There are already a strong body of godly and honest folk
therein, who would rejoice to see a Protestant army within their gates.
Should we have to beleaguer it we may count upon some help from within.'

'Hegel und blitzen!' exclaimed the German soldier, with an impatience
which even the presence of the King could not keep in bounds; 'how can
we talk of sieges and leaguers when we have not a breaching-piece in the
army?'

'The Lard will find us the breaching-pieces,' cried Ferguson, in his
strange, nasal voice. 'Did the Lard no breach the too'ers o' Jericho
withoot the aid o' gunpooder? Did the Lard no raise up the man Robert
Ferguson and presairve him through five-and-thairty indictments and
twa-and-twenty proclamations o' the godless? What is there He canna do?
Hosannah! Hosannah!'

'The Doctor is right,' said a square-faced, leather-skinned English
Independent. 'We talk too much o' carnal means and worldly chances,
without leaning upon that heavenly goodwill which should be to us as a
staff on stony and broken paths. Yes, gentlemen,' he continued, raising
his voice and glancing across the table at some of the courtiers, 'ye
may sneer at words of piety, but I say that it is you and those like you
who will bring down God's anger upon this army.'

'And I say so too,' cried another sectary fiercely.

'And I,' 'And I,' shouted several, with Saxon, I think, among them.

'Is it your wish, your Majesty, that we should be insulted at your very
council board?' cried one of the courtiers, springing to his feet with
a flushed face. 'How long are we to be subject to this insolence because
we have the religion of a gentleman, and prefer to practise it in the
privacy of our hearts rather than at the street corners with these
pharisees?'

'Speak not against God's saints,' cried a Puritan, in a loud stern
voice. 'There is a voice within me which tells me that it were better to
strike thee dead--yea, even in the presence of the King--than to allow
thee to revile those who have been born again.'

Several had sprung to their feet on either side. Hands were laid upon
sword-hilts, and glances as stern and as deadly as rapier thrusts were
flashing backwards and forwards; but the more neutral and reasonable
members of the council succeeded in restoring peace, and in persuading
the angry disputants to resume their seats.

'How now, gentlemen?' cried the King, his face dark with anger, when
silence was at last restored. 'Is this the extent of my authority that
ye should babble and brawl as though my council-chamber were a Fleet
Street pot-house? Is this your respect for my person? I tell ye that I
would forfeit my just claims for ever, and return to Holland, or devote
my sword to the cause of Christianity against the Turk, rather than
submit to such indignity. If any man he proved to have stirred up strife
amongst the soldiers or commonalty on the score of religion I shall
know how to deal with him. Let each preach to his own, but let him not
interfere with the flock of his neighbour. As to you, Mr. Bramwell,
and you, Mr. Joyce, and you also, Sir Henry Nuttall, we shall hold ye
excused from attending these meetings until ye have further notice from
us. Ye may now separate, each to your quarters, and to-morrow morning
we shall, with the blessing of God, start for the north to see what luck
may await our enterprise in those parts.'

The King bowed as a sign that the formal meeting was over, and taking
Lord Grey aside, he conversed with him anxiously in a recess. The
courtiers, who numbered in their party several English and foreign
gentlemen, who had come over together with some Devonshire and Somerset
country squires, swaggered out of the room in a body, with much clinking
of spurs and clanking of swords. The Puritans drew gravely together and
followed after them, walking not with demure and downcast looks, as was
their common use, but with grim faces and knitted brows, as the Jews of
old may have appeared when, 'To your tents, O Israel!' was still ringing
in their ears.

Indeed, religious dissension and sectarian heat were in the very air.
Outside, on the Castle Green, the voices of preachers rose up like the
drone of insects. Every waggon or barrel or chance provision case had
been converted into a pulpit, each with its own orator and little knot
of eager hearkeners. Here was a russet-coated Taunton volunteer in
jackboots and bandolier, holding forth on the justification by works.
Further on a grenadier of the militia, with blazing red coat and white
cross-belt, was deep in the mystery of the Trinity. In one or two
places, where the rude pulpits were too near to each other, the sermons
had changed into a hot discussion between the two preachers, in which
the audience took part by hums or groans, each applauding the champion
whose creed was most in accordance with his own. Through this wild
scene, made more striking by the ruddy flickering glare of the
camp-fires, I picked my way with a weight at my heart, for I felt how
vain it must be to hope for success where such division reigned, Saxon
looked on, however, with glistening eyes, and rubbed his hands with
satisfaction.

'The leaven is working,' quoth he. 'Something will come of all this
ferment.'

'I see not what can come of it save disorder and weakness,' I answered.

'Good soldiers will come of it, lad,' said he. 'They are all sharpening
themselves, each after his own fashion, on the whetstone of religion.
This arguing breedeth fanatics, and fanatics are the stuff out of which
conquerors are fashioned. Have you not heard how Old Noll's army divided
into Presbyterians, Independents, Ranters, Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchy
men, Brownists, and a score of other sects, out of whose strife rose the
finest regiments that ever formed line upon a field of battle?

          "Such as do build their faith upon
           The holy text of sword and gun."

You know old Samuel's couplet. I tell you, I would rather see them thus
employed than at their drill, for all their wrangling and jangling.'

'But how of this split in the council?' I asked.

'Ah, that is indeed a graver matter. All creeds may be welded together,
but the Puritan and the scoffer are like oil and water. Yet the Puritan
is the oil, for he will be ever atop. These courtiers do but stand for
themselves, while the others are backed up by the pith and marrow of the
army. It is well that we are afoot to-morrow. The King's troops are, I
hear, pouring across Salisbury Plain, but their ordnance and stores are
delaying them, for they know well that they must bring all they need,
since they can expect little from the goodwill of the country folk. Ah,
friend Buyse, wie geht es?'

'Ganz gut,' said the big German, looming up before us through the
darkness. 'But, sapperment, what a cawing and croaking, like a rookery
at sunset! You English are a strange people--yes, donnerwetter, a very
strange people! There are no two of you who think alike upon any subject
under Himmel! The Cavalier will have his gay coat and his loose word.
The Puritan will cut your throat rather than give up his sad-coloured
dress and his Bible. "King James!" cry some, "King Monmouth!" say the
peasants. "King Jesus!" says the Fifth Monarchy man. "No King at all!"
cry Master Wade and a few others who are for a Commonwealth. Since I
set foot on the Helderenbergh at Amsterdam, my head hath been in a whirl
with trying to understand what it is that ye desire, for before I have
got to the end of one man's tale, and begin to see a little through the
finsterniss, another will come with another story, and I am in as evil a
case as ever. But, my young Hercules, I am right glad to see you back
in safety. I am half in fear to give you my hand now, after your recent
treatment of it. I trust that you are none the worse for the danger that
you have gone through.'

'Mine eyelids are in truth a little heavy,' I answered. 'Save for an
hour or two aboard the lugger, and about as long on a prison couch, I
have not closed eye since I left the camp.'

'We shall fall in at the second bugle call, about eight of the clock,'
said Saxon. 'We shall leave you, therefore, that you may restore
yourself after your fatigues. 'With a parting nod the two old soldiers
strode off together down the crowded Fore Street, while I made the best
of my way back to the Mayor's hospitable dwelling, where I had to repeat
my story all over again to the assembled household before I was at last
suffered to seek my room.



Chapter XXVII. Of the Affair near Keynsham Bridge

Monday, June 21, 1685, broke very dark and windy, with dull clouds
moving heavily across the sky and a constant sputter of rain. Yet a
little after daybreak Monmouth's bugles were blowing in every quarter
of the town, from Tone Bridge to Shuttern, and by the hour appointed the
regiments had mustered, the roll had been called, and the vanguard was
marching briskly out through the eastern gate. It went forth in the same
order as it entered, our own regiment and the Taunton burghers bringing
up the rear. Mayor Timewell and Saxon had the ordering of this part of
the army between them, and being men who had seen much service, they
drew the ordnance into a less hazardous position, and placed a strong
guard of horse, a cannon's shot in the rear, to meet any attempt of the
Royal dragoons.

It was remarked on all sides that the army had improved in order and
discipline during the three days' halt, owing perchance to the example
of our own unceasing drill and soldierly bearing. In numbers it had
increased to nigh eight thousand, and the men were well fed and light
of heart. With sturdy close-locked ranks they splashed their way through
mud and puddle, with many a rough country joke and many a lusty stave
from song or hymn. Sir Gervas rode at the head of his musqueteers, whose
befloured tails hung limp and lank with the water dripping from
them. Lockarby's pikemen and my own company of scythesmen were mostly
labourers from the country, who were hardened against all weathers, and
plodded patiently along with the rain-drops glistening upon their ruddy
faces. In front were the Taunton foot; behind, the lumbering train of
baggage waggons, with the horse in the rear of them. So the long line
wound its way over the hills.

At the summit, where the road begins to dip down upon the other side, a
halt was called to enable the regiments to close up, and we looked back
at the fair town which many of us were never to see again. From the dark
walls and house roofs we could still mark the flapping and flutter of
white kerchiefs from those whom we left behind. Reuben sat his horse
beside me, with his spare shirt streaming in the wind and his great
pikemen all agrin behind him, though his thoughts and his eyes were
too far away to note them. As we gazed, a long thin quiver of sunshine
slipped out between two cloud banks and gilded the summit of the
Magdalene tower, with the Royal standard which still waved from it. The
incident was hailed as a happy augury, and a great shout spread from
rank to rank at the sight of it, with a waving of hats and a clattering
of weapons. Then the bugles blew a fanfare, the drums struck up a point
of war, Reuben thrust his shirt into his haversack, and on we marched
through mud and slush, with the dreary clouds bending low over us, and
buttressed by the no less dreary hills on either side. A seeker for
omens might have said that the heavens were weeping over our ill-fated
venture.

All day we trudged along roads which were quagmires, over our ankles
in mud, until in the evening we made our way to Bridgewater, where we
gained some recruits, and also some hundred pounds for our military
chest, for it was a well-to-do place, with a thriving coast trade
carried on down the River Parret. After a night in snug quarters we set
off again in even worse weather than before. The country in these parts
is a quagmire in the driest season, but the heavy rains had caused the
fens to overflow, and turned them into broad lakes on either side of the
road. This may have been to some degree in our favour, as shielding us
from the raids of the King's cavalry, but it made our march very
slow. All day it was splashing and swashing through mud and mire, the
rain-drops shining on the gun-barrels and dripping from the heavy-footed
horses. Past the swollen Parret, through Eastover, by the peaceful
village of Bawdrip, and over Polden Hill we made our way, until the
bugles sounded a halt under the groves of Ashcot, and a rude meal was
served out to the men. Then on again, through the pitiless rain, past
the wooded park of Piper's Inn, through Walton, where the floods were
threatening the cottages, past the orchards of Street, and so in the
dusk of the evening into the grey old town of Glastonbury, where the
good folk did their best by the warmth of their welcome to atone for the
bitterness of the weather.

The next morning was wet still and inclement, so the army made a short
march to Wells, which is a good-sized town, well laid out, with a fine
cathedral, which hath a great number of figures carved in stone and
placed in niches on the outer side, like that which we saw at Salisbury.
The townsfolk were strong for the Protestant cause, and the army was so
well received that their victual cost little from the military chest. On
this march we first began to come into touch with the Royal horse. More
than once when the rain mist cleared we saw the gleam of arms upon the
low hills which overlook the road, and our scouts came in with reports
of strong bodies of dragoons on either flank. At one time they massed
heavily upon our rear, as though planning a descent upon the baggage.
Saxon, however, planted a regiment of pikes on either side, so that they
broke up again and glinted off over the hills.

From Wells we marched upon the twenty-fourth to Shepton Mallet, with the
ominous sabres and helmets still twinkling behind and on either side of
us.

That evening we were at Keynsham Bridge, less than two leagues from
Bristol as the crow flies, and some of our horse forded the river and
pushed on almost to the walls.

By morning the rain clouds had at last cleared, so Reuben and I rode
slowly up one of the sloping green hills which rose behind the camp, in
the hope of gaining some sight of the enemy. Our men we left littered
about upon the grass, trying to light fires with the damp sticks, or
laying out their clothes to dry in the sunshine. A strange-looking band
they were, coated and splashed with mud from head to heel, their hats
all limp and draggled, their arms rusted, and their boots so worn that
many walked barefoot, and others had swathed their kerchiefs round
their feet. Yet their short spell of soldiering had changed them
from honest-faced yokels into fierce-eyed, half-shaven, gaunt-cheeked
fellows, who could carry arms or port pikes as though they had done
nought else since childhood.

The plight of the officers was no better than that of the men, nor
should an officer, my dears, when he is upon service, ever demean
himself by partaking of any comfort which all cannot share with him. Let
him lie by a soldier's fire and eat a soldier's fare, or let him hence,
for he is a hindrance and a stumbling-block. Our clothes were pulp, our
steel fronts red with rust, and our chargers as stained and splashed as
though they had rolled in the mire. Our very swords and pistols were in
such a plight that we could scarce draw the one or snap the other. Sir
Gervas alone succeeded in keeping his attire and his person as neat and
as dainty as ever. What he did in the watches of the night, and how he
gained his sleep, hath ever been a mystery to me, for day after day
he turned out at the bugle call, washed, scented, brushed, with wig
in order, and clothes from which every speck of mud had been carefully
removed. At his saddle-bow he bore with him the great flour dredger
which we saw him use at Taunton, and his honest musqueteers had their
heads duly dusted every morning, though in an hour their tails would
be as brown as nature made them, while the flour would be trickling in
little milky streams down their broad backs, or forming in cakes upon
the skirts of their coats. It was a long contest between the weather and
the Baronet, but our comrade proved the victor.

'There was a time when I was called plump Reuben,' quoth my friend, as
we rode together up the winding track. 'What with too little that is
solid and too much that is liquid I am like to be skeleton Reuben ere I
see Havant again. I am as full of rain-water as my father's casks are of
October. I would, Micah, that you would wring me out and hang me to dry
upon one of these bushes.'

'If we are wet, King James's men must be wetter,' said I, 'for at least
we have had such shelter as there was.'

'It is poor comfort when you are starved to know that another is in
the same plight. I give you my word, Micah, I took in one hole of my
sword-belt on Monday, two on Tuesday, one yesterday, and one to-day. I
tell you, I am thawing like an icicle in the sun.'

'If you should chance to dwindle to nought,' said I, laughing, 'what
account are we to give of you in Taunton? Since you have donned armour
and taken to winning the hearts of fair maidens, you have outstripped us
all in importance, and become a man of weight and substance.'

'I had more substance and weight ere I began trailing over the
countryside like a Hambledon packman,' quoth he. 'But in very truth and
with all gravity, Micah, it is a strange thing to feel that the whole
world for you, your hopes, your ambitions, your all, are gathered into
so small a compass that a hood might cover it, and two little pattens
support it. I feel as if she were my own higher self, my loftier
part, and that I, should I be torn from her, would remain for ever an
incomplete and half-formed being. With her, I ask nothing else. Without
her, all else is nothing.'

'But have you spoken to the old man?' I asked. 'Are you indeed
betrothed?'

'I have spoken to him,' my friend answered, 'but he was so busy in
filling ammunition cases that I could not gain his attention. When I
tried once more he was counting the spare pikes in the Castle armoury
with a tally and an ink-horn. I told him that I had come to crave his
granddaughter's hand, on which he turned to me and asked, "which hand?"
with so blank a stare that it was clear that his mind was elsewhere. On
the third trial, though, the day that you did come back from Badminton,
I did at last prefer my request, but he flashed out at me that this was
no time for such fooleries, and he bade me wait until King Monmouth was
on the throne, when I might ask him again. I warrant that he did not
call such things fooleries fifty years ago, when he went a-courting
himself.'

'At least he did not refuse you,' said I. 'It is as good as a promise
that; should the cause be successful, you shall be so too.'

'By my faith,' cried Reuben, 'if a man could by his own single blade
bring that about, there is none who hath so strong an interest in it as
I. No, not Monmouth himself! The apprentice Derrick hath for a long time
raised his eyes to his master's daughter, and the old man was ready to
have him as a son, so much was he taken by his godliness and zeal. Yet I
have learned from a side-wind that he is but a debauched and low-living
man, though he covers his pleasures with a mask of piety. I thought as
you did think that he was at the head of the roisterers who tried to
bear Mistress Ruth away, though, i' faith, I can scarce think harshly
of them, since they did me the greatest service that ever men did yet.
Meanwhile I have taken occasion, ere we left Wells two nights ago, to
speak to Master Derrick on the matter, and to warn him as he loved his
life to plan no treachery against her.

'And how took he this mild intimation?' I asked.

'As a rat takes a rat trap. Snarled out some few words of godly hatred,
and so slunk away.'

'On my life, lad,' said I, 'you have been having as many adventures in
your own way as I in mine. But here we are upon the hill-top, with as
fair an outlook as man could wish to have.'

Just beneath us ran the Avon, curving in long bends through the
woodlands, with the gleam of the sun striking back from it here and
there, as though a row of baby suns had been set upon a silver string.
On the further side the peaceful, many-hued country, rising and falling
in a swell of cornfields and orchards, swept away to break in a fringe
of forest upon the distant Malverns. On our right were the green hills
near Bath and on our left the rugged Mendips, with queenly Bristol
crouching behind her forts, and the grey channel behind flecked with
snow-white sails. At our very feet lay Keynsham Bridge, and our army
spotted in dark patches over the green fields, the smoke of their fires
and the babble of their voices floating up in the still summer air.

A road ran along the Somersetshire bank of the Avon, and down this two
troops of our horse were advancing, with intent to establish outposts
upon our eastern flank. As they jangled past in somewhat loose order,
their course lay through a pine-wood, into which the road takes a sharp
bend. We were gazing down at the scene when, like lightning from a
cloud, a troop of the Horse Guards wheeled out into the open, and
breaking from trot to canter, and from canter to gallop, dashed down in
a whirlwind of blue and steel upon our unprepared squadrons. A crackle
of hastily unslung carbines broke from the leading ranks, but in an
instant the Guards burst through them and plunged on into the second
troop. For a space the gallant rustics held their own, and the dense
mass of men and horses swayed backwards and forwards, with the swirling
sword-blades playing above them in flashes of angry light. Then blue
coats began to break from among the russet, the fight rolled wildly back
for a hundred paces, the dense throng was split asunder, and the Royal
Guards came pouring through the rent, and swerved off to right and left
through hedges and over ditches, stabbing and hacking at the fleeing
horsemen. The whole scene, with the stamping horses, tossing manes,
shouts of triumph or despair, gasping of hard-drawn breath and musical
clink and clatter of steel, was to us upon the hill like some wild
vision, so swiftly did it come and so swiftly go. A sharp, stern
bugle-call summoned the Blues back into the road, where they formed up
and trotted slowly away before fresh squadrons could come up from the
camp. The sun gleamed and the river rippled as ever, and there was
nothing save the long litter of men and horses to mark the course of the
hell blast which had broken so suddenly upon us.

As the Blues retired we observed that a single officer brought up the
rear, riding very slowly, as though it went much against his mood to
turn his back even to an army. The space betwixt the troop and him was
steadily growing greater, yet he made no effort to quicken his pace,
but jogged quietly on, looking back from time to time to see if he were
followed. The same thought sprang into my comrade's mind and my own at
the same instant, and we read it in each other's faces.

'This path,' cried he eagerly. 'It brings us out beyond the grove, and
is in the hollow all the way.'

'Lead the horses until we get on better ground,' I answered. 'We may
just cut him off if we are lucky.'

There was no time for another word, for we hurried off down the uneven
track, sliding and slipping on the rain-soaked turf. Springing into our
saddles we dashed down the gorge, through the grove, and so out on to
the road in time to see the troop disappear in the distance, and to meet
the solitary officer face to face.

He was a sun-burned, high-featured man, with black mustachios, mounted
on a great raw-boned chestnut charger. As we broke out on to the road he
pulled up to have a good look at us. Then, having fully made up his mind
as to our hostile intent, he drew his sword, plucked a pistol out of his
holster with his left hand, and gripping the bridle between his teeth,
dug his spurs into his horse's flanks and charged down upon us at the
top of his speed. As we dashed at him, Reuben on his bridle arm and I
on the other, he cut fiercely at me, and at the same moment fired at my
companion. The ball grazed Reuben's cheek, leaving a red weal behind it
like a lash from a whip, and blackening his face with the powder. His
cut, however, fell short, and throwing my arm round his waist as the two
horses dashed past each other, I plucked him from the saddle and drew
him face upwards across my saddlebow. Brave Covenant lumbered on with
his double burden, and before the Guards had learned that they had lost
their officer, we had brought him safe, in spite of his struggles and
writhings, to within sight of Monmouth's camp.

'A narrow shave, friend,' quoth Reuben, with his hand to his cheek. 'He
hath tattooed my face with powder until I shall be taken for Solomon
Sprent's younger brother.'

'Thank God that you are unhurt,' said I. 'See, our horse are advancing
along the upper road. Lord Grey himself rides at their head. We had best
take our prisoner into camp, since we can do nought here.'

'For Christ's sake, either slay me or set me down!' he cried. 'I cannot
bear to be carried in this plight, like a half-weaned infant, through
your campful of grinning yokels.'

'I would not make sport of a brave man,' I answered. 'If you will give
your word to stay with us, you shall walk between us.'

'Willingly,' said he, scrambling down and arranging his ruffled attire.
'By my faith, sirs, ye have taught me a lesson not to think too meanly
of mine enemies. I should have ridden with my troop had I thought that
there was a chance of falling in with outposts or videttes.'

'We were upon the hill before we cut you off,' quoth Reuben. 'Had that
pistol ball been a thought straighter, it is I that should have been
truly the cut-off one. Zounds, Micah! I was grumbling even now that I
had fallen away, but had my cheek been as round as of old the slug had
been through it.'

'Where have I seen you before?' asked our captive, bending his dark
eyes upon me. 'Aye, I have it! It was in the inn at Salisbury, where
my light-headed comrade Horsford did draw upon an old soldier who was
riding with you. Mine own name is Ogilvy--Major Ogilvy of the Horse
Guards Blue. I was right glad that ye did come off safely from the
hounds. Some word had come of your errand after your departure, so this
same Horsford with the Mayor and one or two other Tantivies, whose zeal
methinks outran their humanity, slipped the dogs upon your trail.'

'I remember you well,' I answered. 'You will find Colonel Decimus Saxon,
my former companion, in the camp. No doubt you will be shortly exchanged
for some prisoner of ours.'

'Much more likely to have my throat cut,' said he, with a smile. 'I
fear that Feversham in his present temper will scarce pause to make
prisoners, and Monmouth may be tempted to pay him back in his own
coin. Yet it is the fortune of war, and I should pay for my want of all
soldierly caution. Truth to tell, my mind was far from battles and ruses
at the moment, for it had wandered away to aqua-regia and its action
upon the metals, until your appearance brought me back to soldiership.'

'The horse are out of sight,' said Reuben, looking backwards, 'ours as
well as theirs. Yet I see a clump of men over yonder at the other side
of the Avon, and there on the hillside can you not see the gleam of
steel?'

'There are foot there,' I answered, puckering my eyes. 'It seems to me
that I can discern four or five regiments and as many colours of horse.
King Monmouth should know of this with all speed.'

'He does know of it,' said Reuben. 'Yonder he stands under the trees
with his council about him. See, one of them rides this way!'

A trooper had indeed detached himself from the group and galloped
towards us. 'If you are Captain Clarke, sir,' he said, with a salute,
'the King orders you to join his council.'

'Then I leave the Major in your keeping, Reuben,' I cried. 'See that
he hath what our means allow.' So saying I spurred my horse, and soon
joined the group who were gathered round the King. There were Grey,
Wade, Buyse, Ferguson, Saxon, Hollis, and a score more, all looking very
grave, and peering down the valley with their glasses. Monmouth himself
had dismounted, and was leaning against the trunk of a tree, with his
arms folded upon his breast, and a look of white despair upon his face.
Behind the tree a lackey paced up and down leading his glossy black
charger, who pranced and tossed his lordly mane, a very king among
horses.

'You see, friends,' said Monmouth, turning lack-lustre eyes from one
leader to another, 'Providence would seem to be against us. Some new
mishap is ever at our heels.'

'Not Providence, your Majesty, but our own negligence,' cried Saxon
boldly. 'Had we advanced on Bristol last night, we might have been on
the right side of the ramparts by now.'

'But we had no thought that the enemy's foot was so near!' exclaimed
Wade.

'I told ye what would come of it, and so did Oberst Buyse and the worthy
Mayor of Taunton,' Saxon answered. 'However, there is nought to be
gained by mourning over a broken pipkin. We must e'en piece it together
as best we may.'

'Let us advance on Bristol, and put oor trust in the Highest,' quoth
Ferguson. 'If it be His mighty will that we should tak' it, then
shall we enter into it, yea, though drakes and sakers lay as thick as
cobblestanes in the streets.'
