
Quite often the cave gave way to the pressure of the surrounding rock.
Then man was hurled amidst the bones of his own victims.

Thousands of years later the anthropologist (ask your father what that
means) comes along with his little spade and his wheelbarrow.

He digs and he digs and at last he uncovers this age-old tragedy and
makes it possible for me to tell you all about it.



THE END OF THE STONE AGE

The struggle to keep alive during the cold period was terrible. Many
races of men and animals, whose bones we have found, disappeared from
the face of the earth.

Whole tribes and clans were wiped out by hunger and cold and want.
First the children would die and then the parents. The old people were
left to the mercy of the wild animals who hastened to occupy the
undefended cave. Until another change in the climate or the slowly
decreasing moisture of the air made life impossible for these wild
invaders and forced them to find a retreat in the heart of the African
jungle where they have lived ever since.

This part of my history is very difficult because the changes which I
must describe were so very slow and so very gradual.

Nature is never in a hurry. She has all eternity in which to accomplish
her task and she can afford to bring about the necessary changes with
deliberate care.

Prehistoric man lived through at least four definite eras when the ice
descended far down into the valleys and covered the greater part of the
European continent.

The last one of these periods came to an end almost thirty thousand
years ago.

From that moment on man left behind him concrete evidence of his
existence in the form of tools and arms and pictures and in a general
way we can say that history begins when the last cold period had become
a thing of the past.

The endless struggle for life had taught the survivors many things.

Stone and wooden implements had become as common as steel tools are in
our own days.

Gradually the rudely chipped flint axe had been replaced by one of
polished flint which was infinitely more practical. It allowed man to
attack many animals at whose mercy he had been since the beginning
of time.

The mammoth was no longer seen.

The musk-ox had retreated to the polar circle.

The tiger had left Europe for good.

The cave-bear no longer ate little children.

The powerful brain of the weakest and most helpless of all living
creatures--Man--had devised such terrible instruments of destruction
that he was now the master of all the other animals.

The first great victory over Nature had been gained but many others were
to follow.

Equipped with a full set of tools both for hunting and fishing, the
cave-dweller looked for new living quarters.

The shores of rivers and lakes offered the best opportunity for a
regular livelihood.

The old caves were deserted and the human race moved toward the water.

Now that man could handle heavy axes, the felling of trees no longer
offered any great difficulties.

For countless ages birds had been constructing comfortable houses out of
chips of wood and grass amidst the branches of trees.

Man followed their example.

He, too, built himself a nest and called it his "home."

He did not, except in a few parts of Asia, take to the trees which were
a bit too small and unsteady for his purpose.

He cut down a number of logs. These he drove firmly into the soft bottom
of a shallow lake. On top of them he constructed a wooden platform and
upon this platform he erected his first wooden house.

It offered many advantages over the old cave.

No wild animals could break into it and robbers could not enter it. The
lake itself was an inexhaustible store-room containing an endless supply
of fresh fish.

These houses built on piles were much healthier than the old caves and
they gave the children a chance to grow up into strong men. The
population increased steadily and man began to occupy vast tracts of
wilderness which had been unoccupied since the beginning of time.

And all the time new inventions were made which made life more
comfortable and less dangerous.

Often enough these innovations were not due to the cleverness of man's
brain.

He simply copied the animals.

You know of course that there are a large number of beasties who prepare
for the long winter by burying nuts and acorns and other food which is
abundant during the summer. Just think of the squirrels who are for ever
filling their larder in gardens and parks with supplies for the winter
and the early spring.

Early man, less intelligent in many respects than the squirrels, had not
known how to preserve anything for the future.

He ate until his hunger was stilled, but what he did not need right away
he allowed to rot. As a result he often went without his meals during
the cold period and many of his children died from hunger and want.

Until he followed the example of the animals and prepared for the future
by laying in sufficient stores when the harvest had been good and there
was an abundance of wheat and grain.

We do not know which genius first discovered the use of pottery but he
deserves a statue.

Very likely it was a woman who had got tired of the eternal chores of
the kitchen and wanted to make her household duties a little less
exacting. She noticed that chunks of clay, when exposed to the rays of
the sun, got baked into a hard substance.

If a flat piece of clay could be transformed into a brick, a slightly
curved piece of the same material must produce a similar result.

And behold, the brick grew into a piece of pottery and the human race
was able to save for the day of tomorrow.

If you think that my praises of this invention are exaggerated, look at
the breakfast table and see what pottery, in one form and the other,
means in your own life.

Your oatmeal is served in a dish.

The cream is served from a pitcher.

Your eggs are carried from the kitchen to the dining-room table on a
plate.

Your milk is brought to you in a china mug. Then go to the store-room
(if there is no store-room in your house go to the nearest Delicatessen
store). You will see how all the things which we are supposed to eat
tomorrow and next week and next year have been put away in jars and cans
and other artificial containers which Nature did not provide for us but
which man was forced to invent and perfect before he could be assured of
his regular meals all the year around.

Even a gas-tank is nothing but a large pitcher, made of iron because
iron does not break as easily as china and is less porous than clay. So
are barrels and bottles and pots and pans. They all serve the same
purpose--of providing us in the future with those things of which we
happen to have an abundance at the present moment.

And because he could preserve eatable things for the day of need, man
began to raise vegetables and grain and saved the surplus for future
consumption.

This explains why, during the late Stone Age, we find the first
wheat-fields and the first gardens, grouped around the settlements of
the early pile-dwellers.

It also tells us why man gave up his habit of wandering and settled down
in one fixed spot where he raised his children until the day of his
death when he was decently buried among his own people.

[Illustration: PREHISTORIC MAN IS DISCOVERED.]

It is safe to say that these earliest ancestors of ours would have given
up the ways of savages of their own accord if they had been left to
their fate.

But suddenly there was an end to their isolation.

Prehistoric man was discovered.

A traveler from the unknown south-land who had dared to cross the
turbulent sea and the forbidding mountain passes had found his way to
the wild people of Central Europe.

On his back he carried a pack.

When he had spread his wares before the gaping curiosity of the
bewildered natives, their eyes beheld wonders of which their minds had
never dared to dream.

They saw bronze hammers and axes and tools made of iron and helmets made
of copper and beautiful ornaments consisting of a strangely colored
substance which the foreign visitor called "glass."

And overnight the Age of Stone came to an end.

It was replaced by a new civilization which had discarded wooden and
stone implements centuries before and had laid the foundations for that
"Age of Metal" which has endured until our own day.

It is of this new civilization that I shall tell you in the rest of my
book and if you do not mind, we shall leave the northern continent for a
couple of thousand years and pay a visit to Egypt and to western Asia.

"But," you will say, "this is not fair. You promise to tell us about
prehistoric man and then, just when the story is going to be
interesting, you close the chapter and you jump to another part of the
world and we must jump with you whether we like it or not."

I know. It does not seem the right thing to do.

Unfortunately, history is not at all like mathematics.

When you solve a sum you go from "a" to "b" and from "b" to "c" and from
"c" to "d" and so on.

History on the other hand jumps from "a" to "z" and then back to "f" and
next to "m" without any apparent respect for neatness and order.

There is a good reason for this.

History is not exactly a science.

It tells the story of the human race and most people, however much we
may try to change their nature, refuse to behave with the regularity and
the precision of the tables of multiplication.

No two men ever do precisely the same thing.

No two human brains ever reach exactly the same conclusion.

You will notice that for yourself when you grow up.

It was not different a few hundred centuries ago.

Prehistoric man, as I just told you, was on a fair way to progress.

He had managed to survive the ice and the snow and the wild animals and
that in itself, was a great deal.

He had invented many useful things.

Suddenly, however, other people in a different part of the world entered
the race.

They rushed forward at a terrible speed and within a very short space of
time they reached a height of civilization which had never before been
seen upon our planet. Then they set forth to teach what they knew to the
others who had been less intelligent than themselves.

Now that I have explained this to you, does it not seem just to give the
Egyptians and the people of western Asia their full share of the
chapters of this book?



THE EARLIEST SCHOOL OF THE HUMAN RACE

We are the children of a practical age.

We travel from place to place in our own little locomotives which we
call automobiles.

When we wish to speak to a friend whose home is a thousand miles away,
we say "Hello" into a rubber tube and ask for a certain telephone number
in Chicago.

At night when the room grows dark we push a button and there is light.

If we happen to be cold we push another button and the electric stove
spreads its pleasant glow through our study.

On the other hand in summer when it is hot the same electric current
will start a small artificial storm (an electric fan) which keeps us
cool and comfortable.

We seem to be the masters of all the forces of nature and we make them
work for us as if they were our very obedient slaves.

But do not forget one thing when you pride yourself upon our splendid
achievements.

We have constructed the edifice of our modern civilization upon the
fundament of wisdom that had been built at great pains by the people of
the ancient world.

Do not be afraid of their strange names which you will meet upon every
page of the coming chapters.

Babylonians and Egyptians and Chaldeans and Sumerians are all dead and
gone, but they continue to influence our own lives in everything we do,
in the letters we write, in the language we use, in the complicated
mathematical problems which we must solve before we can build a bridge
or a skyscraper.

And they deserve our grateful respect as long as our planet continues to
race through the wide space of the high heavens.

These ancient people of whom I shall now tell you lived in three
definite spots.

Two of these were found along the banks of vast rivers.

The third was situated on the shores of the Mediterranean.

The oldest center of civilization developed in the valley of the Nile,
in a country which was called Egypt.

The second was located in the fertile plains between two big rivers of
western Asia, to which the ancients gave the name of Mesopotamia.

The third one which you will find along the shore of the Mediterranean,
was inhabited by the Phoenicians, the earliest of all colonizers and by
the Jews who bestowed upon the rest of the world the main principles of
their moral laws.

This third center of civilization is known by its ancient Babylonian
name of Suri, or as we pronounce it, Syria.

The history of the people who lived in these regions covers more than
five thousand years.

It is a very, very complicated story.

I can not give you many details.

I shall try and weave their adventures into a single fabric, which will
look like one of those marvelous rugs of which you read in the tales
which Scheherazade told to Harun the Just.



THE KEY OF STONE

Fifty years before the birth of Christ, the Romans conquered the land
along the eastern shores of the Mediterranean and among this newly
acquired territory was a country called Egypt.

The Romans, who are to play such a great role in our history, were a
race of practical men.

They built bridges, they constructed roads, and with a small but highly
trained army of soldiers and civil officers, they managed to rule the
greater part of Europe, of eastern Africa and western Asia.

As for art and the sciences, these did not interest them very much. They
regarded with suspicion a man who could play the lute or who could write
a poem about Spring and only thought him little better than the clever
fellow who could walk the tightrope or who had trained his poodle dog to
stand on its hind legs. They left such things to the Greeks and to the
Orientals, both of whom they despised, while they themselves spent their
days and nights keeping order among the thousand and one nations of
their vast empire.

When they first set foot in Egypt that country was already terribly old.

More than six thousand and five hundred years had gone by since the
history of the Egyptian people had begun.

Long before any one had dreamed of building a city amidst the swamps of
the river Tiber, the kings of Egypt had ruled far and wide and had made
their court the center of all civilization.

While the Romans were still savages who chased wolves and bears with
clumsy stone axes, the Egyptians were writing books, performing
intricate medical operations and teaching their children the tables of
multiplication.

This great progress they owed chiefly to one very wonderful invention,
to the art of preserving their spoken words and their ideas for the
benefit of their children and grandchildren.

We call this the art of writing.

We are so familiar with writing that we can not understand how people
ever managed to live without books and newspapers and magazines.

But they did and it was the main reason why they made such slow progress
during the first million years of their stay upon this planet.

They were like cats and dogs who can only teach their puppies and their
kittens a few simple things (barking at a stranger and climbing trees
