crosses the adjoining plain has been bleached to almost perfect
whiteness by the vapors. The crust of ground is very thin all around
here, and indiscriminate exploring is dangerous. To slip through the
crust into the boiling water beneath would inevitably involve being
scalded to death, and the man who allows the guide to show him where to
tread exhibits the greater wisdom.

In direct contrast to this basin is the Elk Park. Yellowstone is
celebrated among other things for being the home of an immense number of
the most remarkable specimens of North American animals. The Government
herd of buffalo in the park is of countless value, because it is really
the only complete representation at the present time of the practically
extinct species of flesh and hide producing animals which used to graze
by the million on the prairie. The buffalo are comparatively tame. Most
of them were born within the confines of the park, and seem to have
realized that the existence of their kind in perpetuity is one of the
greatest desires of the Government. There are a number of bears around
as well, but they have lost their viciousness, and enjoy life very
hugely under somewhat changed conditions. They seldom hurt any one, but
prowl around the hotels at night, and by eating up the scraps and
leavings solve the garbage problem in a satisfactory manner.

Deer, elk, antelope and mountain sheep climb the mountains, and very
frequently find their way into Elk Park or Gibbon Meadow. This is an
exceptionally desirable wintering ground, because it is surrounded by
hills and mountains which keep off the worst of the winds, and there is,
moreover, a perpetual spring of pure water. The meadow is probably the
prettiest spot in the entire park. There is less of the awful and more
of the picturesque than can be found elsewhere, and it is, in many
respects, an oasis in a vast and somewhat dreary expanse of land.

Golden Gate is another of the exquisite spots every visitor to
Yellowstone Park seeks and finds. To reach the Golden Gate one must be a
great climber, for it is high up, and the road to it is built along the
edge of a cliff, which, in places, seems to be absolutely perpendicular.
The gate is, however, worth reaching, and one is not surprised to hear
that as much as $14,000 were spent in cutting out a single mile of the
road to it through the rock.

Leaving the Golden Gate, and continuing the tour of inspection, a valley
of large dimensions is seen. The contrast between the rich green of
almost faultless verdure, and the dreariness of the rocks left behind,
is striking. It would seem as though nature had built up an immense
barrier between the weird and the natural, so that the one could not
affect the other. The Bible speaks of the intense comfort of the shade
of a great rock in a dry and thirsty land. A sensation of equal, if not
greater, relief is experienced in Yellowstone Park when one leaves the
grand, death-like desolation around the Hot Springs, and encounters the
exquisite beauty of shrub land and timber but a few paces away. The
groves of trees are in themselves sources of great delight, and also of
immense wealth. Fortunately, they will be preserved in perpetuity for
the American people. The lumber king cannot get here. His ravages must
be confined to other regions.

The valley into which the tourist has entered takes its name from the
Swan Lake, a very delightful inland mountain scene. The lake is about
two miles from Golden Gate. It is not a very large body of water, but
its rippling surface extracts expressions of admiration from all who
behold it. It has been described as a demure looking sheet of water, and
there is something about the appearance of the lake which seems to
justify the peculiar definition. The canon forming the valley is like
everything else in Yellowstone Park--a little out of the ordinary. On
the one side there are lofty mountains, with eminences and peaks of
various formation and height, while in the distance the great Electric
Peak can be easily seen. We have already spoken of Yellowstone Park as
being about 10,000 feet above the sea level. Electric Peak, well
described as the sentinel of the park, is more than 11,000 feet high.
Viewed from a distance, or along the line of the valley, it is
calculated to excite both admiration and awe.

Willow Creek Park, or Willow Park, as it is sometimes called, lies due
south. It takes its name from the immense growth of willow bushes which
hide the ground from view, and monopolize the scenery and groundwork
entirely. None of these bushes can claim the right to be called trees,
as the average height is inconsiderable. But they make up in density
what they lack in altitude. The peculiar green of the willow is the
predominating color, without any variation of any kind. The idea
conveyed to the mind is of a huge green carpet or rug, and when the wind
blows freely across the valley, it divides up the bushes into little
ridges or furrows, which add to the uniqueness of the scene. Springs of
remarkably pure water, many of them possessed of medicinal power, abound
in this neighborhood, and tourists slake an imaginary thirst with much
interest at different ones of these.

The Obsidian Creek runs slowly through this valley. Obsidian Cliff is
the next object of special interest which is witnessed. It is half a
mile long and from 150 to 200 feet high. The southern end is formed of
volcanic glass, or obsidian, as true a glass as any artificially
produced. The roadway at its base is constructed across the talus, and
is emphatically a glass road. Huge fragments of obsidian, black and
shining, some of it streaked with white seams, line the road. Small
pieces are also plentiful. This flow of glass came from a high plateau
to the east-northeast. Numerous vent pits, or apparent craters, have
been discovered on this plateau. Mr. J. P. Iddings, of the Unites States
Geological Survey, who has made a special study of Obsidian Cliff,
contributes to the survey report for 1885-86 a paper that has in it much
that is of interest to the unscientific mind.

The Lower Geyser Basin is in some respects more pleasing than the
Norris, although the desolation is perhaps even more apparent. People
who have seen districts in which salt is made out of brine extracted
from wells, state that the appearance in the Lower Geyser Basin is very
similar to what is seen around manufacturing districts of that
character. This basin is in the valley of the Firehole River, a
strangely named stream, of a very beautiful character. In the basin
itself the branches of the Firehole unite, and with the Gibbon River
form one of the three sources of the Missouri, called the Madison, after
the President of that name. The Fountain Geyser is the largest in the
neighborhood, and is one of the best in the park. It is very regular in
its eruptions, and seldom fails to perform on time for the benefit of
the onlooker. It sends an immense volume of water into the air, and
resembles a fountain very closely. Its basin is very interesting, and
gives a good example of the singular deposits left by a geyser.

When the fountain is busy throwing out its volumes of water, the
appearance is very peculiar. Little notice is given of an eruption,
which takes place suddenly, although at stated intervals. All at once
the watcher is rewarded for his patience by having the stillness changed
into activity of the most boisterous character. The water is hurled
upwards in a mass of frothing, boiling and foaming crystals. The actual
height varies, but frequently goes as far as thirty feet. In a moment
the wall of water becomes compact, oblong and irregular. Crystal effects
are produced, varying according to the time of day and the amount of
light, but always delightful and peculiar.

Close at hand are the Mammoth Paint Pots, in the center of the Firehole
Geyser. We can explain the appearance of the Paint Pot or Mud Bath much
more easily than we can account for the phenomenon. It is well named,
because it resembles a succession of paint pots of enormous size more
than anything else that the imagination can liken it to. The basin
measures forty by sixty feet, with a mud boundary three or four feet
high on three sides of it. The contents of the basin have kept
scientists wondering for years. The substance is white, looking very
much like ordinary paint, but, unlike paint, it is constantly in motion,
and the agitation is so persistent that an idea is given that the Paint
Pot's basin is the bed of a crater. The continual bubbling and vibration
is very interesting in its effects, and the noise it makes is quite
peculiar, not unlike a subdued hiss or a badly executed stage-whisper.
Mixed among the white substance is a quantity of silicious clay of all
sorts and conditions of color. This produces a variation in the
appearance, but is merely in addition to what is otherwise marvelous in
the extreme. Pearl gray, with terra cotta, red and green tints is the
basic color of this boiling, seething mass, which seems to be
continually at unrest and in a course of worry.

The Excelsior Geyser is the most conspicuous feature of the Midway
Basin, a collection of hot springs and pools. They are situated in the
Midway Basin, and were originally called Cliff Caldron. Excelsior Geyser
is in a continual state of anarchy, without law, government or
regulation. It does just as it likes and when it likes. It seldom
performs when wanted to, but when it does break out into a condition of
fermentation, the effect is very magnificent. As one writer puts it, the
beauties and exhibitions of this geyser are as far superior to those of
all the others as the light of the sun seems to that of the moon.

The geyser was for years regarded as the grandest spring in the park,
before its exceptionally great features prevailed or became apparent. In
the years 1881-82, the eruptions from this geyser became so terrific
that it spouted water as high as 250 feet, and converted the generally
inoffensive Firehole River into a torrent of storming water. Rocks of
large size and heavy enough to be very dangerous were hurled headlong
from within the mysterious confines of the earth, and were dashed around
in all directions. For miles the terrific noise could be heard, and
people who had been waiting for a phenomenon of this character, hurried
across country to witness it. It is only now and again that a phenomenon
of this kind is repeated, and the most skillful geologists are unable to
give us any adequate forecasts as to when the next performance will take
place.

Rehearsals seem always in progress. Vast masses of steam rise from the
crater or hole. Many people crowd to the edge of the basin and strive to
penetrate into the mysteries of subterranean happenings. The day may
come when some scientific method of seeing through smoke and steam and
enduring scalding heat without difficulty may be devised. Until then the
mystery must remain unsolved.

In exact contrast with the irregular and spasmodic action of the
Excelsior, is the methodical, persevering action of Old Faithful. This
is another of the great and popular geysers of Yellowstone Park. It is
so uniform in its appearance that a man can keep his watch regulated by
it. Every sixty-five minutes the well-named geyser gives forth a
peculiar noise to warn the world that it is about to perform. Then for
about five minutes a vast stream of water and steam is hurled into the
air to the height of about 150 feet. The mass of boiling water measures
six feet in diameter, and the volume discharged exceeds a hundred
thousand gallons each hour. Day by day and hour, for nearly twenty
years, this industrious geyser has regularly done its duty, and afforded
entertainment for visitors. No one knows how long prior to that time it
commenced operations, or for how long it will continue.

Leaving for the moment the consideration of geysers and hot springs and
other wonders of this character, the sightseer gets a view of a very
different nature. At Keppler's Cascades the stage coach generally stops
to enable passengers to walk to the edge of the cliff and watch the
cascades and foaming river in the black canon below. Then the journey
proceeds through the Firehole Valley, and through leafy forests and open
glades, until the narrow and tortuous canon of Spring Creek is reached.
The scenery here is decidedly unconventional and wild.

We soon reach the summit of the Continental Divide. Now the outlook is
much expanded, and it becomes more majestic and dignified. The mountains
overhang the roadway on one side and drop far below on the other. Heavy,
shaggy forests cover the slopes and peaks, while tiny island parks, as
it were, and cheerful openings are occasionally seen. The road winds
about the mountain-flanks, now climbing up, now descending; the whole
aspect of nature grows more grand, more austere; the air grows more
rarified, and one becomes more and more exalted in spirit. Occasionally
the mountains break away and you obtain a view far out beyond the narrow
limits round about. Distant mountains are seen, and the feeling that
there are nothing but mountain-walls about you impresses itself strongly
upon one, and it is just about true. After several miles of such riding,
and when you have begun to imagine that nothing finer can come, the road
leads up to a point that, almost before you know it, simply drives from
your thoughts all else seen on this ride.

It is a wonderful picture, and produces a state of exultation that to
some must seem almost too strong to endure. The mountains, which rise
high above, stretch also far below, and in every direction are at their
very best. Proud and regal in their strength and bearing, they are
still, from summit to the depths, heavily covered with the primeval
forest. It would seem as if they really knew what a view was here
unfolded, and to rejoice in the grandeur of the scene. Like a thread,
you can trace the turns and lines of the road along which the stage has
come. But that which adds the softer, more beautiful element to a
picture otherwise almost overpowering in its grandeur, and withal stern
and unyielding, is seen through a break or portal off to the south.

Far away, far below, lies a portion of Shoshone Lake. Like a sleeping
babe in its mother's lap, nestles this tiny lakelet babe in the
mountains. It shines like a plate of silver or beautiful mirror. It is a
gem worth crossing a continent to see, especially as there runs between
the lake and the point of view a little valley dressed in bright, grassy
green as a kind of foreground in the rear. There is thus a silvered
lake, a lovely valley, with bright and warm green shades, and rich,
dark-black forests in the rear. No one can gaze upon such a combination
and contrast without being impressed, and without recognizing the
sublime beauty and grandeur of the park and its surroundings.

Yellowstone Lake is another of the extraordinary attractions of our
great National Park. It is described as the highest inland sea in the
world, and more than 7,000 feet above the sea level. It is, really,
nearly 8,000 feet above the sea, and its icy cold water covers an area
some thirty miles in length and about half as wide or about 300 square
miles. This glorious inland ocean is perched up at the summit of the
Rocky Mountains, just where no one would expect to find it. Several
islands of varying sizes are dotted over the surface of the water, which
at times is as smooth as a little mill pond, and at others almost as
turbulent as the sea. The shores are entirely irregular in their
formation, and Promontory Point extends out into the water a great
distance, forming one of the most peculiar inland peninsulas in the
entire world. Along the southern shore, inlets and bays are very
numerous, some of them natural in character, and others full of evidence
of brisk, and even terrific, volcanic action.

From the peculiar rocks and eminences along the shore, reflections are
cast into the water of an almost indescribable character. They are
varied in nature and color, and, like the lake itself, differ from
anything to be seen elsewhere. Another unique feature of this lake, and
one that has to be seen to be understood, is the presence on the banks,
and even out in the lake itself, of hot springs and geysers full of
boiling water and steam. Some of these springs have wide and secure
edges, or banks, on which a man can stand and fish. Then, on his right
hand, he has the icy-cold water of the lake, from which he can obtain
trout and other fish, until he begins to dream of a fisherman's
paradise. Dr. Hayden, the explorer, already referred to, was the first
man to take advantage of the opportunity and to cook his fish unhooked
in the boiling water to his left, merely making a half turn in order to
do so. When the Professor first mentioned this fact, he was good
humoredly laughed at, but, as stated in an earlier part of this chapter,
the possibility has been so clearly demonstrated, that people have long
since admitted as a possibility what they had first denounced as an
utter absurdity.





CHAPTER XVI.


THE HEROES OF THE IRON HORSE.

Honor to Whom Honor is Due--A Class of Men Not Always Thoroughly
Appreciated at their Worth--An Amateur's Ride on a Flying
Locomotive--From Twelve Miles an Hour to Six Times that Speed--The
Signal Tower and the Men who Work in it--Stealing a Train--A Race with
Steam--Stones about Bewitched Locomotives and Providential Escapes.


No one who has not given the matter special consideration has the
remotest idea of the magnitude and importance of the railroad system of
the United States. Nor has any one who has not studied the statistics
bearing on the question the faintest conception of the cost of the roads
built and in operation. The cost in dollars and cents for a mile of
track has been ascertained to a fractional point. Expert accountants
have figured out to a hundredth part of a cent the cost of hauling a
passenger or a ton of merchandise any given distance. There are even
tables in existence showing the actual expense incurred in stopping a
train, while such details as the necessary outlay in wages, fuel,
repairs, etc., have received the attention which the magnitude of the
interests involved deserves.

But the cost in human life and suffering of the great railroad system of
the United States is quite another matter, and one that does not come
within the scope of the calculations of accountants, expert or
otherwise. It has been said repeatedly that a man is safer in a railroad
train than on the streets. In other words, the percentage of death and
serious injury is said by statisticians to be lower among men habitually
traveling than among people who are classed as stay-at-homes, and who
seldom take a railroad journey. But while this is doubtless correct, so
far as passengers are concerned, the rule does not apply to railroad
employes, and those who by their never-wavering care and energy protect
the life and limbs of passengers, and make railroad traveling safe as
well as comfortable.

A celebrated divine, when preaching on the subject of faith, once took a
railroad journey for an illustration. As he pointed out, with much
eloquence and force, there could be no more realistic personification of
faith than the man who peacefully lay down to sleep at night in his
berth of a Pullman car, relying implicitly upon the railroad men to
avert the thousands of dangers which had to be encountered during the
still hours of the night.

Whenever there is a strike, a great deal is written about the men
employed in various capacities by railroads, and every misdeed is
exaggerated, and every indiscretion magnified into a crime. But very
little is said on the other side of the question. The men to whom
railroad travelers, and especially those who ride at night, commend
their safety, are worked to the full extent of their powers, and are
paid very small wages, when the nature of their duties and the hours
they have to make are taken into consideration.

The commendation of these men takes the form of deeds, rather than
words, and while so few have ever stopped to consider the loyalty and
devotion of the poorly paid and hard-worked railroad man, every traveler
who enters a railroad car pays silent tribute to their reliability. The
passenger, as he lounges comfortably in a luxurious seat, or sleeps
peacefully in his state-room, thinks nothing of the anxiety and
annoyances of the men in charge of the train, or of those who are
responsible for the track being kept clear, and proper orders being
given to the engineer.

This official is a man of many hardships and dangers. To him is
entrusted daily the lives of hundreds of human beings. He knows not how
many, but he knows that the slightest error on his part will hurl
perhaps ten, perhaps twenty, and perhaps fifty human beings into
eternity, besides maiming for life two or three times as many more. He
