"Pardon me, my revered lady," he began; "but I grieve to say that your
safety demands instant action, and must excuse my intrusion; your life
and liberty are no longer safe here."

"Life and liberty?"

"There is some foul plot to detain you all here, on pretence your safety
requires it. I have been this morning to Redwald, and he refuses
permission for any one to leave the place, asserting that thus only can
he assure your safety. Now, it is plain that if the place comes to be
besieged you would be far safer in the priory or the old priests' house.
Our own countrymen would not injure us."

"He will not detain us by force?"

"I would not trust to that; but we must meet guile by guile. I have
pretended to be content on your behalf and he is just going to leave the
hall, with the greater part of his followers, to collect provisions and
cattle. I have told him that the Grange farm is well stocked; he has
caught the bait, and is going to superintend the work of spoliation in
person: far better, in the present need, that he should rob the estate
than that a hair of your head or of those of your children should perish."

"But why do you suspect him of evil?"

"I cannot tell you now. I have overheard dark, dark speeches. So soon as
he has gone, Alfred and I must summon all your own people who are in the
hall. We will then bring the body forth, and follow it ourselves; as we
shall outnumber those left behind I do not imagine they will dare, in
his absence, to interfere with our progress."

"I will go at once," said Alfred, "and summon the household."

"No; you would be observed. I am older and perhaps a little more
discreet. Stay with your mother till all is ready."

Alfred reluctantly obeyed, and Father Cuthbert went forth. So great was
their anxiety that it almost banished the power of prayer, save such
mental shafts as could be sent heavenward in each interval of thought.

At last Alfred, who was at the window, saw Redwald and his followers--
nearly a hundred in number--leave the castle and ride across towards
the forest in the direction of the farm in question. Another moment and
Father Cuthbert entered.

"Are you ready? If so, follow me."

He took them by a private passage into the chapel, where four men
already stood by the bier, ready to head the procession, and thirty or
forty others were gathered in the chapel or about the door--their own
vassals, good and true. They all were armed.

Father Cuthbert ascended the wooden tower above the chapel, which served
as a bell cot. He looked from its windows; the party of Redwald had
disappeared behind the trees.

He came down and gave the signal. The sad procession started; they
descended the steps to the courtyard. Redwald had left some forty or
fifty men behind--men who had grown old in arms, and who, if they had
pleased, might perhaps have stopped the exit, but they were not
sufficiently in the confidence of their leader to take the initiative;
and the only man who was in his confidence, and whom he had charged to
see that no one departed, was fortunately at that moment in another part
of the building. The sentinel at the drawbridge was one of Redwald's
troop. He menaced opposition, and refused to let the drawbridge be
peaceably lowered.

"Art thou a Christian?" said Father Cuthbert, coming forward in his
priestly attire, "and dost thou presume to interfere with a servant of
the Lord and to delay a funeral?"

"I must obey my orders."

"Then I will excommunicate thee, and deliver thy soul to Satan."

And he began to utter some awful Latin imprecation, which so aroused the
superstition of the sentinel that he made no further opposition, which
perhaps saved his life, for the retainers of Aescendune were meditating
instant violence, indignant at the delay and the outrage to their lady.

They themselves let the drawbridge down and guarded the sad cortege over
the plain. Their numbers increased every moment, and before they reached
the neighbourhood of the priory they had little cause to fear any
attack, should Redwald have arrived and have been rash enough to attempt
one.

The old parsonage house, which had served for the residence of each
successive parish prior or mass-thane, was a large and commodious
building, containing all such accommodation as the family absolutely
required in the emergency, while furniture, provision and comforts of
all kinds were sent over from the priory, for the good fathers did not
forget at this hour of need that they owed their own home to the
liberality of Ella and his father.

So when they had deposited the loved remains before the altar of the
church, and had knelt a brief season in prayer, the exiled family took
possession of their temporary home. It was hard--very hard--to give
up their loved dwelling at such a season of affliction, but the dread
which Redwald had somehow inspired made it a great relief to be removed
from his immediate presence.

Yet they could give no reason for the feeling they all shared. Father
Cuthbert evidently suspected, or knew, things which he as yet concealed
from them.

"Who could have slain the husband and father?"

This was the unanswered question. Their suspicions could only turn to
Redwald or some of his crew: no marauders were known to lurk in the
forest; there was, they felt assured, not one of his own people who
would not have died in his defence. Again, it was not the lust of gold
which had suggested the deed, for they had found the gold chain he wore
untouched. What then could have been the motive of the murderer?

Father Cuthbert had found a solution, which was based upon sad
experience of the traditional feuds so frequently handed down from
father to son. Still he would not suggest further cause of disquietude,
and added no further words.

The utter uncertainty about Elfric was another cause of uneasiness.
Whether he had gone southward with the king, or had fallen on the
battlefield, they knew not; or whether he had surrendered with the
prisoners taken in the entrenched camp, and who had been all admitted to
mercy.

In the course of the morning they saw Redwald return, laden with the
spoils of the Grange farm--oxen and sheep, waggons containing corn,
driven before him. What passed within on his entrance they could not
tell; how narrow their escape they knew not--were not even certain it
had been an escape at all.

It was now determined that the interment should take place on the
morrow, and the intelligence was communicated rapidly to all the tenantry.

Hourly they expected the forces of Mercia to appear, and exact a heavy
account from Redwald for his offences. He was supposed to be the
instigator of the expedition which had failed so utterly; it was not
likely that he would be allowed to retain Aescendune a long time. The
only surprise people felt was that he should have dared to remain at the
post when all hope of successful resistance had ceased. He had his own
reasons, which they knew not.

Under these circumstances it seemed desirable to hurry forward the
interment, lest it should be interfered with from without, in the
confusion of hostile operations against the hall.

The priory church was a noble but irregular structure, of great size for
those days. The cunning architect from the Continent, who had designed
it, had far surpassed the builders of ordinary churches in the grandeur
of his conception. The lofty roof, the long choir beyond the transept,
gave the idea of magnitude most forcibly, and added dignity to the
design. In the south transept was a chapel dedicated especially to St.
Cuthbert, where the aged Offa reposed, and the mother of Ella. There
they had removed the body to await the last solemn rites. Six large wax
tapers burned around it, and watchers were there day and night--
mourners who had loved him well, and felt that in him they had lost a
dear friend.

The wife, the son, or the daughter, were ever there, but seldom alone.
For when the monks in the choir were not saying the canonical hours, or
the low mass was not being said at one of the side altars, still the
voice of intercession arose, with its burden:

"Eternal rest give unto him, O Lord,
And let perpetual light shine upon him."

At length the morning came, the second only after death. The
neighbouring thanes whom the troubled times did not detain at home, the
churls of the estate, the thralls, crowded the precincts of the minster,
as the solemn bell tolled the deep funeral knell. At length the monks
poured into the church, while the solemn "_Domino refugium_" arose from
their lips--the same grand words which for these thousand years past
have told of the eternity of God and the destiny of the creature;
speaking as deeply to the heart then as in these days of civilisation.

The mourners entered, Alfred supporting his widowed mother, who had
summoned all her fortitude to render the last sad offices to her dear
lord; her daughter, a few distant relations--there were none nearer of
kin. The bier, with its precious burden, was placed in the centre before
the high altar. Six monks, bearing torches, knelt around it. A pall,
beautifully embroidered, covered the coffin, a wreath of flowers
surmounting a cross was placed upon it.

The solemn requiem mass commenced, and the great Sacrifice once offered
upon Calvary was pleaded for the soul of the deceased thane. When the
last prayer had been said, the coffin was sprinkled with hallowed water,
and perfumed with sweet incense, after which it was removed to its last
resting place. The grave was already prepared. Again the earthly cavern
was sprinkled with the hallowed water, emblematical of the blood of
sprinkling which speaketh better things than that of Abel, and the body
--the sacred dust for which Christ had died, in which God had dwelt as
in a temple--was lowered, to be sown in corruption, that hereafter it
might be raised in incorruption and joy unspeakable.

All crowded to take the last sad look. Alfred felt his dear mother's arm
tremble as she leant on him, yet gazed firmly into that last resting
place, while the solemn strain arose:

"Ego sum resurrectio et vita. Qui credit in Me, etiam si mortuus fuerit
vivet; et omnis qui vivit, et credit in Me, non morietur in aeternum."
[xxx]


    CHAPTER XX. "AND THE DOOR WAS SHUT."

The reader is, we trust, somewhat impatient to learn what had really
been the fate of the unhappy Elfric of Aescendune--whether he had
indeed been cut off with the work of repentance incomplete, or whether
he yet survived to realise the calamity which had fallen upon his household.

He lived. When the blow of his adversary, as we have seen, crushed him
to the earth, and he lay there with his head on the ground, prostrate,
amidst kicking and plunging hoofs, and the roar and confusion of deadly
strife, Providence, without which not one sparrow falleth to the ground,
watched over him, and averted the iron hoofs from his forehead. Could
one have concentrated his gaze upon that little spot of earth and have
seen the furious hoofs graze, without injuring, that tender forehead,
could he have beheld the gallop of the retreating steeds over and around
that senseless form, for it now lay senseless, he would have realised
that there is One Whose Eye is observant of each minute detail which
concerns the life of His beloved ones--nay, Who knows the movements of
the tiniest insect, while His Hand directs the rolling spheres. And his
care preserved Elfric for His Own wise ends, until the fight receded,
leaving its traces behind it, as when the tide of ocean recedes after a
storm and the beach is strewn with wreck--bodies of men, of horses,
mutilated, dismembered, dead or dying, disabled or desperately wounded.

Hours had passed, during which the sounds of the combat still maintained
at the entrenched camp came freshly on the ear, and then died away,
until the solemn night fell upon the scene, and the only sound which
smote the ear were faint, faint moans--cries of "Water! water!"
incessantly repeated from hundreds of feeble lips.

It was then that Elfric awoke from the insensibility which had resulted
from exhaustion and the stunning blow he had received in his fall. Every
limb seemed in pain, for the loss of blood had not left the vital powers
strength for the maintenance of the due circulation through the body,
and the cold night air chilled the frame. He did not at first comprehend
where he was, but as his senses returned he perceived all too well that
he was left for dead.

His first impulse was to see whether he had strength to arise. He raised
himself partially, first on one elbow, and then he strove to stand up,
but fell back feebly and helplessly, like an infant who first essays to
escape its mother's arms and to trust its feeble limbs.

Then he looked around him, thus raising his head, and gazed upon the sad
and shocking scene. Close by him, with the head cleft literally in two
by a battle-axe, lay a horseman, and his blood reddened all the ground
around Elfric's feet, and had deeply dyed the youth's lower garments; a
horse, his own, lay dead, the jugular vein cut through, with all the
surrounding muscles and sinews; hard by, a rider had fallen with such
impetus, that his helmet had fixed itself deeply in the ground, and the
body seemed as if it had quivered for the moment in the air; a dart had
transfixed another through belt and stomach, and he lay with the weapon
appearing on either side the body. Near these lay another, whose thigh
had been pierced to the great artery, and who had bled to death, as the
deadly paleness of the face showed; here and there one yet lived, as
faint moan and broken utterance testified; but Elfric could bear no
more, his head sank upon the ground, and he hid his face.

It was bright starlight, and the gleam of the heavenly host seemed to
mock the wounded youth as he thought of the previous night, when, sound
in body, he had wandered beneath the glittering canopy of the heavens;
and thus reminded, all the thoughts of that previous night came back
upon him, especially the remembrance of his sin, of his desertion of his
father, of his vicious life at court, of his neglect for three years and
more of all the obligations of religion, and he groaned aloud in the
anguish of his spirit.

"Oh! spare me, my God!" he cried, "for I am not fit to die! Spare me,
that I may at least receive my father's forgiveness."

For he felt as if he could not ask God to forgive him until he had been
forgiven by his father. Little did he think, poor boy, that that father
lay cold in death; that never could he hear the blessed words of
forgiveness from his tongue; neither had he the consolation of knowing
how completely he had been forgiven, and how lovingly he had been
remembered in his father's last hours upon earth.

"I cannot die! I cannot die!" thus he cried; and he strove again to
raise himself from the ground, but in vain; strove again, as if he would
have dragged his feeble body through pain and anguish all the way to
Aescendune, but could not. The story of the prodigal son, often told him
by Father Cuthbert, came back to him, not so much in its spiritual as in
its literal aspect: he would fain arise and go to his father; but he
could not.

"O happy prodigal!" he cried; "thou couldst at least go from that far
off country, and the husks which the swine did eat; but I cannot, I cannot!"

While thus grieving in bitterness of spirit, he saw a light flitting
about amongst the dead bodies, and stopping every now and then; once he
saw it pause, and heard a cry of expostulation, then a faint scream, and
all was still; and he comprehended that this was no ministering angel,
but one of those villainous beings who haunt the battlefield to prey
upon the slain, and to despatch with short mercy those who offer resistance.

He lay very, very quiet, hoping that the light would not come near him,
and he trembled every time it bent its course that way; but at length
his fears seemed about to be realised--it drew near, and he saw the
face of a hideous looking hag, dressed in coarse and vile garments, who
held a bloody dagger in the right hand, and kept the left in a kind of
bag, tied to her person, in which she had evidently accumulated great
store. Her eyes were roaming about, until the light suddenly was
reflected from the poor lad's brilliant accoutrements, and she advanced
towards him.

He groaned, and sank backwards, and her hand was upon the dagger, while
she cast such a look as the fabled vampire might cast upon her destined
victim, loving gold much, but perhaps blood most, when all at once she
turned and fled.

Elfric knew not what had saved him; when voices fell upon his ear, and
the baying of a dog.

"Which way has that hag fled? Pursue her, she murders the wounded."

