  The managed winds, now forcible, as best
  Suited dispatch, now gentle, if the will
  Of Vulcan and his labor so required.
  Impenetrable brass, tin, silver, gold,                         590
  He cast into the forge, then, settling firm
  His ponderous anvil on the block, one hand
  With his huge hammer fill'd, one with the tongs.
    [10]He fashion'd first a shield massy and broad
  Of labor exquisite, for which he form'd                        595
  A triple border beauteous, dazzling bright,
  And loop'd it with a silver brace behind.
  The shield itself with five strong folds he forged,
  And with devices multiform the disk
  Capacious charged, toiling with skill divine.                  600
    There he described the earth, the heaven, the sea,
  The sun that rests not, and the moon full-orb'd.
  There also, all the stars which round about
  As with a radiant frontlet bind the skies,
  The Pleiads and the Hyads, and the might                       605
  Of huge Orion, with him Ursa call'd,
  Known also by his popular name, the Wain,
  That spins around the pole looking toward
  Orion, only star of these denied
  To slake his beams in ocean's briny baths.                     610
    Two splendid cities also there he form'd
  Such as men build. In one were to be seen
  Rites matrimonial solemnized with pomp
  Of sumptuous banquets; from their chambers forth
  Leading the brides they usher'd them along                     615
  With torches through the streets, and sweet was heard
  The voice around of Hymenaeal song.
  Here striplings danced in circles to the sound
  Of pipe and harp, while in the portals stood
  Women, admiring, all, the gallant show.                        620
  Elsewhere was to be seen in council met
  The close-throng'd multitude. There strife arose.
  Two citizens contended for a mulct
  The price of blood. This man affirm'd the fine
  All paid,[11] haranguing vehement the crowd,                   625
  That man denied that he had aught received,
  And to the judges each made his appeal
  Eager for their award. Meantime the people,
  As favor sway'd them, clamor'd loud for each.
  The heralds quell'd the tumult; reverend sat                   630
  On polish'd stones the elders in a ring,
  Each with a herald's sceptre in his hand,
  Which holding they arose, and all in turn
  Gave sentence. In the midst two talents lay
  Of gold, his destined recompense whose voice                   635
  Decisive should pronounce the best award.
  The other city by two glittering hosts
  Invested stood, and a dispute arose
  Between the hosts, whether to burn the town
  And lay all waste, or to divide the spoil.                     640
  Meantime, the citizens, still undismay'd,
  Surrender'd not the town, but taking arms
  Secretly, set the ambush in array,
  And on the walls their wives and children kept
  Vigilant guard, with all the ancient men.                      645
  They sallied; at their head Pallas and Mars
  Both golden and in golden vests attired
  Advanced, proportion each showing divine,
  Large, prominent, and such as Gods beseem'd.
  Not such the people, but of humbler size.                      650
  Arriving at the spot for ambush chosen,
  A river's side, where cattle of each kind
  Drank, down they sat, all arm'd in dazzling brass.
  Apart from all the rest sat also down
  Two spies, both looking for the flocks and herds.              655
  Soon they appear'd, and at their side were seen
  Two shepherd swains, each playing on his pipe
  Careless, and of the danger nought apprized,
  Swift ran the spies, perceiving their approach,
  And intercepting suddenly the herds                            660
  And flocks of silver fleece, slew also those
  Who fed them. The besiegers, at that time
  In council, by the sound alarm'd, their steeds
  Mounted, and hasted, instant, to the place;
  Then, standing on the river's brink they fought                665
  And push'd each other with the brazen lance.
  There Discord raged, there Tumult, and the force
  Of ruthless Destiny; she now a Chief
  Seized newly wounded, and now captive held
  Another yet unhurt, and now a third                            670
  Dragg'd breathless through the battle by his feet
  And all her garb was dappled thick with blood
  Like living men they traversed and they strove,
  And dragg'd by turns the bodies of the slain.
    He also graved on it a fallow field                          675
  Rich, spacious, and well-till'd. Plowers not few,
  There driving to and fro their sturdy teams,
  Labor'd the land; and oft as in their course
  They came to the field's bourn, so oft a man
  Met them, who in their hands a goblet placed                   680
  Charged with delicious wine. They, turning, wrought
  Each his own furrow, and impatient seem'd
  To reach the border of the tilth, which black
  Appear'd behind them as a glebe new-turn'd,
  Though golden. Sight to be admired by all!                     685
    There too he form'd the likeness of a field
  Crowded with corn, in which the reapers toil'd
  Each with a sharp-tooth'd sickle in his hand.
  Along the furrow here, the harvest fell
  In frequent handfuls, there, they bound the sheaves.           690
  Three binders of the sheaves their sultry task
  All plied industrious, and behind them boys
  Attended, filling with the corn their arms
  And offering still their bundles to be bound.
  Amid them, staff in hand, the master stood                     695
  Silent exulting, while beneath an oak
  Apart, his heralds busily prepared
  The banquet, dressing a well-thriven ox
  New slain, and the attendant maidens mix'd
  Large supper for the hinds of whitest flour.                   700
    There also, laden with its fruit he form'd
  A vineyard all of gold; purple he made
  The clusters, and the vines supported stood
  By poles of silver set in even rows.
  The trench he color'd sable, and around                        705
  Fenced it with tin. One only path it show'd
  By which the gatherers when they stripp'd the vines
  Pass'd and repass'd. There, youths and maidens blithe
  In frails of wicker bore the luscious fruit,
  While, in the midst, a boy on his shrill harp                  710
  Harmonious play'd, still as he struck the chord
  Carolling to it with a slender voice.
  They smote the ground together, and with song
  And sprightly reed came dancing on behind.[12]
    There too a herd he fashion'd of tall beeves                 715
  Part gold, part tin. They, lowing, from the stalls
  Rush'd forth to pasture by a river-side
  Rapid, sonorous, fringed with whispering reeds.
  Four golden herdsmen drove the kine a-field
  By nine swift dogs attended. Dreadful sprang                   720
  Two lions forth, and of the foremost herd
  Seized fast a bull. Him bellowing they dragg'd,
  While dogs and peasants all flew to his aid.
  The lions tore the hide of the huge prey
  And lapp'd his entrails and his blood. Meantime                725
  The herdsmen, troubling them in vain, their hounds
  Encouraged; but no tooth for lions' flesh
  Found they, and therefore stood aside and bark'd.
    There also, the illustrious smith divine
  Amidst a pleasant grove a pasture form'd                       730
  Spacious, and sprinkled o'er with silver sheep
  Numerous, and stalls and huts and shepherds' tents.
    To these the glorious artist added next,
  With various skill delineated exact,
  A labyrinth for the dance, such as of old                      735
  In Crete's broad island Daedalus composed
  For bright-hair'd Ariadne.[13] There the youths
  And youth-alluring maidens, hand in hand,
  Danced jocund, every maiden neat-attired
  In finest linen, and the youths in vests                       740
  Well-woven, glossy as the glaze of oil.
  These all wore garlands, and bright falchions, those,
  Of burnish'd gold in silver trappings hung:--[14]
  They with well-tutor'd step, now nimbly ran
  The circle, swift, as when, before his wheel                   745
  Seated, the potter twirls it with both hands
  For trial of its speed,[15] now, crossing quick
  They pass'd at once into each other's place.
  On either side spectators numerous stood
  Delighted, and two tumblers roll'd themselves                  750
  Between the dancers, singing as they roll'd.
    Last, with the might of ocean's boundless flood
  He fill'd the border of the wondrous shield.
    When thus the massy shield magnificent
  He had accomplish'd, for the hero next                         755
  He forged, more ardent than the blaze of fire,
  A corselet; then, a ponderous helmet bright
  Well fitted to his brows, crested with gold,
  And with laborious art divine adorn'd.
  He also made him greaves of molten tin.                        760
    The armor finish'd, bearing in his hand
  The whole, he set it down at Thetis' feet.
  She, like a falcon from the snowy top
  Stoop'd of Olympus, bearing to the earth
  The dazzling wonder, fresh from Vulcan's hand.                 765




                              THE ILIAD.

                              BOOK XIX.




                   ARGUMENT OF THE NINETEENTH BOOK.


Achilles is reconciled to Agamemnon, and clothed in new armor forged
by Vulcan, leads out the Myrmidons to battle.




                              BOOK XIX.


  Now rose the morn in saffron vest attired
  From ocean, with new day for Gods and men,
  When Thetis at the fleet of Greece arrived,
  Bearing that gift divine. She found her son
  All tears, and close enfolding in his arms                       5
  Patroclus, while his Myrmidons around
  Wept also;[1] she amid them, graceful, stood,
  And seizing fast his hand, him thus bespake.
    Although our loss be great, yet, oh my son!
  Leave we Patroclus lying on the bier                            10
  To which the Gods ordain'd him from the first.
  Receive from Vulcan's hands these glorious arms,
  Such as no mortal shoulders ever bore.
    So saying, she placed the armor on the ground
  Before him, and the whole bright treasure rang.                 15
  A tremor shook the Myrmidons; none dared
  Look on it, but all fled. Not so himself.
  In him fresh vengeance kindled at the view,
  And, while he gazed, a splendor as of fire
  Flash'd from his eyes. Delighted, in his hand                   20
  He held the glorious bounty of the God,
  And, wondering at those strokes of art divine,
  His eager speech thus to his mother turn'd.[2]
    The God, my mother! hath bestow'd in truth
  Such armor on me as demanded skill                              25
  Like his, surpassing far all power of man.
  Now, therefore, I will arm. But anxious fears
  Trouble me, lest intrusive flies, meantime,
  Breed worms within the spear-inflicted wounds
  Of Menoetiades, and fill with taint                             30
  Of putrefaction his whole breathless form.[3]
    But him the silver-footed Goddess fair
  Thus answer'd. Oh, my son! chase from thy mind
  All such concern. I will, myself, essay
  To drive the noisome swarms which on the slain                  35
  In battle feed voracious. Should he lie
  The year complete, his flesh shall yet be found
  Untainted, and, it may be, fragrant too.
  But thou the heroes of Achaia's host
  Convening, in their ears thy wrath renounce                     40
  Against the King of men, then, instant, arm
  For battle, and put on thy glorious might.
    So saying, the Goddess raised his courage high.
  Then, through the nostrils of the dead she pour'd
  Ambrosia, and the ruddy juice divine                            45
  Of nectar, antidotes against decay.
    And now forth went Achilles by the side
  Of ocean, calling with a dreadful shout
  To council all the heroes of the host.[4]
  Then, even they who in the fleet before                         50
  Constant abode, helmsmen and those who held
  In stewardship the food and public stores,
  All flock'd to council, for that now at length
  After long abstinence from dread exploits
  Of war, Achilles had once more appear'd.                        55
  Two went together, halting on the spear,
  (For still they felt the anguish of their wounds)
  Noble Ulysses and brave Diomede,
  And took an early seat; whom follow'd last
  The King of men, by Cooen in the field                           60
  Of furious battle wounded with a lance.
  The Grecians all assembled, in the midst
  Upstood the swift Achilles, and began.
    Atrides! we had doubtless better sped
  Both thou and I, thus doing, when at first                      65
  With cruel rage we burn'd, a girl the cause.
  I would that Dian's shaft had in the fleet
  Slain her that self-same day when I destroy'd
  Lyrnessus, and by conquest made her mine!
  Then had not many a Grecian, lifeless now,                      70
  Clench'd with his teeth the ground, victim, alas!
  Of my revenge; whence triumph hath accrued
  To Hector and his host, while ours have cause
  For long remembrance of our mutual strife.
  But evils past let pass, yielding perforce                      75
  To sad necessity. My wrath shall cease
  Now; I resign it; it hath burn'd too long.
  Thou therefore summon forth the host to fight,
  That I may learn meeting them in the field,
  If still the Trojans purpose at our fleet                       80
  To watch us this night also. But I judge
  That driven by my spear to rapid flight,
  They shall escape with weary limbs[5] at least.
    He ended, and the Grecians brazen-greaved
  Rejoiced that Peleus' mighty son had cast                       85
  His wrath aside. Then not into the midst
  Proceeding, but at his own seat, upstood
  King Agamemnon, and them thus bespake.
    Friends! Grecian heroes! Ministers of Mars!
  Arise who may to speak, he claims your ear;                     90
  All interruption wrongs him, and distracts,
  Howe'er expert the speaker. Who can hear
  Amid the roar of tumult, or who speak?
  The clearest voice, best utterance, both are vain
  I shall address Achilles. Hear my speech                        95
  Ye Argives, and with understanding mark.
  I hear not now the voice of your reproach[6]
  First; ye have oft condemn'd me. Yet the blame
  Rests not with me; Jove, Destiny, and she
  Who roams the shades, Erynnis, caused the offence.             100
  She fill'd my soul with fury on that day
  In council, when I seized Achilles' prize.
  For what could I? All things obey the Gods.
  Ate, pernicious Power, daughter of Jove,
  By whom all suffer, challenges from all                        105
  Reverence and fear. Delicate are her feet
  Which scorn the ground, and over human heads
  She glides, injurious to the race of man,
  Of two who strive, at least entangling one.
  She injured, on a day, dread Jove himself                      110
  Most excellent of all in earth or heaven,
  When Juno, although female, him deceived,
  What time Alcmena should have brought to light
  In bulwark'd Thebes the force of Hercules.
  Then Jove, among the gods glorying, spake.                     115
    Hear all! both Gods and Goddesses, attend!
  That I may make my purpose known. This day
  Birth-pang-dispensing Ilithya brings
  An hero forth to light, who, sprung from those
  That sprang from me, his empire shall extend                   120
  Over all kingdoms bordering on his own.
    To whom, designing fraud, Juno replied.
  Thou wilt be found false, and this word of thine
  Shall want performance. But Olympian Jove!
  Swear now the inviolable oath, that he                         125
  Who shall, this day, fall from between the feet
  Of woman, drawing his descent from thee,
  Shall rule all kingdoms bordering on his own.
    She said, and Jove, suspecting nought her wiles,
  The great oath swore, to his own grief and wrong.              130
  At once from the Olympian summit flew
  Juno, and to Achaian Argos borne,
  There sought the noble wife[7] of Sthenelus,
  Offspring of Perseus. Pregnant with a son
  Six months, she now the seventh saw at hand,                   135
  But him the Goddess premature produced,
  And check'd Alcmena's pangs already due.
  Then joyful to have so prevail'd, she bore
  Herself the tidings to Saturnian Jove.
    Lord of the candent lightnings! Sire of all!                 140
  I bring thee tidings. The great prince, ordain'd
  To rule the Argive race, this day is born,
  Eurystheus, son of Sthenelus, the son
  Of Perseus; therefore he derives from thee,
  Nor shall the throne of Argos shame his birth.                 145
    She spake; then anguish stung the heart of Jove
  Deeply, and seizing by her glossy locks
  The Goddess Ate, in his wrath he swore
  That never to the starry skies again
  And the Olympian heights he would permit                       150
  The universal mischief to return.
  Then, whirling her around, he cast her down
  To earth. She, mingling with all works of men,
  Caused many a pang to Jove, who saw his son
  Laborious tasks servile, and of his birth                      155
  Unworthy, at Eurystheus' will enjoin'd.
    So when the hero Hector at our ships
  Slew us, I then regretted my offence
  Which Ate first impell'd me to commit.
  But since, infatuated by the Gods                              160
  I err'd, behold me ready to appease
  With gifts of price immense whom I have wrong'd.
  Thou, then, arise to battle, and the host
  Rouse also. Not a promise yesternight
  Was made thee by Ulysses in thy tent                           165
  On my behalf, but shall be well perform'd.
  Or if it please thee, though impatient, wait
  Short season, and my train shall bring the gifts
  Even now; that thou may'st understand and know
  That my peace-offerings are indeed sincere.                    170
    To whom Achilles, swiftest of the swift.
  Atrides! Agamemnon! passing all
  In glory! King of men! recompense just
  By gifts to make me, or to make me none,
  That rests with thee. But let us to the fight                  175
  Incontinent. It is no time to play
  The game of rhetoric, and to waste the hours
  In speeches. Much remains yet unperform'd.
  Achilles must go forth. He must be seen
  Once more in front of battle, wasting wide                     180
  With brazen spear, the crowded ranks of Troy.
  Mark him--and as he fights, fight also ye.
    To whom Ulysses ever-wise replied.
  Nay--urge not, valiant as thou art thyself,
  Achaia's sons up to the battlements                            185
  Of Ilium, by repast yet unrefresh'd,
  Godlike Achilles!--For when phalanx once
  Shall clash with phalanx, and the Gods with rage
  Both hosts inspire, the contest shall not then
  Prove short. Bid rather the Achaians take                      190
  Both food and wine, for they are strength and might.
  To stand all day till sunset to a foe
  Opposed in battle, fasting, were a task
  Might foil the best; for though his will be prompt
  To combat, yet the power must by degrees                       195
  Forsake him; thirst and hunger he must feel,
  And his limbs failing him at every step.
  But he who hath his vigor to the full
  Fed with due nourishment, although he fight
  All day, yet feels his courage unimpair'd,                     200
  Nor weariness perceives till all retire.
  Come then--dismiss the people with command
  That each prepare replenishment. Meantime
  Let Agamemnon, King of men, his gifts
  In presence here of the assembled Greeks                       205
  Produce, that all may view them, and that thou
  May'st feel thine own heart gladden'd at the sight.
  Let the King also, standing in the midst,
  Swear to thee, that he renders back the maid
  A virgin still, and strange to his embrace,                    210
  And let thy own composure prove, the while,
  That thou art satisfied. Last, let him spread
  A princely banquet for thee in his tent,
  That thou may'st want no part of just amends.
  Thou too, Atrides, shalt hereafter prove                       215
  More just to others; for himself, a King,
  Stoops not too low, soothing whom he hath wrong'd.
    Him Agamemnon answer'd, King of men.
  Thou hast arranged wisely the whole concern,
  O Laeertiades, and I have heard                                 220
  Thy speech, both words and method with delight.
  Willing I am, yea more, I wish to swear
  As thou hast said, for by the Gods I can
  Most truly. Let Achilles, though of pause
  Impatient, suffer yet a short delay                            225
  With all assembled here, till from my tent
  The gifts arrive, and oaths of peace be sworn.
  To thee I give it in peculiar charge
  That choosing forth the most illustrious youths
  Of all Achaia, thou produce the gifts                          230
  from my own ship, all those which yesternight
  We promised, nor the women leave behind.
  And let Talthybius throughout all the camp
  Of the Achaians, instant, seek a boar
  For sacrifice to Jove and to the Sun.                          235
    Then thus Achilles matchless in the race.
  Atrides! most illustrious! King of men!
  Expedience bids us to these cares attend
  Hereafter, when some pause, perchance, of fight
  Shall happen, and the martial rage which fires                 240
  My bosom now, shall somewhat less be felt.
  Our friends by Priameian Hector slain,
  Now strew the field mangled, for him hath Jove
  Exalted high, and given him great renown.
  But haste, now take refreshment; though, in truth              245
  Might I direct, the host should by all means
  Unfed to battle, and at set of sun
  All sup together, this affront revenged.
  But as for me, no drop shall pass my lips
  Or morsel, whose companion lies with feet                      250
  Turn'd to the vestibule, pierced by the spear,
  And compass'd by my weeping train around.
  No want of food feel I. My wishes call
  For carnage, blood, and agonies and groans.
    But him, excelling in all wisdom, thus                       255
  Ulysses answer'd. Oh Achilles! son
  Of Peleus! bravest far of all our host!
  Me, in no scanty measure, thou excell'st
  Wielding the spear, and thee in prudence, I
  Not less. For I am elder, and have learn'd                     260
  What thou hast yet to learn. Bid then thine heart
  Endure with patience to be taught by me.
  Men, satiate soon with battle, loathe the field
  On which the most abundant harvest falls,
  Reap'd by the sword; and when the hand of Jove                 265
  Dispenser of the great events of war,
  Turns once the scale, then, farewell every hope
  Of more than scanty gleanings. Shall the Greeks
  Abstain from sustenance for all who die?
  That were indeed severe, since day by day                      270
  No few expire, and respite could be none.
  The dead, die whoso may, should be inhumed.
  This, duty bids, but bids us also deem
  One day sufficient for our sighs and tears.
  Ourselves, all we who still survive the war,                   275
  Have need of sustenance, that we may bear
  The lengthen'd conflict with recruited might,
  Case in enduring brass.--Ye all have heard
  Your call to battle; let none lingering stand
  In expectation of a farther call,                              280
  Which if it sound, shall thunder prove to him
  Who lurks among the ships. No. Rush we all
  Together forth, for contest sharp prepared,
  And persevering with the host of Troy.
    So saying, the sons of Nestor, glorious Chief,               285
  He chose, with Meges Phyleus' noble son,
  Thoas, Meriones, and Melanippus
  And Lycomedes. These, together, sought
  The tent of Agamemnon, King of men.
  They ask'd, and they received. Soon they produced              290
  The seven promised tripods from the tent,
  Twice ten bright caldrons, twelve high-mettled steeds,
  Seven lovely captives skill'd alike in arts
  Domestic, of unblemish'd beauty rare,
  And last, Briseis with the blooming cheeks.                    295
  Before them went Ulysses, bearing weigh'd
  Ten golden talents, whom the chosen Greeks
  Attended laden with the remnant gifts.
  Full in the midst they placed them. Then arose
  King Agamemnon, and Talthybius                                 300
  The herald, clear in utterance as a God,
  Beside him stood, holding the victim boar.
  Atrides, drawing forth his dagger bright,
  Appendant ever to his sword's huge sheath,
  Sever'd the bristly forelock of the boar,                      305
  A previous offering. Next, with lifted hands
  To Jove he pray'd, while, all around, the Greeks
  Sat listening silent to the Sovereign's voice.
  He look'd to the wide heaven, and thus he pray'd.
    First, Jove be witness! of all Powers above                  310
  Best and supreme; Earth next, and next the Sun!
  And last, who under Earth the guilt avenge
  Of oaths sworn falsely, let the Furies hear!
  For no respect of amorous desire
  Or other purpose, have I laid mine hand                        315
  On fair Briseis, but within my tent
  Untouch'd, immaculate she hath remain'd.
  And if I falsely swear, then may the Gods
  The many woes with which they mark the crime
  Of men forsworn, pour also down on me!                         320
    So saying, he pierced the victim in his throat
  And, whirling him around, Talthybius, next,
  Cast him into the ocean, fishes' food.[8]
  Then, in the centre of Achaia's sons
  Uprose Achilles, and thus spake again.                         325
    Jove! Father! dire calamities, effects
  Of thy appointment, fall on human-kind.
  Never had Agamemnon in my breast
  Such anger kindled, never had he seized,
  Blinded by wrath, and torn my prize away,                      330
  But that the slaughter of our numerous friends
  Which thence ensued, thou hadst, thyself, ordained.
  Now go, ye Grecians, eat, and then to battle.
    So saying, Achilles suddenly dissolved
  The hasty council, and all flew dispersed                      335
  To their own ships. Then took the Myrmidons
  Those splendid gifts which in the tent they lodged
  Of swift Achilles, and the damsels led
  Each to a seat, while others of his train
  Drove forth the steeds to pasture with his herd.               340
  But when Briseis, bright as Venus, saw
  Patroclus lying mangled by the spear,
  Enfolding him around, she shriek'd and tore
  Her bosom, her smooth neck and beauteous cheeks.
  Then thus, divinely fair, with tears she said.                 345
    Ah, my Patroclus! dearest friend of all
  To hapless me, departing from this tent
  I left thee living, and now, generous Chief!
  Restored to it again, here find thee dead.
  How rapid in succession are my woes!                           350
  I saw, myself, the valiant prince to whom
  My parents had betroth'd me, slain before
  Our city walls; and my three brothers, sons
  Of my own mother, whom with long regret
  I mourn, fell also in that dreadful field.                     355
  But when the swift Achilles slew the prince
  Design'd my spouse, and the fair city sack'd
  Of noble Mynes, thou by every art
  Of tender friendship didst forbid my tears,
  Promising oft that thou would'st make me bride                 360
  Of Peleus' godlike son, that thy own ship
  Should waft me hence to Phthia, and that thyself
  Would'st furnish forth among the Myrmidons
  Our nuptial feast. Therefore thy death I mourn
  Ceaseless, for thou wast ever kind to me.                      365
    She spake, and all her fellow-captives heaved
  Responsive sighs, deploring each, in show,
  The dead Patroclus, but, in truth, herself.[9]
  Then the Achaian Chiefs gather'd around
  Achilles, wooing him to eat, but he                            370
  Groan'd and still resolute, their suit refused--
    If I have here a friend on whom by prayers
  I may prevail, I pray that ye desist,
  Nor longer press me, mourner as I am,
  To eat or drink, for till the sun go down                      375
  I am inflexible, and _will_ abstain.
    So saying, the other princes he dismiss'd
  Impatient, but the sons of Atreus both,
  Ulysses, Nestor and Idomeneus,
  With Phoenix, hoary warrior, in his tent                       380
  Abiding still, with cheerful converse kind
  Essay'd to soothe him, whose afflicted soul
  All soothing scorn'd till he should once again
  Rush on the ravening edge of bloody war.
  Then, mindful of his friend, groaning he said                  385
    Time was, unhappiest, dearest of my friends!
  When even thou, with diligent dispatch,
  Thyself, hast spread a table in my tent,
  The hour of battle drawing nigh between
  The Greeks and warlike Trojans. But there lies                 390
  Thy body now, gored by the ruthless steel,
  And for thy sake I neither eat nor drink,
  Though dearth be none, conscious that other wo
  Surpassing this I can have none to fear.
  No, not if tidings of my father's death                        395
  Should reach me, who, this moment, weeps, perhaps,
  In Phthia tears of tenderest regret
  For such a son; while I, remote from home
  Fight for detested Helen under Troy.
  Nor even were _he_ dead, whom, if he live,                     400
  I rear in Scyros, my own darling son,
  My Neoptolemus of form divine.[10]
  For still this hope I cherish'd in my breast
  Till now, that, of us two, myself alone
  Should fall at Ilium, and that thou, restored                  405
  To Phthia, should'st have wafted o'er the waves
  My son from Scyros to his native home,
  That thou might'st show him all his heritage,
  My train of menials, and my fair abode.
  For either dead already I account                              410
  Peleus, or doubt not that his residue
  Of miserable life shall soon be spent,
  Through stress of age and expectation sad
  That tidings of my death shall, next, arrive.
    So spake Achilles weeping, around whom                       415
  The Chiefs all sigh'd, each with remembrance pain'd
  Of some loved object left at home. Meantime
  Jove, with compassion moved, their sorrow saw,
  And in wing'd accents thus to Pallas spake.
    Daughter! thou hast abandon'd, as it seems,                  420
  Yon virtuous Chief for ever; shall no care
  Thy mind engage of brave Achilles more?
  Before his gallant fleet mourning he sits
  His friend, disconsolate; the other Greeks
  Sat and are satisfied; he only fasts.                          425
  Go then--instil nectar into his breast,
  And sweets ambrosial, that he hunger not.
    So saying, he urged Minerva prompt before.
  In form a shrill-voiced Harpy of long wing
  Through ether down she darted, while the Greeks                430
  In all their camp for instant battle arm'd.
  Ambrosial sweets and nectar she instill'd
  Into his breast, lest he should suffer loss
  Of strength through abstinence, then soar'd again
  To her great Sire's unperishing abode.                         435
  And now the Grecians from their gallant fleet
  All pour'd themselves abroad. As when thick snow
  From Jove descends, driven by impetuous gusts
  Of the cloud-scattering North, so frequent shone
  Issuing from the fleet the dazzling casques,                   440
  Boss'd bucklers, hauberks strong, and ashen spears.
  Upwent the flash to heaven; wide all around
  The champain laugh'd with beamy brass illumed,
  And tramplings of the warriors on all sides
  Resounded, amidst whom Achilles arm'd.                         445
  He gnash'd his teeth, fire glimmer'd in his eyes,
  Anguish intolerable wrung his heart
  And fury against Troy, while he put on
  His glorious arms, the labor of a God.
  First, to his legs his polish'd greaves he clasp'd             450
  Studded with silver, then his corselet bright
  Braced to his bosom, his huge sword of brass
  Athwart his shoulder slung, and his broad shield
  Uplifted last, luminous as the moon.
  Such as to mariners a fire appears,                            455
  Kindled by shepherds on the distant top
  Of some lone hill; they, driven by stormy winds,
  Reluctant roam far off the fishy deep,
  Such from Achilles' burning shield divine
  A lustre struck the skies; his ponderous helm                  460
  He lifted to his brows; starlike it shone,
  And shook its curling crest of bushy gold,
  By Vulcan taught to wave profuse around.
  So clad, godlike Achilles trial made
  If his arms fitted him, and gave free scope                    465
  To his proportion'd limbs; buoyant they proved
  As wings, and high upbore his airy tread.
  He drew his father's spear forth from his case,
  Heavy and huge and long. That spear, of all
  Achaia's sons, none else had power to wield;                   470
  Achilles only could the Pelian spear
  Brandish, by Chiron for his father hewn
  From Pelion's top for slaughter of the brave.
  His coursers, then, Automedon prepared
  And Alcimus, adjusting diligent                                475
  The fair caparisons; they thrust the bits
  Into their mouths, and to the chariot seat
  Extended and made fast the reins behind.
  The splendid scourge commodious to the grasp
  Seizing, at once Automedon upsprang                            480
  Into his place; behind him, arm'd complete
  Achilles mounted, as the orient sun
  All dazzling, and with awful tone his speech
  Directed to the coursers of his Sire.
    Xanthus, and Balius of Podarges' blood                       485
  Illustrious! see ye that, the battle done,
  Ye bring whom now ye bear back to the host
  Of the Achaians in far other sort,
  Nor leave him, as ye left Patroclus, dead.[11]
  Him then his steed unconquer'd in the race,                    490
  Xanthus answer'd from beneath his yoke,
  But, hanging low his head, and with his mane
  Dishevell'd all, and streaming to the ground.
  Him Juno vocal made, Goddess white-arm'd.
    And doubtless so we will. This day at least                  495
  We bear thee safe from battle, stormy Chief!
  But thee the hour of thy destruction swift
  Approaches, hasten'd by no fault of ours,
  But by the force of fate and power divine.
  For not through sloth or tardiness on us                       500
  Aught chargeable, have Ilium's sons thine arms
  Stript from Patroclus' shoulders, but a God
  Matchless in battle, offspring of bright-hair'd
  Latona, him contending in the van
  Slew, for the glory of the Chief of Troy.                      505
  We, Zephyrus himself, though by report
  Swiftest of all the winds of heaven, in speed
  Could equal, but the Fates thee also doom
  By human hands to fall, and hands divine.
    The interposing Furies at that word                          510
  Suppress'd his utterance,[12] and indignant, thus,
  Achilles, swiftest of the swift, replied.
    Why, Xanthus, propheciest thou my death?
  It ill beseems thee. I already know
  That from my parents far remote my doom                        515
  Appoints me here to die; yet not the more
  Cease I from feats if arms, till Ilium's host
  Shall have received, at length, their fill of war.
    He said, and with a shout drove forth to battle.




                              THE ILIAD.

                               BOOK XX.




                   ARGUMENT OF THE TWENTIETH BOOK.


By permission of Jupiter the Gods descend into the battle, and range
themselves on either side respectively. Neptune rescues AEneas from
death by the hand of Achilles, from whom Apollo, soon after, rescues
Hector. Achilles slays many Trojans.




                               BOOK XX.


  The Grecians, thus, before their lofty ships
  Stood arm'd around Achilles, glorious Chief
  Insatiable with war, and opposite
  The Trojans on the rising-ground appear'd.[1]
  Meantime, Jove order'd Themis, from the head                     5
  Of the deep-fork'd Olympian to convene
  The Gods in council. She to every part
  Proceeding, bade them to the courts of Jove.[2]
  Nor of the Floods was any absent thence
  Oceanus except, or of the Nymphs                                10
  Who haunt the pleasant groves, or dwell beside
  Stream-feeding fountains, or in meadows green.
  Within the courts of cloud-assembler Jove
  Arrived, on pillar'd thrones radiant they sat,
  With ingenuity divine contrived                                 15
  By Vulcan for the mighty Sire of all.
  Thus they within the Thunderer's palace sat
  Assembled; nor was Neptune slow to hear
  The voice of Themis, but (the billows left)
  Came also; in the midst his seat he took,                       20
  And ask'd, incontinent, the mind of Jove.[3]
    King of the lightnings! wherefore hast thou call'd
  The Gods to council? Hast thou aught at heart
  Important to the hosts of Greece and Troy?
  For on the battle's fiery edge they stand.                      25
    To whom replied Jove, Sovereign of the storms,
  Thou know'st my council, Shaker of the shores!
  And wherefore ye are call'd. Although ordain'd
  So soon to die, they interest me still.
  Myself, here seated on Olympus' top,                            30
  With contemplation will my mind indulge
  Of yon great spectacle; but ye, the rest,
  Descend into the field, Trojan or Greek
  Each to assist, as each shall most incline.
  For should Achilles in the field no foe                         35
  Find save the Trojans, quickly should they fly
  Before the rapid force of Peleus' son.
  They trembled ever at his look, and since
  Such fury for his friend hath fired his heart,
