sprang forward when he saw the merchant slip.

"This time, Ruggiero, my hands are free. How about your vengeance now?"

Ruggiero gave a cry of astonishment, at seeing the lad whom he believed
to be lying in chains, five hundred miles away, facing him. For a
moment he recoiled, and then with the cry, "I will take it now," sprang
forward. But this time he had met an opponent as active and as capable
as himself.

For a minute or two they fought on even terms, and then Ruggiero fell
suddenly backwards, a crossbow bolt, from one of the Venetians on the
poop of the vessel, having struck him full in the forehead.

Without their leader, the spirit of the pirates had fled. They still
fought, steadily and desperately, but it was only to sell their lives
as dearly as possible; and in five minutes after the fall of Ruggiero
the last man was cut down, for no quarter was given to pirates.

Just as the combat concluded, the sound of oars was heard, and the
other two galleys came up to the assistance of their consort. They
arrived too late to take part in the conflict, but cheered lustily when
they heard that the pirate captain, and all his crew, had been killed.
Upon learning that the commander of the galley was killed, the captain
next in seniority assumed the command.

In a few minutes, the bodies of the pirates were thrown overboard, the
wounded were carried below to have their wounds attended to, while the
bodies of those who had fallen--thirteen in number--were laid together
on the deck, for burial on shore.

"Thanks to you, Francisco, that I am not lying there beside them," the
merchant said. "I did not know that you were so close at hand, and as I
slipped I felt that my end had come."

"You were getting the better of him up to that point," Francis said. "I
was close at hand, in readiness to strike in should I see that my aid
was wanted, but up to the moment you slipped, I believed that you would
have avenged your wrongs yourself."

"It is well that he fell as he did. It would have been dreadful,
indeed, had he been carried to Venice, to bring shame and disgrace upon
a noble family. Thank God, his power for mischief is at an end! I have
had no peace of mind since the day when you first thwarted his attempt
to carry off the girls; nor should I have ever had, until I obtained
sure tidings that he was dead. The perseverance with which he has
followed his resolve, to make my daughter his wife, is almost beyond
belief. Had his mind been turned to other matters, he was capable of
attaining greatness, for no obstacle would have barred his way.

"It almost seems as if it were a duel between him and you to the
death--his aim to injure me, and yours to defend us. And now it has
ended. Maria will breathe more freely when she hears the news, for, gay
and light hearted as she is, the dread of that man has weighed heavily
upon her."

The governor, who from the poop of the vessel had watched the conflict,
now came up, and warmly congratulated Francis upon his bravery.

"I saw you rush forward, just as my friend Polani fell, and engage his
assailant. At first I thought you lost, for the villain was counted one
of the best swordsmen in Venice, and you are still but a lad; but I saw
you did not give way an inch, but held your own against him; and I
believe you would have slain him unaided, for you were fighting with
greater coolness than he was. Still, I was relieved when I saw him
fall, for even then the combat was doubtful, and his men, to do them
justice, fought like demons. How comes it that one so young as you
should be so skilled with your weapon?"

"This is not the first time that my young friend has done good service
to the state," Polani said; "for it was he who led a crew of one of my
ships to the aid of Pisani, when his galley was boarded by the Genoese,
at the battle of Antium."

"Is this he?" the governor said, in surprise. "I heard, of course, by
the account of those who came from Venice a month since, how Pisani was
aided, when hard pressed, by the crew of one of your ships, headed by a
young Englishman, upon whom the state had conferred the rights of
citizenship as a recognition of his services; but I did not dream that
the Englishman was but a lad.

"What is your age, young sir?"

"I am just eighteen," Francis replied. "Our people are all fond of
strong exercise, and thus it was that I became more skilled, perhaps,
than many of my age, in the use of arms."

At nine o'clock the squadron arrived in the port, bringing with them
the captured galley. As soon as they were seen approaching, the church
bells rang, flags were hung out from the houses, and the whole
population assembled at the quay to welcome the victors and to hear the
news.

"Do you go on at once, directly we land, Francisco, and set the girls'
minds at ease. I must come on with the governor, and he is sure to be
detained, and will have much to say before he can make his way through
the crowd."

Francis was, on his arrival at the governor's, recognized by the
domestics, and at once shown into the room where the girls were
awaiting him. The fact that the pirate galley had been captured was
already known to them, the news having been brought some hours before,
by a horseman, from the other side of the island.

"Where is our father?" Maria exclaimed, as Francis entered alone.

"He is well, and sent me on to relieve your minds."

"Saint Mark be praised!" Maria said. "We have been sorely anxious about
you both. A messenger, who brought the news, said that it could be seen
from the shore that there was a desperate fight on board the pirate
ship, which was attacked by one galley only. We felt sure that it would
be the ship that the governor was in, and we knew you were with him;
and our father was so enraged at what had happened, that we felt sure
he would take part in the fight."

"He did so," Francis said, "and himself engaged hand-to-hand with
Mocenigo, and would probably have killed him, had not his foot slipped
on the deck. I was, of course, by his side, and occupied the villain
until a cross bolt pierced his brain. So there is an end to all your
trouble with him."

"Is he really dead?" Maria said. "Oh, Francisco, how thankful I am! He
seemed so determined, that I began to think he was sure some day to
succeed in carrying me off. Not that I would ever have become his wife,
for I had vowed to kill myself before that came about. I should have
thought he might have known that he could never have forced me to be
his wife."

"I told him the same thing," Francis said, "and he replied that he was
not afraid of that, for that he should have your sister in his power
also, and that he should warn you that, if you laid hands on yourself,
he should make her his wife instead of you."

The girls both gave an exclamation of horror.

"I never thought of that," Maria said; "but he would indeed have
disarmed me with such a threat. It would have been horrible for me to
have been the wife of such a man; but I think I could have borne it
rather than have consigned Giulia to such a fate.

"Oh, here is father!"

"I have got away sooner than I expected," Polani said as he entered.
"The governor was good enough to beg me to come on at once to you. You
have heard all the news, I suppose, and know that our enemy will
persecute you no more."

"We have heard, papa, and also that you yourself fought with him, which
was very wrong and very rash of you."

"And did he tell you that had it not been for him I should not be here
alive now, girls?"

"No, father. He said that when you slipped he occupied Ruggiero's
attention until the cross bolt struck him."

"That is what he did, my dear; but had he not occupied his attention I
should have been a dead man. The thrust was aimed at me as I fell, and
would have pierced me had he not sprung forward and turned it aside,
and then engaged in single combat with Mocenigo, who, with all his
faults, was brave and a skillful swordsman; and yet, as the governor
himself said, probably Francisco would have slain him, even had not the
combat ended as it did.

"And now we must have his story in full. I have not heard much about it
yet, and you have heard nothing; and I want to know how he managed to
get out of the hands of that man, when he had once fallen into them."

"That is what we want to know, too, father. We know what a sharp watch
was kept upon us, and I am sure they must have been much more severe
with him."

"They were certainly more severe," Francis said smiling, "for my right
hand was chained to my left ankle, and the left hand to to my right
ankle--not tightly, you know, but the chain was so short that I could
not stand upright. But, on the other hand, I do not think my guards
were as vigilant as yours. However, I will tell you the whole story."

The girls listened with rapt attention to the story of the capture, the
escape, and of his hiding in the hold of the pirate in order to be able
to give them a warning in time.

"Your escape was fortunate, indeed," the merchant said when he had
finished. "Fortunate both for you and for us, for I have no doubt that
Mocenigo had intended to put you to a lingering death, on his return.
As for the girls, nothing could have saved them from the fate he
designed for them, save the method which you took of arriving here
before him."

"What are we to do for him, father?" Maria exclaimed. "We are not tired
of thanking him, but he hates being thanked. If he would only get into
some terrible scrape, Giulia and I would set out to rescue him at once;
but you see he gets out of his scrapes before we hear of them. It is
quite disheartening not to be able to do anything."

Francis laughed merrily.

"It is terrible, is it not, signora? But if I manage to get into any
scrape, and have time to summon you to my assistance, be sure I will do
so. But, you see, one cannot get into a scrape when one chooses, and I
must be content, while I am away, in knowing that I have the good
wishes of you and your sister."

"Do not trouble yourself, Maria," her father said. "Some day an
opportunity may come for our paying our debts, and in the meantime
Francis is content that we should be his debtors."

"And now, what are you going to do, papa?"

"I shall sail with you for Venice tomorrow. The governor will be
sending one of the galleys with the news of the capture of the pirate,
and doubtless he will give us all a passage in her. I shall order steps
to be taken at once for rebuilding the villa, and will get it completed
by the spring, before which time you will be off my hands, young lady;
and I shall not be altogether sorry, for you have been a very
troublesome child lately."

"It has not been my fault," Maria pouted.

"Not at all, my dear. It has been your misfortune, and I am not blaming
you at all."

"But the trouble is now over, father!"

"So much the better for Rufino," the merchant said. "It will be good
news to him that you are freed from the persecution of Ruggiero. And
now, I must leave you, for I have arranged to ride over with the
governor to the other side of the island. He has to investigate the
damage which took place last evening. I hear that upwards of a score of
villas were sacked and destroyed, and that many persons were killed;
and while he is doing that I shall see what has to be done at our
place. I don't know whether the walls are standing, or whether it will
have to be entirely rebuilt, and I must arrange with some builder to to
go over from here with me, and take my instructions as to what must be
done."

On the following day the party set sail for Venice, where they arrived
without adventure. Preparations were at once begun for the marriage of
Maria with Rufino Giustiniani, and six weeks later the wedding ceremony
took place. Francis did not go to sea until this was over, for when he
spoke of a fresh voyage, a short time after their return, Maria
declared that she would not be married unless he remained to be
present.

"You have got me out of all my scrapes hitherto, Francisco, and you
must see me safely through this."

As Signor Polani also declared that it was not to be thought of, that
Francis should leave until after the marriage, he was obliged to remain
for it. He was glad, however, when it was over, for he found the time
on shore more tedious than usual. The girls were taken up with the
preparations for the ceremony, and visitors were constantly coming and
going, and the house was not like itself.

But even when the marriage was over, he was forced to remain some time
longer in Venice. The Genoese fleets were keeping the sea, and Pisani
had not, since the battle of Antium, succeeded in coming up with them.
The consequence was that commerce was at a standstill, for the risk of
capture was so great that the merchants ceased to send their ships to
sea.

"The profit would not repay us for the risk, Francisco," the merchant
said one day when they were talking over it. "If only one cargo in ten
fell into their hands the profit off the other nine would be swept
away; but as I see that you are longing to be afloat again, you can, if
you like, join one of the state galleys which start next week to
reinforce Pisani's fleet.

"The last time Pisani wrote to me he said how glad he should be to have
you with him; and after your service at Antium, I have no doubt
whatever that I could procure for you a post as second in command in
one of the ships. What do you say?"

"I should certainly like it, signor, greatly; but, as you said before,
it would be a mere waste of time for me to take service with the state,
when I am determined upon the vocation of a merchant."

"I did say that, Francis, and meant it at the time; but at present
trade is, as you see, at a standstill, so you would not be losing time,
and, in the next place, it is always an advantage, even to a trader, to
stand well with the state. Here in Venice all the great merchants are
of noble family, and trade is no bar to occupying the highest offices
of the state. Many of our doges have been merchants; while merchants
are often soldiers, diplomatists, or governors, as the state requires
their services.

"You have already, you see, obtained considerable benefit by the action
at Antium. I do not say that you would derive any direct benefit, even
were you to distinguish yourself again as highly as on that occasion.
Still, it is always well to gain the consideration of your fellows, and
to be popular with the people. Therefore, if you would like to take
service with the state until this affair is decided with Genoa, and the
seas are again open to our ships, I think it will be advantageous to
you rather than not."

"Then, with your permission I will certainly do so, signor," Francis
said. "Of course I should prefer to go as an officer on board one of
the ships; but if not, I will go as a volunteer."

"You need not fear about that, Francis. With my influence, and that of
the Giustiniani, and the repute you have gained for yourself, you may
be sure of an appointment. Rufino would have commanded one of the ships
had it not been for his marriage."

Rufino Giustiniani had indeed been most warm in his expressions of
gratitude to Francis, to whom the whole family had shown the greatest
attention, giving him many presents as a proof of their goodwill and
gratitude.

"I am quite jealous of your English friend," Rufino had said one day to
Maria. "I do believe, Maria, that you care for him more than you do for
me. It is lucky for me that he is not two or three years older."

Maria laughed.

"I do care for him dearly; and if he had been, as you say, older and
had fallen in love with me, I can't say how it would have been. You
must acknowledge, it would be very hard to say no to a man who keeps on
saving you from frightful peril; but then, you see, a girl can't fall
in love with a man who does not fall in love with her.

"Francisco is so different from us Venetians. He always says just what
he thinks, and never pays anyone even the least bit of a compliment.
How can you fall in love with a man like that? Of course you can love
him like a brother--and I do love Francisco as if he were my
brother--but I don't think we should have got further than that, if he
had been ever so old."

"And does Francis never pay you compliments, Giulia?"

"Never!" Giulia said decidedly. "It would be hateful of him if he did."

"But Maria doesn't object to compliments, Giulia. She looks for them as
if they were her daily bread--

"Don't you, Maria--

"You will have to learn to put up with them soon, Giulia, for you will
be out in society now, and the young men will crowd round your chair,
just as they have done round that of this little flirt, your sister."

"I shall have to put up with it, I suppose," Giulia said quietly, "just
as one puts up with other annoyances. But I should certainly never get
to care for anyone who thinks so little of me, as to believe that I
could be pleased by being addressed in such terms."

"From which I gather," Giustiniani said, smiling, "that this English
lad's bluntness of speech pleases you more than it does Maria?"

"It pleases Maria, too," Giulia said, "though she may choose to say
that it doesn't. And I don't think it quite right to discuss him at
all, when we all owe him as much as we do."

Giustiniani glanced at Maria and gave a little significant nod.

"I do not think Giulia regards Francisco in quite the brotherly way
that you do, Maria," he whispered presently to her.

"Perhaps not," Maria answered. "You see, she had not fallen in love
with you before she met him. But I do not know. Giulia seldom speaks of
him when we are alone, and if she did, you don't suppose I should tell
you my sister's secrets, sir?"

The day after his conversation with Francis, Polani handed him his
nomination as second in command of the Pluto, which he had obtained
that morning from the seignory.

"You will be glad to hear that it is in this ship that Matteo also
sails," for Matteo had come home for his brother's wedding.

"I am very glad of that," Francis said. "I wish that poor Giuseppi was
also here to go with me. I shall miss him terribly. He was a most
faithful and devoted follower."

"I have already sent orders, to my agent in Tunis, to spare no pains in
discovering to whom the crew of the Naxos were sold. It is unfortunate
that so many other captives were sold at the same time, as it will make
it so much more difficult to trace our men. Those purchasing are not
likely to know more than their first names, and may not even take the
trouble to find out those, but may give them the first appellation that
comes to hand. Therefore he has to find out who are now the masters of
the whole of the captives sold at the same time, and then to pursue his
investigations until he discovers the identity of the men he is looking
for. Once he has found this, I will promise you there will be no delay.
I have ordered him to make the best bargain in each case he can, but
that at any rate he is to buy every one of them, whatever it may cost.

"I have sent him the personal descriptions of each man of the boat's
crew, as given to me by their friends and relatives here, as this will
be an assistance in his search. If, for instance, he hears of a
Christian slave named Giuseppi living with a master some hundreds of
miles in the interior, the fact that this man is middle aged will show
at once that he was not the Giuseppi, age 20, of whom he is in search.
I have particularly impressed upon him, in my letter, that we were
especially anxious for the rescue of the captain, and the young man
Giuseppi, so I hope that by the time you return from the voyage, I may
have received some news of them."

Matteo was greatly pleased when he heard that he was going to sail
under Francis.

"I would rather that we had both been volunteers," Francis said. "It
seems absurd my being appointed second officer, while you as yet have
no official position."

"I am not in the least bit in the world jealous, Francisco. With the
exception of taking part in the fight at Antium, I have had no
experience whatever, while you have been going through all sorts of
adventures for the last two years, and always have come out of them
marvellously well."

An hour after Matteo left him, a retainer of the family brought Francis
a letter from Signor Giustiniani, inviting him to come to his house
that evening, as many of Matteo's comrades on board the Pluto would be
present. On Francis going to the palace he found assembled, not only
the young men who would be Matteo's comrades as volunteers, but also
the captain and other officers of the ship; and to them Signor
Giustiniani personally presented Francis, while Rufino and Matteo did
all they could to ensure the heartiest welcome for him, by telling
everyone how greatly they were indebted to him, and how gallantly he
had behaved on several occasions.

Many of the young men he already knew as Matteo's friends, and by them
he was received with the greatest cordiality; but his reception by the
captain, and one or two of the other officers, was much more cool. The
captain, whose name was Carlo Bottini, was a distant connection of the
Mocenigo family, and was therefore already prejudiced against Francis.
The coolness of the other officers was due to the fact that Francis, a
foreigner and several years junior to themselves, had been placed in
command over their heads.



Chapter 15: The Battle Of Pola.


