THOMAS IS DOOMED


At the words of Cortes two Spaniards came forward, and seizing me one
by either arm, they led me across the roof of the house towards the
stairway. Otomie had heard also, and though she did not understand the
words, she read the face of Cortes, and knew well that I was being taken
to imprisonment or death. As I passed her, she started forward, a terror
shining in her eyes. Fearing that she was about to throw herself upon
my breast, and thus to reveal herself as my wife, and bring my fate upon
her, I glanced at her warningly, then making pretence to stumble, as
though with fear and exhaustion, I fell at her feet. The soldiers who
led me laughed brutally, and one of them kicked me with his heavy boot.
But Otomie stooped down and held her hand to me to help me rise, and as
I did so, we spoke low and swiftly.

'Farewell, wife,' I said; 'whatever happens, keep silent.'

'Farewell,' she answered; 'if you must die, await me in the gates of
death, for I will join you there.'

'Nay, live on. Time shall bring comfort.'

'You are my life, beloved. With you time ends for me.' Now I was on my
feet again, and I think that none noted our whispered words, for all
were listening to Cortes, who rated the man that had kicked me.

'I bade you guard this traitor, not to kick him,' he said angrily in
Castilian. 'Will you put us to open shame before these savages? Do
so once more, and you shall pay for it smartly. Learn a lesson in
gentleness from that woman; she is starving, yet she leaves her food to
help your prisoner to his feet. Now take him away to the camp, and see
that he comes to no harm, for he can tell me much.'

Then the soldiers led me away, grumbling as they went, and the last
thing that I saw was the despairing face of Otomie my wife, as she gazed
after me, faint with the secret agony of our parting. But when I came
to the head of the stairway, Guatemoc, who stood near, took my hand and
shook it.

'Farewell, my brother,' he said with a heavy smile; 'the game we played
together is finished, and now it is time for us to rest. I thank you for
your valour and your aid.'

'Farewell, Guatemoc,' I answered. 'You are fallen, but let this comfort
you, in your fall you have found immortal fame.'

'On, on!' growled the soldiers, and I went, little thinking how Guatemoc
and I should meet again.

They took me to a canoe, and we were paddled across the lake by
Tlascalans, till at length we came to the Spanish camp. All the journey
through, my guards, though they laid no hand on me, fearing the anger
of Cortes, mocked and taunted me, asking me how I liked the ways of the
heathen, and whether I ate the flesh of the sacrifices raw or cooked;
and many another such brutal jest they made at my expense. For a while I
bore it, for I had learned to be patient from the Indians, but at last I
answered them in few words and bitter.

'Peace, cowards,' I said; 'remember that I am helpless, and that were I
before you strong and armed, either I should not live to listen to such
words, or you would not live to repeat them.'

Then they were silent, and I also was silent.

When we reached their camp I was led through it, followed by a throng of
fierce Tlascalans and others, who would have torn me limb from limb had
they not feared to do so. I saw some Spaniards also, but the most
of these were so drunk with mescal, and with joy at the tidings that
Tenoctitlan had fallen, and their labours were ended at last, that they
took no heed of me. Never did I see such madness as possessed them, for
these poor fools believed that henceforth they should eat their very
bread off plates of gold. It was for gold that they had followed Cortes;
for gold they had braved the altar of sacrifice and fought in a hundred
fights, and now, as they thought, they had won it.

The room of the stone house where they prisoned me had a window secured
by bars of wood, and through these bars I could see and hear the
revellings of the soldiers during the time of my confinement. All day
long, when they were not on duty, and most of the night also, they
gambled and drank, staking tens of pesos on a single throw, which
the loser must pay out of his share of the countless treasures of the
Aztecs. Little did they care if they won or lost, they were so sure
of plunder, but played on till drink overpowered them, and they rolled
senseless beneath the tables, or till they sprang up and danced wildly
to and fro, catching at the sunbeams and screaming 'Gold! gold! gold!'

Listening at this window also I gathered some of the tidings of the
camp. I learned that Cortes had come back, bringing Guatemoc and several
of the princes with him, together with many of the noble Aztec ladies.
Indeed I saw and heard the soldiers gambling for these women when they
were weary of their play for money, a description of each of them
being written on a piece of paper. One of these ladies answered well to
Otomie, my wife, and she was put up to auction by the brute who won her
in the gamble, and sold to a common soldier for a hundred pesos. For
these men never doubted but that the women and the gold would be handed
over to them.

Thus things went for several days, during which I sat and slept in my
prison untroubled by any, except the native woman who waited on me and
brought me food in plenty. During those days I ate as I have never eaten
before or since, and I slept much, for my sorrows could not rid my body
of its appetites and commanding need for food and rest. Indeed I verily
believe that at the end of a week, I had increased in weight by a full
half; also my weariness was conquered at length, and I was strong again.

But when I was neither sleeping nor eating I watched at my window,
hoping, though in vain, to catch some sight of Otomie or of Guatemoc.
If I might not see my friends, however, at least I saw my foe, for one
evening de Garcia came and stared at my prison. He could not see me, but
I saw him, and the devilish smile that flickered on his face as he went
away like a wolf, made me shiver with a presage of woes to come. For ten
minutes or more he stood gazing at my window hungrily, as a cat gazes at
a caged bird, and I felt that he was waiting for the door to be opened,
and KNEW that it would soon be opened.

This happened on the eve of the day upon which I was put to torture.

Meanwhile, as time went on, I noticed that a change came over the temper
of the camp. The soldiers ceased to gamble for untold wealth, they even
ceased from drinking to excess and from their riotous joy, but took to
hanging together in knots discussing fiercely I could not learn of what.
On the day when de Garcia came to look at my prison there was a great
gathering in the square opposite my prison, to which I saw Cortes ride
up on a white horse and richly dressed. The meeting was too far away for
me to overhear what passed, but I noted that several officers addressed
Cortes angrily, and that their speeches were loudly cheered by the
soldiers. At length the great captain answered them at some length, and
they broke up in silence. Next morning after I had breakfasted, four
soldiers came into my prison and ordered me to accompany them.

'Whither?' I asked.

'To the captain, traitor,' their leader answered.

'It has come at last,' I thought to myself, but I said only:

'It is well. Any change from this hole is one for the better.'

'Certainly,' he replied; 'and it is your last shift.'

Then I knew that the man believed that I was going to my death. In five
minutes I was standing before Cortes in his private house. At his side
was Marina and around him were several of his companions in arms. The
great man looked at me for a while, then spoke.

'Your name is Wingfield; you are of mixed blood, half English and
half Spanish. You were cast away in the Tobasco River and taken to
Tenoctitlan. There you were doomed to personate the Aztec god Tezcat,
and were rescued by us when we captured the great teocalli. Subsequently
you joined the Aztecs and took part in the attack and slaughter of the
noche triste. You were afterwards the friend and counsellor of Guatemoc,
and assisted him in his defence of Tenoctitlan. Is this true, prisoner?'

'It is all true, general,' I answered.

'Good. You are now our prisoner, and had you a thousand lives, you have
forfeited them all because of your treachery to your race and blood.
Into the circumstances that led you to commit this horrible treason I
cannot enter; the fact remains. You have slain many of the Spaniards
and their allies; that is, being in a state of treason you have murdered
them. Wingfield, your life is forfeit and I condemn you to die by
hanging as a traitor and an apostate.'

'Then there is nothing more to be said,' I answered quietly, though a
cold fear froze my blood.

'There is something,' answered Cortes. 'Though your crimes have been so
many, I am ready to give you your life and freedom upon a condition.
I am ready to do more, to find you a passage to Europe on the first
occasion, where you may perchance escape the echoes of your infamy if
God is good to you. The condition is this. We have reason to believe
that you are acquainted with the hiding place of the gold of Montezuma,
which was unlawfully stolen from us on the night of the noche triste.
Nay, we know that this is so, for you were seen to go with the canoes
that were laden with it. Choose now, apostate, between a shameful death
and the revealing to us of the secret of this treasure.'

For a moment I wavered. On the one hand was the loss of honour with life
and liberty and the hope of home, on the other a dreadful end. Then I
remembered my oath and Otomie, and what she would think of me living or
dead, if I did this thing, and I wavered no more.

'I know nothing of the treasure, general,' I answered coldly. 'Send me
to my death.'

'You mean that you will say nothing of it, traitor. Think again. If you
have sworn any oaths they are broken by God. The empire of the Aztecs
is at an end, their king is my prisoner, their great city is a ruin. The
true God has triumphed over these devils by my hand. Their wealth is my
lawful spoil, and I must have it to pay my gallant comrades who cannot
grow rich on desolation. Think again.'

'I know nothing of this treasure, general.'

'Yet memory sometimes wakens, traitor. I have said that you shall die
if yours should fail you, and so you shall to be sure. But death is not
always swift. There are means, doubtless you who have lived in Spain
have heard of them,' and he arched his brows and glared at me meaningly,
'by which a man may die and yet live for many weeks. Now, loth as I am
to do it, it seems that if your memory still sleeps, I must find some
such means to rouse it--before you die.'

'I am in your power, general,' I answered. 'You call me traitor again
and again. I am no traitor. I am a subject of the King of England, not
of the King of Spain. I came hither following a villain who has wrought
me and mine bitter wrong, one of your company named de Garcia or
Sarceda. To find him and for other reasons I joined the Aztecs. They are
conquered and I am your prisoner. At the least deal with me as a brave
man deals with a fallen enemy. I know nothing of the treasure; kill me
and make an end.'

'As a man I might wish to do this, Wingfield, but I am more than a man,
I am the hand of the Church here in Anahuac. You have partaken with the
worshippers of idols, you have seen your fellow Christians sacrificed
and devoured by your brute comrades. For this alone you deserve to be
tortured eternally, and doubtless that will be so after we have done
with you. As for the hidalgo Don Sarceda, I know him only as a brave
companion in arms, and certainly I shall not listen to tales told
against him by a wandering apostate. It is, however, unlucky for you,'
and here a gleam of light shot across the face of Cortes, 'that there
should be any old feud between you, seeing that it is to his charge that
I am about to confide you. Now for the last time I say choose. Will
you reveal the hiding place of the treasure and go free, or will you be
handed over to the care of Don Sarceda till such time as he shall find
means to make you speak?'

Now a great faintness seized me, for I knew that I was condemned to be
tortured, and that de Garcia was to be the torturer. What mercy had I to
expect from his cruel heart when I, his deadliest foe, lay in his power
to wreak his vengeance on? But still my will and my honour prevailed
against my terrors, and I answered:

'I have told you, general, that I know nothing of this treasure. Do your
worst, and may God forgive you for your cruelty.'

'Dare not to speak that holy Name, apostate and worshipper of idols,
eater of human flesh. Let Sarceda be summoned.'

A messenger went out, and for a while there was silence. I caught
Marina's glance and saw pity in her gentle eyes. But she could not help
me here, for Cortes was mad because no gold had been found, and the
clamour of the soldiers for reward had worn him out and brought him to
this shameful remedy, he who was not cruel by nature. Still she strove
to plead for me with him, whispering earnestly in his ear. For a while
Cortes listened, then he pushed her from him roughly.

'Peace, Marina,' he said. 'What, shall I spare this English dog some
pangs, when my command, and perchance my very life, hangs upon the
finding of the gold? Nay, he knows well where it lies hid; you said it
yourself when I would have hung him for a traitor, and certainly he was
one of those whom the spy saw go out with it upon the lake. Our friend
was with them also, but he came back no more; doubtless they murdered
him. What is this man to you that you should plead for him? Cease to
trouble me, Marina, am I not troubled enough already?' and Cortes put
his hands to his face and remained lost in thought. As for Marina, she
looked at me sadly and sighed as though to say, 'I have done my best,'
and I thanked her with my eyes.

Presently there was a sound of footsteps and I looked up to see de
Garcia standing before me. Time and hardship had touched him lightly,
and the lines of silver in his curling hair and peaked beard did but add
dignity to his noble presence. Indeed, when I looked at him in his dark
Spanish beauty, his rich garments decked with chains of gold, as he
bowed before Cortes hat in hand, I was fain to confess that I had never
seen a more gallant cavalier, or one whose aspect gave the lie so wholly
to the black heart within. But knowing him for what he was, my very
blood quivered with hate at the sight of him, and when I thought of my
own impotence and of the errand on which he had come, I ground my teeth
and cursed the day that I was born. As for de Garcia, he greeted me with
a little cruel smile, then spoke to Cortes.

'Your pleasure, general?'

'Greeting to you, comrade,' answered Cortes. 'You know this renegade?'

'But too well, general. Three times he has striven to murder me.'

'Well, you have escaped and it is your hour now, Sarceda. He says that
he has a quarrel with you; what is it?'

De Garcia hesitated, stroking his peaked beard, then answered: 'I am
loth to tell it because it is a tale of error for which I have often
sorrowed and done penance. Yet I will speak for fear you should think
worse of me than I deserve. This man has some cause to mislike me,
since to be frank, when I was younger than I am to-day and given to
the follies of youth, it chanced that in England I met his mother, a
beautiful Spanish lady who by ill fortune was wedded to an Englishman,
this man's father and a clown of clowns, who maltreated her. I will be
short; the lady learned to love me and I worsted her husband in a duel.
Hence this traitor's hate of me.'

I heard and thought that my heart must burst with fury. To all his
wickedness and offences against me, de Garcia now had added slander of
my dead mother's honour.

'You lie, murderer,' I gasped, tearing at the ropes that bound me.

'I must ask you to protect me from such insult, general,' de Garcia
answered coldly. 'Were the prisoner worthy of my sword, I would ask
further that his bonds should be loosed for a little space, but my
honour would be tarnished for ever were I to fight with such as he.'

'Dare to speak thus once more to a gentleman of Spain,' said Cortes
coldly, 'and, you heathen dog, your tongue shall be dragged from you
with red-hot pincers. For you, Sarceda, I thank you for your confidence.
If you have no worse crime than a love affair upon your soul, I think
that our good chaplain Olmedo will frank you through the purgatorial
fires. But we waste words and time. This man has the secret of the
treasure of Guatemoc and of Montezuma. If Guatemoc and his nobles will
not tell it, he at least may be forced to speak, for the torments that
an Indian can endure without a groan will soon bring truth bubbling from
the lips of this white heathen. Take him, Sarceda, and hearken, let
him be your especial care. First let him suffer with the others, and
afterwards, should he prove obdurate, alone. The method I leave to you.
Should he confess, summon me.'

'Pardon me, general, but this is no task for an hidalgo of Spain. I have
been more wont to pierce my enemies with the sword than to tear them
with pincers,' said de Garcia, but as he spoke I saw a gleam of triumph
shine in his black eyes, and heard the ring of triumph through the mock
anger of his voice.

'I know it, comrade. But this must be done; though I hate it, it must be
done, there is no other way. The gold is necessary to me--by the
Mother of God! the knaves say that I have stolen it!--and I doubt these
stubborn Indian dogs will ever speak, however great their agony. This
man knows and I give him over to you because you are acquainted with his
wickedness, and that knowledge will steel your heart against all pity.
Spare not, comrade; remember that he must be forced to speak.'

'It is your command, Cortes, and I will obey it, though I love the task
little; with one proviso, however, that you give me your warrant in
writing.'

'It shall be made out at once,' answered the general. 'And now away with
him.'

'Where to?'

'To the prison that he has left. All is ready and there he will find his
comrades.'

Then a guard was summoned and I was dragged back to my own place, de
Garcia saying as I went that he would be with me presently.



CHAPTER XXIX

DE GARCIA SPEAKS HIS MIND


At first I was not taken into the chamber that I had left, but placed in
a little room opening out of it where the guard slept. Here I waited
a while, bound hand and foot and watched by two soldiers with drawn
swords. As I waited, torn by rage and fear, I heard the noise of
hammering through the wall, followed by a sound of groans. At length
the suspense came to an end; a door was opened, and two fierce Tlascalan
Indians came through it and seized me by the hair and ears, dragging me
thus into my own chamber.

'Poor devil!' I heard one of the Spanish soldiers say as I went.
'Apostate or no, I am sorry for him; this is bloody work.'

Then the door closed and I was in the place of torment. The room was
darkened, for a cloth had been hung in front of the window bars, but its
gloom was relieved by certain fires that burned in braziers. It was by
the light of these fires chiefly that I saw the sight. On the floor of
the chamber were placed three solid chairs, one of them empty. The other
two were filled by none other than Guatemoc, Emperor of the Aztecs, and
by his friend and mine the cacique of Tacuba. They were bound in the
chairs, the burning braziers were placed at their feet, behind them
stood a clerk with paper and an inkhorn, and around them Indians were
busy at some dreadful task, directed to it by two Spanish soldiers. Near
the third chair stood another Spaniard who as yet took no part in
the play; it was de Garcia. As I looked, an Indian lifted one of the
braziers and seizing the naked foot of the Tacuban prince, thrust it
down upon the glowing coals. For a while there was silence, then the
Tacuban broke into groans. Guatemoc turned his head towards him and
spoke, and as he spoke I saw that his foot also was resting in the
flames of a brazier. 'Why do you complain, friend,' he said, in a steady
voice, 'when I keep silence? Am I then taking my pleasure in a bed?
Follow me now as always, friend, and be silent beneath your sufferings.'

The clerk wrote down his words, for I heard the quill scratching on the
paper, and as he wrote, Guatemoc turned his head and saw me. His face
was grey with pain, still he spoke as a hundred times I had heard him
speak at council, slowly and clearly. 'Alas! are you also here, my
friend Teule?' he said; 'I hoped that they had spared you. See how these
Spaniards keep faith. Malinche swore to treat me with all honour; behold
how he honours me, with hot coals for my feet and pincers for my flesh.
They think that we have buried treasure, Teule, and would wring its
secret from us. You know that it is a lie. If we had treasure would we
not give it gladly to our conquerors, the god-born sons of Quetzal? You
know that there is nothing left except the ruins of our cities and the
bones of our dead.'

Here he ceased suddenly, for the demon who tormented him struck him
across the mouth saying, 'Silence, dog.'

But I understood, and I swore in my heart that I would die ere I
revealed my brother's secret. This was the last triumph that Guatemoc
could win, to keep his gold from the grasp of the greedy Spaniard, and
that victory at least he should not lose through me. So I swore, and
very soon my oath must be put to the test, for at a motion from de
Garcia the Tlascalans seized me and bound me to the third chair.

Then he spoke into my ear in Castilian: 'Strange are the ways of
Providence, Cousin Wingfield. You have hunted me across the world, and
several times we have met, always to your sorrow. I thought I had you
in the slave ship, I thought that the sharks had you in the water, but
somehow you escaped me whom you came to hunt. When I knew it I grieved,
but now I grieve no more, for I see that you were reserved for this
moment. Cousin Wingfield, it shall go hard if you escape me this time,
and yet I think that we shall spend some days together before we part.
Now I will be courteous with you. You may have a choice of evils. How
shall we begin? The resources at my command are not all that we could
wish, alas! the Holy Office is not yet here with its unholy armoury, but
still I have done my best. These fellows do not understand their art:
hot coals are their only inspiration. I, you see, have several,' and he
pointed to various instruments of torture. 'Which will you select?'

I made no answer, for I had determined that I would speak no word and
utter no cry, do what they might with me.

'Let me think, let me think,' went on de Garcia, smoothing his beard.
'Ah, I have it. Here, slaves.'

Now I will not renew my own agonies, or awake the horror of any who may
chance to read what I have written by describing what befell me after
this. Suffice it to say that for two hours and more this devil, helped
in his task by the Tlascalans, worked his wicked will upon me. One by
one torments were administered to me with a skill and ingenuity that
cannot often have been surpassed, and when at times I fainted I was
recovered by cold water being dashed upon me and spirits poured down
my throat. And yet, I say it with some pride, during those two dreadful
hours I uttered no groan however great my sufferings, and spoke no word
good or bad.

Nor was it only bodily pain that I must bear, for all this while my
enemy mocked me with bitter words, which tormented my soul as his
instruments and hot coals tormented my body. At length he paused
exhausted, and cursed me for an obstinate pig of an Englishman, and at
that moment Cortes entered the shambles and with him Marina.

'How goes it?' he said lightly, though his face turned pale at the sight
of horror.

'The cacique of Tacuba has confessed that gold is buried in his garden,
the other two have said nothing, general,' the clerk answered, glancing
down his paper.

'Brave men, indeed!' I heard Cortes mutter to himself; then said aloud,
'Let the cacique be carried to-morrow to the garden of which he speaks,
that he may point out the gold. As for the other two, cease tormenting
them for this day. Perhaps they may find another mind before to-morrow.
I trust so, for their own sakes I trust so!'

Then he drew to the corner of the room and consulted with Sarceda and
the other torturers, leaving Marina face to face with Guatemoc and with
me. For a while she stared at the prince as though in horror, then a
strange light came into her beautiful eyes, and she spoke to him in a
low voice, saying in the Aztec tongue:

'Do you remember how once you rejected me down yonder in Tobasco,
Guatemoc, and what I told you then?--that I should grow great in spite
of you? You see it has all come true and more than true, and you are
brought to this. Are you not sorry, Guatemoc? I am sorry, though were I
as some women are, perchance I might rejoice to see you thus.'

'Woman,' the prince answered in a thick voice, 'you have betrayed your
country and you have brought me to shame and torment. Yes, had it not
been for you, these things had never been. I am sorry, indeed I am
sorry--that I did not kill you. For the rest, may your name be shameful
for ever in the ears of honest men and your soul be everlastingly
accursed, and may you yourself, even before you die, know the bitterness
of dishonour and betrayal! Your words were fulfilled, and so shall mine
be also.'

She heard and turned away trembling, and for a while was silent. Then
her glance fell upon me and she began to weep.

'Alas! poor man,' she said; 'alas! my friend.'

'Weep not over me, Marina,' I answered, speaking in Aztec, 'for our
tears are of no worth, but help me if you may.'

'Ah that I could!' she sobbed, and turning fled from the place, followed
presently by Cortes.
