so the discovery of gold filled up that part of the country with
emigrants years before they would have gone if no gold had been found
there.

[Illustration: WASHING DIRT TO GET OUT THE GOLD-DUST.]

Captain Sutter lost all his property. He would have died poor if the
people of California had not given him money to live on.

Marshall was still more to be pitied. He got nothing by his discovery.
Years after he had found the shining dust, some one wrote to him and
asked him for his photograph. He refused to send it. He said, "My
likeness ... is, in fact, all I have that I can call my own; and I
feel like any other poor wretch:[7] I want _something_ for self."

[Illustration: MIRROR LAKE, YOSEMITE VALLEY, CALIFORNIA.]

[Footnote 5: Western boundary line: the people of Texas held that
their state extended west as far as the Rio Grande River, but Mexico
insisted that the boundary line was at the Nueces River, which is
much further east.]

[Footnote 6: Namely: California, Nevada, Utah, and part of Wyoming,
Colorado, New Mexico, and Arizona.]

[Footnote 7: Wretch: here a very unhappy and miserable person.]


240. How we bought more land; our growth since the Revolution.--Long
before Captain Sutter died, the United States bought from Mexico
another great piece of land (1853), marked on the map by the name
of the Gadsden Purchase.[8] A number of years later (1867) we bought
the territory of Alaska[9] from Russia.

[Illustration: This map shows the extent of the United States in 1853
after we had added the land called the Gadsden Purchase, bought from
Mexico; the land is marked on the map, 1853.]

The Revolution ended something over a hundred years ago; if you look
on the map in paragraph 187, and compare it with the maps which follow,
you will see how we have grown during that time. Then we had just
thirteen states[10] which stretched along the Atlantic, and, with
the country west of them, extended as far as the Mississippi River.

Next (1803) we bought the great territory of Louisiana (see map in
paragraph 188), which has since been divided into many states; then
(1819) we bought Florida (see map in paragraph 218); then (1845) we
added Texas (see map in paragraph 230); the next year (1846) we added
Oregon territory, since cut up into two great states (see map in
paragraph 234); then (1848) we obtained California and New Mexico
(see map in paragraph 239). Five years after that (1853) we bought
the land then known as the Gadsden Purchase (see first map in this
paragraph); last of all (1867) we bought Alaska (see second map in
this paragraph).

[Illustration: This map shows the territorial growth of the United
States from the time of the Revolution to the present day.]

[Illustration: SCENE ON THE COAST OF ALASKA.]

[Footnote 8: See maps in this paragraph. It was called the Gadsden
Purchase, because General James Gadsden of South Carolina bought it
from Mexico for the United States, in 1853. It included what is now
part of Southern Arizona and N. Mexico.]

[Footnote 9: Alaska: see second map in this paragraph.]

[Footnote 10: Thirteen states: see footnote 4 in paragraph 102.]


241. "Brother Jonathan's"[11] seven steps.--If you count up these
additions, you will see that, beginning with Louisiana in 1803, and
ending with Alaska in 1867, they make just seven in all. There is
a story of a giant who was so tall that at one long step he could
go more than twenty miles; but "Brother Jonathan" can beat that, for
in the seven steps he has taken since the Revolution he has gone over
three thousand miles. He stands now with one foot on the coast of
the Atlantic and with the other on that of the Pacific.

[Footnote 11: "Brother Jonathan": a name given in fun to the people
of the United States, just as "John Bull" is to the people of England.

One explanation of the origin of the name is this: General Washington
had a very high opinion of the good sense and sound judgment of
Governor Jonathan Trumbull of Connecticut. At the beginning of the
Revolutionary War, when no one seemed to know where to get a supply
of powder, General Washington said to his officers, "We must consult
Brother Jonathan on this subject." Afterwards when any serious
difficulty arose it became a common saying in the army that "We must
consult Brother Jonathan," and in time the name came to stand for
the American people.]


242. Summary.--In January, 1848, gold was discovered at Captain
Sutter's saw-mill at Coloma, California. Soon after that, Mexico let
us have California and New Mexico, and they were added to the United
States. Thousands of people, from all parts of the country, hurried
to California to dig gold, and so that state grew more rapidly in
population than any other new part of the United States ever had in
the same length of time. Before Captain Sutter died we added the
Gadsden Purchase and Alaska.


Who was Captain Sutter? Where did he live? Tell how he lived. What
did he begin to build at Coloma? Tell what Marshall found there, and
what was said about it. Tell how Marshall took the shining dust to
Captain Sutter, and what the captain did. What made them both certain
that the dust was gold? Was the captain pleased with the discovery?
What did he think would happen? What is said about our war with
Mexico? What did we fight about? What did we get at the end of the
war? What happened in May, 1848? Then what happened? How many people
went to California? What happened to Captain Sutter? What is said
about Marshall? What land did we buy in 1853? What in 1867?

How long ago did the Revolution end? How many states did we have then?
[Can any one in the class tell how many we have now?] What land did
we buy in 1803? In 1819? What did we add in 1845? In 1846? In 1848?
What did we buy in 1853? In 1867? How many such additions have we
made in all? What could the giant do? What has "Brother Jonathan"
done? Where is one foot? Where is the other?




ABRAHAM LINCOLN
(1809-1865).


243. The tall man from Illinois making his first speech in Congress;
how he wrote his name; what the people called him.--Not many days
before gold was found at Sutter's saw-mill in California (1848), a
tall, awkward-looking man from Illinois was making his first speech
in Congress. At that time he generally wrote his name

[Illustration: A. Lincoln.]

but after he had become President of the United States, he often wrote
it out in full,--

[Illustration: Abraham Lincoln.]

The plain country people of Illinois, who knew all about him, liked
best to call him by the title they had first given him,--"_Honest
Abe Lincoln_," or, for short, "_Honest Abe_." Let us see how he got
that name.


244. The Lincoln family move to Indiana; "Abe" helps his father build
a new home; what it was like.--Abraham Lincoln was born on February
12th, 1809, in a log shanty on a lonely little farm in Kentucky.[1]
When "Abe," as he was called, was seven years old, his father, Thomas
Lincoln, moved, with his family, to Indiana;[2] there the boy and
his mother worked in the woods and helped him build a new home. That
new home was not so good or so comfortable as some of our cow-sheds
are. It was simply a hut made of rough logs and limbs of trees. It
had no door and no windows. One side of it was left entirely open;
and if a roving Indian or a bear wanted to walk in to dinner, there
was nothing whatever to stop him. In winter "Abe's" mother used to
hang up some buffalo skins before this wide entrance, to keep out
the cold, but in summer the skins were taken down, so that living
in such a cabin was the next thing to living out-of-doors.

[Footnote 1: Kentucky: Abraham Lincoln was born on the banks of the
Big South Fork (or branch) of Nolin Creek in Hardin (now La Rue)
County, Kentucky.]

[Footnote 2: Indiana: the Lincoln family moved to a farm on Little
Pigeon Creek, near Gentryville, in what is now Spencer County,
Indiana.]


245. The new log cabin with four sides to it; how the furniture was
made; "Abe's" bed in the loft.--The Lincoln family stayed in that
shed for about a year; then they moved into a new log cabin which
had four sides to it. They seem to have made a new set of furniture
for the new house. "Abe's" father got a large log, split it in two,
smoothed off the flat side, bored holes in the under side and drove
in four stout sticks for legs: that made the table. They had no
chairs,--it would have been too much trouble to make the backs,--but
they had three-legged stools, which Thomas Lincoln made with an axe,
just as he did the table; perhaps "Abe" helped him drive in the legs.

[Illustration: HOME-MADE FURNITURE.]

In one corner of the loft of this cabin the boy had a big bag of dry
leaves for his bed. Whenever he felt like having a new bed, all that
he had to do was to go out in the woods and gather more leaves.

He worked about the place during the day, helping his father and
mother. For his supper he had a piece of cornbread. After he had eaten
it, he climbed up to his loft in the dark, by a kind of ladder of
wooden pins driven into the logs. Five minutes after that he was fast
asleep on his bed of sweet-smelling leaves, and was dreaming of
hunting coons, or of building big bonfires out of brush.[3]

[Footnote 3: Brush: bushes and limbs of trees.]


246. Death of "Abe's" mother; the lonely grave in the woods; what
Abraham Lincoln said of his mother after he had grown to be a man;
what "Abe's" new mother said of him.--"Abe's" mother was not strong,
and before they had been in their new log cabin a year she fell sick
and died. She was buried on the farm. "Abe" used to go out and sit
by her lonely grave in the forest and cry. It was the first great
sorrow that had ever touched the boy's heart. After he had grown to
be a man, he said with eyes full of tears to a friend with whom he
was talking: "God bless my mother; all that I am or ever hope to be
I owe to her."

[Illustration: "ABE" LEARNING TO USE HIS AXE.]

At the end of a year Thomas Lincoln married again. The new wife that
he brought home was a kind-hearted and excellent woman. She did all
she could to make the poor, ragged, barefooted boy happy. After he
had grown up and become famous, she said: "Abe never gave me a cross
word or look, and never refused to do anything I asked him: Abe was
the best boy I ever saw."


247. The school in the woods; the new teacher; reading by the open
fire; how "Abe" used the fire-shovel.--There was a log schoolhouse
in the woods quite a distance off, and there "Abe" went for a short
time. At the school he learned to read and write a little, but after
a while he found a new teacher, that was--himself. When the rest of
the family had gone to bed, he would sit up and read his favorite
books by the light of the great blazing logs heaped up on the open
fire. He had not more than half a dozen books in all. They were
"Robinson Crusoe," "Pilgrim's Progress," AEsop's[4] Fables, the
Bible, a Life of Washington, and a small History of the United States.
The boy read these books over and over till he knew a great deal of
them by heart and could repeat whole pages from them.

[Illustration: WRITING BY THE FIRE.]

Part of his evenings he spent in writing and ciphering. Thomas
Lincoln was so poor that he could seldom afford to buy paper and pens
for his son, so the boy had to get on without them. He used to take
the back of the broad wooden fire-shovel to write on and a piece of
charcoal for a pencil. When he had covered the shovel with words or
with sums in arithmetic, he would shave it off clean and begin over
again. If "Abe's" father complained that the shovel was getting thin,
the boy would go out into the woods, cut down a tree, and make a new
one; for as long as the woods lasted, fire-shovels and furniture were
cheap.

[Footnote 4: AEsop (E'sop): the name of a noted writer of fables.
Here is one of AEsop's fables: An old frog thought that he could blow
himself up to be as big as an ox. So he drew in his breath and puffed
himself out prodigiously. "Am I big enough now?" he asked his son.
"No," said his son; "you don't begin to be as big as an ox yet." Then
he tried again, and swelled himself out still more. "How's that?"
he asked. "Oh, it's no use trying," said his son, "you can't do it."
"But I will," said the old frog. With that he drew in his breath with
all his might and puffed himself up to such an enormous size that
he suddenly burst.

Moral: Don't try to be bigger than you can.]


248. What Lincoln could do at seventeen; what he was at nineteen;
his strength.--By the time the lad was seventeen he could write a
good hand, do hard examples in long division, and spell better than
any one else in the county. Once in a while he wrote a little piece
of his own about something which interested him; when the neighbors
heard it read, they would say, "The world can't beat it."

At nineteen Abraham Lincoln had reached his full height. He stood
nearly six feet four inches, barefooted. He was a kind of
good-natured giant. No one in the neighborhood could strike an axe
as deep into a tree as he could, and few, if any, were equal to him
in strength. It takes a powerful man to put a barrel of flour into
a wagon without help, and there is not one in a hundred who can lift
a barrel of cider off the ground; but it is said that young Lincoln
could stoop down, lift a barrel on to his knees, and drink from the
bung-hole.


249. Young Lincoln makes a voyage to New Orleans; how he handled the
robbers.--At this time a neighbor hired Abraham to go with his son
to New Orleans. The two young men were to take a flat-boat loaded
with corn and other produce down the Ohio and the Mississippi. It
was called a voyage of about eighteen hundred miles, and it would
take between three and four weeks.

[Illustration: LINCOLN ON THE FLAT-BOAT GOING DOWN THE MISSISSIPPI
RIVER.]

Young Lincoln was greatly pleased with the thought of making such
a trip. He had never been away any distance from home, and, as he
told his father, he felt that he wanted to see something more of the
world. His father made no objection, but, as he bade his son good
by, he said, Take care that in trying to see the world you don't see
the bottom of the Mississippi.

The two young men managed to get the boat through safely. But one
night a gang of negroes came on board, intending to rob them of part
of their cargo. Lincoln soon showed the robbers he could handle a
club as vigorously as he could an axe, and the rascals, bruised and
bleeding, were glad to get off with their lives.


250. The Lincolns move to Illinois; what Abraham did; hunting
frolics; how Abraham chopped; how he bought his clothes.--Not long
after young Lincoln's return, his father moved to Illinois.[5] It
was a two weeks' journey through the woods with ox-teams. Abraham
helped his father build a comfortable log cabin; then he and a man
named John Hanks split walnut rails, and fenced in fifteen acres of
land for a cornfield.

[Illustration: THE LOG CABIN IN ILLINOIS WHICH LINCOLN HELPED HIS
FATHER BUILD.]

That part of the country had but few settlers, and it was still full
of wild beasts. When the men got tired of work and wanted a frolic,
they had a grand wolf-hunt. First, a tall pole was set up in a
clearing;[6] next, the hunters in the woods formed a great circle
of perhaps ten miles in extent. Then they began to move nearer and
nearer together, beating the bushes and yelling with all their might.
The frightened wolves, deer, and other wild creatures inside of the
circle of hunters were driven to the pole in the clearing; there they
were shot down in heaps.
