exception of some fruit, and the meat sent off by the tumangong, no
other fresh food had been obtained, since they sailed from
Calcutta. The boat was turned over and launched; and the work of
making a new fore-top mast, and overhauling the rigging, proceeded
with.

During the day, several of the natives were observed at the edge of
the forest by Harry who, having no special work to do, had been
asked by Fairclough to keep his eye on the shore, and to ascertain
whether they were being watched; as he intended, when the repairs
were finished, to see if any spring of fresh water existed in the
neighbourhood. He therefore kept a telescope directed on the shore
and, soon after daybreak, made out two little men at the edge of
the trees.

The natives of the Andaman Islands are among the lowest types of
humanity known. Their stature does not exceed five feet and, with
their slender limbs and large heads, their appearance is almost
that of a deformed people. They use no clothing whatever,
plastering their bodies with clay, or mud, to protect the skin from
the sun's rays. Animals are scarce on the islands, and the people
live chiefly on fish. They carry bows and arrows, and heavy spears;
to which, in most cases, are added shields. They inhabit
roughly-made arbours, and seldom remain long at any spot; moving
about in small communities, according to the abundance or scarcity
of food. They use no cooking utensils, and simply prepare their
food by placing it on burning embers.

The men first made out soon disappeared but, later on, Harry could
see that there were many of them inside the line of forest.

"It is a nuisance," the captain said, when he told him the result
of his examination of the shore. "I suppose, in a day or two, we
shall have hundreds of them down here. I don't think they will try
to interfere with us, as long as we are at work; but they will
certainly oppose us, if we attempt to enter the forest, and will
effectually prevent our wandering about in search of water. We
could only go in a strong body and, even then, might lose a good
many lives from their arrows.

"Of course, we should be able to beat them off; but I should be
sorry to have to kill a lot of the poor little beggars. One can
hardly blame them for their hostility. Naturally, they want to have
the place to themselves, and are just as averse to our landing as
our forefathers were to Julius Caesar and his Romans.

"Of course they would be, if they only knew it, very much better
off by being civil. We have numbers of things that would be
invaluable to them. For instance, I would willingly give them a
dozen cooking pots, and as many frying pans, if they would let us
obtain water peaceably. I suppose that, at some time or other,
Malays landed here, and carried off a number of heads; or they may
have been shot down by some reckless ruffians of traders, and have
so come to view all strangers as deadly enemies. However, so far as
I have heard, there is no chance of their being friendly; and
native traders say that, of vessels that have been wrecked on the
coast, none of the crew ever escaped.

"By the way, I believe that fish are extremely plentiful here. We
have a good supply of fishing lines on board, for we generally fish
when we are at anchor."

"If you will let me have them, tomorrow," Harry said, "Abdool and I
will look after that. I hate having nothing to do and, certainly,
fish would be a very agreeable change, after such a long spell of
salt meat."

"You shall have them, the first thing in the morning."

Accordingly, the next day the lines were got out; and the Malay
interpreter, who knew a great deal more of fishing than did Harry
or Abdool, took the matter in hand. The hooks were baited with
pieces of meat, or shreds of white or scarlet bunting. The fish bit
eagerly, and all three were kept actively employed in drawing them
up, and rebaiting the hooks. They were of all sizes, from a quarter
of a pound to four or five pounds and, by dinner time, there were
enough to furnish an ample meal for all on board.

"I will keep three or four of the men at work, this afternoon,"
Fairclough said, "and we will have night lines down. We can salt
down those we do not eat and, at any rate, we shall not be drawing
much on our stores."

By evening the new fore-top mast was in its place. As the heaviest
part of the work was now done, orders were given for a boat's crew
to start, in the morning, to cruise along the coast and see if any
stream ran into it. Mr. Eden was to be in command. The crew were to
be well armed, but were not to attempt to effect a landing.

The sea had now calmed down, and the southwest monsoon was blowing
steadily.

"You had better go south. The land is much higher there, and there
is more likelihood of there being streams. I think you will be able
to lie your course or, at any rate, make a long leg and a short
one. You are to go, as nearly as you can tell, twenty miles. If you
do not meet with a stream by that time, turn back. You will have
the wind free, then, and can be back here well before sunset. Of
course, if you find fresh water, you will at once return.

"Would you like to go with the boat, Mr. Lindsay?"

"Very much. My hands are so sore, from hauling in the lines, that I
am afraid I shall not be able to help in the fishing, tomorrow."

The party started early. It consisted of ten men, the coxswain, the
midshipmen, and Harry. The surf was no longer breaking on the bar
outside. There was a bright sea, with white-crested waves and,
before starting, the captain ordered a reef to be put in the sails.

"She could carry full sail, well enough," he said to Harry, "but
there is no occasion for haste; and it is always best to be on the
safe side, especially when a middy is in command. Besides, it is
just as well to keep dry jackets."

A keg of water and a supply of food, sufficient for two days, were
placed on board.

"I expect you will be back by three o'clock in the afternoon, Mr.
Eden; but it is always well to provide against any accident."

With the sheets hauled tight aft, the cutter was just able to lie
her course, outside the line of breakers. In a little over an hour
there was a break in the shore, and a stream of some forty feet
wide fell into the sea; and a general cheer broke from the sailors,
who had been put on allowance for the past week.

"Put her about, coxswain," the midshipman said; "we need go no
farther."

"Can't we land, and have a bathe, sir?" the coxswain asked.

"Certainly not. That is the very thing that we mus'n't do. For
anything we know, there may be natives about; and some of us might
get stuck full of their arrows before we could get out of range.
This will be good news, and there will be no longer any need for
your being kept on short allowance of water."

At ten o'clock the boat re-entered the inlet, and lowered sail by
the side of the brig.

"You have been successful, I suppose, by your coming back so soon,
Mr. Eden?" the captain said, when they were within easy hail.

"Yes, sir. There is a small stream, about seven miles from here."

"That is very satisfactory. Now you can come on board. There is
plenty of work for all hands."

Everyone, indeed, was busy in repairing damages. The carpenters
were engaged upon the bulwarks and the stern, which had been much
damaged by the wave that had lifted them over the bar. As there
were not sufficient planks on board for this work, canvas was
utilized for filling up the gaps in the bulwarks; and this, after
being nailed to temporary stanchions, was coated with pitch. All
hands worked cheerfully. The change of diet already benefited them,
and the news that there was plenty of fresh water near enabled the
remaining supply to be freely used--a matter of no slight
consequence, to men working in the broiling sun.

Two days later the work was finished and, on the following morning,
the anchors were weighed and the sails shaken out; and the brig
left the inlet that had saved them from destruction and, after
sailing out to sea a couple of miles, came about and laid her
course for the mouth of the stream.

The fishing had been continued, without intermission. Watches had
again been set, and the work of attending to the lines was very
welcome, as helping to pass away the four hours of darkness. By the
time they left the inlet, a sufficient quantity had been salted
down to last the ship's company for a week, without recourse to the
salt-meat casks.

The carpenter, with three or four assistants, had patched up the
second cutter--the boat that had been least injured. The others had
been broken up for firewood, some of the pieces being reserved for
the repairs of the cutter.

As soon as the brig reached the mouth of the stream she was
anchored, two hundred yards off the shore. The water barrels had
already been got up on deck, and some of these were lowered into
the first cutter, of which Mr. Hardy took the command. It was not
deemed advisable to employ the second boat in bringing water on
board as, if heavily laden, the water would force its way in
through the hastily-executed repairs. The captain, then,
accompanied by Harry and an armed crew, took his place in her; and
went ahead of the larger boat into the stream.

It was found to be but three or four feet deep, with a slow current
and, for some little distance up, was too brackish to be used. It
was not until they entered the line of forest that it was found
fresh enough. The men in the first cutter proceeded to fill their
casks, while those in the other boat laid in their oars and, musket
in hand, watched the forest. In a few minutes the work was done,
and the first cutter rowed straight for the brig; while the second
cutter followed her, for some distance beyond the trees, and there
waited for her return.

"So far, so good," Fairclough said; "but I am afraid that we shall
be disturbed, before we have made another trip. No doubt, some of
the natives followed the cutter along the shore, yesterday. I don't
suppose they recognized what your object was, as you did not enter
the stream; but when they saw the brig going the same way this
morning, I have no doubt that they set off in this direction.
However, with one more boat load we can manage, well enough, until
we reach the Hooghly for, with this wind, we shall make a quick
run."

In a quarter of an hour the cutter was seen returning and, when it
approached them, Fairclough again took the lead. All appeared still
in the forest, and the men had just begun to refill the casks, when
a shower of arrows fell among the boats.

"Let half your men go on with their work, Mr. Hardy, and the others
stand to their arms."

Not a single foe was visible, but the arrows still flew fast from
among the trees.

"Open fire!" Fairclough said. "Fire anywhere among the bushes. I
don't suppose that we shall hit them, but it may frighten them.
They can't know much about firearms."

From both boats a scattering fire of musketry at once opened, the
men loading and firing as quickly as they could. The effect was
immediate. Arrows still fell, but only occasionally; and evidently
shot at random, for but few of them came near the boats.

The men in the first cutter were working energetically, dipping
breakers into the water and emptying them into the large casks. In
three or four minutes these were filled, and Hardy hailed the
captain.

"We are full up, now, sir, both casks and breakers."

"Then retire at once, Mr. Hardy. We will follow you."

As they issued from under the trees, the arrows again fell fast.

"Don't fire," the captain said; "perhaps they may issue out, and
then we will give them a lesson--that it is better not to interfere
with men who are doing them no harm."

This proved to be the case. No one had been hit by the fire from
the boats and, now that the shooting had ceased, the natives, with
shouts of triumph, ran out from the forest. There were some
hundreds of them.

The captain hailed the boat in front.

"Stop rowing, Mr. Hardy, and open fire on them.

"Now, lads," he went on, to his own crew, "fire steadily, and don't
throw away a shot."

[Illustration: The rattle of musketry broke out again.]

As the rattle of musketry broke out again from both boats, many of
the natives dropped. The others stopped, at once. A shower of
arrows was discharged; and then, as the fire was kept up, they fled
back into the woods; and the men, again taking to their oars, rowed
out without further molestation to the brig. None of the crew had
been killed, but four were wounded by the arrows.

"I hope they are not poisoned," Fairclough said, in a low voice, to
Harry. "I don't know whether they use poison, on these islands; but
we must hope not. However, we will not frighten them by even
hinting at the possibility of such a thing."

Happily, however, no evil symptoms resulted. The wounds were, for
the most part slight and, the next day, all were able to return to
their duty. The fair weather now set in and, ten days later, the
brig dropped anchor in the river, opposite Calcutta.

Harry at once went ashore, and handed to the Governor a full report
of what had taken place.

"I have not time to read this rather bulky report of yours, at
present, Captain Lindsay," the latter said, with a smile. "Please
give me the pith of it, as shortly as possible."

"The island, sir, is well adapted for a trading station; and would,
I should think, when the forests are partly cleared away, be a
healthy one. I have interviewed the tumangong, who has signed a
document agreeing, at any time in the future that it may be
desired, to cede either a trading station or the whole island to
us. He was greatly pleased with the presents that you sent; and is,
I believe, thoroughly in earnest in his desire for a trading
station to be established so close to him. The Rajah of Johore has
ratified this agreement, and has given his cordial consent for the
cession of the island to us.

"It seems that he, himself, is an usurper. The rightful heir is a
boy of seven or eight years old, and I think it is possible that,
either at the present man's death, or possibly even before that, he
may ascend the throne. At present, he and his mother are in the
hands of the reigning rajah; but I have promised her that, if we
take possession of Singapore, she and her son can find an asylum
there, and a small pension for her maintenance; and she, on her
part, has promised that she will bring up her son to regard us as
his best friends; and that he, if he ascends the throne, shall also
ratify the treaty, and will become our warm ally.

"As to the Dutch, the reply of their Governor is with the report,
but certainly it is an unfavourable one; and no cooperation, in the
work of repressing piracy, can be expected from them."

"I did not expect it, Captain Lindsay; and indeed, as I told you at
the time, only sent you to Batavia in order to account for the
presence of one of our ships of war in those waters.

"Well, sir, your mission has been, in all respects, most
satisfactory. I shall read your report, and give it full
consideration, at my leisure. For the present you will remain here,
available for any office, military or civil; but at present, at any
rate, you will retain your civil employment.

"I will not ask you to dine with me, today, as it is hardly likely
that I shall have time to read your report, this afternoon; but I
shall be glad if you will do so, tomorrow, and you can then answer
any questions that may suggest themselves to me."



Chapter 15: Assaye.


While the Deccan had been torn by civil war, the Government of
Bombay had extended their territory. The Nabob of Surat, who had
been under their protection, had died; and they had taken the
government of the province into their own hands. A civil war having
broken out, at Baroda, they had supported one of the rival princes;
and had, after a good deal of fighting, placed their candidate on
the throne--various districts being assigned to them, in return for
their assistance.

Holkar, on hearing of Bajee's arrival at Bassein, placed his
brother Amrud on the musnud, and commenced a series of atrocities,
in Poona, equal to that which it had suffered at the hands of
Ghatgay; respectable inhabitants being robbed and ill treated, many
tortured, and some killed, in order to wring from them the
treasures that they were supposed to have concealed.

During the months that followed his return to Calcutta, Harry
remained attached to the staff of the Marquis of Wellesley--for to
this title Lord Mornington had succeeded, during his absence, on
the death of his father--and was sent on various missions; among
others accompanying the Governor General's brother, the Honorable
Henry Wellesley, to the court of Oude. He could now speak
Hindustani, as well as Mahratti; and was very useful in acting as
an interpreter, and in aiding to carry on the negotiations.

In February, 1803, he was sent by the Governor General to join the
force that Major General Wellesley was preparing, in Mysore, to aid
Bajee Rao to recover his throne. The treaty that the latter had
concluded with the Government, on his arrival at Bassein, was a
most advantageous one to the English. In return for their
assistance, he agreed that a force of infantry, with guns and
European artillerymen, should be stationed within his territories;
their maintenance being paid by handing over to the Company a large
amount of territory. The two parties were to support each other in
case of war, and the Peishwa bound himself not to make aggressions
against other states, nor to negotiate with them without the
Governor's consent. The Peishwa agreed, also, to abandon the
Mahratta claims on Surat, and other districts that had been
occupied by the English.

On arriving at General Wellesley's camp, Harry reported himself to
that officer for service.

"I am very glad to have you with me, Captain Lindsay. I have
frequently heard my brother speak of your services, and your
perfect knowledge of Mahratti, and your acquaintance with its
people will be of great value to me.

"You know the Peishwa well. Do you think that he will be faithful
to the engagement that he has made with us?"

"Certainly not, sir. He has been intriguing, ever since he ascended
the musnud. His duplicity is only equalled by his treachery and, as
soon as he is restored, in Poona, he will again begin his intrigues
with Scindia and the other Mahratta chiefs."

"That is the opinion that I have formed of him, from what I have
heard," the general said. "However, the terms of the treaty will
render him practically our servant; for we shall maintain a body of
troops near Poona, which will effectually prevent any scheme of his
from succeeding.

"What course Holkar will take, we cannot say; but the other
Mahratta chiefs have all entered into a confederacy against us, and
we shall have the forces of Scindia, of the Rajah of Bhopal, the
Rajah of Berar, and the Rajah of Kolapoore to deal with."

The partition of Mysore had, indeed, done much to unite the
Mahrattas together. The ever-increasing power of the British was a
serious source of alarm for, in addition to Mysore, Lord Wellesley
had, without a shadow of justification, obtained the control of
Oude.

"I am sorry, sir, that the Rajah of Berar has declared against us.
I was nearly three months with him; and should, after the news of
the capture of Seringapatam, have fallen a victim to the fury of
the Mohammedans in the city, had he not taken me under his
protection. But at the same time, I have no doubt in my mind that
he was ready to join whichever side was victorious."

"You have, then, no good opinion of the Mahrattas, Captain
Lindsay?"

"I have met but one honest man among them. Nana Furnuwees was not
only an extraordinary man, but devoted his talents wholly to the
good of the state. His word could always be relied upon. His life
was simple, and his habits frugal. I honoured and esteemed him,
greatly."

"Yes, it was owing to you, as my brother told me, that he was
released from prison. I was greatly struck with the story, when I
heard it; because it showed how much can be accomplished, even by
the youngest officer who is active, and enterprising, and ready to
act on his own initiative. I saw a copy of Mr. Uhtoff's report of
the affair.

"Well, you will be attached to my staff, with no particular duties,
at present; but doubtless we shall find plenty for you to do, when
we once cross the frontier into the Mahratta country."

Harry found that, in addition to the eight thousand infantry and
seventeen hundred cavalry, under the command of General Wellesley,
the Nizam's force of eight thousand regular troops and fifteen
thousand irregulars were advancing towards the frontier, the whole
commanded by Colonel Stephenson. On the 25th of March these forces
advanced, and were joined by numerous small Mahratta chiefs in the
Peishwa's interest. General Wellesley's army advanced straight on
Poona, which was evacuated at once by Holkar's force and, as it was
stated that he intended to burn the town, before he retired, the
general hastened forward with his cavalry and, on the 20th of
April, took possession of the place. Colonel Stephenson, whose
cooperation was no longer required, moved north towards the
Godavery, to protect the country against the irruptions of Holkar.

Four weeks later Bajee Rao arrived from the coast, and resumed his
seat on the musnud amid great rejoicings by the inhabitants; who
had suffered terribly, both at the hands of Ghatgay and Holkar.

Scindia, having recovered from the effects of his defeat by Holkar,
had returned, crossed the Nerbudda, and encamped on the Nizam's
frontier. He was busy preparing for war, in conjunction with the
Rajah of Berar; and had even made overtures, to Holkar, to join in
opposing the English. Bajee Rao himself, as was afterwards
discovered, was also in friendly communication with Scindia.

The Resident at Scindia's court was ordered to leave it, unless
that prince retired from his position on the Nizam's frontier.
Scindia, when summoned, sent a defiant reply and, as it was now
evident that war was impending, General Wellesley was invested with
full powers; and Lord Lake, who commanded the army of Hindustan,
was ordered to advance to attack the formidable force of French
infantry, under Perron, and take possession of Delhi, Agra, and
other places held by the Mahrattas. Another attempt was made to
persuade Scindia to retire; but evasive answers were returned, and
it was not until the 3rd of August that the Resident quitted
Scindia, and Wellesley prepared to attack Ahmednuggur.

The possession of this place was of great importance, because it
was situated close to the Nizam's frontier, and afforded great
facilities for future operations. The town was surrounded by a
wall, flanked by towers; and was defended by a number of Arabs, and
a battalion of Scindia's regular infantry. These offered a vigorous
resistance for, after a breach had been made in the walls, and the
troops had entered, they retired; fighting from house to house, and
keeping up a heavy fire. However, by nightfall they were driven
inside their fort.

A battery of four guns was erected, within four hundred yards of
it; and these opened with such effect that the governor
surrendered, on being allowed to depart with the garrison and their
private property.

On the 24th, General Wellesley crossed the Godavery; Colonel
Stephenson moving in the direction of Aurungabad. Scindia and the
Rajah of Berar were now within forty miles of him; but they
suddenly turned off, as if intending to make a dash for Hyderabad,
where the Nizam had expired, three weeks before.

Wellesley followed close after them, and they then turned and took
up a position to the north of Julnapoor, a town lying east of
Aurungabad. On the 2nd of September, Julnapoor was captured by
Colonel Stephenson; who afterwards made a night attack upon
Scindia's camp, inflicting considerable loss.

On the 21st the whole Mahratta army, with sixteen battalions of
regular infantry, were encamped twenty-two miles north of Julnapoor
and, the next day, the army marched against them by two routes;
Colonel Stephenson taking the western road, and General Wellesley
the eastern.

The next afternoon, when about to halt, General Wellesley learned
that the Mahrattas were encamped about six miles from him, on the
banks of the Kaitna. He determined to attack them at once, without
waiting for Colonel Stephenson; for in another day they would, in
all probability, send off their infantry, and begin to carry on a
desultory warfare with their horse.

[Illustration: Plan of the Battle of Assaye.]

The general rode on, with his staff and an escort of cavalry, and
obtained a view of the Mahratta host from rising ground. They were
in the fork formed by the junction of the Kaitna with the Juah.
Their right consisted wholly of cavalry, and was protected by the
high and rocky bank of the stream; which was, at one or two points,
impassable for guns. Their left, consisting of the infantry and
artillery, was posted in the village of Assaye, which lay near the
fork of the river.

The general determined, at once, to attack at this point. The force
under his command consisted of four battalions of Sepoys, and the
74th and 78th Regiments; with the 19th Dragoons, and three
