dispatched above an hundred different sollicitors, in walking with us to
the house of a neighbouring gentleman, where we dined by invitation.
Our landlord's housekeeping is equally rough and hospitable, and savours
much of the simplicity of ancient times: the great hall, paved with flat
stones, is about forty-five feet by twenty-two, and serves not only for
a dining-room, but also for a bedchamber, to gentlemen-dependents and
hangers-on of the family. At night, half a dozen occasional beds are
ranged on each side along the wall. These are made of fresh heath,
pulled up by the roots, and disposed in such a manner as to make a very
agreeable couch, where they lie, without any other covering than the
plaid--My uncle and I were indulged with separate chambers and down beds
which we begged to exchange for a layer of heath; and indeed I never
slept so much to my satisfaction. It was not only soft and elastic, but
the plant, being in flower, diffused an agreeable fragrance, which is
wonderfully refreshing and restorative.

Yesterday we were invited to the funeral of an old lady, the grandmother
of a gentleman in this neighbourhood, and found ourselves in the midst
of fifty people, who were regaled with a sumptuous feast, accompanied by
the music of a dozen pipers. In short, this meeting had all the air of
a grand festival; and the guests did such honour to the entertainment,
that many of them could not stand when we were reminded of the business
on which we had met. The company forthwith taking horse, rode in a very
irregular cavalcade to the place of interment, a church, at the distance
of two long miles from the castle. On our arrival, however, we found
we had committed a small oversight, in leaving the corpse behind; so we
were obliged to wheel about, and met the old gentlewoman half way, being
carried upon poles by the nearest relations of her family, and attended
by the coronach, composed of a multitude of old hags, who tore their
hair, beat their breasts, and howled most hideously. At the grave, the
orator, or senachie, pronounced the panegyric of the defunct, every
period being confirmed by a yell of the coronach. The body was committed
to the earth, the pipers playing a pibroch all the time; and all the
company standing uncovered. The ceremony was closed with the discharge
of pistols; then we returned to the castle, resumed the bottle, and
by midnight there was not a sober person in the family, the females
excepted. The 'squire and I were, with some difficulty, permitted to
retire with our landlord in the evening; but our entertainer was a
little chagrined at our retreat; and afterwards seemed to think it a
disparagement to his family, that not above a hundred gallons of whisky
had been drunk upon such a solemn occasion. This morning we got up by
four, to hunt the roebuck, and, in half an hour, found breakfast ready
served in the hall. The hunters consisted of Sir George Colquhoun and
me, as strangers (my uncle not chusing to be of the party), of the laird
in person, the laird's brother, the laird's brother's son, the laird's
sister's son, the laird's father's brother's son, and all their foster
brothers, who are counted parcel of the family: but we were attended by
an infinite number of Gaelly's, or ragged Highlanders without shoes or
stockings.

The following articles formed our morning's repast: one kit of boiled
eggs; a second, full of butter; a third full of cream; an entire cheese,
made of goat's milk; a large earthen pot full of honey; the best part
of a ham; a cold venison pasty; a bushel of oat meal, made in thin cakes
and bannocks, with a small wheaten loaf in the middle for the strangers;
a large stone bottle full of whisky, another of brandy, and a kilderkin
of ale. There was a ladle chained to the cream kit, with curious wooden
bickers to be filled from this reservoir. The spirits were drank out of
a silver quaff, and the ale out of hems: great justice was done to the
collation by the guest in general; one of them in particular ate above
two dozen of hard eggs, with a proportionable quantity of bread, butter,
and honey; nor was one drop of liquor left upon the board. Finally,
a large roll of tobacco was presented by way of desert, and every
individual took a comfortable quid, to prevent the bad effects of the
morning air. We had a fine chace over the mountains, after a roebuck,
which we killed, and I got home time enough to drink tea with Mrs
Campbell and our 'squire. To-morrow we shall set out on our return for
Cameron. We propose to cross the Frith of Clyde, and take the towns of
Greenock and Port-Glasgow in our way. This circuit being finished, we
shall turn our faces to the south, and follow the sun with augmented
velocity, in order to enjoy the rest of the autumn in England, where
Boreas is not quite so biting as he begins already to be on the tops
of these northern hills. But our progress from place to place shall
continue to be specified in these detached journals of

Yours always, J. MELFORD ARGYLSHIRE, Sept. 3.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

About a fortnight is now elapsed, since we left the capital of Scotland,
directing our course towards Stirling, where we lay. The castle of this
place is such another as that of Edinburgh, and affords a surprising
prospect of the windings of the river Forth, which are so extraordinary,
that the distance from hence to Alloa by land, is but forty miles, and
by water it is twenty-four. Alloa is a neat thriving town, that depends
in a great measure on the commerce of Glasgow, the merchants of which
send hither tobacco and other articles, to be deposited in warehouses
for exportation from the Frith of Forth. In our way hither we visited
a flourishing iron-work, where, instead of burning wood, they use coal,
which they have the art of clearing in such a manner as frees it from
the sulphur, that would otherwise render the metal too brittle for
working. Excellent coal is found in almost every part of Scotland.

The soil of this district produces scarce any other grain but oats, lid
barley; perhaps because it is poorly cultivated, and almost altogether
uninclosed. The few inclosures they have consist of paultry walls of
loose stones gathered from the fields, which indeed they cover, as if
they had been scattered on purpose. When I expressed my surprize that
the peasants did not disencumber their grounds of these stones; a
gentleman, well acquainted with the theory as well as practice of
farming, assured me that the stones, far from being prejudicial, were
serviceable to the crop. This philosopher had ordered a field of his own
to be cleared, manured and sown with barley, and the produce was more
scanty than before. He caused the stones to be replaced, and next year
the crop was as good as ever. The stones were removed a second time,
and the harvest failed; they were again brought back, and the ground
retrieved its fertility. The same experiment has been tried in different
parts of Scotland with the same success--Astonished at this information,
I desired to know in what manner he accounted for this strange
phenomenon; and he said there were three ways in which the stones
might be serviceable. They might possibly restrain an excess in the
perspiration of the earth, analogous to colliquative sweats, by which
the human body is sometimes wasted and consumed. They might act as so
many fences to protect the tender blade from the piercing winds of the
spring; or, by multiplying the reflexion of the sun, they might increase
the warmth, so as to mitigate the natural chilness of the soil
and climate--But, surely this excessive perspiration might be more
effectually checked by different kinds of manure, such as ashes, lime,
chalk, or marl, of which last it seems there are many pits in this
kingdom: as for the warmth, it would be much more equally obtained by
inclosures; the cultivation would require less labour; and the ploughs,
harrows, and horses, would not suffer half the damage which they now
sustain.

These north-western parts are by no means fertile in corn. The ground is
naturally barren and moorish. The peasants are poorly lodged, meagre
in their looks, mean in their apparel, and remarkably dirty. This last
reproach they might easily wash off, by means of those lakes, rivers,
and rivulets of pure water, with which they are so liberally supplied by
nature. Agriculture cannot be expected to flourish where the farms are
small, the leases short, and the husbandman begins upon a rack rent,
without a sufficient stock to answer the purposes of improvement. The
granaries of Scotland are the banks of the Tweed, the counties of East
and Mid-Lothian, the Carse of Gowrie, in Perthshire, equal in fertility
to any part of England, and some tracts in Aberdeenshire and Murray,
where I am told the harvest is more early than in Northumberland,
although they lie above two degrees farther north. I have a strong
curiosity to visit many places beyond the Forth and the Tay, such as
Perth, Dundee, Montrose, and Aberdeen, which are towns equally elegant
and thriving; but the season is too far advanced to admit of this
addition to my original plan.

I am so far happy as to have seen Glasgow, which, to the best of my
recollection and judgment, is one of the prettiest towns in Europe; and,
without all doubt, it is one of the most flourishing in Great Britain.
In short, it is a perfect bee-hive in point of industry. It stands
partly on a gentle declivity; but the greatest part of it is in a plain,
watered by the river Clyde. The streets are straight, open, airy, and
well paved; and the houses lofty and well built of hewn stone. At the
upper end of the town, there is a venerable cathedral, that may be
compared with York-minster or West-minster; and, about the middle of the
descent from this to the Cross, is the college, a respectable pile
of building, with all manner of accommodation for the professors and
students, including an elegant library, and a observatory well provided
with astronomical instruments. The number of inhabitants is said to
amount to thirty thousand; and marks of opulence and independency appear
in every quarter of this commercial city, which, however, is not without
its inconveniences and defects. The water of their public pumps is
generally hard and brackish, an imperfection the loss excusable, as
the river Clyde runs by their doors, in the lower part of the town; and
there are rivulets and springs above the cathedral, sufficient to fill a
large reservoir with excellent water, which might be thence distributed
to all the different parts of the city. It is of more consequence to
consult the health of the inhabitants in this article than to employ so
much attention in beautifying their town with new streets, squares, and
churches. Another defect, not so easily remedied, is the shallowness
of the river, which will not float vessels of any burthen within ten or
twelve miles of the city; so that the merchants are obliged to load and
unload their ships at Greenock and Port-Glasgow, situated about fourteen
miles nearer the mouth of the Frith, where it is about two miles broad.

The people of Glasgow have a noble spirit of enterprise--Mr Moore, a
surgeon, to whom I was recommended from Edinburgh, introduced me to all
the principal merchants of the place. Here I became acquainted with
Mr Cochran, who may be stiled one of the sages of this kingdom. He was
first magistrate at the time of the last rebellion. I sat as member
when he was examined in the house of commons, upon which occasion Mr P--
observed he had never heard such a sensible evidence given at that bar.
I was also introduced to Dr John Gordon, a patriot of a truly Roman
spirit, who is the father of the linen manufacture in this place, and
was the great promoter of the city workhouse, infirmary, and other works
of public utility. Had he lived in ancient Rome, he would have been
honoured with a statue at the public expence. I moreover conversed with
one Mr G--ssf--d, whom I take to be one of the greatest merchants in
Europe. In the last war, he is said to have had at one time five and
twenty ships with their cargoes, his own property, and to have traded
for above half a million sterling a-year. The last war was a fortunate
period for the commerce of Glasgow--The merchants, considering that
their ships bound for America, launching out at once into the Atlantic
by the north of Ireland, pursued a track very little frequented
by privateers, resolved to insure one another, and saved a very
considerable sum by this resolution, as few or none of their ships were
taken--You must know I have a sort of national attachment to this part
of Scotland--The great church dedicated to St Mongah, the river Clyde,
and other particulars that smack of our Welch language and customs,
contribute to flatter me with the notion, that these people are the
descendants of the Britons, who once possessed this country. Without
all question, this was a Cumbrian kingdom: its capital was Dumbarton (a
corruption of Dunbritton) which still exists as a royal borough, at
the influx of the Clyde and Leven, ten miles below Glasgow. The same
neighbourhood gave birth to St Patrick, the apostle of Ireland, at a
place where there is still a church and village, which retain his name.
Hard by are some vestiges of the famous Roman wall, built in the reign
of Antonine, from the Clyde to the Forth, and fortified with castles, to
restrain the incursions of the Scots or Caledonians, who inhabited
the West-Highlands. In a line parallel to this wall, the merchants of
Glasgow have determined to make a navigable canal betwixt the two Firths
which will be of incredible advantage to their commerce, in transporting
merchandize from one side of the island to the other.

From Glasgow we travelled along the Clyde, which is a delightful stream,
adorned on both sides with villas, towns, and villages. Here is no want
of groves, and meadows, and corn-fields interspersed; but on this side
of Glasgow, there is little other grain than oats and barley; the first
are much better, the last much worse, than those of the same species in
England. I wonder, there is so little rye, which is a grain that will
thrive in almost any soil; and it is still more surprising, that the
cultivation of potatoes should be so much neglected in the Highlands,
where the poor people have not meal enough to supply them with bread
through the winter. On the other side of the river are the towns of
Paisley and Renfrew. The first, from an inconsiderable village, is
become one of the most flourishing places of the kingdom, enriched
by the linen, cambrick, flowered lawn, and silk manufactures. It was
formerly noted for a rich monastery of the monks of Clugny, who wrote
the famous Scoti-Chronicon, called The Black Book of Paisley. The old
abbey still remains, converted into a dwelling-house, belonging to the
earl of Dundonald. Renfrew is a pretty town, on the banks of Clyde,
capital of the shire, which was heretofore the patrimony of the Stuart
family, and gave the title of baron to the king's eldest son, which is
still assumed by the prince of Wales.

The Clyde we left a little on our left-hand at Dunbritton, where it
widens into an aestuary or frith, being augmented by the influx of the
Leven. On this spot stands the castle formerly called Alcluyd, washed,
by these two rivers on all sides, except a narrow isthmus, which at
every spring-tide is overflowed. The whole is a great curiosity, from
the quality and form of the rock, as well as from the nature of its
situation--We now crossed the water of Leven, which, though nothing near
so considerable as the Clyde, is much more transparent, pastoral, and
delightful. This charming stream is the outlet of Lough-Lomond, and
through a tract of four miles pursues its winding course, murmuring over
a bed of pebbles, till it joins the Frith at Dunbritton. A very little
above its source, on the lake, stands the house of Cameron, belonging to
Mr Smollett, so embosomed in an oak wood, that we did not see it till
we were within fifty yards of the door. I have seen the Lago di Garda,
Albano, De Vico, Bolsena, and Geneva, and, upon my honour, I prefer
Lough-Lomond to them all, a preference which is certainly owing to the
verdant islands that seem to float upon its surface, affording the most
inchanting objects of repose to the excursive view. Nor are the banks
destitute of beauties, which even partake of the sublime. On this side
they display a sweet variety of woodland, cornfield, and pasture, with
several agreeable villas emerging as it were out of the lake, till, at
some distance, the prospect terminates in huge mountains covered with
heath, which being in the bloom, affords a very rich covering of purple.
Every thing here is romantic beyond imagination. This country is justly
stiled the Arcadia of Scotland; and I don't doubt but it may vie with
Arcadia in every thing but climate.--I am sure it excels it in verdure,
wood, and water.--What say you to a natural bason of pure water, near
thirty miles long, and in some places seven miles broad, and in many
above a hundred fathom deep, having four and twenty habitable islands,
some of them stocked with deer, and all of them covered with wood;
containing immense quantities of delicious fish, salmon, pike, trout,
perch, flounders, eels, and powans, the last a delicate kind of
fresh-water herring peculiar to this lake; and finally communicating
with the sea, by sending off the Leven, through which all those species
(except the powan) make their exit and entrance occasionally?

Inclosed I send you the copy of a little ode to this river, by Dr
Smollett, who was born on the banks of it, within two miles of the
place where I am now writing.--It is at least picturesque and accurately
descriptive, if it has no other merit.--There is an idea of truth in an
agreeable landscape taken from nature, which pleases me more than the
gayest fiction which the most luxuriant fancy can display.

I have other remarks to make; but as my paper is full, I must reserve
them till the next occasion. I shall only observe at present, that I am
determined to penetrate at least forty miles into the Highlands, which
now appear like a vast fantastic vision in the clouds, inviting the
approach of

Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE CAMERON, Aug. 28.

ODE TO LEVEN-WATER

On Leven's banks, while free to rove, And tune the rural pipe to love; I
envied not the happiest swain That ever trod th' Arcadian plain.

Pure stream! in whose transparent wave My youthful limbs I wont to
lave; No torrents stain thy limpid source; No rocks impede thy dimpling
course, That sweetly warbles o'er its bed, With white, round, polish'd
pebbles spread; While, lightly pois'd, the scaly brood In myriads cleave
thy crystal flood; The springing trout in speckled pride; The salmon,
monarch of the tide; The ruthless pike, intent on war; The silver eel,
and motled par.*

Devolving from thy parent lake, A charming maze thy waters make, By
bow'rs of birch, and groves of pine, And hedges flow'r'd with eglantine.

Still on thy banks so gayly green, May num'rous herds and flocks be
seen, And lasses chanting o'er the pail, And shepherds piping in the
dale, And ancient faith that knows no guile, And industry imbrown'd with
toil, And hearts resolv'd, and hands prepar'd, The blessings they enjoy
to guard.

     * The par is a small fish, not unlike the smelt, which it
     rivals in delicacy and flavour.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

If I was disposed to be critical, I should say this house of Cameron is
too near the lake, which approaches, on one side, to within six or seven
yards of the window. It might have been placed in a higher site, which
would have afforded a more extensive prospect and a drier atmosphere;
but this imperfection is not chargeable on the present proprietor, who
purchased it ready built, rather than be at the trouble of repairing his
own family-house of Bonhill, which stands two miles from hence on the
Leven, so surrounded with plantation, that it used to be known by the
name of the Mavis (or thrush) Nest. Above that house is a romantic glen
or clift of a mountain, covered with hanging woods having at bottom a
stream of fine water that forms a number of cascades in its descent to
join the Leven; so that the scene is quite enchanting. A captain of a
man of war, who had made the circuit of the globe with Mr Anson, being
conducted to this glen, exclaimed, 'Juan Fernandez, by God!'

Indeed, this country would be a perfect paradise, if it was not, like
Wales, cursed with a weeping climate, owing to the same cause in both,
the neighbourhood of high mountains, and a westerly situation, exposed
to the vapours of the Atlantic ocean. This air, however, notwithstanding
its humidity, is so healthy, that the natives are scarce ever visited by
any other disease than the smallpox, and certain cutaneous evils, which
are the effects of dirty living, the great and general reproach of the
commonalty of this kingdom. Here are a great many living monuments of
longaevity; and among the rest a person, whom I treat with singular
respect, as a venerable druid, who has lived near ninety years,
without pain or sickness, among oaks of his own planting.--He was once
proprietor of these lands; but being of a projecting spirit, some of
his schemes miscarried, and he was obliged to part with his possession,
which hath shifted hands two or three times since that period; but every
succeeding proprietor hath done every thing in his power, to make
his old age easy and comfortable. He has a sufficiency to procure
the necessaries of life; and he and his old woman reside in a small
convenient farm-house, having a little garden which he cultivates with
his own hands. This ancient couple live in great health, peace, and
harmony, and, knowing no wants, enjoy the perfection of content. Mr
Smollet calls him the admiral, because he insists upon steering his
pleasure-boat upon the lake; and he spends most of his time in ranging
through the woods, which he declares he enjoys as much as if they were
still his own property--I asked him the other day, if he was never sick,
and he answered, Yes; he had a slight fever the year before the union.
If he was not deaf, I should take much pleasure in his conversation; for
he is very intelligent, and his memory is surprisingly retentive--These
are the happy effects of temperance, exercise, and good nature--
Notwithstanding all his innocence, however, he was the cause of great
perturbation to my man Clinker, whose natural superstition has been
much injured, by the histories of witches, fairies, ghosts, and goblins,
which he has heard in this country--On the evening after our arrival,
Humphry strolled into the wood, in the course of his meditation, and all
at once the admiral stood before him, under the shadow of a spreading
oak. Though the fellow is far from being timorous in cases that are not
supposed preternatural, he could not stand the sight of this apparition,
but ran into the kitchen, with his hair standing on end, staring wildly,
and deprived of utterance. Mrs Jenkins, seeing him in this condition,
screamed aloud, 'Lord have mercy upon us, he has seen something!' Mrs
Tabitha was alarmed, and the whole house in confusion. When he was
recruited with a dram, I desired him to explain the meaning of all this
agitation; and, with some reluctance, he owned he had seen a spirit,
in the shape of an old man with a white beard, a black cap, and a plaid
night-gown. He was undeceived by the admiral in person, who, coming in
at this juncture, appeared to be a creature of real flesh and blood.

Do you know how we fare in this Scottish paradise? We make free with our
landlord's mutton, which is excellent, his poultry-yard, his garden,
his dairy, and his cellar, which are all well stored. We have delicious
salmon, pike, trout, perch, par, &c. at the door, for the taking. The
Frith of Clyde, on the other side of the hill, supplies us with mullet,
red and grey, cod, mackarel, whiting, and a variety of sea-fish,
including the finest fresh herrings I ever tasted. We have sweet, juicy
beef, and tolerable veal, with delicate bread from the little town of
Dunbritton; and plenty of partridge, growse, heath cock, and other game
in presents.

We have been visited by all the gentlemen in the neighbourhood, and they
have entertained us at their houses, not barely with hospitality, but
with such marks of cordial affection, as one would wish to find among
near relations, after an absence of many years.

I told you, in my last, I had projected an excursion to the Highlands,
which project I have now happily executed, under the auspices of Sir
George Colquhoun, a colonel in the Dutch service, who offered himself
as our conductor on this occasion. Leaving our women at Cameron, to
the care and inspection of Lady H-- C--, we set out on horseback for
Inverary, the county town of Argyle, and dined on the road with the
Laird of Macfarlane, the greatest genealogist I ever knew in any
country, and perfectly acquainted with all the antiquities of Scotland.

The Duke of Argyle has an old castle in Inverary, where he resides when
he is in Scotland; and hard by is the shell of a noble Gothic palace,
built by the last duke, which, when finished, will be a great ornament
to this part of the Highlands. As for Inverary, it is a place of very
little importance.

This country is amazingly wild, especially towards the mountains, which
are heaped upon the backs of one another, making a most stupendous
appearance of savage nature, with hardly any signs of cultivation, or
even of population. All is sublimity, silence, and solitude. The people
live together in glens or bottoms, where they are sheltered from the
cold and storms of winter: but there is a margin of plain ground spread
along the sea side, which is well inhabited and improved by the arts of
husbandry; and this I take to be one of the most agreeable tracts of the
whole island; the sea not only keeps it warm, and supplies it with fish,
but affords one of the most ravishing prospects in the whole world; I
mean the appearance of the Hebrides, or Western Islands to the number
of three hundred, scattered as far as the eye can reach, in the most
agreeable confusion. As the soil and climate of the Highlands are but
ill adapted to the cultivation of corn, the people apply themselves
chiefly to the breeding and feeding of black cattle, which turn to good
account. Those animals run wild all the winter, without any shelter or
subsistence, but what they can find among the heath. When the snow lies
so deep and hard, that they cannot penetrate to the roots of the grass,
they make a diurnal progress, guided by a sure instinct, to the seaside
at low water, where they feed on the alga marina, and other plants that
grow upon the beach.

Perhaps this branch of husbandry, which required very little attendance
and labour, is one of the principal causes of that idleness and want of
industry, which distinguishes these mountaineers in their own country.
When they come forth into the world, they become as diligent and alert
as any people upon earth. They are undoubtedly a very distinct species
from their fellow subjects of the Lowlands, against whom they indulge
an ancient spirit of animosity; and this difference is very discernible
even among persons of family and education. The Lowlanders are generally
cool and circumspect, the Highlanders fiery and ferocious:' but this
violence of their passions serves only to inflame the zeal of their
devotion to strangers, which is truly enthusiastic.

We proceeded about twenty miles beyond Inverary, to the house of a
gentleman, a friend of our conductor, where we stayed a few days, and
were feasted in such a manner, that I began to dread the consequence to
my constitution.

Notwithstanding the solitude that prevails among these mountains, there
is no want of people in the Highlands. I am credibly informed that the
duke of Argyle can assemble five thousand men in arms, of his own clan
and surname, which is Campbell; and there is besides a tribe of the same
appellation, whose chief' is the Earl of Breadalbine. The Macdonalds
are as numerous, and remarkably warlike: the Camerons, M'Leods, Frasers,
Grants, M'Kenzies, M'Kays, M'Phersons, M'Intoshes, are powerful clans;
so that if all the Highlanders, including the inhabitants of the Isles,
were united, they could bring into the field an army of forty thousand
fighting men, capable of undertaking the most dangerous enterprize. We
have lived to see four thousand of them, without discipline, throw
the whole kingdom of Great Britain into confusion. They attacked and
defeated two armies of regular troops accustomed to service. They
penetrated into the centre of England; and afterwards marched back
with deliberation, in the face of two other armies, through an enemy's
country, where every precaution was taken to cut off their retreat. I
know not any other people in Europe, who, without the use or knowledge
of arms, will attack regular forces sword in hand, if their chief
will head them in battle. When disciplined, they cannot fail of being
