valour."

   [Footnote 549: This perfect has much the same usage as [Greek:
   epenenothe], 219.]

Thus having spoken, the god on his part again departed into the labour
of the men; but heavy grief oppressed Hector as to his dark soul. Then,
indeed, he looked around through the ranks, and immediately observed the
one bearing away the famous armour, and the other lying upon the ground;
and the blood flowed through the inflicted wound. But he advanced
through the foremost warriors, armed in shining brass, shrilly shouting,
like unto the inextinguishable flame of Vulcan. Nor did he escape the
notice of the son of Atreus, loudly exclaiming; but he, deeply sighing,
thus communed with his own great-hearted soul:

"Ah me! if I leave the beautiful armour and Patroclus, who lies here for
the sake of my honour, [I dread] lest some one of the Greeks, whoever
perceives it, will be indignant; but if, being alone, I fight with
Hector and the Trojans, from shame, [I fear] lest many surround me,
[being] alone. But crest-tossing Hector is leading all the Trojans
hither. But wherefore has my soul been thus debating? Whenever a man
desires, in opposition to a deity, to fight with a hero whom a god
honours, soon is a great destruction hurled upon him; wherefore no one
of the Greeks will blame me, who may perceive me retiring from Hector,
since he wars under the impulse of a god. But if I could hear Ajax,
brave in the din of war, both of us, again returning, would be mindful
of battle even against a god, if by any means we could draw off the body
for the sake of Achilles, the son of Peleus: of evils, certainly it
would be the better." [550]

   [Footnote 550: "The evil here spoken of, and of which a choice is
   presented to Menelaus, are loss of both the body and the armour
   of Patroclus, or of either separately. The first alternative he
   is resolved on guarding against by summoning Ajax to his aid; of
   the last two, he prefers the abandonment of the arms, _i.e._
   [Greek: syle], spoliation of the corpse, to [Greek: aeikeia], its
   disfigurement."--Kennedy.]

While he was thus deliberating these things in his mind and soul, the
ranks of the Trojans were meanwhile advancing; and Hector led the way.
But he retired back, and quitted the corpse, turning round as a
shaggy-bearded lion, which dogs and men drive from the stall with spears
and clamour; out his valiant heart within his breast is shaken, and he,
unwilling, departs from the fold: thus did yellow-haired Menelaus retire
from Patroclus. And being turned round, he stood, when he had reached
the band of his companions, looking all around for mighty Ajax, the son
of Telamon; whom he very quickly perceived upon the left of the whole
battle, encouraging his companions, and urging them to fight: for Phoebus
Apollo had cast a heaven-sent panic amongst them. But he made haste to
run, and, immediately standing near, spoke:

"Ajax, hither, friend, let us hasten in defence of slain Patroclus, if
we can bear his naked corse at least to Achilles; for his armour
crest-tossing Hector possesses."

Thus he spoke, but he roused the courage of warlike Ajax, and he
advanced through the foremost warriors, and with him yellow-haired
Menelaus. Hector on his part, after he had despoiled him of his
beautiful armour, was dragging Patroclus, that he might sever the head
from the shoulders with the sharp brass, and, carrying off the body,
might give it to the Trojan dogs, when Ajax came near, bearing his
shield, like a tower. Then Hector, retiring back, retreated into the
throng of his companions, and sprung up into his chariot; but he gave
the handsome armour to the Trojans to carry to the city, to be a great
glory to him. But Ajax, with his broad shield covering around the son of
Menoetius, stood like a lion over her young; against which, when leading
her whelps, the huntsmen rush together in the wood; whilst he looks
dreadful in his might, and draws down all his eyebrows, concealing his
eyes: so strode Ajax round the hero Patroclus. On the other side stood
the son of Atreus, warlike Menelaus, augmenting the great grief in his
bosom.

But Glaucus, the son of Hippolochus, leader of the Lycian heroes,
looking sternly at Hector, upbraided him with harsh language: "Hector,
most excellent as to appearance, certainly thou art greatly deficient
in fighting; doubtless good fame possesses thee without reason, since
thou art a fugitive. Consider now, how alone with the people [who are]
born in Ilium, thou mayest preserve the state and city, for none of the
Lycians, at all events, will go to fight with the Greeks for thy city;
since indeed there is no gratitude for fighting ever incessantly with
hostile men. How indeed, inglorious one, hast thou preserved an inferior
man in the throng, and suffered Sarpedon, at once thy guest and
companion, to become a prey and booty to the Greeks; who, when alive,
was a great advantage to thy city and thyself; but now thou didst not
attempt to drive away the dogs from him. Wherefore if any of the Lycian
warriors will now obey me, go home,[551] and utter destruction will be
manifest to Troy. For if now that confident, intrepid strength, was in
the Trojans, which enters heroes who in the defence of their country
undertake toil, and conflict with hostile men, immediately might we draw
Patroclus into Ilium. But if he, lifeless, should come to the great city
of king Priam, and we had drawn him away from the battle, quickly indeed
would the Greeks ransom [to us] the beautiful armour of Sarpedon, and we
might bear himself also into Troy; for the attendant of that man is
slain, who is by far the bravest of the Greeks at the ships, and whose
servants are close-fighting warriors. But thou, forsooth, hast not dared
to stand against magnanimous Ajax, beholding his eyes in the battle of
the enemy, nor to fight against him; for he is more brave than thou."

   [Footnote 551: Take [Greek: imen (ienai)] imperatively, or
   understand [Greek: epipeisetai emoi oste auton ienai eis oikon,
   ameinon an eie outos ara olethros, k. t. l.] See Kennedy.]

But him sternly regarding, crest-tossing Hector addressed: "O Glaucus,
why hast thou, being such as thou art, spoken haughtily? I' faith,
friend, I thought that thou didst excel in judgment the others, as many
as inhabit fertile Lycia; but now I altogether blame thy understanding,
since thou hast thus spoken, thou who sayest that I do not withstand
mighty Ajax. Neither have I dreaded the battle, nor the tumult of
steeds; but the counsel of aegis-bearing Jove is ever superior, who puts
even the valiant man to flight, and easily takes away the victory; but
at another time he himself impels him to fight. But come hither, my
friend, stand by me, and behold my conduct. Truly I shall always be a
coward, as thou sayest, or I will restrain even some of the Greeks,
although very eager, from keeping defence over dead Patroclus."

Thus saying, he cheered on the Trojans, loudly shouting, "Ye Trojans and
Lycians, and close-fighting Dardanians, be men, my friends, and be
mindful of impetuous valour, whilst I put on the armour of illustrious
Achilles, beautiful, of which I despoiled mighty Patroclus, having slain
him."

Thus having spoken, crest-tossing Hector departed from the glowing
battle, and, running very quickly, overtook his companions, not far off,
following with swift feet those who were bearing towards the city the
renowned arms of Achilles. Then standing apart from the mournful battle,
he changed his armour. His own indeed he gave to the warlike Trojans to
bear to sacred Ilium; but he put on the immortal arms of Achilles, the
son of Peleus, which the heavenly gods had bestowed on his dear father;
but he indeed, growing old, presented them to his son; but the son grew
not old in the armour of his father.

But when cloud-compelling Jove beheld him apart, accoutred in the
armour of divine Pelides, then shaking his head, he said to his own
soul:

"Ah! luckless one; nor is death at all in thy thoughts, which is now
near thee; but thou puttest on the immortal armour of the bravest hero,
at whom others also tremble; and thou hast slain his companion, both
gentle and brave, and thou hast taken the armour from his head and
shoulders not according to propriety. But now will I give into thy hands
a great victory, a compensation for this, that Andromache shall never
receive from thee, having returned from the battle, the illustrious arms
of the son of Peleus."

The son of Saturn spoke, and moreover nodded with his sable brows. But
the armour fitted the person of Hector, and Mars, the dreadful warrior,
entered him. And his limbs were inwardly filled with might and strength,
and he went after the illustrious allies, exclaiming aloud; and
glittering in his armour, to all of them he presented the appearance of
the magnanimous son of Peleus. But going among them, he animated each
with his words,--Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, and Thersilochus, Asteropaeus,
Disenor, and Hippothoues, Phorcys, Chromius, and Ennomus the augur.
Exhorting these, he spoke winged words:

"Hear, ye countless troops of allies dwelling around, for I did not
assemble you here, each from his own city, seeking or wanting a crowd,
but that ye might willingly defend for me the wives and infant children
of the Trojans from the warlike Greeks. Thinking these things, I wear
away my people by gifts and provisions [to you], and I satisfy the
desire of each of you. Wherefore now let some one, being turned round
straight, either perish or be saved; for these are the chances of
war.[552] Nevertheless, whoever will drag Patroclus, although dead, to
the horse-breaking Trojans, and to whom Ajax shall yield, [to him] will
I present one-half of the spoils, but I myself will keep the other half;
and glory shall be to him as much as to me."

Thus he spoke; but they, lifting up their spears, advanced with
condensed might[553] direct against the Greeks; and their mind eagerly
hoped to draw away the dead body from Telamonian Ajax:--fools! truly
over it he took away the life from many. And then Ajax addressed
Menelaus, good in the din of war:

   [Footnote 552: See Duport, Gnom. Hom. p. 97.]

   [Footnote 553: Schol.: [Greek: Stiphros poiesantes,
   sunaspisantes, eis to auto pantes apmesantes]. A curious
   interpretation is given in the Glossaries: "[Greek: Boizo], _post
   cibum denuo impetum facio."_ See Alberti on Hesych. p. 766.]

"O my friend, O Jove-nurtured Menelaus, no longer do I expect that even
we ourselves will return from battle. Nor do I fear so much about the
dead body of Patroclus, which will quickly satiate the dogs and birds of
the Trojans, as much as I fear for my own head, lest it suffer anything,
and for thine, for Hector, that cloud of war, overshadows all things;
whilst to us, on the other hand, utter destruction appears. But come,
call the bravest of the Greeks, if any one will hear."

Thus he spoke; nor did Menelaus, good in the din of war, disobey; but he
shouted, crying with a loud voice to the Greeks:

"O friends, leaders and chieftains of the Greeks, ye who with Agamemnon,
the son of Atreus, and Menelaus, drink the public wine,[554] and command
each his forces; but honour and glory follows from Jove. Difficult would
it be for me to look to each of the leaders, for so great a strife of
battle burns. But let some one advance, and let him be indignant in his
mind, that Patroclus should become a sport to Trojan dogs."

   [Footnote 554: _I.e._ who are supplied from the public
   resources,--[Greek: ta ek ton koinon kai semosion chrematon
   choregoumena tois basileysi].--Schol.]

Thus he spoke; but quickly the swift Oilean Ajax heard, and first
advanced opposite, running through the battle; after him Idomeneus, and
Meriones, the armour-bearer of Idomeneus, equal to man-slaughtering
Mars. But who in his mind could recount the names of the others as many
as afterwards aroused the battle of the Greeks? But the Trojans, in
close array, first made the onset, and Hector led them on.

But as when, at the mouths[555] of a river flowing from Jove, the great
wave roars against the stream, while around the lofty shores resound,
the wave being ejected [upon the beach], with so loud a clamour did the
Trojans advance: but the Greeks stood round the son of Menoetius, having
one spirit, protected by their brazen shields; whilst over their
shining helmets the son of Saturn poured a thick haze; for he did not
formerly hate the son of Menoetius when, being alive, he was the
attendant of Achilles, therefore he was loth that he should become a
prey to the Trojan dogs of the enemy; and so he excited his companions
to defend him. The Trojans, however, first dislodged the dark-eyed
Greeks, and they, leaving the dead body, retreated; nor did the
magnanimous Trojans slay any of them with their spears, although
desirous, but drew off the body. But the Greeks were about to be absent
from him a very short while, for very quickly did Ajax rally them, who,
next to the renowned son of Peleus, excelled the other Greeks in beauty
and in deeds. And he broke through the front ranks, resembling a wild
boar in strength, which amongst the mountains easily disperses the dogs
and blooming youths through the woods, turning to bay; so the son of
illustrious Telamon, noble Ajax, having made the attack, easily routed
the phalanxes of the Trojans who had surrounded Patroclus, and mostly
expected to drag him to their city, and bear away glory. Meanwhile
Hippothous, the illustrious son of Pelasgian Lethus, was dragging him by
the foot through the violent conflict, having bound him with a strap at
the ancle round the tendons, gratifying Hector and the Trojans. But soon
came evil upon him, which no one, even of those desiring it, averted
from him. Him the son of Telamon, rushing through the crowd, smote in
close fight through the brazen-cheeked helmet. The horse-haired helmet
was cleft by the point of the weapon, stricken by the great spear and
strong hand; and the brain, bloody, gushed out of the wound at the cone
of the helmet;[556] and his strength was there relaxed. Then he let fall
from his hands the foot of magnanimous Patroclus, to lie upon the earth,
and near him he himself fell, prone upon the dead body, far away from
fertile Larissa: nor did he repay the debt of nourishment to his beloved
parents, for his life was short, subdued by the spear of magnanimous
Ajax. But Hector again aimed at Ajax with his shining spear; he,
however, seeing it opposite, avoided the brazen spear by a little; but
he struck Schedius, the magnanimous son of Iphitus, by far the bravest
of the Phoceans, who inhabited dwellings in renowned Panopeus, ruling
over many men. Him he smote under the middle of the clavicle, and the
brazen point of the weapon went quite through, near the extremity of the
shoulder. Falling, he made a crash, and his arms rang upon him. Then
Ajax again smote warlike Phorcys, the son of Phaenops, in the middle of
the belly, while defending Hippothous. And he broke the cavity of the
corslet, and the brazen weapon drank his entrails through; and falling
in the dust, he seized the earth with the palm of his hand. The foremost
warriors and illustrious Hector retreated; but the Greeks shouted
loudly, and drew off the bodies, both Phorcys and Hippothous, and they
loosed the armour from their shoulders.

   [Footnote 555: Schol. Apoll. Rhod. i. 11: [Greek: Ton potamon oi
   symballontes topoi te thalasse prochoai legontai], where he
   quotes this instance from Homer.]

   [Footnote 556: See iii. 372, "the part of the helmet in which the
   crest was inserted--unless [Greek: ailon] be taken
   metaphorically, and by [Greek: par' aulon] be meant the _stream_
   of blood, as from a pipe."--Oxford Transl.]

Then again would the Trojans, [routed] by the warlike Greeks, have gone
up to Ilium, subdued through cowardice; but the Argives on their part,
by their valour and might, would have obtained glory, even contrary to
the destined will of Jove, had not Apollo himself excited AEneas, in body
like unto Periphas the herald, son of Epytis, who knowing prudent
counsels in his mind, had grown old, as a herald, with his aged sire.
Assimilating himself to him, Apollo, the son of Jove, addressed him:

"O AEneas, how could ye preserve lofty Ilium against the deity, since I
behold these other men relying on their bravery, and might, and valour,
and their number, and possessing a dauntless host? Yet Jove wills the
victory to us, rather than to the Danai; yet ye greatly tremble, nor
fight."

Thus he spoke; but AEneas, seeing him before him, recognized far-darting
Apollo; and loudly shouting, addressed Hector:

"O Hector, and ye other leaders of the Trojans and allies, this now
indeed is a shame, that we, subdued by cowardice, should go up to Ilium,
[driven] by the warlike Achaeans. For already even now some one of the
gods, having stood near to me, declared that Jove, the highest
counsellor, is an ally of the battle [to us]. Wherefore let us go direct
against the Greeks, nor let them quietly move the dead Patroclus to the
ships."

Thus he spoke, and then springing forth, stood far before the front
ranks. But they rallied, and stood opposed to the Greeks. Then AEneas
wounded with his spear Leocritus, son of Arisbas, the brave companion of
Lycomedes. Him falling, warlike Lycomedes pitied, and advancing very
near, he stood, and hurled with his shining spear, and struck Apisaon,
the son of Hippasis, shepherd of the people, in the liver, beneath the
diaphragm, and immediately relaxed his limbs. He had come from fertile
Paeonia, and next to Asteropaeus, was the bravest to fight. Warlike
Asteropaeus pitied him-fallen, and he rushed forward, willing to fight
with the Greeks. But not yet could he [do so], for [those] standing
around Patroclus were fenced in on every side with shields, and held
their spears before them; for Ajax went eagerly among all, greatly
cheering them on. He suffered not any one either to retire from the
body, nor any of the Greeks to fight in front, excelling the others, but
vigorously to stalk around for defence, and to combat in close fight.
Thus did mighty Ajax command; but the earth was moistened with purple
gore, whilst upon each other fell the dead bodies of the Trojans and
courageous allies, and of the Greeks; for neither did they fight
bloodlessly, although far fewer perished, because they were ever mindful
throughout the tumult to repel severe labour from each other.

Thus indeed they fought, like a fire; nor would you say that the Sun was
safe, or the Moon, for they were wrapt in dark haze in the combat, as
many of the bravest as stood around the dead son of Menoetius. The other
Trojans and well-armed Greeks, however, fought at ease[557] beneath the
atmosphere; the piercing splendour of the sun was expanded over them,
and a cloud did not appear over all the earth, nor the mountains.
Resting at intervals, they fought, avoiding the cruel weapons of each
other, standing far asunder; whilst those in the middle suffered
hardships from darkness and from war, and were afflicted by the ruthless
brass, as many as were most brave. But two heroes, illustrious men,
Thrasymedes and Antilochus, had not yet heard that blameless Patroclus
was dead; but thought that, still alive, he was fighting with the
Trojans in the foremost tumult. But these, watching the slaughter and
flight of their companions, fought apart, since Nestor had so ordered,
urging [them] on to battle from the black ships. But to these all day a
mighty contest of severe strife arose, and ever incessantly the knees,
the legs, and the feet of each under him, the hands and the eyes of
those fighting around the brave companion of swift-footed AEacides, were
defiled with fatigue and perspiration. And as when a man gives the hide
of a huge ox, saturated with grease, to his people to stretch, but they,
having received, stretch it, standing apart from each other in a circle,
and straightway the moisture exudes, and the oily matter enters, many
pulling it, till it is stretched in every direction; so they, on both
sides, dragged the body here and there in a small space; for the mind of
the Trojans, on the one hand, eagerly hoped to draw him to Ilium, but of
the Greeks, on the other, to the hollow ships. Around him arose a fierce
tumult; nor could Mars, the exciter of troops, nor Minerva, having
beheld it, have found fault, not even if wrath had particularly come
upon her; such an evil labour of men and horses did Jove extend over
Patroclus on that day. Nor as yet did noble Achilles at all know that
Patroclus was dead, because they fought far from the swift ships,
beneath the wall of the Trojans. He never thought in his mind that he
was dead; but that alive, having approached the gates, he would return
back, since he did not at all suppose that he could sack the city
without him, for he had often heard this from his mother, hearing it
apart, who used to tell him the design of mighty Jove. Yet his mother
had not then told him so great an evil as had happened, that the
companion by far most dear to him had perished.

   [Footnote 557: _I.e._ resting at intervals, as it is explained in
   ver. 373.]

But they, ever around the dead body, holding their sharp spears, charged
incessantly, and slaughtered one another, and thus would some of the
brazen-mailed Greeks say:

"O friends, surely it will not be honourable for us to retreat to the
hollow ships; but [rather] let the black earth here gape for all. This
indeed would at once be better for us, than that we should permit the
horse-breaking Trojans to drag him to their city, and obtain glory."

And thus also would some one of the magnanimous Trojans say:

"O friends, although it be our destiny that all be equally subdued
beside this man, never let any one retire from the battle."

Thus, then, some one said, and aroused the spirit of each. Thus indeed
were they fighting; and the iron clangour[558] reached the brazen heaven
through the unfruitful air. But the horses of AEacides being apart from
the combat, wept, when first they perceived that their charioteer had
fallen in the dust, beneath man-slaughtering Hector. Automedon, indeed,
the brave son of Diores, frequently urged them on, beating them with the
sharp lash, and frequently addressed them in mild terms and in threats;
but they chose neither to go back to the ships towards the wide
Hellespont nor into the battle among the Greeks; but, as a pillar
remains firm, which stands at the tomb of a dead man or woman, so they
remained detaining the splendid chariot motionless, and drooping their
heads to the earth. But warm tears[559] flowed from their eyelids to the
earth, complaining from desire of their charioteer; and their thick mane
was defiled, flowing down on both sides from the collar at the yoke. But
the son of Saturn beholding them lamenting, felt compassion, and shaking
his head, communed with his own mind:

"Ah! luckless pair, why did we give you to king Peleus, a mortal; for ye
are free from old age, and immortal? Was it that ye might endure griefs
with unhappy men? For there is not anything at all more wretched than
man,[560] of all, as many as breathe and move over the earth. But
Hector, the son of Priam, shall not be borne by you, even in the
curiously-wrought chariot, for I will not permit it. Is it not enough
that he both possesses those arms, and vainly boasts? But into your
knees and spirit will I cast vigour, that ye may safely bear Automedon
from the battle to the hollow ships; for still will I give glory to them
(the Trojans), to slay, until they reach the well-benched ships, till
the sun set, and sacred darkness come on."

   [Footnote 558: Clarke compares AEn. xii. 284, from Ennius, apud
   Macrob. vi. 1: "Hastati spargunt hastas, fit ferreus imber." See
   Columna's notes. p. 82, ed. Hessel. The Scholiast rather
   interprets it, of a strong and violent shout, [Greek: stereos kai
   poly schyros].]

   [Footnote 559: See Virg. AEn. xi. 89, sqq. with Servius, Quintus
   Calab. iii. 740: [Greek: oude min aubrotoi ippoiatarbeos Aiakidao
   Mimnon adakrytoi para neestin' alla kai autoi Myronto spheteroio
   daikiamenou basileos. Oud' etholon mogeroisin et' andrasin oude
   meth' ippois Misgesth' Argeion, olopn peri penthos echontes].]

   [Footnote 560: On this comfortable and satisfactory sentiment,
   see the lugubrious collection of parallel passages in Duport, p.
   98.]

So saying, he breathed strong vigour into the steeds; and they, shaking
the dust from their manes to the ground, quickly bore the rapid car
amongst the Trojans and Greeks. And against them[561] fought Automedon,
though grieved for his companion, rushing along in his chariot like a
vulture among the geese. For he fled easily from the tumult of the
Trojans, and easily did he rush on, pursuing through the dense throng.
Yet did he not slay the men when he pressed onward to pursue; for it was
by no means possible for him, being alone in the sacred[562] car, to
assault with the spear and to rein in the fleet steeds. At length,
however, a companion, the hero Alcimedon, son of Laerceus, the son of
AEmon, beheld him with his eyes, and stood behind his chariot, and
addressed Automedon:

   [Footnote 561: The Trojans.]

   [Footnote 562: _I.e._ splendid, of surpassing workmanship. Others
   refer the epithet to the divine gift mentioned in ver. 443, to
   the fabrication of the chariot by the god Vulcan, or to the
   origin of Achilles himself from a goddess.]

"Which of the gods, O Automedon, has placed a foolish counsel in thy
bosom, and taken from thee sound judgment; inasmuch as alone thou
fightest in the foremost ranks with the Trojans? Thy companion indeed is
slain; and Hector himself vaunts, having upon his shoulders the armour
of AEacides."

Him then Automedon, the son of Diores, addressed:

"Alcimedon, what other of the Greeks, then, is like thee, to subdue and
restrain the spirit of immortal steeds, unless Patroclus, whilst alive,
a counsellor equal to the gods? Now, however, death and fate possess
him. Nevertheless, do thou take the lash and beautiful reins; but I will
descend from the chariot, that I may fight." [563]

   [Footnote 563: Alcimedon in this address condemns the imprudence
   of his friend, who, in this moment of imminent danger, takes upon
   him the joint offices of warrior [Greek: (parabates)] and
   charioteer [Greek: (eniochos)].]

Thus he spoke, but Alcimedon, ascending the chariot, swift in war,
instantly took in his hands the lash and reins, whilst Automedon leaped
down; but illustrious Hector perceived this, and immediately addressed
AEneas, being near:

"AEneas, counsellor of the brazen-mailed Trojans, I have observed these
two steeds of Achilles proceeding through the battle with unskilful
charioteers. I therefore may hope to capture them, if thou, at least,
desire it in thy mind; for standing opposite, they will not dare to
withstand us, rushing on to fight in battle."

Thus he spoke; nor did the brave son of Anchises disobey. Both advanced
direct, covered as to their shoulders with bulls' hides, dry, thick; and
upon them much brass was plated. But along with them went both Chromius
and god-like Aretus: and their mind greatly hoped to slay them, and to
drive away the long-necked steeds. Foolish,[564] for they were not
destined to return back bloodlessly from Automedon, for he, having
prayed to father Jove, was filled with fortitude and valour, as to his
dark mind, and immediately addressed Alcimedon, his faithful comrade:

   [Footnote 564: Cf. AEn. x. 501, sqq. So Milton, P.L. ix. 404:--

       "O much deceived, much failing, hapless Eve,
       Of thy presumed return! event perverse!"]

"O Alcimedon, do not now detain the steeds far from me; but [keep them]
breathing closely at my back; for I do not think that Hector, the son of
Priam, will abstain from violence, before that he has mounted the
beautiful-maned horses of Achilles, having slain both of us, and put to
rout the ranks of Grecian heroes; or himself be slain among the first."

Thus saying, he called upon the Ajaces, and Menelaus: "Ye Ajaces,
leaders of the Greeks, and Menelaus, leave then the dead body to those,
as many as are bravest, to defend it on all sides, and to repulse the
ranks of men; but from us who are alive avert the merciless day. For
hither violently rush through the lamentable fight Hector and AEneas, who
are the best of the Trojans. But all these things rest upon the knees of
the gods; for I also will hurl, and all these things will be a care to
Jove."

He said; and, brandishing, hurled his long-shadowed spear, and struck
upon the shield of Aretus, equal on all sides; it however did not repel
the spear, but the brass went entirely through, and passed through the
belt into the bottom of his belly. And as when a man in youthful vigour,
holding a sharp axe, cuts through the whole tendon, striking behind the
horns of a wild bull; but it, leaping forward, falls; so he, springing
forward, fell supine; and the sharp spear, quivering in his entrails,
relaxed his limbs. Then Hector took aim at Automedon with his shining
spear, but he, seeing it in front of him, avoided the brazen weapon; for
he bent forward. But the long spear was fixed in the ground behind him;
and moreover the nether end of the spear was shaken; but there then the
strong weapon spent its force. Then truly they would have engaged hand
to hand with their swords, had not the eager Ajaces, who came through
the crowd, at the call of their companion, separated them. But Hector,
AEneas, and godlike Chromius, greatly dreading them, retired back again,
and left Aretus lying there, lacerated as to his heart; but him
Automedon, equal to swift Mars, despoiled of his armour, and, boasting,
uttered this speech:

"Surely now I have a little relieved my heart of sorrow for the dead son
of Menoetius, although having slain but an inferior man."

Thus having spoken, seizing the gore-stained spoils, he placed them in
the chariot, and mounted himself, bloody as to his feet and hands above,
like some lion which has fed upon a bull. Again over Patroclus was the
direful battle extended, grievous, lamentable; and Minerva excited the
contention, descending from heaven; for far-sounding Jove sent her forth
to encourage the Greeks, as his intention was now changed. As Jove
extends a purple rainbow from heaven to mortals, to be a signal either
of war, or of a chilling storm, which causes men to cease from their
works upon the earth, and afflicts the cattle; so she, having obscured
herself in a purple cloud, entered the army of the Greeks, and aroused
every man. First, however, she addressed the son of Atreus, gallant
Menelaus, inciting him, for he was near her, assimilating herself, in
her form and unwearied voice, to Phoenix:

"Thine, of a truth, will shame and disgrace now be, O Menelaus, if the
swift dogs tear the faithful companion of illustrious Achilles beneath
the wall of the Trojans; therefore bravely hold on, and urge on all the
people." Whom, in return, Menelaus, good in the din of war, addressed:
"Phoenix, father, old man long since born, would that Minerva would give
me strength, and ward off the force of the weapons. Then indeed would I
be willing to stand by and defend Patroclus; for dying, he greatly
affected my mind with grief. But Hector has the dreadful force of fire,
nor does he cease slaying with his spear; for to him Jove affords
glory."

Thus he spoke; but the azure-eyed goddess Minerva rejoiced, because to
her he had prayed first of all the gods. But in his shoulders and knees
she put strength, and placed in his bosom the boldness of a fly, which,
although frequently driven away from a human body, persists in
biting,--and the blood of man is sweet to it. With such confidence she
filled his dark soul: and he advanced towards Patroclus, and took aim
with his splendid spear. Now there was among the Trojans one Podes, the
son of Eetion, rich and brave; whom of his people Hector chiefly
honoured, for he was his dear companion in the banquet. Him
yellow-haired Menelaus smote upon the belt while hastening to flight,
and drove the brazen weapon quite through. He, falling, gave a crash,
and Menelaus, the son of Atreus, dragged away the body from the Trojans
to the crowd of his companions. But Apollo, standing near, excited
Hector in the likeness of Phoenops, son of Asias, who, inhabiting
dwellings at Abydos, was most dear to him of all his guests.
Assimilating himself to him, far-darting Apollo spoke:

"Hector, what other of the Greeks will any more fear thee, since now
thou dreadest Menelaus, who indeed before was but an effeminate warrior,
but now departs done, bearing off the dead corse from the Trojans? He
has slain, in the front ranks, Podes, the son of Eetion, thy comrade,
faithful and brave."

Thus he spoke; but him a dark cloud of grief overshadowed, and he went
through the front ranks, armed in glittering brass. And then the son of
Saturn took his aegis, fringed and splendid, and covered Ida with clouds;
but having flashed his lightning, he thundered very loudly, and shook it
(the mountain); and (he) gave victory to the Trojans, but put the Greeks
to flight.

Peneleus, the Boeotian, first was leader of the flight; for he was
wounded slightly[565] on the tip of the shoulder with a spear, being
always turned frontwards; but the spear of Polydamas grazed even to the
bone, for he, coming close, had wounded him. Next Hector wounded Leitus,
son of magnanimous Alectryon, on the hand at the wrist, and caused him
to cease from battle. Then looking around him, he trembled, since he no
longer hoped in his mind [to be able] to fight with the Trojans, holding
his spear in his hand. But Idomeneus had struck, on the corslet, upon
the breast near the pap, Hector rushing after Leitus: the long spear,
however, was broken at the socket; and the Trojans shouted. But he
[Hector] discharged his javelin at Idomeneus, the son of Deucalion, as
he was standing in his car: him he missed by a little, but struck
Coeranus, the attendant and charioteer of Meriones, who had followed him
from well-situated Lyctus. For at first on foot, having left his
equally-plied ships, he came, and would have secured a decided victory
to the Trojans, had not Coeranus quickly driven on his swift-footed
steeds: to him then he (Coeranus) came as a help, and warded off the
merciless day; but he himself lost his life beneath man-slaughtering
Hector. Him he smote beneath the jaw-bone and ear, and the extremity of
the spear forced out his teeth and cut through the middle of his tongue.
He fell from his chariot, and the reins dropped to the ground; and
Meriones, stooping, lifted them from the plain in his own hands, and
addressed Idomeneus:

"Lash on, now, until thou reach the swift ships; for even thou thyself
perceivest that victory is no longer on the side of the Achaeans."

   [Footnote 565: [Greek: Epiligoen], _on the surface_, [Greek: di'
   epipoles].--Kennedy.]

Thus he spake; and Idomeneus lashed on the beautiful-maned steeds to the
hollow ships; for fear now seized his mind.

Nor did Jove escape notice of magnanimous Ajax and Menelaus, when he for
the present gave the dubious victory to the Trojans; but to them the
mighty Ajax, son of Telamon, began to speak:

"Alas! even he who is very stupid might now know that father Jove
himself is aiding the Trojans; for the weapons of them all take effect,
whoever may throw them, whether coward or brave man. Jove certainly
directs them all. But the weapons of all of us fall to the earth in
vain. Come, however, let us devise the best plan, both how we may drag
off the corse, and how we ourselves may be a source of joy to our
beloved comrades, having returned home. They, of a truth, beholding us
here, are grieved, and think that we shall no longer resist the might
and invincible hands of man-slaughtering Hector. But, would there were
some companion who would quickly bring word to Achilles, since I think
he has not yet heard the mournful tidings, that his dear comrade has
died. But nowhere can I see such a person among the Greeks, for they and
their steeds are together enveloped in darkness. O father Jove, liberate
at least the sons of the Greeks from darkness; make a clear atmosphere,
and grant us to see with our eyes; then destroy us in the light,[566] if
thus it be pleasing to thee."

   [Footnote 566: A prayer well worthy of Ajax. Ammian. Marcell.
   xxviii.: "Per horrorem tenebrarum--quo tempore hebetari solent
   obstrictae terroribus mentes; ut inter innumera multa Ajax quoque
   Homericus docet, optans perire potius luce, quam pati formidinis
   augmenta nocturnae." Cf. Longin. ix.]

Thus he spoke; but the Sire felt compassion for him weeping, and
immediately dissipated the haze, and removed the cloud. And the sun
shone forth, and the whole battle was displayed, and then Ajax addressed
Menelaus, good in the din of war:

"Look around now, O Jove-nurtured Menelaus, if anywhere thou canst
perceive, yet alive, Antilochus, the son of magnanimous Nestor. Urge
him, going speedily, to tell to warlike Achilles, that the comrade, by
far most dear to him, has perished."

Thus he spoke; nor did Menelaus, good in the din of war, disobey. But he
