
'Why, then,' said the person addressed, 'I shall owe him just such a
licking as thou, old Jephson, had from Dan Cooke, and will pay as duly
and truly as he did.'

The old man was about to make an angry reply, when his doubts were
silenced by the return of Dick Gardener, who announced that Miss
Arthuret was coming herself as far as the gateway to speak with them.

Nanty Ewart cursed in a low tone the suspicions of old maids and the
churlish scruples of Catholics, that made so many obstacles to helping
a fellow creature, and wished Miss Arthuret a hearty rheumatism or
toothache as the reward of her excursion; but the lady presently
appeared, to cut short further grumbling. She was attended by a
waiting-maid with a lantern, by means of which she examined the party
on the outside, as closely as the imperfect light, and the spars of the
newly-erected gate, would permit.

'I am sorry we have disturbed you so late, Madam Arthuret,' said Nanty;
'but the case is this'--

'Holy Virgin,' said she, 'why do you speak so loud? Pray, are you not
the captain of the SAINTE GENEVIEVE?'

'Why, aye, ma'am,' answered Ewart, 'they call the brig so at Dunkirk,
sure enough; but along shore here, they call her the JUMPING JENNY.'

'You brought over the holy Father Buonaventure, did you not?'

'Aye, aye, madam, I have brought over enough of them black cattle,'
answered Nanty. 'Fie! fie! friend,' said Miss Arthuret; 'it is a pity
that the saints should commit these good men to a heretic's care.'

'Why, no more they would, ma'am,' answered Nanty, 'could they find a
Papist lubber that knew the coast as I do; then I am trusty as steel
to owners, and always look after cargo--live lumber, or dead flesh,
or spirits, all is one to me; and your Catholics have such d--d large
hoods, with pardon, ma'am, that they can sometimes hide two faces under
them. But here is a gentleman dying, with letters about him from the
Laird of Summertrees to the Laird of the Lochs, as they call him, along
Solway, and every minute he lies here is a nail in his coffin.'

'Saint Mary! what shall we do?' said Miss Arthuret; 'we must admit him,
I think, at all risks. You, Richard Gardener, help one of these men to
carry the gentleman up to the Place; and you, Selby, see him lodged at
the end of the long gallery. You are a heretic, captain, but I think you
are trusty, and I know you have been trusted--but if you are imposing on
me'--

'Not I, madam--never attempt to impose on ladies of your experience--my
practice that way has been all among the young ones. Come, cheerly, Mr.
Fairford--you will be taken good care of--try to walk.'

Alan did so; and, refreshed by his halt, declared himself able to walk
to the house with the sole assistance of the gardener.

'Why, that's hearty. Thank thee, Dick, for lending him thine arm'--and
Nanty slipped into his hand the guinea he had promised.--'Farewell,
then, Mr. Fairford, and farewell, Madam Arthuret, for I have been too
long here.'

So saying, he and his two companions threw themselves on horseback, and
went off at a gallop. Yet, even above the clatter of their hoofs did the
incorrigible Nanty hollo out the old ballad--

  A lovely lass to a friar came,
  To confession a-morning early;--
  'In what, my dear, are you to blame?
  Come tell me most sincerely?'
  'Alas!  my fault I dare not name--
  But my lad he loved me dearly.'

'Holy Virgin!' exclaimed Miss Seraphina, as the unhallowed sounds
reached her ears; 'what profane heathens be these men, and what frights
and pinches we be put to among them! The saints be good to us, what a
night has this been!--the like never seen at Fairladies. Help me to make
fast the gate, Richard, and thou shalt come down again to wait on it,
lest there come more unwelcome visitors--Not that you are unwelcome,
young gentleman, for it is sufficient that you need such assistance as
we can give you, to make you welcome to Fairladies--only, another time
would have done as well--but, hem! I dare say it is all for the best.
The avenue is none of the smoothest, sir, look to your feet. Richard
Gardener should have had it mown and levelled, but he was obliged to go
on a pilgrimage to Saint Winifred's Well, in Wales.' (Here Dick gave
a short dry cough, which, as if he had found it betrayed some internal
feeling a little at variance with what the lady said, he converted into
a muttered SANCTA WINIFREDA, ORA PRO NOBIS. Miss Arthuret, meantime,
proceeded) 'We never interfere with our servants' vows or penances,
Master Fairford--I know a very worthy father of your name, perhaps a
relation--I say, we never interfere with our servants vows. Our Lady
forbid they should not know some difference between our service and a
heretic's.--Take care, sir, you will fall if you have not a care. Alas!
by night and day there are many stumbling-blocks in our paths!'

With more talk to the same purpose, all of which tended to show a
charitable and somewhat silly woman with a strong inclination to her
superstitious devotion, Miss Arthuret entertained her new guest, as,
stumbling at every obstacle which the devotion of his guide, Richard,
had left in the path, he at last, by ascending some stone steps
decorated on the side with griffins, or some such heraldic anomalies,
attained a terrace extending in front of the Place of Fairladies; an
old-fashioned gentleman's house of some consequence, with its range of
notched gable-ends and narrow windows, relieved by here and there an old
turret about the size of a pepper-box. The door was locked during the
brief absence of the mistress; a dim light glimmered through the sashed
door of the hall, which opened beneath a huge stone porch, loaded with
jessamine and other creepers. All the windows were dark as pitch.

Miss Arthuret tapped at the door. 'Sister, sister Angelica.' 'Who is
there?' was answered from within; 'is it you, sister Seraphina?'

'Yes, yes, undo the door; do you not know my voice?'

'No doubt, sister,' said Angelica, undoing bolt and bar; 'but you know
our charge, and the enemy is watchful to surprise us--INCEDIT SICUT LEO
VORANS, saith the breviary. Whom have you brought here? Oh, sister, what
have you done?'

'It is a young man,' said Seraphina, hastening to interrupt her sister's
remonstrance, 'a relation, I believe, of our worthy Father Fairford;
left at the gate by the captain of that blessed vessel the SAINTE
GENEVIEVE--almost dead--and charged with dispatches to '--

She lowered her voice as she mumbled over the last words.

'Nay, then, there is no help,' said Angelica; 'but it is unlucky.'

During this dialogue between the vestals of Fairladies, Dick Gardener
deposited his burden in a chair, where the young lady, after a moment
of hesitation, expressing a becoming reluctance to touch the hand of a
stranger, put her finger and thumb upon Fairford's wrist, and counted
his pulse.

'There is fever here, sister,' she said; 'Richard must call Ambrose, and
we must send some of the febrifuge.'

Ambrose arrived presently, a plausible and respectable-looking old
servant, bred in the family, and who had risen from rank to rank in
the Arthuret service till he was become half-physician, half-almoner,
half-butler, and entire governor; that is, when the Father Confessor,
who frequently eased him of the toils of government, chanced to be
abroad. Under the direction, and with the assistance of this venerable
personage, the unlucky Alan Fairford was conveyed to a decent apartment
at the end of a long gallery, and, to his inexpressible relief,
consigned to a comfortable bed. He did not attempt to resist the
prescription of Mr. Ambrose, who not only presented him with the
proposed draught, but proceeded so far as to take a considerable
quantity of blood from him, by which last operation he probably did his
patient much service.




CHAPTER XVI

NARRATIVE OF ALAN FAIRFORD, CONTINUED

On the next morning, when Fairford awoke, after no very refreshing
slumbers, in which were mingled many wild dreams of his father and of
Darsie Latimer,--of the damsel in the green mantle and the vestals of
Fairladies,--of drinking small beer with Nanty Ewart and being immersed
in the Solway with the JUMPING JENNY,--he found himself in no condition
to dispute the order of Mr. Ambrose, that he should keep his bed, from
which, indeed, he could not have raised himself without assistance. He
became sensible that his anxiety, and his constant efforts for some days
past, had been too much for his health, and that, whatever might be his
impatience, he could not proceed in his undertaking until his strength
was re-established.

In the meanwhile, no better quarters could have been found for an
invalid. The attendants spoke under their breath, and moved only on
tiptoe--nothing was done unless PAR ORDONNANCE DU MEDECIN. Aesculapius
reigned paramount in the premises at Fairladies. Once a day, the ladies
came in great state to wait upon him and inquire after his health, and
it was then that; Alan's natural civility, and the thankfulness which
he expressed for their timely and charitable assistance, raised him
considerably in their esteem. He was on the third day removed to a
better apartment than that in which he had been at first accommodated.
When he was permitted to drink a glass of wine, it was of the first
quality; one of those curious old-fashioned cobwebbed bottles being
produced on the occasion, which are only to be found in the crypts of
old country-seats, where they may have lurked undisturbed for more than
half a century.

But however delightful a residence for an invalid, Fairladies, as
its present inmate became soon aware, was not so agreeable to a
convalescent. When he dragged himself to the window so soon as he could
crawl from bed, behold it was closely grated, and commanded no view
except of a little paved court. This was nothing remarkable, most
old Border houses having their windows so secured. But then Fairford
observed, that whosoever entered or left the room always locked the
door with great care and circumspection; and some proposals which he
made to take a walk in the gallery, or even in the garden, were so
coldly received, both by the ladies and their prime minister, Mr.
Ambrose, that he saw plainly such an extension of his privileges as a
guest would not be permitted.

Anxious to ascertain whether this excessive hospitality would permit
him his proper privilege of free agency, he announced to this important
functionary, with grateful thanks for the care with which he had been
attended, his purpose to leave Fairladies next morning, requesting only,
as a continuance of the favours with which he had been loaded, the
loan of a horse to the next town; and, assuring Mr. Ambrose that his
gratitude would not be limited by such, a trifle, he slipped three
guineas into his hand, by way of seconding his proposal. The fingers of
that worthy domestic closed as naturally upon the honorarium, as if a
degree in the learned faculty had given him a right to clutch it; but
his answer concerning Alan's proposed departure was at first evasive,
and when he was pushed, it amounted to a peremptory assurance that he
could not be permitted to depart to-morrow; it was as much as his life
was worth, and his ladies would not authorize it.

'I know best what my own life is worth,' said Alan; 'and I do not value
it in comparison to the business which requires my instant attention.'

Receiving still no satisfactory answer from Mr. Ambrose, Fairford
thought it best to state his resolution to the ladies themselves, in
the most measured, respectful, and grateful terms; but still such as
expressed a firm determination to depart on the morrow, or next day
at farthest. After some attempts to induce him to stay, on the alleged
score of health, which were so expressed that he was convinced they were
only used to delay his departure, Fairford plainly told them that he was
entrusted with dispatches of consequence to the gentleman known by the
name of Herries, Redgauntlet, and the Laird of the Lochs; and that it
was matter of life and death to deliver them early.

'I dare say, Sister Angelica,' said the elder Miss Arthuret, that the
gentleman is honest; and if he is really a relation of Father Fairford,
we can run no risk.'

'Jesu Maria!' exclaimed the younger. 'Oh, fie, Sister Seraphina! Fie,
fie!--'VADE RETRO--get thee behind me!'

'Well, well; but, sister--Sister Angelica--let me speak with you in the
gallery.'

So out the ladies rustled in their silks and tissues, and it was a good
half-hour ere they rustled in again, with importance and awe on their
countenances.

'To tell you the truth, Mr. Fairford, the cause of our desire to delay
you is--there is a religious gentleman in this house at present'--

'A most excellent person indeed'--said the sister Angelica.

'An anointed of his Master!' echoed Seraphina,--'and we should be glad
that, for conscience' sake, you would hold some discourse with him
before your departure.'

'Oho!' thought Fairford, 'the murder is out--here is a design of
conversion! I must not affront the good ladies, but I shall soon send
off the priest, I think.' He then answered aloud, 'that he should be
happy to converse with any friend of theirs--that in religious matters
he had the greatest respect for every modification of Christianity,
though, he must say, his belief was made up to that in which he had
been educated; nevertheless, if his seeing the religious person they
recommended could in the least show his respect'--

'It is not quite that,' said Sister Seraphina, 'although I am sure the
day is too short to hear him--Father Buonaventure, I mean--speak upon
the concerns of our souls; but'--

'Come, come, Sister Seraphina,' said the younger, 'it is needless
to talk so much about it. His--his Eminence--I mean Father
Buonaventure--will himself explain what he wants this gentleman to
know.'

'His Eminence!' said Fairford, surprised--'is this gentleman so high in
the Catholic Church? The title is given only to Cardinals, I think.'

'He is not a Cardinal as yet,' answered Seraphina; 'but I assure you,
Mr. Fairford, he is as high in rank as he is eminently endowed with good
gifts, and'--

'Come away,' said Sister Angelica. 'Holy Virgin, how you do talk! What
has Mr. Fairford to do with Father Buonaventure's rank? Only, sir, you
will remember that the Father has been always accustomed to be treated
with the most profound deference; indeed'--

'Come away, sister,' said Sister Seraphina, in her turn; 'who talks now,
I pray you? Mr. Fairford will know how to comport himself.'

'And we had best both leave the room,' said the younger lady, 'for here
his Eminence comes.'

She lowered her voice to a whisper as she pronounced the last words; and
as Fairford was about to reply, by assuring her that any friend of hers
should be treated by him with all the ceremony he could expect, she
imposed silence on him, by holding up her finger.

A solemn and stately step was now heard in the gallery; it might have
proclaimed the approach not merely of a bishop or cardinal, but of
the Sovereign Pontiff himself. Nor could the sound have been more
respectfully listened to by the two ladies, had it announced that the
Head of the Church was approaching in person. They drew themselves,
like sentinels on duty, one on each side of the door by which the
long gallery communicated with Fairford's apartment, and stood there
immovable, and with countenances expressive of the deepest reverence.

The approach of Father Buonaventure was so slow, that Fairford had time
to notice all this, and to marvel in his mind what wily and ambitious
priest could have contrived to subject his worthy but simple-minded
hostesses to such superstitious trammels. Father Buonaventure's entrance
and appearance in some degree accounted for the whole.

He was a man of middle life, about forty or upwards; but either care, or
fatigue, or indulgence, had brought on the appearance of premature
old age, and given to his fine features a cast of seriousness or even
sadness. A noble countenance, however, still remained; and though his
complexion was altered, and wrinkles stamped upon his brow in many a
melancholy fold, still the lofty forehead, the full and well-opened eye,
and the well-formed nose, showed how handsome in better days he
must have been. He was tall, but lost the advantage of his height
by stooping; and the cane which he wore always in his hand, and
occasionally used, as well as his slow though majestic gait, seemed to
intimate that his form and limbs felt already some touch of infirmity.
The colour of his hair could not be discovered, as, according to the
fashion, he wore a periwig. He was handsomely, though gravely dressed in
a secular habit, and had a cockade in his hat; circumstances which did
not surprise Fairford, who knew that a military disguise was very often
assumed by the seminary priests, whose visits to England, or residence
there, subjected them to legal penalties.

As this stately person entered the apartment, the two ladies facing
inward, like soldiers on their post when about to salute a superior
officer, dropped on either hand of the father a curtsy so profound that
the hoop petticoats which performed the feat seemed to sink down to
the very floor, nay, through it, as if a trap-door had opened for the
descent of the dames who performed this act of reverence.

The father seemed accustomed to such homage, profound as it was; he
turned his person a little way first towards one sister, and then
towards the other, while, with a gracious inclination of his person,
which certainly did not amount to a bow, he acknowledged their curtsy.
But he passed forward without addressing them, and seemed by doing so to
intimate that their presence in the apartment was unnecessary.

They accordingly glided out of the room, retreating backwards, with
hands clasped and eyes cast upwards, as if imploring blessings on the
religious man whom they venerated so highly. The door of the apartment
was shut after them, but not before Fairford had perceived that there
were one or two men in the gallery, and that, contrary to what he had
before observed, the door, though shut, was not locked on the outside.

'Can the good souls apprehend danger from me to this god of their
idolatry?' thought Fairford. But he had no time to make further
observations, for the stranger had already reached the middle of his
apartment.

Fairford rose to receive him respectfully, but as he fixed his eyes on
the visitor, he thought that the father avoided his looks. His reasons
for remaining incognito were cogent enough to account for this, and
Fairford hastened to relieve him, by looking downwards in his turn;
but when again he raised his face, he found the broad light eye of the
stranger so fixed on him that he was almost put out of countenance by
the steadiness of his gaze. During this time they remained standing.

'Take your seat, sir,' said the father; 'you have been an invalid.'

He spoke with the tone of one who desires an inferior to be seated in
his presence, and his voice was full and melodious.

Fairford, somewhat surprised to find himself overawed by the airs of
superiority, which could be only properly exercised towards one over
whom religion gave the speaker influence, sat down at his bidding, as
if moved by springs, and was at a loss how to assert the footing of
equality on which he felt that they ought to stand. The stranger kept
the advantage which he had obtained.

'Your name, sir, I am informed, is Fairford?' said the father.

Alan answered by a bow.

'Called to the Scottish bar,' continued his visitor, 'There is, I
believe, in the West, a family of birth and rank called Fairford of
Fairford.'

Alan thought this a strange observation from a foreign ecclesiastic,
as his name intimated Father Buonaventure to be; but only answered he
believed there was such, a family.

'Do you count kindred with them, Mr. Fairford?' continued the inquirer.

'I have not the honour to lay such a claim,' said Fairford.

'My father's industry has raised his family from a low and obscure
situation--I have no hereditary claim to distinction of any kind. May I
ask the cause of these inquiries?'

'You will learn it presently,' said Father Buonaventure, who had given
a dry and dissatisfied HEM at the young man's acknowledging a plebeian
descent. He then motioned to him to be silent, and proceeded with his
queries.

'Although not of condition, you are, doubtless, by sentiments and
education, a man of honour and a gentleman?'

'I hope so, sir,' said Alan, colouring with displeasure. 'I have not
been accustomed to have it questioned.'

'Patience, young man,' said the unperturbed querist--'we are on serious
business, and no idle etiquette must prevent its being discussed
seriously. You are probably aware that you speak to a person proscribed
by the severe and unjust laws of the present government?'

'I am aware of the statute 1700, chapter 3,' said Alan, 'banishing from
the realm priests and trafficking Papists, and punishing by death, on
summary conviction, any such person who being so banished may return.
But I have no means of knowing you, sir, to be one of those persons; and
I think your prudence may recommend to you to keep your own counsel.'

'It is sufficient, sir; and I have no apprehensions of disagreeable
consequences from your having seen me in this house,' said the priest.

'Assuredly no,' said Alan. 'I consider myself as indebted for my life to
the mistresses of Fairladies; and it would be a vile requital on my
part to pry into or make known what I may have seen or heard under
this hospitable roof. If I were to meet the Pretender himself in such
a situation, he should, even at the risk of a little stretch to my
loyalty, be free from any danger from my indiscretion.'

'The Pretender!' said the priest, with some angry emphasis; but
immediately softened his tone and added, 'No doubt, however, that
person is a pretender; and some people think his pretensions are not ill
founded. But, before running into politics, give me leave to say, that I
am surprised to find a gentleman of your opinions in habits of intimacy
with Mr. Maxwell of Summertrees and Mr. Redgauntlet, and the medium of
conducting the intercourse betwixt them.'

'Pardon me, sir,' replied Alan Fairford; 'I do not aspire to the honour
of being reputed their confidant or go-between. My concern with those
gentlemen is limited to one matter of business, dearly interesting to
me, because it concerns the safety--perhaps the life--of my dearest
friend.'

'Would you have any objection to entrust me with the cause of your
journey?' said Father Buonaventure. 'My advice may be of service to you,
and my influence with one or both these gentlemen is considerable.'

Fairford hesitated a moment, and, hastily revolving all circumstances,
concluded that he might perhaps receive some advantage from propitiating
this personage; while, on the other hand, he endangered nothing by
communicating to him the occasion of his journey. He, therefore, after
stating shortly that he hoped Mr. Buonaventure would render him the same
confidence which he required on his part, gave a short account of Darsie
Latimer--of the mystery which hung over his family--and of the disaster
which had befallen him. Finally, of his own resolution to seek for his
friend, and to deliver him, at the peril of his own life.

The Catholic priest, whose manner it seemed to be to avoid all
conversation which did not arise from his own express motion, made
no remarks upon what he had heard, but only asked one or two abrupt
questions, where Alan's narrative appeared less clear to him; then
rising from his seat, he took two turns through the apartment, muttering
between his teeth, with emphasis, the word 'madman!' But apparently he
was in the habit of keeping all violent emotions under restraint; for he
presently addressed Fairford with the most perfect indifference.

'If,' said he, 'you thought you could do so without breach of
confidence, I wish you would have the goodness to show me the letter
of Mr. Maxwell of Summertrees. I desire to look particularly at the
address.'

Seeing no cause to decline this extension of his confidence, Alan,
without hesitation, put the letter into his hand. Having turned it
round as old Trumbull and Nanty Ewart had formerly done, and, like them,
having examined the address with much minuteness, he asked whether he
had observed these words, pointing to a pencil-writing upon the under
side of the letter. Fairford answered in the negative, and, looking
at the letter, read with surprise, 'CAVE NE LITERAS BELLEROPHONTIS
ADFERRES'; a caution which coincided so exactly with the provost's
admonition, that he would do well to inspect the letter of which he was
bearer, that he was about to spring up and attempt an escape, he knew
not wherefore, or from whom.

'Sit still, young man,' said the father, with the same tone of authority
which reigned in his whole manner, although mingled with stately
courtesy. 'You are in no danger--my character shall be a pledge for your
safety. By whom do you suppose these words have been written?'

Fairford could have answered, 'By Nanty Ewart,' for he remembered seeing
that person scribble something with a pencil, although he was not well
enough to observe with accuracy where or upon what. But not knowing
what suspicions, or what worse consequences the seamen's interest in his
affairs might draw upon him, he judged it best to answer that he knew
not the hand.

Father Buonaventure was again silent for a moment or two, which he
employed in surveying the letter with the strictest attention; then
stepped to the window, as if to examine the address and writing of the
envelope with the assistance of a stronger light, and Alan Fairford
beheld him, with no less amazement than high displeasure, coolly and
deliberately break the seal, open the letter, and peruse the contents.

'Stop, sir, hold!' he exclaimed, so soon as his astonishment permitted
him to express his resentment in words; 'by what right do you dare'--

'Peace, young gentleman,' said the father, repelling him with a wave
of his hand; 'be assured I do not act without warrant--nothing can pass
betwixt Mr. Maxwell and Mr. Redgauntlet that I am not fully entitled to
know.'

'It may be so,' said Alan, extremely angry; 'but though you may be these
gentlemen's father confessor, you are not mine; and in breaking the seal
of a letter entrusted to my care, you have done me'--

'No injury, I assure you,' answered the unperturbed priest; 'on the
contrary, it may be a service.'

'I desire no advantage at such a rate, or to be obtained in such a
manner,' answered Fairford; 'restore me the letter instantly, or'--

'As you regard your own safety,' said the priest, 'forbear all injurious
expressions, and all menacing gestures. I am not one who can be
threatened or insulted with impunity; and there are enough within
hearing to chastise any injury or affront offered to me, in case I may
think it unbecoming to protect or avenge myself with my own hand.'

In saying this, the father assumed an air of such fearlessness and calm
authority, that the young lawyer, surprised and overawed, forbore, as he
had intended, to snatch the letter from his hand, and confined himself
to bitter complaints of the impropriety of his conduct, and of the light
in which he himself must be placed to Redgauntlet should he present him
a letter with a broken seal.

'That,' said Father Buonaventure, 'shall be fully cared for. I will
myself write to Redgauntlet, and enclose Maxwell's letter, provided
always you continue to desire to deliver it, after perusing the
contents.'

He then restored the letter to Fairford, and, observing that he
hesitated to peruse it, said emphatically, 'Read it, for it concerns
you.'

This recommendation, joined to what Provost Crosbie had formerly
recommended, and to the warning which he doubted not that Nanty intended
to convey by his classical allusion, decided Fairford's resolution. 'If
these correspondents,' he thought, 'are conspiring against my person,
I have a right to counterplot them; self-preservation, as well as my
friend's safety, require that I should not be too scrupulous.'

So thinking, he read the letter, which was in the following words:--

'DEAR RUGGED AND DANGEROUS, 'Will you never cease meriting your old
nick-name? You have springed your dottrel, I find, and what is the
consequence?--why, that there will be hue and cry after you presently.
The bearer is a pert young lawyer, who has brought a formal complaint
against you, which, luckily, he has preferred in a friendly court.
Yet, favourable as the judge was disposed to be, it was with the utmost
difficulty that cousin Jenny and I could keep him to his tackle. He
begins to be timid, suspicious, and untractable, and I fear Jenny will
soon bend her brows on him in vain. I know not what to advise--the
lad who carries this is a good lad--active for his friend--and I have
pledged my honour he shall have no personal ill-usage. Pledged my
honour, remark these words, and remember I can be rugged and dangerous
as well, as my neighbours. But I have not ensured him against a short
captivity, and as he is a stirring active fellow, I see no remedy but
keeping him out of the way till this business of the good Father B----
is safely blown over, which God send it were!--Always thine, even should
I be once more CRAIG-IN-PERIL.'

'What think you, young man, of the danger you have been about to
encounter so willingly?'

'As strangely,' replied Alan Fairford, 'as of the extraordinary means
which you have been at present pleased to use for the discovery of Mr.
Maxwell's purpose.

'Trouble not yourself to account for my conduct,' said the father; 'I
have a warrant for what I do, and fear no responsibility. But tell me
what is your present purpose.'

'I should not perhaps name it to you, whose own safety may be
implicated.'

'I understand you,' answered the father; 'you would appeal to the
existing government? That can at no rate be permitted--we will rather
detain you at Fairladies by compulsion.'

'You will probably,' said Fairford, 'first weigh the risk of such a
proceeding in a free country.'

'I have incurred more formidable hazard,' said the priest, smiling; 'yet
I am willing to find a milder expedient. Come; let us bring the matter
to a compromise.' And he assumed a conciliating graciousness of
manner, which struck Fairford as being rather too condescending for the
occasion; 'I presume you will be satisfied to remain here in seclusion
for a day or two longer, provided I pass my solemn word to you that you
shall meet with the person whom you seek after--meet with him in perfect
safety, and, I trust, in good health, and be afterwards both at liberty
to return to Scotland, or dispose of yourselves as each of you may be
minded?'

'I respect the VERBUM SACERDOTIS as much as can reasonably be expected
from a Protestant,' answered Fairford; 'but methinks, you can scarce
expect me to repose so much confidence in the word of an unknown person
as is implied in the guarantee which you offer me.'

'I am not accustomed, sir,' said the father, in a very haughty tone, 'to
have my word disputed. But,' he added, while the angry hue passed from
his cheek, after a moment's reflection, 'you know me not, and ought to
be excused. I will repose more confidence in your honour than you seem
willing to rest upon mine; and, since we are so situated that one must
rely upon the other's faith, I will cause you to be set presently at
liberty, and furnished with the means of delivering your letter as
addressed, provided that now, knowing the contents, you think it safe
for yourself to execute the commission.'

Alan Fairford paused. 'I cannot see,' he at length replied, 'how I can
proceed with respect to the accomplishment of my sole purpose, which is
the liberation of my friend, without appealing to the law and obtaining
the assistance of a magistrate. If I present this singular letter of
Mr. Maxwell, with the contents of which I have become so unexpectedly
acquainted, I shall only share his captivity.'

'And if you apply to a magistrate, young man, you will bring ruin on
these hospitable ladies, to whom, in all human probability, you owe your
life. You cannot obtain a warrant for your purpose, without giving a
clear detail of all the late scenes through which you have passed. A
magistrate would oblige you to give a complete account of yourself,
before arming you with his authority against a third party; and in
giving such an account, the safety of these ladies will necessarily be
compromised. A hundred spies have had, and still have, their eyes
upon this mansion; but God will protect his own.'--He crossed himself
devoutly, and then proceeded,--'You can take an hour to think of your
best plan, and I will pledge myself to forward it thus far, provided
it be not asking you to rely more on my word than your prudence can
warrant. You shall go to Redgauntlet,--I name him plainly, to show
my confidence in you,--and you shall deliver him this letter of Mr.
Maxwell's, with one from me, in which I will enjoin him to set your
friend at liberty, or at least to make no attempts upon your own person,
either by detention or otherwise. If you can trust me thus far,' he
said, with a proud emphasis on the words 'I will on my side see you
depart from this place with the most perfect confidence that you will
not return armed with powers to drag its inmates to destruction. You
are young and inexperienced--bred to a profession also which sharpens
suspicion, and gives false views of human nature. I have seen much of
the world, and have known better than most men how far mutual confidence
is requisite in managing affairs of consequence.'

He spoke with an air of superiority, even of authority, by which
Fairford, notwithstanding his own internal struggles, was silenced and
overawed so much, that it was not till the father had turned to leave
the apartment that he found words to ask him what the consequences would
be, should he decline to depart on the terms proposed.

'You must then, for the safety of all parties, remain for some days
an inhabitant of Fairladies, where we have the means of detaining you,
which self-preservation will in that case compel us to make use of. Your
captivity will be short; for matters cannot long remain as they are. The
cloud must soon rise, or it must sink upon us for ever. BENEDICITE!'

With these words he left the apartment.

Fairford, upon his departure, felt himself much at a loss what course to
pursue. His line of education, as well as his father's tenets in matters
of church and state, had taught him a holy horror for Papists, and a
devout belief in whatever had been said of the Punic faith of Jesuits,
and of the expedients of mental reservation by which the Catholic
