He now commenced the task in good earnest; and the first question
was, Who was the young lady that visited the hut during his
illness? Janet paused for a little; and then observed, that to
keep the secret now would neither do good nor ill to anybody.

' It was just a leddy that hasna her equal in the world--Miss
Rose Bradwardine!'

'Then Miss Rose was probably also the author of my deliverance,'
inferred Waverley, delighted at the confirmation of an idea which
local circumstances had already induced him to entertain.

'I wot weel, Mr. Wauverley, and that was she e'en; but sair, sair
angry and affronted wad she hae been, puir thing, if she had
thought ye had been ever to ken a word about the matter; for she
gar'd me speak aye Gaelic when ye was in hearing, to mak ye trow
we were in the Hielands. I can speak it weil eneugh, for my mother
was a Hieland woman.'

A few more questions now brought out the whole mystery respecting
Waverley's deliverance from the bondage in which he left
Cairnvreckan. Never did music sound sweeter to an amateur than the
drowsy tautology with which old Janet detailed every circumstance
thrilled upon the ears of Waverley. But my reader is not a lover
and I must spare his patience, by attempting to condense within
reasonable compass the narrative which old Janet spread through a
harangue of nearly two hours.

When Waverley communicated to Fergus the letter he had received
from Rose Bradwardine by Davie Gellatley, giving an account of
Tully-Veolan being occupied by a small party of soldiers, that
circumstance had struck upon the busy and active mind of the
Chieftain. Eager to distress and narrow the posts of the enemy,
desirous to prevent their establishing a garrison so near him, and
willing also to oblige the Baron--for he often had the idea of
marriage with Rose floating through his brain--he resolved to send
some of his people to drive out the red-coats and to bring Rose to
Glennaquoich. But just as he had ordered Evan with a small party
on this duty, the news of Cope's having marched into the
Highlands, to meet and disperse the forces of the Chevalier ere
they came to a head, obliged him to join the standard with his
whole forces.

He sent to order Donald Bean to attend him; but that cautious
freebooter, who well understood the value of a separate command,
instead of joining, sent various apologies which the pressure of
the times compelled Fergus to admit as current, though not without
the internal resolution of being revenged on him for his
procrastination, time and place convenient. However, as he could
not amend the matter, he issued orders to Donald to descend into
the Low Country, drive the soldiers from Tully-Veolan, and, paying
all respect to the mansion of the Baron, to take his abode
somewhere near it, for protection of his daughter and family, and
to harass and drive away any of the armed volunteers or small
parties of military which he might find moving about the vicinity.
As this charge formed a sort of roving commission, which Donald
proposed to interpret in the way most advantageous to himself, as
he was relieved from the immediate terrors of Fergus, and as he
had, from former secret services, some interest in the councils of
the Chevalier, he resolved to make hay while the sun shone. He
achieved without difficulty the task of driving the soldiers from
Tully-Veolan; but, although he did not venture to encroach upon
the interior of the family, or to disturb Miss Rose, being
unwilling to make himself a powerful enemy in the Chevalier's
army,

    For well he knew the Baron's wrath was deadly;

yet he set about to raise contributions and exactions upon the
tenantry, and otherwise to turn the war to his own advantage.
Meanwhile he mounted the white cockade, and waited upon Rose with
a pretext of great devotion for the service in which her father
was engaged, and many apologies for the freedom he must
necessarily use for the support of his people. It was at this
moment that Rose learned, by open-mouthed fame, with all sorts of
exaggeration, that Waverley had killed the smith at Cairnvreckan,
in an attempt to arrest him; had been cast into a dungeon by Major
Melville of Cairnvreckan, and was to be executed by martial law
within three days. In the agony which these tidings excited she
proposed to Donald Bean the rescue of the prisoner. It was the
very sort of service which he was desirous to undertake, judging
it might constitute a merit of such a nature as would make amends
for any peccadilloes which he might be guilty of in the country.
He had the art, however, pleading all the while duty and
discipline, to hold off, until poor Rose, in the extremity of her
distress, offered to bribe him to the enterprise with some
valuable jewels which had been her mother's.

Donald Bean, who had served in France, knew, and perhaps over-
estimated, the value of these trinkets. But he also perceived
Rose's apprehensions of its being discovered that she had parted
with her jewels for Waverley's liberation. Resolved this scruple
should not part him and the treasure, he voluntarily offered to
take an oath that he would never mention Miss Rose's share in the
transaction; and, foreseeing convenience in keeping the oath and
no probable advantage in breaking it, he took the engagement--in
order, as he told his lieutenant, to deal handsomely by the young
lady--in the only mode and form which, by a mental paction with
himself, he considered as binding: he swore secrecy upon his drawn
dirk. He was the more especially moved to this act of good faith
by some attentions that Miss Bradwardine showed to his daughter
Alice, which, while they gained the heart of the mountain damsel,
highly gratified the pride of her father. Alice, who could now
speak a little English, was very communicative in return for
Rose's kindness, readily confided to her the whole papers
respecting the intrigue with Gardiner's regiment, of which she was
the depositary, and as readily undertook, at her instance, to
restore them to Waverley without her father's knowledge. For 'they
may oblige the bonnie young lady and the handsome young
gentleman,' said Alice, 'and what use has my father for a whin
bits o' scarted paper?'

The reader is aware that she took an opportunity of executing this
purpose on the eve of Waverley's leaving the glen.

How Donald executed his enterprise the reader is aware. But the
expulsion of the military from Tully-Veolan had given alarm, and
while he was lying in wait for Gilfillan, a strong party, such as
Donald did not care to face, was sent to drive back the insurgents
in their turn, to encamp there, and to protect the country. The
officer, a gentleman and a disciplinarian, neither intruded
himself on Miss Bradwardine, whose unprotected situation he
respected, nor permitted his soldiers to commit any breach of
discipline. He formed a little camp upon an eminence near the
house of Tully-Veolan, and placed proper guards at the passes in
the vicinity. This unwelcome news reached Donald Bean Lean as he
was returning to Tully-Veolan. Determined, however, to obtain the
guerdon of his labour, he resolved, since approach to Tully-Veolan
was impossible, to deposit his prisoner in Janet's cottage, a
place the very existence of which could hardly have been suspected
even by those who had long lived in the vicinity, unless they had
been guided thither, and which was utterly unknown to Waverley
himself. This effected, he claimed and received his reward.
Waverley's illness was an event which deranged all their
calculations. Donald was obliged to leave the neighbourhood with
his people, and to seek more free course for his adventures
elsewhere. At Rose's entreaty, he left an old man, a herbalist,
who was supposed to understand a little of medicine, to attend
Waverley during his illness.

In the meanwhile, new and fearful doubts started in Rose's mind.
They were suggested by old Janet, who insisted that, a reward
having been offered for the apprehension of Waverley, and his own
personal effects being so valuable, there was no saying to what
breach of faith Donald might be tempted. In an agony of grief and
terror, Rose took the daring resolution of explaining to the
Prince himself the danger in which Mr. Waverley stood, judging
that, both as a politician and a man of honour and humanity,
Charles Edward would interest himself to prevent his falling into
the hands of the opposite party. This letter she at first thought
of sending anonymously, but naturally feared it would not in that
case be credited. She therefore subscribed her name, though with
reluctance and terror, and consigned it in charge to a young man,
who at leaving his farm to join the Chevalier's army, made it his
petition to her to have some sort of credentials to the
adventurer, from whom he hoped to obtain a commission.

The letter reached Charles Edward on his descent to the Lowlands,
and, aware of the political importance of having it supposed that
he was in correspondence with the English Jacobites, he caused the
most positive orders to be transmitted to Donald Bean Lean to
transmit Waverley, safe and uninjured, in person or effects, to
the governor of Doune Castle. The freebooter durst not disobey,
for the army of the Prince was now so near him that punishment
might have followed; besides, he was a politician as well as a
robber, and was unwilling to cancel the interest created through
former secret services by being refractory on this occasion. He
therefore made a virtue of necessity, and transmitted orders to
his lieutenant to convey Edward to Doune, which was safely
accomplished in the mode mentioned in a former chapter. The
governor of Doune was directed to send him to Edinburgh as a
prisoner, because the Prince was apprehensive that Waverley, if
set at liberty, might have resumed his purpose of returning to
England, without affording him an opportunity of a personal
interview. In this, indeed, he acted by the advice of the
Chieftain of Glennaquoich, with whom it may be remembered the
Chevalier communicated upon the mode of disposing of Edward,
though without telling him how he came to learn the place of his
confinement.

This, indeed, Charles Edward considered as a lady's secret; for
although Rose's letter was couched in the most cautious and
general terms, and professed to be written merely from motives of
humanity and zeal for the Prince's service, yet she expressed so
anxious a wish that she should not be known to have interfered,
that the Chevalier was induced to suspect the deep interest which
she took in Waverley's safety. This conjecture, which was well
founded, led, however, to false inferences. For the emotion which
Edward displayed on approaching Flora and Rose at the ball of
Holyrood was placed by the Chevalier to the account of the latter;
and he concluded that the Baron's views about the settlement of
his property, or some such obstacle, thwarted their mutual
inclinations. Common fame, it is true, frequently gave Waverley to
Miss Mac-Ivor; but the Prince knew that common fame is very
prodigal in such gifts; and, watching attentively the behaviour of
the ladies towards Waverley, he had no doubt that the young
Englishman had no interest with Flora, and was beloved by Rose
Bradwardine. Desirous to bind Waverley to his service, and wishing
also to do a kind and friendly action, the Prince next assailed
the Baron on the subject of settling his estate upon his daughter.
Mr. Bradwardine acquiesced; but the consequence was that Fergus
was immediately induced to prefer his double suit for a wife and
an earldom, which the Prince rejected in the manner we have seen.
The Chevalier, constantly engaged in his own multiplied affairs,
had not hitherto sought any explanation with Waverley, though
often meaning to do so. But after Fergus's declaration he saw the
necessity of appearing neutral between the rivals, devoutly hoping
that the matter, which now seemed fraught with the seeds of
strife, might be permitted to lie over till the termination of the
expedition. When, on the march to Derby, Fergus, being questioned
concerning his quarrel with Waverley, alleged as the cause that
Edward was desirous of retracting the suit he had made to his
sister, the Chevalier plainly told him that he had himself
observed Miss Mac-Ivor's behaviour to Waverley, and that he was
convinced Fergus was under the influence of a mistake in judging
of Waverley's conduct, who, he had every reason to believe, was
engaged to Miss Bradwardine. The quarrel which ensued between
Edward and the Chieftain is, I hope, still in the remembrance of
the reader. These circumstances will serve to explain such points
of our narrative as, according to the custom of story-tellers, we
deemed it fit to leave unexplained, for the purpose of exciting
the reader's curiosity.

When Janet had once finished the leading facts of this narrative,
Waverley was easily enabled to apply the clue which they afforded
to other mazes of the labyrinth in which he had been engaged. To
Rose Bradwardine, then, he owed the life which he now thought he
could willingly have laid down to serve her. A little reflection
convinced him, however, that to live for her sake was more
convenient and agreeable, and that, being possessed of
independence, she might share it with him either in foreign
countries or in his own. The pleasure of being allied to a man of
the Baron's high worth, and who was so much valued by his uncle
Sir Everard, was also an agreeable consideration, had anything
been wanting to recommend the match. His absurdities, which had
appeared grotesquely ludicrous during his prosperity, seemed, in
the sunset of his fortune, to be harmonised and assimilated with
the noble features of his character, so as to add peculiarity
without exciting ridicule. His mind occupied with such projects of
future happiness, Edward sought Little Veolan, the habitation of
Mr. Duncan Macwheeble.





CHAPTER LXVI

    Now is Cupid a child of conscience--he makes restitution.

    SHAKSPEARE


Mr. Duncan MacWheeble, no longer Commissary or Bailie, though
still enjoying the empty name of the latter dignity, had escaped
proscription by an early secession from the insurgent party and by
his insignificance.

Edward found him in his office, immersed among papers and
accounts. Before him was a large bicker of oatmeal porridge, and
at the side thereof a horn spoon and a bottle of two-penny.
Eagerly running his eye over a voluminous law-paper, he from time
to time shovelled an immense spoonful of these nutritive viands
into his capacious mouth. A pot-bellied Dutch bottle of brandy
which stood by intimated either that this honest limb of the law
had taken his morning already, or that he meant to season his
porridge with such digestive; or perhaps both circumstances might
reasonably be inferred. His night-cap and morning-gown, had
whilome been of tartan, but, equally cautious and frugal, the
honest Bailie had got them dyed black, lest their original ill-
omened colour might remind his visitors of his unlucky excursion
to Derby. To sum up the picture, his face was daubed with snuff up
to the eyes, and his fingers with ink up to the knuckles. He
looked dubiously at Waverley as he approached the little green
rail which fenced his desk and stool from the approach of the
vulgar. Nothing could give the Bailie more annoyance than the idea
of his acquaintance being claimed by any of the unfortunate
gentlemen who were now so much more likely to need assistance than
to afford profit. But this was the rich young Englishman; who knew
what might be his situation? He was the Baron's friend too; what
was to be done?

While these reflections gave an air of absurd perplexity to the
poor man's visage, Waverley, reflecting on the communication he
was about to make to him, of a nature so ridiculously contrasted
with the appearance of the individual, could not help bursting out
a-laughing, as he checked the propensity to exclaim with Syphax--

    Cato's a proper person to intrust
    A love-tale with.

As Mr. Macwheeble had no idea of any person laughing heartily who
was either encircled by peril or oppressed by poverty, the
hilarity of Edward's countenance greatly relieved the
embarrassment of his own, and, giving him a tolerably hearty
welcome to Little Veolan, he asked what he would choose for
breakfast. His visitor had, in the first place, something for his
private ear, and begged leave to bolt the door. Duncan by no means
liked this precaution, which savoured of danger to be apprehended;
but he could not now draw back.

Convinced he might trust this man, as he could make it his
interest to be faithful, Edward communicated his present situation
and future schemes to Macwheeble. The wily agent listened with
apprehension when he found Waverley was still in a state of
proscription; was somewhat comforted by learning that he had a
passport; rubbed his hands with glee when he mentioned the amount
of his present fortune; opened huge eyes when he heard the
brilliancy of his future expectations; but when he expressed his
intention to share them with Miss Rose Bradwardine, ecstasy had
almost deprived the honest man of his senses. The Bailie started
from his three-footed stool like the Pythoness from her tripod;
flung his best wig out of the window, because the block on which
it was placed stood in the way of his career; chucked his cap to
the ceiling, caught it as it fell; whistled 'Tullochgorum'; danced
a Highland fling with inimitable grace and agility, and then threw
himself exhausted into a chair, exclaiming, 'Lady Wauverley! ten
thousand a year the least penny! Lord preserve my poor
understanding!'

'Amen with all my heart,' said Waverley; 'but now, Mr. Macwheeble,
let us proceed to business.' This word had somewhat a sedative
effect, but the Bailie's head, as he expressed himself, was still
'in the bees.' He mended his pen, however, marked half a dozen
sheets of paper with an ample marginal fold, whipped down Dallas
of St. Martin's 'Styles' from a shelf, where that venerable work
roosted with Stair's 'Institutions,' Dirleton's 'Doubts,'
Balfour's 'Practiques,' and a parcel of old account-books, opened
the volume at the article Contract of Marriage, and prepared to
make what he called a'sma' minute to prevent parties frae
resiling.'

With some difficulty Waverley made him comprehend that he was
going a little too fast. He explained to him that he should want
his assistance, in the first place, to make his residence safe for
the time, by writing to the officer at Tully-Veolan that Mr.
Stanley, an English gentleman nearly related to Colonel Talbot,
was upon a visit of business at Mr. Macwheeble's, and, knowing the
state of the country, had sent his passport for Captain Foster's
inspection. This produced a polite answer from the officer, with
an invitation to Mr. Stanley to dine with him, which was declined
(as may easily be supposed) under pretence of business.

Waverley's next request was, that Mr. Macwheeble would despatch a
man and horse to----, the post-town at which Colonel Talbot was to
address him, with directions to wait there until the post should
bring a letter for Mr. Stanley, and then to forward it to Little
Veolan with all speed. In a moment the Bailie was in search of his
apprentice (or servitor, as he was called Sixty Years Since), Jock
Scriever, and in not much greater space of time Jock was on the
back of the white pony. 'Tak care ye guide him weel, sir, for he's
aye been short in the wind since--ahem--Lord be gude to me! (in a
low voice), I was gaun to come out wi'--since I rode whip and spur
to fetch the Chevalier to redd Mr. Wauverley and Vich lan Vohr;
and an uncanny coup I gat for my pains. Lord forgie your honour! I
might hae broken my neck; but troth it was in a venture, mae ways
nor ane; but this maks amends for a'. Lady Wauverley! ten thousand
a year! Lord be gude unto me!'

'But you forget, Mr. Macwheeble, we want the Baron's consent--the
lady's--'

'Never fear, I'se be caution for them; I'se gie you my personal
warrandice. Ten thousand a year! it dings Balmawhapple out and
out--a year's rent's worth a' Balmawhapple, fee and life-rent!
Lord make us thankful!'
