Manichees?'

'Have no fears on that score. But, as I told you, since my wonderful
conversion by Bran, the dog, I have begun to hold dumb animals in
respect, as probably quite as good as myself.'

'Then you need a further conversion, friend Raphael, and to learn what
is the dignity of man; and when that arrives, you will learn to believe,
with me, that the life of every beast upon the face of the earth would
be a cheap price to pay in exchange for the life of the meanest human
being.'

'Yes, if they be required for food: but really, to kill them for our
amusement!'

'Friend, when I was still a heathen, I recollect well how I used to
haggle at that story of the cursing of the fig-tree; but when I learnt
to know what man was, and that I had been all my life mistaking for a
part of nature that race which was originally, and can be again, made
in the likeness of God, then I began to see that it were well if every
fig-tree upon earth were cursed, if the spirit of one man could be
taught thereby a single lesson. And so I speak of these, my darling
field-sports, on which I have not been ashamed, as you know, to write a
book.'

'And a very charming one: yet you were still a pagan, recollect, when
you wrote it.'

'I was; and then I followed the chase by mere nature and inclination.
But now I know I have a right to follow it, because it gives me
endurance, promptness, courage, self-control, as well as health and
cheerfulness: and therefore--Ah! a fresh ostrich-track!'

And stopping short, Synesius began pricking slowly up the hillside.

'Back!' whispered he, at last. 'Quietly and silently. Lie down on your
horse's neck, as I do, or the long-necked rogues may see you. They must
be close to us over the brow. I know that favourite grassy slope of old.
Round under yon hill, or they will get wind of us, and then farewell to
them!'

And Synesius and his groom cantered on, hanging each to their horses'
necks by an arm and a leg, in a way which Raphael endeavoured in vain to
imitate.

Two or three minutes more of breathless silence brought them to the
edge of the hill, where Synesius halted, peered down a moment, and then
turned to Raphael, his face and limbs quivering with delight, as he held
up two fingers, to denote the number of the birds.

'Out of arrow-range! Slip the dogs, Syphax!'

And in another minute Raphael found himself galloping headlong down the
hill, while two magnificent ostriches, their outspread plumes waving in
the bright breeze, their necks stooped almost to the ground, and their
long legs flashing out behind them, were sweeping away before the
greyhounds at a pace which no mortal horse could have held for ten
minutes.

'Baby that I am still!' cried Synesius, tears of excitement glittering
in his eyes;.... while Raphael gave himself up to the joy, and forgot
even Victoria, in the breathless rush over rock and bush, sandhill and
watercourse.

'Take care of that dry torrent-bed! Hold up, old horse! This will
not last two minutes more. They cannot hold their pace against this
breeze.... Well tried, good dog, though you did miss him! Ah, that my
boy were here! There--they double. Spread right and left, my children,
and ride at them as they pass!'

And the ostriches, unable, as Synesius said, to keep their pace against
the breeze, turned sharp on their pursuers, and beating the air with
outspread wings, came down the wind again, at a rate even more wonderful
than before.

'Ride at him, Raphael--ride at him, and turn him into those bushes!'
cried Synesius, fitting an arrow to his bow.

Raphael obeyed, and the bird swerved into the low scrub; the
well-trained horse leapt at him like a cat; and Raphael, who dare not
trust his skill in archery, struck with his whip at the long neck as it
struggled past him, and felled the noble quarry to the ground. He was
in the act of springing down to secure his prize, when a shout from
Synesius stopped him.

'Are you mad? He will kick out your heart! Let the dogs hold him!'

'Where is the other?' asked Raphael, panting.

'Where he ought to be. I have not missed a running shot for many a
month.'

'Really, you rival the Emperor Commodus himself.'

'Ah! I tried his fancy of crescent-headed arrows once, and decapitated
an ostrich or two tolerably: but they are only fit for the amphitheatre:
they will not lie safely in the quiver on horseback, I find. But what
is that?' And he pointed to a cloud of white dust, about a mile down the
valley. 'A herd of antelopes? If so, God is indeed gracious to us! Come
down--whatsoever they are, we have no time to lose.'

And collecting his scattered forces, Synesius pushed on rapidly towards
the object which had attracted his attention.

'Antelopes!' cried one.

'Wild horses!' cried another.

'Tame ones, rather!' cried Synesius, with a gesture of wrath. 'I saw the
flash of arms!'

'The Ausurians!' And a yell of rage rang from the whole troop.

'Will you follow me, children?'

'To death!' shouted they.

'I know it. Oh that I had seven hundred of you, as Abraham had! We would
see then whether these scoundrels did not share, within a week, the fate
of Chedorlaomer's.'

'Happy man, who can actually trust your own slaves!' said Raphael, as
the party galloped on, tightening their girdles and getting ready their
weapons.

'Slaves? If the law gives me the power of selling one or two of them who
are not yet wise enough to be trusted to take care of themselves, it
is a fact which both I and they have long forgotten. Their fathers grew
gray at my father's table, and God grant that they may grow gray at
mine! We eat together, work together, hunt together, fight together,
jest together, and weep together. God help us all! for we have but one
common weal. Now--do you make out the enemy, boys?'

'Ausurians, your Holiness. The same party who tried Myrsinitis last
week. I know them by the helmets which they took from the Markmen.'

'And with whom are they fighting?'

No one could see. Fighting they certainly were: but their victims were
beyond them, and the party galloped on.

'That was a smart business at Myrsinitis. The Ausurians appeared while
the people were at morning prayers. The soldiers, of course, ran for
their lives, and hid in the caverns, leaving the matter to the priests.'

'If they were of your presbytery, I doubt not they proved themselves
worthy of their diocesan.'

'Ah, if all my priests were but like them! or my people either!' said
Synesius, chatting quietly in full gallop, like a true son of the
saddle. 'They offered up prayers for victory, sallied out at the head
of the peasants, and met the Moors in a narrow pass. There their hearts
failed them a little. Faustus, the deacon, makes them a speech; charges
the leader of the robbers, like young David, with a stone, beats his
brains out therewith, strips him in true Homeric fashion, and routs the
Ausurians with their leader's sword; returns and erects a trophy in due
classic form, and saves the whole valley.'

'You should make him archdeacon.'

'I would send him and his townsfolk round the province, if I could,
crowned with laurel, and proclaim before them at every market-place,
"These are men of God." With whom can those Ausurians be dealing?
Peasants would have been all killed long ago, and soldiers would have
run away long ago. It is truly a portent in this country to see a fight
last ten minutes. Who can they be? I see them now, and hewing away
like men too. They are all on foot but two; and we have not a cohort of
infantry left for many a mile round.'

'I know who they are!' cried Raphael, suddenly striking spurs into his
horse. 'I will swear to that armour among a thousand. And there is a
litter in the midst of them. On! and fight, men, if you ever fought in
your lives!'

'Softly!' cried Synesius. 'Trust an old soldier, and perhaps--alas! that
he should have to say it--the best left in this wretched country. Round
by the hollow, and take the barbarians suddenly in flank. They will not
see us then till we are within twenty paces of them. Aha! you have a
thing or two to learn yet, Aben-Ezra.'

And chuckling at the prospect of action, the gallant bishop wheeled his
little troop and in five minutes more dashed out of the copse with a
shout and a flight of arrows, and rushed into the thickest of the fight.

One cavalry skirmish must be very like another. A crash of horses, a
flashing of sword-blades, five minutes of blind confusion, and
then those who have not been knocked out of their saddles by their
neighbours' knees, and have not cut off their own horses' heads instead
of their enemies', find themselves, they know not how, either running
away or being run away from--not one blow in ten having taken effect on
either side. And even so Raphael, having made vain attempts to cut
down several Moors, found himself standing on his head in an altogether
undignified posture, among innumerable horses' legs, in all possible
frantic motions. To avoid one was to get in the way of another; so he
philosophically sat still, speculating on the sensation of having his
brains kicked out, till the cloud of legs vanished, and he found himself
kneeling abjectly opposite the nose of a mule, on whose back sat,
utterly unmoved, a tall and reverend man, in episcopal costume. The
stranger, instead of bursting out laughing, as Raphael did, solemnly
lifted his hand, and gave him his blessing. The Jew sprang to his feet,
heedless of all such courtesies, and, looking round, saw the Ausurians
galloping off up the hill in scattered groups, and Synesius standing
close by him, wiping a bloody sword.

'Is the litter safe'?' were his first words.

'Safe; and so are all. I gave you up for killed when I saw you run
through with that lance.

'Run through? I am as sound in the hide as a crocodile, said Raphael,
laughing.

'Probably the fellow took the butt instead of the point, in his hurry.
So goes a cavalry scuffle. I saw you hit three or four fellows running
with the flat of your sword.'

Ah, that explains,' said Raphael, why, I thought myself once the best
swordsman on the Armenian frontier....'

'I suspect that you were thinking of some one besides the Moors,' said
Synesius, archly pointing to the litter; and Raphael, for the first
time for many a year, blushed like a boy of fifteen, and then turned
haughtily away, and remounted his horse, saying, 'Clumsy fool that I
was!'

'Thank God rather that you have been kept from the shedding of blood,'
said the stranger bishop, in a soft, deliberate voice, with a peculiarly
clear and delicate enunciation. 'If God have given us the victory, why
grudge His having spared any other of His creatures besides ourselves?'

'Because there are so many the more of them left to ravish, burn, and
slay,' answered Synesius. 'Nevertheless, I am not going to argue with
Augustine.'

Augustine! Raphael looked intently at the man, a tall, delicate-featured
personage, with a lofty and narrow forehead, scarred like his cheeks
with the deep furrows of many a doubt and woe. Resolve, gentle but
unbending, was expressed in his thin close-set lips and his clear quiet
eye; but the calm of his mighty countenance was the calm of a worn-out
volcano, over which centuries must pass before the earthquake-rents be
filled with kindly soil, and the cinder-slopes grow gay with grass and
flowers. The Jew's thoughts, however, were soon turned into another
channel by the hearty embraces of Majoricus and his son.

'We have caught you again, you truant!' said the young Tribune; 'you
could not escape us, you see, after all.'

'Rather,' said the father, 'we owe him a second debt of gratitude for a
second deliverance. We were right hard bested when you rode up.'

'Oh, he brings nothing but good with him whenever he appears; and then
he pretends to be a bird of ill-omen,' said the light-hearted Tribune,
putting his armour to rights.

Raphael was in his secret heart not sorry to find that his old friends
bore him no grudge for his caprice; but all he answered was-- 'Pray
thank any one but me; I have, as usual, proved myself a fool. But
what brings you here, like Gods e Machina? It is contrary to all
probabilities. One would not admit so astounding an incident, even in
the modern drama.'

'Contrary to none whatsoever, my friend. We found Augustine at Berenice,
in act to set off to Synesius: we--one of us, that is--were certain that
you would be found with him; and we decided on acting as Augustine's
guard, for none of the dastard garrison dare stir out.'

'One of us,' thought Raphael,--'which one?' And, conquering his pride,
he asked, as carelessly as he could, for Victoria.

'She is there in the litter, poor child!' said her father in a serious
tone.

'Surely not ill?'

'Alas! either the overwrought excitement of months of heroism broke down
when she found us safe at last' or some stroke from God--.... Who can
tell what I may not have deserved?--But she has been utterly prostrate
in body and mind, ever since we parted from you at Berenice.'

The blunt soldier little guessed the meaning of his own words. But
Raphael, as he heard, felt a pang shoot through his heart, too keen for
him to discern whether it sprang from joy or from despair.

'Come,' cried the cheerful voice of Synesius, 'come, Aben-Ezra; you have
knelt for Augustine's blessing already, and now you must enter into the
fruition of it. Come, you two philosophers must know each other. Most
holy, I entreat you to preach to this friend of mine, at once the wisest
and the foolishest of men.'

'Only the latter,' said Raphael; 'but open to any speech of Augustine's,
at least when we are safe home, and game enough for Synesius's new
guests killed.'

And turning away, he rode silent and sullen by the side of his
companions, who began at once to consult together as to the plans of
Majoricus and his soldiers.

In spite of himself, Raphael soon became interested in Augustine's
conversation. He entered into the subject of Cyrenian misrule and ruin
as heartily and shrewdly as any man of the world; and when all the
rest were at a loss, the prompt practical hint which cleared up the
difficulty was certain to come from him. It was by his advice that
Majoricus had brought his soldiery hither; it was his proposal that they
should be employed for a fixed period in defending these remote southern
boundaries of the province; he checked the impetuosity of Synesius,
cheered the despair of Majoricus, appealed to the honour and the
Christianity of the soldiers, and seemed to have a word--and that the
right word--for every man; and after a while, Aben-Ezra quite forgot
the stiffness and deliberation of his manner, and the quaint use of
Scripture texts in far-fetched illustrations of every opinion which he
propounded. It had seemed at first a mere affectation; but the arguments
which it was employed to enforce were in themselves so moderate and so
rational that Raphael began to feel, little by little, that his apparent
pedantry was only the result of a wish to refer every matter, even the
most vulgar, to some deep and divine rule of right and wrong.

'But you forget all this while, my friends,' said Majoricus at last,
'the danger which you incur by sheltering proclaimed rebels.'

'The King of kings has forgiven your rebellion, in that while He has
punished you by the loss of your lands and honours, He has given you
your life for a prey in this city of refuge. It remains for you to bring
forth worthy fruits of penitence; of which I know none better than those
which John the Baptist commanded to the soldiery of old, "Do no violence
to any man, and be content with your wages."'

'As for rebels and rebellion,' said Synesius, 'they are matters
unknown among as; for where there is no king there can be no rebellion.
Whosoever will help us against Ausurians is loyal in our eyes. And as
for our political creed, it is simple enough--namely, that the emperor
never dies, and that his name is Agamemnon, who fought at Troy; which
any of my grooms will prove to you syllogistically enough to satisfy
Augustine himself. As thus--

'Agamemnon was the greatest and the best of kings.

'The emperor is the greatest and the best of kings.

'Therefore, Agamemnon is the emperor, and conversely.'

'It had been well,' said Augustine, with a grave smile, 'if some of our
friends had held the same doctrine, even at the expense of their logic.'

'Or if,' answered Synesius, 'they believed with us, that the emperor's
chamberlain is a clever old man, with a bald head like my own, Ulysses
by name, who was rewarded with the prefecture of all lands north of the
Mediterranean, for putting out the Cyclop's eye two years ago. However,
enough of this. But you see, you are not in any extreme danger of
informers and intriguers.... The real difficulty is, how you will be
able to obey Augustine, by being content with your wages. For,' lowering
his voice, 'you will get literally none.'

'It will be as much as we deserve,' said the young Tribune: 'but my
fellows have a trick of eating--'

'They are welcome, then, to all deer and ostriches which they can
catch. But I am not only penniless, but reduced myself to live, like the
Laestrygons, on meat and nothing else; all crops and stocks for miles
round being either burnt or carried off.'

'E nihilo nihil!' said Augustine, having nothing else to say. But here
Raphael woke up on a sudden with--

'Did the Pentapolitan wheat-ships go to Rome?'

'No; Orestes stopped them when he stopped the Alexandrian convoy.'

'Then the Jews have the wheat, trust them for it; and what they have
I have. There are certain moneys of mine lying at interest in the
seaports, which will set that matter to rights for a month or two. Do
you find an escort to-morrow, and I will find wheat.'

'But; most generous of friends, I can neither repay you interest nor
principal.'

'Be it so. I have spent so much money during the last thirty years in
doing nothing but evil, that it is hard if I may not at last spend a
little in doing good.--Unless his Holiness of Hippo thinks it wrong for
you to accept the goodwill of an infidel?'

'Which of these three,' said Augustine, 'was neighbour to him who fell
among thieves, but he who had mercy on him? Verily, my friend Raphael
Aben-Ezra, thou art not far from the kingdom of God.'

'Of which God?' asked Raphael slyly.

'Of the God of thy forefather Abraham, whom thou shalt hear us worship
this evening, if He will. Synesius, have you a church wherein I can
perform the evening service, and give a word of exhortation to these my
children?'

Synesius sighed. 'There is a ruin, which was last month a church.'

'And is one still. Man did not place there the presence of God, and man
cannot expel it.'

And so, sending out hunting-parties right and left in chase of
everything which had animal life, and picking up before nightfall a
tolerably abundant supply of game, they went homewards, where Victoria
was entrusted to the care of Synesius's old stewardess, and the soldiery
were marched straight into the church; while Synesius's servants, to
whom the Latin service would have been unintelligible, busied themselves
in cooking the still warm game.

Strangely enough it sounded to Raphael that evening to hear, among those
smoke-grimed pillars and fallen rafters, the grand old Hebrew psalms of
his nation ring aloft, to the very chants, too, which were said by the
rabbi to have been used in the Temple-worship of Jerusalem.... They, and
the invocations, thanksgivings, blessings, the very outward ceremonial
itself, were all Hebraic, redolent of the thoughts, the words of his
own ancestors. That lesson from the book of Proverbs, which Augustine's
deacon was reading in Latin--the blood of the man who wrote these words
was flowing in Aben-Ezra's veins.... Was it a mistake, an hypocrisy? or
were they indeed worshipping, as they fancied, the Ancient One who spoke
face to face with his forefathers, the Archetype of man, the friend of
Abraham and of Israel?

And now the sermon began; and as Augustine stood for a moment in prayer
in front of the ruined altar, every furrow in his worn face lit up by
a ray of moonlight which streamed in through the broken roof,
Raphael waited impatiently for his speech. What would he, the refined
dialectician, the ancient teacher of heathen rhetoric, the courtly and
learned student, the ascetic celibate and theosopher, have to say
to those coarse war-worn soldiers, Thracians and Markmen, Gauls and
Belgians, who sat watching there, with those sad earnest faces? What one
thought or feeling in common could there be between Augustine and his
congregation?

At last, after signing himself with the cross, he began. The subject was
one of the psalms which had just been read--a battle psalm, concerning
Moab and Amalek, and the old border wars of Palestine. What would he
make of that?

He seemed to start lamely enough, in spite of the exquisite grace of his
voice, and manner, and language, and the epigrammatic terseness of
every sentence. He spent some minutes over the inscription of the
psalm--allegorised it--made it mean something which it never did mean in
the writer's mind, and which it, as Raphael well knew, never could mean,
for his interpretation was founded on a sheer mis-translation. He punned
on the Latin version--derived the meaning of Hebrew words from Latin
etymologies.... And as he went on with the psalm itself, the common
sense of David seemed to evaporate in mysticism. The most fantastic and
far-fetched illustrations, drawn from the commonest objects, alternated
with mysterious theosophic dogma. Where was that learning for which he
was so famed? Where was that reverence for the old Hebrew Scriptures
which he professed? He was treating David as ill as Hypatia used to
treat Homer--worse even than old Philo did, when in the home life of
the old Patriarchs, and in the mighty acts of Moses and Joshua, he could
find nothing but spiritual allegories wherewith to pamper the private
experiences of the secluded theosophist. And Raphael felt very much
inclined to get up and go away, and still more inclined to say, with a
smile, in his haste, 'All men are liars.'....

And yet, what an illustration that last one was! No mere fancy, but a
real deep glance into the working of the material universe, as symbolic
of the spiritual and unseen one. And not drawn, as Hypatia's were,
exclusively from some sublime or portentous phenomenon, but from
some dog, or kettle, or fishwife, with a homely insight worthy of old
Socrates himself. How personal he was becoming, too!... No long bursts
of declamation, but dramatic dialogue and interrogation, by-hints,
and unexpected hits at one and the other most commonplace soldier's
failing.... And yet each pithy rebuke was put in a universal,
comprehensive form, which made Raphael himself wince--which might, he
thought, have made any man, or woman either, wince in like manner. Well,
whether or not Augustine knew truths for all men, he at least knew
sins for all men, and for himself as well as his hearers. There was
no denying that. He was a real man, right or wrong. What he rebuked in
others, he had felt in himself, and fought it to the death-grip, as the
flash and quiver of that worn face proclaimed.... But yet, why were the
Edomites, by an utterly mistaken pun on their name, to signify one sort
of sin, and the Ammonites another, and the Amalekites another? What
had that to do with the old psalm? What had it to do with the present
auditory? Was not this the wildest and lowest form of that unreal,
subtilising, mystic pedantry, of which he had sickened long ago in
Hypatia's lecture-room, till he fled to Bran, the dog, for honest
practical realities?

No.... Gradually, as Augustine's hints became more practical and orated,
Raphael saw that there was in his mind most real and organic connection,
true or false, in what seemed at first mere arbitrary allegory.
Amalekites, personal sins, Ausurian robbers and ravishers, were to him
only so many different forms of one and the same evil. He who helped
any of them fought against the righteous God: he who fought against them
fought for that God; but he must conquer the Amalekites within, if
he expected to conquer the Amalekites without. Could the legionaries
permanently put down the lust and greed around them, while their own
hearts were enslaved to lust and greed within? Would they not be helping
it by example, while they pretended to crush it by sword-strokes? Was it
not a mockery, an hypocrisy? Could God's blessing be on it? Could they
restore unity and peace to the country while there was neither unity nor
peace within them? What had produced the helplessness of the people, the
imbecility of the military, but inward helplessness, inward weakness?
They were weak against Moors, because they were weak against enemies
more deadly than Moors. How could they fight for God outwardly, while
they were fighting against him inwardly? He would not go forth with
their hosts. How could He, when He was not among their hosts? He, a
spirit, must dwell in their spirits .... And then the shout of a king
would be among them, and one of them should chase a thousand.... Or if
not--if both people and soldiers required still further chastening and
humbling--what matter, provided that they were chastened and humbled?
What matter if their faces were confounded, if they were thereby driven
to seek His Name, who alone was the Truth, the Light, and the Life? What
if they were slain? Let them have conquered the inward enemies, what
matter to them if the outward enemies seemed to prevail for a moment?
They should be recompensed at the resurrection of the just, when death
was swallowed up in victory. It would be seen then who had really
conquered in the eyes of the just God--they, God's ministers,
the defenders of peace and justice, or the Ausurians, the enemies
thereof.... And then, by some quaintest turn of fancy, he introduced a
word of pity and hope, even for the wild Moorish robbers. It might be
good for them to have succeeded thus far; they might learn from their
Christian captives, purified by affliction, truths which those captives
had forgotten in prosperity. And, again, it might be good for them, as
well as for Christians, to be confounded and made like chaff before the
wind, that so they too might learn His Name....And so on, through and
in spite of all conceits, allegories, overstrained interpretations,
Augustine went on evolving from the Psalms, and from the past, and from
the future, the assertion of a Living, Present God, the eternal enemy of
discord, injustice, and evil, the eternal helper and deliverer of those
who were enslaved and crushed thereby in soul or body.... It was all
most strange to Raphael.... Strange in its utter unlikeness to any
teaching, Platonist or Hebrew, which he had ever heard before, and
stranger still in its agreement with those teachings; in the instinctive
ease with which it seemed to unite and justify them all by the talisman
of some one idea--and what that might be, his Jewish prejudices could
not prevent his seeing, and yet would not allow him to acknowledge. But,
howsoever he might redden with Hebrew pride; howsoever he might long
to persuade himself that Augustine was building up a sound and right
practical structure on the foundation of a sheer lie; he could not help
watching, at first with envy, and then with honest pleasure, the
faces of the rough soldiers, as they gradually lightened up into fixed
attention, into cheerful and solemn resolve.

'What wonder?' said Raphael to himself, 'what wonder, after all? He has
been speaking to these wild beasts as to sages and saints; he has
been telling them that God is as much with them as with prophets and
psalmists.... I wonder if Hypatia, with all her beauty, could have
touched their hearts as he has done?'

And when Raphael rose at the end of this strange discourse, he felt more
like an old Hebrew than he had done since he sat upon his nurse's
knee, and heard legends about Solomon and the Queen of Sheba. What
if Augustine were right after all? What if the Jehovah of the old
Scriptures were not merely the national patron of the children of
Abraham, as the Rabbis held; not merely, as Philo held, the Divine
Wisdom which inspired a few elect sages, even among the heathen; but the
Lord of the whole earth, and of the nations thereof?--And suddenly,
for the first time in his life, passages from the psalms and prophets
flashed across him, which seemed to assert this. What else did that
whole book of Daniel and the history of Nebuchadnezzar mean--if not
that? Philosophic latitudinarianism had long ago cured him of the
Rabbinical notion of the Babylonian conqueror as an incarnate fiend,
devoted to Tophet, like Sennacherib before him. He had long in private
admired the man, as a magnificent human character, a fairer one, in his
eyes, than either Alexander or Julius Caesar.... What if Augustine had
given him a hint which might justify his admiration?.... But more.
.... What if Augustine were right in going even further than Philo and
Hypatia? What if this same Jehovah, Wisdom, Logos, call Him what they
might, were actually the God of the spirits, as well as of the bodies
of all flesh? What if he was as near--Augustine said that He was--to the
hearts of those wild Markmen, Gauls, Thracians, as to Augustine's
own heart? What if He were--Augustine said He was--yearning after,
enlightening, leading home to Himself, the souls of the poorest, the
most brutal, the most sinful?--What if He loved man as man, and not
merely one favoured race or one favoured class of minds?.... And in the
light of that hypothesis, that strange story of the Cross of Calvary
seemed not so impossible after all.... But then, celibacy and
asceticism, utterly non-human as they were, what had they to do with the
theory of a human God?

And filled with many questionings, Raphael was not sorry to have the
matter brought to an issue that very evening in Synesius's sitting-room.
Majoricus, in his blunt, soldierlike way, set Raphael and Augustine at
each other without circumlocution; and Raphael, after trying to smile
and pooh-pooh away the subject, was tempted to make a jest on a seeming
fallacious conceit of Augustine's--found it more difficult than he
thought to trip up the serious and wary logician, lost his temper a
little--a sign, perhaps, of returning health in a sceptic--and
soon found himself fighting desperately, with Synesius backing him,
apparently for the mere pleasure of seeing a battle, and Majoricus
making him more and more cross by the implicit dogmatic faith with which
he hewed at one Gordian knot after another, till Augustine had to save
himself from his friends by tripping the good Prefect gently up, and
leaving him miles behind the disputants, who argued on and on, till
broad daylight shone in, and the sight of the desolation below recalled
all parties to more material weapons, and a sterner warfare.

But little thought Raphael Aben-Ezra, as he sat there, calling up every
resource of his wit and learning, in the hope, half malicious, half
honestly cautious, of upsetting the sage of Hippo, and forgetting all
heaven and earth in the delight of battle with his peers, that in a
neighbouring chamber, her tender limbs outspread upon the floor, her
face buried in her dishevelled locks; lay Victoria, wrestling all night
long for him in prayer and bitter tears, as the murmur of busy voices
reached her eager ears, longing in vain to catch the sense of words, on
which hung now her hopes and bliss-how utterly and entirely, she lead
never yet confessed to herself, though she dare confess it to that
Son of Man to whom she prayed, as to One who felt with tenderness and
insight beyond that of a brother, a father, even of a mother, for her
maiden's blushes and her maiden's woes.



CHAPTER XXII: PANDEMONIUM


But where was Philammon all that week?

For the first day or two of his imprisonment he had raved like some wild
beast entrapped. His new-found purpose and energy, thus suddenly dammed
back and checked, boiled up in frantic rage. He tore at the bars of his
prison; he rolled himself, shrieking, on the floor. He called in vain on
Hypatia, on Pelagia, on Arsenius--on all but God. Pray he could not, and
dare not; for to whom was he to pray? To the stars?--to the Abysses and
the Eternities?....

Alas! as Augustine said once, bitterly enough, of his own Manichaean
teachers, Hypatia had taken away the living God, and given him instead
the four Elements.... And in utter bewilderment and hopeless terror
he implored the pity of every guard and gaoler who passed along the
corridor, and conjured them, as brothers, fathers, men, to help him.
Moved at once by his agony and by his exceeding beauty, the rough
Thracians, who knew enough of their employer's character to have little
difficulty in believing his victim to be innocent, listened to him and
