is done you.

"This evening a crier will go through the place proclaiming that
the two English galley slaves have been given their freedom by
me, and will henceforth live in the town without molestation from
anyone, carrying on their work and selling their labour like true
believers. The crier will inform the people that the nation to which
you belong is at war with our enemies the Spaniards, and that, save
as to the matter of your religion, you are worthy of being regarded
as friends by all good Moslems. My superintendent will go down with
you in the morning. I have ordered him to hire a little house for
you and furnish it with what is needful, to recommend you to your
neighbours, and to give you a purse of piastres with which to
maintain yourselves until work comes to you."

Stephen Boldero expressed the warmest gratitude, on the part of
his companion and himself, to the bey for his kindness.

"I have done but simple justice," the bey said, "and no thanks are
necessary. Faithful work should have its reward, and as you have
done to me so I do to you."

The next morning as they were leaving, a female slave presented them
with a purse of silver, the gift of the bey's wife and daughters,
who had often derived much pleasure from the songs of the two
captives. The superintendent conducted them to a small hut facing
the sea. It was furnished with the few articles that were, according
to native ideas, necessary for comfort. There were cushions on
the divan of baked clay raised about a foot above the floor, which
served as a sofa during the day and as a bed at night. There was a
small piece of carpet on the floor and a few cooking utensils on a
shelf, and some dishes of burnt clay; and nothing more was required.
There was, however, a small chest, in which, after the superintendent
had left, they found two sets of garments as worn by the natives.

"This is a comfort indeed," Geoffrey said. "My clothes are all in
rags, and as for yours the less we say about them the better. I
shall feel like a new man in these things."

"I shall be glad myself," Stephen agreed, "for the clothes they
give the galley slaves are scarce decent for a Christian man to
wear. My consolation has been that if they had been shocked by our
appearance they would have given us more clothes; but as they did
not mind it there was no reason why I should. Still it would be a
comfort to be clean and decent again."

For the first few days the natives of the place looked askance
at these Christians in their midst, but the bey's orders had been
peremptory that no insults should be offered to them. Two days after
their liberation one of the principal men of the place sent for them
and employed them in digging the foundations for a fountain, and a
deep trench of some hundred yards in length for the pipe bringing
water to it. After that they had many similar jobs, receiving always
the wages paid to regular workmen, and giving great satisfaction by
their steady toil. Sometimes when not otherwise engaged they went
out in boats with fishermen, receiving a portion of the catch in
payment for their labours.

So some months passed away. Very frequently they talked over methods
of escape. The only plan that seemed at all possible was to take a
boat and make out to sea; but they knew that they would be pursued,
and if overtaken would revert to their former life at the galleys,
a change which would be a terrible one indeed after the present
life of freedom and independence. They knew, too, that they might
be days before meeting with a ship, for all traders in the Mediterranean
hugged the northern shores as much as possible in order to avoid the
dreaded corsairs, and there would be a far greater chance of their
being recaptured by one of the Moorish cruisers than of lighting
upon a Christian trader.

"It is a question of chance," Stephen said, "and when the chance
comes we will seize it; but it is no use our giving up a life against
which there is not much to be said, unless some fair prospect of
escape offers itself to us."



CHAPTER XVI

THE ESCAPE


"In one respect," Geoffrey said, as they were talking over their
chance of escape, "I am sorry that the bey has behaved so kindly
to us."

"What is that?" Stephen Boldero asked in surprise.

"Well, I was thinking that were it not for that we might manage
to contrive some plan of escape in concert with the galley slaves,
get them down to the shore here, row off to the galley, overpower
the three or four men who live on board her, and make off with her.
Of course we should have had to accumulate beforehand a quantity
of food and some barrels of water, for I have noticed that when
they go out they always take their stores on board with them, and
bring on shore on their return what has not been consumed. Still,
I suppose that could be managed. However, it seems to me that our
hands are tied in that direction by the kindness of the bey. After
his conduct to us it would be ungrateful in the extreme for us to
carry off his galley."

"So it would, Geoffrey. Besides I doubt whether the plan would
succeed. You may be sure the Spaniards are as jealous as can be
of the good fortune that we have met with, and were we to propose
such a scheme to them the chances are strongly in favour of one of
them trying to better his own position by denouncing us. I would
only trust them as far as I can see them. No, if we ever do anything
it must be done by ourselves. There is no doubt that if some night
when there is a strong wind blowing from the southeast we were
to get on board one of these fishing boats, hoist a sail, and run
before it, we should not be far off from the coast of Spain before
they started to look for us. But what better should we be there?
We can both talk Spanish well enough, but we could not pass as
Spaniards. Besides, they would find out soon enough that we were
not Catholics, and where should we be then? Either sent to row
in their galleys or clapped into the dungeons of the Inquisition,
and like enough burnt alive at the stake. That would be out of the
frying pan into the fire with vengeance."

"I think we might pass as Spaniards," Geoffrey said; "for there is
a great deal of difference between the dialects of the different
provinces, and confined as you have been for the last ten years with
Spanish sailors you must have caught their way of talking. Still,
I agree with you it will be better to wait for a bit longer for
any chance that may occur rather than risk landing in Spain again,
where even if we passed as natives we should have as hard work to
get our living as we have here, and with no greater chance of making
our way home again."

During the time that they had been captives some three or four
vessels had been brought in by the corsair. The men composing
the crews had been either sold as slaves to Moors or Arabs in the
interior or sent to Algiers, which town lay over a hundred miles
to the east. They were of various nationalities, Spanish, French,
and Italian, as the two friends learned from the talk of the
natives, for they always abstained from going near the point where
the prisoners were landed, as they were powerless to assist the
unfortunate captives in any way, and the sight of their distress
was very painful to them.

One day, however, they learned from the people who were running
down to the shore to see the captives landed from a ship that had
been brought in by the corsair during the night, that there were
two or three women among the captives. This was the first time that
any females had been captured since their arrival at the place, for
women seldom travelled far from their homes in those days, except
the wives of high officials journeying in great ships that were
safe from the attack of the Moorish corsairs.

"Let us go down and see them," Boldero said. "I have not seen the
face of a white woman for nine years."

"I will go if you like," Geoffrey said. "They will not guess that
we are Europeans, for we are burnt as dark as the Moors."

They went down to the landing place. Eight men and two women were
landed from the boat. These were the sole survivors of the crew.

"They are Spaniards," Boldero said. "I pity that poor girl. I
suppose the other woman is her servant."

The girl, who was about sixteen years of age, was very pale, and
had evidently been crying terribly. She did not seem to heed the
cries and threats with which the townspeople as usual assailed the
newly arrived captives, but kept her eyes fixed upon one of the
captives who walked before her.

"That is her father, no doubt," Geoffrey said. "It is probably her
last look at him. Come away, Stephen; I am awfully sorry we came
here. I shall not be able to get that girl's face out of my mind
for I don't know how long."

Without a word they went back to their hut. They had no particular
work that day. Geoffrey went restlessly in and out, sometimes pacing
along the strand, sometimes coming in and throwing himself on the
divan. Stephen Boldero went on quietly mending a net that had been
damaged the night before, saying nothing, but glancing occasionally
with an amused look at his companion's restless movements. Late in
the afternoon Geoffrey burst out suddenly: "Stephen, we must try
and rescue that girl somehow from her fate."

"I supposed that was what it was coming to," Boldero said quietly.
"Well, let me hear all about it. I know you have been thinking it
over ever since morning. What are your ideas?"

"I do not know that I have any ideas beyond getting her and her
father down to a boat and making off."

"Well, you certainly have not done much if you haven't got farther
than that," Stephen said drily. "Now, if you had spent the day
talking it over with me instead of wandering about like one out
of his mind, we should have got a great deal further than that by
this time. However, I have been thinking for you. I know what you
young fellows are. As soon as I saw that girl's face and looked
at you I was dead certain there was an end of peace and quietness,
and that you would be bent upon some plan of getting her off.
It did not need five minutes to show that I was right; and I have
been spending my time thinking, while you have thrown yours away
in fidgeting.

"Well, I think it is worth trying. Of course it will be a vastly
more difficult job getting the girl and her father away than just
taking a boat and sailing off as we have often talked of doing.
Then, on the other hand, it would altogether alter our position
afterwards. By his appearance and hers I have no doubt he is a
well to do trader, perhaps a wealthy one. He walked with his head
upright when the crowd were yelling and cursing, and is evidently
a man of courage and determination. Now, if we had reached the
Spanish coast by ourselves we should have been questioned right
and left, and, as I have said all along, they would soon have found
that we were not Spaniards, for we could not have said where we
came from, or given our past history, or said where our families
lived. But it would be altogether different if we landed with
them. Every one would be interested about them. We should only be
two poor devils of sailors who had escaped with them, and he would
help to pass it off and get us employment; so that the difficulty
that has hitherto prevented us from trying to escape is very greatly
diminished. Now, as to getting them away. Of course she has been
taken up to the bey's, and no doubt he will send her as a present
to the bey of Algiers. I know that is what has been done several
times before when young women have been captured.

"I have been thinking it over, and I do not see a possibility of
getting to speak to her as long as she is at the bey's. I do not
see that it can be done anyhow. She will be indoors most of the
time, and if she should go into the garden there would be other women
with her. Our only plan, as far as I can see at present, would be
to carry her off from her escort on the journey. I do not suppose
she will have more than two, or at most three, mounted men with
her, and we ought to be able to dispose of them. As to her father,
the matter is comparatively easy. We know the ways of the prison,
and I have no doubt we can get him out somehow; only there is the
trouble of the question of time. She has got to be rescued and
brought back and hidden somewhere till nightfall, he has got to be
set free the same evening, and we have to embark early enough to
be well out of sight before daylight; and maybe there will not be
a breath of wind stirring. It is a tough job, Geoffrey, look at it
which way you will."

"It is a tough job," Geoffrey agreed. "I am afraid the escort
would be stronger than you think. A present of this kind to the bey
is regarded as important, and I should say half a dozen horsemen
at least will be sent with her. In that case an attempt at rescue
would be hopeless. We have no arms, and if we had we could not kill
six mounted men; and if even one escaped, our plans would be all
defeated. The question is, would they send her by land? It seems
to me quite as likely that they might send her by water."

"Yes, that is likely enough, Geoffrey. In that case everything would
depend upon the vessel he sent her in. If it is the great galley
there is an end of it; if it is one of their little coasters it
might be managed. We are sure to learn that before long. The bey
might keep her for a fortnight or so, perhaps longer, for her to
recover somewhat from the trouble and get up her good looks again,
so as to add to the value of the present. If she were well and
bright she would be pretty enough for anything. In the meantime we
can arrange our plans for getting her father away. Of course if she
goes with a big escort on horseback, or if she goes in the galley,
there is an end of our plans. I am ready to help you, Geoffrey, if
there is a chance of success; but I am not going to throw away my
life if there is not, and unless she goes down in a coaster there
is an end of the scheme."

"I quite agree to that," Geoffrey replied; "we cannot accomplish
impossibilities."

They learned upon the following day that three of the newly arrived
captives were to take the places of the galley slaves who had
been killed in the capture of the Spanish ship, which had defended
itself stoutly, and that the others were to be sold for work in
the interior.

"It is pretty certain," Boldero said, "that the trader will not be
one of the three chosen for the galley. The work would break him
down in a month. That makes that part of the business easier, for
we can get him away on the journey inland, and hide him up here
until his daughter is sent off."

Geoffrey looked round the bare room.

"Well, I do not say as how we could hide him here," Boldero said
in answer to the look, "but we might hide him somewhere among the
sand hills outside the place, and take him food at night."

"Yes, we might do that," Geoffrey agreed. "That could be managed
easily enough, I should think, for there are clumps of bushes
scattered all over the sand hills half a mile back from the sea.
The trouble will be if we get him here, and find after all that we
cannot rescue his daughter."

"That will make no difference," Boldero said. "In that case we
will make off with him alone. Everything else will go on just the
same. Of course, I should be very sorry not to save the girl; but,
as far as we are concerned, if we save the father it will answer
our purpose."

Geoffrey made no reply. Just at that moment his own future was a
very secondary matter, in comparison, to the rescue of this unhappy
Spanish girl.

Geoffrey and his companion had been in the habit of going up
occasionally to the prison. They had won over the guard by small
presents, and were permitted to go in and out with fruit and other
little luxuries for the galley slaves. They now abstained from
going near the place, in order that no suspicion might fall upon
them after his escape of having had any communication with the
Spanish trader.

Shortly after the arrival of the captives two merchants from the
interior came down, and Geoffrey learned that they had visited the
prison, and had made a bargain with the bey for all the captives
except those transferred to the galley. The two companions had
talked the matter over frequently, and had concluded it was best
that only one of them should be engaged in the adventure, for the
absence of both might be noticed. After some discussion it was
agreed that Geoffrey should undertake the task, and that Boldero
should go alone to the house where they were now at work, and should
mention that his friend was unwell, and was obliged to remain at
home for the day.

As they knew the direction in which the captives would be taken
Geoffrey started before daybreak, and kept steadily along until he
reached a spot where it was probable they would halt for the night.
It was twenty miles away, and there was here a well of water and a
grove of trees. Late in the afternoon he saw the party approaching.
It consisted of the merchants, two armed Arabs, and the five
captives, all of whom were carrying burdens. They were crawling
painfully along, overpowered by the heat of the sun, by the length
of the journey, and by the weight they carried. Several times the
Arabs struck them heavily with their sticks to force them to keep
up.

Geoffrey retired from the other side of the clump of trees, and
lay down in a depression of the sand hills until darkness came on,
when he again entered the grove, and crawling cautiously forward
made his way close up to the party. A fire was blazing, and a meal
had been already cooked and eaten. The traders and the two Arabs
were sitting by the fire; the captives were lying extended on the
ground. Presently, at the command of one of the Arabs, they rose
to their feet and proceeded to collect some more pieces of wood
for the fire. As they returned the light fell on the gray hair of
the man upon whom Geoffrey had noticed that the girl's eyes were
fixed.

He noted the place where he lay down, and had nothing to do now
but to wait until the party were asleep. He felt sure that no guard
would be set, for any attempt on the part of the captives to escape
would be nothing short of madness. There was nowhere for them to
go, and they would simply wander about until they died of hunger
and exhaustion, or until they were recaptured, in which case they
would be almost beaten to death. In an hour's time the traders and
their men lay down by the fire, and all was quiet. Geoffrey crawled
round until he was close to the Spaniard. He waited until he felt
sure that the Arabs were asleep, and then crawled up to him. The
man started as he touched him.

"Silence, senor," Geoffrey whispered in Spanish; "I am a friend,
and have come to rescue you."

"I care not for life; a few days of this work will kill me, and
the sooner the better. I have nothing to live for. They killed my
wife the other day, and my daughter is a captive in their hands.
I thank you, whoever you are, but I will not go."

"We are going to try to save your daughter too," Geoffrey whispered;
"we have a plan for carrying you both off."

The words gave new life to the Spaniard. "In that case, sir, I am
ready. Whoever you are whom God has sent to my aid I will follow
you blindly, whatever comes of it."

Geoffrey crawled away a short distance, followed by the Spaniard.
As soon as they were well beyond the faint light now given out by
the expiring fire they rose to their feet, and gaining the track
took their way on the backward road. As soon as they were fairly
away, Geoffrey explained to the Spaniard who he was, and how he
had undertaken to endeavour to rescue him. The joy and gratitude
of the Spaniard were too deep for words, and he uttered his thanks
in broken tones. When they had walked about a mile Geoffrey halted.

"Sit down here," he said. "I have some meat and fruit here and a
small skin of water. We have a long journey before us, for we must
get near the town you left this morning before daybreak, and you
must eat to keep up your strength."

"I did not think," the Spaniard said, "when we arrived at the well,
that I could have walked another mile had my life depended upon
it. Now I feel a new man, after the fresh hope you have given me.
I no longer feel the pain of my bare feet or the blisters the sun
has raised on my naked back. I am struggling now for more than
life--for my daughter. You shall not find me to fail, sir."

All night they toiled on. The Spaniard kept his promise, and utterly
exhausted as he was, and great as was the pain in his limbs, held
on bravely. With the first dawn of morning they saw the line of
the sea before them. They now turned off from the track, and in
another half hour the Spaniard took shelter in a clump of bushes
in a hollow, while Geoffrey, having left with him the remainder
of the supply of provisions and water, pursued his way and reached
the hut just as the sun was shining in the east, and without having
encountered a single person.

"Well, have you succeeded?" Boldero asked eagerly, as he entered.

"Yes; I have got him away. He is in hiding within a mile of this
place. He kept on like a hero. I was utterly tired myself, and how
he managed to walk the distance after what he had gone through in
the day is more than I can tell. His name is Mendez. He is a trader
in Cadiz, and owns many vessels. He was on his way to Italy, with
his wife and daughter, in one of his own ships, in order to gratify
the desire of his wife to visit the holy places at Rome. She was
killed by a cannon shot during the fight, and his whole heart is
now wrapped up in his daughter. And now, Stephen, I must lie down
and sleep. You will have to go to work alone today again, and can
truly say that I am still unfit for labour."

Four days later it became known in the little town that a messenger
had arrived from the merchant who bought the slaves from the bey,
saying that one of them had made his escape from their first halting
place.

"The dog will doubtless die in the desert," the merchant wrote;
"but if he should find his way down, or you should hear of him as
arriving at any of the villages, I pray you to send him up to me
with a guard. I will so treat him that it will be a lesson to my
other slaves not to follow his example."

Every evening after dark Geoffrey went out with a supply of food
and water to the fugitive. For a week he had no news to give him
as to his daughter; but on the eighth night he said that he and
his companion had that morning been sent by the bey on board the
largest of the coasting vessels in the port, with orders to paint
the cabins and put them in a fit state for the reception of a
