"No; my sister herself--and you."

"Your sister I understand; but I?"

"Didn't you tell me general, that you would take charge of marrying
her?"

Bonaparte walked up and down the room with his arms crossed; then,
suddenly stopping before Roland, he said: "What is your Englishman
like?"

"You have seen him, general."

"I don't mean physically; all Englishmen are alike--blue eyes, red hair,
white skin, long jaws."

"That's their _th_," said Roland, gravely.

"Their _th_?"

"Yes. Did you ever learn English, general?"

"Faith! I tried to learn it."

"Your teacher must have told you that the _th_ was sounded by pressing
the tongue against the teeth. Well, by dint of punching their teeth with
their tongues the English have ended by getting those elongated jaws,
which, as you said just now, is one of the distinctive characteristics
of their physiognomy."

Bonaparte looked at Roland to see if that incorrigible jester were
laughing or speaking seriously. Roland was imperturbable.

"Is that your opinion?" said Bonaparte.

"Yes, general, and I think that physiologically it is as good as any
other. I have a lot of opinions like it, which I bring to light as the
occasion offers."

"Come back to your Englishman."

"Certainly, general."

"I asked you what he was like."

"Well, he is a gentleman; very brave, very calm, very impassible, very
noble, very rich, and, moreover--which may not be a recommendation
to you--a nephew of Lord Grenville, prime minister to his Britannic
Majesty."

"What's that?"

"I said, prime minister to his Britannic Majesty."

Bonaparte resumed his walk; then, presently returning to Roland, he
said: "Can I see your Englishman?"

"You know, general, that you can do anything."

"Where is he?"

"In Paris."

"Go find him and bring him here."

Roland was in the habit of obeying without reply; he took his hat and
went toward the door.

"Send Bourrienne to me," said the First Consul, just as Roland passed
into the secretary's room.

Five minutes later Bourrienne appeared.

"Sit down there, Bourrienne," said the First Consul, "and write."

Bourrienne sat down, arranged his paper, dipped his pen in the ink, and
waited.

"Ready?" asked the First Consul, sitting down upon the writing table,
which was another of his habits; a habit that reduced his secretary to
despair, for Bonaparte never ceased swinging himself back and forth all
the time he dictated--a motion that shook the table as much as if it had
been in the middle of the ocean with a heaving sea.

"I'm ready," replied Bourrienne, who had ended by forcing himself to
endure, with more or less patience, all Bonaparte's eccentricities.

"Then write." And he dictated:

  Bonaparte, First Consul of the Republic, to his Majesty the King
  of Great Britain and Ireland.

  Called by the will of the French nation to the chief magistracy
  of the Republic, I think it proper to inform your Majesty
  personally of this fact.

  Must the war, which for two years has ravaged the four quarters
  of the globe, be perpetuated? Is there no means of staying it?

  How is it that two nations, the most enlightened of Europe,
  more powerful and strong than their own safety and
  independence require; how is it that they sacrifice to their
  ideas of empty grandeur or bigoted antipathies the welfare
  of commerce, eternal prosperity, the happiness of families?
  How is it that they do not recognize that peace is the first
  of needs and the first of a nation's glories?

  These sentiments cannot be foreign to the heart of a king who
  governs a free nation with the sole object of rendering it happy.

  Your Majesty will see in this overture my sincere desire to
  contribute efficaciously, for the second time, to a general
  pacification, by an advance frankly made and free of those
  formalities which, necessary perhaps to disguise the dependence
  of feeble states, only disclose in powerful nations a mutual
  desire to deceive.

  France and England can, for a long time yet, by the abuse of
  their powers, and to the misery of their people, carry on the
  struggle without exhaustion; but, and I dare say it, the fate
  of all the civilized nations depends on the conclusion of a
  war which involves the universe.

Bonaparte paused. "I think that will do," said he. "Read it over,
Bourrienne."

Bourrienne read the letter he had just written. After each paragraph the
First Consul nodded approvingly; and said: "Go on."

Before the last words were fairly uttered, he took the letter from
Bourrienne's hands and signed it with a new pen. It was a habit of his
never to use the same pen twice. Nothing could be more disagreeable to
him than a spot of ink on his fingers.

"That's good," said he. "Seal it and put on the address: 'To Lord
Grenville.'"

Bourrienne did as he was told. At the same moment the noise of a
carriage was heard entering the courtyard of the Luxembourg. A moment
later the door opened and Roland appeared.

"Well?" asked Bonaparte.

"Didn't I tell you you could have anything you wanted, general?"

"Have you brought your Englishman?"

"I met him in the Place de Buci; and, knowing that you don't like to
wait, I caught him just as he was, and made him get into the carriage.
Faith! I thought I should have to drive round to the Rue Mazarine, and
get a guard to bring him. He's in boots and a frock-coat."

"Let him come in," said Bonaparte.

"Come in, Sir John," cried Roland, turning round.

Lord Tanlay appeared on the threshold. Bonaparte had only to glance at
him to recognize a perfect gentleman. A trifling emaciation, a slight
pallor, gave Sir John the characteristics of great distinction. He
bowed, awaiting the formal introduction, like the true Englishman he
was.

"General," said Roland, "I have the honor to present to you Sir John
Tanlay, who proposed to go to the third cataract for the purpose of
seeing you, but who has, to-day, obliged me to drag him by the ear to
the Luxembourg."

"Come in, my lord; come in," said Bonaparte. "This is not the first time
we have seen each other, nor the first that I have expressed the wish to
know you; there was therefore positive ingratitude in trying to evade my
desire."

"If I hesitated," said Sir John, in excellent French, as usual, "it was
because I could scarcely believe in the honor you do me."

"And besides, very naturally, from national feeling, you detest me,
don't you, like the rest of your countrymen?"

"I must confess, general," answered Sir John, smiling, "that they have
not got beyond admiration."

"And do you share the absurd prejudice that claims that national honor
requires you to hate to-day the enemy who may be a friend to-morrow?"

"France has been almost a second mother country to me, and my friend
Roland will tell you that I long for the moment when, of my two
countries, the one to which I shall owe the most will be France."

"Then you ought to see France and England shaking hands for the good of
the world, without repugnance."

"The day when I see that will be a happy day for me."

"If you could contribute to bring it about would you do so?"

"I would risk my life to do it."

"Roland tells me you are a relative of Lord Grenville."

"His nephew."

"Are you on good terms with him?"

"He was very fond of my mother, his eldest sister."

"Have you inherited the fondness he bore your mother?"

"Yes; only I think he holds it in reserve till I return to England."

"Will you deliver a letter for me?"

"To whom?"

"King George III."

"I shall be greatly honored."

"Will you undertake to say to your uncle that which cannot be written in
a letter?"

"Without changing a syllable; the words of General Bonaparte are
history."

"Well, tell him--" but, interrupting himself, he turned to Bourrienne,
saying: "Bourrienne, find me the last letter from the Emperor of
Russia."

Bourrienne opened a box, and, without searching, laid his hand on a
letter that he handed to Bonaparte.

The First Consul cast his eye over the paper and then gave it to Lord
Tanlay.

"Tell him," said he, "first and before all, that you have read this
letter."

Sir John bowed and read as follows:

  CITIZEN FIRST CONSUL--I have received, each armed and newly
  clothed in the uniform of his regiment, the nine thousand
  Russians, made prisoners in Holland, whom you have returned
  to me without ransom, exchange, or condition of any kind.

  This is pure chivalry, and I boast of being chivalrous.

  I think that which I can best offer you in exchange for this
  magnificent present, citizen First Consul, is my friendship.
  Will you accept it?

  As an earnest of that friendship, I am sending his passports
  to Lord Whitworth, the British Ambassador to Saint Petersburg.

  Furthermore, if you will be, I do not say my second, but my
  witness, I will challenge personally every king who will not
  take part against England and close his ports to her.

  I begin with my neighbor the King of Denmark, and you will
  find in the "Gazette de la Cour" the ultimatum I have sent him.

  What more can I say to you? Nothing, unless it be that you and
  I together can give laws to the world.

  I am your admirer and sincere friend,  PAUL.

Lord Tanlay turned to the First Consul. "Of course you know," said he,
"that the Emperor of Russia is mad."

"Is it that letter that makes you think so, my lord?" asked Bonaparte.

"No; but it confirms my opinion."

"It was a madman who gave Henry VI. of Lancaster the crown of
Saint-Louis, and the blazon of England still bears--until I scratch them
out with my sword--the fleur-de-lis of France."

Sir John smiled; his national pride revolted at this assumption in the
conqueror of the Pyramids.

"But," said Bonaparte, "that is not the question to-day; everything in
its own time."

"Yes," murmured Sir John, "we are too near Aboukir."

"Oh, I shall never defeat you at sea," said Bonaparte; "it would take
fifty years to make France a maritime nation; but over there," and he
motioned with his hand to the East, "at the present moment, I repeat,
that the question is not war but peace. I must have peace to accomplish
my dream, and, above all, peace with England. You see, I play
aboveboard; I am strong enough to speak frankly. If the day ever comes
when a diplomatist tells the truth, he will be the first diplomatist in
the world; for no one will believe him, and he will attain, unopposed,
his ends."

"Then I am to tell my uncle that you desire peace."

"At the same time letting him know that I do not fear war. If I can't
ally myself with King George, I can, as you see, do so with the Emperor
Paul; but Russia has not reached that point of civilization that I
desire in an ally."

"A tool is sometimes more useful than an ally."

"Yes; but, as you said, the Emperor is mad, and it is better to disarm
than to arm a madman. I tell you that two nations like France and
England ought to be inseparable friends or relentless enemies; friends,
they are the poles of the world, balancing its movements with perfect
equilibrium; enemies, one must destroy the other and become the world's
sole axis."

"But suppose Lord Grenville, not doubting your genius, still doubts your
power; if he holds the opinion of our poet Coleridge, that our island
needs no rampart, no bulwark, other than the raucous murmur of the
ocean, what shall I tell him?"

"Unroll the map of the world, Bourrienne," said Bonaparte.

Bourrienne unrolled a map; Bonaparte stepped over to it.

"Do you see those two rivers?" said he, pointing to the Volga and the
Danube. "That's the road to India," he added.

"I thought Egypt was, general," said Sir John.

"So did I for a time; or, rather, I took it because I had no other. But
the Czar opens this one; your government can force me to take it. Do you
follow me?"

"Yes; citizen; go on."

"Well, if England forces me to fight her, if I am obliged to accept this
alliance with Catherine's successor, this is what I shall do: I shall
embark forty thousand Russians on the Volga; I shall send them down
the river to Astrakhan; they will cross the Caspian and await me at
Asterabad."

Sir John bowed in sign of deep attention. Bonaparte continued: "I shall
embark forty thousand Frenchmen on the Danube."

"Excuse me, citizen First Consul, but the Danube is an Austrian river."

"I shall have taken Vienna."

Sir John stared at Bonaparte.

"I shall have taken Vienna," continued the latter. "I shall then embark
forty thousand Frenchmen on the Danube; I find Russian vessels at its
mouth ready to transport them to Taganrog; I march them by land along
the course of the Don to Pratisbianskaia, whence they move to Tzaritsin;
there they descend the Volga in the same vessels that have transported
the forty thousand Russians to Asterabad; fifteen days later I have
eighty thousand men in western Persia. From Asterabad, these united
corps will march to the Indus; Persia, the enemy of England, is our
natural ally."

"Yes; but once in the Punjab, the Persian alliance will do you no good;
and an army of eighty thousand men cannot drag its provisions along with
it."

"You forget one thing," said Bonaparte, as if the expedition were
already under way, "I have left bankers at Teheran and Caboul. Now,
remember what happened nine years ago in Lord Cornwallis' war with Tippo
Saib. The commander-in-chief fell short of provisions, and a simple
captain--I forget his name."

"Captain Malcolm," said Lord Tanlay.

"That's it!" cried Bonaparte. "You know the story! Captain Malcolm had
recourse to the Brinjaries, those Bohemians of India, who cover the
whole Hindostan peninsula with their encampments, and control the grain
supplies. Well, those Bohemians are faithful to the last penny to those
who pay them; they will feed me."

"You must cross the Indus."

"What of that!" exclaimed Bonaparte, "I have a hundred and eighty miles
of bank between Dera-Ismael-Khan and Attok to choose from. I know the
Indus as well as I do the Seine. It is a slow current flowing about
three miles an hour; its medium depth is, I should say, at the point I
mentioned, from twelve to fifteen feet, and there are ten or more fords
on the line of my operations."

"Then your line is already traced out?" asked Sir John smiling.

"Yes, in so far as it follows a broad uninterrupted stretch of fertile,
well-watered provinces; that I avoid the sandy deserts which separate
the lower valley of the Indus from Rajputana; and also that I follow the
general bases of all invasions of India that have had any success, from
Mahmoud of Ghazni, in the year 1000, to Nadir Shah, in 1739. And how
many have taken the route I mean to take between the two epochs! Let us
count them. After Mahmoud of Ghazni came Mohammed Ghori, in 1184, with
one hundred and twenty thousand men; after him, Timur Tang, or Timur the
Lame, whom we call Tamerlane, with sixty thousand men; after Tamerlane,
Babar; after Babar, Humajan, and how many more I can't remember. Why,
India is there for whoever will go and take it!"

"You forget, citizen First Consul, that all the conquerors you have
named had only the aboriginal populations to deal with, whereas you have
the English. We hold India--"

"With from twenty to twenty-two thousand men."

"And a hundred thousand Sepoys."

"I have counted them all, and I regard England and India, the one with
the respect, the other with the contempt, they merit. Wherever I meet
European infantry, I prepare a second, a third, and if necessary, a
fourth line of reserves, believing that the first three might give way
before the British bayonets; but wherever I find the Sepoys, I need only
the postilion's whip to scatter the rabble. Have you any other questions
to put to me, my lord?"

"One, citizen First Consul: are you sincerely desirous of peace?"

"Here is the letter in which I ask it of your king, my lord, and it is
to be quite sure that it reaches his Britannic Majesty that I ask Lord
Grenville's nephew to be my messenger."

"It shall be done as you desire, citizen; and were I the uncle, instead
of the nephew, I should promise more."

"When can you start?"

"In an hour I shall be gone."

"You have no wish to express to me before leaving?"

"None. In any case, if I have any, I leave my affairs to my friend,
Roland."

"Shake hands with me, my lord; it will be a good omen, as you represent
England and I France."

Sir John accepted the honor done him by Bonaparte, with the exact
measure of cordiality that indicated both his sympathy for France, and
his mental reserves for the honor of his own nation.

Then, having pressed Roland's hand with fraternal effusion, he
bowed again to the First Consul and went out. Bonaparte followed him
reflectively with his eyes; then he said suddenly: "Roland, I not only
consent to your sister's marriage with Lord Tanlay, but I wish it. Do
you understand? _I wish it_."

He laid such emphasis upon those three words, that to any one who knew
him they signified plainly, not "I wish," but "I will."

The tyranny was sweet to Roland, and he accepted it with grateful
thanks.




CHAPTER XXXVIII. THE TWO SIGNALS

Let us now relate what happened at the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines
three days after the events we have just described took place in Paris.

Since the successive departures of Roland, then Madame de Montrevel and
her son, and finally Sir John--Roland to rejoin his general, Madame de
Montrevel to place Edouard in school, and Sir John to acquaint Roland
with his matrimonial plans--Amelie had remained alone with Charlotte at
the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines. We say _alone_, because Michel and his
son Jacques did not live in the house, but in the little lodge at the
gate where he added the duties of porter to those of gardener.

It therefore happened that at night all the windows, excepting those of
Amelie, which, as we have said, were on the first floor overlooking the
garden, and that of Charlotte in the attic, were left in darkness.

Madame de Montrevel had taken the second chambermaid with her. The two
young girls were perhaps rather isolated in their part of the house,
which consisted of a dozen bedrooms on three floors, especially at a
time when so many rumors of robberies on the highroads reached them.
Michel, therefore, proposed to his young mistress that he sleep in the
main building, so as to be near her in case of need. But she, in a firm
voice, assured him that she felt no fear, and desired no change in the
customary routine of the chateau.

Michel did not insist, and retired, saying that Mademoiselle might, in
any case, sleep in peace, for he and Jacques would make the rounds of
the house during the night.

Amelie at first seemed anxious about those rounds; but she soon noticed
that Michel and Jacques contented themselves with watching on the edge
of the forest of Seillon, and the frequent appearance of a jugged hare,
or a haunch of venison on the table, proved to her that Michel kept his
word regarding the promised rounds.

She therefore ceased to trouble about Michel's rounds, which were always
on the side of the house opposite to that where she feared them.

Now, as we have said, three days after the events we have just related,
or, to speak more correctly, during the night following the third day,
those who were accustomed to see no light save in Amelie's windows on
the first floor and Charlotte's on the third, might have observed with
surprise that, from eleven o'clock until midnight, the four windows on
the first floor were illuminated. It is true that each was lighted by a
single wax-candle. They might also have seen the figure of a young
girl through the shades, staring in the direction of the village of
Ceyzeriat.

This young girl was Amelie, pale, breathing with difficulty, and seeming
to watch anxiously for a signal.

At the end of a few minutes she wiped her forehead and drew a joyous
breath. A fire was lighted in the direction she had been watching. Then
she passed from room to room, putting out the three candles one after
the other, leaving only the one which was burning in her own room. As if
the fire awaited this return signal, it was now extinguished.

Amelie sat down by her window and remained motionless, her eyes fixed
on the garden. The night was dark, without moon or stars, and yet at
the end of a quarter of an hour she saw, or rather divined, a shadow
crossing the lawn and approaching the window. She placed her single
candle in the furthest corner of her room, and returned to open her
window.

He whom she was awaiting was already on the balcony.

As on the first night when we saw him climb it, the young man put his
arm around the girl's waist and drew her into the room. She made but
slight resistance; her hand sought the cord of the Venetian blind,
unfastened it from the hook that held it, and let it fall with more
noise than prudence would have counselled.

Behind the blind, she closed the window; then she fetched the candle
from the corner where she had hidden it. The light illuminated her face,
and the young man gave a cry of alarm, for it was covered with tears.

"What has happened?" he asked.

"A great misfortune!" replied the young girl.

"Oh, I feared it when I saw the signal by which you recalled me after
receiving me last night. But is it irreparable?"

"Almost," answered Amelie.

"I hope, at least, that it threatens only me."

"It threatens us both."

The young man passed his hand over his brow to wipe away the sweat that
covered it.

"Tell me," said he; "you know I am strong."

"If you have the strength to hear it," said she, "I have none to tell
it." Then, taking a letter from the chimney-piece, she added: "Read
that; that is what I received by the post to-night."

The young man took the letter, opened it, and glanced hastily at the
signature.

"From Madame de Montrevel," said he.

"Yes, with a postscript from Roland."

The young man read:

  MY DEAREST DAUGHTER--I hope that the news I announce will give
  you as much joy as it has already given our dear Roland and me.
  Sir John, whose heart you doubted, claiming that it was only a
  mechanical contrivance, manufactured in the workshops at
  Vaucanson, admits that such an opinion was a just one until the
  day he saw you; but he maintains that since that day he has a
  heart, and that that heart adores you.

  Did you suspect it, my dear Amelie, from his aristocratic and
  polished manners, when your mother's eyes failed to discern this
  tenderness.

  This morning, while breakfasting with your brother, he formally
  asked your hand. Your brother received the offer with joy, but
  he made no promises at first. The First Consul, before Roland's
  departure for the Vendee, had already spoken of making himself
  responsible for your establishment. But since then he has asked to
  see Lord Tanlay, and Sir John, though he maintained his national
  reserve, was taken into the first Consul's good graces at once, to
  such a degree that he received from him, at their first interview,
  a mission to his uncle, Lord Grenville. Sir John started for
  England immediately.

  I do not know how many days Sir John will be absent, but on his
  return he is certain to present himself to you as your betrothed.

  Lord Tanlay is still young, pleasing in appearance, and immensely
  rich; he is highly connected in England, and Roland's friend. I
  do not know a man who has more right, I will not say to your love,
  but to your profound esteem.

  The rest of my news I can tell you in two words. The First Consul
  is still most kind to me and to your two brothers, and Madame
  Bonaparte has let me know that she only awaits your marriage to
  place you near her.

  There is talk of leaving the Luxembourg, and removing to the
  Tuileries. Do you understand the full meaning of this change of
  domicile?

  Your mother, who loves you,
  CLOTILDE DE MONTREVEL.

Without pausing, the young man turned to Roland's postscript. It was as
follows:

  You have read, my dear little sister, what our good mother has
  written. This marriage is a suitable one under all aspects. It
  is not a thing to be childish about; the First Consul _wishes_
  you to become Lady Tanlay; that is to say, he _wills_ it.

  I am leaving Paris for a few days. Though you may not see me,
  you will hear of me.

  I kiss you, ROLAND.

"Well, Charles," asked Amelie, when the young man had finished reading,
"what do you think of that?"

"That it is something we had to expect from day to day, my poor angel,
but it is none the less terrible."

"What is to be done?"

"There are three things we can do."

"Tell me."

"In the first place, resist if you have the strength; it is the shortest
and surest way."

Amelie dropped her head.

"You will never dare, will you?"

"Never."

"And yet you are my wife, Amelie; a priest has blessed our union."

"But they say that marriage before a priest is null before the law."

"Is it not enough for you, the wife of a proscribed man?" asked Morgan,
his voice trembling as he spoke.

Amelie flung herself into his arms.

"But my mother," said she; "our marriage did not have her presence and
blessing."

"Because there were too many risks to run, and we wished to run them
alone."

"But that man--Did you notice that my brother says he _wills_ it?"

"Oh, if you loved me, Amelie, that man would see that he may change the
face of the State, carry war from one end of the world to the other,
make laws, build a throne, but that he cannot force lips to say yes when
the heart says no."

"If I loved you!" said Amelie, in a tone of soft reproach. "It is
midnight, you are here in my room, I weep in your arms--I, the daughter
of General de Montrevel and the sister of Roland--and you say, 'If you
loved me.'"

"I was wrong, I was wrong, my darling Amelie. Yes, I know that you were
brought up in adoration of that man; you cannot understand that any one
should resist him, and whoever does resist him is a rebel in your eyes."

"Charles, you said there were three things that we could do. What is the
second?"

"Accept apparently the marriage they propose to you, and gain time, by
delaying under various pretexts. The man is not immortal."

"No; but is too young for us to count on his death. The third way, dear
friend?"

"Fly--but that is a last resource, Amelie; there are two objections:
first, your repugnance."

"I am yours, Charles; I will surmount my repugnance."

"And," added the young man, "my engagements."

"Your engagements?"

"My companions are bound to me, Amelie; but I, too, am bound to them. We
also have a man to whom we have sworn obedience. That man is the future
king of France. If you accept your brother's devotion to Bonaparte,
accept ours to Louis XVIII."

Amelie let her face drop into her hands with a sigh.

"Then," said she, "we are lost."

"Why so? On various pretexts, your health above all, you can gain a
year. Before the year is out Bonaparte will probably be forced to begin
another war in Italy. A single defeat will destroy his prestige; in
short, a great many things can happen in a year."

"Did you read Roland's postscript, Charles?"

"Yes; but I didn't see anything in it that was not in your mother's
letter."

"Read the last sentence again." And Amelie placed the letter before him.
He read:

  I am leaving Paris for a few days; though you may not see me,
  you will hear of me.

"Well?"

"Do you know what that means?"

"No."

"It means that Roland is in pursuit of you."

"What does that matter? He cannot die by the hand of any of us."

"But you, unhappy man, you can die by his!"

"Do you think I should care so very much if he killed me, Amelie?"

"Oh! even in my gloomiest moments I never thought of that."

"So you think your brother is on the hunt for us?"

"I am sure of it."

"What makes you so certain?"

"Because he swore over Sir John's body, when he thought him dead, to
avenge him."

"If he had died," exclaimed the young man, bitterly, "we should not be
where we are, Amelie."

"God saved him, Charles; it was therefore good that he did not die."

"For us?"

"I cannot fathom the ways of the Lord. I tell you, my beloved Charles,
beware of Roland; Roland is close by."

Charles smiled incredulously.

"I tell you that he is not only near here, but he has been seen."

"He has been seen! Where? Who saw him?"

"Who saw him?"

"Yes."

"Charlotte, my maid, the jailer's daughter. She asked permission to
visit her parents yesterday, Sunday; you were coming, so I told her she
could stay till this morning."

"Well?"

"She therefore spent the night with her parents. At eleven o'clock the
captain of the gendarmerie brought in some prisoners. While they were
locking them up, a man, wrapped in a cloak, came in and asked for the
captain. Charlotte thought she recognized the new-comer's voice. She
looked at him attentively; his cloak slipped from his face, and she saw
that it was my brother."

The young man made a movement.

"Now do you understand, Charles? My brother comes to Bourg,
mysteriously, without letting me know; he asks for the captain of
the gendarmerie, follows him into the prison, speaks only to him, and
disappears. Is that not a threatening outlook for our love? Tell me,
Charles!"

As Amelie spoke, a dark cloud spread slowly over her lover's face.

"Amelie," said he, "when my companions and I bound ourselves together,
we did not deceive ourselves as to the risks we ran."

"But, at least," said Amelie, "you have changed your place of refuge;
you have abandoned the Chartreuse of Seillon?"

"None but our dead are there now."

"Is the grotto of Ceyzeriat perfectly safe?"

"As safe as any refuge can be that has two exit."

"The Chartreuse of Seillon had two exits; yet, as you say, you left your
dead there."

"The dead are safer than the living; they are sure not to die on the
scaffold."

Amelie felt a shudder go through her.

"Charles!" she murmured.

"Listen," said the young man. "God is my witness, and you too, that I
have always put laughter and gayety between your presentiments and my
fears; but to-day the aspect of things has changed; we are coming face
to face with the crisis. Whatever the end brings us, it is approaching.
I do not ask of you, my Amelie, those selfish, unreasonable things that
lovers in danger of death exact from their mistresses; I do not ask you
to bind your heart to the dead, your love to a corpse--"

"Friend," said the young girl, laying her hand on his arm, "take care;
you are doubting me."

"No; I do you the highest honor in leaving you free to accomplish the
sacrifice to its full extent; but I do not want you to be bound by an
oath; no tie shall fetter you."

"So be it," said Amelie.

"What I ask of you," continued the young man, "and I ask you to swear
it on our love, which has been, alas! so fatal to you, is this: if I
am arrested and disarmed, if I am imprisoned and condemned to death, I
implore you, Amelie, I exact of you, that in some way you will send me
arms, not only for myself, but for my companions also, so that we may
still be masters of our lives."

"But in such a case, Charles, may I not tell all to my brother? May I
not appeal to his tenderness; to the generosity of the First Consul?"

Before the young girl had finished, her lover seized her violently by
the wrist.

"Amelie," said he, "it is no longer one promise I ask of you, there are
two. Swear to me, in the first place, and above all else, that you will
not solicit my pardon. Swear it, Amelie; swear it!"

"Do I need to swear, dear?" asked the young girl, bursting into tears.
"I promise it."

"Promise it on the hour when I first said I loved you, on the hour when
you answered that I was loved!"

"On your life, on mine, on the past, on the future, on our smiles, on
our tears."

"I should die in any case, you see, Amelie, even though I had to beat my
brains out against the wall; but I should die dishonored."

"I promise you, Charles."

"Then for my second request, Amelie: if we are taken and condemned, send
