recesses of thought are best reached by the simplest forms of
expression. I said to myself, 'I will study that truth if ever I take to
literature as I have taken to song;' and--yes--it was that evening
that the ambition fatal to woman fixed on me its relentless fangs--at
Enghien--we were on the lake--the sun was setting."

"But you do not tell me the line that so impressed you," said Mrs.
Morley, with a woman's kindly tact.

"The line--which line? Oh, I remember; the line was this:

"'I see as from a tower the end of all."

"And now--kiss me, dearest--never a word again to me about this
conversation: never a word about Mr. Vane--the dark curtain has fallen
on the past."




CHAPTER XI.

Men and women are much more like each other in certain large elements
of character than is generally supposed, but it is that very resemblance
which makes their differences the more incomprehensible to each other;
just as in politics, theology, or that most disputatious of all things
disputable, metaphysics, the nearer the reasoners approach each other in
points that to an uncritical bystander seem the most important, the
more sure they are to start off in opposite directions upon reaching the
speck of a pin-prick.

Now there are certain grand meeting-places between man and woman--the
grandest of all is on the ground of love, and yet here also is the great
field of quarrel. And here the teller of a tale such as mine ought,
if he is sufficiently wise to be humble, to know that it is almost
profanation if, as man, he presumes to enter the penetralia of a woman's
innermost heart, and repeat, as a man would repeat, all the vibrations
of sound which the heart of a woman sends forth undistinguishable even
to her own ear.

I know Isaura as intimately as if I had rocked her in her cradle, played
with her in her childhood, educated and trained her in her youth; and
yet I can no more tell you faithfully what passed in her mind during
the forty-eight hours that intervened between her conversation with that
American lady and her reappearance in some commonplace drawing-room,
than I can tell you what the Man in the Moon might feel if the sun that
his world reflected were blotted out of creation.

I can only say that when she reappeared in that commonplace drawing-room
world, there was a change in her face not very perceptible to the
ordinary observer. If anything, to his eye she was handsomer--the eye
was brighter--the complexion (always lustrous, though somewhat pale,
the limpid paleness that suits so well with dark hair) was yet more
lustrous,--it was flushed into delicate rose hues--hues that still
better suit with dark hair. What, then, was the change, and change not
for the better? The lips, once so pensively sweet, had grown hard; on
the brow that had seemed to laugh when the lips did, there was no longer
sympathy between brow and lip; there was scarcely seen a fine threadlike
line that in a few years would be a furrow on the space between the
eyes; the voice was not so tenderly soft; the step was haughtier. What
all such change denoted it is for a woman to decide-I can only guess.
In the mean while, Mademoiselle Cicogna had sent her servant daily to
inquire after M. Rameau. That, I think, she would have done under any
circumstances. Meanwhile, too, she had called on Madame Savarin--made it
up with her--sealed the reconciliation by a cold kiss. That, too, under
any circumstances, I think she would have done--under some circumstances
the kiss might have been less cold.

There was one thing unwonted in her habits. I mention it, though it is
only a woman who can say if it means anything worth noticing.

For six days she had left a letter from Madame de Grantmesnil
unanswered. With Madame de Grantmesnil was connected the whole of her
innermost life--from the day when the lonely desolate child had seen,
beyond the dusty thoroughfares of life, gleams of the faery land
in poetry and art-onward through her restless, dreamy, aspiring
youth-onward--onward--till now, through all that constitutes the
glorious reality that we call romance.

Never before had she left for two days unanswered letters which were to
her as Sibylline leaves to some unquiet neophyte yearning for solutions
to enigmas suggested whether by the world without or by the soul within.
For six days Madame de Grantmesnil's letter remained unanswered, unread,
neglected, thrust out of sight; just as when some imperious necessity
compels us to grapple with a world that is, we cast aside the romance
which, in our holiday hours, had beguiled us to a world with which we
have interests and sympathies no more.




CHAPTER XII.

Gustave recovered, but slowly. The physician pronounced him out of all
immediate danger, but said frankly to him, and somewhat more guardedly
to his parents, "There is ample cause to beware." "Look you, my young
friend," he added to Rameau, "mere brain-work seldom kills a man
once accustomed to it like you; but heart-work, and stomach-work, and
nerve-work, added to brain-work, may soon consign to the coffin a frame
ten times more robust than yours. Write as much as you will--that is
your vocation; but it is not your vocation to drink absinthe--to preside
at orgies in the Maison Doree. Regulate yourself, and not after the
fashion of the fabulous Don Juan. Marry--live soberly and quietly--and
you may survive the grandchildren of viveurs. Go on as you have done,
and before the year is out you are in Pere la Chaise."

Rameau listened languidly, but with a profound conviction that the
physician thoroughly understood his case.

Lying helpless on his bed, he had no desire for orgies at the Maison
Doree; with parched lips thirsty for innocent tisane of lime-blossoms,
the thought of absinthe was as odious to him as the liquid fire of
Phlegethon. If ever sinner became suddenly convinced that there was
a good deal to be said in favour of a moral life, that sinner at the
moment I speak of was Gustave Rameau: Certainly a moral life--'Domus
et placens uxor',--was essential to the poet who, aspiring to immortal
glory, was condemned to the ailments of a very perishable frame.

"Ah," he murmured plaintively to himself, "that girl Isaura can have no
true sympathy with genius! It is no ordinary man that she will kill in
me!"

And so murmuring he fell asleep. When he woke and found his head
pillowed on his mother's breast, it was much as a sensitive, delicate
man may wake after having drunk too much the night before. Repentant,
mournful, maudlin, he began to weep, and in the course of his weeping he
confided to his mother the secret of his heart.

Isaura had refused him--that refusal had made him desperate.

"Ah! with Isaura how changed would be his habits! how pure! how
healthful!" His mother listened fondly, and did her best to comfort him
and cheer his drooping spirits.

She told him of Isaura's messages of inquiry duly twice a day. Rameau,
who knew more about women in general, and Isaura in particular, than his
mother conjectured, shook his head mournfully. "She could not do less,"
he said. "Has no one offered to do more?"--he thought of Julie when he
asked that--Madame Rameau hesitated.

The poor Parisians! it is the mode to preach against them; and before
my book closes, I shall have to preach--no, not to preach, but to
imply--plenty of faults to consider and amend. Meanwhile I try my best
to take them, as the philosophy of life tells us to take other people,
for what they are.

I do not think the domestic relations of the Parisian bourgeoisie are
as bad as they are said to be in French novels. Madame Rameau is not
an uncommon type of her class. She had been when she first married
singularly handsome. It was from her that Gustave inherited his beauty;
and her husband was a very ordinary type of the French shopkeeper--very
plain, by no means intellectual, but gay, good-humoured, devotedly
attached to his wife, and with implicit trust in her conjugal virtue.
Never was trust better placed. There was not a happier nor a more
faithful couple in the quartier in which they resided. Madame Rameau
hesitated when her boy, thinking of Julie, asked if no one had done more
than send to inquire after him as Isaura had done.

After that hesitating pause she said, "Yes--a young lady calling herself
Mademoiselle Julie Caumartin wished to instal herself here as your
nurse. When I said, 'But I am his mother--he needs no other nurses,' she
would have retreated, and looked ashamed--poor thing! I don't blame her
if she loved my son. But, my son, I say this,--if you love her, don't
talk to me about that Mademoiselle Cicogna; and if you love Mademoiselle
Cicogna, why, then your father will take care that the poor girl
who loved you not knowing that you loved another is not left to the
temptation of penury."

Rameau's pale lips withered into a phantom-like sneer! Julie! the
resplendent Julie!--true, only a ballet-dancer, but whose equipage in
the Bois had once been the envy of duchesses--Julie! who had sacrificed
fortune for his sake--who, freed from him, could have millionaires again
at her feet!--Julie! to be saved from penury, as a shopkeeper would save
an erring nursemaid--Julie! the irrepressible Julie! who had written
to him, the day before his illness, in a pen dipped, not in ink, but in
blood from a vein she had opened in her arm:

   "Traitor!--I have not seen thee for three days. Dost thou dare to
   love another? If so, I care not how thou attempt to conceal it--woe
   to her! Ingrat! woe to thee! Love is not love, unless, when
   betrayed by Love, it appeals to death. Answer me quick--quick.
   JULIE."

Poor Gustave thought of that letter and groaned. Certainly his mother
was right--he ought to get rid of Julie; but he did not clearly see
how Julie was to be got rid of. He replied to Madame Rameau peevishly,
"Don't trouble your head about Mademoiselle Caumartin; she is in no want
of money. Of course, if I could hope for Isaura--but, alas! I dare not
hope. Give me my tisane."

When the doctor called next day, he looked grave, and, drawing Madame
Rameau into the next room, he said, "We are not getting on so well as
I had hoped; the fever is gone, but there is much to apprehend from the
debility left behind. His spirits are sadly depressed." Then added the
doctor, pleasantly, and with that wonderful insight into our complex
humanity in which physicians excel poets, and in which Parisian
physicians are not excelled by any physicians in the world: "Can't you
think of any bit of good news--that 'M. Thiers raves about your son's
last poem! that 'it is a question among the Academicians between him and
Jules Janin'--or that 'the beautiful Duchesse de ------- has been placed
in a lunatic asylum because she has gone mad for love of a certain young
Red Republican whose name begins with R.'--can't you think of any bit of
similar good news? If you can, it will be a tonic to the relaxed state
of your dear boy's amour propre, compared to which all the drugs in the
Pharmacopoeia are moonshine and water; and meanwhile be sure to remove
him to your own house, and out of the reach of his giddy young friends,
as soon as you possibly can."

When that great authority thus left his patient's case in the hands of
the mother, she said, "The boy shall be saved."




CHAPTER XIII.

Isaura was seated beside the Venosta,--to whom, of late, she seemed
to cling with greater fondness than ever,--working at some piece of
embroidery--a labour from which she had been estranged for years; but
now she had taken writing, reading, music, into passionate disgust.
Isaura was thus seated, silently intent upon her work, and the Venosta
in full talk, when the servant announced Madame Rameau.

The name startled both; the Venosta had never heard that the poet had
a mother living, and immediately jumped to the conclusion that Madame
Rameau must be a wife he had hitherto kept unrevealed. And when a woman,
still very handsome, with a countenance grave and sad, entered the
salon, the Venosta murmured, "The husband's perfidy reveals itself on
a wife's face," and took out her handkerchief in preparation for
sympathising tears.

"Mademoiselle," said the visitor, halting, with eyes fixed on Isaura.
"Pardon my intrusion-my son has the honour to be known to you. Every one
who knows him must share in my sorrow--so young--so promising, and in
such danger--my poor boy!" Madame Rameau stopped abruptly. Her tears
forced their way--she turned aside to conceal them.

In her twofold condition of being--womanhood and genius--Isaura was
too largely endowed with that quickness of sympathy which distinguishes
woman from man, and genius from talent, not to be wondrously susceptible
to pity.

Already she had wound her arm round the grieving mother--already drawn
her to the seat from which she herself had risen--and bending over her
had said some words--true, conventional enough in themselves,--but cooed
forth in a voice the softest I ever expect to hear, save in dreams, on
this side of the grave.

Madame Rameau swept her hand over her eyes, glanced round the room, and
noticing the Venosta in dressing-robe and slippers, staring with those
Italian eyes, in seeming so quietly innocent, in reality so searchingly
shrewd, she whispered pleadingly, "May I speak to you a few minutes
alone?" This was not a request that Isaura could refuse, though she was
embarrassed and troubled by the surmise of Madame Rameau's object in
asking it; accordingly she led her visitor into the adjoining room, and
making an apologetic sign to the Venosta, closed the door.




CHAPTER XIV.

When they were alone, Madame Rameau took Isaura's hand in both her
own, and, gazing wistfully into her face, said, "No wonder you are so
loved--yours is the beauty that sinks into the hearts and rests there.
I prize my boy more, now that I have seen you. But, oh, Mademoiselle!
pardon me--do not withdraw your hand--pardon the mother who comes from
the sick-bed of her only son and asks if you will assist to save him! A
word from you is life or death to him!"

"Nay, nay, do not speak thus, Madame; your son knows how much I value,
how sincerely I return, his friendship; but--but," she paused a moment,
and continued sadly and with tearful eyes--"I have no heart to give to
him-to any one."

"I do not--I would not if I dared--ask what it would be violence to
yourself to promise. I do not ask you to bid me return to my son and
say, 'Hope and recover,' but let me take some healing message from your
lips. If I understand your words rightly, I at least may say that you do
not give to another the hopes you, deny to him?"

"So far you understand me rightly, Madame. It has been said, that
romance-writers give away so much of their hearts to heroes or heroines
of their own creation, that they leave nothing worth the giving to human
beings like themselves. Perhaps it is so; yet, Madame," added Isaura,
with a smile of exquisite sweetness in its melancholy, "I have heart
enough left to feel for you."

Madame Rameau was touched. "Ah, Mademoiselle, I do not believe in the
saying you have quoted. But I must not abuse your goodness by pressing
further upon you subjects from which you shrink. Only one word more:
you know that my husband and I are but quiet tradesfolks, not in the
society, nor aspiring to it, to which my son's talents have raised
himself; yet dare I ask that you will not close here the acquaintance
that I have obtruded on you?--dare I ask, that I may, now and then, call
on you--that now and then I may see you at my own home? Believe that I
would not here ask anything which your own mother would disapprove if
she overlooked disparities of station. Humble as our home is, slander
never passed its threshold."

"Ah, Madame, I and the Signora Venosta, whom in our Italian tongue I
call mother, can but feel honoured and grateful whenever it pleases you
to receive visits from us."

"It would be a base return for such gracious compliance with my request
if I concealed from you the reason why I pray Heaven to bless you for
that answer. The physician says that it may be long before my son is
sufficiently convalescent to dispense with a mother's care, and resume
his former life and occupation in the great world. It is everything
for us if we can coax him into coming under our own roof-tree. This is
difficult to do. It is natural for a young man launched into the world
to like his own chez lui. Then what will happen to Gustave? He,
lonely and heart-stricken, will ask friends, young as himself, but
far stronger, to come and cheer him; or he will seek to distract his
thoughts by the overwork of his brain; in either case he is doomed. But
I have stronger motives yet to fix him a while at our hearth. This
is just the moment, once lost never to be regained, when soothing
companionship, gentle reproachless advice, can fix him lastingly in the
habits and modes of life which will banish all fears of his future from
the hearts of his parents. You at least honour him with friendship, with
kindly interest--you at least would desire to wean him from all that a
friend may disapprove or lament--a creature whom Providence meant to be
good, and perhaps great. If I say to him, 'It will be long before you
can go out and see your friends, but at my house your friends shall come
and see you--among them Signora Venosta and Mademoiselle Cicogna will
now and then drop in'--my victory is gained, and my son is saved."

"Madame," said Isaura, half sobbing, "what a blessing to have a mother
like you! Love so noble ennobles those who hear its voice. Tell your son
how ardently I wish him to be well, and to fulfil more than the promise
of his genius; tell him also this--how I envy him his mother."




CHAPTER XV.

It needs no length of words to inform thee, my intelligent reader,
be thou man or woman--but more especially woman--of the consequences
following each other, as wave follows wave in a tide, that resulted from
the interview with which my last chapter closed. Gustave is removed to
his parents' house; he remains for weeks confined within doors, or, on
sunny days, takes an hour or so in his own carriage, drawn by the horse
bought from Rochebriant, into by-roads remote from the fashionable
world; Isaura visits his mother, liking, respecting, influenced by her
more and more; in those visits she sits beside the sofa on which Rameau
reclines. Gradually, gently--more and more by his mother's lips--is
impressed on her the belief that it is in her power to save a human
life, and to animate its career towards those goals which are never
based wholly upon earth in the earnest eyes of genius, or perhaps in the
yet more upward vision of pure-souled believing woman.

And Gustave himself, as he passes through the slow stages of
convalescence, seems so gratefully to ascribe to her every step in his
progress--seems so gently softened in character--seems so refined from
the old affectations, so ennobled above the old cynicism--and, above
all, so needing her presence, so sunless without it, that--well, need I
finish the sentence?--the reader will complete what I leave unsaid.

Enough, that one day Isaura returned home from a visit at Madame
Rameau's with the knowledge that her hand was pledged--her future life
disposed of; and that, escaping from the Venosta, whom she so fondly,
and in her hunger for a mother's love, called Madre, the girl shut
herself up in her own room with locked doors.

Ah, poor child! ah, sweet-voiced Isaura! whose delicate image I feel
myself too rude and too hard to transfer to this page in the purity of
its outlines, and the blended softnesses of its hues--thou who,
when saying things serious in the words men use, saidst them with a
seriousness so charming, and with looks so feminine--thou, of whom no
man I ever knew was quite worthy--ah, poor, simple, miserable girl, as I
see thee now in the solitude of that white-curtained virginal room; hast
thou, then, merged at last thy peculiar star into the cluster of all
these commonplace girls whose lips have said "Ay," when their hearts
said "No"?--thou, O brilliant Isaura! thou, O motherless child!

She had sunk into her chair--her own favourite chair, the covering of it
had been embroidered by Madame de Grantmesnil, and bestowed on her as a
birthday present last year--the year in which she had first learned what
it is to love--the year in which she had first learned what it is to
strive for fame. And somehow uniting, as many young people do, love and
fame in dreams of the future, that silken seat had been to her as the
Tripod of Delphi was to the Pythian: she had taken to it, as it were
intuitively, in all those hours, whether of joy or sorrow, when youth
seeks to prophesy, and does but dream.

There she sat now, in a sort of stupor--a sort of dreary
bewilderment--the illusion of the Pythian gone--desire of dream and of
prophecy alike extinct--pressing her hands together, and muttering to
herself, "What has happened?--what have I done?"

Three hours later you would not have recognised the same face that you
see now. For then the bravery, the honour, the loyalty of the girl's
nature had asserted their command. Her promise had been given to one
man--it could not be recalled. Thought itself of any other man must be
banished. On her hearth lay ashes and tinder--the last remains of every
treasured note from Graham Vane; of the hoarded newspaper extracts that
contained his name; of the dry treatise he had published, and which had
made the lovely romance-writer first desire "to know something about
politics." Ay, if the treatise had been upon fox-hunting, she would have
desired "to know something about" that! Above all, yet distinguishable
from the rest--as the sparks still upon stem and leaf here and there
faintly glowed and twinkled--the withered flowers which recorded that
happy hour in the arbour, and the walks of the forsaken garden--the hour
in which she had so blissfully pledged herself to renounce that career
in art wherein fame would have been secured, but which would not have
united Fame with Love--in dreams evermore over now.





BOOK X.




CHAPTER I.

Graham Vane had heard nothing for months from M. Renard, when one
morning he received the letter I translate:

"MONSIEUR,--I am happy to inform you that I have at last obtained one
piece of information which may lead to a more important discovery. When
we parted after our fruitless research in Vienna, we had both concurred
in the persuasion that, for some reason known only to the two ladies
themselves, Madame Marigny and Madame Duval had exchanged names--that
it was Madame Marigny who had deceased in the name of Madame Duval, and
Madame Duval who had survived in that of Marigny.

"It was clear to me that the beau Monsieur who had visited the false
Duval must have been cognisant of this exchange of name, and that, if
his name and whereabouts could be ascertained, he, in all probability,
would know what had become of the lady who is the object of our
research; and after the lapse of so many years he would probably have
very slight motive to preserve the concealment of facts which might,
no doubt, have been convenient at the time. The lover of the soi-disant
Mademoiselle Duval was by such accounts as we could gain a man of some
rank--very possibly a married man; and the liaison, in short, was one of
those which, while they last, necessitate precautions and secrecy.

"Therefore, dismissing all attempts at further trace of the missing
lady, I resolved to return to Vienna as soon as the business that
recalled me to Paris was concluded, and devote myself exclusively to the
search after the amorous and mysterious Monsieur.

"I did not state this determination to you, because, possibly, I
might be in error--or, if not in error, at least too sanguine in my
expectations--and it is best to avoid disappointing an honourable
client.

"One thing was clear, that, at the time of the soi-disant Duval's
decease, the beau Monsieur was at Vienna.

"It appeared also tolerably clear that when the lady friend of the
deceased quitted Munich so privately, it was to Vienna she repaired,
and from Vienna comes the letter demanding the certificates of Madame
Duval's death. Pardon me, if I remind you of all these circumstances no
doubt fresh in your recollection. I repeat them in order to justify the
conclusions to which they led me.

"I could not, however, get permission to absent myself from Paris for
the time I might require till the end of last April. I had meanwhile
sought all private means of ascertaining what Frenchmen of rank and
station were in that capital in the autumn of 1849. Among the list of
the very few such Messieurs I fixed upon one as the most likely to be
the mysterious Achille--Achille was, indeed, his nom de bapteme.

"A man of intrigue--a bonnes fortunes--of lavish expenditure withal;
very tenacious of his dignity, and avoiding any petty scandals by
which it might be lowered; just the man who, in some passing affair of
gallantry with a lady of doubtful repute, would never have signed his
titular designation to a letter, and would have kept himself as much
incognito as he could. But this man was dead--had been dead some years.
He had not died at Vienna--never visited that capital for some years
before his death. He was then, and had long been, the ami de la maison
of one of those grandes dames of whose intimacy grands seigneurs are not
ashamed. They parade there the bonnes fortunes they conceal elsewhere.
Monsieur and the grande dame were at Baden when the former died. Now,
Monsieur, a Don Juan of that stamp is pretty sure always to have a
confidential Leporello. If I could find Leporello alive I might learn
the secrets not to be extracted from a Don Juan defunct. I ascertained,
in truth, both at Vienna, to which I first repaired in order to verify
the renseignements I had obtained at Paris, and at Baden, to which I
then bent my way, that this brilliant noble had a favourite valet who
had lived with him from his youth--an Italian, who had contrived in
the course of his service to lay by savings enough to set up a hotel
somewhere in Italy, supposed to be Pisa. To Pisa I repaired, but the man
had left some years; his hotel had not prospered--he had left in debt.
No one could say what had become of him. At last, after a long and
tedious research, I found him installed as manager of a small hotel at
Genoa--a pleasant fellow enough; and after friendly intercourse with
him (of course I lodged at his hotel), I easily led him to talk of his
earlier life and adventures, and especially of his former master, of
whose splendid career in the army of 'La Belle Deesse' he was not a
little proud. It was not very easy to get him to the particular subject
in question. In fact, the affair with the poor false Duval had been so
brief and undistinguished an episode in his master's life, that it was
not without a strain of memory that he reached it.

"By little and little, however, in the course of two or three evenings,
and by the aid of many flasks of Orviette or bottles of Lacrima (wines,
Monsieur, that I do not commend to any one who desires to keep his
stomach sound and his secrets safe), I gathered these particulars.

"Our Don Juan, since the loss of a wife in the first year of marriage,
had rarely visited Paris where he had a domicile--his ancestral hotel
there he had sold.

"But happening to visit that capital of Europe a few months before we
come to our dates at Aix-la-Chapelle, he made acquaintance with Madame
Marigny, a natural daughter of high-placed parents, by whom, of course,
she had never been acknowledged, but who had contrived that she should
receive a good education at a convent; and on leaving it also contrived
that an old soldier of fortune--which means an officer without
fortune--who had served in Algiers with some distinction, should offer
her his hand, and add the modest dot they assigned her to his yet more
modest income. They contrived also that she should understand the
offer must be accepted. Thus Mademoiselle 'Quelque Chose' became Madame
Marigny, and she, on her part, contrived that a year or so later she
should be left a widow. After a marriage, of course the parents washed
their hands of her--they had done their duty. At the time Don Juan made
this lady's acquaintance nothing could be said against her character;
but the milliners and butchers had begun to imply that they would rather
have her money than trust to her character. Don Juan fell in love with
her, satisfied the immediate claims of milliner and butcher, and
when they quitted Paris it was agreed that they should meet later at
Aix-la-Chapelle. But when he resorted to that sultry and, to my mind,
unalluring spa, he was surprised by a line from her saying that she had
changed her name of Marigny for that of Duval.

"'I recollect,' said Leporello, 'that two days afterwards my master said
to me, 'Caution and secrecy. Don't mention my name at the house to which
I may send you with any note for Madame Duval. I don't announce my name
when I call. La petite Marigny has exchanged her name for that of Louise
Duval; and I find that there is a Louise Duval here, her friend, who
is niece to a relation of my own, and a terrible relation to quarrel
with--a dead shot and unrivalled swordsman--Victor de Mauleon. My master
was brave enough, but he enjoyed life, and he did not think la petite
Marigny worth being killed for.'

"Leporello remembered very little of what followed. All he did remember
is that Don Juan, when at Vienna, said to him one morning, looking less
gay than usual, 'It is finished with ca petite Marigny-she is no more.'
Then he ordered his bath, wrote a note, and said with tears in his eyes,
'Take this to Mademoiselle Celeste; not to be compared to la petite
Marigny; but la petite Celeste is still alive.' Ah, Monsieur! if only
any man in France could be as proud of his ruler as that Italian was of
my countrymen! Alas! we Frenchmen are all made to command--or at least
we think ourselves so--and we are insulted by one who says to us, 'Serve
and obey.' Nowadays, in France, we find all Don Juans and no Leporellos.

"After strenuous exertions upon my part to recall to Leporello's mind
the important question whether he had ever seen the true Duval, passing
under the name of Marigny--whether she had not presented herself to his
master at Vienna or elsewhere--he rubbed his forehead, and drew from it
these reminiscences.

"'On the day that his Excellency,'--Leporello generally so styled his
master--'Excellency,' as you are aware, is the title an Italian would
give to Satan if taking his wages,'told me that la petite Marigny was no
more, he had received previously a lady veiled and mantled, whom I did
not recognise as any one I had seen before, but I noticed her way of
carrying herself--haughtily--her head thrown back; and I thought to
myself, that lady is one of his grandes dames. She did call again two or
three times, never announcing her name; then she did not reappear. She
might be Madame Duval--I can't say.'

"'But did you never hear his Excellency speak of the real Duval after
that time?'

"'No--non mi ricordo--I don't remember.'

"'Nor of some living Madame Marigny, though the real one was dead?'

"'Stop, I do recollect; not that he ever named such a person to me, but
that I have posted letters for him to a Madame Marigny--oh, yes! even
years after the said petite Marigny was dead; and once I did venture to
say, 'Pardon me, Eccellenza, but may I ask if that poor lady is really
dead, since I have to prepay this letter to her?'"

"'Oh,' said he, 'Madame Marigny! Of course the one you know is dead, but
there are others of the same name; this lady is of my family. Indeed,
her house, though noble in itself, recognises the representative of mine
as its head, and I am too bon prince not to acknowledge and serve any
one who branches out of my own tree.'"

"A day after this last conversation on the subject, Leporello said to
me: 'My friend, you certainly have some interest in ascertaining what
became of the lady who took the name of Marigny (I state this frankly,
Monsieur, to show how difficult even for one so prudent as I am to beat
about a bush long but what you let people know the sort of bird you are
in search of).

"'Well,' said I, 'she does interest me. I knew something of that Victor
de Mauleon, whom his Excellency did not wish to quarrel with; and it
would be a kindly act to her relation if one could learn what became of
Louise Duval.'

"'I can put you on the way of learning all that his Excellency was
likely to have known of her through correspondence. I have often heard
him quote, with praise, a saying so clever that it might have been
Italian, "Never write, never burn;" that is, never commit yourself by
a letter--keep all letters that could put others in your power. All the
letters he received were carefully kept and labelled. I sent them to his
son in four large trunks. His son, no doubt, has them still.'

"Now, however, I have exhausted my budget. I arrived at Paris last
night. I strongly advise you to come hither at once, if you still desire
to prosecute your search.

"You, Monsieur, can do what I could not venture to do; you can ask the
son of Don Juan if, amid the correspondence of his father, which he may
have preserved, there be any signed Marigny or Duval--any, in
short, which can throw light on this very obscure complication of
circumstances. A grand seigneur would naturally be more complaisant to
a man of your station than he would be to an agent of police. Don
Juan's son, inheriting his father's title, is Monsieur le Marquis de
Rochebriant; and permit me to add, that at this moment, as the journals
doubtless inform you, all Paris resounds with the rumour of the coming
war; and Monsieur de Rochebriant--who is, as I have ascertained, now
in Paris--it may be difficult to find anywhere on earth a month or
two hence.--I have the honour, with profound consideration, &c., &c.,
RENARD."

The day after the receipt of this letter Graham Vane was in Paris.




CHAPTER II.

Among things indescribable is that which is called "Agitation" in
Paris--"Agitation" without riot or violence--showing itself by no
disorderly act, no turbulent outburst. Perhaps the cafes are more
crowded; passengers in the streets stop each other more often, and
converse in small knots and groups; yet, on the whole, there is little
externally to show how loudly the heart of Paris is beating. A traveller
may be passing through quiet landscapes, unconscious that a great battle
is going on some miles off, but if he will stop and put his ear to the
ground he will recognise by a certain indescribable vibration, the voice
of the cannon.

But at Paris an acute observer need not stop and put his ear to the
ground; he feels within himself a vibration--a mysterious inward
sympathy which communicates to the individual a conscious thrill--when
the passions of the multitude are stirred, no matter how silently.

Tortoni's cafe was thronged when Duplessis and Frederic Lemercier
entered it: it was in vain to order breakfast; no table was vacant
either within the rooms or under the awnings without.

But they could not retreat so quickly as they had entered. On catching
sight of the financier several men rose and gathered round him, eagerly
questioning:

"What do you think, Duplessis? Will any insult to France put a drop of
warm blood into the frigid veins of that miserable Ollivier?"

"It is not yet clear that France has been insulted, Messieurs," replied
Duplessis, phlegmatically.

"Bah! Not insulted! The very nomination of a Hohenzollern to the crown
of Spain was an insult--what would you have more?"

"I tell you what it is, Duplessis," said the Vicomte de Breze, whose
habitual light good temper seemed exchanged for insolent swagger--"I
tell you what it is, your friend the Emperor has no more courage than a
chicken. He is grown old, and infirm, and lazy; he knows that he can't
even mount on horseback. But if, before this day week, he has not
declared war on the Prussians, he will be lucky if he can get off as
quietly as poor Louis Philippe did under shelter of his umbrella, and
ticketed 'Schmidt.' Or could you not, M. Duplessis, send him back to
London in a bill of exchange?"

"For a man of your literary repute, M. le Vicomte," said Duplessis, "you
indulge in a strange confusion of metaphors. But, pardon me, I came here
to breakfast, and I cannot remain to quarrel. Come, Lemercier, let us
take our chance of a cutlet at the Trois Freres."

"Fox, Fox," cried Lemercier, whistling to a poodle that had followed him
into the cafe, and, frightened by the sudden movement and loud voices of
the habitues, had taken refuge under the table.

"Your dog is poltron," said De Breze; "call him Nap." At this stroke
of humour there was a general laugh, in the midst of which Duplessis
escaped, and Frederic, having discovered and caught his dog, followed
with that animal tenderly clasped in his arms.

"I would not lose Fox for a great deal," said Lemercier with
effusion; "a pledge of love and fidelity from an English lady the most
distinguished: the lady left me--the dog remains."

Duplessis smiled grimly: "What a thoroughbred Parisian you are, my dear
Frederic! I believe if the tramp of the last angel were sounding, the
Parisians would be divided into two sets: one would be singing the
Marseillaise, and parading the red flag; the other would be shrugging
their shoulders and saying, 'Bah! as if le Bon Dieu would have the bad
taste to injure Paris--the Seat of the Graces, the School of the Arts,
the Fountain of Reason, the Eye of the World;' and so be found by
the destroying angel caressing poodles and making bons mots about les
femmes."

"And quite right, too," said Lemercier, complacently; "what other people
in the world could retain lightness of heart under circumstances so
unpleasant? But why do you take things so solemnly? Of course there will
be war idle now to talk of explanations and excuses. When a Frenchman
says, 'I am insulted,' he is not going to be told that he is not
insulted. He means fighting, and not apologising. But what if there be
war? Our brave soldiers beat the Prussians--take the Rhine--return
to Paris covered with laurels; a new Boulevard de Berlin eclipses the
Boulevard Sebastopol. By the way, Duplessis, a Boulevard de Berlin will
be a good speculation--better than the Rue de Louvier. Ah! is not that
my English friend, Grarm Varn?" here, quitting the arm of Duplessis,
Lemercier stopped a gentleman who was about to pass him unnoticing. "Bon
jour, mon ami! how long have you been at Paris?"

"I only arrived last evening," answered Graham, "and my stay will be so
short that it is a piece of good luck, my dear Lemercier, to meet with
you, and exchange a cordial shake of the hand."

"We are just going to breakfast at the Trois Freres--Duplessis and
I--pray join us."

"With great pleasure--ah, M. Duplessis, I shall be glad to hear from
you that the Emperor will be firm enough to check the advances of that
martial fever which, to judge by the persons I meet, seems to threaten
delirium."

Duplessis looked very keenly at Graham's face, as he replied slowly:
"The English, at least, ought to know that when the Emperor by his last
reforms resigned his personal authority for constitutional monarchy, it
ceased to be a question whether he could or could not be firm in
matters that belonged to the Cabinet and the Chambers. I presume that
if Monsieur Gladstone advised Queen Victoria to declare war upon the
Emperor of Russia, backed by a vast majority in Parliament, you would
think me very ignorant of constitutional monarchy and Parliamentary
government if I said, 'I hope Queen Victoria will resist that martial
fever.'"

"You rebuke me very fairly, M. Duplessis, if you can show me that the
two cases are analogous; but we do not understand in England that,
despite his last reforms, the Emperor has so abnegated his individual
ascendency, that his will, clearly and resolutely expressed, would not
prevail in his Council and silence opposition in the Chambers. Is it so?
I ask for information."

The three men were walking on towards the Palais Royal side by side
while this conversation proceeded.

"That all depends," replied Duplessis, "upon what may be the increase
of popular excitement at Paris. If it slackens, the Emperor, no doubt,
could turn to wise account that favourable pause in the fever. But if
it continues to swell, and Paris cries, 'War,' in a voice as loud as
it cried to Louis Philippe 'Revolution,' do you think that the Emperor
could impose on his ministers the wisdom of peace? His ministers would
be too terrified by the clamour to undertake the responsibility of
opposing it--they would resign. Where is the Emperor to find another
Cabinet? a peace Cabinet? What and who are the orators for peace?--whom
a handful!--who? Gambetta, Jules Favre, avowed Republicans,--would they
even accept the post of ministers to Louis Napoleon? If they did,
would not their first step be the abolition of the Empire? Napoleon is
therefore so far a constitutional monarch in the same sense as Queen
Victoria, that the popular will in the country (and in France in such
matters Paris is the country) controls the Chambers, controls the
Cabinet; and against the Cabinet the Emperor could not contend. I say
nothing of the army--a power in France unknown to you in England,
which would certainly fraternise with no peace party. If war is
proclaimed,--let England blame it if she will--she can't lament it more
than I should: but let England blame the nation; let her blame, if she
please, the form of the government, which rests upon popular suffrage;
but do not let her blame our sovereign more than the French would blame
her own, if compelled by the conditions on which she holds her crown to
sign a declaration of war, which vast majorities in a Parliament just
elected, and a Council of Ministers whom she could not practically
replace, enforced upon her will."

"Your observations, M. Duplessis, impress me strongly, and add to the
deep anxieties with which, in common with all my countrymen, I regard
the menacing aspect of the present hour. Let us hope the best. Our
Government, I know, is exerting itself to the utmost verge of its power,
to remove every just ground of offence that the unfortunate nomination
of a German Prince to the Spanish throne could not fail to have given to
French statesmen."

"I am glad you concede that such a nomination was a just ground of
offence," said Lemercier, rather bitterly; "for I have met Englishmen
who asserted that France had no right to resent any choice of a
sovereign that Spain might make."

"Englishmen in general are not very reflective politicians in foreign
affairs," said Graham; "but those who are must see that France could
not, without alarm the most justifiable, contemplate a cordon of hostile
states being drawn around her on all sides,--Germany, is, itself so
formidable since the field of Sadowa, on the east; a German prince
in the southwest; the not improbable alliance between Prussia and the
Italian kingdom, already so alienated from the France to which it
owed so much. If England would be uneasy were a great maritime power
possessed of Antwerp, how much more uneasy might France justly be if
Prussia could add the armies of Spain to those of Germany, and launch
them both upon France. But that cause of alarm is over--the Hohenzollern
is withdrawn. Let us hope for the best."

The three men had now seated themselves at a table in the Trois Freres,
and Lemercier volunteered the task of inspecting the menu and ordering
the repast, still keeping guard on Fox.

"Observe that man," said Duplessis, pointing towards a gentleman who
had just entered; "the other day he was the popular hero--now, in the
excitement of threatened war, he is permitted to order his bifteck
uncongratulated, uncaressed; such is fame at Paris! here to-day and gone
to-morrow."

"How did the man become famous?"

"He is a painter, and refused a decoration--the only French painter who
ever did."

"And why refuse?"

"Because he is more stared at as the man who refused than he would have
been as the man who accepted. If ever the Red Republicans have their
day, those among them most certain of human condemnation will be the
coxcombs who have gone mad for the desire of human applause."

"You are a profound philosopher, M. Duplessis."

"I hope not--I have an especial contempt for philosophers. Pardon me a
moment--I see a man to whom I would say a word or two."

Duplessis crossed over to another table to speak to a middle-aged man of
somewhat remarkable countenance, with the red ribbon in his buttonhole,
in whom Graham recognised an ex-minister of the Emperor, differing from
most of those at that day in his Cabinet, in the reputation of being
loyal to his master and courageous against a mob. Left thus alone with
Lemercier, Graham said:

"Pray tell me where I can find your friend the Marquis de Rochebriant. I
called at his apartment this morning, and I was told that he had gone on
some visit into the country, taking his valet, and the concierge could
not give me his address. I thought myself so lucky on meeting with you,
who are sure to know."

"No, I do not; it is some days since I saw Alain. But Duplessis will be
sure to know." Here the financier rejoined them.

"Mon cher, Grarm Varn wants to know for what Sabine shades Rochebriant
has deserted the 'fumum opes strepitumque' of the capital."

"Ah! the Marquis is a friend of yours, Monsieur?"

"I can scarcely boast that honour, but he is an acquaintance whom I
should be very glad to see again."

"At this moment he is at the Duchesse de Tarascon's country-house near
Fontainebleau; I had a hurried line from him two days ago stating
that he was going there on her urgent invitation. But he may return
to-morrow; at all events he dines with me on the 8th, and I shall be
charmed if you will do me the honour to meet him at my house."

"It is an invitation too agreeable to refuse, and I thank you very much
for it."

Nothing worth recording passed further in conversation between Graham
and the two Frenchmen. He left them smoking their cigars in the garden,
and walked homeward by the Rue de Rivoli. As he was passing beside the
Magasin du Louvre he stopped, and made way for a lady crossing quickly
out of the shop towards her carriage at the door. Glancing at him with
a slight inclination of her head in acknowledgment of his courtesy, the
lady recognised his features,--

"Ah, Mr. Vane!" she cried, almost joyfully--"you are then at Paris,
though you have not come to see me."

"I only arrived last night, dear Mrs. Morley," said Graham, rather
embarrassed, "and only on some matters of business which unexpectedly
summoned me. My stay will probably be very short."

"In that case let me rob you of a few minutes--no, not rob you even of
them; I can take you wherever you want to go, and as my carriage moves
more quickly than you do on foot, I shall save you the minutes instead
of robbing you of them."

"You are most kind, but I was only going to my hotel, which is close
by."

"Then you have no excuse for not taking a short drive with me in the
Champs Elysees--come."

Thus bidden, Graham could not civilly disobey. He handed the fair
American into her carriage, and seated himself by her side.




CHAPTER III.

"Mr. Vane, I feel as if I had many apologies to make for the interest in
your life which my letter to you so indiscreetly betrayed."

