the open air, trained from infancy to feats of activity, their muscles
were sharp and prominent, their aspects had something of masculine
audacity and rudeness; health itself seemed in them more loathsome
than disease. Upon those faces of bronze, vice had set its ineffable,
unmistaken seal. To those eyes never had sprung the tears of compassion
or woman's gentle sorrow; on those brows never had flushed the glow of
modest shame: their very voices half belied their sex,--harsh and deep
and hoarse, their laughter loud and dissonant. Some amongst them were
not destitute of a certain beauty, but it was a beauty of feature with a
common hideousness of expression,--an expression at once cunning,
bold, callous, licentious. Womanless through the worst vices of woman,
passionless through the premature waste of passion, they stood between
the sexes like foul and monstrous anomalies, made up and fashioned
from the rank depravities of both. These creatures seemed to have newly
arrived from some long wayfaring; their shoes and the hems of their
robes were covered with dust and mire; their faces were heated, and the
veins in their bare, sinewy, sunburned arms were swollen by fatigue.
Each had beside her on the floor a timbrel, each wore at her girdle a
long knife in its sheath: well that the sheaths hid the blades, for not
one--not even that which yon cold-eyed child of fifteen wore--but had on
its steel the dark stain of human blood!

The presence of soldiers fresh from the scene of action had naturally
brought into the hostelry several of the idle gossips of the suburb, and
these stood round the table, drinking into their large ears the boasting
narratives of the soldiers. At a small table, apart from the revellers,
but evidently listening with attention to all the news of the hour, sat
a friar, gravely discussing a mighty tankard of huffcap, and ever and
anon, as he lifted his head for the purpose of drinking, glancing a
wanton eye at one of the tymbesteres.

"But an' you had seen," said a trooper, who was the mouthpiece of his
comrades--"an' you had seen the raptrils run when King Edward himself
led the charge! Marry, it was like a cat in a rabbit burrow! Easy to
see, I trow, that Earl Warwick was not amongst them! His men, at least,
fight like devils!"

"But there was one tall fellow," said a soldier, setting down his
tankard, "who made a good fight and dour, and, but for me and my
comrades, would have cut his way to the king."

"Ay, ay, true; we saved his highness, and ought to have been
knighted,--but there's no gratitude nowadays!"

"And who was this doughty warrior?" asked one of the bystanders, who
secretly favoured the rebellion.

"Why, it was said that he was Robin of Redesdale,--he who fought my Lord
Montagu off York."

"Our Robin!" exclaimed several voices. "Ay, he was ever a brave
fellow--poor Robin!"

"'Your Robin,' and 'poor Robin,' varlets!" cried the principal trooper.
"Have a care! What do ye mean by your Robin?"

"Marry, sir soldier," quoth a butcher, scratching his head, and in a
humble voice, "craving your pardon and the king's, this Master Robin
sojourned a short time in this hamlet, and was a kind neighbour, and
mighty glib of the tongue. Don't ye mind, neighbours," he added rapidly,
eager to change the conversation, "how he made us leave off when we were
just about burning Adam Warner, the old nigromancer, in his den yonder?
Who else could have done that? But an' we had known Robin had been
a rebel to sweet King Edward, we'd have roasted him along with the
wizard!"

One of the timbrel-girls, the leader of the choir, her arm round a
soldier's neck, looked up at the last speech, and her eye followed the
gesture of the butcher, as he pointed through the open lattice to the
sombre, ruinous abode of Adam Warner.

"Was that the house ye would have burned?" she asked abruptly.

"Yes; but Robin told us the king would hang those who took on them the
king's blessed privilege of burning nigromancers; and, sure enough,
old Adam Warner was advanced to be wizard-in-chief to the king's own
highness a week or two afterwards."

The friar had made a slight movement at the name of Warner; he now
pushed his stool nearer to the principal group, and drew his hood
completely over his countenance.

"Yea!" exclaimed the mechanic, whose son had been the innocent cause of
the memorable siege to poor Adam's dilapidated fortress, related in the
first book of this narrative"--yea; and what did he when there? Did he
not devise a horrible engine for the destruction of the poor,--an engine
that was to do all the work in England by the devil's help?--so that if
a gentleman wanted a coat of mail, or a cloth tunic; if his dame needed
a Norwich worsted; if a yeoman lacked a plough or a wagon, or his good
wife a pot or a kettle; they were to go, not to the armourer, and the
draper, and the tailor, and the weaver, and the wheelwright, and the
blacksmith,--but, hey presto! Master Warner set his imps a-churning, and
turned ye out mail and tunic, worsted and wagon, kettle and pot, spick
and span new, from his brewage of vapour and sea-coal. Oh, have I not
heard enough of the sorcerer from my brother, who works in the Chepe
for Master Stokton, the mercer!--and Master Stokton was one of the
worshipful deputies to whom the old nigromancer had the front to boast
his devices."

"It is true," said the friar, suddenly.

"Yes, reverend father, it is true," said the mechanic, doffing his
cap, and inclining his swarthy face to this unexpected witness of his
veracity. A murmur of wrath and hatred was heard amongst the bystanders.
The soldiers indifferently turned to their female companions. There
was a brief silence; and, involuntarily, the gossips stretched over the
table to catch sight of the house of so demoniac an oppressor of the
poor.

"See," said the baker, "the smoke still curls from the rooftop! I heard
he had come back. Old Madge, his handmaid, has bought cimnel-cakes of me
the last week or so; nothing less than the finest wheat serves him now,
I trow. However, right's right, and--"

"Come back!" cried the fierce mechanic; "the owl hath kept close in his
roost! An' it were not for the king's favour, I would soon see how the
wizard liked to have fire and water brought to bear against himself!"

"Sit down, sweetheart," whispered one of the young tymbesteres to the
last speaker--

    "Come, kiss me, my darling,
       Warm kisses I trade for."

"Avaunt!" quoth the mechanic, gruffly, and shaking off the seductive arm
of the tymbestere--"avaunt! I have neither liefe nor halfpence for thee
and thine. Out on thee!--a child of thy years! a rope's end to thy back
were a friend's best kindness!"

The girl's eyes sparkled, she instinctively put her hand to her knife;
then turning to a soldier by her side, she said, "Hear you that, and sit
still?"

"Thunder and wounds!" growled the soldier thus appealed to, "more
respect to the sex, knave; if I don't break thy fool's costard with
my sword-hilt, it is only because Red Grisell can take care of herself
against twenty such lozels as thou. These honest girls have been to the
wars with us; King Edward grudges no man his jolly fere. Speak up for
thyself, Grisell! How many tall fellows didst thou put out of their pain
after the battle of Losecote?"

"Only five, Hal," replied the cold-eyed girl, and showing her glittering
teeth with the grin of a young tigress; "but one was a captain. I shall
do better next time; it was my first battle, thou knowest!"

The more timid of the bystanders exchanged a glance of horror, and drew
back. The mechanic resumed sullenly,--"I seek no quarrel with lass or
lover. I am a plain, blunt man, with a wife and children, who are dear
to me; and if I have a grudge to the nigromancer, it is because he
glamoured my poor boy Tim. See!"--and he caught up a blue-eyed, handsome
boy, who had been clinging to his side, and baring the child's arm,
showed it to the spectators; there was a large scar on the limb, and it
was shrunk and withered.

"It was my own fault," said the little fellow, deprecatingly. The
affectionate father silenced the sufferer with a cuff on the cheek, and
resumed: "Ye note, neighbours, the day when the foul wizard took this
little one in his arms: well, three weeks afterwards--that very day
three weeks--as he was standing like a lamb by the fire, the good wife's
caldron seethed over, without reason or rhyme, and scalded his arm till
it rivelled up like a leaf in November; and if that is not glamour, why
have we laws against witchcraft?"

"True, true!" groaned the chorus.

The boy, who had borne his father's blow without a murmur, now again
attempted remonstrance. "The hot water went over the gray cat, too, but
Master Warner never bewitched her, daddy."

"He takes his part!--You hear the daff laddy? He takes the old
nigromancer's part,--a sure sign of the witchcraft; but I'll leather it
out of thee, I will!" and the mechanic again raised his weighty arm. The
child did not this time await the blow; he dodged under the butcher's
apron, gained the door, and disappeared. "And he teaches our own
children to fly in our faces!" said the father, in a kind of whimper.
The neighbours sighed in commiseration.

"Oh," he exclaimed in a fiercer tone, grinding his teeth, and shaking
his clenched fist towards Adam Warner's melancholy house, "I say again,
if the king did not protect the vile sorcerer, I would free the land
from his devilries ere his black master could come to his help."

"The king cares not a straw for Master Warner or his inventions, my
son," said a rough, loud voice. All turned, and saw the friar standing
in the midst of the circle. "Know ye not, my children, that the king
sent the wretch neck and crop out of the palace for having bewitched
the Earl of Warwick and his grace the Lord Clarence, so that they turned
unnaturally against their own kinsman, his highness? But 'Manus malorum
suos bonos breaket,'--that is to say, the fists of wicked men only whack
their own bones. Ye have all heard tell of Friar Bungey, my children?"

"Ay, ay!" answered two or three in a breath,--"a wizard, it's true, and
a mighty one; but he never did harm to the poor; though they do say he
made a quaint image of the earl, and--"

"Tut, tut!" interrupted the friar, "all Bungey did was to try to
disenchant the Lord Warwick, whom yon miscreant had spellbound. Poor
Bungey! he is a friend to the people: and when he found that Master Adam
was making a device for their ruin, he spared no toil, I assure ye, to
frustrate the iniquity. Oh, how he fasted and watched! Oh, how many a
time he fought, tooth and nail, with the devil in person, to get at the
infernal invention! for if he had that invention once in his hands, he
could turn it to good account, I can promise ye: and give ye rain for
the green blade and sun for the ripe sheaf. But the fiend got the better
at first; and King Edward, bewitched himself for the moment, would have
hanged Friar Bungey for crossing old Adam, if he had not called three
times, in a loud voice, 'Presto pepranxenon!' changed himself into a
bird, and flown out of the window. As soon as Master Adam Warner found
the field clear to himself, he employed his daughter to bewitch the Lord
Hastings; he set brother against brother, and made the king and Lord
George fall to loggerheads; he stirred up the rebellion; and where
he would have stopped the foul fiend only knows, if your friend Friar
Bungey, who, though a wizard as you say, is only so for your benefit
(and a holy priest into the bargain), had not, by aid of a good spirit,
whom he conjured up in the island of Tartary, disenchanted the king, and
made him see in a dream what the villanous Warner was devising against
his crown and his people,--whereon his highness sent Master Warner and
his daughter back to their roost, and, helped by Friar Bungey, beat his
enemies out of the kingdom. So, if ye have a mind to save your children
from mischief and malice, ye may set to work with good heart, always
provided that ye touch not old Adam's iron invention. Woe betide ye, if
ye think to destroy that! Bring it safe to Friar Bungey, whom ye will
find returned to the palace, and journeyman's wages will be a penny a
day higher for the next ten years to come!" With these words the friar
threw down his reckoning, and moved majestically to the door.

"An' I might trust you!" said Tim's father, laying hold of the friar's
serge.

"Ye may, ye may!" cried the leader of the tymbesteres, starting up from
the lap of her soldier, "for it is Friar Bungey himself!"

A movement of astonishment and terror was universal. "Friar Bungey
himself!" repeated the burly impostor. "Right, lassie, right; and he now
goes to the palace of the Tower, to mutter good spells in King Edward's
ear,--spells to defeat the malignant ones, and to lower the price of
beer. Wax wobiscum!"

With that salutation, more benevolent than accurate, the friar vanished
from the room; the chief of the tymbesteres leaped lightly on the table,
put one foot on the soldier's shoulder, and sprang through the open
lattice. She found the friar in the act of mounting a sturdy mule, which
had been tied to a post by the door.

"Fie, Graul Skellet! Fie, Graul!" said the conjurer "Respect for my
serge. We must not be noted together out of door in the daylight.
There's a groat for thee. Vade, execrabilis,--that is, good-day to thee,
pretty rogue!"

"A word, friar, a word. Wouldst thou have the old man burned, drowned,
or torn piecemeal? He hath a daughter too, who once sought to mar our
trade with her gittern; a daughter, then in a kirtle that I would not
have nimmed from a hedge, but whom I last saw in sarcenet and lawn, with
a great lord for her fere." The tymbestere's eyes shone with malignant
envy, as she added, "Graul Skellet loves not to see those who have
worn worsted and say walk in sarcenet and lawn. Graul Skellet loves not
wenches who have lords for their feres, and yet who shrink from Graul
and her sisters as the sound from the leper."

"Fegs," answered the friar, impatiently, "I know naught against the
daughter,--a pretty lass, but too high for my kisses. And as for the
father, I want not the man's life,--that is, not very specially,--but
his model, his mechanical. He may go free, if that can be compassed; if
not, why, the model at all risks. Serve me in this."

"And thou wilt teach me the last tricks of the cards, and thy great art
of making phantoms glide by on the wall?"

"Bring the model intact, and I will teach thee more, Graul,--the dead
man's candle, and the charm of the newt; and I'll give thee, to boot,
the Gaul of the parricide that thou hast prayed me so oft for. Hum! thou
hast a girl in thy troop who hath a blinking eye that well pleases me;
but go now, and obey me. Work before play, and grace before pudding!"

The tymbestere nodded, snapped her fingers in the air, and humming no
holy ditty, returned to the house through the doorway.

This short conference betrays to the reader the relations, mutually
advantageous, which subsisted between the conjuror and the tymbesteres.
Their troop (the mothers, perchance, of the generation we treat of)
had been familiar to the friar in his old capacity of mountebank, or
tregetour, and in his clerical and courtly elevation, he did not disdain
an ancient connection that served him well with the populace; for these
grim children of vice seemed present in every place, where pastime was
gay, or strife was rampant,--in peace, at the merry-makings and the
hostelries; in war, following the camp, and seen, at night, prowling
through the battlefields to dispatch the wounded and to rifle the slain:
in merrymaking, hostelry, or in camp, they could thus still spread the
fame of Friar Bungey, and uphold his repute both for terrible lore and
for hearty love of the commons.

Nor was this all; both tymbesteres and conjuror were fortune-tellers by
profession. They could interchange the anecdotes each picked up in their
different lines. The tymbestere could thus learn the secrets of gentle
and courtier, the conjuror those of the artisan and mechanic.

Unconscious of the formidable dispositions of their neighbours, Sibyll
and Warner were inhaling the sweet air of the early spring in their
little garden. His disgrace had affected the philosopher less than might
be supposed. True, that the loss of the king's favour was the deferring
indefinitely--perhaps for life--any practical application of his adored
theory; and yet, somehow or other, the theory itself consoled him. At
the worst, he should find some disciple, some ingenious student, more
fortunate than himself, to whom he could bequeath the secret, and who,
when Adam was in his grave, would teach the world to revere his name.
Meanwhile, his time was his own; he was lord of a home, though ruined
and desolate; he was free, with his free thoughts; and therefore, as he
paced the narrow garden, his step was lighter, his mind less absent than
when parched with feverish fear and hope for the immediate practical
success of a principle which was to be tried before the hazardous
tribunal of prejudice and ignorance.

"My child," said the sage, "I feel, for the first time for years, the
distinction of the seasons. I feel that we are walking in the pleasant
spring. Young days come back to me like dreams; and I could almost think
thy mother were once more by my side!"

Sibyll pressed her father's hand, and a soft but melancholy sigh stirred
her rosy lips. She, too, felt the balm of the young year; yet her
father's words broke upon sad and anxious musings. Not to youth as to
age, not to loving fancy as to baffled wisdom, has seclusion charms that
compensate for the passionate and active world! On coming back to the
old house, on glancing round its mildewed walls, comfortless and bare,
the neglected, weed-grown garden, Sibyll had shuddered in dismay. Had
her ambition fallen again into its old abject state? Were all her hopes
to restore her ancestral fortunes, to vindicate her dear father's fame,
shrunk into this slough of actual poverty,--the butterfly's wings folded
back into the chrysalis shroud of torpor? The vast disparity between
herself and Hastings had not struck her so forcibly at the court; here,
at home, the very walls proclaimed it. When Edward had dismissed the
unwelcome witnesses of his attempted crime, he had given orders that
they should be conducted to their house through the most private ways.
He naturally desired to create no curious comment upon their departure.
Unperceived by their neighbours, Sibyll and her father had gained access
by the garden gate. Old Madge received them in dismay; for she had been
in the habit of visiting Sibyll weekly at the palace, and had gained,
in the old familiarity subsisting, then, between maiden and nurse, some
insight into her heart. She had cherished the fondest hopes for the fate
of her young mistress; and now, to labour and to penury had the fate
returned! The guard who accompanied them, according to Edward's orders,
left some pieces of gold, which Adam rejected, but Madge secretly
received and judiciously expended. And this was all their wealth. But
not of toil nor of penury in themselves thought Sibyll; she thought
but of Hastings,--wildly, passionately, trustfully, unceasingly, of the
absent Hastings. Oh, he would seek her, he would come, her reverse would
but the more endear her to him! Hastings came not. She soon learned the
wherefore. War threatened the land,--he was at his post, at the head of
armies.

Oh, with what panoply of prayer she sought to shield that beloved
breast! And now the old man spoke of the blessed spring, the holiday
time of lovers and of love, and the young girl, sighing, said to her
mournful heart, "The world hath its sun,--where is mine?"

The peacock strutted up to his poor protectors, and spread his plumes to
the gilding beams. And then Sibyll recalled the day when she had walked
in that spot with Marmaduke, and he had talked of his youth, ambition,
and lusty hopes, while, silent and absorbed, she had thought within
herself, "Could the world be open to me as to him,--I too have ambition,
and it should find its goal." Now what contrast between the two,--the
man enriched and honoured, if to-day in peril or in exile, to-morrow
free to march forward still on his career, the world the country to him
whose heart was bold and whose name was stainless! and she, the woman,
brought back to the prison-home, scorn around her, impotent to avenge,
and forbidden to fly! Wherefore?--Sibyll felt her superiority of mind,
of thought, of nature,--wherefore the contrast? The success was that
of man, the discomfiture that of woman. Woe to the man who precedes his
age; but never yet has an age been in which genius and ambition are safe
to woman!

The father and the child turned into their house. The day was declining.
Adam mounted to his studious chamber, Sibyll sought the solitary
servant.

"What tidings, oh, what tidings? The war, you say, is over; the
great earl, his sweet daughter, safe upon the seas, but Hastings--ob,
Hastings! what of him?"

"My bonnibell, my lady-bird, I have none but good tales to tell thee. I
saw and spoke with a soldier who served under Lord Hastings himself;
he is unscathed, he is in London. But they say that one of his bands
is quartered in the suburb, and that there is a report of a rising in
Hertfordshire."

"When will peace come to England and to me!" sighed Sibyll.




CHAPTER IV. THE WORLD'S JUSTICE, AND THE WISDOM OF OUR ANCESTORS.

The night had now commenced, and Sibyll was still listening--or,
perhaps, listening not--to the soothing babble of the venerable servant.
They were both seated in the little room that adjoined the hall, and
their only light came through the door opening on the garden,--a gray,
indistinct twilight, relieved by the few earliest stars. The peacock,
his head under his wing, roosted on the balustrade, and the song of the
nightingale, from amidst one of the neighbouring copses, which studded
the ground towards the chase of Marybone, came soft and distant on the
serene air. The balm and freshness of spring were felt in the dews, in
the skies, in the sweet breath of young herb and leaf; through the calm
of ever-watchful nature, it seemed as if you might mark, distinct and
visible, minute after minute, the blessed growth of April into May.

Suddenly Madge uttered a cry of alarm, and pointed towards the opposite
wall. Sibyll, startled from her revery, looked up, and saw something
dusk and dwarf-like perched upon the crumbling eminence. Presently this
apparition leaped lightly into the garden, and the alarm of the women
was lessened on seeing a young boy creep stealthily over the grass and
approach the open door.

"Hey, child!" said Madge, rising. "What wantest thou?"

"Hist, gammer, hist! Ah, the young mistress? That's well. Hist! I say
again." The boy entered the room. "I'm in time to save you. In half
an hour your house will be broken into, perhaps burned. The boys are
clapping their hands now at the thoughts of the bonfire. Father and all
the neighbours are getting ready. Hark! hark! No, it is only the wind!
The tymbesteres are to give note. When you hear their bells tinkle, the
mob will meet. Run for your lives, you and the old man, and don't ever
say it was poor Tim who told you this, for Father would beat me to
death. Ye can still get through the garden into the fields. Quick!"

"I will go to the master," exclaimed Madge, hurrying from the room.

The child caught Sibyll's cold hand through the dark. "And I say,
mistress, if his worship is a wizard, don't let him punish Father and
Mother, or poor Tim, or his little sister; though Tim was once naughty,
and hooted Master Warner. Many, many, many a time and oft have I seen
that kind, mild face in my sleep, just as when it bent over me, while I
kicked and screamed, and the poor gentleman said, 'Thinkest thou I would
harm thee?' But he'll forgive me now, will he not? And when I turned
the seething water over myself, and they said it was all along of the
wizard, my heart pained more than the arm. But they whip me, and groan
out that the devil is in me, if I don't say that the kettle upset of
itself! Oh, those tymbesteres! Mistress, did you ever see them? They
fright me. If you could hear how they set on all the neighbours! And
their laugh--it makes the hair stand on end! But you will get away,
and thank Tim too? Oh, I shall laugh then, when they find the old house
empty!"

"May our dear Lord bless thee--bless thee, child," sobbed Sibyll,
clasping the boy in her arms, and kissing him, while her tears bathed
his cheeks.

A light gleamed on the threshold; Madge, holding a candle, appeared with
Warner, his hat and cloak thrown on in haste. "What is this?" said the
poor scholar. "Can it be true? Is mankind so cruel? What have I done,
woe is me! what have I done to deserve this?"

"Come, dear father, quick," said Sibyll, drying her tears, and wakened
by the presence of the old man into energy and courage. "But put thy
hand on this boy's head, and bless him; for it is he who has, haply,
saved us."

The boy trembled a moment as the long-bearded face turned towards
him, but when he caught and recognized those meek, sweet eyes, his
superstition vanished, and it was but a holy and grateful awe that
thrilled his young blood, as the old man placed both withered hands over
his yellow hair, and murmured,--

"God shield thy youth! God make thy manhood worthy! God give thee
children in thine old age with hearts like thine!" Scarcely had the
prayer ceased when the clash of timbrels, with their jingling bells,
was heard in the street. Once, twice, again, and a fierce yell closed
in chorus,--caught up and echoed from corner to corner, from house to
house.

"Run! run!" cried the boy, turning white with terror.

"But the Eureka--my hope--my mind's child!" exclaimed Adam, suddenly,
and halting at the door.

"Eh, eh!" said Madge, pushing him forward. "It is too heavy to move;
thou couldst not lift it. Think of thine own flesh and blood, of thy
daughter, of her dead mother! Save her life, if thou carest not for
thine own!"

"Go, Sibyll, go, and thou, Madge; I will stay. What matters my life,--it
is but the servant of a thought! Perish master, perish slave!"

"Father, unless you come with me, I stir not. Fly or perish, your fate
is mine! Another minute--Oh, Heaven of mercy, that roar again! We are
both lost!"

"Go, sir, go; they care not for your iron,--iron cannot feel. They will
not touch that! Have not your daughter's life upon your soul!"

"Sibyll, Sibyll, forgive me! Come!" said Warner, conscience-stricken at
the appeal.

Madge and the boy ran forwards; the old woman unbarred the garden-gate;
Sibyll and her father went forth; the fields stretched before them calm
and solitary; the boy leaped up, kissed Sibyll's pale cheek, and then
bounded across the grass, and vanished.

"Loiter not, Madge. Come!" cried Sibyll.

"Nay," said the old woman, shrinking back, "they bear no grudge to me;
I am too old to do aught but burthen ye. I will stay, and perchance save
the house and the chattels, and poor master's deft contrivance. Whist!
thou knowest his heart would break if none were by to guard it."

With that the faithful servant thrust the broad pieces that yet remained
of the king's gift into the gipsire Sibyll wore at her girdle, and then
closed and rebarred the door before they could detain her.

"It is base to leave her," said the scholar-gentleman.

The noble Sibyll could not refute her father. Afar they heard the
tramping of feet; suddenly, a dark red light shot up into the blue air,
a light from the flame of many torches.

"The wizard, the wizard! Death to the wizard, who would starve the
poor!" yelled forth, and was echoed by a stern hurrah.

Adam stood motionless, Sibyll by his side.

"The wizard and his daughter!" shrieked a sharp single voice, the voice
of Graul the tymbestere.

Adam turned. "Fly, my child,--they now threaten thee. Come, come, come!"
and, taking her by the hand, he hurried her across the fields, skirting
the hedge, their shadows dodging, irregular and quaint, on the starlit
sward. The father had lost all thought, all care but for the daughter's
life. They paused at last, out of breath and exhausted: the sounds at
the distance were lulled and hushed. They looked towards the direction
of the home they had abandoned, expecting to see the flames destined to
consume it reddening the sky; but all was dark,--or, rather, no light
save the holy stars and the rising moon offended the majestic heaven.

"They cannot harm the poor old woman; she hath no lore. On her gray
hairs has fallen not the curse of men's hate!" said Warner.

"Right, Father! when they found us flown, doubtless the cruel ones
dispersed. But they may search yet for thee. Lean on me, I am strong and
young. Another effort, and we gain the safe coverts of the Chase."

While yet the last word hung on her lips, they saw, on the path they
had left, the burst of torch-light, and heard the mob hounding on their
track. But the thick copses, with their pale green just budding into
life, were at hand. On they fled. The deer started from amidst the
entangled fern, but stood and gazed at them without fear; the playful
hares in the green alleys ceased not their nightly sports at the
harmless footsteps; and when at last, in the dense thicket, they sunk
down on the mossy roots of a giant oak, the nightingales overhead
chanted as if in melancholy welcome. They were saved!

But in their home, fierce fires glared amidst the tossing torch-light;
the crowd, baffled by the strength of the door, scaled the wall, broke
through the lattice-work of the hall window, and streaming through
room after room, roared forth, "Death to the wizard!" Amidst the sordid
dresses of the men, the soiled and faded tinsel of the tymbesteres
gleamed and sparkled. It was a scene the she-fiends revelled in,--dear
are outrage and malice, and the excitement of turbulent passions, and
the savage voices of frantic men, and the thirst of blood to those
everlasting furies of a mob, under whatever name we know them, in
whatever time they taint with their presence,--women in whom womanhood
is blasted!

Door after door was burst open with cries of disappointed rage; at last
they ascended the turret-stairs, they found a small door barred and
locked. Tim's father, a huge axe in his brawny arm, shivered the panels;
the crowd rushed in, and there, seated amongst a strange and motley
litter, they found the devoted Madge. The poor old woman had collected
into this place, as the stronghold of the mansion, whatever portable
articles seemed to her most precious, either from value or association.
Sibyll's gittern (Marmaduke's gift) lay amidst a lumber of tools and
implements; a faded robe of her dead mother's, treasured by Madge and
Sibyll both, as a relic of holy love; a few platters and cups of pewter,
the pride of old Madge's heart to keep bright and clean; odds and ends
of old hangings; a battered silver brooch (a love-gift to Madge herself
when she was young),--these, and suchlike scraps of finery, hoards
inestimable to the household memory and affection, lay confusedly heaped
around the huge grim model, before which, mute and tranquil, sat the
brave old woman.

The crowd halted, and stared round in superstitious terror and dumb
marvel.

The leader of the tymbesteres sprang forward.

"Where is thy master, old hag, and where the bonny maid who glamours
lords, and despises us bold lasses?"

"Alack! master and the damsel have gone hours ago! I am alone in the
house; what's your will?"

"The crone looks parlous witchlike!" said Tim's father; crossing
himself, and somewhat retreating from her gray, unquiet eyes. And,
indeed, poor Madge, with her wrinkled face, bony form, and high cap,
corresponded far more with the vulgar notions of a dabbler in the black
art than did Adam Warner, with his comely countenance and noble mien.

"So she doth, indeed, and verily," said a hump-backed tinker; "if we
were to try a dip in the horsepool yonder it could do no harm."

"Away with her, away!" cried several voices at that humane suggestion.

"Nay, nay," quoth the baker, "she is a douce creature after all,
and hath dealt with me many years. I don't care what becomes of the
wizard,--every one knows," he added with pride, "that I was one of the
first to set fire to his house when Robin gainsayed it! but right's
right--burn the master, not the drudge!"

This intercession might have prevailed, but unhappily, at that moment
Graul Skellet, who had secured two stout fellows to accomplish the
object so desired by Friar Bungey, laid hands on the model, and, at her
shrill command, the men advanced and dislodged it from its place. At the
same tine the other tymbesteres, caught by the sight of things pleasing
to their wonted tastes, threw themselves, one upon the faded robe
Sibyll's mother had worn in her chaste and happy youth; another, upon
poor Madge's silver brooch; a third, upon the gittern.

These various attacks roused up all the spirit and wrath of the old
woman: her cries of distress as she darted from one to the other,
striking to the right and left with her feeble arms, her form trembling
with passion, were at once ludicrous and piteous; and these were
responded to by the shrill exclamations of the fierce tymbesteres, as
they retorted scratch for scratch, and blow for blow. The spectators
grew animated by the sight of actual outrage and resistance; the
humpbacked tinker, whose unwholesome fancy one of the aggrieved
tymbesteres had mightily warmed, hastened to the relief of his virago;
and rendered furious by finding ten nails fastened suddenly on his face,
he struck down the poor creature by a blow that stunned her, seized her
in his arms,--for deformed and weakly as the tinker was, the old woman,
now sense and spirit were gone, was as light as skin and bone could
be,--and followed by half a score of his comrades, whooping and
laughing, bore her down the stairs. Tim's father, who, whether from
parental affection, or, as is more probable, from the jealous hatred
and prejudice of ignorant industry, was bent upon Adam's destruction,
hallooed on some of his fierce fellows into the garden, tracked the
footsteps of the fugitives by the trampled grass, and bounded over the
wall in fruitless chase. But on went the more giddy of the mob, rather
in sport than in cruelty, with a chorus of drunken apprentices and
riotous boys, to the spot where the humpbacked tinker had dragged
his passive burden. The foul green pond near Master Sancroft's hostel
reflected the glare of torches; six of the tymbesteres, leaping and
wheeling, with doggerel song and discordant music, gave the signal for
the ordeal of the witch,--

    "Lake or river, dyke or ditch,
     Water never drowns the witch.
     Witch or wizard would ye know?
     Sink or swim, is ay or no.
     Lift her, swing her, once and twice,
       Lift her, swing her o'er the brim,--
     Lille--lera--twice and thrice
       Ha! ha! mother, sink or swim!"

And while the last line was chanted, amidst the full jollity of laughter
and clamour and clattering timbrels, there was a splash in the sullen
water; the green slough on the surface parted with an oozing gurgle, and
then came a dead silence.

"A murrain on the hag! she does not even struggle!" said, at last, the
hump-backed tinker.

"No,--no! she cares not for water. Try fire! Out with her! out!" cried
Red Grisell.

"Aroint her! she is sullen!" said the tinker, as his lean fingers
clutched up the dead body, and let it fall upon the margin. "Dead!" said
the baker, shuddering; "we have done wrong,--I told ye so! She dealt
with me many a year. Poor Madge! Right's right. She was no witch!"

"But that was the only way to try it," said the humpbacked tinker; "and
if she was not a witch, why did she look like one? I cannot abide ugly
folks!"

The bystanders shook their heads. But whatever their remorse, it was
diverted by a double sound: first, a loud hurrah from some of the mob
who had loitered for pillage, and who now emerged from Adam's house,
following two men, who, preceded by the terrible Graul, dancing before
them, and tossing aloft her timbrel, bore in triumph the captured
Eureka; and, secondly, the blast of a clarion at the distance, while
up the street marched--horse and foot, with pike and banner--a goodly
troop. The Lord Hastings in person led a royal force, by a night march,
against a fresh outbreak of the rebels, not ten miles from the city,
under Sir Geoffrey Gates, who had been lately arrested by the Lord
Howard at Southampton, escaped, collected a disorderly body of such
restless men as are always disposed to take part in civil commotion, and
now menaced London itself. At the sound of the clarion the valiant mob
dispersed in all directions, for even at that day mobs had an instinct
of terror at the approach of the military, and a quick reaction from
outrage to the fear of retaliation.

But, at the sound of martial music, the tymbesteres silenced their own
instruments, and instead of flying, they darted through the crowd, each
to seek the other, and unite as for counsel. Graul, pointing to Mr.
Sancroft's hostelry, whispered the bearers of the Eureka to seek refuge
there for the present, and to bear their trophy with the dawn to Friar
Bungey at the Tower; and then, gliding nimbly through the fugitive
rioters, sprang into the centre of the circle formed by her companions.

"Ye scent the coming battle?" said the arch-tymbestere.

"Ay, ay, ay!" answered the sisterhood.

"But we have gone miles since noon,--I am faint and weary!" said one
amongst them.

Red Grisell, the youngest of the band, struck her comrade on the
cheek--"Faint and weary, ronion, with blood and booty in the wind!"

The tymbesteres smiled grimly on their young sister; but the leader
whispered "Hush!" and they stood for a second or two with outstretched
throats, with dilated nostrils, with pent breath, listening to the
clarion and the hoofs and the rattling armour, the human vultures
foretasting their feast of carnage; then, obedient to a sign from
their chieftainess, they crept lightly and rapidly into the mouth of a
neighbouring alley, where they cowered by the squalid huts, concealed.
The troop passed on,--a gallant and serried band, horse and foot, about
fifteen hundred men. As they filed up the thoroughfare, and the tramp
of the last soldiers fell hollow on the starlit ground, the tymbesteres
stole from their retreat, and, at the distance of some few hundred
yards, followed the procession, with long, silent, stealthy strides,--as
the meaner beasts, in the instinct of hungry cunning, follow the lion
for the garbage of his prey.




CHAPTER V. THE FUGITIVES ARE CAPTURED--THE TYMBESTERES
REAPPEAR--MOONLIGHT ON THE REVEL OF THE LIVING--MOONLIGHT ON THE SLUMBER
OF THE DEAD.

The father and child made their resting-place under the giant oak. They
knew not whither to fly for refuge; the day and the night had become the
same to them,--the night menaced with robbers, the day with the mob. If
return to their home was forbidden, where in the wide world a shelter
for the would-be world-improver? Yet they despaired not, their hearts
failed them not. The majestic splendour of the night, as it deepened in
its solemn calm; as the shadows of the windless trees fell larger and
sharper upon the silvery earth; as the skies grew mellower and more
luminous in the strengthening starlight, inspired them with the serenity
of faith,--for night, to the earnest soul, opens the Bible of the
universe, and on the leaves of Heaven is written, "God is everywhere."

Their hands were clasped each in each, their pale faces were upturned;
they spoke not, neither were they conscious that they prayed, but their
silence was thought, and the thought was worship.

Amidst the grief and solitude of the pure, there comes, at times, a
strange and rapt serenity,--a sleep-awake,--over which the instinct
of life beyond the grave glides like a noiseless dream; and ever that
heaven that the soul yearns for is coloured by the fancies of the fond
human heart, each fashioning the above from the desires unsatisfied
below.

"There," thought the musing maiden, "cruelty and strife shall cease;
there, vanish the harsh differences of life; there, those whom we have
loved and lost are found, and through the Son, who tasted of mortal
sorrow, we are raised to the home of the Eternal Father!"

"And there," thought the aspiring sage, "the mind, dungeoned and chained
below, rushes free into the realms of space; there, from every mystery
falls the veil; there, the Omniscient smiles on those who, through the
darkness of life, have fed that lamp, the soul; there, Thought, but the
seed on earth, bursts into the flower and ripens to the fruit!"

And on the several hope of both maid and sage the eyes of the angel
stars smiled with a common promise.

At last, insensibly, and while still musing, so that slumber but
continued the revery into visions, father and daughter slept.

The night passed away; the dawn came slow and gray; the antlers of the
deer stirred above the fern; the song of the nightingale was hushed; and
just as the morning star waned back, while the reddening east announced
the sun, and labour and trouble resumed their realm of day, a fierce
band halted before those sleeping forms.

These men had been Lancastrian soldiers, and, reduced to plunder for a
living, had, under Sir Geoffrey Gates, formed the most stalwart part of
the wild, disorderly force whom Hilyard and Coniers had led to Olney.
They had heard of the new outbreak, headed by their ancient captain, Sir
Geoffrey (who was supposed to have been instigated to his revolt by the
gold and promises of the Lancastrian chiefs), and were on their way to
join the rebels; but as war for them was but the name for booty, they
felt the wonted instinct of the robber, when they caught sight of the
old man and the fair maid.

Both Adam and his daughter wore, unhappily, the dresses in which they
had left the court, and Sibyll's especially was that which seemed to
betoken a certain rank and station.

"Awake, rouse ye!" said the captain of the band, roughly shaking the arm
which encircled Sibyll's slender waist. Adam started, opened his eyes,
and saw himself begirt by figures in rusty armour, with savage faces
peering under their steel sallets.

"How came you hither? Yon oak drops strange acorns," quoth the chief.

"Valiant sir," replied Adam, still seated, and drawing his gown
instinctively over Sibyll's face, which nestled on his bosom, in slumber
so deep and heavy, that the gruff voice had not broken it, "valiant
sir! we are forlorn and houseless, an old man and a simple girl. Some
evil-minded persons invaded our home; we fled in the night, and--"

"Invaded your house! ha, it is clear," said the chief. "We know the
rest."

At this moment Sibyll woke, and starting to her feet in astonishment and
terror at the sight on which her eyes opened, her extreme beauty made a
sensible effect upon the bravoes.

"Do not be daunted, young demoiselle," said the captain, with an air
almost respectful; "it is necessary thou and Sir John should follow us,
but we will treat you well, and consult later on the ransom ye will pay
us. Jock, discharge the young sumpter mule; put its load on the black
one. We have no better equipment for thee, lady; but the first haquenee
we find shall replace the mule, and meanwhile my knaves will heap their
cloaks for a pillion."

"But what mean you?--you mistake us!" exclaimed Sibyll. "We are poor; we
cannot ransom ourselves."

"Poor!--tut!" said the captain, pointing significantly to the costly
robe of the maiden--"moreover his worship's wealth is well known. Mount
in haste,--we are pressed." And without heeding the expostulations of
Sibyll and the poor scholar, the rebel put his troop into motion, and
marched himself at their head, with his lieutenant.

Sibyll found the subalterns sterner than their chief; for as Warner
offered to resist, one of them lifted his gisarme, with a frightful
oath, and Sibyll was the first to persuade her father to submit. She
mildly, however, rejected the mule, and the two captives walked together
in the midst of the troop.

"Pardie!" said the lieutenant, "I see little help to Sir Geoffrey in
these recruits, captain!"

"Fool!" said the chief, disdainfully, "if the rebellion fail, these
prisoners may save our necks. Will Somers last night was to break into
the house of Sir John Bourchier, for arms and moneys, of which the
knight hath a goodly store. Be sure, Sir John slinked off in the siege,
and this is he and his daughter. Thou knowest he is one of the greatest
knights, and the richest, whom the Yorkists boast of; and we may name
our own price for his ransom."

"But where lodge them while we go to the battle?"

"Ned Porpustone hath a hostelry not far from the camp, and Ned is a good
Lancastrian, and a man to be trusted."

"We have not searched the prisoners," said the lieutenant; "they may
have some gold in their pouches."

"Marry, when Will Somers storms a hive, little time does he leave to the
bees to fly away with much money. Nathless, thou mayest search the old
knight, but civilly, and with gentle excuses."

"And the damsel?"

"Nay! that were unmannerly, and the milder our conduct, the larger the
ransom,--when we have great folks to deal with."

The lieutenant accordingly fell back to search Adam's gipsire, which
contained only a book and a file, and then rejoined his captain, without
offering molestation to Sibyll.

The mistake made by the bravo was at least so far not wholly unfortunate
that the notion of the high quality of the captives--for Sir John
Bourchier was indeed a person of considerable station and importance (a
notion favoured by the noble appearance of the scholar and the
delicate and highborn air of Sibyll)--procured for them all the respect
compatible with the circumstances. They had not gone far before they
entered a village, through which the ruffians marched with the most
perfect impunity; for it was a strange feature in those civil wars that
the mass of the population, except in the northern districts, remained
perfectly supine and neutral. And as the little band halted at a small
inn to drink, the gossips of the village collected round them, with the
same kind of indolent, careless curiosity which is now evinced in some
hamlet at the halt of a stage-coach. Here the captain learned, however,
some intelligence important to his objects,--namely, the night march of
the troop under Lord Hastings, and the probability that the conflict
was already begun. "If so," muttered the rebel, "we can see how the tide
turns, before we endanger ourselves; and at the worst, our prisoners
will bring something of prize-money."

While thus soliloquizing, he spied one of those cumbrous vehicles of
the day called whirlicotes [Whirlicotes were in use from a very early
period, but only among the great, till, in the reign of Richard II., his
queen, Anne, introduced side-saddles, when the whirlicote fell out of
fashion, but might be found at different hostelries on the main roads
for the accommodation of the infirm or aged.] standing in the yard of
the hostelry; and seizing upon it, vi et armis, in spite of all the
cries and protestations of the unhappy landlord, he ordered his captives
to enter, and recommenced his march.

As the band proceeded farther on their way, they were joined by fresh
troops of the same class as themselves, and they pushed on gayly, till,
about the hour of eight, they halted before the hostelry the captain had
spoken of. It stood a little out of the high road, not very far from
the village of Hadley, and the heath or chase of Gladsmore, on which was
fought, some time afterwards, the battle of Barnet. It was a house of
good aspect, and considerable size, for it was much frequented by all
caravanserais and travellers from the North to the metropolis. The
landlord, at heart a stanch Lancastrian, who had served in the French
wars, and contrived, no one knew how, to save moneys in the course of an
adventurous life, gave to his hostelry the appellation and sign of the
Talbot, in memory of the old hero of that name; and, hiring a tract of
land, joined the occupation of a farmer to the dignity of a host. The
house, which was built round a spacious quadrangle, represented the
double character of its owner, one side being occupied by barns and
a considerable range of stabling, while cows, oxen, and ragged colts
grouped amicably together in a space railed off in the centre of
the yard. At another side ran a large wooden staircase, with an open
gallery, propped on wooden columns, conducting to numerous chambers,
after the fashion of the Tabard in Southwark, immortalized by Chaucer.
Over the archway, on entrance, ran a labyrinth of sleeping lofts for
foot passengers and muleteers; and the side facing the entrance was
nearly occupied by a vast kitchen, the common hall, and the bar, with
the private parlour of the host, and two or three chambers in the second
