And the priest devoutly crossed himself, and turned and louted to the
altar.

With that, he spoke a few words more to the soldiers, and taking Dick by
the hand, led him up to the choir, and placed him in the stall beside his
own, where, for mere decency, the lad had instantly to kneel and appear
to be busy with his devotions.

His mind and his eyes, however, were continually wandering.  Three of the
soldiers, he observed, instead of returning to the house, had got them
quietly into a point of vantage in the aisle; and he could not doubt that
they had done so by Sir Oliver's command.  Here, then, he was trapped.
Here he must spend the night in the ghostly glimmer and shadow of the
church, and looking on the pale face of him he slew; and here, in the
morning, he must see his sweetheart married to another man before his
eyes.

But, for all that, he obtained a command upon his mind, and built himself
up in patience to await the issue.



CHAPTER IV--IN THE ABBEY CHURCH


In Shoreby Abbey Church the prayers were kept up all night without
cessation, now with the singing of psalms, now with a note or two upon
the bell.

Rutter, the spy, was nobly waked.  There he lay, meanwhile, as they had
arranged him, his dead hands crossed upon his bosom, his dead eyes
staring on the roof; and hard by, in the stall, the lad who had slain him
waited, in sore disquietude, the coming of the morning.

Once only, in the course of the hours, Sir Oliver leaned across to his
captive.

"Richard," he whispered, "my son, if ye mean me evil, I will certify, on
my soul's welfare, ye design upon an innocent man.  Sinful in the eye of
Heaven I do declare myself; but sinful as against you I am not, neither
have been ever."

"My father," returned Dick, in the same tone of voice, "trust me, I
design nothing; but as for your innocence, I may not forget that ye
cleared yourself but lamely."

"A man may be innocently guilty," replied the priest.  "He may be set
blindfolded upon a mission, ignorant of its true scope.  So it was with
me.  I did decoy your father to his death; but as Heaven sees us in this
sacred place, I knew not what I did."

"It may be," returned Dick.  "But see what a strange web ye have woven,
that I should be, at this hour, at once your prisoner and your judge;
that ye should both threaten my days and deprecate my anger.  Methinks,
if ye had been all your life a true man and good priest, ye would neither
thus fear nor thus detest me.  And now to your prayers.  I do obey you,
since needs must; but I will not be burthened with your company."

The priest uttered a sigh so heavy that it had almost touched the lad
into some sentiment of pity, and he bowed his head upon his hands like a
man borne down below a weight of care.  He joined no longer in the
psalms; but Dick could hear the beads rattle through his fingers and the
prayers a-pattering between his teeth.

Yet a little, and the grey of the morning began to struggle through the
painted casements of the church, and to put to shame the glimmer of the
tapers.  The light slowly broadened and brightened, and presently through
the south-eastern clerestories a flush of rosy sunlight flickered on the
walls.  The storm was over; the great clouds had disburdened their snow
and fled farther on, and the new day was breaking on a merry winter
landscape sheathed in white.

A bustle of church officers followed; the bier was carried forth to the
deadhouse, and the stains of blood were cleansed from off the tiles, that
no such ill-omened spectacle should disgrace the marriage of Lord
Shoreby.  At the same time, the very ecclesiastics who had been so
dismally engaged all night began to put on morning faces, to do honour to
the merrier ceremony which was about to follow.  And further to announce
the coming of the day, the pious of the town began to assemble and fall
to prayer before their favourite shrines, or wait their turn at the
confessionals.

Favoured by this stir, it was of course easily possible for any man to
avoid the vigilance of Sir Daniel's sentries at the door; and presently
Dick, looking about him wearily, caught the eye of no less a person than
Will Lawless, still in his monk's habit.

The outlaw, at the same moment, recognised his leader, and privily signed
to him with hand and eye.

Now, Dick was far from having forgiven the old rogue his most untimely
drunkenness, but he had no desire to involve him in his own predicament;
and he signalled back to him, as plain as he was able, to begone.

Lawless, as though he had understood, disappeared at once behind a
pillar, and Dick breathed again.

What, then, was his dismay to feel himself plucked by the sleeve and to
find the old robber installed beside him, upon the next seat, and, to all
appearance, plunged in his devotions!

Instantly Sir Oliver arose from his place, and, gliding behind the
stalls, made for the soldiers in the aisle.  If the priest's suspicions
had been so lightly wakened, the harm was already done, and Lawless a
prisoner in the church.

"Move not," whispered Dick.  "We are in the plaguiest pass, thanks,
before all things, to thy swinishness of yestereven.  When ye saw me
here, so strangely seated where I have neither right nor interest, what a
murrain I could ye not smell harm and get ye gone from evil?"

"Nay," returned Lawless, "I thought ye had heard from Ellis, and were
here on duty."

"Ellis!" echoed Dick.  "Is Ellis, then, returned?

"For sure," replied the outlaw.  "He came last night, and belted me sore
for being in wine--so there ye are avenged, my master.  A furious man is
Ellis Duckworth!  He hath ridden me hot-spur from Craven to prevent this
marriage; and, Master Dick, ye know the way of him--do so he will!"

"Nay, then," returned Dick, with composure, "you and I, my poor brother,
are dead men; for I sit here a prisoner upon suspicion, and my neck was
to answer for this very marriage that he purposeth to mar.  I had a fair
choice, by the rood! to lose my sweetheart or else lose my life!  Well,
the cast is thrown--it is to be my life."

"By the mass," cried Lawless, half arising, "I am gone!"

But Dick had his hand at once upon his shoulder.

"Friend Lawless, sit ye still," he said.  "An ye have eyes, look yonder
at the corner by the chancel arch; see ye not that, even upon the motion
of your rising, yon armed men are up and ready to intercept you?  Yield
ye, friend.  Ye were bold aboard ship, when ye thought to die a
sea-death; be bold again, now that y' are to die presently upon the
gallows."

"Master Dick," gasped Lawless, "the thing hath come upon me somewhat of
the suddenest.  But give me a moment till I fetch my breath again; and,
by the mass, I will be as stout-hearted as yourself."

"Here is my bold fellow!" returned Dick.  "And yet, Lawless, it goes hard
against the grain with me to die; but where whining mendeth nothing,
wherefore whine?"

"Nay, that indeed!" chimed Lawless.  "And a fig for death, at worst!  It
has to be done, my master, soon or late.  And hanging in a good quarrel
is an easy death, they say, though I could never hear of any that came
back to say so."

And so saying, the stout old rascal leaned back in his stall, folded his
arms, and began to look about him with the greatest air of insolence and
unconcern.

"And for the matter of that," Dick added, "it is yet our best chance to
keep quiet.  We wot not yet what Duckworth purposes; and when all is
said, and if the worst befall, we may yet clear our feet of it."

Now that they ceased talking, they were aware of a very distant and thin
strain of mirthful music which steadily drew nearer, louder, and merrier.
The bells in the tower began to break forth into a doubling peal, and a
greater and greater concourse of people to crowd into the church,
shuffling the snow from off their feet, and clapping and blowing in their
hands.  The western door was flung wide open, showing a glimpse of
sunlit, snowy street, and admitting in a great gust the shrewd air of the
morning; and in short, it became plain by every sign that Lord Shoreby
desired to be married very early in the day, and that the wedding-train
was drawing near.

Some of Lord Shoreby's men now cleared a passage down the middle aisle,
forcing the people back with lance-stocks; and just then, outside the
portal, the secular musicians could be descried drawing near over the
frozen snow, the fifers and trumpeters scarlet in the face with lusty
blowing, the drummers and the cymbalists beating as for a wager.

These, as they drew near the door of the sacred building, filed off on
either side, and, marking time to their own vigorous music, stood
stamping in the snow.  As they thus opened their ranks, the leaders of
this noble bridal train appeared behind and between them; and such was
the variety and gaiety of their attire, such the display of silks and
velvet, fur and satin, embroidery and lace, that the procession showed
forth upon the snow like a flower-bed in a path or a painted window in a
wall.

First came the bride, a sorry sight, as pale as winter, clinging to Sir
Daniel's arm, and attended, as brides-maid, by the short young lady who
had befriended Dick the night before.  Close behind, in the most radiant
toilet, followed the bridegroom, halting on a gouty foot; and as he
passed the threshold of the sacred building and doffed his hat, his bald
head was seen to be rosy with emotion.

And now came the hour of Ellis Duckworth.

Dick, who sat stunned among contrary emotions, grasping the desk in front
of him, beheld a movement in the crowd, people jostling backward, and
eyes and arms uplifted.  Following these signs, he beheld three or four
men with bent bows leaning from the clerestory gallery.  At the same
instant they delivered their discharge, and before the clamour and cries
of the astounded populace had time to swell fully upon the ear, they had
flitted from their perch and disappeared.

The nave was full of swaying heads and voices screaming; the
ecclesiastics thronged in terror from their places; the music ceased, and
though the bells overhead continued for some seconds to clang upon the
air, some wind of the disaster seemed to find its way at last even to the
chamber where the ringers were leaping on their ropes, and they also
desisted from their merry labours.

Right in the midst of the nave the bridegroom lay stone-dead, pierced by
two black arrows.  The bride had fainted.  Sir Daniel stood, towering
above the crowd in his surprise and anger, a clothyard shaft quivering in
his left forearm, and his face streaming blood from another which had
grazed his brow.

Long before any search could be made for them, the authors of this tragic
interruption had clattered down a turnpike stair and decamped by a
postern door.

But Dick and Lawless still remained in pawn; they had, indeed, arisen on
the first alarm, and pushed manfully to gain the door; but what with the
narrowness of the stalls and the crowding of terrified priests and
choristers, the attempt had been in vain, and they had stoically resumed
their places.

And now, pale with horror, Sir Oliver rose to his feet and called upon
Sir Daniel, pointing with one hand to Dick.

"Here," he cried, "is Richard Shelton--alas the hour!--blood guilty!
Seize him!--bid him be seized!  For all our lives' sakes, take him and
bind him surely!  He hath sworn our fall."

Sir Daniel was blinded by anger--blinded by the hot blood that still
streamed across his face.

"Where?" he bellowed.  "Hale him forth!  By the cross of Holywood, but he
shall rue this hour!"

The crowd fell back, and a party of archers invaded the choir, laid rough
hands on Dick, dragged him head-foremost from the stall, and thrust him
by the shoulders down the chancel steps.  Lawless, on his part, sat as
still as a mouse.

Sir Daniel, brushing the blood out of his eyes, stared blinkingly upon
his captive.

"Ay," he said, "treacherous and insolent, I have thee fast; and by all
potent oaths, for every drop of blood that now trickles in mine eyes, I
will wring a groan out of thy carcase.  Away with him!" he added.  "Here
is no place!  Off with him to my house.  I will number every joint of thy
body with a torture."

But Dick, putting off his captors, uplifted his voice.

"Sanctuary!" he shouted.  "Sanctuary!  Ho, there, my fathers!  They would
drag me from the church!"

"From the church thou hast defiled with murder, boy," added a tall man,
magnificently dressed.

"On what probation?" cried Dick.  "They do accuse me, indeed, of some
complicity, but have not proved one tittle.  I was, in truth, a suitor
for this damsel's hand; and she, I will be bold to say it, repaid my suit
with favour.  But what then?  To love a maid is no offence, I trow--nay,
nor to gain her love.  In all else, I stand here free from guiltiness."

There was a murmur of approval among the bystanders, so boldly Dick
declared his innocence; but at the same time a throng of accusers arose
upon the other side, crying how he had been found last night in Sir
Daniel's house, how he wore a sacrilegious disguise; and in the midst of
the babel, Sir Oliver indicated Lawless, both by voice and gesture, as
accomplice to the fact.  He, in his turn, was dragged from his seat and
set beside his leader.  The feelings of the crowd rose high on either
side, and while some dragged the prisoners to and fro to favour their
escape, others cursed and struck them with their fists.  Dick's ears rang
and his brain swam dizzily, like a man struggling in the eddies of a
furious river.

But the tall man who had already answered Dick, by a prodigious exercise
of voice restored silence and order in the mob.

"Search them," he said, "for arms.  We may so judge of their intentions."

Upon Dick they found no weapon but his poniard, and this told in his
favour, until one man officiously drew it from its sheath, and found it
still uncleansed of the blood of Rutter.  At this there was a great shout
among Sir Daniel's followers, which the tall man suppressed by a gesture
and an imperious glance.  But when it came to the turn of Lawless, there
was found under his gown a sheaf of arrows identical with those that had
been shot.

"How say ye now?" asked the tall man, frowningly, of Dick.

"Sir," replied Dick, "I am here in sanctuary, is it not so?  Well, sir, I
see by your bearing that ye are high in station, and I read in your
countenance the marks of piety and justice.  To you, then, I will yield
me prisoner, and that blithely, foregoing the advantage of this holy
place.  But rather than to be yielded into the discretion of that
man--whom I do here accuse with a loud voice to be the murderer of my
natural father and the unjust retainer of my lands and revenues--rather
than that, I would beseech you, under favour, with your own gentle hand,
to despatch me on the spot.  Your own ears have heard him, how before
that I was proven guilty he did threaten me with torments.  It standeth
not with your own honour to deliver me to my sworn enemy and old
oppressor, but to try me fairly by the way of law, and, if that I be
guilty indeed, to slay me mercifully."

"My lord," cried Sir Daniel, "ye will not hearken to this wolf?  His
bloody dagger reeks him the lie into his face."

"Nay, but suffer me, good knight," returned the tall stranger; "your own
vehemence doth somewhat tell against yourself."

And here the bride, who had come to herself some minutes past and looked
wildly on upon this scene, broke loose from those that held her, and fell
upon her knees before the last speaker.
