
'Aye! aye! On to Bristol! God with us!' cried several of the Puritans
excitedly.

'But it is madness--dummheit--utter foolishness,' Buyse broke in hotly.
'You have the chance and you will not take it. Now the chance is gone
and you are all eager to go. Here is an army of, as near as I can judge,
five thousand men on the right side of the river. We are on the wrong
side, and yet you talk of crossing and making a beleaguering of Bristol
without breaching-pieces or spades, and with this force in our rear.
Will the town make terms when they can see from their ramparts the van
of the army which comes to help them? Or does it assist us in fighting
the army to have a strong town beside us, from which horse and foot can
make an outfall upon our flank? I say again that it is madness.'

What the German soldier said was so clearly the truth that even the
fanatics were silenced. Away in the east the long shimmering lines
of steel, and the patches of scarlet upon the green hillside, were
arguments which the most thoughtless could not overlook.

'What would you advise, then?' asked Monmouth moodily, tapping his
jewelled riding-whip against his high boots.

'To cross the river and come to hand-grips with them ere they can
get help from the town,' the burly German answered bluntly. 'I cannot
understand what we are here for if it be not to fight. If we win, the
town must fall. If we lose, We have had a bold stroke for it, and can do
no more.'

'Is that your opinion, too, Colonel Saxon?' the King asked.

'Assuredly, your Majesty, if we can fight to advantage. We can scarce
do that, however, by crossing the river on a single narrow bridge in
the face of such a force. I should advise that we destroy this Keynsham
Bridge, and march down this southern bank in the hope of forcing a fight
in a position which we may choose.'

'We have not yet summoned Bath,' said Wade. 'Let us do as Colonel Saxon
proposes, and let us in the meantime march in that direction and send a
trumpet to the governor.'

'There is yet another plan,' quoth Sir Stephen Timewell, 'which is to
hasten to Gloucester, to cross the Severn there, and so march through
Worcestershire into Shropshire and Cheshire. Your Majesty has many
friends in those parts.'

Monmouth paced up and down with his hand to his forehead like one
distrait. 'What am I to do,' he cried at last, 'in the midst of all this
conflicting advice, when I know that not only my own success, but the
lives of these poor faithful peasants and craftsmen depend upon my
resolution?'

'With all humbleness, your Majesty,' said Lord Grey, who had just
returned with the horse, 'I should suggest, since there are only a few
troops of their cavalry on this side of the Avon, that we blow up the
bridge and move onwards to Bath, whence we can pass into Wiltshire,
which we know to be friendly.'

'So be it!' cried the King, with the reckless air of one who accepts
a plan, not because it is the best, but because he feels that all are
equally hopeless. 'What think you, gentlemen?' he added, with a bitter
smile. 'I have heard news from London this morning, that my uncle has
clapped two hundred merchants and others who are suspected of being true
to their creed into the Tower and the Fleet. He will have one half of
the nation mounting guard over the other half ere long.'

'Or the whole, your Majesty, mounting guard over him,' suggested Wade.
'He may himself see the Traitor's Gate some of these mornings.'

'Ha, ha! Think ye so? think ye so!' cried Monmouth, rubbing his hands
and brightening into a smile. 'Well, mayhap you have nicked the truth.
Who knows? Henry's cause seemed a losing one until Bosworth Field
settled the contention. To your charges, gentlemen. We shall march in
half-an-hour. Colonel Saxon and you, Sir Stephen, shall cover the rear
and guard the baggage--a service of honour with this fringe of horse
upon our skirts.'

The council broke up forthwith, every man riding off to his own
regiment. The whole camp was in a stir, bugles blowing and drums
rattling, until in a very short time the army was drawn up in order, and
the forlorn of cavalry had already started along the road which leads to
Bath. Five hundred horse with the Devonshire militiamen were in the van.
After them in order came the sailor regiment, the North Somerset men,
the first Taunton regiment of burghers, the Mendip and Bagworthy miners,
the lace and wool-workers of Honiton, Wellington, and Ottery St. Mary;
the woodmen, the graziers, the marsh-men, and the men from the Quantock
district. Behind were the guns and the baggage, with our own brigade and
four colours of horse as a rearguard. On our march we could see the red
coats of Feversham keeping pace with us upon the other side of the Avon.
A large body of his horse and dragoons had forded the stream and hovered
upon our skirts, but Saxon and Sir Stephen covered the baggage so
skilfully, and faced round so fiercely with such a snarl of musketry
whenever they came too nigh, that they never ventured to charge home.



Chapter XXVIII. Of the Fight in Wells Cathedral

I am fairly tied to the chariot-wheels of history now, my dear children,
and must follow on with name and place and date, whether my tale suffer
by it or no. With such a drama as this afoot it were impertinent to
speak of myself, save in so far as I saw or heard what may make these
old scenes more vivid to you. It is no pleasant matter for me to dwell
upon, yet, convinced as I am that there is no such thing as chance
either in the great or the little things of this world, I am very sure
that the sacrifices of these brave men were not thrown away, and that
their strivings were not as profitless as might at first sight appear.
If the perfidious race of Stuart is not now seated upon the throne, and
if religion in England is still a thing of free growth, we may, to my
thinking, thank these Somerset yokels for it, who first showed how small
a thing would shake the throne of an unpopular monarch. Monmouth's
army was but the vanguard of that which marched throe years later into
London, when James and his cruel ministers were flying as outcasts over
the face of the earth.

On the night of June 27, or rather early in the morning of June 28, we
reached the town of Frome, very wet and miserable, for the rain had come
on again, and all the roads were quagmires. From this next day we pushed
on once more to Wells, where we spent the night and the whole of the
next day, to give the men time to get their clothes dry, and to recover
themselves after their privations.

In the forenoon a parade of our Wiltshire regiment was held in the
Cathedral Close, when Monmouth praised it, as it well deserved, for the
soldierly progress made in so short a time.

As we returned to our quarters after dismissing our men we came upon a
great throng of the rough Bagworthy and Oare miners, who were assembled
in the open space in front of the Cathedral, listening to one of their
own number, who was addressing them from a cart. The wild and frenzied
gestures of the man showed us that he was one of those extreme sectaries
whose religion runs perilously near to madness. The hums and groans
which rose from the crowd proved, however, that his fiery words were
well suited to his hearers, so we halted on the verge of the multitude
and hearkened to his address. A red-bearded, fierce-faced man he was,
with tangled shaggy hair tumbling over his gleaming eyes, and a hoarse
voice which resounded over the whole square.

'What shall we not do for the Lord?' he cried; 'what shall we not do for
the Holy of Holies? Why is it that His hand is heavy upon us? Why is it
that we have not freed this land, even as Judith freed Bethulia? Behold,
we have looked for peace but no good came, and for a time of health, and
behold trouble! Why is this, I say? Truly, brothers, it is because we
have slighted the Lord, because we have not been wholehearted towards
Him. Lo! we have praised Him with our breath, but in our deeds we have
been cold towards Him. Ye know well that Prelacy is an accursed thing--a
hissing and an abomination in the eyes of the Almighty! Yet what have
we, His servants, wrought for Him in this matter? Have we not seen
Prelatist churches, churches of form and of show, where the creature is
confounded with the Creator--have we not seen them, I say, and have we
not forborne to sweep them away, and so lent our sanction to them? There
is the sin of a lukewarm and back-sliding generation! There is the cause
why the Lord should look coldly upon His people! Lo! at Shepton and at
Frome we have left such churches behind us. At Glastonbury, too, we have
spared those wicked walls which were reared by idolatrous hands of old.
Woe unto ye, if, after having put your hands to God's plough, ye turn
back from the work! See there!' he howled, facing round to the beautiful
Cathedral, 'what means this great heap of stones? Is it not an altar of
Baal? Is it not built for man-worship rather than God-worship? Is it not
there that the man Ken, tricked out in his foolish rochet and baubles,
may preach his soulless and lying doctrines, which are but the old dish
of Popery served up under a new cover? And shall we suffer this thing?
Shall we, the chosen children of the Great One, allow this plague-spot
to remain? Can we expect the Almighty to help us when we will not
stretch out a hand to help Him? We have left the other temples of
Prelacy behind us. Shall we leave this one, too, my brothers?'

'No, no!' yelled the crowd, tossing and swaying.

'Shall we pluck it down, then, until no one stone is left upon another?'

'Yes, yes!' they shouted.

'Now, at once?'

'Yes, yes!'

'Then to work!' he cried, and springing from the cart he rushed towards
the Cathedral, with the whole mob of wild fanatics at his heels. Some
crowded in, shouting and yelling, through the open doors, while others
swarmed up the pillars and pedestals of the front, hacking at the
sculptured ornaments, and tugging at the grey old images which filled
every niche.

'This must be stopped,' said Saxon curtly. 'We cannot afford to insult
and estray the whole Church of England to please a few hot-headed
ranters. The pillage of this Cathedral would do our cause more harm than
a pitched battle lost. Do you bring up your company, Sir Gervas, and we
shall do what we can to hold them in check until they come.'

'Hi, Masterton!' cried the Baronet, spying one of his under-officers
among the crowd who were looking on, neither assisting nor opposing the
rioters. 'Do you hasten to the quarters, and tell Barker to bring up the
company with their matches burning. I may be of use here.'

'Ha, here is Buyse!' cried Saxon joyously, as the huge German ploughed
his way through the crowd. 'And Lord Grey, too! We must save the
Cathedral, my lord! They would sack and burn it.'

'This way, gentlemen,' cried an old grey-haired man, running out towards
us with hands outspread, and a bunch of keys clanking at his girdle. 'Oh
hasten, gentlemen, if ye can indeed prevail over these lawless men! They
have pulled down Saint Peter, and they will have Paul down too unless
help comes. There will not be an apostle left. The east window is
broken. They have brought a hogshead of beer, and are broaching it
upon the high altar. Oh, alas, alas! That such things should be in a
Christian land!' He sobbed aloud and stamped about in a very frenzy of
grief.

'It is the verger, sirs,' said one of the townsfolk. 'He hath grown grey
in the Cathedral.'

'This way to the vestry door, my lords and gentlemen,' cried the old
man, pushing a way strenuously through the crowd. 'Now, lack-a-day, the
sainted Paul hath gone too!'

As he spoke a splintering crash from inside the Cathedral announced some
fresh outrage on the part of the zealots. Our guide hastened on with
renewed speed, until he came to a low oaken door heavily arched, which
he unlocked with much rasping of wards and creaking of hinges. Through
this we sidled as best we might, and hurried after the old man down a
stone-flagged corridor, which led through a wicket into the Cathedral
close by the high altar.

The great building was full of the rioters, who were rushing hither and
thither, destroying and breaking everything which they could lay their
hands on. A good number of these were genuine zealots, the followers of
the preacher whom we had listened to outside. Others, however, were on
the face of them mere rogues and thieves, such as gather round every
army upon the march. While the former were tearing down images from the
walls, or hurling the books of common prayer through the stained-glass
windows, the others were rooting up the massive brass candlesticks,
and carrying away everything which promised to be of value. One ragged
fellow was in the pulpit, tearing off the crimson velvet and hurling it
down among the crowd. Another had upset the reading-desk, and was busily
engaged in wrenching off the brazen fastenings. In the centre of
the side aisle a small group had a rope round the neck of Mark the
Evangelist, and were dragging lustily upon it, until, even as we
entered, the statue, after tottering for a few moments, came crashing
down upon the marble floor. The shouts which greeted every fresh
outrage, with the splintering of woodwork, the smashing of windows, and
the clatter of falling masonry, made up a most deafening uproar, which
was increased by the droning of the organ, until some of the rioters
silenced it by slitting up the bellows.

What more immediately concerned ourselves was the scene which was being
enacted just in front of us at the high altar. A barrel of beer had been
placed upon it, and a dozen ruffians gathered round it, one of whom with
many ribald jests had climbed up, and was engaged in knocking in the
top of the cask with a hatchet. As we entered he had just succeeded in
broaching it, and the brown mead was foaming over, while the mob with
roars of laughter were passing up their dippers and pannikins. The
German soldier rapped out a rough jagged oath at this spectacle, and
shouldering his way through the roisterers he sprang upon the altar.
The ringleader was bending over his cask, black-jack in hand, when the
soldier's iron grip fell upon his collar, and in a moment his heels were
flapping in the air, and his head three feet deep in the cask, while the
beer splashed and foamed in every direction. With a mighty heave Buyse
picked up the barrel with the half-drowned miner inside, and hurled it
clattering down the broad marble steps which led from the body of the
church. At the same time, with the aid of a dozen of our men who had
followed us into the Cathedral, we drove back the fellow's comrades, and
thrust them out beyond the rails which divided the choir from the nave.

Our inroad had the effect of checking the riot, but it simply did so by
turning the fury of the zealots from the walls and windows to ourselves.
Images, stone-work, and wood-carvings were all abandoned, and the whole
swarm came rushing up with a hoarse buzz of rage, all discipline and
order completely lost in their religious frenzy. 'Smite the Prelatists!'
they howled. 'Down with the friends of Antichrist! Cut them off even at
the horns of the altar! Down with them!' On either side they massed, a
wild, half-demented crowd, some with arms and some without, but filled
to a man with the very spirit of murder.

'This is a civil war within a civil war,' said Lord Grey, with a quiet
smile. 'We had best draw, gentlemen, and defend the gap in the rails, if
we may hold it good until help arrives.' He flashed out his rapier as
he spoke, and took his stand on the top of the steps, with Saxon and Sir
Gervas upon one side of him, Buyse, Reuben, and myself upon the other.
There was only room for six to wield their weapons with effect, so our
scanty band of followers scattered themselves along the line of the
rails, which were luckily so high and strong as to make an escalado
difficult in the face of any opposition.

The riot had now changed into open mutiny among these marshmen and
miners. Pikes, scythes, and knives glimmered through the dim light,
while their wild cries re-echoed from the high arched roof like the
howling of a pack of wolves. 'Go forward, my brothers,' cried the
fanatic preacher, who had been the cause of the outbreak--'go forward
against them! What though they be in high places! There is One who
is higher than they. Shall we shrink from His work because of a naked
sword? Shall we suffer the Prelatist altar to be preserved by these sons
of Amalek? On, on! In the name of the Lord!'

'In the name of the Lord!' cried the crowd, with a sort of hissing gasp,
like one who is about to plunge into an icy bath. 'In the name of the
Lord!' From either side they came on, gathering speed and volume, until
at last with a wild cry they surged right down upon our sword-points.

I can say nothing of what took place to right or left of me during the
ruffle, for indeed there were so many pressing upon us, and the fight
was so hot, that it was all that each of us could do to hold our own.
The very number of our assailants was in our favour, by hampering their
sword-arms. One burly miner cut fiercely at me with his scythe, but
missing me he swung half round with the force of the blow, and I passed
my sword through his body before he could recover himself. It was the
first time that I had ever slain a man in anger, my dear children, and
I shall never forget his white startled face as he looked over his
shoulder at me ere he fell. Another closed in with me before I could get
my weapon disengaged, but I struck him out with my left hand, and then
brought the flat of my sword upon his head, laying him senseless
upon the pavement. God knows, I did not wish to take the lives of the
misguided and ignorant zealots, but our own were at stake. A marshman,
looking more like a shaggy wild beast than a human being, darted under
my weapon and caught me round the knees, while another brought a flail
down upon my head-piece, from which it glanced on to my shoulder. A
third thrust at me with a pike, and pricked me on the thigh, but I shore
his weapon in two with one blow, and split his head with the next. The
man with the flail gave back at sight of this, and a kick freed me from
the unarmed ape-like creature at my feet, so that I found myself clear
of my assailants, and none the worse for my encounter, save for a touch
on the leg and some stiffness of the neck and shoulder.

Looking round I found that my comrades had also beaten off those who
were opposed to them. Saxon was holding his bloody rapier in his left
hand, while the blood was trickling from a slight wound upon his right.
Two miners lay across each other in front of him, but at the feet of
Sir Gervas Jerome no fewer than four bodies were piled together. He had
plucked out his snuff-box as I glanced at him, and was offering it with
a bow and a flourish to Lord Grey, as unconcernedly as though he were
back once more in his London coffee-house. Buyse leaned upon his long
broadsword, and looked gloomily at a headless trunk in front of him,
which I recognised from the dress as being that of the preacher. As to
Reuben, he was unhurt himself, but in sore distress over my own trifling
scar, though I assured the faithful lad that it was a less thing than
many a tear from branch or thorn which we had had when blackberrying
together.

The fanatics, though driven back, were not men to be content with a
single repulse. They had lost ten of their number, including their
leader, without being able to break our line, but the failure only
served to increase their fury. For a minute or so they gathered panting
in the aisle. Then with a mad yell they dashed in once more, and made a
desperate effort to cut a way through to the altar. It was a fiercer and
more prolonged struggle than before. One of our followers was stabbed to
the heart over the rails, and fell without a groan. Another was stunned
by a mass of masonry hurled at him by a giant cragsman. Reuben was
felled by a club, and would have been dragged out and hacked to pieces
had I not stood over him and beaten off his assailants. Sir Gervas was
borne off his legs by the rush, but lay like a wounded wildcat, striking
out furiously at everything which came within his reach. Buyse and
Saxon, back to back, stood firm amidst the seething, rushing crowd,
cutting down every man within sweep of their swords. Yet in such a
struggle numbers must in the end prevail, and I confess that I for one
had begun to have fears for the upshot of our contest, when the heavy
tramp of disciplined feet rang through the Cathedral, and the Baronet's
musqueteers came at a quick run up the central aisle. The fanatics did
not await their charge, but darted off over benches and pews, followed
by our allies, who were furious on seeing their beloved Captain upon the
ground. There was a wild minute or two, with confused shuffling of feet,
stabs, groans, and the clatter of musket butts on the marble floor. Of
the rioters some were slain, but the greater part threw down their arms
and were arrested at the command of Lord Grey, while a strong guard was
placed at the gates to prevent any fresh outburst of sectarian fury.

When at last the Cathedral was cleared and order restored, we had time
to look around us and to reckon our own injuries. In all my wanderings,
and the many wars in which I afterwards fought--wars compared to which
this affair of Monmouth's was but the merest skirmish--I have never seen
a stranger or more impressive scene. In the dim, solemn light the pile
of bodies in front of the rails, with their twisted limbs and white-set
faces, had a most sad and ghost-like aspect. The evening light, shining
through one of the few unbroken stained-glass windows, cast great
splotches of vivid crimson and of sickly green upon the heap of
motionless figures. A few wounded men sat about in the front pews or lay
upon the steps moaning for water. Of our own small company not one had
escaped unscathed. Three of our followers had been slain outright, while
a fourth was lying stunned from a blow. Buyse and Sir Gervas were much
bruised. Saxon was cut on the right arm. Reuben had been felled by a
bludgeon stroke, and would certainly have been slain but for the fine
temper of Sir Jacob Clancing's breastplate, which had turned a fierce
pike-thrust. As to myself it is scarce worth the mention, but my head
sang for some hours like a good wife's kettle, and my boot was full of
blood, which may have been a blessing in disguise, for Sneckson, our
Havant barber, was ever dinning into my ears how much the better I
should be for a phlebotomy.

In the meantime all the troops had assembled and the mutiny been swiftly
stamped out. There were doubtless many among the Puritans who had no
love for the Prelatists, but none save the most crack-brained fanatics
could fail to see that the sacking of the Cathedral would set the
whole Church of England in arms, and ruin the cause for which they were
fighting. As it was, much damage had been done; for whilst the gang
within had been smashing all which they could lay their hands upon,
others outside had chipped off cornices and gargoyles, and had even
dragged the lead covering from the roof and hurled it down in great
sheets to their companions beneath. This last led to some profit, for
the army had no great store of ammunition, so the lead was gathered up
by Monmouth's orders and recast into bullets. The prisoners were held
in custody for a time, but it was deemed unwise to punish them, so that
they were finally pardoned and dismissed from the army.

A parade of our whole force was held in the fields outside the town upon
the second day of our stay at Wells, the weather having at last become
warm and sunny. The foot was then found to muster six regiments of nine
hundred men, or five thousand four hundred in all. Of these fifteen
hundred were musqueteers, two thousand were pikemen, and the rest were
scythesmen or peasants with flails and hammers. A few bodies, such as
our own or those from Taunton, might fairly lay claim to be soldiers,
but the most of them were still labourers and craftsmen with weapons
in their hands. Yet, ill-armed and ill-drilled as they were, they were
still strong robust Englishmen, full of native courage and of religious
zeal. The light and fickle Monmouth began to take heart once more at the
sight of their sturdy bearing, and at the sound of their hearty cheers.
I heard him as I sat my horse beside his staff speak exultantly to those
around him, and ask whether these fine fellows could possibly be beaten
by mercenary half-hearted hirelings.

'What say you, Wade!' he cried. 'Are we never to see a smile on that sad
face of yours? Do you not see a woolsack in store for you as you look
upon these brave fellows?'

'God forbid that I should say a word to damp your Majesty's ardour,' the
lawyer answered; 'yet I cannot but remember that there was a time when
your Majesty, at the head of these same hirelings, did drive men as
brave as these in headlong rout from Bothwell Bridge.'

'True, true!' said the King, passing his hand over his forehead--a
favourite motion when he was worried and annoyed. 'They were bold men,
the western Covenanters, yet they could not stand against the rush of
our battalions. But they had had no training, whereas these can fight in
line and fire a platoon as well as one would wish to see.'

'If we hadna a gun nor a patronal among us,' said Ferguson, 'if we hadna
sae muckle as a sword, but just oor ain honds, yet would the Lard gie us
the victory, if it seemed good in His a' seeing een.'

'All battles are but chance work, your Majesty,' remarked Saxon, whose
sword-arm was bound round with his kerchief. 'Some lucky turn, some slip
or chance which none can foresee, is ever likely to turn the scale. I
have lost when I have looked to win, and I have won when I have looked
to lose. It is an uncertain game, and one never knows the finish till
the last card is played.'

'Not till the stakes are drawn,' said Buyse, in his deep guttural voice.
'There is many a leader that wins what you call the trick, and yet loses
the game.'

'The trick being the battle and the game the campaign,' quoth the King,
with a smile. 'Our German friend is a master of camp-fire metaphors. But
methinks our poor horses are in a sorry state. What would cousin William
over at The Hague, with his spruce guards, think of such a show as
this?'

During this talk the long column of foot had tramped past, still bearing
the banners which they had brought with them to the wars, though much
the worse for wind and weather. Monmouth's remarks had been drawn forth
by the aspect of the ten troops of horse which followed. The chargers
had been sadly worn by the continued work and constant rain, while the
riders, having allowed their caps and fronts to get coated with rust,
appeared to be in as bad a plight as their steeds. It was clear to the
least experienced of us that if we were to hold our own it was upon
our foot that we must rely. On the tops of the low hills all round the
frequent shimmer of arms, glancing here and there when the sun's rays
struck upon them, showed how strong our enemies were in the very point
in which we were so weak. Yet in the main this Wells review was cheering
to us, as showing that the men kept in good heart, and that there was no
ill-feeling at the rough handling of the zealots upon the day before.

The enemy's horse hovered about us during these days, but the foot had
been delayed through the heavy weather and the swollen streams. On the
last day of June we marched out of Wells, and made our way across flat
sedgy plains and over the low Polden Hills to Bridgewater, where we
found some few recruits awaiting us. Here Monmouth had some thoughts
of making a stand, and even set to work raising earthworks, but it was
pointed out to him that, even could he hold the town, there was not more
than a few days' provisions within it, while the country round had been
already swept so bare that little more could be expected from it. The
works were therefore abandoned, and, fairly driven to bay, without a
loophole of escape left, we awaited the approach of the enemy.



Chapter XXIX. Of the Great Cry from the Lonely House

And so our weary marching and counter-marching came at last to an end,
and we found ourselves with our backs fairly against the wall, and the
whole strength of the Government turned against us. Not a word came
to us of a rising or movement in our favour in any part of England.
Everywhere the Dissenters were cast into prison and the Church dominant.
From north and east and west the militia of the counties was on its
march against us. In London six regiments of Dutch troops had arrived as
a loan from the Prince of Orange. Others were said to be on their way.
The City had enrolled ten thousand men. Everywhere there was mustering
and marching to succour the flower of the English army, which was
already in Somersetshire. And all for the purpose of crushing some five
or six thousand clodhoppers and fishermen, half-armed and penniless, who
were ready to throw their lives away for a man and for an idea.

But this idea, my dear children, was a noble one, and one which a man
might very well sacrifice all for, and yet feel that all was well spent.
For though these poor peasants, in their dumb, blundering fashion, would
have found it hard to give all their reasons in words, yet in the inmost
heart of them they knew and felt that it was England's cause which they
were fighting for, and that they were upholding their country's true
self against those who would alter the old systems under which she had
led the nations. Three more years made all this very plain, and showed
that our simple unlettered followers had seen and judged the signs of
the times more correctly than those who called themselves their betters.
There are, to my thinking, stages of human progress for which the Church
of Rome is admirably suited. Where the mind of a nation is young, it may
be best that it should not concern itself with spiritual affairs, but
should lean upon the old staff of custom and authority. But England had
cast off her swaddling-clothes, and was a nursery of strong, thinking
men, who would bow to no authority save that which their reason and
conscience approved. It was hopeless, useless, foolish, to try to drive
such men back into a creed which they had outgrown. Such an attempt was,
however, being made, backed by all the weight of a bigoted king with a
powerful and wealthy Church as his ally. In three years the nation would
understand it, and the King would be flying from his angry people; but
at present, sunk in a torpor after the long civil wars and the corrupt
reign of Charles, they failed to see what was at stake, and turned
against those who would warn them, as a hasty man turns on the messenger
who is the bearer of evil tidings. Is it not strange, my dears, how
quickly a mere shadowy thought comes to take living form, and grow into
a very tragic reality? At one end of the chain is a king brooding over a
point of doctrine; at the other are six thousand desperate men, chivied
and chased from shire to shire, standing to bay at last amid the bleak
Bridgewater marshes, with their hearts as bitter and as hopeless as
those of hunted beasts of prey. A king's theology is a dangerous thing
for his subjects.

But if the idea for which these poor men fought was a worthy one, what
shall we say of the man who had been chosen as the champion of their
cause? Alas, that such men should have had such a leader! Swinging from
the heights of confidence to the depths of despair, choosing his future
council of state one day and proposing to fly from the army on the
next, he appeared from the start to be possessed by the very spirit
of fickleness. Yet he had borne a fair name before this enterprise. In
Scotland he had won golden opinions, not only for his success, but for
the moderation and mercy with which he treated the vanquished. On the
Continent he had commanded an English brigade in a way that earned
praise from old soldiers of Louis and the Empire. Yet now, when his own
head and his own fortunes were at stake, he was feeble, irresolute, and
cowardly. In my father's phrase, 'all the virtue had gone out of him.'
I declare when I have seen him riding among his troops, with his head
bowed upon his breast and a face like a mute at a burying, casting an
air of gloom and of despair all round him, I have felt that, even in
case of success, such a man could never wear the crown of the Tudors and
the Plantagenets, but that some stronger hand, were it that of one of
his own generals, would wrest it from him.

I will do Monmouth the justice to say that from the time when it was at
last decided to fight--for the very good reason that no other course was
open--he showed up in a more soldierly and manlier spirit. For the first
few days in July no means were neglected to hearten our troops and to
nerve them for the coming battle. From morning to night we were at work,
teaching our foot how to form up in dense groups to meet the charge of
horse, and how to depend upon each other, and look to their officers for
orders. At night the streets of the little town from the Castle Field
to the Parret Bridge resounded with the praying and the preaching. There
was no need for the officers to quell irregularities, for the troops
punished them amongst themselves. One man who came out on the streets
hot with wine was well-nigh hanged by his companions, who finally cast
him out of the town as being unworthy to fight in what they looked
upon as a sacred quarrel. As to their courage, there was no occasion to
quicken that, for they were as fearless as lions, and the only danger
was lest their fiery daring should lead them into foolhardiness. Their
desire was to hurl themselves upon the enemy like a horde of Moslem
fanatics, and it was no easy matter to drill such hot-headed fellows
into the steadiness and caution which war demands.

Provisions ran low upon the third day of our stay in Bridgewater, which
was due to our having exhausted that part of the country before, and
also to the vigilance of the Royal Horse, who scoured the district round
and cut off our supplies. Lord Grey determined, therefore, to send
out two troops of horse under cover of night, to do what they could to
refill the larder. The command of the small expedition was given over
to Major Martin Hooker, an old Lifeguardsman of rough speech and curt
manners, who had done good service in drilling the headstrong farmers
and yeomen into some sort of order. Sir Gervas Jerome and I asked leave
from Lord Grey to join the foray--a favour which was readily granted,
since there was little stirring in the town.

It was about eleven o'clock on a moonless night that we sallied out
of Bridgewater, intending to explore the country in the direction of
Boroughbridge and Athelney. We had word that there was no large body
of the enemy in that quarter, and it was a fertile district where
good store of supplies might be hoped for. We took with us four empty
waggons, to carry whatever we might have the luck to find. Our commander
arranged that one troop should ride before these and one behind, while a
small advance party, under the charge of Sir Gervas, kept some hundreds
of paces in front. In this order we clattered out of the town just as
the late bugles were blowing, and swept away down the quiet shadowy
roads, bringing anxious peering faces to the casements of the wayside
cottages as we whirled past in the darkness.
