"For the last week the distemper has raged fearfully--fearfully,
indeed," said Rainbird; "but yesterday and to-day have far exceeded all
that have gone before. The distempered have died quicker than cattle of
the murrain. I visited upwards of a hundred houses in the Borough this
morning, and only found ten persons alive; and out of those ten, not
one, I will venture to say, is alive now. It will, in truth, be a mercy
if they are gone. There were distracted mothers raving over their
children,--a young husband lamenting his wife,--two little children
weeping over their dead parents, with none to attend them, none to feed
them,--an old man mourning over his son cut off in his prime. In short,
misery and distress in their worst form,--the streets ringing with
shrieks and groans, and the numbers of dead so great that it was
impossible to carry them off. You remember Solomon Eagle's prophecy?"

"Perfectly," replied Leonard; "and I lament to see its fulfilment."

"'The streets shall be covered with grass, and the living shall not be
able to bury their dead,'--so it ran," said Rainbird. "And it has come
to pass. Not a carriage of any description, save the dead-cart, is to be
seen in the broadest streets of London, which are now as green as the
fields without her walls, and as silent as the grave itself. Terrible
times, as I said before--terrible times! The dead are rotting in heaps
in the courts, in the alleys, in the very houses, and no one to remove
them. What will be the end of it all? What will become of this great
city?"

"It is not difficult to foresee what will become of it," replied
Leonard, "unless it pleases the Lord to stay his vengeful arm. And
something whispers in my ear that we are now at the worst. The scourge
cannot exceed its present violence without working our ruin; and deeply
as we have sinned, little as we repent, I cannot bring myself to believe
that God will sweep his people entirely from the face of the earth."

"I dare not hope otherwise," rejoined Rainbird, "though I would fain do
so. I discern no symptoms of abatement of the distemper, but, on the
contrary, an evident increase of malignity, and such is the opinion of
all I have spoken with on the subject. Chowles told me he buried two
hundred more yesterday than he had ever done before, and yet he did not
carry a third of the dead to the plague-pit. He is a strange fellow that
Chowles. But for his passion for his horrible calling there is no
necessity for him to follow it, for he is now one of the richest men in
London."

"He must have amassed his riches by robbery, then," remarked Leonard.

"True," returned Rainbird. "He helps himself without scruple to the
clothes, goods, and other property, of all who die of the pestilence;
and after ransacking their houses, conveys his plunder in the dead-cart
to his own dwelling."

"In Saint Paul's?" asked Leonard.

"No--a large house in Nicholas-lane, once belonging to a wealthy
merchant, who perished, with his family, of the plague," replied
Rainbird. "He has filled it from cellar to garret with the spoil he has
obtained."

"And how has he preserved it?" inquired the apprentice.

"The plague has preserved it for him," replied Rainbird. "The few
authorities who now act have, perhaps, no knowledge of his proceedings;
or if they have, have not cared to interfere, awaiting a more favourable
season, if it should ever arrive, to dispossess him of his hoard, and
punish him for his delinquencies; while, in the mean time, they are
glad, on any terms, to avail themselves of his services as a burier.
Other people do not care to meddle with him, and the most daring robber
would be afraid to touch infected money or clothes."

"If you are going towards Nicholas-lane," said Leonard, as if struck
with a sudden idea, "and will point out to me the house in question, you
will do me a favour."

Rainbird nodded assent, and they walked on together towards
Fish-street-hill. Ascending it, and turning off on the right, they
entered Great Eastcheap, but had not proceeded far when they were
obliged to turn back, the street being literally choked up with a pile
of carcasses deposited there by the burier's assistants. Shaping their
course along Gracechurch-street, they turned off into Lombard-street,
and as Leonard gazed at the goldsmiths' houses on either side, which
were all shut up, with the fatal red cross on the doors, he could not
help remarking to his companion, "The plague has not spared any of these
on account of their riches."

"True," replied the other; "and of the thousands who used formerly to
throng this street not one is left. Wo to London!--wo!--wo!"

Leonard echoed the sentiment, and fell into a melancholy train of
reflection. It has been more than once remarked that the particular day
now under consideration was the one in which the plague exercised its
fiercest dominion over the city; and though at first its decline was as
imperceptible as the gradual diminution of the day after the longest has
passed, yet still the alteration began. On that day, as if death had
known that his power was to be speedily arrested, he sharpened his
fellest arrows, and discharged them with unerring aim. To pursue the
course of the destroyer from house to house--to show with what
unrelenting fury he assailed his victims--to describe their
sufferings--to number the dead left within their beds, thrown into the
streets, or conveyed to the plague-pits--would be to present a narrative
as painful as revolting. On this terrible night it was as hot as if it
had been the middle of June. No air was stirring, and the silence was so
profound, that a slight noise was audible at a great distance. Hushed in
the seemingly placid repose lay the great city, while hundreds of its
inhabitants were groaning in agony, or breathing their last sigh.

On reaching the upper end of Nicholas-lane, Rainbird stood still for a
moment, and pointed out a large house on the right, just below the old
church dedicated to the saint from which the thoroughfare took its name.
They were about to proceed towards it, when the smith again paused, and
called Leonard's attention to two figures quickly advancing from the
lower end of the street. As the apprentice and his companion stood in
the shade, they could not be seen, while the two persons, being in the
moonlight, were fully revealed. One of them, it was easy to perceive,
was Chowles. He stopped before the door of his dwelling and unfastened
it, and while he was thus occupied, the other person turned his face so
as to catch the full radiance of the moon, disclosing the features of
Sir Paul Parravicin. Before Leonard recovered from the surprise into
which he was thrown by this unexpected discovery, they had entered the
house.

He then hurried forward, but, to his great disappointment, found the
door locked. Anxious to get into the house without alarming those who
had preceded him, he glanced at the windows; but the shutters were
closed and strongly barred. While hesitating what to do, Rainbird came
up, and guessing his wishes, told him there was a door at the back of
the house by which he might probably gain admittance. Accordingly they
hastened down a passage skirting the churchyard, which brought them to a
narrow alley lying between Nicholas-lane and Abchurch-lane. Tracking it
for about twenty yards, Rainbird paused before a small yard-door, and
trying the latch, found it yielded to his touch.

Crossing the yard, they came to another door. It was locked, and though
they could have easily burst it open, they preferred having recourse to
an adjoining window, the shutter of which, being carelessly fastened,
was removed without noise or difficulty. In another moment they gained a
small dark room on the ground-floor, whence they issued into a passage,
where, to their great joy, they found a lighted lantern placed on a
chair. Leonard hastily possessed himself of it, and was about to enter a
room on the left when his companion arrested him.

"Before we proceed further," he said in a low voice, "I must know what
you are about to do?"

"My purpose will be explained in a word," replied the apprentice in the
same tone. "I suspect that Nizza Macascree is confined here by Sir Paul
Parravicin and Chowles, and if it turns out I am right in my conjecture,
I propose to liberate her. Will you help me?"

"Humph!" exclaimed Rainbird, "I don't much fancy the job. However, since
I am here, I'll not go back. I am curious to see the coffin-maker's
hoards. Look at yon heap of clothes. There are velvet doublets and
silken hose enow to furnish wardrobes for a dozen court gallants. And
yet, rich as the stuffs are, I would not put the best of them on for all
the wealth of London."

"Nor I," replied Leonard. "I shall make free, however, with a sword," he
added, selecting one from the heap. "I may need a weapon."

"I require nothing more than my halberd," observed the smith; "and I
would advise you to throw away that velvet scabbard; it is a certain
harbour for infection."

Leonard did not neglect the caution, and pushing open the door, they
entered a large room which resembled an upholsterer's shop, being
literally crammed with chairs, tables, cabinets, moveable cupboards,
bedsteads, curtains, and hangings, all of the richest description.

"What I heard is true," observed Rainbird, gazing around in
astonishment. "Chowles must have carried off every thing he could lay
hands upon. What can he do with all that furniture?"

"What the miser does with his store," replied Leonard: "feast his eyes
with it, but never use it."

They then proceeded to the next room. It was crowded with books,
looking-glasses, and pictures; many of them originally of great value,
but greatly damaged by the careless manner in which they were piled one
upon another. A third apartment was filled with flasks of wine, with
casks probably containing spirits, and boxes, the contents of which they
did not pause to examine. A fourth contained male and female
habiliments, spread out like the dresses in a theatrical wardrobe. Most
of these garments were of the gayest and costliest description, and of
the latest fashion, and Leonard sighed as he looked upon them, and
thought of the fate of those they had so lately adorned.

"There is contagion enough in those clothes to infect a whole city,"
said Rainbird, who regarded them with different feelings. "I have half a
mind to set fire to them."

"It were a good deed to do so," returned Leonard; "but it must not be
done now. Let us go upstairs. These are the only rooms below."

Accordingly, they ascended the staircase, and entered chamber after
chamber, all of which were as full of spoil as those they had just
visited; but they could find no one, nor was there any symptom that the
house was tenanted. They next stood still within the gallery, and
listened intently for some sound to reveal those they sought, but all
was still and silent as the grave.

"We cannot be mistaken," observed Leonard. "It is clear this house is
the receptacle for Chowles's plunder. Besides, we should not have found
the lantern burning if they had gone forth again. No, no; they must be
hidden somewhere, and I will not quit the place till I find them." Their
search, however, was fruitless. They mounted to the garrets, opened
every door, and glanced into every corner. Still, no one was to be seen.

"I begin to think Nizza cannot be here," said the apprentice; "but I am
resolved not to depart without questioning Chowles on the subject."

"You must find him first," rejoined Rainbird. "If he is anywhere, he
must be in the cellar, for we have been into every room in this part of
the house. For my own part, I think you had better abandon the search
altogether. No good will come of it."

Leonard, however, was not to be dissuaded, and they went downstairs. A
short flight of stone steps brought them to a spacious kitchen, but it
was quite empty, and seemed to have been long disused. They then peeped
into the scullery adjoining, and were about to retrace their steps, when
Rainbird plucked Leonard's sleeve to call attention to a gleam of light
issuing from a door which stood partly ajar, in a long narrow passage
leading apparently to the cellars.

"They are there," he said, in a whisper.

"So I see," replied Leonard, in the same tone. And raising his finger to
his lips in token of silence, he stole forward on the points of his feet
and cautiously opened the door.

At the further end of the cellar--for such it was--knelt Chowles,
examining with greedy eyes the contents of a large chest, which, from
the hasty glance that Leonard caught of it, appeared to be filled with
gold and silver plate. A link stuck against the wall threw a strong
light over the scene, and showed that the coffin-maker was alone. As
Leonard advanced, the sound of his footsteps caught Chowles's ear, and
uttering a cry of surprise and alarm, he let fall the lid of the chest,
and sprang to his feet.

"What do you want?" he cried, looking uneasily round, as if in search of
some weapon. "Are you come to rob me?"

"No," replied Leonard; "neither are we come to reclaim the plunder you
have taken from others. We are come in search of Nizza Macascree."

"Then you have come on a fool's errand," replied Chowles, regaining his
courage, "for she is not here. I know nothing of her."

"That is false," replied Leonard. "You have just conducted Sir Paul
Parravicin to her."

This assertion on the part of the apprentice, which he thought himself
justified under the circumstances in making, produced a strong effect on
Chowles. He appeared startled and confounded. "What right have you to
play the spy upon me thus?" he faltered.

"The right that every honest man possesses to check the designs of the
wicked," replied Leonard. "You admit she is here. Lead me to her
hiding-place without more ado."

"If you know where it is," rejoined Chowles, who now perceived the trick
that had been practised upon him, "you will not want me to conduct you
to it. Neither Nizza nor Sir Paul Parravicin are here."

"That is false, prevaricating scoundrel," cried Leonard. "My companion
and I saw you enter the house with your profligate employer. And as we
gained admittance a few minutes after you, it is certain no one can have
left it. Lead me to Nizza's retreat instantly, or I will cut your
throat." And seizing Chowles by the collar, he held the point of his
sword to his breast.

"Use no violence," cried Chowles, struggling to free himself, "and I
will take you wherever you please. This way--this way." And he motioned
as if he would take them upstairs.

"Do not think to mislead me, villain," cried Leonard, tightening his
grasp. "We have searched every room in the upper part of the house, and
though we have discovered the whole of your ill-gotten hoards, we have
found nothing else. No one is there."

"Well, then," rejoined Chowles, "since the truth must out, Sir Paul is
in the next house. But it is his own abode. I have nothing to do with
it, nothing whatever. He is accountable for his own actions, and you
will be accountable to _him_ if you intrude upon his privacy. Release
me, and I swear to conduct you to him. But you will take the
consequences of your rashness upon yourself. I only go upon compulsion."

"I am ready to take any consequences," replied Leonard, resolutely.

"Come along, then," said Chowles, pointing down the passage.

"You mean us no mischief?" cried Leonard, suspiciously. "If you do, the
attempt will cost you your life."

Chowles made no answer, but moved along the passage as quickly as
Leonard, who kept fast hold of him and walked by his side, would permit.
Presently they reached a door, which neither the apprentice nor Rainbird
had observed before, and which admitted them into an extensive vault,
with a short staircase at the further end, communicating with a passage
that Leonard did not require to be informed was in another house.

Here Chowles paused. "I think it right to warn you you are running into
a danger from which ere long you will be glad to draw back, young man,"
he said, to the apprentice. "As a friend, I advise you to proceed no
further in the matter."

"Waste no more time in talking," cried Leonard, fiercely, and forcing
him forward as he spoke, "where is Nizza? Lead me to her without an
instant's delay."

"A wilful man must have his way," returned Chowles, hurrying up the main
staircase. "It is not my fault if any harm befalls you."

They had just gained the landing when a door on the right was suddenly
thrown open, and Sir Paul Parravicin stood before them. He looked
surprised and startled at the sight of the apprentice, and angrily
demanded his business. "I am come for Nizza Macascree," replied Leonard,
"whom you and Chowles have detained against her will."

Parravicin glanced sternly and inquiringly at the coffin-maker.

"I have protested to him that she is not here, Sir Paul," said the
latter, "but he will not believe me, and has compelled me, by threats of
taking my life, to bring him and his companion to you."

"Then take them back again," rejoined Parravicin, turning haughtily upon
his heel.

"That answer will not suffice, Sir Paul," cried Leonard--"I will not
depart without her."

"How!" exclaimed the knight, drawing his sword. "Do you dare to intrude
upon my presence? Begone! or I will punish your presumption." And he
prepared to attack the apprentice.

"Advance a footstep," rejoined Leonard, who had never relinquished his
grasp of Chowles, "and I pass my sword through this man's body. Speak,
villain," he continued, in a tone so formidable that the coffin-maker
shook with apprehension--"is she here or not?" Chowles gazed from him to
the knight, whose deportment was equally menacing and appeared
bewildered with terror.

"It is needless," said Leonard, "your looks answer for you. She _is_."

"Yes, yes, I confess she is," replied Chowles.

"You hear what he says, Sir Paul," remarked Leonard.

"His fears would make him assert anything," rejoined Parravicin,
disdainfully. "If you do not depart instantly, I will drive you forth."

"Sir Paul Parravicin," rejoined Leonard, in an authoritative tone, "I
command you in the king's name, to deliver up this girl."

Parravicin laughed scornfully. "The king has no authority here," he
said.

"Pardon me, Sir Paul," rejoined Chowles, who began to be seriously
alarmed at his own situation, and eagerly grasped at the opportunity
that offered of extricating himself from it--"pardon me. If it is the
king's pleasure she should be removed, it materially alters the case,
and I can be no party to her detention."

"Both you and your employer will incur his majesty's severest
displeasure, by detaining her after this notice," remarked Leonard.

"Before I listen to the young man's request, let him declare that it is
his intention to deliver her up to the king," rejoined Parravicin,
coldly.

"It is my intention to deliver her up to one who has the best right to
take charge of her," returned Leonard.

"You mean her father," sneered Parravicin.

"Ay, but not the person you suppose to be her father," replied Leonard.
"An important discovery has been made respecting her parentage."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Parravicin, with a look of surprise. "Who has the
honour to be her father?"

"A gentleman named Thirlby," replied Leonard.

"What!" cried Parravicin, starting, and turning pale. "Did you say
Thirlby?"

The apprentice reiterated his assertion. Parravicin uttered a deep
groan, and pressed his hand forcibly against his brow for some moments,
during which the apprentice watched him narrowly. He then controlled
himself by a powerful effort, and returned his sword to its scabbard.

"Come into this room, young man," he said to the apprentice, "and let
your companion remain outside with Chowles. Fear nothing. I intend you
no injury."

"I do not distrust you," replied Leonard, "and if I did, should have no
apprehension." And motioning Rainbird to remain where he was, he entered
the room with the knight, who instantly closed the door.

Parravicin's first proceeding was to question him as to his reasons for
supposing Nizza to be Thirlby's daughter, and clearly perceiving the
deep interest his interrogator took in the matter, and the favourable
change that, from some unknown cause, had been wrought in his
sentiments, the apprentice did not think fit to hide anything from him.
Parravicin's agitation increased as he listened to the recital; and at
last, overcome by emotion, he sank into a chair, and covered his face
with his hands. Recovering himself in a short time, he arose, and began
to pace the chamber to and fro.

"What I have told you seems to have disturbed you, Sir Paul," remarked
Leonard. "May I ask the cause of your agitation?"

"No, man, you may not," replied Parravicin, angrily. And then suddenly
checking himself, he added, with forced calmness, "And so you parted
with Mr. Thirlby on London Bridge, and you think he will return to
Doctor Hodges's residence in Watling-street."

"I am sure of it," replied Leonard.

"I must see him without delay," rejoined Parravicin.

"I will take you to him," remarked Leonard; "but first I must see
Nizza."

Parravicin walked to a table, on which stood a small silver bell, and
ringing it, the summons was immediately answered by an old woman. He was
about to deliver a message to her, when the disturbed expression of her
countenance struck him, and he hastily inquired the cause of it.

"You must not see the young lady to-night, Sir Paul," said the old
woman.

"Why not?" demanded the knight, hastily. "Why not?"

"Because--but you frighten me so that I dare not speak," was the answer.

"I will frighten you still more if you keep me in this state of
suspense," rejoined Parravicin, furiously. "Is she ill?"

"I fear she has got the plague," returned the old woman. "Now you can
see her if you think proper."

"_I_ will see her," said Leonard. "I have no fear of infection."

The old woman looked hard at Parravicin, as if awaiting his orders.
"Yes, yes, you can take him to her room," said the knight, who seemed
completely overpowered by the intelligence, "if he chooses to go
thither. But why do you suppose it is the plague?"

"One cannot well be deceived in a seizure of that kind," replied the old
woman, shaking her head.

"I thought the disorder never attacked the same person twice," said
Parravicin.

"I myself am an instance to the contrary," replied Leonard.

"And, as you have twice recovered, there may be a chance for Nizza,"
said Parravicin. "This old woman will take you to her. I will hasten to
Doctor Hodges's residence, and if I should fail in meeting him, will not
rest till I procure assistance elsewhere. Do not leave her till I
return."

Leonard readily gave a promise to the desired effect, and accompanying
him to the door, told Rainbird what had happened. The latter agreed to
wait below to render any assistance that might be required, and went
downstairs with Parravicin and Chowles. The two latter instantly quitted
the house together, and hastened to Watling-street.

With a beating heart, Leonard then followed the old woman to Nizza's
chamber. They had to pass through a small anteroom, the door of which
was carefully locked. The suite of apartments occupied by the captive
girl were exquisitely and luxuriously furnished, and formed a striking
contrast to the rest of the house. The air was loaded with perfumes;
choice pictures adorned the walls; and the tables were covered with
books and china ornaments. The windows, however, were strictly barred,
and every precaution appeared to be taken to prevent an attempt at
escape. Leonard cast an anxious look round as he entered the anteroom,
and its luxurious air filled him with anxiety. His conductress, however,
did not allow him time for reflection, but led him into another room,
still more richly furnished than the first, and lighted by a large
coloured lamp, that shed a warm glow around it. An old dwarfed African,
in a fantastic dress, and with a large scimetar stuck in his girdle,
stepped forward on their approach, and shook his head significantly.

"He is dumb," said the old woman, "but his gestures are easy to be
understood. He means that Nizza is worse."

Leonard heaved a deep sigh. Passing into a third room, they perceived
the poor girl stretched on a couch placed in a recess at one side. She
heard their footsteps, and without raising her head, or looking towards
them, said, in a weak but determined voice--"Tell your master I will see
him no more. The plague has again attacked me, and I am glad of it, for
it will deliver me from him. It will be useless to offer me any
remedies, for I will not take them."

"It is not Sir Paul Parravicin," replied the old woman. "I have brought
a stranger, with whose name I am unacquainted, to see you."

"Then you have done very wrong," replied Nizza. "I will see no one."

"Not even me, Nizza?" asked Leonard, advancing. The poor girl started at
the sound of his voice, and raising herself on one arm, looked wildly
towards him. As soon as she was satisfied that her fancy did not deceive
her, she uttered a cry of delight, and falling backwards on the couch,
became insensible.

Leonard and the old woman instantly flew to the poor girl's assistance,
and restoratives being applied, she speedily opened her eyes and fixed
them tenderly and inquiringly on the apprentice. Before replying to her
mute interrogatories, Leonard requested the old woman to leave them--an
order very reluctantly obeyed--and as soon as they were left alone,
proceeded to explain, as briefly as he could, the manner in which he had
discovered her place of captivity. Nizza listened to his recital with
the greatest interest, and though evidently suffering acute pain,
uttered no complaint, but endeavoured to assume an appearance of
composure and tranquillity.

"I must now tell you all that has befallen me since we last met," she
said, as he concluded. "I will not dwell upon the persecution I endured
from the king, whose passion increased in proportion to my resistance--I
will not dwell upon the arts, the infamous arts, used to induce me to
comply with his wishes--neither will I dwell upon the desperate measure
I had determined to resort to, if driven to the last strait--nor would I
mention the subject at all, except to assure you I escaped contamination
where few escaped it."

"You need not give me any such assurance," remarked Leonard.

"While I was thus almost driven to despair," pursued Nizza, "a young
female who attended me, and affected to deplore my situation, offered to
help me to escape. I eagerly embraced the offer; and one night, having
purloined, as she stated, the key of the chamber in which I was lodged,
she conducted me by a back staircase into the palace-gardens. Thinking
myself free, I warmly thanked my supposed deliverer, who hurried me
towards a gate, at which she informed me a man was waiting to guide me
to a cottage about a mile from the city, where I should be in perfect
safety."

"I see the device," cried Leonard. "But, why--why did you trust her?"

"What could I do?" rejoined Nizza. "To stay was as bad as to fly, and
might have been worse. At all events, I had no distrust. My companion
opened the gate, and called to some person without. It was profoundly
dark; but I could perceive a carriage, or some other vehicle, at a
little distance. Alarmed at the sight, I whispered my fears to my
companion, and would have retreated; but she laid hold of my hand, and
detained me. The next moment I felt a rude grasp upon my arm. Before I
could cry out, a hand was placed over my mouth so closely as almost to
stifle me; and I was forced into the carriage by two persons, who seated
themselves on either side of me, threatening to put me to death if I
made the slightest noise. The carriage was then driven off at a furious
pace. For some miles it pursued the high road, and then struck into a
lane, where, in consequence of the deep and dangerous ruts, the driver
was obliged to relax his speed. But in spite of all his caution, one of
the wheels sunk into a hole, and in the efforts to extricate it, the
carriage was overturned. No injury was sustained either by me or the
others inside, and the door being forced open without much difficulty,
we were let out. One of my captors kept near me, while the other lent
his assistance to the coachman to set the carriage to rights. It proved,
however, to be so much damaged, that it could not proceed; and, after
considerable delay, my conductors ordered the coachman to remain with it
till further assistance could be sent; and, taking the horses, one of
them, notwithstanding my resistance, placed me beside him, and galloped
off. Having ridden about five miles, we crossed an extensive common, and
passed an avenue of trees, which brought us to the entrance of an old
house. Our arrival seemed to be expected; for the instant we appeared,
the gate was opened, and the old woman you have just seen, and who is
called Mrs. Carteret, together with a dumb African, named Hassan,
appeared at it. Some muttered discourse passed between my conductors and
these persons, which ended in my being committed to the care of Mrs.
Carteret who led me upstairs to a richly-furnished chamber, and urged me
to take some refreshment before I retired to rest, which, however, I
declined."

"Still, you saw nothing of Sir Paul Parravicin?" asked Leonard.

"On going downstairs next morning, he was the first person I beheld,"
replied Nizza. "Falling upon his knees, he implored my pardon for the
artifice he had practised, and said he had been compelled to have
recourse to it in order to save me from the king. He then began to plead
his own suit; but finding his protestations of passion of no effect, he
became yet more importunate; when, at this juncture, one of the men who
had acted as my conductor on the previous night suddenly entered the
room, and told him he must return to Oxford without an instant's delay,
as the king's attendants were in search of him. Casting a look at me
that made me tremble, he then departed; and though I remained more than
two months in that house, I saw nothing more of him."

"Did you not attempt to escape during that time?" asked Leonard.

"I was so carefully watched by Mrs. Carteret and Hassan, that it would
have been vain to attempt it," she replied. "About a week ago, the two
men who had conducted me to my place of captivity, again made their
appearance, and told me I must accompany them to London. I attempted no
resistance, well aware it would be useless; and as the journey was made
by by-roads, three days elapsed before we reached the capital. We
arrived at night, and I almost forgot my own alarm in the terrible
sights I beheld at every turn. It would have been useless to call out
for assistance, for there was no one to afford it. I asked my conductors
if they had brought me there to die, and they answered, sternly, 'It
depended on myself.' At Ludgate we met Chowles, the coffin-maker, and he
brought us to this house. Yesterday, Sir Paul Parravicin made his
appearance, and told me he had brought me hither to be out of the king's
way. He then renewed his odious solicitations. I resisted him as firmly
as before; but he was more determined; and I might have been reduced to
the last extremity but for your arrival, or for the terrible disorder
that has seized me. But I have spoken enough of myself. Tell me what has
become of Amabel?"

"She, too, has got the plague," replied Leonard, mournfully.

"Alas! alas!" cried Nizza, bursting into tears; "she is so dear to you,
that I grieve for her far more than for myself."

"I have not seen her since I last beheld you," said Leonard, greatly
touched by the poor girl's devotion. "She was carried off by the Earl of
Rochester on the same night that you were taken from Kingston Lisle by
the king."

"And she has been in his power ever since?" demanded Nizza, eagerly.

"Ever since," repeated Leonard.

"The same power that has watched over me, I trust has protected her,"
cried Nizza, fervently.

"I cannot doubt it," replied Leonard. "She would now not be alive were
it otherwise. But I have now something of importance to disclose to you.
You remember the stranger we met near the plague-pit in Finsbury Fields,
and whose child I buried?"

"Perfectly," replied Nizza.

"What if I tell you he is your father?" said Leonard.

"What!" cried Nizza, in the utmost surprise. "Have I, then, been
mistaken all these years in supposing the piper to be my father?"

"You have," replied Leonard. "I cannot explain more to you at present;
but a few hours will reveal all. Thirlby is the name of your father.
Have you ever heard it before?"

"Never," returned Nizza. "It is strange what you tell me. I have often
reproached myself for not feeling a stronger affection for the piper,
who always treated me with the kindness of a parent. But it now seems
the true instinct was wanting. Tell me your reasons for supposing this
person to be my father."

As Leonard was about to reply, the door was opened by Mrs. Carteret, who
said that Sir Paul Parravicin had just returned with Doctor Hodges and
another gentleman. The words were scarcely uttered, when Thirlby rushed
into the room, and, flinging himself on his knees before the couch,
cried, "At last I have found you--my child! my child!" The surprise
which Nizza must have experienced at such an address was materially
lessened by what Leonard had just told her; and, after earnestly
regarding the stranger for some time, she exclaimed, in a gentle voice,
"My father!"

Thirlby sprang to his feet, and would have folded her in his arms, if
Doctor Hodges, who by this time had reached the couch, had not prevented
him. "Touch her not, or you destroy yourself," he cried.

"I care not if I do," rejoined Thirlby. "The gratification would be
cheaply purchased at the price of my life; and if I could preserve hers
by the sacrifice, I would gladly make it."

"No more of this," cried Hodges, impatiently, "or you will defeat any
attempt I may make to cure her. You had better not remain here. Your
presence agitates her."

Gazing wistfully at his daughter, and scarcely able to tear himself
away, Thirlby yielded at last to the doctor's advice, and quitted the
room. He was followed by Leonard, who received a hint to the same
effect. On reaching the adjoining room, they found Sir Paul Parravicin
walking to and fro in an agitated manner. He immediately came up to
Thirlby, and, in an anxious but deferential tone, inquired how he had
found Nizza? The latter shook his head, and, sternly declining any
further conversation, passed on with the apprentice to an outer room. He
then flung himself into a chair, and appeared lost in deep and bitter
reflection. Leonard was unwilling to disturb him; but at last his own
anxieties compelled him to break silence.

"Can you tell me aught of Amabel?" he asked.

"Alas! no," replied Thirlby, rousing himself. "I have had no time to
inquire about her, as you shall hear. After leaving you on the bridge, I
went into Southwark, and hurrying through all the principal streets,
inquired from every watchman I met whether he had seen any person
answering to Doctor Hodges's description, but could hear nothing of him.
At last I gave up the quest, and, retracing my steps, was proceeding
along Cannon-street, when I descried a person a little in advance of me,
whom I thought must be the doctor, and, calling out to him, found I was
not mistaken. I had just reached him, when two other persons turned the
corner of Nicholas-lane. On seeing us, one of them ran up to the doctor,
exclaiming, 'By Heaven, the very person I want!' It was Sir Paul
Parravicin; and he instantly explained his errand. Imagine the feelings
with which I heard his account of the illness of my daughter. Imagine,
also, the horror I must have experienced in recognising in her
persecutor my--"

The sentence was not completed, for at that moment the door was opened
by Sir Paul Parravicin, who, advancing towards Thirlby, begged, in the
same deferential tone as before, to have a few words with him.

"I might well refuse you," replied Thirlby, sternly, "but it is
necessary we should have some explanation of what has occurred."

"It is," rejoined Parravicin, "and, therefore, I have sought you."
Thirlby arose, and accompanied the knight into the outer room, closing
the door after him. More than a quarter of an hour--it seemed an age to
Leonard--elapsed, and still no one came. Listening intently, he heard
voices in the next room. They were loud and angry, as if in quarrel.
Then all was quiet, and at last Thirlby reappeared, and took his seat
beside him.

"Have you seen Doctor Hodges?" inquired the apprentice, eagerly.

"I have," replied Thirlby--"and he speaks favourably of my poor child.
He has administered all needful remedies, but as it is necessary to
watch their effect, he will remain with her some time longer."

"And, meanwhile, I shall know nothing of Amabel," cried Leonard, in a
tone of bitter disappointment.

"Your anxiety is natural," returned Thirlby, "but you may rest
satisfied, if Doctor Hodges has seen her, he has done all that human aid
can effect. But as you must perforce wait his coming forth, I will
endeavour to beguile the tedious interval by relating to you so much of
my history as refers to Nizza Macascree."

After a brief pause, he commenced. "You must know, then, that in my
youth I became desperately enamoured of a lady named Isabella Morley.
She was most beautiful--but I need not enlarge upon her attractions,
since you have beheld her very image in Nizza. When I first met her she
was attached to another, but I soon rid myself of my rival. I quarrelled
with him, and slew him in a duel. After a long and urgent suit, for the
successful issue of which I was mainly indebted to my rank and wealth,
which gave great influence with her parents, Isabella became mine. But I
soon found out she did not love me. In consequence of this discovery, I
became madly jealous, and embittered her life and my own by constant,
and, now I know too well, groundless suspicions. She had borne me a son,
and in the excess of my jealous fury, fancying the child was not my own,
I threatened to put it to death. This violence led to the unhappy result
I am about to relate. Another child was born, a daughter--need I say
Nizza, or to give her her proper name, Isabella, for she was so
christened after her mother--and one night--one luckless
night,--maddened by some causeless doubt, I snatched the innocent babe
from her mother's arms, and if I had not been prevented by the
attendants, who rushed into the room on hearing their mistress's
