softly, presently, lest he should be lonely in that place. And there she
spoke to him of her own faith, saying that already he owed much to it.
For he was making his vows to the Asir for success.

"Shall you pray yet again to the Asir, my husband?" she asked.

"Why should I? I have vowed my vows, and there is an end. If they heed
them, all is well; and if not, the Norns hinder."

"There is One whom the Norns hinder not at all," she said gently, and so
told him how that her prayers would go up every day.

Fain was she that he also prayed in that wise to her God, that naught
might be apart in their minds.

Then he said, "I have heard this from David and Withelm also, and it is
good. Teach me to vow to your God, sweet wife, and I will do so; and you
shall teach me to pray as you pray."

So it came to pass that Havelok in the after days was more than ready to
help the Christian teachers when they came to him; for that was how the
vow that he made ran, that he would do so if he was king, and had the power.

Now there is nothing to tell of our voyage, for one could not wish for a
better passage, if the ship was slow. Indeed, she was so slow that a
smaller vessel that left Tetney haven on the next day reached the same
port that we were bound for on the night that we came to our old home.
And that we learned soon after she had come.

Into Sigurd's haven we sailed on the morning tide, and strange it seemed
to me to see the well-known place unchanged as we neared it. My father's
house was there, and Arngeir's, and the great hall of the jarl towered
over all, as I remembered it. Men were building a ship in the long shed
where ours had been built, and where the queen had hidden; and the
fishing boats lay on the hard as on the day when Havelok had come to us.
The little grove was yet behind our house, and it seemed strange when I
remembered that the old stones of its altar were far beyond the seas. I
wondered if Thor yet stood under his great ash tree; and then I saw one
change, for that tree was gone, and in its place stood a watchtower,
stone built, and broad and high, for haven beacon.

On the high fore deck stood Havelok, and his arm was round Goldberga as
we ran in, but they were silent. The land held overmuch of coming wonder
for them to put into words, as I think.

Presently the boats came off to us in the old way, and here and there I
seemed to know the faces of the men, but I was not sure. It was but the
remembrance of the old Danish cast of face, maybe. I could put no names
to any of them. And as we were warped alongside the wharf, there rode
down to see who we were Sigurd the jarl himself, seeming unchanged,
although twelve years had gone over him. He was younger than my father,
I think, and was at that age when a man changes too slowly for a boy to
notice aught but that the one he left as a man he thought old is so yet.
He was just the noble-looking warrior that I had always wondered at and
admired.

We had arranged in this way: Havelok was to be the merchant, and we his
partners in the venture, trading with the goods in the ship as our own.
That the owner, who was also ship master, had agreed to willingly
enough, as we promised to make good any loss that might be from our want
of skill in bargaining. One may say that we bought the cargo, which was
not a great one, on our own risk, therefore, hiring the vessel to wait
our needs, in case we found it better to fly or to land elsewhere
presently. Then Havelok was to ask the jarl's leave to trade in the
land, and so find a chance to speak with him in private. After that the
goods might be an excuse for going far and wide through the villages to
let men know who had come, without rousing Hodulf's fears.

And as we thought of all this on the voyage, Goldberga remembered that
it was likely that Sigurd would know again the ring that had been the
queen's, and she said that it had better be shown him at once, that he
might begin to suspect who his guest was. For we knew that he was true
to the son of Gunnar, if none else might still be so.

This seemed good to us all; and, indeed, everything seemed to be well
planned, though we knew that there are always some happenings that have
been overlooked. We thought we had provided against these by keeping the
ship as our own to wait for us, however, and it will be seen how it all
worked out in the end.

Now Havelok went ashore as soon as the ship was moored; and the moment
that he touched land he made a sign on his breast, and I think that it
was not that of the hammer of Thor, for Goldberga watched him with
bright eyes, and she seemed content as she did so. He went at once to
where the jarl sat on his horse waiting him, and greetings passed. I was
so used to seeing men stare at my brother that I thought little of the
long look that Sigurd gave him; but presently it seemed that he was
mightily taken with this newcomer, for he came on board the ship, that
he might speak more with him and us.

"Presently," he said, "you must come and dine with me at my hall; for
the lady whom I saw as you came in will be weary, and a meal on shore
after a long voyage is ever pleasant. Now what is your errand here?"

"Trading, jarl," answered Havelok.

"I thought you somewhat over warlike-looking for a merchant," said
Sigurd; "what is your merchandise?"

"Lincoln cloth, and bar iron, and such like; and with it all one thing
that is worth showing to you, jarl, for I will sell it to none but
yourself."

Now we went aft slowly, and presently Havelok and the jarl were alone by
the steering oar, by design on our part.

"This seems to be somewhat special," said Sigurd. "What is it?"

Havelok took the ring from his pouch, and set it in the jarl's hand
without a word; and long Sigurd looked at it. I saw the red on his cheek
deepen as he did so, but he said never a word for a long time. And next
he looked at Havelok, and the eyes of these two met.

"This is beyond price," said the jarl slowly. "Not my whole town would
buy this. It is such as a queen might wear and be proud of."

"Should I show it to Hodulf the king, therefore?" asked Havelok, with
his eyes on those of the jarl.

"Let no man see it until I know if I can buy it," answered Sigurd.
"Trust it to my keeping, if you will, for I would have it valued maybe."

"It is my wife's, and you must ask her that."

Then Havelok called Goldberga from her cabin under the after deck, and
the jarl greeted her in most courtly wise.

"I will trust it with you, Jarl Sigurd," she said, when he asked her if
he might keep the ring for a time. "Yet it is a great trust, as you
know, and it will be well to show the ring to none but men who are true."

"It is to true men that I would show it," he answered, with that look
that had passed between him and Havelok already; and I was sure that he
knew now pretty certainly who we were. Yet he could not say more at this
time, for the many men who waited for Havelok must be told somewhat of
his coming first.

Now men were gathering on the wharf to see the newcomers, and so the
jarl spoke openly for all to hear.

"Come up to my hall, all of you, and take a meal ashore with me; for
good is the first food on dry land after days at sea and the fare of the
ship."

So he went across the gangway, and to his horse, and rode away quickly,
calling back to us, "Hasten, for we wait for you. And I will find you
lodgings in the town for the time that you bide with us."

Now at first that seemed somewhat hazardous, for we had meant to stay in
the ship, lest we should have to fly for any reason suddenly. But it
seemed that we had no choice but to do as he bade us, and we could not
doubt him in any way. We should go armed, of course, as in a strange
place; and, after all, unless Hodulf heard of us, and wanted to see us,
he was not to be feared as yet. So I fell to wondering where our
lodgings would he, and if the old families still dwelt in the houses
that I had known, and then who had ours. Many such thoughts will crowd
into the mind of one who sees his old land again after many years, and
finds naught changed, to the eye at least.

Men have told me that, as we came into the hall presently, they thought
us the most goodly company that had ever crossed its threshold; and that
is likely, for at our head were Havelok and Goldberga. Raven was a
mighty warrior to look on as he came next, grave and silent, with
far-seeing grey eyes that were full of watching, as it were, from his
long seafaring, and yet had the seaman's ready smile in them. And
Withelm was the pattern of a well-made youth who has his strength yet to
gather, and already knows how to make the best use of that he has. There
were none but thought that he was the most handsome of the three sons of
Grim. And last came I, and I am big enough, at least, to stand at
Havelok's back; and for the rest, one remembers what Eglaf said of me.
But I do not think that any noticed us with those twain to look at,
unless they scanned our arms, which were more after the English sort
than the Danish, so far as mail and helms are concerned, and therefore
might seem strange.

The old hall was not changed at all; and handsome it seemed after
Alsi's, though it was not so large. There were more and better weapons
on the walls, and carved work was everywhere, so that in the swirl and
heat-flicker of the torches the beams, and door posts, and bench ends,
and the pillars of the high seat seemed alive with knotted dragons that
began, and ended, and writhed everywhere, wondrous to look on. Our
English have not the long winter nights, and cruel frosts, and deep snow
that make time for such work as this for the men of the household.

There fell a silence as we came in, and then Sigurd greeted us; and we
were set on the high seat, and feasted royally. On right and left of our
host sat Havelok and Goldberga, and the jarl's wife next to Havelok, and
Biorn the Brown, the sheriff, next to our princess. This was a newcomer
here since my days, but well we liked him.

There is nothing to tell of what happened at this feast, for Sigurd
asked no questions of us but the most common ones of sea, and wind, and
voyage, and never a word that would have been hard for Havelok to answer
in this company, where men of Hodulf's might well be present. Withelm
noticed this, and said that no doubt it was done purposely, and he
thought much of it.

When we had ended with song and tale, and it was near time for rest,
Sigurd bade Biorn, the sheriff, take us to his house for the night,
telling him that he must answer for our safety, and specially that of
the fair lady who had come from so far. And then he gave us a good guard
of his housecarls to take us down the street, as if he feared some danger.

"Why, jarl," said Biorn, "our guests will have a bad night if they think
that in our quiet place they need twenty men to see them to bed thus!"

"Nay, but the town is strange to the lady," answered Sigurd; "and who
knows what she may fear in a foreign land!"

So Biorn laughed, and was content; and we bade farewell to the jarl, and
went out. And then I found that it was to my father's house we were to
go, for it had been given to Biorn.

Now, I was next to Goldberga as we came to the door, and there was a
step into the house which we always had to warn strangers of when it was
dark; and so, in the old way, without thinking for a moment, I said to
her, "One step into the house, sister."

"Ho, Master Radbard, if that is you, you have sharp eyes in the dark,"
said Biorn at once; "I was just about to say that myself."

"I have some feeling in my toes," I answered; and that turned the
matter, for they laughed.

And then, when we were inside, and the courtmen had gone clattering down
the street homewards, Biorn took the great door bar from its old place
and ran it into the sockets in the doorposts, as I had done so many
times; and the runes that my father had cut on it when he made the house
were still plain to be seen on it, with the notches I had made with the
first knife that I ever had. More I will not say, but everywhere that my
eyes fell were things that I knew, even to fishing gear, for it seemed
that Biorn was somewhat of a fisher, like Grim himself.

Then they put me and my brothers into our old loft, and Havelok and
Goldberga had the room that had been my father's. As for Biorn, he would
be in the great room, before the fire. There was only this one door to
the house, and therefore he would guard that. His thralls were in the
sheds, as ours used to be, so that we and he were alone in the house.

Now, as soon as we three had gone into our old place of rest, Raven went
at once, as in the old days, to the little square window that was in the
high-pitched gable, and looked out over the town and sea. We used to
laugh at him for this, for he was never happy until he had seen, as we
said, if all was yet there.

"There are yet lights in the jarl's hall," he said, "and there are one
or two moving about down in the haven. I think that there is a vessel
coming in."

"Come and lie down, brother," I said. "We are not in Grimsby, and you
cannot go and take toll from her if there is."

He laughed, and came to his bed; but we talked of old days and of many
things more for a long while before we slept. And most of all, we
thought that Sigurd the jarl knew Havelok by the token of the ring and
by that likeness to Gunnar which Mord had seen, and that our errand was
almost told.

So we slept without thought of any danger; but the first hour of the
night in that house was not so quiet to Goldberga, for presently she
woke Havelok, and she was trembling.

"Husband," she said, "it is in my mind that we are in danger in this
place; for I cannot sleep by reason of a dream that will come to me so
soon as my eyes are closed."

"You are overtired with the voyage," Havelok told her gently; and then
he asked her what the dream was.

"It seems that I see you attacked by a boar and many foxes, and hard
pressed, and then that a bear and good hounds help you. Yet we have to
flee to a great tree, and there is safety. Then come two lions, and they
obey you."

"I think that is a dream that comes of waves, and the foam that has
followed us, and the shrill wind in the rigging, and the humming of the
sail, sweet wife; and the tree is the tall mast maybe, and the lions are
the surges that you saw along this shore, where is no danger."

So she was content; and then all in the house slept.


    CHAPTER XIX. THE LAST OF GRIFFIN OF WALES.

Maybe it was about an hour before midnight when the first waking came to
any of us, and then it was Biorn himself who was roused by footsteps
that stayed at the doorway itself, after coming across the garth, and
then a voice that was strange to him which bade him open. At once he
caught up his axe and went to the door, and asked quietly who was there.

"Open at once," said the man who was without; "we must speak with you."

"Go hence, I pray you, and wait for morning," said the sheriff. "Here
are guests of the jarl's, and they must not be disturbed."

"Open, or we will open for ourselves," was the answer. "We have no time
to stay here talking."

"That is no honest speech," quoth Biorn. "Go hence, or give me your
errand from without."

"Open, fool, or we will have the door down."

"There is an axe waiting for you if you do that. I rede you go hence in
peace, or it may be worse for you in the end."

I suppose it was in the mind of the sheriff that here were some friends
of his who had been overlong at the ale bench in the hall that evening;
but on this there was a little talk outside, and then the crash of a
great stone that was hurled against the door; and at that he started
back and got his mail shirt on him, for the door was strong enough to
stand many such blows yet. It seemed that there was more than a drunken
frolic on hand. Then came another stone against the door, and it shook;
and at the same moment Havelok came from his chamber to see what was
amiss, for the noise had waked him. He had thrown on the feasting gear
that he had been wearing; but he had neither mail nor helm, though he
had his axe in his hand.

"What is the noise?" he said anxiously, seeing that Biorn was arming.

The sheriff told him quickly, and again the door was battered.

"It is a pity that a good door should be spoilt," said Havelok, "for
down it is bound to come thus. Stand you there with the axe, and I will
even save them the trouble of breaking in."

"Nay," said Biorn; "we know not how many are there, and it were better
that you should arm first. There is time."

"Why, they think that you are alone in the house, no doubt, and will run
when they find out their mistake. They are common thieves from the
forest, or outlaws. Stand you by to cut down the first man that dares to
enter, if there happen to be one bold enough."

He set his axe down, and went to the bar, and began to slide it back
into the deep socket that would let it free, and the men outside stayed
their blows as they heard it scraping. It was a very heavy bar of oak,
some seven feet long, and over a palm square.

"Now!" cried Havelok, and caught the bar from its place.

He did not take the trouble to set it down and get his axe; but as the
door opened a little he stood back balancing the great beam in his
hands, as a boy would handle a quarterstaff, ready for the rush of the
thieves that he expected, and so he was in the way of Biorn more or less.
