the turn she dyed her hair red, and whatever man she had to do with, she
sent him to the block in the morning, that he would be able to tell
nothing. She had an awful temper. She would throw a knife from the table
at the waiting ladies, and if anything vexed her she would maybe work
upon the floor. A thousand dresses she left after her. Very
superstitious she was. Sure after her death they found a card, the ace
of hearts, nailed to her chair under the seat. She thought she would
never die while she had it there. And she bought a bracelet from an old
woman out in Wales that was over a hundred years. It was superstition
made her do that, and they found it after her death tied about her
neck."


HER DEATH

"It was a town called Calais brought her to her death, and she lay
chained on the floor three days and three nights. The Archbishop was
trying to urge her to eat, but she said 'You would not ask me to do it
if you knew the way I am,' for nobody could see the chains. After her
death they waked her for six days in Whitehall, and there were six
ladies sitting beside the body every night. Three coffins were about
it, the one nearest the body of lead, and then a wooden one, and a
leaden one on the outside. And every night there came from them a great
bellow. And the last night there came a bellow that broke the three
coffins open, and tore the velvet, and there came out a stench that
killed the most of the ladies and a million of the people of London with
the plague. Queen Victoria was more honourable than that. It would be
hard to beat Queen Elizabeth."


THE TRACE OF CROMWELL

"I'll tell you now about the trace of Cromwell. There was a young lady
was married to a gentleman, and she died with her first baby, and she
was brought away into a forth by the fairies, the good people, as I
suppose. She used to be sitting on the side of it combing her hair, and
three times her husband saw her there, but he had not the courage to go
and to bring her away. But there was a man of the name of Howley living
near the forth, and he went out with his gun one day and he saw her
beside the forth, and he brought her away to his house, and a young baby
sprang between them at the end of a year. One day the husband was out
shooting and he came in upon Howley's land, and when young Howley heard
the shooting he rose up and went out and he bade the gentleman to stop,
for this was his land. So he stopped, and he said he was weary and
thirsty, and he asked could he rest in the house. So young Howley said
as long as he asked pardon he had leave to use what he liked. So he came
in the house and he sat at the table, and he put his two eyes through
the young lady. 'If I didn't see her dead and buried,' he said, 'I'd say
that to be my own wife.' 'Oh!' said she, 'so I am your wife, and you are
badly worthy of me, and you have the worst courage ever I knew, that you
would not come and bring me away out of the forth as young Howley had
the courage to bring me,' she said. So then he asked young Howley would
he give him back his wife. 'I will give her,' he said, 'but you never
will get the child.' So the child was reared, and when he was grown he
went travelling up to Dublin. And he was at a hunt, and he lost the top
of his boot, and he went into a shoemaker's shop and he gave him half a
sovereign for nothing but to put the tip on the boot, for he saw he was
poor and had a big family. And more than that, when he was going away he
took out three sovereigns and gave them to the blacksmith, and he looked
at one of the little chaps, and he said 'That one will be in command of
the whole of England.' 'Oh, that cannot be,' said the blacksmith, 'where
I am poor and have not the means to do anything for him.' 'It will be as
I tell you,' said he, 'and write me out now a docket,' he said, 'that
if ever that youngster will come to command Ireland, he will give me a
free leg.' So the docket was made out, and he brought it away with him.
And sure enough, the shoemaker's son listed, and was put at the head of
soldiers, and got the command of England, and came with his soldiers to
put down Ireland. And Howley saw them coming and he tied his
handkerchief to the top of his stick, and when Cromwell saw that, he
halted the army, 'For there is some poor man in distress,' he said. Then
Howley showed him the docket his father had written. 'I will do some
good thing for you on account of that,' said Cromwell; 'and go now to
the top of that high cliff,' he said, 'and I'll give as much land as you
can see from it.' And so he did give it to him. It was no wonder Howley
to have known the shoemaker's son would be in command and all would
happen him, because of his mother that got knowledge in the years she
was in the forth. That is the trace of Cromwell. I heard it at a wake,
and I would believe it, and if I had time to put my mind to it, and if I
was not on the road from Loughrea to Ballyvaughan, I could give you the
foundations of it better."


CROMWELL'S LAW

"I'll tell you about Cromwell and the White Friars. There was a White
Friar at that time was known to have knowledge, and Cromwell sent word
to him to come see him. It was of a Saturday he did that, of an Easter
Saturday, but the Friar never came. On the Sunday Cromwell sent for him
again, and he didn't come. And on the Monday he sent for him the third
time, and he did come. 'Why is it you did not come to me when I sent
before?' said Cromwell. 'I'll tell you that,' said the White Friar. 'I
didn't come on Saturday,' he said, 'because your passion was on you. And
I didn't come on the Sunday,' he said, 'because your passion was not
gone down enough, and I thought you would not give me my steps. But I
came to-day,' he said, 'because your passion is cool.' When Cromwell
heard his answer, 'That is true,' he said, 'and tell me how long my law
will last in Ireland.' 'It will last,' says the White Friar, 'till
yesterday will come (that was Easter Sunday) the same day as our Lady
Day.' Cromwell was satisfied then, and he gave him a free leg, and he
went away. And so that law did last till now, and it's well it did, for
without that law in the country you wouldn't be safe walking the road
having so much as the price of a pint of porter in your pocket."


CROMWELL IN CONNACHT

"Cromwell cleared the road before him. If any great man stood against
him he would pull down his castle the same as he pulled down that
castle of your own, Ballinamantane, that is down the road. He never got
more than two hours sleep or three, or at the most four, but starting up
fearing his life would be peppered. There was a word he sounded out to
the Catholics, 'To hell or Connacht,' and the reason he did that was
that Connacht was burned bare, and he that thought to pass the winter
there would get no lodging at all. Himself and his men travelled it, and
they never met with anything that had human breath put in it by God till
they came to Breffny, and they saw smoke from a chimney, and they
surrounded the house and went into it. And what they saw was a skeleton
over the fire roasting, and the people of the house picking flesh off it
with the bits of a hook. And when they saw that, they left them there.
It was a Clare man that burned Connacht so bare; he was worse than
Cromwell, and he made a great slaughter in the house of God at Clonmel.
The people have it against his family yet, and against the whole County
of Clare."


A WORSE THAN CROMWELL

"Cromwell was very bad, but the drink is worse. For a good many that
Cromwell killed should go to heaven, but those that are drunken never
see heaven. And as to drink, a man that takes the first glass is as
quiet and as merry as a pet lamb; and after the second glass he is as
knacky as a monkey; and after the third glass he is as ready for battle
as a lion; and after the fourth glass he is like a swine as he is. 'I am
thirsty' [IRISH: Ta Tart Orm], that was one of our Lord's seven words on
the Cross, where he was dry. And a man far off would have given him
drink; but there was a drunkard at the foot of the Cross, and he
prevented him."


THE BATTLE OF AUGHRIM

"That was a great slaughter at Aughrim. St. Ruth wanted to do all
himself, he being a foreigner. He gave no plan of the battle to
Sarsfield, but a written command to stop where he was, and Sarsfield
knew no more than yourself or myself in the evening before it happened.
It was Colonel Merell's wife bade him not go to the battle, where she
knew it would go bad with him through a dream. But he said that meant
that he would be crowned, and he went out and was killed. That is what
the poem says:

  If Caesar listened to Calpurnia's dream
  He had not been by Pompey's statue slain.

All great men gave attention to dreams, though the Church is against
them now. It is written in Scripture that Joseph gave attention to his
dream. But Colonel Merell did not, and so he went to his death. Aughrim
would have been won if it wasn't for the drink. There was too much of it
given to the Irish soldiers that day--drink and spies and traitors.
The English never won a battle in Ireland in fair fight, but getting
spies and setting the people against one another. I saw where Aughrim
was fought, and I turned aside from the road to see the tree where St
Ruth was killed. The half of it is gone like snuff. That was spies too,
a Colonel's daughter that told the English in what place St. Ruth would
be washing himself at six o'clock in the morning. And it was there he
was shot by one O'Donnell, an Englishman. He shot him from six miles
off. The Danes were dancing in the raths around Aughrim the night after
the battle. Their ancestors were driven out of Ireland before; and they
were glad when they saw those that had put them out put out themselves,
and every one of them skivered."

[ILLUSTRATION: WILLIAM III]


THE STUARTS

"As to the Stuarts, there are no songs about them and no praises in the
West, whatever there may be in the South. Why would there, and they
running away and leaving the country the way they did? And what good did
they ever do it? James the Second was a coward. Why didn't he go into
the thick of the battle like the Prince of Orange? He stopped on a hill
three miles away, and rode off to Dublin, bringing the best of his
troops with him. There was a lady walking in the street at Dublin when
he got there, and he told her the battle was lost, and she said 'Faith
