
"Parricide!" exclaimed the indignant prisoner. "My father, more
fortunate than I, died fighting against thee at Senlac."

"Hugo of Aescendune and Malville was nevertheless thy father by
adoption; and by the law of civilised nations, carried with that
adoption the rights and prerogatives of a sire. But we waste time.
Herald, summon the accuser."

"Etienne de Malville et Aescendune, enter!" cried the herald of the
court.

And Etienne appeared, dressed in sable mourning, and bowed before
the throne. He was pale, too, if that sallow colour, which
olive-like complexions like his assume when wrought upon, can be
called pale. He cast upon Wilfred one glance of intense hatred, and
then, looking down respectfully, awaited the words of the
Conqueror.

"Etienne de Malville, dost thou appear as the accuser of this
prisoner?"

"I do."

"Take thine oath, then, upon the Holy Gospels, only to speak the
truth; my Lord Archbishop will administer it."

Lanfranc administered the oath, much as it is done in courts of
justice nowadays, but with peculiar solemnity of manner.

Etienne repeated the words very solemnly and distinctly. No one
doubted, or could doubt, his sincerity.

"Of what crimes dost thou accuse the prisoner?"

"Parricide, in that he hath compassed the death of his adoptive
father; sacrilege, in that he burnt the priory of St. Wilfred with
all the monks therein, and later the Priory of St. Denys, from
which the inmates had happily escaped, and in support of this
accusation I am ready to wager my body in the lists, if the King so
allow."

"We do not risk thy safety against one who is already proved guilty
of rebellion, and who is not of knightly rank like thyself."

(Etienne had duly received knighthood after the taking of the Camp
of Refuge.)

"This is a question of evidence. State thy case."

Etienne spake clearly and well; and as he told the story of the
destruction of the priory of St. Wilfred, of the subsequent
appearance of our hero in the woods at the head of the outlaws, and
the later conflagrations, there were few who did not think that he
had proved his case, so far as it admitted of proof.

"We will now hear thy story of the destruction of the priory, and
the manner in which thou didst escape from it," said the Conqueror
to Wilfred.

Wilfred spoke good Norman French, thanks to his early education, in
company with Etienne and the other pages, after the Conquest. So he
began his story lucidly, but not without some emotion, which he
strove in vain to suppress.

"Normans," he said, "I would not defend myself against this foul
charge to save my forfeit life, nor could I hope to save it. Ye
have met like wolves to judge a stag, and since ye have taken from
me all that makes life dear, I refuse not to die; only I would die
with honour, and hence I strive, speaking but the words of truth,
to remove the stain which my enemy there" (he turned and pointed at
Etienne) "has cast upon my honour, for I am of a house that has
never known shame, and would not disgrace it in my person.

"I submitted to the father ye Normans gave me, and bore all the
wrongs he and his heaped upon me, until the day when I discovered
in that father" (he pronounced the word with the deepest scorn)
"the murderer of my own mother."

A general burst of incredulity, followed by an indignant and
scornful denial from Etienne.

"Silence," said a stern voice, "this is not a hostelry; the
prisoner has the right of speech and the ear of the judge; only,
Englishman, be careful what thou sayest."

"I repeat the simple fact, my lord" (this was the only title
Wilfred would give the King); "the baron, whom ye are pleased
sportively to call my father, poisoned my own mother."

"Poisoned! poisoned! My liege, can this be endured?"

"Hear him to the end, and then, if he have spoken without proof, it
will be time to pronounce his aggravated sentence. SILENCE!"

Wilfred continued, and told the whole story as our readers know it,
until his arrival at the Dismal Swamp. He described all that had
passed so clearly that his foes became interested in spite of
themselves, and listened. He did not charge Hugo with the burning
of the priory, for he had no evidence to sustain the charge, being
only aware that such was at hand to be produced by others; as he
had learnt from Father Kenelm, who had been granted admittance to
his cell.

At length he finished in these words:

"And now I have told you all the truth, and if ye will not believe
me, but prefer to think I betrayed those to death I loved so
dearly, I cannot help myself; but if there be a God, and a judgment
day--as ye all profess to believe--I appeal to that God and that
day, knowing that my innocence will then be made clear. That I
fought with them who slew the baron I freely admit, and hold myself
justified, as ye must, if ye believe my story; but I myself
protected the monks of your kindred, albeit they had taken the
places of better men than themselves, and not one was harmed; and
when we fled, we burnt castle, priory, and village, without
distinction, that they might not shelter an enemy. This, too, I
hold to be lawful in war.

"I know that Englishmen find scant justice at Norman hands, and
that ye will slay me as a rebel. Do so, and I will thank you; only
defile not the memory--slay not the reputation as well as the body.
If the house of Aescendune, which was planted in this land when ye
Normans were but pagan Danes, is to perish, let it at least go
unsullied to its grave. I have spoken."

There was strong sensation. His speech had produced some reaction
in his favour.

"It is, as we said before, a question of evidence," said the King.
"Is any forthcoming on one side or the other? for as yet neither
party has really shown who burnt the priory and the monks therein.
We have only assumptions, and they are not facts."

Lanfranc looked at the King, as if asking permission to speak. The
King bent his head, and the Archbishop began, addressing Etienne:

"Amongst the followers of thy father, was there a warrior named
Guy, son of Roger, born at Malville?"

"There was."

"Didst thou know him well?"

"Intimately."

"What became of him?"

"He was lost when my father perished--faithful, doubtless, to the
last."

"Didst thou ever see his mark as a witness to any charter, or the
like?"

"I did; instead of making a cross, he preferred to draw a bow."

"Wouldst thou recognise it, then?"

"I should, indeed."

"Then," said the Archbishop, holding a parchment folded up so as to
conceal all but the name and the mark of a bow beside it, "dost
thou know this mark?"

"I do; it is the mark of Guy, the son of Roger."

"Do ye all," said Lanfranc, turning round, "hear his affirmation?"

"We do--"

"Then hear what the paper contains."

I, Guy, son of Roger, born at Malville, being a dying man, and
about to meet my God, do make this, my last confession, for the
safety of my poor soul.

In the summer of the year 1068, in the mouth of June, I, with
twenty other men, who have, so far as I know, perished by firs in
the Dismal Swamp, was summoned to wait upon the Baron of Aescendune
in a private chamber. He told us that the honour of his house
depended upon us, and asked us whether we were willing to stand by
him in his necessity. He had selected us well. We were born on his
Norman estates, and trained up from childhood to do his will, and
that of the devil. We all promised to do whatever he should ask,
and to keep the matter a secret.

Then he told us that we were to burn the Priory of St. Wilfred at
midnight, and to allow none to escape.

This we did, we took possession silently of every exit, piled up
wood and straw, set it on fire on every side at once, and
transfixed all those who tried to break out with arrows or lances,
and hurled them back into the flames.

Long has my soul been sick with horror that I slew these holy men,
and now that all who were my companions in this deed have perished
by God's just judgment--burnt alive even as they burned--I, willing
to save my soul from the everlasting flame, do make this my
penitent confession, praying God to have mercy upon my soul.

Given in the Dismal Swamp, in the month of June, 1068.



CHAPTER XXIII. "GUILTY OR NOT GUILTY."


A dead silence followed the reading of the dying confession of Guy,
son of Roger.

The mighty Conqueror looked around, as if he would read men's
hearts.

Etienne de Malville was flushed, and seemed ready to sink into the
earth for shame, as though he himself were responsible for the
guilt of his father.

Wilfred of Aescendune, on the other hand, looked like one whose
innocence was vindicated; there was an expression of joy on his
face--joy, however, so tempered by other feelings, that it could
not be called exultation.

"It is a forgery--a vile and shameful forgery," cried Etienne.

"Thou didst thyself recognise the mark," said the king sternly. "We
pardon thine excitement, but do not forget the presence of thine
elders."

"Can I sit thus tamely, and hear my dead father accused of the
vilest crimes?"

"Justice shall be done his memory--justice, neither more nor less,"
said the Conqueror sternly.

"I claim, then, my privilege to meet the accuser in knightly
combat."

"The accuser is dead. Wilt thou go to purgatory to meet him? for we
trust his penitence has saved him from going farther and faring
worse. Keep silence, and do not further interrupt the course of
justice. We can pity thee, believing thee to be incapable of such
deeds thyself."

Then, turning to the court:

"Is there any other evidence, verbal or written, bearing upon this
question?"

"There is, my liege," said Bishop Geoffrey.

"What is it?"

"A letter addressed to me by the murdered prior of St. Wilfred's
Priory, who perished in the flames on the fatal night of which we
have heard so much."

"Its date?"

"The night in Ascensiontide, three years agone, in which the
prisoner left his stepfather's protection and made a vain attempt
to reach me at Oxenford, striving to bear the missive of which this
is a copy."

"And the original?"

"Fell into the possession of the late baron, his stepfather, after
Eustace, Count of Blois, had borne the lad back again by force."

"Hast thou satisfied thyself of the authenticity of the copy?"

"I have; it was attested by Prior Elphege himself, in the presence
of the Benedictine from whom I received it."

"Then read the letter."

And amidst breathless attention, Geoffrey read:

Elphege, prior of the house of St. Wilfred at Aescendune, to the
noble prelate Geoffrey, Bishop of Coutances, now resident at
Oxenford, sendeth greeting.

It will not have escaped thy remembrance, most holy father in God,
that on the fatal field of Senlac--fatal, that is, to my
countrymen, for I am not ashamed to call myself an Englishman--thou
didst favourably notice a youth, who sought and found his father's
dead body, by name Wilfred, son of Edmund of Aescendune.

Nor wilt thou forget that thou didst intercede for the boy that he
might retain his ancestral possessions, which boon thou didst only
obtain at the cost of his widowed mother's marriage with Hugo, Lord
of Malville, outre mer.

It was then settled that the two boys, Etienne de Melville and
Wilfred of Aescendune, thereby thrown together, should each inherit
the lands and honours of their respective sires; but that, should
the latter die, the united estates should fall to Etienne de
Malville, did he still survive.

In this arrangement, we naturally saw danger to our own precious
charge--for our spiritual child he was--Wilfred of Aescendune.

His mother died the year after the Conquest, and passed, as we
thought, happily from a world of sin and sorrow.

The boy, at first disconsolate with grief, recovered his health and
spirits after awhile, and if allowed to live, might assuredly grow
to man's estate, and perpetuate his ancient line.

If allowed, I say, for we have just received evidence that the
mother was poisoned, and we tremble with horror lest the boy should
share her fate.

This evidence is in the form of a dying confession, which, at the
request of the poor penitent, we have written with pen and ink.

When thou hast read it, for the love of God and of His saints,
especially of our father Benedict, stretch forth thine hand and
protect the unhappy bearer, the youthful lord of Aescendune.

We commend him with all confidence to thy care.

Given at St. Wilfred's priory, in the octave of Ascension, 1068.

"Hear ye the confession enclosed," said Geoffrey.

It is five years since I fled the face of my lord, Edmund of
Aescendune, for I had slain his red deer, and sold them for filthy
lucre, and I feared to meet his face; so I fled to the great city,
even London, where I was like to starve, till a Jew, who saw my
distress, took pity on me, and gave me shelter.

His name was Abraham of Toledo, and he was mighty in magic arts,
and in compounding of deadly drugs to slay, or medicines to keep
alive. He made me his servant, and I, albeit a Christian man, soon
learned to do the bidding of the devil at his command.

One day there came a Norman noble, and bought of my master a
liquid, which would cause those who drank but one drop, daily, to
die of deadly decline within the year. I heard the bargain made as
I was compounding some drugs within a recess of my master's
chamber. No sooner was the man gone than Abraham descended the
stairs, calling for me. I managed to reach him without raising his
suspicions, when he bade me follow the retreating stranger, not yet
out of sight in the gloom, and learn his name. I did so; it was
Hugo de Malville, the new lord of Aescendune.

I knew of his marriage, and felt sure whom he wanted to destroy;
