
"True," said Montrose; "but as this is a matter of particular moment, I
would willingly know the grounds of so positive an assurance."

"Concisely then, my lord," said the Major, "not only did they disdain to
profit by a handsome reward which Argyle did me the honour to place upon
this poor head of mine, and not only did they abstain from pillaging
my personal property, whilk was to an amount that would have tempted
regular soldiers in any service of Europe; and not only did they restore
me my horse, whilk your Excellency knows to be of value, but I could not
prevail on them to accept one stiver, doit, or maravedi, for the trouble
and expenses of my sick bed. They actually refused my coined money when
freely offered,--a tale seldom to be told in a Christian land."

"I admit," said Montrose, after a moment's reflection, "that their
conduct towards you is good evidence of their fidelity; but how to
secure against the breaking out of this feud?" He paused, and then
suddenly added, "I had forgot I have supped, while you, Major, have been
travelling by moonlight."

He called to his attendants to fetch a stoup of wine and some
refreshments. Major Dalgetty, who had the appetite of a convalescent
returned from Highland quarters, needed not any pressing to partake of
what was set before him, but proceeded to dispatch his food with such
alacrity, that the Marquis, filling a cup of wine, and drinking to his
health, could not help remarking, that coarse as the provisions of his
camp were, he was afraid Major Dalgetty had fared much worse during his
excursion into Argyleshire.

"Your Excellency may take your corporal oath upon that," said the worthy
Major, speaking with his mouth full; "for Argyle's bread and water are
yet stale and mouldy in my recollection, and though they did their
best, yet the viands that the Children of the Mist procured for me, poor
helpless creatures as they were, were so unrefreshful to my body, that
when enclosed in my armour, whilk I was fain to leave behind me for
expedition's sake, I rattled therein like the shrivelled kernel in a nut
that hath been kept on to a second Hallowe'en."

"You must take the due means to repair these losses, Major Dalgetty."

"In troth," answered the soldier, "I shall hardly be able to compass
that, unless my arrears are to be exchanged for present pay; for I
protest to your Excellency, that the three stone weight which I have
lost were simply raised upon the regular accountings of the States of
Holland."

"In that case," said the Marquis, "you are only reduced to good marching
order. As for the pay, let us once have victory--victory, Major, and
your wishes, and all our wishes, shall be amply fulfilled. Meantime,
help yourself to another cup of wine."

"To your Excellency's health," said the Major, filling a cup to the
brim, to show the zeal with which he drank the toast, "and victory over
all our enemies, and particularly over Argyle! I hope to twitch another
handful from his board myself--I have had one pluck at it already."

"Very true," answered Montrose; "but to return to those men of the Mist.
You understand, Dalgetty, that their presence here, and the purpose for
which we employ them, is a secret between you and me?"

Delighted, as Montrose had anticipated, with this mark of his
General's confidence, the Major laid his hand upon his nose, and nodded
intelligence.

"How many may there be of Ranald's followers?" continued the Marquis.

"They are reduced, so far as I know, to some eight or ten men," answered
Major Dalgetty, "and a few women and children."

"Where are they now?" demanded Montrose.

"In a valley, at three miles' distance," answered the soldier, "awaiting
your Excellency's command; I judged it not fit to bring them to your
leaguer without your Excellency's orders."

"You judged very well," said Montrose; "it would be proper that they
remain where they are, or seek some more distant place of refuge. I will
send them money, though it is a scarce article with me at present."

"It is quite unnecessary," said Major Dalgetty; "your Excellency has
only to hint that the M'Aulays are going in that direction, and my
friends of the Mist will instantly make volte-face, and go to the right
about."

"That were scarce courteous," said the Marquis. "Better send them a few
dollars to purchase them some cattle for the support of the women and
children."

"They know how to come by their cattle at a far cheaper rate," said the
Major; "but let it be as your Excellency wills."

"Let Ranald MacEagh," said Montrose, "select one or two of his
followers, men whom he can trust, and who are capable of keeping their
own secret and ours; these, with their chief for scout-master-general,
shall serve for our guides. Let them be at my tent to-morrow at
daybreak, and see, if possible, that they neither guess my purpose, nor
hold any communication with each other in private.--This old man, has he
any children?"

"They have been killed or hanged," answered the Major, "to the number of
a round dozen, as I believe--but he hath left one grand-child, a smart
and hopeful youth, whom I have noted to be never without a pebble in
his plaid-nook, to fling at whatsoever might come in his way; being
a symbol, that, like David, who was accustomed to sling smooth stones
taken from the brook, he may afterwards prove an adventurous warrior."

"That boy, Major Dalgetty," said the Marquis, "I will have to attend
upon my own person. I presume he will have sense enough to keep his name
secret?"

"Your Excellency need not fear that," answered Dalgetty; "these Highland
imps, from the moment they chip the shell--"

"Well," interrupted Montrose, "that boy shall be pledge for the fidelity
of his parent, and if he prove faithful, the child's preferment shall be
his reward.--And now, Major Dalgetty, I will license your departure for
the night; tomorrow you will introduce this MacEagh, under any name or
character he may please to assume. I presume his profession has rendered
him sufficiently expert in all sort of disguises; or we may admit
John of Moidart into our schemes, who has sense, practicability,
and intelligence, and will probably allow this man for a time to be
disguised as one of his followers. For you, Major, my groom of the
chambers will be your quarter-master for this evening."

Major Dalgetty took his leave with a joyful heart greatly elated with
the reception he had met with, and much pleased with the personal
manners of his new General, which, as he explained at great length to
Ranald MacEagh, reminded him in many respects of the demeanour of the
immortal Gustavus Adolphus, the Lion of the North, and Bulwark of the
Protestant Faith.



CHAPTER XVII.


     The march begins in military state,
     And nations on his eyes suspended wait;
     Stern famine guards the solitary coast,
     And winter barricades the realms of frost.
     He comes,--nor want, nor cold, his course delay.
     --VANITY OF HUMAN WISHES.

By break of day Montrose received in his cabin old MacEagh, and
questioned him long and particularly as to the means of approaching the
country of Argyle. He made a note of his answers, which he compared with
those of two of his followers, whom he introduced as the most prudent
and experienced. He found them to correspond in all respects; but, still
unsatisfied where precaution was so necessary, the Marquis compared the
information he had received with that he was able to collect from the
Chiefs who lay most near to the destined scene of invasion, and being in
all respects satisfied of its accuracy, he resolved to proceed in full
reliance upon it.

In one point Montrose changed his mind. Having judged it unfit to take
the boy Kenneth into his own service, lest, in case of his birth being
discovered, it should be resented as an offence by the numerous clans
who entertained a feudal enmity to this devoted family, he requested the
Major to take him in attendance upon himself; and as he accompanied
this request with a handsome DOUCEUR, under pretence of clothing and
equipping the lad, this change was agreeable to all parties.

It was about breakfast-time, when Major Dalgetty, being dismissed by
Montrose, went in quest of his old acquaintances, Lord Menteith and the
M'Aulays, to whom he longed to communicate his own adventures, as
well as to learn from them the particulars of the campaign. It may
be imagined he was received with great glee by men to whom the late
uniformity of their military life had rendered any change of society
an interesting novelty. Allan M'Aulay alone seemed to recoil from his
former acquaintance, although, when challenged by his brother, he could
render no other reason than a reluctance to be familiar with one who
had been so lately in the company of Argyle, and other enemies. Major
Dalgetty was a little alarmed by this sort of instinctive consciousness
which Allan seemed to entertain respecting the society he had been
lately keeping; he was soon satisfied, however, that the perceptions of
the seer in this particular were not infallible.

As Ranald MacEagh was to be placed under Major Dalgetty's protection and
superintendence, it was necessary he should present him to those persons
with whom he was most likely to associate. The dress of the old man had,
in the meantime, been changed from the tartan of his clan to a sort
of clothing peculiar to the men of the distant Isles, resembling a
waistcoat with sleeves, and a petticoat, all made in one piece. This
dress was laced from top to bottom in front, and bore some resemblance
to that called Polonaise, still worn by children in Scotland of the
lower rank. The tartan hose and bonnet completed the dress, which old
men of the last century remembered well to have seen worn by the distant
Islesmen who came to the Earl of Mar's standard in the year 1715.

Major Dalgetty, keeping his eye on Allan as he spoke, introduced Ranald
MacEagh under the fictitious name of Ranald MacGillihuron in Benbecula,
who had escaped with him out of Argyle's prison. He recommended him as
a person skilful in the arts of the harper and the senachie, and by no
means contemptible in the quality of a second-sighted person or seer.
While making this exposition, Major Dalgetty stammered and hesitated in
a way so unlike the usual glib forwardness of his manner, that he could
not have failed to have given suspicion to Allan M'Aulay, had not that
person's whole attention been engaged in steadily perusing the
features of the person thus introduced to him. This steady gaze so much
embarrassed Ranald MacEagh, that his hand was beginning to sink down
towards his dagger, in expectation of a hostile assault, when Allan,
suddenly crossing the floor of the hut, extended his hand to him in the
way of friendly greeting. They sat down side by side, and conversed in
a low mysterious tone of voice. Menteith and Angus M'Aulay were not
surprised at this, for there prevailed among the Highlanders who
pretended to the second-sight, a sort of Freemasonry, which generally
induced them, upon meeting, to hold communication with each other on the
nature and extent of their visionary experiences.

"Does the sight come gloomy upon your spirits?" said Allan to his new
acquaintance.

"As dark as the shadow upon the moon," replied Ranald, "when she is
darkened in her mid-course in heaven, and prophets foretell of evil
times."

"Come hither," said Allan, "come more this way, I would converse with
you apart; for men say that in your distant islands the sight is poured
forth with more clearness and power than upon us, who dwell near the
Sassenach."

While they were plunged into their mystic conference, the two English
cavaliers entered the cabin in the highest possible spirits, and
announced to Angus M'Aulay that orders had been issued that all should
hold themselves in readiness for an immediate march to the westward.
Having delivered themselves of their news with much glee, they paid
their compliments to their old acquaintance Major Dalgetty, whom they
instantly recognised, and enquired after the health of his charger,
Gustavus.

"I humbly thank you, gentlemen," answered the soldier, "Gustavas is
well, though, like his master, somewhat barer on the ribs than when you
offered to relieve me of him at Darnlinvarach; and let me assure you,
that before you have made one or two of those marches which you seem to
contemplate with so much satisfaction in prospect, you will leave, my
good knights, some of your English beef, and probably an English horse
or two, behind you."

Both exclaimed that they cared very little what they found or what they
left, provided the scene changed from dogging up and down Angus and
Aberdeenshire, in pursuit of an enemy who would neither fight nor run
away.

"If such be the case," said Angus M'Aulay, "I must give orders to my
followers, and make provision too for the safe conveyance of Annot Lyle;
for an advance into M'Callum More's country will be a farther and fouler
road than these pinks of Cumbrian knighthood are aware of." So saying,
he left the cabin.

"Annot Lyle!" repeated Dalgetty, "is she following the campaign?"

"Surely," replied Sir Giles Musgrave, his eye glancing slightly from
Lord Menteith to Allan M'Aulay; "we could neither march nor fight,
advance nor retreat, without the influence of the Princess of Harps."

"The Princess of Broadswords and Targets, I say," answered his
companion; "for the Lady of Montrose herself could not be more
courteously waited upon; she has four Highland maidens, and as many
bare-legged gillies, to wait upon her orders."

"And what would you have, gentlemen?" said Allan, turning suddenly from
the Highlander with whom he was in conversation; "would you yourselves
have left an innocent female, the companion of your infancy, to die by
violence, or perish by famine? There is not, by this time, a roof upon
the habitation of my fathers--our crops have been destroyed, and our
cattle have been driven--and you, gentlemen, have to bless God, that,
coming from a milder and more civilized country, you expose only your
own lives in this remorseless war, without apprehension that your
enemies will visit with their vengeance the defenceless pledges you may
have left behind you."

The Englishmen cordially agreed that they had the superiority in this
respect; and the company, now dispersing, went each to his several
charge or occupation.

Allan lingered a moment behind, still questioning the reluctant Ranald
MacEagh upon a point in his supposed visions, by which he was greatly
perplexed. "Repeatedly," he said, "have I had the sight of a Gael, who
seemed to plunge his weapon into the body of Menteith,--of that young
nobleman in the scarlet laced cloak, who has just now left the bothy.
But by no effort, though I have gazed till my eyes were almost fixed
in the sockets, can I discover the face of this Highlander, or even
conjecture who he may be, although his person and air seem familiar to
me." [See Note II.--Wraiths.]

"Have you reversed your own plaid," said Ranald, "according to the rule
of the experienced Seers in such case?"

"I have," answered Allan, speaking low, and shuddering as if with
internal agony.

"And in what guise did the phantom then appear to you?" said Ranald.

"With his plaid also reversed," answered Allan, in the same low and
convulsed tone.

"Then be assured," said Ranald, "that your own hand, and none other,
will do the deed of which you have witnessed the shadow."

"So has my anxious soul a hundred times surmised," replied Allan. "But
it is impossible! Were I to read the record in the eternal book of fate,
I would declare it impossible--we are bound by the ties of blood, and by
a hundred ties more intimate--we have stood side by side in battle,
and our swords have reeked with the blood of the same enemies--it is
IMPOSSIBLE I should harm him!"

"That you WILL do so," answered Ranald, "is certain, though the cause be
hid in the darkness of futurity. You say," he continued, suppressing his
own emotions with difficulty, "that side by side you have pursued your
prey like bloodhounds--have you never seen bloodhounds turn their fangs
against each other, and fight over the body of a throttled deer?"

"It is false!" said M'Aulay, starting up, "these are not the forebodings
of fate, but the temptation of some evil spirit from the bottomless
pit!" So saying, he strode out of the cabin.

"Thou hast it!" said the Son of the Mist, looking after him with an
air of exultation; "the barbed arrow is in thy side! Spirits of the
slaughtered, rejoice! soon shall your murderers' swords be dyed in each
other's blood."

On the succeeding morning all was prepared, and Montrose advanced by
rapid marches up the river Tay, and poured his desultory forces into the
romantic vale around the lake of the same name, which lies at the head
