    Come hither, and trample dainty fern and poppy-blossom: sleep
    On goatskins that are softer than thy fleeces piled three deep.
    Here will I plant eight milkpails, great Pan's regard to gain,
    Bound them eight cups: full honeycombs shall every cup contain.

    LACON.
    Well! there essay thy woodcraft: thence fight me, never budge
    From thine own oak; e'en have thy way. But who shall be our judge?
    Oh, if Lycopas with his kine should chance this way to trudge!

    COMETAS.
    Nay, I want no Lycopas. But hail yon woodsman, do:
    'Tis Morson--see! his arms are full of bracken--there, by you.

    LACON.
    We'll hail him.

    COMETAS.
          Ay, you hail him.

    LACON.
            Friend, 'twill not take thee long:
    We're striving which is master, we twain, in woodland song:
    And thou, my good friend Morson, ne'er look with favouring eyes
    On me; nor yet to yonder lad be fain to judge the prize.

    COMETAS.
    Nay, by the Nymphs, sweet Morson, ne'er for Cometas' sake
    Stretch thou a point; nor e'er let him undue advantage take.
    Sibyrtas owns yon wethers; a Thurian is he:
    And here, my friend, Eumares' goats, of Sybaris, you may see.

    LACON.
    And who asked thee, thou naughty knave, to whom belonged these flocks,
    Sibyrtas, or (it might be) me? Eh, thou'rt a chatter-box!

    COMETAS.
    The simple truth, most worshipful, is all that I allege:
    I'm not for boasting. But thy wit hath all too keen an edge.

    LACON.
    Come sing, if singing's in thee--and may our friend get back
    To town alive! Heaven help us, lad, how thy tongue doth clack!

    COMETAS. [_Sings_]
    Daphnis the mighty minstrel was less precious to the Nine
    Than I. I offered yesterday two kids upon their shrine.

    LACON. [_Sings_]
    Ay, but Apollo fancies me hugely: for him I rear
    A lordly ram: and, look you, the Carnival is near.

    COMETAS.
    Twin kids hath every goat I milk, save two. My maid, my own,
    Eyes me and asks 'At milking time, rogue, art thou all alone?'

    LACON.
    Go to! nigh twenty baskets doth Lacon fill with cheese:
    Hath time to woo a sweetheart too upon the blossomed leas.

    COMETAS.
    Clarissa pelts her goatherd with apples, should he stray
    By with his goats; and pouts her lip in a quaint charming way.

    LACON.
    Me too a darling smooth of face notes as I tend my flocks:
    How maddeningly o'er that fair neck ripple those shining locks!

    COMETAS.
    Tho' dogrose and anemone are fair in their degree,
    The rose that blooms by garden-walls still is the rose for me.

    LACON.
    Tho' acorns' cups are fair, their taste is bitterness, and still
    I'll choose, for honeysweet are they, the apples of the hill.

    COMETAS.
    A cushat I will presently procure and give to her
    Who loves me: I know where it sits; up in the juniper.

    LACON.
    Pooh! a soft fleece, to make a coat, I'll give the day I shear
    My brindled ewe--(no hand but mine shall touch it)--to my dear.

    COMETAS.
    Back, lambs, from that wild-olive: and be content to browse
    Here on the shoulder of the hill, beneath the myrtle boughs.

    LACON.
    Run, (will ye?) Ball and Dogstar, down from that oak tree, run:
    And feed where Spot is feeding, and catch the morning sun.

    COMETAS.
    I have a bowl of cypress-wood: I have besides a cup:
    Praxiteles designed them: for _her_ they're treasured up.

    LACON.
    I have a dog who throttles wolves: he loves the sheep, and they
    Love him: I'll give him to my dear, to keep wild beasts at bay.

    COMETAS.
    Ye locusts that o'erleap my fence, oh let my vines escape
    Your clutches, I beseech you: the bloom is on the grape.

    LACON.
    Ye crickets, mark how nettled our friend the goatherd is!
    I ween, ye cost the reapers pangs as acute as his.

    COMETAS.
    Those foxes with their bushy tails, I hate to see them crawl
    Round Micon's homestead and purloin his grapes at evenfall.

    LACON.
    _I_ hate to see the beetles that come warping on the wind.
    And climb Philondas' trees, and leave never a fig behind.

    COMETAS.
    Have you forgot that cudgelling I gave you? At each stroke
    You grinned and twisted with a grace, and clung to yonder oak.

    LACON.
    That I've forgot--but I have not, how once Eumares tied
    You to that selfsame oak-trunk, and tanned your unclean hide.

    COMETAS.
    There's some one ill--of heartburn. You note it, I presume,
    Morson? Go quick, and fetch a squill from some old beldam's tomb.

    LACON.
    I think I'm stinging somebody, as Morson too perceives--
    Go to the river and dig up a clump of sowbread-leaves.

    COMETAS.
    May Himera flow, not water, but milk: and may'st thou blush,
    Crathis, with wine; and fruitage grow upon every rush.

    LACON.
    For me may Sybaris' fountain flow, pure honey: so that you,
    My fair, may dip your pitcher each morn in honey-dew.

    COMETAS.
    My goats are fed on clover and goat's-delight: they tread
    On lentisk leaves; or lie them down, ripe strawberries o'er their head.

    LACON.
    My sheep crop honeysuckle bloom, while all around them blows
    In clusters rich the jasmine, as brave as any rose.

    COMETAS.
    I scorn my maid; for when she took my cushat, she did not
    Draw with both hands my face to hers and kiss me on the spot.

    LACON.
    I love my love, and hugely: for, when I gave my flute,
    I was rewarded with a kiss, a loving one to boot.

    COMETAS.
    Lacon, the nightingale should scarce be challenged by the jay,
    Nor swan by hoopoe: but, poor boy, thou aye wert for a fray.

    MORSON.
    I bid the shepherd hold his peace. Cometas, unto you
    I, Morson, do adjudge the lamb. You'll first make offering due
    Unto the nymphs: then savoury meat you'll send to Morson too.

    COMETAS.
    By Pan I will! Snort, all my herd of he-goats: I shall now
    O'er Lacon, shepherd as he is, crow ye shall soon see how.
    I've won, and I could leap sky-high! Ye also dance and skip,
    My horned ewes: in Sybaris' fount to-morrow all shall dip.
    Ho! you, sir, with the glossy coat and dangerous crest; you dare
    Look at a ewe, till I have slain my lamb, and ill you'll fare.
    What! is he at his tricks again? He is, and he will get
    (Or my name's not Cometas) a proper pounding yet.




IDYLL VI.


The Drawn Battle.

DAPHNIS. DAMOETAS.

    Daphnis the herdsman and Damoetas once
    Had driven, Aratus, to the selfsame glen.
    One chin was yellowing, one shewed half a beard.
    And by a brookside on a summer noon
    The pair sat down and sang; but Daphnis led
    The song, for Daphnis was the challenger.

    DAPHNIS.
    "See! Galatea pelts thy flock with fruit,
    And calls their master 'Lack-love,' Polypheme.
    Thou mark'st her not, blind, blind, but pipest aye
    Thy wood-notes. See again, she smites thy dog:
    Sea-ward the fleeced flocks' sentinel peers and barks,
    And, through the clear wave visible to her still,
    Careers along the gently babbling beach.
    Look that he leap not on the maid new-risen
    From her sea-bath and rend her dainty limbs.
    She fools thee, near or far, like thistle-waifs
    In hot sweet summer: flies from thee when wooed,
    Unwooed pursues thee: risks all moves to win;
    For, Polypheme, things foul seem fair to Love."

      And then, due prelude made, Damoetas sang.

    DAMOETAS.
    "I marked her pelt my dog, I was not blind,
    By Pan, by this my one my precious eye
    That bounds my vision now and evermore!
    But Telemus the Seer, be his the woe,
    His and his children's, that he promised me!
    Yet do I too tease her; I pass her by,
    Pretend to woo another:--and she hears
    (Heaven help me!) and is faint with jealousy;
    And hurrying from the sea-wave as if stung,
    Scans with keen glance my grotto and my flock.
    'Twas I hissed on the dog to bark at her;
    For, when I loved her, he would whine and lay
    His muzzle in her lap. These things she'll note
    Mayhap, and message send on message soon:
    But I will bar my door until she swear
    To make me on this isle fair bridal-bed.
    And I am less unlovely than men say.
    I looked into the mere (the mere was calm),
    And goodly seemed my beard, and goodly seemed
    My solitary eye, and, half-revealed,
    My teeth gleamed whiter than the Parian marl.
    Thrice for good luck I spat upon my robe:
    That learned I of the hag Cottytaris--her
    Who fluted lately with Hippocooen's mowers."

      Damoetas then kissed Daphnis lovingly:
    One gave a pipe and one a goodly flute.
    Straight to the shepherd's flute and herdsman's pipe
    The younglings bounded in the soft green grass:
    And neither was o'ermatched, but matchless both.




IDYLL VII.


Harvest-Home.

    Once on a time did Eucritus and I
    (With us Amyntas) to the riverside
    Steal from the city. For Lycopeus' sons
    Were that day busy with the harvest-home,
    Antigenes and Phrasidemus, sprung
    (If aught thou holdest by the good old names)
    By Clytia from great Chalcon--him who erst
    Planted one stalwart knee against the rock,
    And lo, beneath his foot Burine's rill
    Brake forth, and at its side poplar and elm
    Shewed aisles of pleasant shadow, greenly roofed
    By tufted leaves. Scarce midway were we now,
    Nor yet descried the tomb of Brasilas:
    When, thanks be to the Muses, there drew near
    A wayfarer from Crete, young Lycidas.
    The horned herd was his care: a glance might tell
    So much: for every inch a herdsman he.
    Slung o'er his shoulder was a ruddy hide
    Torn from a he-goat, shaggy, tangle-haired,
    That reeked of rennet yet: a broad belt clasped
    A patched cloak round his breast, and for a staff
    A gnarled wild-olive bough his right hand bore.
    Soon with a quiet smile he spoke--his eye
    Twinkled, and laughter sat upon his lip:
    "And whither ploddest thou thy weary way
    Beneath the noontide sun, Simichidas?
    For now the lizard sleeps upon the wall,
    The crested lark folds now his wandering wing.
    Dost speed, a bidden guest, to some reveller's board?
    Or townward to the treading of the grape?
    For lo! recoiling from thy hurrying feet
    The pavement-stones ring out right merrily."
    Then I: "Friend Lycid, all men say that none
    Of haymakers or herdsmen is thy match
    At piping: and my soul is glad thereat.
    Yet, to speak sooth, I think to rival thee.
    Now look, this road holds holiday to-day:
    For banded brethren solemnise a feast
    To richly-dight Demeter, thanking her
    For her good gifts: since with no grudging hand
    Hath the boon goddess filled the wheaten floors.
    So come: the way, the day, is thine as mine:
    Try we our woodcraft--each may learn from each.
    I am, as thou, a clarion-voice of song;
    All hail me chief of minstrels. But I am not,
    Heaven knows, o'ercredulous: no, I scarce can yet
    (I think) outvie Philetas, nor the bard
    Of Samos, champion of Sicilian song.
    They are as cicadas challenged by a frog."

      I spake to gain mine ends; and laughing light
    He said: "Accept this club, as thou'rt indeed
    A born truth-teller, shaped by heaven's own hand!
    I hate your builders who would rear a house
    High as Oromedon's mountain-pinnacle:
    I hate your song-birds too, whose cuckoo-cry
    Struggles (in vain) to match the Chian bard.
    But come, we'll sing forthwith, Simichidas,
    Our woodland music: and for my part I--
    List, comrade, if you like the simple air
    I forged among the uplands yesterday.

    [_Sings_] Safe be my true-love convoyed o'er the main
    To Mitylene--though the southern blast
    Chase the lithe waves, while westward slant the Kids,
    Or low above the verge Orion stand--
    If from Love's furnace she will rescue me,
    For Lycidas is parched with hot desire.
    Let halcyons lay the sea-waves and the winds,
    Northwind and Westwind, that in shores far-off
    Flutters the seaweed--halcyons, of all birds
    Whose prey is on the waters, held most dear
    By the green Nereids: yea let all things smile
    On her to Mitylene voyaging,
    And in fair harbour may she ride at last.
    I on that day, a chaplet woven of dill
    Or rose or simple violet on my brow,
    Will draw the wine of Pteleas from the cask
    Stretched by the ingle. They shall roast me beans,
    And elbow-deep in thyme and asphodel
    And quaintly-curling parsley shall be piled
    My bed of rushes, where in royal ease
    I sit and, thinking of my darling, drain
    With stedfast lip the liquor to the dregs.
    I'll have a pair of pipers, shepherds both,
    This from Acharnae, from Lycope that;
    And Tityrus shall be near me and shall sing
    How the swain Daphnis loved the stranger-maid;
    And how he ranged the fells, and how the oaks
    (Such oaks as Himera's banks are green withal)
    Sang dirges o'er him waning fast away
    Like snow on Athos, or on Haemus high,
    Or Rhodope, or utmost Caucasus.
    And he shall sing me how the big chest held
    (All through the maniac malice of his lord)
    A living goatherd: how the round-faced bees,
    Lured from their meadow by the cedar-smell,
    Fed him with daintiest flowers, because the Muse
    Had made his throat a well-spring of sweet song.
    Happy Cometas, this sweet lot was thine!
    Thee the chest prisoned, for thee the honey-bees
    Toiled, as thou slavedst out the mellowing year:
    And oh hadst thou been numbered with the quick
    In my day! I had led thy pretty goats
    About the hill-side, listening to thy voice:
    While thou hadst lain thee down 'neath oak or pine,
    Divine Cometas, warbling pleasantly."

      He spake and paused; and thereupon spake I.
    "I too, friend Lycid, as I ranged the fells,
    Have learned much lore and pleasant from the Nymphs,
    Whose fame mayhap hath reached the throne of Zeus.
    But this wherewith I'll grace thee ranks the first:
    Thou listen, since the Muses like thee well.

    [_Sings_] On me the young Loves sneezed: for hapless I
    Am fain of Myrto as the goats of Spring.
    But my best friend Aratus inly pines
    For one who loves him not. Aristis saw--
    (A wondrous seer is he, whose lute and lay
    Shrined Apollo's self would scarce disdain)--
    How love had scorched Aratus to the bone.
    O Pan, who hauntest Homole's fair champaign,
    Bring the soft charmer, whosoe'er it be,
    Unbid to his sweet arms--so, gracious Pan,
    May ne'er thy ribs and shoulderblades be lashed
    With squills by young Arcadians, whensoe'er
    They are scant of supper! But should this my prayer
    Mislike thee, then on nettles mayest thou sleep,
    Dinted and sore all over from their claws!
    Then mayest thou lodge amid Edonian hills
    By Hebrus, in midwinter; there subsist,
    The Bear thy neighbour: and, in summer, range
    With the far AEthiops 'neath the Blemmyan rocks
    Where Nile is no more seen! But O ye Loves,
    Whose cheeks are like pink apples, quit your homes
    By Hyetis, or Byblis' pleasant rill,
    Or fair Dione's rocky pedestal,
    And strike that fair one with your arrows, strike
    The ill-starred damsel who disdains my friend.
    And lo, what is she but an o'er-ripe pear?
    The girls all cry 'Her bloom is on the wane.'
    We'll watch, Aratus, at that porch no more,
    Nor waste shoe-leather: let the morning cock
    Crow to wake others up to numb despair!
    Let Molon, and none else, that ordeal brave:
    While we make ease our study, and secure
    Some witch, to charm all evil from our door."

      I ceased. He smiling sweetly as before,
    Gave me the staff, 'the Muses' parting gift,'
    And leftward sloped toward Pyxa. We the while,
    Bent us to Phrasydeme's, Eucritus and I,
    And baby-faced Amyntas: there we lay
    Half-buried in a couch of fragrant reed
    And fresh-cut vineleaves, who so glad as we?
    A wealth of elm and poplar shook o'erhead;
    Hard by, a sacred spring flowed gurgling on
    From the Nymphs' grot, and in the sombre boughs
    The sweet cicada chirped laboriously.
    Hid in the thick thorn-bushes far away
    The treefrog's note was heard; the crested lark
    Sang with the goldfinch; turtles made their moan,
    And o'er the fountain hung the gilded bee.
    All of rich summer smacked, of autumn all:
    Pears at our feet, and apples at our side
    Rolled in luxuriance; branches on the ground
    Sprawled, overweighed with damsons; while we brushed
    From the cask's head the crust of four long years.
    Say, ye who dwell upon Parnassian peaks,
    Nymphs of Castalia, did old Chiron e'er
    Set before Heracles a cup so brave
    In Pholus' cavern--did as nectarous draughts
    Cause that Anapian shepherd, in whose hand
    Rocks were as pebbles, Polypheme the strong,
    Featly to foot it o'er the cottage lawns:--
    As, ladies, ye bid flow that day for us
    All by Demeter's shrine at harvest-home?
    Beside whose cornstacks may I oft again
    Plant my broad fan: while she stands by and smiles,
    Poppies and cornsheaves on each laden arm.




IDYLL VIII.


The Triumph of Daphnis.

_DAPHNIS. MENALCAS. A GOATHERD_.

    Daphnis, the gentle herdsman, met once, as legend tells,
    Menalcas making with his flock the circle of the fells.
    Both chins were gilt with coming beards: both lads could sing and play:
    Menalcas glanced at Daphnis, and thus was heard to say:--
    "Art thou for singing, Daphnis, lord of the lowing kine?
    I say my songs are better, by what thou wilt, than thine."
    Then in his turn spake Daphnis, and thus he made reply:
    "O shepherd of the fleecy flock, thou pipest clear and high;
    But come what will, Menalcas, thou ne'er wilt sing as I."

    MENALCAS.
    This art thou fain to ascertain, and risk a bet with me?

    DAPHNIS.
    This I full fain would ascertain, and risk a bet with thee.

    MENALCAS.
    But what, for champions such as we, would, seem a fitting prize?

    DAPHNIS.
    I stake a calf: stake thou a lamb, its mother's self in size.

    MENALCAS.
    A lamb I'll venture never: for aye at close of day
    Father and mother count the flock, and passing strict are they.

    DAPHNIS.
    Then what shall be the victor's fee? What wager wilt thou lay?

    MENALCAS.
    A pipe discoursing through nine mouths I made, full fair to view;
    The wax is white thereon, the line of this and that edge true.
    I'll risk it: risk my father's own is more than I dare do.

    DAPHNIS.
    A pipe discoursing through nine mouths, and fair, hath Daphnis too:
    The wax is white thereon, the line of this and that edge true.
    But yesterday I made it: this finger feels the pain
    Still, where indeed the rifted reed hath cut it clean in twain.
    But who shall be our umpire? who listen to our strain?

    MENALCAS.
    Suppose we hail yon goatherd; him at whose horned herd now
    The dog is barking--yonder dog with white upon his brow.

      Then out they called: the goatherd marked them, and up came he;
    Then out they sang; the goatherd their umpire fain would be.
    To shrill Menalcas' lot it fell to start the woodland lay:
    Then Daphnis took it up. And thus Menalcas led the way.

    MENALCAS.
    "Rivers and vales, a glorious birth! Oh if Menalcas e'er
      Piped aught of pleasant music in your ears:
    Then pasture, nothing loth, his lambs; and let young Daphnis fare
      No worse, should he stray hither with his steers."

    DAPHNIS.
    "Pastures and rills, a bounteous race! If Daphnis sang you e'er
      Such songs as ne'er from nightingale have flowed;
    Then to his herd your fatness lend; and let Menalcas share
      Like boon, should e'er he wend along this road."
