BANDAISAN'S WORK OF TERROR


This sense of security was fatally dissipated on a day in July, 1888,
when the mountain suddenly broke into eruption and flung 1,600 million
cubic yards of its summit material so high into the air that many of the
falling fragments, in their fall, struck the ground with such velocity
as to be buried far out of sight. The steam and dust were driven to a
height of 13,000 feet, where they spread into a canopy of much greater
elevation, causing pitchy darkness beneath. There were from fifteen to
twenty violent explosions, and a great landslide devastated about thirty
square miles and buried many villages in the Nagase Valley.

Mr. Norman, a traveler who visited the spot shortly afterward, thus
describes the scene of ruin. After a journey through the forests which
clothed the slopes of the volcanic mountain and prevented any distant
view, the travelers at last found themselves "standing upon the ragged
edge of what was left of the mountain of Bandaisan, after two-thirds of
it, including, of course, the summit, had been literally blown away and
spread over the face of the country.

"The original cone of the mountain," he continues, "had been truncated
at an acute angle to its axis. From our very feet a precipitous mud
slope falls away for half a mile or more till it reaches the level. At
our right, still below us, rises a mud wall a mile long, also sloping
down to the level, and behind it is evidently the crater; but before us,
for five miles in a straight line, and on each side nearly as far, is
a sea of congealed mud, broken up into ripples and waves and great
billows, and bearing upon its bosom a thousand huge boulders, weighing
hundreds of tons apiece."

On reaching the crater he found it to resemble a gigantic cauldron,
fully a mile in width, and enclosed with precipitous walls of indurated
mud. From several orifices volumes of steam rose into the air, and when
the vapor cleared away for a moment glimpses of a mass of boiling mud
were obtained. Before the eruption the mountain top had terminated in
three peaks. Of these the highest had an elevation of about 5,800 feet.
The peak destroyed was the middle one, which was rather smaller than the
other two.

"The explosion was caused by steam; there was neither fire nor lava of
any kind. It was, in fact, nothing more nor less than a gigantic boiler
explosion. The whole top and one side of Sho-Bandai-san had been blown
into the air in a lateral direction, and the earth of the mountain was
converted by the escaping steam, at the moment of the explosion, into
boiling mud, part of which was projected into the air to fall at a long
distance, and then take the form of an overflowing river, which rushed
with vast rapidity and covered the country to a depth of from 20 to 150
feet. Thirty square miles of country were thus devastated."

In the devastated lowlands and buried villages below and on the slopes
of the mountain many lives were lost. From the survivors Mr. Norman
gathered some information, enabling him to describe the main features of
the catastrophe. We append a brief outline of his narrative:


MR. NORMAN'S NARRATIVE


"At a few minutes past 8 o'clock in the morning a frightful noise was
heard by the inhabitants of a village ten miles distant from the crater.
Some of them instinctively took to flight, but before they could run
much more than a hundred yards the light of day was suddenly changed
into a darkness more intense than that of midnight; a shower of blinding
hot ashes and sand poured down upon them; the ground was shaken with
earthquakes, and explosion followed explosion, the last being the most
violent of all. Many fugitives, as well as people in the houses, were
overwhelmed by the deluge of mud, none of the fugitives, when overtaken
by death, being more than two hundred yards from the village." From the
statements made by those fortunate enough to escape with their lives,
and from a personal examination of the ground, Mr. Norman inferred that
the mud must have been flung fully six miles through the air and then
have poured in a torrent along the ground for four miles further. All
this was done in less than five minutes, so that "millions of tons of
boiling mud were hurled over the country at the rate of two miles a
minute."

The velocity of the mud torrent may perhaps be overestimated, but in its
awful suddenness this catastrophe was evidently one with few equals. The
cone destroyed may have been largely composed of rather fine ashes and
scoriae, which was almost instantaneously converted into mud by the
condensing steam and the boiling water ejected. The quantity of water
thus discharged must have been enormous.

Of the remaining volcanic regions of the Pacific, the New Zealand
islands present some of the most striking examples of activity. All
the central parts, indeed, of the northern island of the group are of a
highly volcanic character. There is here a mountain named Tongariro, on
whose snow-clad summit is a deep crater, from which volcanic vapors are
seen to issue, and which exhibits other indications of having been in a
state of greater activity at a not very remote period of time. There
is also, at no great distance from this mountain, a region containing
numerous funnel-shaped chasms, emitting hot water, or steam, or
sulphurous vapors, or boiling mud. The earthquakes in New Zealand had
probably their origin in this volcanic focus.


THE NEW ZEALAND VOLCANOES


Tongariro has a height of about 6,500 feet, while Egmont, 8,270 feet in
height, is a perfect cone with a perpetual cap of snow. There are many
other volcanic mountains, and also great numbers of mud volcanoes, hot
springs and geysers. It is for the latter that the island is best known
to geologists. Their waters are at or near the boiling point and contain
silica in abundance.

At a place called Rotomahana, in the vicinity of Mount Tarawera, there
was formerly a lake of about one hundred and twenty acres in area,
which was in its way one of the most remarkable bodies of water upon the
earth. Formerly, we say, for this lake no longer exists, it having been
destroyed by the very forces to which it owed its fame. Its waters were
maintained nearly at the boiling point by the continual accession of
boiling water from numerous springs. The most abundant of those sources
was situated at the height of about 100 feet above the level of the
lake. It kept continually filled an oval basin about 250 feet in
circumference--the margins of which were fringed all round with
beautiful pure white stalactites, formed by deposits of silica, with
which the hot water was strongly impregnated. At various stages below
the principal spring were several others, that contributed to feed the
lake at the bottom, in the centre of which was a small island. Minute
bubbles continually escaped from the surface of the water with a hissing
sound, and the sand all round the lake was at a high temperature. If a
stick was thrust into it, very hot vapors would ascend from the hole.
Not far from this lake were several small basins filled with tepid
water, which was very clear, and of a blue color.

The conditions here were of a kind with those to which are due the great
geysers of Iceland and the Yellowstone Park, but different in the fact
that instead of being intermittent and throwing up jets at intervals,
the springs allowed the water to flow from them in a continuous stream.


THE PINK AND WHITE TERRACES


The silicious incrustations left by the overflow from the large pool had
made a series of terraces, two to six feet high, with the appearance of
being hewn from white or pink marble; each of the basins containing
a similar azure water. These terraces covered an area of about three
acres, and looked like a series of cataracts changed into stone, each
edge being fringed with a festoon of delicate stalactites. The water
contained about eighty-five per cent. of silica, with one or two per
cent of iron alumina, and a little alkali.

There were no more beautiful products of nature upon the earth than
those "pink and white terraces," as they were called. The hot springs of
the Yellowstone have produced formations resembling them, but not
their equal in fairy-like charm. One series of these terraced pools and
cascades was of the purest white tint, the other of the most delicate
pink, the waters topping over the edge of each pool and falling in a
miniature cascade to the one next below, thus keeping the edges built
up by a continual renewal of the silicious incrustation. But all their
beauty could not save them from utter and irremediable destruction by
the forces below the earth's surface.

On June 9, 1886, a great volcanic disturbance began in the Auckland Lake
region with a tremendous earthquake, followed during the night by many
others. At seven the next morning a lead-covered cloud of pumice sand,
advancing from the south, burst and discharged showers of fine dust.
The range of Mount Tarawera seemed to be in full volcanic activity,
including some craters supposed to be extinct, and embracing an area of
one hundred and twenty miles by twenty.

The showers of dust were so thick as to turn day into night for nearly
two days. Some lives were lost, and several villages were destroyed,
these being covered ten feet deep with ashes, dust and clayey mud. The
volcanic phenomena were of the most violent character, and the whole
island appears to have been more or less convulsed. Mount Tarawera is
said to be five hundred feet higher than before the eruption; glowing
masses were thrown up into the air, and tongues of fiery hue, gases or
illuminated vapors, five hundred feet wide, towered up one thousand feet
high. The mountain was 2,700 feet in height.


TARAWERA IN ERUPTION


This eruption presented a spectacle of rarely-equalled grandeur.
To travelers and strangers the greatest resultant loss will be the
destruction of those world-famous curiosities, the white and pink
terraces, in the vicinity of Lake Rotomahana and the region of the
famous geysers. The natives have a superstition that the eruption of the
extinct Tarawera was caused by the profanation of foreign footsteps. It
was to them a sacred place, and its crater a repository for their dead.
The first earthquake occurred in this region. One side of the mountain
fell in, and then the eruption began. The basin of the lake was broken
up and disappeared, but again reappeared as a boiling mud cauldron;
craters burst out in various places, and the beautiful terraces were no
more. After the first day the violence gradually diminished, and in a
week had ceased. Very possibly another lake will be formed, and in time
other terraces; but it is hardly within the range of probability that
the beauty of the lost terraces will ever be paralleled.

In this eruption, as usual, we find the earthquake preceding the
volcanic outburst. New Zealand, like the Philippines, Java and the
Japanese Islands, is situated over a great earth-fissure or line of
weakness. Subsidence or dislocation from tensile strain of the crust
took place, and the influx of water to new regions of heated strata
may have developed the explosive force. The earthquake and the volcano
worked together here, as they frequently do, unfortunately in this case
destroying one of the most beautiful scenes on the surface of the globe.


THE ANTARCTIC VOLCANOES


Much further south, on the frozen shore of Victoria Land in the
Antarctic regions, Sir James Ross, in 1841, sailing in his discovery
ships the Erebus and Terror, discovered two great volcanic mountains,
which he named after those two vessels. Mount Erebus is continually
covered, from top to bottom, with snow and glaciers. The mountain is
about 12,000 feet high, and although the snow reaches to the very edge
of the crater, there rise continually from the summit immense volumes of
volcanic fumes, illuminated by the glare of glowing lava beneath them.
The vapors ascend to an estimated height of 2,200 feet above the top of
the mountain.



CHAPTER XXV.

The Wonderful Hawaiian Craters and Kilauea's Lake of Fire.


In the central region of the North Pacific Ocean lies the archipelago
formerly known as the Sandwich Islands, now collectively designated as
Hawaii. The people of the United States should be specially interested
in this island group, for it has become one of our possessions, an
outlying Territory of our growing Republic, and in making it part of
our national domain we have not alone extended our dominion far over the
seas, but have added to the many marvels of nature within our land one
of the chief wonders of the world, the stupendous Hawaiian
volcanoes, before whose grandeur many of more ancient fame sink into
insignificance.


THE ISLAND OF HAWAII


The Island of Hawaii, the principal island of the group, we may safely
say contains the most enormous volcano of the earth. Indeed, the whole
island, which is 4000 square miles in extent, may be regarded as of
volcanic origin. It contains four volcanic mountains--Kohola, Hualalia,
Mauna Kea and Mauna Loa. The two last named are the chief, the former
being 13,800 feet, the latter 13,600 feet, above the sea-level. Although
their height is so vast, the ascent to their summits is so gradual that
their circumference at the base is enormous. The bulk of each of them is
reckoned to be equal to two and a half times that of Etna. Some of the
streams of lava which have emanated from them are twenty-six miles in
length by two miles in breadth.

On the adjoining island of Maui is a still larger volcano, the mighty
Haleakala, long since extinct, but memorable as possessing the most
stupendous crater on the face of the earth. The mountain itself is
over 10,000 feet high, and forms a great dome-like mass of 90 miles
circumference at base. The crater on its summit has a length of 7 1/2
and a width of 2 1/4 miles, with a total area of about sixteen square
miles. The only approach in dimensions to this enormous opening exists
in the still living crater of Kilauea, on the flank of Mauna Loa.


A VOLCANIC ISLAND GROUP


The peaks named are the most apparent remnants of a world-rending
volcanic activity in the remote past, by whose force this whole Hawaiian
island group was lifted up from the depths of the ocean, here descending
some three and a half miles below the surface level. The coral reefs
which abound around the islands are of comparatively recent formation,
and rest upon a substratum of lava probably ages older, which forms the
base of the archipelago. The islands are volcanic peaks and ridges that
have been pushed up above the surrounding seas by the profound action of
the interior forces of the earth.

It must not be supposed that this action was a violent perpendicular
thrust upward over a very limited locality, for the mountains continue
to slope at about the same angle under the sea and for great distances
on every side, so that the islands are really the crests of an extensive
elevation, estimated to cover an area of about 2000 miles in one
direction by 150 or 200 miles in the other. The process was probably
a gradual one of up-building, by means of which the sea receded as the
land steadily rose. Some idea of the mighty forces that have been at
work beneath the sea and above it can be gained by considering the
enormous mass of material now above the sea-level. Thus, the bulk of the
island of Hawaii, the largest of the group, has been estimated by the
Hawaiian Surveyor General as containing 3,600 cubic miles of lava rock
above sea-level. Taking the area of England at 50,000 square miles, this
mass of volcanic matter would cover that entire country to a depth of
274 feet. We must remember, however, that what is above sea-level is
only a small fraction of the total amount, since it sweeps down below
the waves hundreds of miles on every side.


CRATER OF HALEAKALA


Of the lava openings on these islands, the extinct one of Haleakala,
as stated, with its twenty-seven miles circumference, is far the most
stupendous. It is easy of access, the mountain sides leading to it
presenting a gentle slope; while the walls of the crater, in places
perpendicular, in others are so sloping that man and horse can descend
them. The pit varies from 1500 to 2000 feet in depth, its bottom being
very irregular from the old lava flows and the many cinder cones, these
still looking as fresh as though their fires had just gone out. Some
of these cones are over 500 feet high. There is a tradition among the
natives that the vast lava streams which in the past flowed from the
crater to the sea continued to do so in the period of their remote
ancestors. They still, indeed, appear as if recent, though there are
to-day no signs of volcanic activity anywhere on this island.

In fact, the only volcano now active in the Hawaiian Islands is Mauna
Loa, in the southern section of the Island of Hawaii. A striking feature
of this is that it has two distinct and widely disconnected craters, one
on its summit, the other on its flank, at a much lower level. The latter
is the vast crater of Kilauea, the largest active crater known on the
face of the globe.


MISS BIRD IN THE CRATER OF KILAUEA


We cannot offer a better description of the aspect of this lava abyss
than to give Miss Bird's eloquent description of her adventurous descent
into it:

"The abyss, which really is at a height of four thousand feet on the
flank of Mauna Loa, has the appearance of a pit on a rolling plain. But
such a pit! It is quite nine miles in circumference, and at its lowest
area--which not long ago fell about three hundred feet, just as the ice
on a pond falls when the water below is withdrawn--covers six square
miles. The depth of the crater varies from eight hundred to one thousand
feet, according as the molten sea below is at flood or ebb. Signs of
volcanic activity are present more or less throughout its whole depth
and for some distance along its margin, in the form of steam-cracks,
jets of sulphurous vapor, blowing cones, accumulating deposits of
acicular crystals of sulphur, etc., and the pit itself is constantly
rent and shaken by earthquakes. Great eruptions occur with circumstances
of indescribable terror and dignity; but Kilauea does not limit its
activity to these outbursts, but has exhibited its marvellous phenomena
through all known time in a lake or lakes on the southern part of the
crater three miles from this side.

"This lake--the Hale-mau-mau, or 'House of everlasting Fire', of
the Hawaiian mythology, the abode of the dreaded goddess Pele--is
approachable with safety, except during an eruption. The spectacle,
however, varies almost daily; and at times the level of the lava in the
pit within a pit is so low, and the suffocating gases are evolved in
such enormous quantities, that travellers are unable to see anything.

"At the time of our visit there had been no news from it for a week; and
as nothing was to be seen but a very faint bluish vapor hanging round
its margin, the prospect was not encouraging. After more than an hour
of very difficult climbing, we reached the lowest level of the crater,
pretty nearly a mile across, presenting from above the appearance of a
sea at rest; but on crossing it, we found it to be an expanse of waves
and convolutions of ashy-colored lava, with huge cracks filled up with
black iridescent rolls of lava only a few weeks old. Parts of it are
very rough and ridgy, jammed together like field-ice, or compacted by
rolls of lava, which may have swelled up from beneath; but the largest
part of the area presents the appearance of huge coiled hawsers, the
ropy formation of the lava rendering the illusion almost perfect. These
are riven by deep cracks, which emit hot sulphurous vapors.

"As we ascended, the flow became hotter under our feet, as well as more
porous and glistening. It was so hot that a shower of rain hissed as it
fell upon it. The crust became increasingly insecure, and necessitated
our walking in single file with the guide in front, to test the security
of the footing. I fell through several times, and always into holes full
of sulphurous steam so malignantly acid that my strong dogskin gloves
were burned through as I raised myself on my hands.

"We had followed the lava-flow for thirty miles up to the crater's
brink, and now we had toiled over recent lava for three hours, and, by
all calculations, were close to the pit; yet there was no smoke or sign
of fire, and I felt sure that the volcano had died out for once for my
special disappointment.

"Suddenly, just above and in front of us, gory drops were tossed in
the air, and springing forwards, we stood on the brink of Hale-mau-mau,
which was about thirty-five feet below us. I think we all screamed. I
know we all wept; but we were speechless, for a new glory and terror had
been added to the earth. It is the most unutterable of wonderful things.
The words of common speech are quite useless. It is unimaginable,
indescribable; a sight to remember forever; a sight which at once took
possession of every faculty of sense and soul, removing one altogether
out of the range of ordinary life. Here was the real 'bottomless pit',
'the fire which is not quenched', 'the place of Hell', 'the lake which
burneth with fire and brimstone', 'the everlasting burnings', 'the fiery
sea whose waves are never weary'. Perhaps those Scripture phrases
were suggested by the sight of some volcano in eruption. There were
groanings, rumblings, and detonations; rushings, hissings, splashings,
and the crashing sound of breakers on the coast; but it was the surging
of fiery waves upon a fiery shore. But what can I write? Such words as
jets, fountains, waves, spray, convey some idea of order and regularity,
but here there are none.

"The inner lake, while we stood there, formed a sort of crater within
itself; the whole lava sea rose about three feet; a blowing cone about
eight feet high was formed; it was never the same two minutes together.
And what we saw had no existence a month before, and probably will be
changed in every essential feature a month from hence. The prominent
object was fire in motion; but the surface of the double lake was
continually skimming over for a second or two with a cool crust of
lustrous grey-white, like frost-silver, broken by jagged cracks of a
bright rose-color. The movement was nearly always from the sides to the
centre; but the movement of the centre itself appeared independent, and
always took a southerly direction. Before each outburst of agitation
there was much hissing and throbbing, with internal roaring as of
imprisoned gases. Now it seemed furious, demoniacal, as if no power
on earth could bind it, then playful and sportive; then for a second
languid, but only because it was accumulating fresh force. Sometimes the
whole lake took the form of mighty waves, and, surging heavily against
the partial barrier with a sound like the Pacific surf, lashed, tore,
covered it, and threw itself over it in clots of living fire. It was all
confusion, commotion, forces, terror, glory, majesty, mystery, and even
beauty. And the color, 'eye hath not seen' it! Molten metal hath not
that crimson gleam, nor blood that living light."

To this description we may add that of Mr. Ellis, a former missionary to
these islands, and one of the number who have descended to the shores of
Kilauea's abyss of fire. He says, after describing his difficult descent
and progress over the lava-strewn pit:


MR. ELLIS VISITS THE LAKE OF LAVA


"Immediately before us yawned an immense gulf, in the form of a
crescent, about two miles in length, from northeast to southwest; nearly
a mile in width, and apparently 800 feet deep. The bottom was covered
with lava, and the southwestern and northern parts of it were one vast
flood of burning matter in a state of terrific ebullition, rolling
to and fro its 'fiery surges' and flaming billows. Fifty-one conical
islands, of varied form and size, containing as many craters, rose
either round the edge or from the surface of the burning lake;
twenty-two constantly emitted columns of gray smoke or pyramids of
brilliant flame, and several of these at the same time vomited from
their ignited mouths streams of lava, which rolled in blazing torrents
down their black indented sides into the boiling mass below.

"The existence of these conical craters led us to conclude that the
boiling cauldron of lava before us did not form the focus of the
volcano; that this mass of melted lava was comparatively shallow, and
that the basin in which it was contained was separated by a stratum of
solid matter from the great volcanic abyss, which constantly poured
out its melted contents through these numerous craters into this
upper reservoir. The sides of the gulf before us, although composed of
different strata of ancient lava, were perpendicular for about 400 feet,
and rose from a wide horizontal ledge of solid black lava of irregular
