  I fear lest he anticipate the will                              40
  Of Fate, and Ilium perish premature.
    So spake the son of Saturn kindling war
  Inevitable, and the Gods to fight
  'Gan move with minds discordant. Juno sought
  And Pallas, with the earth-encircling Power                     45
  Neptune, the Grecian fleet, with whom were join'd
  Mercury, teacher of all useful arts,
  And Vulcan, rolling on all sides his eyes
  Tremendous, but on disproportion'd legs,
  Not without labor hard, halting uncouth.                        50
  Mars, warrior-God, on Ilium's part appear'd
  With Phoebus never-shorn, Dian shaft-arm'd,
  Xanthus, Latona, and the Queen of smiles,
  Venus. So long as the immortal Gods
  Mixed not with either host, Achaia's sons                       55
  Exulted, seeing, after tedious pause,
  Achilles in the field, and terror shook
  The knees of every Trojan, at the sight
  Of swift Achilles like another Mars
  Panting for blood, and bright in arms again.                    60
  But when the Olympian Powers had enter'd once
  The multitude, then Discord, at whose voice
  The million maddens, vehement arose;
  Then, Pallas at the trench without the wall
  By turns stood shouting, and by turns a shout                   65
  Sent terrible along the sounding shore,
  While, gloomy as a tempest, opposite,
  Mars from the lofty citadel of Troy
  Now yell'd aloud, now running o'er the hill
  Callicolone, on the Simois' side.                               70
    Thus the Immortals, ever-blest, impell'd
  Both hosts to battle, and dire inroad caused
  Of strife among them. Sudden from on high
  The Sire of Gods and men thunder'd; meantime,
  Neptune the earth and the high mountains shook;                 75
  Through all her base and to her topmost peak
  Ida spring-fed the agitation felt
  Reeling, all Ilium and the fleet of Greece.
  Upstarted from his throne, appall'd, the King
  Of Erebus, and with a cry his fears                             80
  Through hell proclaim'd, lest Neptune, o'er his head
  Shattering the vaulted earth, should wide disclose
  To mortal and immortal eyes his realm
  Terrible, squalid, to the Gods themselves
  A dreaded spectacle; with such a sound                          85
  The Powers eternal into battle rush'd.[4]
  Opposed to Neptune, King of the vast Deep,
  Apollo stood with his wing'd arrows arm'd;
  Pallas to Mars; Diana shaft-expert,
  Sister of Phoebus, in her golden bow                            90
  Rejoicing, with whose shouts the forests ring
  To Juno; Mercury, for useful arts
  Famed, to Latona; and to Vulcan's force
  The eddied River broad by mortal men
  Scamander call'd, but Xanthus by the Gods.                      95
    So Gods encounter'd Gods. But most desire
  Achilles felt, breaking the ranks, to rush
  On Priameian Hector, with whose blood
  Chiefly his fury prompted him to sate
  The indefatigable God of war.                                  100
  But, the encourager of Ilium's host
  Apollo, urged AEneas to assail
  The son of Peleus, with heroic might
  Inspiring his bold heart. He feign'd the voice
  Of Priam's son Lycaon, and his form                            105
  Assuming, thus the Trojan Chief address'd.
    AEneas! Trojan leader! where are now
  Thy vaunts, which, banqueting erewhile among
  Our princes, o'er thy brimming cups thou mad'st,
  That thou would'st fight, thyself, with Peleus' son?           110
    To whom AEneas answer thus returned.
  Offspring of Priam! why enjoin'st thou me
  Not so inclined, that arduous task, to cope
  With the unmatch'd Achilles? I have proved
  His force already, when he chased me down                      115
  From Ida with his spear, what time he made
  Seizure of all our cattle, and destroy'd
  Pedasus and Lyrnessus; but I 'scaped
  Unslain, by Jove himself empower'd to fly,
  Else had I fallen by Achilles' hand,                           120
  And by the hand of Pallas, who his steps
  Conducted, and exhorted him to slay
  Us and the Leleges.[5] Vain, therefore, proves
  All mortal force to Peleus' son opposed;
  For one, at least, of the Immortals stands                     125
  Ever beside him, guardian of his life,
  And, of himself, he hath an arm that sends
  His rapid spear unerring to the mark.
  Yet, would the Gods more equal sway the scales
  Of battle, not with ease should he subdue                      130
  Me, though he boast a panoply of brass.
    Him, then, Apollo answer'd, son of Jove.
  Hero! prefer to the immortal Gods
  Thy Prayer, for thee men rumor Venus' son
  Daughter of Jove; and Peleus' son his birth                    135
  Drew from a Goddess of inferior note.
  Thy mother is from Jove; the offspring, his,
  Less noble of the hoary Ocean old.
  Go, therefore, and thy conquering spear uplift
  Against him, nor let aught his sounding words                  140
  Appal thee, or his threats turn thee away.
    So saying, with martial force the Chief he fill'd,
  Who through the foremost combatants advanced
  Radiant in arms. Nor pass'd Anchises' son
  Unseen of Juno, through the crowded ranks                      145
  Seeking Achilles, but the Powers of heaven
  Convened by her command, she thus address'd.
    Neptune, and thou, Minerva! with mature
  Deliberation, ponder the event.
  Yon Chief, AEneas, dazzling bright in arms;                     150
  Goes to withstand Achilles, and he goes
  Sent by Apollo; in despite of whom
  Be it our task to give him quick repulse,
  Or, of ourselves, let some propitious Power
  Strengthen Achilles with a mind exempt                         155
  From terror, and with force invincible.
  So shall he know that of the Gods above
  The mightiest are his friends, with whom compared
  The favorers of Ilium in time past,
  Who stood her guardians in the bloody strife,                  160
  Are empty boasters all, and nothing worth.
  For therefore came we down, that we may share
  This fight, and that Achilles suffer nought
  Fatal to-day, though suffer all he must
  Hereafter, with his thread of life entwined                    165
  By Destiny, the day when he was born.
  But should Achilles unapprized remain
  Of such advantage by a voice divine,
  When he shall meet some Deity in the field,
  Fear then will seize him, for celestial forms                  170
  Unveil'd are terrible to mortal eyes.
    To whom replied the Shaker of the shores.
  Juno! thy hot impatience needs control;
  It ill befits thee. No desire I feel
  To force into contention with ourselves                        175
  Gods, our inferiors. No. Let us, retired
  To yonder hill, distant from all resort,
  There sit, while these the battle wage alone.
  But if Apollo, or if Mars the fight
  Entering, begin, themselves, to interfere                      180
  Against Achilles, then will we at once
  To battle also; and, I much misdeem,
  Or glad they shall be soon to mix again
  Among the Gods on the Olympian heights,
  By strong coercion of our arms subdued.                        185
    So saying, the God of Ocean azure-hair'd
  Moved foremost to the lofty mound earth-built
  Of noble Hercules, by Pallas raised
  And by the Trojans for his safe escape,
  What time the monster of the deep pursued                      190
  The hero from the sea-bank o'er the plain.
  There Neptune sat, and his confederate Gods,
  Their shoulders with impenetrable clouds
  O'ermantled, while the city-spoiler Mars
  Sat with Apollo opposite on the hill                           195
  Callicolone, with their aids divine.
  So, Gods to Gods in opposite aspect
  Sat ruminating, and alike the work
  All fearing to begin of arduous war,
  While from his seat sublime Jove urged them on.                200
  The champain all was fill'd, and with the blaze
  Illumined wide of men and steeds brass-arm'd,
  And the incumber'd earth jarr'd under foot
  Of the encountering hosts. Then, two, the rest
  Surpassing far, into the midst advanced                        205
  Impatient for the fight, Anchises' son
  AEneas and Achilles, glorious Chief!
  AEneas first, under his ponderous casque
  Nodding and menacing, advanced; before
  His breast he held the well-conducted orb                      210
  Of his broad shield, and shook his brazen spear.
  On the other side, Achilles to the fight
  Flew like a ravening lion, on whose death
  Resolved, the peasants from all quarters meet;
  He, viewing with disdain the foremost, stalks                  215
  Right on, but smitten by some dauntless youth
  Writhes himself, and discloses his huge fangs
  Hung with white foam; then, growling for revenge,
  Lashes himself to battle with his tail,
  Till with a burning eye and a bold heart                       220
  He springs to slaughter, or himself is slain;
  So, by his valor and his noble mind
  Impell'd, renown'd Achilles moved toward
  AEneas, and, small interval between,
  Thus spake the hero matchless in the race.                     225
    Why stand'st thou here, AEneas! thy own band
  Left at such distance? Is it that thine heart
  Glows with ambition to contend with me
  In hope of Priam's honors, and to fill
  His throne hereafter in Troy steed-renown'd?                   230
  But shouldst thou slay me, not for that exploit
  Would Priam such large recompense bestow,
  For he hath sons, and hath, beside, a mind
  And disposition not so lightly changed.
  Or have the Trojans of their richest soil                      235
  For vineyard apt or plow assign'd thee part
  If thou shalt slay me? Difficult, I hope,
  At least, thou shalt experience that emprize.
  For, as I think, I have already chased
  Thee with my spear. Forgettest thou the day                    240
  When, finding thee alone, I drove thee down
  Headlong from Ida, and, thy cattle left
  Afar, thou didst not dare in all thy flight
  Turn once, till at Lyrnessus safe arrived,
  Which city by Jove's aid and by the aid                        245
  Of Pallas I destroy'd, and captive led
  Their women? Thee, indeed, the Gods preserved
  But they shall not preserve thee, as thou dream'st
  Now also. Back into thy host again;
  Hence, I command thee, nor oppose in fight                     250
  My force, lest evil find thee. To be taught
  By suffering only is the part of fools.
    To whom AEneas answer thus return'd.
  Pelides! hope not, as I were a boy,
  With words to scare me. I have also taunts                     255
  At my command, and could be sharp as thou.
  By such reports as from the lips of men
  We oft have heard, each other's birth we know
  And parents; but my parents to behold
  Was ne'er thy lot, nor have I thine beheld.                    260
  Thee men proclaim from noble Peleus sprung
  And Thetis, bright hair'd Goddess of the Deep;
  I boast myself of lovely Venus born
  To brave Anchises; and his son this day
  In battle slain thy sire shall mourn, or mine;                 265
  For I expect not that we shall depart
  Like children, satisfied with words alone.
  But if it please thee more at large to learn
  My lineage (thousands can attest it true)
  Know this. Jove, Sovereign of the storms, begat                270
  Dardanus, and ere yet the sacred walls
  Of Ilium rose, the glory of this plain,
  He built Dardania; for at Ida's foot
  Dwelt our progenitors in ancient days.
  Dardanus was the father of a son,                              275
  King Ericthonius, wealthiest of mankind.
  Three thousand mares of his the marish grazed,
  Each suckling with delight her tender foal.
  Boreas, enamor'd of no few of these,
  The pasture sought, and cover'd them in form                   280
  Of a steed azure-maned. They, pregnant thence,
  Twelve foals produced, and all so light of foot,
  That when they wanton'd in the fruitful field
  They swept, and snapp'd it not, the golden ear;
  And when they wanton'd on the boundless deep,                  285
  They skimm'd the green wave's frothy ridge, secure.
  From Ericthonius sprang Tros, King of Troy,
  And Tros was father of three famous sons,
  Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymede
  Loveliest of human kind, whom for his charms                   290
  The Gods caught up to heaven, there to abide
  With the immortals, cup-bearer of Jove.
  Ilus begat Laomedon, and he
  Five sons, Tithonus, Priam, Clytius,
  Lampus, and Hicetaon, branch of Mars.                          295
  Assaracus a son begat, by name
  Capys, and Capys in due time his son
  Warlike Anchises, and Anchises me.
  But Priam is the noble Hector's sire.[6]
  Such is my lineage, and such blood I boast;                    300
  But valor is from Jove; he, as he wills,
  Increases or reduces it in man,
  For he is lord of all. Therefore enough--
  Too long like children we have stood, the time
  Consuming here, while battle roars around.                     305
  Reproach is cheap. Easily might we cast
  Gibes at each other, till a ship that asks
  A hundred oars should sink beneath the load.
  The tongue of man is voluble, hath words
  For every theme, nor wants wide field and long,                310
  And as he speaks so shall he hear again.
  But we--why should we wrangle, and with taunts
  Assail each other, as the practice is
  Of women, who with heart-devouring strife
  On fire, start forth into the public way                       315
  To mock each other, uttering, as may chance,
  Much truth, much falsehood, as their anger bids?
  The ardor of my courage will not slack
  For all thy speeches; we must combat first;
  Now, therefore, without more delay, begin,                     320
  That we may taste each other's force in arms.[7]
    So spake AEneas, and his brazen lance
  Hurl'd with full force against the dreadful shield.
  Loud roar'd its ample concave at the blow.
  Not unalarm'd, Pelides his broad disk                          325
  Thrust farther from him, deeming that the force
  Of such an arm should pierce his guard with ease.
  Vain fear! he recollected not that arms
  Glorious as his, gifts of the immortal Gods,
  Yield not so quickly to the force of man.                      330
  The stormy spear by brave AEneas sent,
  No passage found; the golden plate divine
  Repress'd its vehemence; two folds it pierced,
  But three were still behind, for with five folds
  Vulcan had fortified it; two were brass;                       335
  The two interior, tin; the midmost, gold;
  And at the golden one the weapon stood.[8]
  Achilles next, hurl'd his long shadow'd spear,
  And struck AEneas on the utmost verge
  Of his broad shield, where thinnest lay the brass,             340
  And thinnest the ox-hide. The Pelian ash
  Started right through the buckler, and it rang.
  AEneas crouch'd terrified, and his shield
  Thrust farther from him; but the rapid beam
  Bursting both borders of the ample disk,                       345
  Glanced o'er his back, and plunged into the soil.
  He 'scaped it, and he stood; but, as he stood,
  With horror infinite the weapon saw
  Planted so near him. Then, Achilles drew
  His falchion keen, and with a deafening shout                  350
  Sprang on him; but AEneas seized a stone
  Heavy and huge, a weight to overcharge
  Two men (such men as are accounted strong
  Now) but he wielded it with ease, alone.
  Then had AEneas, as Achilles came                               355
  Impetuous on, smitten, although in vain,
  His helmet or his shield, and Peleus' son
  Had with his falchion him stretch'd at his feet,
  But that the God of Ocean quick perceived
  His peril, and the Immortals thus bespake.                     360
    I pity brave AEneas, who shall soon,
  Slain by Achilles, see the realms below,
  By smooth suggestions of Apollo lured
  To danger, such as he can ne'er avert.
  But wherefore should the Chief, guiltless himself,             365
  Die for the fault of others? at no time
  His gifts have fail'd, grateful to all in heaven.
  Come, therefore, and let us from death ourselves
  Rescue him, lest if by Achilles' arm
  This hero perish, Jove himself be wroth;                       370
  For he is destined to survive, lest all
  The house of Dardanus (whom Jove beyond
  All others loved, his sons of woman born)
  Fail with AEneas, and be found no more.
  Saturnian Jove hath hated now long time                        375
  The family of Priam, and henceforth
  AEneas and his son, and his sons' sons,
  Shall sway the sceptre o'er the race of Troy.
    To whom, majestic thus the spouse of Jove.
  Neptune! deliberate thyself, and choose                        380
  Whether to save AEneas, or to leave
  The hero victim of Achilles' ire.
  For Pallas and myself ofttimes have sworn
  In full assembly of the Gods, to aid
  Troy never, never to avert the day                             385
  Of her distress, not even when the flames
  Kindled by the heroic sons of Greece,
  Shall climb with fury to her topmost towers.
    She spake; then Neptune, instant, through the throng
  Of battle flying, and the clash of spears,                     390
  Came where Achilles and AEneas fought.
  At once with shadows dim he blurr'd the sight
  Of Peleus' son, and from the shield, himself,
  Of brave AEneas the bright-pointed ash
  Retracting, placed it at Achilles' feet.                       395
  Then, lifting high AEneas from the ground,
  He heaved him far remote; o'er many a rank
  Of heroes and of bounding steeds he flew,
  Launch'd into air from the expanded palm
  Of Neptune, and alighted in the rear                           400
  Of all the battle where the Caucons stood.
  Neptune approach'd him there, and at his side
  Standing, in accents wing'd, him thus bespake.
    What God, AEneas! tempted thee to cope
  Thus inconsiderately with the son                              405
  Of Peleus, both more excellent in fight
  Than thou, and more the favorite of the skies?
  From him retire hereafter, or expect
  A premature descent into the shades.
  But when Achilles shall have once fulfill'd                    410
  His destiny, in battle slain, then fight
  Fearless, for thou canst fall by none beside.
    So saying, he left the well-admonish'd Chief,
  And from Achilles' eyes scatter'd the gloom
  Shed o'er them by himself. The hero saw                        415
  Clearly, and with his noble heart incensed
  By disappointment, thus conferring, said.
    Gods! I behold a prodigy. My spear
  Lies at my foot, and he at whom I cast
  The weapon with such deadly force, is gone!                    420
  AEneas therefore, as it seems, himself
  Interests the immortal Gods, although
  I deem'd his boast of their protection vain.
  I reck not. Let him go. So gladly 'scaped
  From slaughter now, he shall not soon again                    425
  Feel an ambition to contend with me.
  Now will I rouse the Danai, and prove
  The force in fight of many a Trojan more.
    He said, and sprang to battle with loud voice,
  Calling the Grecians after him.--Ye sons                       430
  Of the Achaians! stand not now aloof,
  My noble friends! but foot to foot let each
  Fall on courageous, and desire the fight.
  The task were difficult for me alone,
  Brave as I boast myself, to chase a foe                        435
  So numerous, and to combat with them all.
  Not Mars himself, immortal though he be,
  Nor Pallas, could with all the ranks contend
  Of this vast multitude, and drive the whole.
  With hands, with feet, with spirit and with might,             440
  All that I can I will; right through I go,
  And not a Trojan who shall chance within
  Spear's reach of me, shall, as I judge, rejoice.
    Thus he the Greeks exhorted. Opposite,
  Meantime, illustrious Hector to his host                       445
  Vociferated, his design to oppose
  Achilles publishing in every ear.
    Fear not, ye valiant men of Troy! fear not
  The son of Peleus. In a war of words
  I could, myself, cope even with the Gods;                      450
  But not with spears; there they excel us all.
  Nor shall Achilles full performance give
  To all his vaunts, but, if he some fulfil,
  Shall others leave mutilate in the midst.
  I will encounter him, though his hands be fire,                455
  Though fire his hands, and his heart hammer'd steel.
    So spake he them exhorting. At his word
  Uprose the Trojan spears, thick intermixt
  The battle join'd, and clamor loud began.
  Then thus, approaching Hector, Phoebus spake.                  460
    Henceforth, advance not Hector! in the front
  Seeking Achilles, but retired within
  The stormy multitude his coming wait,
  Lest his spear reach thee, or his glittering sword.
    He said, and Hector far into his host                        465
  Withdrew, admonish'd by the voice divine.
  Then, shouting terrible, and clothed with might,
  Achilles sprang to battle. First, he slew
  The valiant Chief Iphition, whom a band
  Numerous obey'd. Otrynteus was his sire.                       470
  Him to Otrynteus, city-waster Chief,
  A Naiad under snowy Tmolus bore
  In fruitful Hyda.[9] Right into his front
  As he advanced, Achilles drove his spear,
  And rived his skull; with thundering sound he fell,            475
  And thus the conqueror gloried in his fall.
    Ah Otryntides! thou art slain. Here lies
  The terrible in arms, who born beside
  The broad Gygaean lake, where Hyllus flows
  And Hermus, call'd the fertile soil his own.                   480
    Thus gloried he. Meantime the shades of death
  Cover'd Iphition, and Achaian wheels
  And horses ground his body in the van.
  Demoleon next, Antenor's son, a brave
  Defender of the walls of Troy, he slew.                        485
  Into his temples through his brazen casque
  He thrust the Pelian ash, nor could the brass
  Such force resist, but the huge weapon drove
  The shatter'd bone into his inmost brain,
  And his fierce onset at a stroke repress'd.                    490
  Hippodamas his weapon next received
  Within his spine, while with a leap he left
  His steeds and fled. He, panting forth his life,
  Moan'd like a bull, by consecrated youths
  Dragg'd round the Heliconian King,[10] who views               495
  That victim with delight. So, with loud moans
  The noble warrior sigh'd his soul away.
  Then, spear in hand, against the godlike son
  Of Priam, Polydorus, he advanced.
  Not yet his father had to him indulged                         500
  A warrior's place, for that of all his sons
  He was the youngest-born, his hoary sire's
  Chief darling, and in speed surpass'd them all.
  Then also, in the vanity of youth,
  For show of nimbleness, he started oft                         505
  Into the vanward, till at last he fell.
  Him gliding swiftly by, swifter than he
  Achilles with a javelin reach'd; he struck
  His belt behind him, where the golden clasps
  Met, and the double hauberk interposed.                        510
  The point transpierced his bowels, and sprang through
  His navel; screaming, on his knees he fell,
  Death-shadows dimm'd his eyes, and with both hands,
  Stooping, he press'd his gather'd bowels back.
  But noble Hector, soon as he beheld                            515
  His brother Polydorus to the earth
  Inclined, and with his bowels in his hands,
  Sightless well-nigh with anguish could endure
  No longer to remain aloof; flame-like
  He burst abroad,[11] and shaking his sharp spear,              520
  Advanced to meet Achilles, whose approach
  Seeing, Achilles bounded with delight,
  And thus, exulting, to himself he said.
    Ah! he approaches, who hath stung my soul
  Deepest, the slayer of whom most I loved!                      525
  Behold, we meet! Caution is at an end,
  And timid skulking in the walks of war.
    He ceased, and with a brow knit into frowns,
  Call'd to illustrious Hector. Haste, approach,
  That I may quick dispatch thee to the shades.                  530
    Whom answer'd warlike Hector, nought appall'd.
  Pelides! hope not, as I were a boy,
  With words to scare me. I have also taunts
  At my command, and can be sharp as thou.
  I know thee valiant, and myself I know                         535
  Inferior far; yet, whether thou shalt slay
  Me, or, inferior as I am, be slain
  By me, is at the pleasure of the Gods,
  For I wield also not a pointless beam.
    He said, and, brandishing it, hurl'd his spear,              540
  Which Pallas, breathing softly, wafted back
  From the renown'd Achilles, and it fell
  Successless at illustrious Hector's feet.
  Then, all on fire to slay him, with a shout
  That rent the air Achilles rapid flew                          545
  Toward him; but him wrapt in clouds opaque
  Apollo caught with ease divine away.
  Thrice, swift Achilles sprang to the assault
  Impetuous, thrice the pitchy cloud he smote,
  And at his fourth assault, godlike in act,                     550
  And terrible in utterance, thus exclaim'd.
    Dog! thou art safe, and hast escaped again;
  But narrowly, and by the aid once more
  Of Phoebus, without previous suit to whom
  Thou venturest never where the javelin sings.                  555
  But when we next encounter, then expect,
  If one of all in heaven aid also me,
  To close thy proud career. Meantime I seek
  Some other, and assail e'en whom I may.
    So saying, he pierced the neck of Dryops through,            560
  And at his feet he fell. Him there he left,
  And turning on a valiant warrior huge,
  Philetor's son, Demuchus, in the knee
  Pierced, and detain'd him by the planted spear,
  Till with his sword he smote him, and he died.                 565
  Laogonus and Dardanus he next
  Assaulted, sons of Bias; to the ground
  Dismounting both, one with his spear he slew,
  The other with his falchion at a blow.
  Tros too, Alastor's son--he suppliant clasp'd                  570
  Achilles' knees, and for his pity sued,
  Pleading equality of years, in hope
  That he would spare, and send him thence alive.
  Ah dreamer! ignorant how much in vain
  That suit he urged; for not of milky mind,                     575
  Or placable in temper was the Chief
  To whom he sued, but fiery. With both hands
  His knees he clasp'd importunate, and he
  Fast by the liver gash'd him with his sword.
  His liver falling forth, with sable blood                      580
  His bosom fill'd, and darkness veil'd his eyes.
  Then, drawing close to Mulius, in his ear
  He set the pointed brass, and at a thrust
  Sent it, next moment, through his ear beyond.
  Then, through the forehead of Agenor's son                     585
  Echechlus, his huge-hafted blade he drove,
  And death and fate forever veil'd his eyes.
  Next, where the tendons of the elbow meet,
  Striking Deucalion, through his wrist he urged
  The brazen point; he all defenceless stood,                    590
  Expecting death; down came Achilles' blade
  Full on his neck; away went head and casque
  Together; from his spine the marrow sprang,
  And at his length outstretch'd he press'd the plain.
  From him to Rhigmus, Pireus' noble son,                        595
  He flew, a warrior from the fields of Thrace.
  Him through the loins he pierced, and with the beam
  Fixt in his bowels, to the earth he fell;
  Then piercing, as he turn'd to flight, the spine
  Of Areithoeus his charioteer,                                   600
  He thrust him from his seat; wild with dismay
  Back flew the fiery coursers at his fall.
  As a devouring fire within the glens
  Of some dry mountain ravages the trees,
  While, blown around, the flames roll to all sides,             605
  So, on all sides, terrible as a God,
  Achilles drove the death-devoted host
  Of Ilium, and the champain ran with blood.
  As when the peasant his yoked steers employs
  To tread his barley, the broad-fronted pair                    610
  With ponderous hoofs trample it out with ease,
  So, by magnanimous Achilles driven,
  His coursers solid-hoof'd stamp'd as they ran
  The shields, at once, and bodies of the slain;
  Blood spatter'd all his axle, and with blood                   615
  From the horse-hoofs and from the fellied wheels
  His chariot redden'd, while himself, athirst
  For glory, his unconquerable hands
  Defiled with mingled carnage, sweat, and dust.




                              THE ILIAD.

                              BOOK XXI.




                  ARGUMENT OF THE TWENTY-FIRST BOOK.


Achilles having separated the Trojans, and driven one part of them to
the city and the other into the Scamander, takes twelve young men
alive, his intended victims to the manes of Patroclus. The river
overflowing his banks with purpose to overwhelm him, is opposed by
Vulcan, and gladly relinquishes the attempt. The battle of the gods
ensues. Apollo, in the form of Agenor, decoys Achilles from the town,
which in the mean time the Trojans enter and shut the gates against
him.




                              BOOK XXI.


  [1]But when they came, at length, where Xanthus winds
  His stream vortiginous from Jove derived,
  There, separating Ilium's host, he drove
  Part o'er the plain to Troy in the same road
  By which the Grecians had so lately fled                         5
  The fury of illustrious Hector's arm.
  That way they fled pouring themselves along
  Flood-like, and Juno, to retard them, threw
  Darkness as night before them. Other part,
  Push'd down the sides of Xanthus, headlong plunged              10
  With dashing sound into his dizzy stream,
  And all his banks re-echoed loud the roar.
  They, struggling, shriek'd in silver eddies whirl'd.
  As when, by violence of fire expell'd,
  Locusts uplifted on the wing escape                             15
  To some broad river, swift the sudden blaze
  Pursues them, they, astonish'd, strew the flood,[2]
  So, by Achilles driven, a mingled throng
  Of horses and of warriors overspread
  Xanthus, and glutted all his sounding course                    20
  He, chief of heroes, leaving on the bank
  His spear against a tamarisk reclined,
  Plunged like a God, with falchion arm'd alone
  But fill'd with thoughts of havoc. On all sides
  Down came his edge; groans follow'd dread to hear               25
  Of warriors smitten by the sword, and all
  The waters as they ran redden'd with blood.
  As smaller fishes, flying the pursuit
  Of some huge dolphin, terrified, the creeks
  And secret hollows of a haven fill,                             30
  For none of all that he can seize he spares,
  So lurk'd the trembling Trojans in the caves
  Of Xanthus' awful flood. But he (his hands
  Wearied at length with slaughter) from the rest
  Twelve youths selected whom to death he doom'd,                 35
  In vengeance for his loved Patroclus slain.
  Them stupified with dread like fawns he drove
  Forth from the river, manacling their hands
  Behind them fast with their own tunic-strings,
  And gave them to his warrior train in charge.                   40
  Then, ardent still for blood, rushing again
  Toward the stream, Dardanian Priam's son
  He met, Lycaon, as he climb'd the bank.
  Him erst by night, in his own father's field
  Finding him, he had led captive away.                           45
  Lycaon was employ'd cutting green shoots
  Of the wild-fig for chariot-rings, when lo!
  Terrible, unforeseen, Achilles came.
  He seized and sent him in a ship afar
  To Lemnos; there the son of Jason paid                          50
  His price, and, at great cost, Eetion
  The guest of Jason, thence redeeming him,
  Sent him to fair Arisba;[3] but he 'scaped
  Thence also and regain'd his father's house.
  Eleven days, at his return, he gave                             55
  To recreation joyous with his friends,
  And on the twelfth his fate cast him again
  Into Achilles' hands, who to the shades
  Now doom'd him, howsoever loth to go.
  Soon as Achilles swiftest of the swift                          60
  Him naked saw (for neither spear had he
  Nor shield nor helmet, but, when he emerged,
  Weary and faint had cast them all away)
  Indignant to his mighty self he said.
    Gods! I behold a miracle! Ere long                            65
  The valiant Trojans whom my self have slain
  Shall rise from Erebus, for he is here,
  The self-same warrior whom I lately sold
  At Lemnos, free, and in the field again.
  The hoary deep is prison strong enough                          70
  For most, but not for him. Now shall he taste
  The point of this my spear, that I may learn
  By sure experience, whether hell itself
  That holds the strongest fast, can him detain,
  Or whether he shall thence also escape.                         75
    While musing thus he stood, stunn'd with dismay
  The youth approach'd, eager to clasp his knees,
  For vehement he felt the dread of death
  Working within him; with his Pelian ash
  Uplifted high noble Achilles stood                              80
  Ardent to smite him; he with body bent
  Ran under it, and to his knees adhered;
  The weapon, missing him, implanted stood
  Close at his back, when, seizing with one hand
  Achilles' knees, he with the other grasp'd                      85
  The dreadful beam, resolute through despair,
  And in wing'd accents suppliant thus began.
    Oh spare me! pity me! Behold I clasp
  Thy knees, Achilles! Ah, illustrious Chief!
  Reject not with disdain a suppliant's prayer.                   90
  I am thy guest also, who at thy own board
  Have eaten bread, and did partake the gift
  Of Ceres with thee on the very day
  When thou didst send me in yon field surprised
  For sale to sacred Lemnos, far remote,                          95
  And for my price receiv'dst a hundred beeves.
  Loose me, and I will yield thee now that sum
  Thrice told. Alas! this morn is but the twelfth
  Since, after numerous hardships, I arrived
  Once more in Troy, and now my ruthless lot                     100
  Hath given me into thy hands again.
  Jove cannot less than hate me, who hath twice
  Made me thy prisoner, and my doom was death,
  Death in my prime, the day when I was born
  Son of Laothoee from Alta sprung,                               105
  From Alta, whom the Leleges obey
  On Satnio's banks in lofty Pedasus.
  His daughter to his other numerous wives
  King Priam added, and two sons she bore
  Only to be deprived by thee of both.                           110
  My brother hath already died, in front
  Of Ilium's infantry, by thy bright spear,
  The godlike Polydorus; and like doom
  Shall now be mine, for I despair to escape
  Thine hands, to which the Gods yield me again.                 115
  But hear and mark me well. My birth was not
  From the same womb as Hector's, who hath slain
  Thy valiant friend for clemency renown'd.
    Such supplication the illustrious son
  Of Priam made, but answer harsh received.                      120
    Fool! speak'st of ransom? Name it not to me.
  For till my friend his miserable fate
  Accomplish'd, I was somewhat given to spare,
  And numerous, whom I seized alive, I sold.
  But now, of all the Trojans whom the Gods                      125
  Deliver to me, none shall death escape,
  'Specially of the house of Priam, none.
  Die therefore, even thou, my friend! What mean
  Thy tears unreasonably shed and vain?
  Died not Patroclus. braver far than thou?                      130
  And look on me--see'st not to what a height
  My stature towers, and what a bulk I boast?
  A King begat me, and a Goddess bore.
  What then! A death by violence awaits
  Me also, and at morn, or eve, or noon,                         135
  I perish, whensoe'er the destined spear
  Shall reach me, or the arrow from the nerve.
    He ceased, and where the suppliant kneel'd, he died.
  Quitting the spear, with both hands spread abroad
  He sat, but swift Achilles with his sword                      140
  'Twixt neck and key-bone smote him, and his blade
  Of double edge sank all into the wound.
  He prone extended on the champain lay
  Bedewing with his sable blood the glebe,
  Till, by the foot, Achilles cast him far                       145
  Into the stream, and, as he floated down,
  Thus in wing'd accents, glorying, exclaim'd.
    Lie there, and feed the fishes, which shall lick
  Thy blood secure. Thy mother ne'er shall place
  Thee on thy bier, nor on thy body weep,                        150
  But swift Scamander on his giddy tide
  Shall bear thee to the bosom of the sea.
  There, many a fish shall through the crystal flood
  Ascending to the rippled surface, find
  Lycaon's pamper'd flesh delicious fare.                        155
  Die Trojans! till we reach your city, you
  Fleeing, and slaughtering, I. This pleasant stream
  Of dimpling silver which ye worship oft
  With victim bulls, and sate with living steeds[4]
  His rapid whirlpools, shall avail you nought,                  160
  But ye shall die, die terribly, till all
  Shall have requited me with just amends
  For my Patroclus, and for other Greeks
  Slain at the ships while I declined the war.
    He ended, at those words still more incensed                 165
  Scamander means devised, thenceforth to check
  Achilles, and avert the doom of Troy.
  Meantime the son of Peleus, his huge spear
  Grasping, assail'd Asteropaeus son
  Of Pelegon, on fire to take his life.                          170
  Fair Periboea, daughter eldest-born
  Of Acessamenus, his father bore
  To broad-stream'd Axius, who had clasp'd the nymph
  In his embrace. On him Achilles sprang.
  He newly risen from the river, stood                           175
  Arm'd with two lances opposite, for him
