my own remembrance of the thing will supply; and that is, the fact is
not granted, namely, that there died none in those long intervals, viz.,
from the 20th of December to the 9th of February, and from thence to the
22d of April. The weekly bills are the only evidence on the other side,
and those bills were not of credit enough, at least with me, to support
an hypothesis, or determine a question of such importance as this; for
it was our received opinion at that time, and I believe upon very good
grounds, that the fraud lay in the parish officers, searchers, and
persons appointed to give account of the dead, and what diseases they
died of; and as people were very loath at first to have the neighbors
believe their houses were infected, so they gave money to procure, or
otherwise procured, the dead persons to be returned as dying of other
distempers; and this I know was practiced afterwards in many places, I
believe I might say in all places where the distemper came, as will be
seen by the vast increase of the numbers placed in the weekly bills
under other articles[278] of diseases during the time of the infection.
For example, in the months of July and August, when the plague was
coming on to its highest pitch, it was very ordinary to have from a
thousand to twelve hundred, nay, to almost fifteen hundred, a week, of
other distempers. Not that the numbers of those distempers were really
increased to such a degree; but the great number of families and houses
where really the infection was, obtained the favor to have their dead be
returned of other distempers, to prevent the shutting up their houses.
For example:--

    _Dead of other Diseases besides the Plague._

    From the 18th to the 25th of July     942
    To the 1st of August                1,004
    To the 8th                          1,213
    To the 15th                         1,439
    To the 22d                          1,331
    To the 29th                         1,394
    To the 5th of September             1,264
    To the 12th                         1,056
    To the 19th                         1,132
    To the 26th                           927

Now, it was not doubted but the greatest part of these, or a great part
of them, were dead of the plague; but the officers were prevailed with
to return them as above, and the numbers of some particular articles of
distempers discovered is as follows:--

                   Aug. 1-8.   Aug. 8-15.   Aug. 15-22.  Aug. 22-29.

    Fever             314         353          348          383
    Spotted fever     174         190          166          165
    Surfeit            85          87           74           99
    Teeth              90         113          111          133
                      ---         ---          ---          ---
                      663         743          699          780

             Aug. 29-Sept. 5.  Sept. 5-12.  Sept. 12-19. Sept. 19-26.

    Fever             364         332          309          268
    Spotted Fever     157          97          101           65
    Surfeit            68          45           49           36
    Teeth             138         128          121          112
                      ---         ---          ---          ---
                      727         602          580          481

There were several other articles which bore a proportion to these, and
which it is easy to perceive were increased on the same account; as
aged,[279] consumptions, vomitings, imposthumes,[280] gripes, and the
like, many of which were not doubted to be infected people; but as it
was of the utmost consequence to families not to be known to be
infected, if it was possible to avoid it, so they took all the measures
they could to have it not believed, and if any died in their houses, to
get them returned to the examiners, and by the searchers, as having died
of other distempers.

This, I say, will account for the long interval which, as I have said,
was between the dying of the first persons that were returned in the
bills to be dead of the plague, and the time when the distemper spread
openly, and could not be concealed.

Besides, the weekly bills themselves at that time evidently discover
this truth; for while there was no mention of the plague, and no
increase after it had been mentioned, yet it was apparent that there was
an increase of those distempers which bordered nearest upon it. For
example, there were eight, twelve, seventeen, of the spotted fever in a
week when there were none or but very few of the plague; whereas before,
one, three, or four were the ordinary weekly numbers of that distemper.
Likewise, as I observed before, the burials increased weekly in that
particular parish and the parishes adjacent, more than in any other
parish, although there were none set down of the plague; all which tell
us that the infection was handed on, and the succession of the distemper
really preserved, though it seemed to us at that time to be ceased, and
to come again in a manner surprising.

It might be, also, that the infection might remain in other parts of the
same parcel of goods which at first it came in, and which might not be,
perhaps, opened, or at least not fully, or in the clothes of the first
infected person; for I cannot think that anybody could be seized with
the contagion in a fatal and mortal degree for nine weeks together, and
support his state of health so well as even not to discover it to
themselves:[281] yet, if it were so, the argument is the stronger in
favor of what I am saying, namely, that the infection is retained in
bodies apparently well, and conveyed from them to those they converse
with, while it is known to neither the one nor the other.

Great were the confusions at that time upon this very account; and when
people began to be convinced that the infection was received in this
surprising manner from persons apparently well, they began to be
exceeding shy and jealous of every one that came near them. Once, on a
public day, whether a sabbath day or not I do not remember, in Aldgate
Church, in a pew full of people, on a sudden one fancied she smelt an
ill smell. Immediately she fancies the plague was in the pew, whispers
her notion or suspicion to the next, then rises and goes out of the pew.
It immediately took with the next, and so with them all; and every one
of them, and of the two or three adjoining pews, got up and went out of
the church, nobody knowing what it was offended them, or from whom.

This immediately filled everybody's mouths with one preparation or
other, such as the old women directed, and some, perhaps, as physicians
directed, in order to prevent infection by the breath of others;
insomuch, that if we came to go into a church when it was anything full
of people, there would be such a mixture of smells at the entrance, that
it was much more strong, though perhaps not so wholesome, than if you
were going into an apothecary's or druggist's shop: in a word, the whole
church was like a smelling bottle. In one corner it was all perfumes; in
another, aromatics,[282] balsamics,[283] and a variety of drugs and
herbs; in another, salts and spirits, as every one was furnished for
their own preservation. Yet I observed that after people were possessed,
as I have said, with the belief, or rather assurance, of the infection
being thus carried on by persons apparently in health, the churches and
meetinghouses were much thinner of people than at other times, before
that, they used to be; for this is to be said of the people of London,
that, during the whole time of the pestilence, the churches or meetings
were never wholly shut up, nor did the people decline coming out to the
public worship of God, except only in some parishes, when the violence
of the distemper was more particularly in that parish at that time, and
even then[284] no longer than it[285] continued to be so.

Indeed, nothing was more strange than to see with what courage the
people went to the public service of God, even at that time when they
were afraid to stir out of their own houses upon any other occasion
(this I mean before the time of desperation which I have mentioned
already). This was a proof of the exceeding populousness of the city at
the time of the infection, notwithstanding the great numbers that were
gone into the country at the first alarm, and that fled out into the
forests and woods when they were further terrified with the
extraordinary increase of it. For when we came to see the crowds and
throngs of people which appeared on the sabbath days at the churches,
and especially in those parts of the town where the plague was abated,
or where it was not yet come to its height, it was amazing. But of this
I shall speak again presently. I return, in the mean time, to the
article of infecting one another at first. Before people came to right
notions of the infection and of infecting one another, people were only
shy of those that were really sick. A man with a cap upon his head, or
with cloths round his neck (which was the case of those that had
swellings there),--such was indeed frightful; but when we saw a
gentleman dressed, with his band[286] on, and his gloves in his hand,
his hat upon his head, and his hair combed,--of such we had not the
least apprehensions; and people conversed a great while freely,
especially with their neighbors and such as they knew. But when the
physicians assured us that the danger was as well from the sound (that
is, the seemingly sound) as the sick, and that those people that thought
themselves entirely free were oftentimes the most fatal; and that it
came to be generally understood that people were sensible of it, and of
the reason of it,--then, I say, they began to be jealous of everybody;
and a vast number of people locked themselves up, so as not to come
abroad into any company at all, nor suffer any that had been abroad in
promiscuous company to come into their houses, or near them (at least
not so near them as to be within the reach of their breath, or of any
smell from them); and when they were obliged to converse at a distance
with strangers, they would always have preservatives in their mouths and
about their clothes, to repel and keep off the infection.

It must be acknowledged that when people began to use these cautions
they were less exposed to danger, and the infection did not break into
such houses so furiously as it did into others before; and thousands of
families were preserved, speaking with due reserve to the direction of
Divine Providence, by that means.

But it was impossible to beat anything into the heads of the poor. They
went on with the usual impetuosity of their tempers, full of outcries
and lamentations when taken, but madly careless of themselves,
foolhardy, and obstinate, while they were well. Where they could get
employment, they pushed into any kind of business, the most dangerous
and the most liable to infection; and if they were spoken to, their
answer would be, "I must trust to God for that. If I am taken, then I am
provided for, and there is an end of me;" and the like. Or thus, "Why,
what must I do? I cannot starve. I had as good have the plague as perish
for want. I have no work: what could I do? I must do this, or beg."
Suppose it was burying the dead, or attending the sick, or watching
infected houses, which were all terrible hazards; but their tale was
generally the same. It is true, necessity was a justifiable, warrantable
plea, and nothing could be better; but their way of talk was much the
same where the necessities were not the same. This adventurous conduct
of the poor was that which brought the plague among them in a most
furious manner; and this, joined to the distress of their circumstances
when taken, was the reason why they died so by heaps; for I cannot say
I could observe one jot of better husbandry[287] among them (I mean the
laboring poor) while they were all well and getting money than there was
before; but[288] as lavish, as extravagant, and as thoughtless for
to-morrow as ever; so that when they came to be taken sick, they were
immediately in the utmost distress, as well for want as for sickness, as
well for lack of food as lack of health.

The misery of the poor I had many occasions to be an eyewitness of, and
sometimes, also, of the charitable assistance that some pious people
daily gave to such, sending them relief and supplies, both of food,
physic, and other help, as they found they wanted. And indeed it is a
debt of justice due to the temper of the people of that day, to take
notice here, that not only great sums, very great sums of money, were
charitably sent to the lord mayor and aldermen for the assistance and
support of the poor distempered people, but abundance of private people
daily distributed large sums of money for their relief, and sent people
about to inquire into the condition of particular distressed and visited
families, and relieved them. Nay, some pious ladies were transported
with zeal in so good a work, and so confident in the protection of
Providence in discharge of the great duty of charity, that they went
about in person distributing alms to the poor, and even visiting poor
families, though sick and infected, in their very houses, appointing
nurses to attend those that wanted attending, and ordering apothecaries
and surgeons, the first to supply them with drugs or plasters, and such
things as they wanted, and the last to lance and dress the swellings and
tumors, where such were wanting; giving their blessing to the poor in
substantial relief to them, as well as hearty prayers for them.

I will not undertake to say, as some do, that none of those charitable
people were suffered to fall under the calamity itself; but this I may
say, that I never knew any one of them that miscarried, which I mention
for the encouragement of others in case of the like distress; and
doubtless if they that give to the poor lend to the Lord, and he will
repay them, those that hazard their lives to give to the poor, and to
comfort and assist the poor in such misery as this, may hope to be
protected in the work.

Nor was this charity so extraordinary eminent only in a few; but (for I
cannot lightly quit this point) the charity of the rich, as well in the
city and suburbs as from the country, was so great, that in a word a
prodigious number of people, who must otherwise have perished for want
as well as sickness, were supported and subsisted by it; and though I
could never, nor I believe any one else, come to a full knowledge of
what was so contributed, yet I do believe, that, as I heard one say that
was a critical observer of that part,[289] there was not only many
thousand pounds contributed, but many hundred thousand pounds, to the
relief of the poor of this distressed, afflicted city. Nay, one man
affirmed to me that he could reckon up above one hundred thousand pounds
a week which was distributed by the churchwardens at the several parish
vestries, by the lord mayor and the aldermen in the several wards and
precincts, and by the particular direction of the court and of the
justices respectively in the parts where they resided, over and above
the private charity distributed by pious hands in the manner I speak of;
and this continued for many weeks together.

I confess this is a very great sum; but if it be true that there was
distributed, in the parish of Cripplegate only, seventeen thousand eight
hundred pounds in one week to the relief of the poor, as I heard
reported, and which I really believe was true, the other may not be
improbable.

It was doubtless to be reckoned among the many signal good providences
which attended this great city, and of which there were many other worth
recording. I say, this was a very remarkable one, that it pleased God
thus to move the hearts of the people in all parts of the kingdom so
cheerfully to contribute to the relief and support of the poor at
London; the good consequences of which were felt many ways, and
particularly in preserving the lives and recovering the health of so
many thousands, and keeping so many thousands of families from perishing
and starving.

And now I am talking of the merciful disposition of Providence in this
time of calamity, I cannot but mention again, though I have spoken
several times of it already on other accounts (I mean that of the
progression of the distemper), how it began at one end of the town, and
proceeded gradually and slowly from one part to another, and like a dark
cloud that passes over our heads, which, as it thickens and overcasts
the air at one end, clears up at the other end: so, while the plague
went on raging from west to east, as it went forwards east, it abated in
the west; by which means those parts of the town which were not seized,
or who[290] were left, and where it had spent its fury, were (as it
were) spared to help and assist the other: whereas, had the distemper
spread itself over the whole city and suburbs at once, raging in all
places alike, as it has done since in some places abroad, the whole body
of the people must have been overwhelmed, and there would have died
twenty thousand a day, as they say there did at Naples, nor would the
people have been able to have helped or assisted one another.

For it must be observed that where the plague was in its full force,
there indeed the people were very miserable, and the consternation was
inexpressible; but a little before it reached even to that place, or
presently after it was gone, they were quite another sort of people; and
I cannot but acknowledge that there was too much of that common temper
of mankind to be found among us all at that time, namely, to forget the
deliverance when the danger is past. But I shall come to speak of that
part again.

It must not be forgot here to take some notice of the state of trade
during the time of this common calamity; and this with respect to
foreign trade, as also to our home trade.

As to foreign trade, there needs little to be said. The trading nations
of Europe were all afraid of us. No port of France, or Holland, or
Spain, or Italy, would admit our ships, or correspond with us. Indeed,
we stood on ill terms with the Dutch, and were in a furious war with
them, though in a bad condition to fight abroad, who had such dreadful
enemies to struggle with at home.

Our merchants were accordingly at a full stop. Their ships could go
nowhere; that is to say, to no place abroad. Their manufactures and
merchandise, that is to say, of our growth, would not be touched abroad.
They were as much afraid of our goods as they were of our people; and
indeed they had reason, for our woolen manufactures are as retentive of
infection as human bodies, and, if packed up by persons infected, would
receive the infection, and be as dangerous to the touch as a man would
be that was infected; and therefore when any English vessel arrived in
foreign countries, if they did take the goods on shore, they always
caused the bales to be opened and aired in places appointed for that
purpose. But from London they would not suffer them to come into port,
much less to unload their goods, upon any terms whatever; and this
strictness was especially used with them in Spain and Italy. In Turkey
and the islands of the Arches,[291] indeed, as they are called, as well
those belonging to the Turks as to the Venetians, they were not so very
rigid. In the first there was no obstruction at all, and four ships
which were then in the river loading for Italy (that is, for Leghorn and
Naples) being denied product, as they call it, went on to Turkey, and
were freely admitted to unlade their cargo without any difficulty, only
that when they arrived there, some of their cargo was not fit for sale
in that country, and other parts of it being consigned to merchants at
Leghorn, the captains of the ships had no right nor any orders to
dispose of the goods; so that great inconveniences followed to the
merchants. But this was nothing but what the necessity of affairs
required; and the merchants at Leghorn and Naples, having notice given
