
Now the Spaniards came in again and removed Guatemoc and the cacique of
Tacuba, carrying them in their arms, for they could not walk, and indeed
the cacique was in a swoon.

'Farewell, Teule,' said Guatemoc as he passed me; 'you are indeed a true
son of Quetzal and a gallant man. May the gods reward you in times to
come for all that you have suffered for me and mine, since I cannot.'

Then he was borne out and these were the last words that I ever heard
him utter.

Now I was left alone with the Tlascalans and de Garcia, who mocked me as
before.

'A little tired, eh, friend Wingfield?' he said sneering. 'Well, the
play is rough till you get used to it. A night's sleep will refresh you,
and to-morrow you will be a new man. Perhaps you believe that I have
done my worst. Fool, this is but a beginning. Also you think doubtless
that your obstinacy angers me? Wrong again, my friend, I only pray that
you may keep your lips sealed to the last. Gladly would I give my share
of this hidden gold in payment for two more such days with you. I have
still much to pay you back, and look you, I have found a way to do it.
There are more ways of hurting a man than through his own flesh--for
instance, when I wished to be revenged upon your father, I struck him
through her whom he loved. Now I have touched you and you wonder what I
mean. Well, I will tell you. Perhaps you may know an Aztec lady of royal
blood who is named Otomie?'

'Otomie, what of her?' I cried, speaking for the first time, since fear
for her stirred me more than all the torments I had borne.

'A triumph indeed; I have found a way to make you speak at last; why,
then, to-morrow you will be full of words. Only this, Cousin Wingfield;
Otomie, Montezuma's daughter, a very lovely woman by the way, is
your wife according to the Indian customs. Well, I know all the story
and--she is in my power. I will prove it to you, for she shall be
brought here presently and then you can console each other. For listen,
dog, to-morrow she will sit where you are sitting, and before your eyes
she shall be dealt with as you have been dealt with. Ah! then you will
talk fast enough, but perhaps it will be too late.'

And now for the first time I broke down and prayed for mercy even of my
foe.

'Spare her,' I groaned; 'do what you will with me, but spare her! Surely
you must have a heart, even you, for you are human. You can never do
this thing, and Cortes would not suffer it.'

'As for Cortes,' he answered, 'he will know nothing of it--till it is
done. I have my warrant that charges me to use every means in my power
to force the truth from you. Torture has failed; this alone is left. And
for the rest, you must read me ill. You know what it is to hate, for you
hate me; multiply your hate by ten and you may find the sum of mine
for you. I hate you for your blood, I hate you because you have your
mother's eyes, but much more do I hate you for yourself, for did you not
beat me, a gentleman of Spain, with a stick as though I were a hound?
Shall I then shrink from such a deed when I can satisfy my hate by it?
Also perhaps, though you are a brave man, at this moment you know what
it is to fear, and are tasting of its agony. Now I will be open with
you; Thomas Wingfield, I fear you. When first I saw you I feared you as
I had reason to do, and that is why I tried to kill you, and as time has
gone by I have feared you more and more, so much indeed, that at times
I cannot rest because of a nameless terror that dogs me and which has
to do with you. Because of you I fled from Spain, because of you I have
played the coward in more frays than one. The luck has always been mine
in this duel between us, and yet I tell you that even as you are, I
fear you still. If I dared I would kill you at once, only then you would
haunt me as your mother haunts me, and also I must answer for it to
Cortes. Fear, Cousin Wingfield, is the father of cruelty, and mine makes
me cruel to you. Living or dead, I know that you will triumph over me
at the last, but it is my turn now, and while you breathe, or while one
breathes who is dear to you, I will spend my life to bring you and them
to shame and misery and death, as I brought your mother, my cousin,
though she forced me to it to save myself. Why not? There is no
forgiveness for me, I cannot undo the past. You came to take vengeance
on me, and soon or late by you, or through you, it will be glutted, but
till then I triumph, ay, even when I must sink to this butcher's work to
do it,' and suddenly he turned and left the place.

Then weakness and suffering overcame me and I swooned away. When I awoke
it was to find that my bonds had been loosed and that I lay on some sort
of bed, while a woman bent over me, tending me with murmured words of
pity and love. The night had fallen, but there was light in the chamber,
and by it I saw that the woman was none other than Otomie, no longer
starved and wretched, but almost as lovely as before the days of siege
and hunger.

'Otomie! you here!' I gasped through my wounded lips, for with my senses
came the memory of de Garcia's threats.

'Yes, beloved, it is I,' she murmured; 'they have suffered that I nurse
you, devils though they are. Oh! that I must see you thus and yet be
helpless to avenge you,' and she burst into weeping.

'Hush,' I said, 'hush. Have we food?'

'In plenty. A woman brought it from Marina.'

'Give me to eat, Otomie.'

Now for a while she fed me and the deadly sickness passed from me,
though my poor flesh burned with a hundred agonies.

'Listen, Otomie: have you seen de Garcia?'

'No, husband. Two days since I was separated from my sister Tecuichpo
and the other ladies, but I have been well treated and have seen no
Spaniard except the soldiers who led me here, telling me that you were
sick. Alas! I knew not from what cause,' and again she began to weep.

'Still some have seen you and it is reported that you are my wife.'

'It is likely enough,' she answered, 'for it was known throughout the
Aztec hosts, and such secrets cannot be kept. But why have they treated
you thus? Because you fought against them?'

'Are we alone?' I asked.

'The guard is without, but there are none else in the chamber.'

'Then bend down your head and I will tell you,' and I told her all.

When I had done so she sprang up with flashing eyes and her hand pressed
upon her breast, and said:

'Oh! if I loved you before, now I love you more if that is possible, who
could suffer thus horribly and yet be faithful to the fallen and your
oath. Blessed be the day when first I looked upon your face, O my
husband, most true of men. But they who could do this--what of them?
Still it is done with and I will nurse you back to health. Surely it is
done with, or they had not suffered me to come to you?'

'Alas! Otomie, I must tell all--it is NOT done with,' and with faltering
voice I went on with the tale, yes, and since I must, I told her for
what purpose she had been brought here. She listened without a word,
though her lips turned pale.

'Truly,' she said when I had done, 'these Teules far surpass the pabas
of our people, for if the priests torture and sacrifice, it is to
the gods and not for gold and secret hate. Now, husband, what is your
counsel? Surely you have some counsel.'

'I have none that I dare offer, wife,' I groaned.

'You are timid as a girl who will not utter the love she burns to tell,'
Otomie answered with a proud and bitter laugh. 'Well, I will speak it
for you. It is in your mind that we must die to-night.'

'It is,' I said; 'death now, or shame and agony to-morrow and then death
at last, that is our choice. Since God will not protect us, we must
protect ourselves if we can find the means.'

'God! there is no God. At times I have doubted the gods of my people and
turned to yours; now I renounce and reject Him. If there were a God of
mercy such as you cling to, could He suffer that such things be? You are
my god, husband, to you and for you I pray, and you alone. Let us have
done now with pleading to those who are not, or who, if they live,
are deaf to our cries and blind to our misery, and befriend ourselves.
Yonder lies rope, that window has bars, very soon we can be beyond the
sun and the cruelty of Teules, or sound asleep. But there is time yet;
let us talk a while, they will scarcely begin their torments before the
dawn, and ere dawn we shall be far.'

So we talked as well as my sufferings would allow. We talked of how we
first had met, of how Otomie had been vowed to me as the wife of Tezcat,
Soul of the World, of that day when we had lain side by side upon the
stone of sacrifice, of our true marriage thereafter, of the siege
of Tenoctitlan and the death of our first-born. Thus we talked till
midnight was two hours gone. Then there came a silence.

'Husband,' said Otomie at last in a hushed and solemn voice, 'you are
worn with suffering, and I am weary. It is time to do that which must
be done. Sad is our fate, but at least rest is before us. I thank you,
husband, for your gentleness, I thank you more for your faithfulness to
my house and people. Shall I make ready for our last journey?'

'Make ready!' I answered.

Then she rose and soon was busy with the ropes. At length all was
prepared and the moment of death was at hand.

'You must aid me, Otomie,' I said; 'I cannot walk by myself.'

She came and lifted me with her strong and tender arms, till I stood
upon a stool beneath the window bars. There she placed the rope about my
throat, then taking her stand by me she fitted the second rope upon her
own. Now we kissed in solemn silence, for there was nothing more to say.
Yet Otomie said something, asking:

'Of whom do you think in this moment, husband? Of me and of my dead
child, or of that lady who lives far across the sea? Nay, I will not
ask. I have been happy in my love, it is enough. Now love and life must
end together, and it is well for me, but for you I grieve. Say, shall I
thrust away the stool?'

'Yes, Otomie, since there is no hope but death. I cannot break my faith
with Guatemoc, nor can I live to see you shamed and tortured.'

'Then kiss me first and for the last time.'

We kissed again and then, as she was in the very act of pushing the
stool from beneath us, the door opened and shut, and a veiled woman
stood before us, bearing a torch in one hand and a bundle in the other.
She looked, and seeing us and our dreadful purpose, ran to us.

'What do you?' she cried, and I knew the voice for that of Marina. 'Are
you then mad, Teule?'

'Who is this who knows you so well, husband, and will not even suffer
that we die in peace?' asked Otomie.

'I am Marina,' answered the veiled woman, 'and I come to save you if I
can.'



CHAPTER XXX

THE ESCAPE


Now Otomie put the rope off her neck, and descending from the stool,
stood before Marina.

'You are Marina,' she said coldly and proudly, 'and you come to save
us, you who have brought ruin on the land that bore you, and have given
thousands of her children to death, and shame, and torment. Now, if I
had my way, I would have none of your salvation, nay, I would rather
save myself as I was about to do.'

Thus Otomie spoke, and never had she looked more royal than in this
moment, when she risked her last chance of life that she might pour
out her scorn upon one whom she deemed a traitress, no, one who was a
traitress, for had it not been for Marina's wit and aid, Cortes would
never have conquered Anahuac. I trembled as I heard her angry words,
for, all I suffered notwithstanding, life still seemed sweet to me, who,
ten seconds ago, had stood upon the verge of death. Surely Marina would
depart and leave us to our doom. But it was not so. Indeed, she shrank
and trembled before Otomie's contempt. They were a strange contrast in
their different loveliness as they stood face to face in the torture
den, and it was strange also to see the spirit of the lady of royal
blood, threatened as she was with a shameful death, or still more
shameful life, triumph over the Indian girl whom to-day fortune had set
as far above her as the stars.

'Say, royal lady,' asked Marina in her gentle voice, 'for what cause
did you, if tales are true, lie by the side of yonder white man upon the
stone of sacrifice?'

'Because I love him, Marina.'

'And for this same cause have I, Marina, laid my honour upon a different
altar, for this same cause I have striven against the children of my
people, because I love another such as he. It is for love of Cortes that
I have aided Cortes, therefore despise me not, but let your love plead
for mine, seeing that, to us women, love is all. I have sinned, I know,
but doubtless in its season my sin shall find a fitting punishment.'

'It had need be sharp,' answered Otomie. 'My love has harmed none, see
before you but one grain of the countless harvest of your own. In yonder
chair Guatemoc your king was this day tortured by your master Cortes,
who swore to treat him with all honour. By his side sat Teule, my
husband and your friend; him Cortes gave over to has private enemy,
de Garcia, whom you name Sarceda. See how he has left him. Nay, do not
shudder, gentle lady; look now at his wounds! Consider to what a pass we
are driven when you find us about to die thus like dogs, he, my husband,
that he may not live to see me handled as he has been, and I with him,
because a princess of the Otomie and of Montezuma's blood cannot submit
to such a shame while death has one door through which to creep. It is
but a single grain of your harvest, outcast and traitress, the harvest
of misery and death that is stored yonder in the ruins of Tenoctitlan.
Had I my will, I tell you that I had sooner die a score of times than
take help from a hand so stained with the blood of my people and of
yours--I--'

'Oh! cease, lady, cease,' groaned Marina, covering her eyes with her
hand, as though the sight of Otomie were dreadful to her. 'What is done
is done; do not add to my remorse. What did you say, that you, the lady
Otomie, were brought here to be tortured?'

'Even so, and before my husband's eyes. Why should Montezuma's daughter
and the princess of the Otomie escape the fate of the emperor of the
Aztecs? If her womanhood does not protect her, has she anything to hope
of her lost rank?'

'Cortes knows nothing of this, I swear it,' said Marina. 'To the rest
he has been driven by the clamour of the soldiers, who taunt him with
stealing treasure that he has never found. But of this last wickedness
he is innocent.'

'Then let him ask his tool Sarceda of it.'

'As for Sarceda, I promise you, princess, that if I can I will avenge
this threat upon him. But time is short, I am come here with the
knowledge of Cortes, to see if I can win the secret of the treasure from
Teule, your husband, and for my friendship's sake I am about to betray
my trust and help him and you to fly. Do you refuse my aid?'

Otomie said nothing, but I spoke for the first time.

'Nay, Marina, I have no love for this thief's fate if I can escape it,
but how is it to be done?'

'The chance is poor enough, Teule, but I bethought me that once out of
this prison you might slip away disguised. Few will be stirring at dawn,
and of them the most will not be keen to notice men or things. See, I
have brought you the dress of a Spanish soldier; your skin is dark, and
in the half light you might pass as one; and for the princess your wife,
I have brought another dress, indeed I am ashamed to offer it, but it is
the only one that will not be noted at this hour; also, Teule, I bring
you a sword, that which was taken from you, though I think that once it
had another owner.'

Now while she spoke Marina undid her bundle, and there in it were the
dresses and the sword, the same that I had taken from the Spaniard Diaz
in the massacre of the noche triste. First she drew out the woman's robe
and handed it to Otomie, and I saw that it was such a robe as among
the Indians is worn by the women who follow camps, a robe with red and
yellow in it. Otomie saw it also and drew back.

'Surely, girl, you have brought a garment of your own in error,' she
said quietly, but in such a fashion as showed more of the savage heart
that is native to her race than she often suffered to be seen; 'at the
least I cannot wear such robes.'

'It seems that I must bear too much,' answered Marina, growing wroth at
last, and striving to keep back the tears that started to her eyes. 'I
will away and leave you;' and she began to roll up her bundle.

'Forgive her, Marina,' I said hastily, for the desire to escape grew on
me every minute; 'sorrow has set an edge upon her tongue.' Then turning
to Otomie I added, 'I pray you be more gentle, wife, for my sake if not
for your own. Marina is our only hope.'

'Would that she had left us to die in peace, husband. Well, so be it,
for your sake I will put on these garments of a drab. But how shall we
escape out of this place and the camp? Will the door be opened to us,
and the guards removed, and if we pass them, can you walk, husband?'

'The doors will not be opened, lady,' said Marina, 'for those wait
without, who will see that they are locked when I have passed them. But
there will be nothing to fear from the guard, trust to me for it. See,
the bars of this window are but of wood, that sword will soon sever
them, and if you are seen you must play the part of a drunken soldier
being guided to his quarters by a woman. For the rest I know nothing,
save that I run great risk for your sakes, since if it is discovered
that I have aided you, then I shall find it hard to soften the rage of
Cortes, who, the war being won,' and she sighed, 'does not need me now
so much as once he did.'

'I can make shift to hop on my right foot,' I said, 'and for the rest we
must trust to fortune. It can give us no worse gifts than those we have
already.'

'So be it, Teule, and now farewell, for I dare stay no longer. I can
do nothing more. May your good star shine on you and lead you hence
in safety; and Teule, if we never meet again, I pray you think of me
kindly, for there are many in the world who will do otherwise in the
days to come.'

'Farewell, Marina,' I said, and she was gone.

We heard the doors close behind her, and the distant voices of those who
bore her litter, then all was silence. Otomie listened at the window for
a while, but the guards seemed to be gone, where or why I do not know to
this hour, and the only sound was that of distant revelry from the camp.

'And now to the work,' I said to Otomie.

'As you wish, husband, but I fear it will be profitless. I do not trust
that woman. Faithless in all, without doubt she betrays us. Still at the
worst you have the sword, and can use it.'

'It matters little,' I answered. 'Our plight cannot be worse than it is
now; life has no greater evils than torment and death, and they are with
us already.'

Then I sat upon the stool, and my arms being left sound and strong, I
hacked with the sharp sword at the wooden bars of the window, severing
them one by one till there was a space big enough for us to creep
through. This being done and no one having appeared to disturb us,
Otomie clad me in the clothes of a Spanish soldier which Marina had
brought, for I could not dress myself. What I suffered in the donning of
those garments, and more especially in the pulling of the long boot
on to my burnt foot, can never be told, but more than once I stopped,
pondering whether it would not be better to die rather than to endure
such agonies. At last it was done, and Otomie must put on the red and
yellow robe, a garb of shame such as many honest Indian women would die
sooner than be seen in, and I think that as she did this, her agony was
greater than mine, though of another sort, for to her proud heart, that
dress was a very shirt of Nessus. Presently she was clad, and minced
before me with savage mockery, saying:

'Prithee, soldier, do I look my part?'

'A peace to such fooling,' I answered; 'our lives are at stake, what
does it matter how we disguise ourselves?'

'It matters much, husband, but how can you understand, who are a man and
a foreigner? Now I will clamber through the window, and you must
follow me if you can, if not I will return to you and we will end this
masquerade.'

Then she passed through the hole swiftly, for Otomie was agile and
strong as an ocelot, and mounting the stool I made shift to follow her
as well as my hurts would allow. In the end I was able to throw myself
upon the sill of the window, and there I was stretched out like a dead
cat till she drew me across it, and I fell with her to the ground on the
further side, and lay groaning. She lifted me to my feet, or rather to
my foot, for I could use but one of them, and we stared round us. No one
was to be seen, and the sound of revelry had died away, for the crest of
Popo was already red with the sunlight and the dawn grew in the valley.

'Where to?' I said.

Now Otomie had been allowed to walk in the camp with her sister, the
wife of Guatemoc, and other Aztec ladies, and she had this gift in
common with most Indians, that where she had once passed there she could
pass again, even in the darkest night.

'To the south gate,' she whispered; 'perhaps it is unguarded now that
the war is done, at the least I know the road thither.'

So we started, I leaning on her shoulder and hopping on my right foot,
and thus very painfully we traversed some three hundred yards meeting
nobody. But now our good luck failed us, for passing round the corner
of some buildings, we came face to face with three soldiers returning to
their huts from a midnight revel, and with them some native servants.

'Whom have we here?' said the first of these. 'Your name, comrade?'

'Good-night, brother, good-night,' I answered in Spanish, speaking with
the thick voice of drunkenness.

'Good morning, you mean,' he said, for the dawn was breaking. 'Your
name. I don't know your face, though it seems that you have been in the
wars,' and he laughed.

'You mustn't ask a comrade his name,' I said solemnly and swinging to
and fro. 'The captain might send for me and he's a temperate man. Your
arm, girl; it is time to go to sleep, the sun sets.'

They laughed, but one of them addressed Otomie, saying:

'Leave the sot, my pretty, and come and walk with us,' and he caught her
by the arm. But she turned on him with so fierce a look that he let
her go again astonished, and we staggered on till the corner of another
house hid us from their view. Here I sank to the ground overcome with
pain, for while the soldiers were in sight, I was obliged to use my
wounded foot lest they should suspect. But Otomie pulled me up, saying:

'Alas! beloved, we must pass on or perish.'

I rose groaning, and by what efforts I reached the south gate I cannot
describe, though I thought that I must die before I came there. At last
it was before us, and as chance would have it, the Spanish guard were
asleep in the guardhouse. Three Tlascalans only were crouched over a
little fire, their zerapes or blankets about their heads, for the dawn
was chilly.

'Open the gates, dogs!' I said in a proud voice.

Seeing a Spanish soldier one of them rose to obey, then paused and said:

'Why, and by whose orders?'

I could not see the man's face because of the blanket, but his voice
sounded familiar to me and I grew afraid. Still I must speak.

'Why?--because I am drunk and wish to lie without till I grow sober. By
whose orders? By mine, I am an officer of the day, and if you disobey
I'll have you flogged till you never ask another question.'

'Shall I call the Teules within?' said the man sulkily to his companion.

'No,' he answered; 'the lord Sarceda is weary and gave orders that he
should not be awakened without good cause. Keep them in or let them
through as you will, but do not wake him.'

I trembled in every limb; de Garcia was in the guardhouse! What if he
awoke, what if he came out and saw me? More--now I guessed whose voice
it was that I knew again; it was that of one of those Tlascalans who had
aided in tormenting me. What if he should see my face? He could scarcely
fail to know that on which he had left his mark so recently. I was dumb
with fear and could say nothing, and had it not been for the wit of
Otomie, there my story would have ended. But now she played her part
and played it well, plying the man with the coarse raillery of the camp,
till at length she put him in a good humour, and he opened the gate,
bidding her begone and me with her. Already we had passed the gate when
