
XLVII. Up Clausus came, of Cures, in the pride
    Of youth. His stark spear, urged with forceful sway,
    Through Dryops' throat, beneath the chin, he plied,
    And voice and life forsook him, as he lay,
    Spewing thick gore, his forehead in the clay.
    Three Thracians next, three sons of Idas bleed.
    Ismarians these. Halaesus to the fray
    Brings his Auruncan bands, and Neptune's seed,
Messapus, too, comes up, the tamer of the steed.

XLVIII. Each side strives hard the other's ground to win.
    E'en on Ausonia's threshold raves the fray.
    As in the broad air warring winds begin
    The battle, matched in strength and rage, nor they,
    The winds themselves, nor clouds nor sea give way,
    All locked in strife, and struggling as they can,
    And long in doubtful balance hangs the day,
    So meet the ranks, and mingle in the van,
And foot clings close to foot, and man is massed with man.

XLIX. Where, in another quarter, stones and trees,
    Torn from its banks, a torrent at its height
    Had strewn with wide-wrought ravage, Pallas sees
    His brave Arcadians break the ranks of fight,
    And turn before their Latin foes in flight.
    Strange to foot-combat, from his trusty horse
    The rough ground lured each rider to alight.
    Now with entreaties--'tis his last resource--
And now with bitter words he fires their flagging force.

L.  "Shame on ye, comrades! whither do ye run?
    By your brave deeds, and by the name ye bear,
    And great Evander's, by the wars ye won,
    By these my hopes, which even now bid fair
    E'en with my father's honours to compare.
    Trust not your feet; the sword, the sword must hew
    A pathway through the foemen. See, 'tis there,
    Where foes press thickest, and our friends are few,
Our noble country calls for Pallas and for you.

LI. "No gods assail us; mortals fight to-day
    With mortals. Lives as many as theirs have we,
    As many hands, to match them in the fray.
    Earth fails for flight, and yonder lies the sea.
    Seaward or Troyward--whither shall we flee?"
    So saying, he plunged amid the throng. First foe,
    Fell Lagus, doomed an evil fate to dree.
    Him, toiling hard a ponderous stone to throw,
Between the ribs and spine a whistling dart laid low.

LII. Scarce from his marrow could the victor tear
    The steel, so tightly clung it to the bone.
    Forth Hisbo leaped, to smite him unaware.
    Rash hope! brave Pallas caught him, rushing on,
    And through the lung his sword a passage won.
    Then Sthenius he slew; beside him bled
    Anchemolus, of Rhoetus' stock the son,
    The lewd defiler of his stepdame's bed.
Fate stopped his lewdness now, and stretched him with the dead.

LIII. Ye, too, young Thymber and Larides fair,
    Twin sons of Daucus, did the victor quell.
    So like in form and features were the pair,
    That e'en their doting parents failed to tell
    This one from that. Alas! the sword too well
    Divides them now. Here, tumbled on the sward,
    At one fierce swoop, the head of Thymber fell.
    Thy severed hand, Larides, seeks its lord;
The fingers, half alive and quivering, clutch the sword.

LIV. Fired by his words, his deeds the Arcadians view,
    And shame and anger arm them to the fray.
    Rhoeteus, as past his two-horsed chariot flew
    He pierced,--'twas Ilus Pallas meant to slay,
    And Ilus gained that moment of delay.
    Rhoeteus, in flight from Teuthras and from thee,
    His brother Tyres, met the spear midway.
    Down from his chariot in the dust rolled he,
And, dying, with his heels beat the Rutulian lea.

LV. As when a shepherd, on a summer's day,
    The wished-for winds arising, hastes to cast
    The flames amid the stubble: far away,
    The mid space seized, the line of fire runs fast
    From field to field, and broadens with the blast:
    And, sitting down, the victor from a height
    Surveys the triumph, as the flames rush past.
    So all Arcadia's chivalry unite,
And round thee, Pallas, throng, and aid thee in the fight.

LVI. But lo, from out the foemen's ranks, athirst
    For battle, fierce Halesus charged, and drew
    His covering shield before him. Ladon first,
    Then Pheres, then Demodocus he slew.
    Next, at his throat as bold Strymonius flew,
    The glittering falchion severed at a blow
    The lifted hand. At Thoas' face he threw
    A stone, that smashed the forehead of his foe,
And bones, and blood, and brains the spattered earth bestrow.

LVII. Halesus, when a boy, in woods concealed,
    His sire, a seer, had reared with tender care.
    But soon as death the old man's eyes had sealed,
    Fate marked the son for the Evandrian spear.
    Him Pallas sought; "O Tiber!" was his prayer,
    "True to Halesus let this javelin go.
    His arms and spoils thy sacred oak shall bear."
    'Twas heard: Halesus, shielding from the foe
Imaon, leaves his breast unguarded to the blow.

LVIII. Firm Lausus stands, bearing the battle's brunt,
    Nor lets Halesus' death his friends dismay.
    Dead falls the first who meets him front to front,
    Brave Abas, knot and holdfast of the fray.
    Down go Arcadia's chivalry that day,
    Down go the Etruscans, and the Teucrians, those
    Whom Grecian conquerors had failed to slay.
    Man locked with man, amid the conflict's throes,
With strength and leaders matched, the rival armies close.

LIX. On press the rearmost, crowding on the van,
    So thick, that neither hand can stir, nor spear
    Be wielded; each one struggles as he can.
    Here Pallas, there brave Lausus, charge and cheer,
    Two foes, in age scarce differing by a year.
    Both fair of form. Stern Fate to each forbade
    His home return. But Jove allowed not here
    A meeting; he who great Olympus swayed,
Awhile for mightier foes their destined doom delayed.

LX. Warned by his gracious sister, Turnus flies
    To take the place of Lausus. Driving through
    The ranks, "Stand off," he shouts to his allies,
    "I fight with Pallas; Pallas is my due.
    Would that his sire were here himself to view!"
    All clear the field. Then, pondering with surprise
    The proud command, as back the crowd withdrew,
    The youth, amazed at Turnus, rolls his eyes
And scans his giant foe, and thus in scorn replies:

LXI. "Or kingly spoils shall make me famed to-day,
    Or glorious death. Whatever end remain,
    My sire can bear it. Put thy threats away."
    Then forth he stepped; cold horror chills his train.
    Down from his car, close combat to darrain,
    Leapt Turnus. As a lion, who far away
    Has marked a bull, that butts the sandy plain
    For battle, springs to grapple with his prey;
So dreadful Turnus looks, advancing to the fray.

LXII. Him, deemed within his spear-throw, undismayed
    The youth prevents, if chance the odds should square,
    And aid his daring. To the skies he prayed,
    "O thou, my father's guest-friend, wont whilere
    A stranger's welcome at his board to share,
    Aid me, Alcides, prosper my emprise;
    Let Turnus fall, and, falling, see me tear
    His blood-stained arms, and may his swooning eyes
Meet mine, and bear the victor's image, when he dies."

LXIII. Alcides heard, and, stifling in his breast
    A deep groan, poured his unavailing grief.
    Whom thus the Sire with kindly words addressed:
    "Each hath his day; irreparably brief
    Is mortal life, and fading as the leaf.
    'Tis valour's part to bid it bloom anew
    By deeds of fame. Dead many a godlike chief,
    Dead lies my son Sarpedon. Turnus too
His proper Fates demand; his destined hour is due."

LXIV. So saying, he turned, and shunned the scene of death.
    Forth Pallas hurled the spear with all his might,
    And snatched the glittering falchion from the sheath.
    Where the shield's top just matched the shoulders' height,
    Clean through the rim, the javelin winged its flight,
    And grazed the flesh. Then Turnus, poising slow
    His oakbeam, tipt with iron sharp and bright,
    Took aim, and, hurling, shouted to his foe,
"See, now, if this my lance can deal a deadlier blow."

LXV. He spake, and through the midmost shield, o'erlaid
    With bull-hide, brass, and iron, welded hard,
    Whizzed the keen javelin, nor its course delayed,
    But pierced the broad breast through the corslet's guard.
    He the warm weapon, in the wound embarred,
    Wrenched, writhing in his agony; in vain;
    Out gushed the life and life-blood. O'er him jarred
    His clanging armour, as he rolled in pain.
Dying, with bloody mouth he bites the hostile plain.

LXVI. Then Turnus, standing o'er the dead, "Go to,
    Arcadians, hear and let Evander know,
    I send back Pallas, handled as was due.
    If aught of honour can a tomb bestow,
    If earth's cold lap yield solace to his woe,
    I grant it. Dearly will his Dardan guest
    Cost him, I trow." Then, trampling on the foe,
    His left foot on the lifeless corpse he pressed,
And tore the ponderous belt in triumph from his breast;

LXVII. The belt, whereon the tale of guilt was told,--
    The wedding night, the couches smeared with gore,
    The bridegrooms slain--which Clonus in the gold,
    The son of Eurytus, had grav'n of yore,
    And Turnus now, exulting, seized and wore.
    Vain mortals! triumphing past bounds to-day,
    Blind to to-morrow's destiny. The hour
    Shall come, when gold in plenty would he pay
Ne'er Pallas to have touched, and curse the costly prey.

LXVIII. With tears his comrades lifted from the ground
    Dead Pallas; groaning, on his shield they bore
    Him homeward, and the bitter wail went round.
    "O grief! O glory! fall'n to rise no more!
    Thus back we bring thee, thus the son restore!
    One day to battle gave thee, one hath ta'en,
    Victor and vanquished in the self-same hour!
    Yet fall'n with honour, for behind thee slain,
Heaps of Rutulian foes thou leavest on the plain!"

LXIX. Sure tidings to AEneas came apace,--
    'Twas no mere rumour--of his friends in flight;
    Time pressed for help, death stared them in the face.
    Sweeping his foes before him, left and right
    He mows a passage through the ranks of fight.
    Thee, haughty Turnus, thee he burns to find,
    Hot with new blood, and glorying in thy might.
    The sire, the son, the welcome warm and kind,
The feast, the parting grasp--all crowd upon his mind.

LXX. Eight youths alive he seizes for the pyre,
    Four, sons of Sulmo, four, whom Ufens bred,
    Poor victims, doomed to feed the funeral fire,
    And pour their blood in quittance for the dead.
    Then from afar a bitter shaft he sped
    At Magus. Warily he stoops below
    The quivering steel, that whistles o'er his head,
    And, like a suppliant, crouching to his foe,
Clings to AEneas' knees, and cries in words of woe:

LXXI. "O by the promise of thy youthful heir,
    By dead Anchises, pity, I implore,
    My son, my father; for their sakes forbear.
    Rich is my house, its cellars heaped with store
    Of gold, and silver talents by the score.
    'Tis not my doom, that shall the day decide.
    If Trojans win, one foeman's life the more
    Mars not the triumph, nor can turn the tide."
Thus he, and thus in scorn the Dardan chief replied:

LXXII. "The treasures that thou vauntest, let them be.
    Thy gold, thy silver, and thy hoarded gain
    Spare for thy children, for they bribe not me.
    Since Pallas fell by Turnus' hand, 'twere vain
    To think thy pelf will traffic for the slain,
    So deems my son, so deems Anchises' shade."
    He spake, and with his left hand grasped amain
    His helmet. Even as the suppliant prayed,
Hilt-deep, the neck bent back, he drove the shining blade.

LXXIII. Hard by, the son of Haemon there was seen,
    Apollo's priest and Trivia's, all aglow
    In robe and armour of resplendent sheen,
    The holy ribboned chaplet on his brow.
    Him, met, afield he chases, lays him low,
    And o'er him, like a storm-cloud, dark as night,
    Stands, hugely shadowing the fallen foe:
    And back Serestus bears his armour bright,
A trophy, vowed to thee, Gradivus, lord of fight.

LXXIV. Then Caeculus, to Vulcan's race allied,
    And Marsian Umbro, rally 'gainst the foe
    The wavering ranks. The Dardan on his side
    Still rages. First from Anxur with a blow
    His sword the shield-arm and the shield laid low.
    Big things had Anxur boasted, empty jeers,
    And deemed his valour with his vaunts would grow:
    Perchance, with spirit lifted to the spheres,
Hoar hairs he looked to see, and length of peaceful years.

LXXV. Sheathed in bright arms, proud Tarquitus in scorn,
    Whom Dryope the nymph, if fame be true,
    To Faunus, ranger of the woods, had borne,
    Leaped forth, and at the fiery Dardan flew.
    He, drawing back his javelin, aimed and threw.
    And through the cuirass and the ponderous shield
    Pinned him. Then, vainly as he strove to sue,
    Much pleading, even while the suppliant kneeled.
Lopt off, the lifeless head went rolling on the field.

LXXVI. His reeking trunk the victor in disdain
    Spurns with his foot, and cries aloud, "Lie there,
    Proud youth, and tell thy terrors to the slain.
    No tender mother shall thy shroud prepare,
    No father's sepulchre be thine to share.
    Thy carrion corpse shall be the vultures' food,
    And birds that batten on the dead shall tear
    Thee piecemeal, and the fishes lick thy blood,
Drowned in the deep sea-gulfs, or drifting on the flood."

LXXVII. Lucas, Antaeus in the van were slain.
    Here Numa, there the fair-haired Camers lay,
    Great Volscens' son; full many a wide domain
    Was his, and mute Amyclae owned his sway.
    As when AEgeon, hundred-armed, they say,
    And hundred-handed, would the Sire withstand,
    And fifty mouths, and fifty maws each way
    Shot flames against Jove's thunder, and each hand
Clashed on a sounding shield, or bared a glittering brand,

LXXVIII. So raves AEneas, victor of the war,
    His sword now warmed, and many a foeman dies.
    Now at Niphaeus, in his four-horse car
    Breasting the battle, in hot haste he flies.
    Scared stand the steeds, in terror and surprise,
    So dire his gestures, as he strides amain,
    So fierce his looks, so terrible his cries;
    Then, turning, from his chariot on the plain
Fling their ill-fated lord, and gallop to the main.

LXXIX. With two white steeds into the midmost dashed
    Bold Lucagus and Liger, brethren twain.
    Around him Lucagus his broad sword flashed
    His brother wheeled the horses with the rein.
    Fired at the sight, AEneas in disdain
    Rushed on them, towering with uplifted spear.
    "No steeds of Diomede, nor Phrygian plain,"
    Cries Liger, "nor Achilles' car are here.
This field shall end the war, thy fatal hour is near."

LXXX. So fly his words, but not in words the foe
    Makes answer, but his javelin hurls with might.
    As o'er the lash proud Lucagus bends low
    To prick the steeds, and planting for the fight
    His left foot forward, stands in act to smite,
    Clean through the nether margin of his shield
    The Dardan shaft goes whistling in its flight,
    And thrills his groin upon the left. He reeled,
And from the chariot fell half-lifeless on the field.

LXXXI. Then bitterly AEneas mocked him: "Lo,
    Proud Lucagus! no lagging steeds have played
    Thy chariot false, nor shadows of the foe
    Deceived thy horses, and their hearts dismayed.
    'Tis thou--thy leap has lost the car!" He said
    And snatched the reins. The brother in despair
    Slipped down, and spread his hapless hands, and prayed:
    "O by thyself, great son of Troy, forbear;
By those who bore thee such, have pity on my prayer."

LXXXII. More would he, but AEneas: "Nay, not so
    Thou spak'st erewhile. Die now, and take thy way,
    And join thy brother, brotherlike, below."
    Deep in the breast he stabbed him as he lay,
    And bared the life's recesses to the day.
    Such deaths the Dardan dealt upon the plain,
    Like storm or torrent, full of rage to slay.
    And now at length Ascanius and his train
Burst forth, and leave their camp, long leaguered, but in vain.

LXXXIII. Great Jove meanwhile to Juno spake and said,
    "Sweet spouse and sister, thou hast deemed aright,
    'Tis Venus, sure, who doth the Trojans aid,
    Not courage, strength and patience in the fight."
    Then Juno meekly: "Dearest, why delight
    With cruel words to vex me, sad with fear
    And sick at heart? Had still my love the might
    It had and should have; were I still so dear,
Not thou, with all thy power, should'st then refuse to hear,

LXXXIV. "But safe should Turnus from the fight once more
    Return to greet old Daunus. Be it so,
    And let him die, and shed his righteous gore
    To glut the vengeance of his Teucrian foe,
    Albeit his name celestial birth doth show,
    Fourth in succession from Pilumnus, yea,
    Though oft his hand thy sacred shrines below
    Hath heaped his gifts." She ended, and straightway
Brief answer made the Sire, who doth Olympus sway:

LXXXV. "If but a respite for the youth be sought,
    A little time of tarrying, ere he die,
    And thus thou read'st the purport of my thought,
    Take then awhile thy Turnus; let him fly
    And 'scape his present fates; thus far may I
    Indulge thee. But if aught beneath thy prayer
    Lie veiled of purpose or of hopes more high,
    To change the war's whole aspect, then beware,
For idle hopes thou feed'st, as empty as the air."

LXXXVI. Then She with tears: "What if thy heart should give
    The pledge and promise, that thy lips disdain,
    And Turnus by thy warrant still should live?
    Now death awaits him guiltless, or in vain
    I read the Fates. Ah! may I merely feign
    An empty fear, and better thoughts advise
    Thee--for thou can'st--to spare him and refrain!"
    So saying, arrayed in storm-clouds, through the skies
Down to Laurentum's camp and Ilian lines she flies.

LXXXVII. Then straight the Goddess from a hollow cloud--
    Strange sight to see!--a thin and strengthless shade
    Shaped like the great AEneas, and endowed
    With Dardan arms, and fixed the shield, and spread
    The plume and crest as on his godlike head.
    And empty words, a soulless sound, she gave,
    And feigned the fashion of the warrior's tread.
    Thus ghosts are said to glide above the grave;
Thus oft delusive dreams the slumbering sense enslave.

LXXXVIII. Proud stalks the phantom, gladdening in the van,
    With darts provokes him, and with words defies.
    Forth rushed fierce Turnus, hurling as he ran
    His whistling spear. The shadow turns and flies.
    Then Turnus, glorying in his fancied prize,
    "Where now, AEneas, from thy plighted bride?
    The land thou soughtest o'er the deep, it lies
    Here, and this hand shall give it thee." He cried,
And waved his glittering sword, and chased him, nor espied

LXXXIX. The winds bear off his triumph.--Hard at hand,
    With steps let down and gangway ready laid,
    Moored by the rocks, a vessel chanced to stand,
    Which brave Osinius, Clusium's king, conveyed.
    Here, as in haste, for shelter plunged the shade.
    On Turnus pressed, and with a bound ascends
    The lofty gangways, dauntless nor delayed.
    The bows scarce reached, the rope Saturnia rends,
And down the refluent tide the loosened ship descends.

XC. Loud calls AEneas for his absent foe,
    And many a hero-body--all who dare
    To meet him--hurries to the shades below.
    No more the phantom lingers in his lair,
    But, soaring, melts into the misty air.
    Turnus a storm-wind o'er the deep sea blows.
    Backward he looks, and of events unware,
    And all unthankful to escape his foes.
Up to the stars of heaven his hand and voice he throws.

XCI. "Great Sire, was I so guilty in thy sight,
    To make thee deem such punishment my due?
    Whence came I? Whither am I borne? What flight
    Is this? and how do I return, and who?
    Again Laurentum's city shall I view?
    What of that band, who followed me, whom I--
    Shame on me--left a shameful death to rue?
    E'en now I see them scattered,--see them fly,--
And see them fall; and hear the groans of those that die.

XCII. "What am I doing? Where can Earth for me
    Gape deep enough? Ye winds that round me roar,
    Pity I crave, on rocks amid the sea--
    'Tis Turnus, I, a willing prayer who pour--
    Dash me this ship, or drive it on the shore,
    'Mid ruthless shoals, where no Rutulian eyes
    May see my shame, nor prying Fame explore."
    Thus he, and, tost in spirit, as he cries,
This plan and that in turn his wavering thoughts devise:

XCIII. Madly to grasp the dagger in his hand,
    And through his ribs drive home the naked blade,
    Or plunge into the deep, and swim to land,
    And, armed, once more the Teucrian foes invade.
    Thrice, but in vain, each venture he essayed.
    Thrice Heaven's high queen, in pity fain to save,
    Held back the youth, and from his purpose stayed.
    And borne along by favouring tide and wave,
On to his father's town the level deep he clave.

XCIV. Jove prompting, fierce Mezentius now the fight
    Takes up, and charges at the Teucrian foes.
    And, hurrying up, the Tuscan troops unite.
    All against one--one only--these and those
    Their gathered hate and crowding darts oppose.
    Unmoved he stands, as when a rocky steep
    In ocean, bare to every blast that blows,
    Around whose base the savage waves upleap,
Braves all the threats of heaven, and buffets of the deep.

XCV. Hebrus he slew, from Dolichaon sprung,
    Then Latagus, then Palmus, as he fled.
    Full in the face of Latagus he flung
    A monstrous stone, that stretched him with the dead.
    Palmus, with severed hamstring, next he sped,
    And rolled him helpless. Lausus takes his gear;
    The shining crest he fits upon his head,
    And dons the breastplate. 'Neath the conqueror's spear
Phrygian Evanthes falls, and Paris' friend and peer,

XCVI. Young Mimas, whom to Amycus that night
    Theano bore, when, big with Ilion's bane,
    Queen Hecuba brought Paris forth to light.
    Now Paris sleeps upon his native plain,
    But Mimas on a foreign shore is slain.
    As when a wild-boar, hounded from the hill,
    Who long on pine-clad Venulus hath lain,
    Or in Laurentum's marish fed his fill,
Now in the toils caught fast, before his foes stands still,

XCVII. And snorts with rage, and rears his bristling back;
    None dares approach him, but aloof they wait,
