candles, narrowly escaping a plunge into the little pool from which he
had drunk.

He found the spot where the candles had been, both of them; he could
feel it by the size, and knew it by the shape, for it grew smaller at
each extremity, so that he had been able to wedge the ends of the
candles tight.

Yes: there was no doubt about it.  Both candles, as if to be in fashion
with the stony drippings of the cavern, had run down a little, to form
tiny stalagmites of grease.

"Burnt right out," muttered Dummy, still more excitedly.  "Why, I may
ha' been asleep for hours."

Thrusting his hand into his breast, there was a faint rattle as he drew
out tinder-box and match, and then felt for a candle in the box he had
carried slung by a strap from the shoulder, and laid it ready.

The next minute he was nicking a piece of flint against the steel,
striking sparks down into the box, and at the second sharp click Mark
started awake.

"Yes!  What is it?" he cried--"Where am I?"

"On'y here, Master Mark," replied the boy.  "Candle's gone out."

"Why, Dummy!  Have we been to sleep?"

"I s'pose so, Master Mark.  Po-o-o-o-f-f-uf!  There we are!"

He had obtained a light, the match burning up brightly, and then the
candle, after the fluffy wick had been burnt and blown.

"How tiresome!  I don't know, though.  I feel rested."

"Being up all last night, I s'pose," said Dummy, as he stuck the candle
in the crack.

"Yes, of course; that's it.  Think we've been asleep long?"

"I dunno.  Fear'd so."

"Let's go back, then, at once," said Mark, springing to his feet.  "Why,
we may have been asleep for hours.  Light another candle, and let's get
back."

"Right, Master Mark.  Well, it don't much matter, for we hadn't nothing
to do."

The second candle was lit, and stuck in the rough wooden carrying-stick,
the other was taken from the crack in the stone and treated the same.

"Won't go no furrer, then, Master Mark?" said the boy.

"No, not to-day," said Mark decisively, as he looked round the chamber,
and then stooped to take a draught of the clear water, an example Dummy
followed.

"Ready, Master Mark?"

"Yes, lead on.  But which way?"

"Don't you know, sir?" said Dummy grinning.

"Haven't the least idea.  Have you?"

"Yes, sir.  This way.  I know."

"But are you sure you are right?"

"Ay, this is right."

"Then you have been there before?"

"Nay, never; but I can feel that's right," and he pointed in the
opposite direction to that which Mark felt they ought to take.

"Forward, then, and let's get out as quick as we can."

"Yes, but it'll take some time;" and the boy led on.

"Why, Dummy," cried Mark, suddenly, "we must have slept for hours and
hours."

"How do you know, sir?"

"Why, I can feel."

"In your head, like, sir?" said Dummy eagerly.

"Head?  No: somewhere else," cried Mark, laughing.  "I am half-starved."

A good three hours must have elapsed before, after a weary climb and
tramp, and when the last candle had been lit, the two lads emerged from
behind the stony veil into the grotto-like place that had deceived Mark
Eden.

"Don't matter about candles now, Master Mark," said Dummy; "I could find
my way out ready enough by touching the wall with one hand."

"Well, make haste and let's get out; I don't want to be in fresh trouble
through stopping so long.  I believe it's supper-time."

"Yes, Master Mark," replied the boy, "and so do I."

They had still a long way to go, but once past the veil of stalactite,
they began to enter the workings with the passages and chambers
possessing fairly level floors, made for the convenience of transporting
the ore to the mouth of the mine.  The walking then became comparatively
easy, but Mark's weariness was on the increase, and there were moments
when the faint glow of light which spread around Dummy, as he walked in
front, grew misty and strange, playing fantastic tricks to the
observer's eye: now it seemed close to him; now it and the black
silhouette it formed of the bearer's body appeared to be far-off, and to
die away in the distance, but only to return again with a sudden jerk,
as Mark started and tried to step out more firmly.

At these moments, his own candle having burned out, Mark watched the
shadow of his companion dancing about, now on the floor, now on the
ceiling or on either side, looking grotesque and goblin-like for a few
moments, and then dying out again and causing the lad to start, as he
felt in a dreamy way that he was being left behind, though on recovering
his fleeting senses it was only to find that Dummy was almost within
touch.

This had been going on for some time, when Mark spoke:

"I say, don't go right away and leave me, Dummy."

"Who's a-going to?" said the boy, looking round in surprise.

"I know you wouldn't on purpose, but keep looking round.  I can't keep
awake.  My legs do, but all the rest goes to sleep, and I begin getting
in a muddle."

"Oh, we shall soon be out now," said the boy laughing.

"Soon be out!  I never knew the place was so big before.  Keep looking
back to see that I don't drop down fast asleep."

"I'd make you go first," said Dummy, "but you don't know the way."

"No: keep on as you are, and make haste."

"Can't: must go steady, because of the candle."

"Oh dear!" sighed Mark.  "I am so sleepy, and it's beginning to get down
below my belt, to where my leg was hurt."

"No, no, don't you think that," cried Dummy.  "Let's keep on talking."

"Yes," said Mark, jumping at the proposal.  "Let's keep talking--Who are
you laughing at?"

"You, Master Mark.  You are sleepy.  'Tarn't far, now.  Fresh air'll
soon rouse you."

There was no reply, and as the boy glanced back he could see that his
companion was beginning to reel about like a drunken man, and that his
eyes had a peculiar dull, fixed look.

The next minute the lids drooped, and he walked on as if that which he
had said was quite true--that all was fast asleep but the legs, which
went on automatically, and supported their load.

"With a fal, lal-lal, lal-lalla, lalla, la!" yelled Dummy, not
unmusically; and it had its effect, for Mark sprang at him, and caught
him by the shoulder.

"What was that?" he cried excitedly.

"On'y me singing, Master Mark.  Soon be out now."

"That's what you keep on saying," cried the lad, pettishly.  "I don't
believe we're going right.  You've taken a wrong turning by mistake.
Here, I can't go any farther, Dummy.  I must lie down and go to sleep
again.  It's horrible to keep on like this.  I know I shall fall."

"You do, and I'll stick a pin in you," said the boy roughly.

"What!"

"I'm not going to have you fall asleep again.  Come, rouse up, Master
Mark; I'm ashamed of you.  For two pins I'd hit you over the head."

"What!" cried Mark, in an access of passion; "why, you ugly big-headed
mole, how dare you speak to me like that?"

"'Cause I like," cried Dummy sharply.  "Talking of going to deep, like a
great gal.  Yah!  Gen'lemen aren't no use.  Never do have no legs."

"You insolent dog!" roared Mark, leaping at him, and striking the boy
twice heavily on the back, with the result that the one candle was
jerked out of the stick he carried, to fly forward on to the floor,
flicker for a moment or two, and then, before it could be seized, go
out, and with it Mark's bit of passion.

"Oh!" he cried, as he stood fast in the darkness.

"There, you've done it now," cried Dummy, in mock tones of horror.

"Yes, be quick; get out the flint and steel."

"What for?"

"To get a light."

"For you to begin knocking me about again."

"No, no, Dummy; I won't touch you again.  It was your fault: you made me
so cross."

"All right, Master Mark," said the boy, with a good-humoured laugh.  "I
only did it o' purpose to wake you up, and it has.  I don't mind what
you did.  Don't feel sleepy now, do you?"

"No, no, I'm quite awake.  The drowsy feeling has gone off.  Come, light
the candle."

"Shan't now," replied Dummy.  "We're only a little way off now, and I
can manage."

"But are you sure?"

"Oh yes, I'm sure enough, Master Mark.  Wait a minute."

"Yes.  What are you going to do?"

"Only unloose a few rings of this line we brought."

"What for?  If you play me any tricks now we're in the dark, I'll--"

"Who's going to play any tricks?" grumbled the boy.  "Men don't play
tricks.  Here, kitch holt: now you can follow me, and feel me, if you
keep the rope tight, and won't go hitting yourself again the wall."

Mark grasped the end of the rope handed to him, and they started forward
in the intense blackness, the novelty and sense of shrinking soon
passing off, and the lad feeling more and more confidence in his leader.

"Don't feel a bit sleepy now, do you?" asked Dummy.

"Not in the least.  I say, are you sure that you can go on without
taking a wrong turning?"

"Oh yes, I'm right enough, Master Mark."

"How far is it now?"

"On'y 'bout fifty fathom or so.  We're just getting to the rise."

"Then we--no, you're wrong.  We can't be.  Why, if we were so near the
mouth we should see daylight."

"What! in the middle o' the night?  Not you."

"What!  You don't think it's so late as that?"

"Yes, I do.  It's past twelve o'clock, if it's a minute."

"Then we must have slept a very long time below there."

"Hours upon hours," said Dummy, chuckling.

"Hark!  What's that?" said Mark excitedly.

"Shouting," said the boy, after listening.  "My! they are making a row
about it.  They're coming to fetch us, because we've been so long."

The two lads were still making for the mouth of the mine, and were now
ascending the rough steps, to pause by the stone shed inside the
entrance, where tools, gunpowder for blasting, and several kinds of
tackle were kept, in among the candles and torches.

"Here, Dummy," cried Mark excitedly, as the noise outside and above them
increased, "what does this mean?  They're fighting!"

"Fighting?" cried the boy excitedly.

"Yes, what can it mean?"

"Mean, Master Mark?  I can tell you.  It's the Darleys come at last to
take our place.  Oh, why didn't I kill young Ralph that night when I
followed him home through the wood?"

"You did what?"

"Followed him.  I wasn't sure he'd been trying to kill you, or I would."

"Come along, and don't talk," whispered Mark excitedly.  "Ah!  I have no
sword."

"Got a pick in your belt, and so have I."

"You'll stand by me, Dummy?"

"Won't I, Master Mark!  I want to get a hit at some of 'em.  You won't
stop me, will you, to-night?"

"If they've come and attacked us, no.  Hush, quiet!  Let's steal out
first, and see."

The night was very dark as they left the mouth of the mine, but after
their late experience it seemed to both to be comparatively light, and
with Mark now armed with the miner's pick, which he felt would be a good
substitute for a battle-axe, they hurried up the steps, with the noise
above increasing, but seeming to be over on the other side of the little
castle.  A minute or two later they had reached the platform which led
to their right over the narrow natural bridge, to the left, through the
gateway into the first courtyard.  This was empty, and they ran lightly
across it, to find that the encounter was going on beyond the second
gateway, which led into the little inner courtyard, surrounded by the
dwelling-house portion of the castle.  Both gateways were furnished with
means of defence, the outer having an iron grille of heavy crossed bars,
while the second had folding doors of massive oak, with a wicket for
ordinary use in the lower part of one of the folds.  But in spite of the
enmity between the two families, little heed had of late been given to
the defences.  Sir Edward had considered that the outer gate at the end
of the natural bridge was sufficient, as there was so little likelihood
of an attack without warning; and, as far as Mark could make out, it
seemed that under cover of the darkness the enemy had crossed the bridge
and forced the gate under the little towers, when the rest would be easy
for them.  They had only had to pass through the first courtyard, and
were now in the lesser or inner court, evidently trying to batter down
the entrance door into the hall.

They must have begun their work before Sir Edward and his people were
alarmed; but how long before it was impossible to tell.  What met the
eyes of the two lads now was an armed group trying to batter in the
great door by means of a beam they had brought up into the yard, while
others, armed with pikes, guarded their companions, upon whom missiles
of all kinds were being dashed down from above, and thrusts were being
made with other pikes from the windows which flanked or overhung the
door.

"The Darleys," whispered Dummy, as they peered together round the inner
corner of the gateway dividing the two courts.

"In with it, boys!" roared a hoarse voice; and they dimly made out a
heavy figure standing in the shelter of the wall.

"Captain Purlrose and his gang," whispered back Mark huskily.  "I wonder
how many men my father has in there."

"They were going over to Dexham for a holiday, all but them as was
hurt," whispered Dummy.  "Come on and help, or the robbers'll get in."

A pang shot through Mark, and he grasped the handle of his pick firmly,
ready for a dash, but the feeling that it would be utter madness kept
him back.  For he knew that even if he could strike down two of the
attacking party, they must succumb to the others, and they would have
done no good.

It was all plain enough.  Purlrose must have gained the information that
the mine people were away, and that Sir Edward would be almost without
defenders, and, out of revenge for the previous night's attack, have
seized the opportunity for a reprisal.

"Why, Dummy," he whispered, with his lips close to the other's ear, "if
they take the castle, they'll keep it, and turn us out."

"Yes, and grab the mine," said the boy hoarsely.  "Well, we mustn't let
'em."

_Bang_, _bang_, came the reports of a couple of arquebuses from one of
the windows, but no harm was done, and the men answered with a derisive
cheer and continued their battering of the door, which still resisted
their efforts.

Another shot was fired, but still without effect, and Mark ground his
teeth together as he felt the impotency of his father's efforts now that
the enemy had stolen in beyond the gates that would have been admirable
for defence.

"Well, aren't you going to do something, Master Mark?"

"What can I do, Dummy?" cried the lad, in despair.  "We might shut these
gates, and defend them."

"Yes, so we could; but what's the good?"

Just then there was a quick flash and a sharp roar close to the doorway,
and in the bright light the lads saw the men drop the beam and run back;
but no one was hurt, and in answer to a roar of orders from their
leader, the enemy seized the beam again and began to drive it against
the centre of the great door.

"Running away from that," roared Purlrose; "handful of powder rolled up
in a bag and thrown at you!  Down with it! they've got no more."

"Yes, they have," whispered Dummy, excitedly.  "Here, Master Mark,
quick!"

