In the meantime I stole a look at the little lady.  She was in a state of
pitiable discomposure, and her arms shook on her lap in her black lace
mittens.

'Madam--' I began.

And she, in the same moment, finding her voice: 'O, what you must think
of me!'

'Madam,' said I, 'what must any gentleman think when he sees youth,
beauty and innocence in distress?  I wish I could tell you that I was old
enough to be your father; I think we must give that up,' I continued,
with a smile.  'But I will tell you something about myself which ought to
do as well, and to set that little heart at rest in my society.  I am a
lover.  May I say it of myself--for I am not quite used to all the
niceties of English--that I am a true lover?  There is one whom I admire,
adore, obey; she is no less good than she is beautiful; if she were here,
she would take you to her arms: conceive that she has sent me--that she
has said to me, "Go, be her knight!"'

'O, I know she must be sweet, I know she must be worthy of you!' cried
the little lady.  'She would never forget female decorum--nor make the
terrible _erratum_ I've done!'

And at this she lifted up her voice and wept.

This did not forward matters: it was in vain that I begged her to be more
composed and to tell me a plain, consecutive tale of her misadventures;
but she continued instead to pour forth the most extraordinary mixture of
the correct school miss and the poor untutored little piece of womanhood
in a false position--of engrafted pedantry and incoherent nature.

'I am certain it must have been judicial blindness,' she sobbed.  'I
can't think how I didn't see it, but I didn't; and he isn't, is he?  And
then a curtain rose . . . O, what a moment was that!  But I knew at once
that _you were_; you had but to appear from your carriage, and I knew it,
O, she must be a fortunate young lady!  And I have no fear with you,
none--a perfect confidence.'

'Madam,' said I, 'a gentleman.'

'That's what I mean--a gentleman,' she exclaimed.  'And he--and
that--_he_ isn't.  O, how shall I dare meet father!'  And disclosing to
me her tear-stained face, and opening her arms with a tragic gesture:
'And I am quite disgraced before all the young ladies, my
school-companions!' she added.

'O, not so bad as that!' I cried.  'Come, come, you exaggerate, my dear
Miss--?  Excuse me if I am too familiar: I have not yet heard your name.'

'My name is Dorothy Greensleeves, sir: why should I conceal it?  I fear
it will only serve to point an adage to future generations, and I had
meant so differently!  There was no young female in the county more
emulous to be thought well of than I.  And what a fall was there!  O,
dear me, what a wicked, piggish donkey of a girl I have made of myself,
to be sure!  And there is no hope! O, Mr.--'

And at that she paused and asked my name.

I am not writing my eulogium for the Academy; I will admit it was
unpardonably imbecile, but I told it her.  If you had been there--and
seen her, ravishingly pretty and little, a baby in years and mind--and
heard her talking like a book, with so much of schoolroom propriety in
her manner, with such an innocent despair in the matter--you would
probably have told her yours.  She repeated it after me.

'I shall pray for you all my life,' she said.  'Every night, when I
retire to rest, the last thing I shall do is to remember you by name.'

Presently I succeeded in winning from her her tale, which was much what I
had anticipated: a tale of a schoolhouse, a walled garden, a fruit-tree
that concealed a bench, an impudent raff posturing in church, an exchange
of flowers and vows over the garden wall, a silly schoolmate for a
confidante, a chaise and four, and the most immediate and perfect
disenchantment on the part of the little lady.  'And there is nothing to
be done!' she wailed in conclusion.  'My error is irretrievable, I am
quite forced to that conclusion.  O, Monsieur de Saint-Yves! who would
have thought that I could have been such a blind, wicked donkey!'

I should have said before--only that I really do not know when it came
in--that we had been overtaken by the two post-boys, Rowley and Mr.
Bellamy, which was the hawbuck's name, bestriding the four post-horses;
and that these formed a sort of cavalry escort, riding now before, now
behind the chaise, and Bellamy occasionally posturing at the window and
obliging us with some of his conversation.  He was so ill-received that I
declare I was tempted to pity him, remembering from what a height he had
fallen, and how few hours ago it was since the lady had herself fled to
his arms, all blushes and ardour.  Well, these great strokes of fortune
usually befall the unworthy, and Bellamy was now the legitimate object of
my commiseration and the ridicule of his own post-boys!

'Miss Dorothy,' said I, 'you wish to be delivered from this man?'

'O, if it were possible!' she cried.  'But not by violence.'

'Not in the least, ma'am,' I replied.  'The simplest thing in life.  We
are in a civilised country; the man's a malefactor--'

'O, never!' she cried.  'Do not even dream it!  With all his faults, I
know he is not _that_.'

'Anyway, he's in the wrong in this affair--on the wrong side of the law,
call it what you please,' said I; and with that, our four horsemen having
for the moment headed us by a considerable interval, I hailed my post-boy
and inquired who was the nearest magistrate and where he lived.
Archdeacon Clitheroe, he told me, a prodigious dignitary, and one who
lived but a lane or two back, and at the distance of only a mile or two
out of the direct road.  I showed him the king's medallion.

'Take the lady there, and at full gallop,' I cried.

'Right, sir!  Mind yourself,' says the postillion.

And before I could have thought it possible, he had turned the carriage
to the rightabout and we were galloping south.

Our outriders were quick to remark and imitate the manoeuvre, and came
flying after us with a vast deal of indiscriminate shouting; so that the
fine, sober picture of a carriage and escort, that we had presented but a
moment back, was transformed in the twinkling of an eye into the image of
a noisy fox-chase.  The two postillions and my own saucy rogue were, of
course, disinterested actors in the comedy; they rode for the mere sport,
keeping in a body, their mouths full of laughter, waving their hats as
they came on, and crying (as the fancy struck them) Tally-ho!'  'Stop,
thief!'  'A highwayman!  A highwayman!'  It was otherguess work with
Bellamy.  That gentleman no sooner observed our change of direction than
he turned his horse with so much violence that the poor animal was almost
cast upon its side, and launched her in immediate and desperate pursuit.
As he approached I saw that his face was deadly white and that he carried
a drawn pistol in his hand.  I turned at once to the poor little bride
that was to have been, and now was not to be; she, upon her side,
deserting the other window, turned as if to meet me.

'O, O, don't let him kill me!' she screamed.

'Never fear,' I replied.

Her face was distorted with terror.  Her hands took hold upon me with the
instinctive clutch of an infant.  The chaise gave a flying lurch, which
took the feet from under me and tumbled us anyhow upon the seat.  And
almost in the same moment the head of Bellamy appeared in the window
which Missy had left free for him.

Conceive the situation!  The little lady and I were falling--or had just
fallen--backward on the seat, and offered to the eye a somewhat ambiguous
picture.  The chaise was speeding at a furious pace, and with the most
violent leaps and lurches, along the highway.  Into this bounding
receptacle Bellamy interjected his head, his pistol arm, and his pistol;
and since his own horse was travelling still faster than the chaise, he
must withdraw all of them again in the inside of the fraction of a
minute.  He did so, but he left the charge of the pistol behind
him--whether by design or accident I shall never know, and I dare say he
has forgotten!  Probably he had only meant to threaten, in hopes of
causing us to arrest our flight.  In the same moment came the explosion
and a pitiful cry from Missy; and my gentleman, making certain he had
struck her, went down the road pursued by the furies, turned at the first
corner, took a flying leap over the thorn hedge, and disappeared across
country in the least possible time.

Rowley was ready and eager to pursue; but I withheld him, thinking we
were excellently quit of Mr. Bellamy, at no more cost than a scratch on
the forearm and a bullet-hole in the left-hand claret-coloured panel.
And accordingly, but now at a more decent pace, we proceeded on our way
to Archdeacon Clitheroe's, Missy's gratitude and admiration were aroused
to a high pitch by this dramatic scene, and what she was pleased to call
my wound.  She must dress it for me with her handkerchief, a service
which she rendered me even with tears.  I could well have spared them,
not loving on the whole to be made ridiculous, and the injury being in
the nature of a cat's scratch.  Indeed, I would have suggested for her
kind care rather the cure of my coat-sleeve, which had suffered worse in
the encounter; but I was too wise to risk the anti-climax.  That she had
been rescued by a hero, that the hero should have been wounded in the
affray, and his wound bandaged with her handkerchief (which it could not
even bloody), ministered incredibly to the recovery of her self-respect;
and I could hear her relate the incident to 'the young ladies, my
school-companions,' in the most approved manner of Mrs. Radcliffe!  To
have insisted on the torn coat-sleeve would have been unmannerly, if not
inhuman.

Presently the residence of the archdeacon began to heave in sight.  A
chaise and four smoking horses stood by the steps, and made way for us on
our approach; and even as we alighted there appeared from the interior of
the house a tall ecclesiastic, and beside him a little, headstrong, ruddy
man, in a towering passion, and brandishing over his head a roll of
paper.  At sight of him Miss Dorothy flung herself on her knees with the
most moving adjurations, calling him father, assuring him she was wholly
cured and entirely repentant of her disobedience, and entreating
forgiveness; and I soon saw that she need fear no great severity from Mr.
Greensleeves, who showed himself extraordinarily fond, loud, greedy of
caresses and prodigal of tears.

To give myself a countenance, as well as to have all ready for the road
when I should find occasion, I turned to quit scores with Bellamy's two
postillions.  They had not the least claim on me, but one of which they
were quite ignorant--that I was a fugitive.  It is the worst feature of
that false position that every gratuity becomes a case of conscience.
You must not leave behind you any one discontented nor any one grateful.
But the whole business had been such a 'hurrah-boys' from the beginning,
and had gone off in the fifth act so like a melodrama, in explosions,
reconciliations, and the rape of a post-horse, that it was plainly
impossible to keep it covered.  It was plain it would have to be talked
over in all the inn-kitchens for thirty miles about, and likely for six
months to come.  It only remained for me, therefore, to settle on that
gratuity which should be least conspicuous--so large that nobody could
grumble, so small that nobody would be tempted to boast.  My decision was
hastily and nor wisely taken.  The one fellow spat on his tip (so he
called it) for luck; the other developing a sudden streak of piety,
prayed God bless me with fervour.  It seemed a demonstration was brewing,
and I determined to be off at once.  Bidding my own post-boy and Rowley
be in readiness for an immediate start, I reascended the terrace and
presented myself, hat in hand, before Mr. Greensleeves and the
archdeacon.

'You will excuse me, I trust,' said I.  'I think shame to interrupt this
agreeable scene of family effusion, which I have been privileged in some
small degree to bring about.'

And at these words the storm broke.

'Small degree! small degree, sir!' cries the father; 'that shall not
pass, Mr. St. Eaves!  If I've got my darling back, and none the worse for
that vagabone rascal, I know whom I have to thank.  Shake hands with
me--up to the elbows, sir!  A Frenchman you may be, but you're one of the
right breed, by God!  And, by God, sir, you may have anything you care to
ask of me, down to Dolly's hand, by God!'

All this he roared out in a voice surprisingly powerful from so small a
person.  Every word was thus audible to the servants, who had followed
them out of the house and now congregated about us on the terrace, as
well as to Rowley and the five postillions on the gravel sweep below.
The sentiments expressed were popular; some ass, whom the devil moved to
be my enemy, proposed three cheers, and they were given with a will.  To
hear my own name resounding amid acclamations in the hills of Westmorland
was flattering, perhaps; but it was inconvenient at a moment when (as I
was morally persuaded) police handbills were already speeding after me at
the rate of a hundred miles a day.

Nor was that the end of it.  The archdeacon must present his compliments,
and pressed upon me some of his West India sherry, and I was carried into
a vastly fine library, where I was presented to his lady wife.  While we
were at sherry in the library, ale was handed round upon the terrace.
Speeches were made, hands were shaken, Missy (at her father's request)
kissed me farewell, and the whole party reaccompanied me to the terrace,
where they stood waving hats and handkerchiefs, and crying farewells to
all the echoes of the mountains until the chaise had disappeared.

The echoes of the mountains were engaged in saying to me privately: 'You
fool, you have done it now!'

'They do seem to have got 'old of your name, Mr. Anne,' said Rowley.  'It
weren't my fault this time.'

'It was one of those accidents that can never be foreseen,' said I,
affecting a dignity that I was far from feeling.  'Some one recognised
me.'

'Which on 'em, Mr. Anne?' said the rascal.

'That is a senseless question; it can make no difference who it was,' I
returned.

'No, nor that it can't!' cried Rowley.  'I say, Mr. Anne, sir, it's what
you would call a jolly mess, ain't it? looks like "clean bowled-out in
the middle stump," don't it?'

'I fail to understand you, Rowley.'

'Well, what I mean is, what are we to do about this one?' pointing to the
postillion in front of us, as he alternately hid and revealed his patched
breeches to the trot of his horse.  'He see you get in this morning under
_Mr. Ramornie_--I was very piticular to _Mr. Ramornie_ you, if you
remember, sir--and he see you get in again under Mr. Saint Eaves, and
whatever's he going to see you get out under? that's what worries me,
sir.  It don't seem to me like as if the position was what you call
_stratetegic_!'

'_Parrrbleu_! will you let me be!' I cried.  'I have to think; you cannot
imagine how your constant idiotic prattle annoys me.'

'Beg pardon, Mr. Anne,' said he; and the next moment, 'You wouldn't like
for us to do our French now, would you, Mr. Anne?'

'Certainly not,' said I.  'Play upon your flageolet.'

The which he did with what seemed to me to be irony.

Conscience doth make cowards of us all!  I was so downcast by my pitiful
mismanagement of the morning's business that I shrank from the eye of my
own hired infant, and read offensive meanings into his idle tootling.

I took off my coat, and set to mending it, soldier-fashion, with a needle
and thread.  There is nothing more conducive to thought, above all in
arduous circumstances; and as I sewed, I gradually gained a clearness
upon my affairs.  I must be done with the claret-coloured chaise at once.
It should be sold at the next stage for what it would bring.  Rowley and
I must take back to the road on our four feet, and after a decent
interval of trudging, get places on some coach for Edinburgh again under
new names!  So much trouble and toil, so much extra risk and expense and
loss of time, and all for a slip of the tongue to a little lady in blue!




CHAPTER XXIV--THE INN-KEEPER OF KIRKBY-LONSDALE


I had hitherto conceived and partly carried out an ideal that was dear to
my heart.  Rowley and I descended from our claret-coloured chaise, a
couple of correctly dressed, brisk, bright-eyed young fellows, like a
pair of aristocratic mice; attending singly to our own affairs,
communicating solely with each other, and that with the niceties and
civilities of drill.  We would pass through the little crowd before the
door with high-bred preoccupation, inoffensively haughty, after the best
English pattern; and disappear within, followed by the envy and
admiration of the bystanders, a model master and servant, point-device in
every part.  It was a heavy thought to me, as we drew up before the inn
at Kirkby-Lonsdale, that this scene was now to be enacted for the last
time.  Alas! and had I known it, it was to go of with so inferior a
grace!

I had been injudiciously liberal to the post-boys of the chaise and four.
My own post-boy, he of the patched breeches, now stood before me, his
eyes glittering with greed, his hand advanced.  It was plain he
anticipated something extraordinary by way of a _pourboire_; and
considering the marches and counter-marches by which I had extended the
stage, the military character of our affairs with Mr. Bellamy, and the
bad example I had set before him at the archdeacon's, something
exceptional was certainly to be done.  But these are always nice
questions, to a foreigner above all: a shade too little will suggest
niggardliness, a shilling too much smells of hush-money.  Fresh from the
scene at the archdeacon's, and flushed by the idea that I was now nearly
done with the responsibilities of the claret-coloured chaise, I put into
his hands five guineas; and the amount served only to waken his cupidity.

'O, come, sir, you ain't going to fob me of with this?  Why, I seen fire
at your side!' he cried.

It would never do to give him more; I felt I should become the fable of
Kirkby-Lonsdale if I did; and I looked him in the face, sternly but still
smiling, and addressed him with a voice of uncompromising firmness.

'If you do not like it, give it back,' said I.

He pocketed the guineas with the quickness of a conjurer, and, like a
base-born cockney as he was, fell instantly to casting dirt.

''Ave your own way of it, Mr. Ramornie--leastways Mr. St. Eaves, or
whatever your blessed name may be.  Look 'ere'--turning for sympathy to
the stable-boys--'this is a blessed business.  Blessed 'ard, I calls it.
'Ere I takes up a blessed son of a pop-gun what calls hisself anything
you care to mention, and turns out to be a blessed _mounseer_ at the end
of it!  'Ere 'ave I been drivin' of him up and down all day, a-carrying
off of gals, a-shootin' of pistyils, and a-drinkin' of sherry and hale;
and wot does he up and give me but a blank, blank, blanketing blank!'

The fellow's language had become too powerful for reproduction, and I
passed it by.

Meanwhile I observed Rowley fretting visibly at the bit; another moment,
and he would have added a last touch of the ridiculous to our arrival by
coming to his hands with the postillion.

'Rowley!' cried I reprovingly.

