was not certain that he was on the right track now.

It was impossible to ride fast in the gathering darkness, and upon
so rough a way; and Tom had more than once suggested that they
should make their bed in some hollow tree, and wait for daylight
before pursuing their journey.

They had halted in an open place, and were just discussing the
matter, when--whiz!--a bullet grazed the flank of Wildgoose, and
the mettlesome creature reared straight into the air, threatening
to fall backwards over his rider.

"Mark ho!" cried a loud voice, and there was a crackling of the
underwood all round.

"It is the footpads!" cried Robin. "I have beard that call before;"
and in a moment the travellers had their pistols out, and were
warily awaiting the first sign of attack.

It was not long in coming. Three men with blackened faces sprang
out from different places, and the crackling of the underwood
showed that more were lurking out of sight.

Tom took steady aim, and brought down the foremost villain at the
first shot; but Robin was not so lucky. He winged his man, but did
not drop him, and the next moment four stalwart figures had sprung
out to the aid of their comrades, and the travellers were
surrounded.

Tom set his teeth hard, a great fury in his heart. He took aim
again, and another of his assailants dropped as he pulled the
trigger; then, setting spurs to Wildfire, who was well-nigh
distracted with terror at the noise and the flash in the darkness,
he rode clean over the man who had sprung at his bridle rein, and
calling to Robin to follow him, he sped away in the darkness at a
pace which was risk to life and limb.

The footpads seemed taken aback by this move, for they had reckoned
that a headlong flight into the recesses of the forest would be too
great a peril to be risked; and indeed it was a headstrong course
to take. But Tom was in a headstrong mood, and his horse was beside
himself with fear. Both man and beast were well used to reckless
riding, and Tom had eyes like a cat, whilst Wildfire had both the
wonderful sight and wonderful instinct of his race. Tom lay along
the horse's back, now on this side, now on that, dodging, swaying,
manoeuvring, in a fashion which showed marvellous horsemanship, and
all the while listening eagerly for the sound of Wildgoose's
following steps.

But he heard nothing. The silence of the forest was unbroken save
for the noise he made himself. It became plain at last that he was
alone. Robin and Wildgoose had either lost his track, or had not
followed him.

And a sudden doubt surged into Tom's brain as to whether or not
Robin had betrayed him to the footpads. Was it not Robin who had
connived at all the halts upon the way in the morning, Robin who
had advised pushing on, and had undertaken to find the way by day
or night? Robin was a son of the forest himself. Might he not have
friends amongst these very outlaws? Had not his father warned him
before this that he did not trust Robin, and did not like his son's
intimacy with the young man?

All these thoughts came surging into Tom's brain as he rode on
through the dark forest. He was loath to harbour doubts of his
servant and friend; but he could not lay them to rest, do what he
would.

But for these doubts he would have ridden back in search of his
comrade. As it was, he set his teeth somewhat grimly, and rode
onwards. Robin had no money about him. He would escape with the
loss of his horse, and could follow his master on foot to London if
he chose. It was not worth while to risk life and fortune in
attempting the rescue of a fellow who might be a villain and a
traitor.

It seemed a heartless thing to do to leave Robin to his fate, but
for all that Tom could not make up his mind to turn back and search
for him; for he felt it was quite probable he would only fall into
a cunningly-devised ambush. But he could not ride all night through
the forest. He might fetch a circuit all unknowingly, and find
himself in the midst of the footpads again. The moon had now risen,
and was giving a faint light. By its aid Tom was able to examine
the nature of the ground about him, and presently saw at a short
distance a dark, arched cavity in the face of a mass of gravelly
rock which rose up on his left hand. It had the appearance of a
cave, and Tom got off and carefully examined the loose shale round
the mouth of it for the trace of recent footsteps. He did not want
to fall into the hands of a band of marauders.

But he could not see any trace of footmarks, either of man or
beast; and the cave was tempting to one who had ridden since early
morning. There was a pool of water close at hand, where his horse
eagerly stooped to quench his thirst; and Tom loosed the girths,
and left the creature to browse at will; for Wildfire was as tame
as a dog, and knew his master's voice well. He could be trusted not
to wander far away, and to come back at the sound of whistle or
call. Indeed, it was probable that he would presently find his way
into the cave, and lie by his master's side.

Tom found that he could make himself comfortable enough in the
little cavern. It was not very deep, but it afforded protection
from the cold night wind; and a great heap of leaves at the end
bespoke the fact that other travellers had utilized the place
before. Tom had a little food in his wallet, which he munched in
silence, feeling his spirits somewhat damped by the events of the
last hour, and yet he was as fully resolved as ever to see life and
taste of adventure before he returned home again.

His adventures had begun rather before he had bargained; but, after
all, that was the way of life. He would learn in future to trust
nobody and to believe in nobody. All men were liars--did not the
Scriptures say as much? It was as well to learn that lesson soon as
late. He would not waste a regret upon Robin. His horse was the one
friend in whom he would trust. He at least would never betray or
desert him.

Presently Wildfire, having eaten his fill of herbage, came and
snuffed at the cave's mouth with a whinny of inquiry. On hearing
Tom's voice, he stepped lightly in, and after standing for a while
beside his master, lay down between him and the opening to the
cave, so that Tom was well shielded from the keen night air, and
could sleep as snugly as in his bed at home.

Sleep he did, and soundly too; for the day's ride had wearied him,
and he was of the age and temperament when slumber is seldom wooed
in vain. How long he slept he knew not; but he was aroused at
length by a movement of Wildfire. The horse had lifted his head,
and was snorting slightly as if in anxiety or fear.

Tom looked out. The gray of dawn was in the sky, and between him
and the light stood a tall, motionless figure, outlined clearly in
the cave's mouth by the coming glow in the east. It was the figure
of a man. He held in his hand a great horse pistol, and was
evidently studying with some curiosity the sleeping figures whose
slumbers he had disturbed.

Tom would have sprung to his feet, but the man called out in a
clear, sharp voice:

"Keep where you are, or I fire!"

The hot blood surged into Tom's cheeks; but for once prudence took
the upper hand of valour, and he remained sitting upright behind
the still recumbent figure of Wildfire. He had restrained the horse
from rising by the pressure of his hand. He knew by hearsay that
robbers seldom fired upon a good horse if there were a chance of
making a capture of so valuable an acquisition. He might find
shelter behind the body of the good steed yet.

"What do you want with me?" he asked, speaking as calmly as he
could, but bitterly regretting the carelessness which had omitted
to load again his pistol after the brush with the footpads of the
previous night. He had meant to do it before falling asleep, but
drowsiness had come quickly upon him, and he was now practically at
the mercy of the man who stood in the cave's mouth, for there was
no way of escape save past him.

"I only want your money, my young friend," answered the man, whose
face was becoming more visible every moment in the growing light.
"I doubt not you have a bag of gold pieces somewhere upon your
person. Give them up to me, and you shall go your way in peace."

The veins on Tom's forehead swelled with rage and impotent fury. He
set his teeth, and his voice sounded hoarse and choked.

"You will have to take my life first," he said.

"Nay, but that is folly," remonstrated the elder man, who had a
rather fine face, and much of the air and manner of a gentleman, as
Tom was quick to perceive. "I desire no man's death; I only ask for
his gold, which is, after all, but the dross of the earth; and life
for a fine young fellow like yourself is full of joyous promise,
even though he carry no purse with him."

"I tell you," answered Tom, in the same stubborn way, "that if you
take my money, you will have first to take my life. Here have I
been leading the life of a dog or of a boor all these years--squire's
son though men call me. I have seen nothing, I have learned nothing;
I have consorted with low hinds; I have been no better than the swine
in the fields. Now at last I have my liberty and a bag of gold given
to me. I am sent out to see the world, and to enjoy life. Take my
gold from me, and I must perforce go back to the old life. I would
choose death sooner. Therefore, sir, let us fight like men for this
same bag of gold; for I will defend it with every drop of my blood!"

And in spite of the peril of so doing, Tom sprang to his feet and
stood facing his antagonist with the air of a man whose blood is
up, and who will prove no mean adversary.

"Come now, I like that spirit," said the other. "In these days of
dandies and ruffled courtiers, stuffed with fine-sounding words but
puling cowards at heart, it refreshes the spirit to meet a
youngster of your sort. Tell me your name, young master, and let us
talk this matter over together. I have ever sought to mingle mercy
and discretion with the need for making a livelihood out of my
fellowmen."

Tom was surprised into a short laugh at this unexpected address.

"I am Tom Tufton of Gablehurst," he began, but was quickly
interrupted.

"What! the son of the good Squire of Gablehurst! Lad, is this the
truth?"

"Ay, verily," answered Tom, somewhat taken aback. "Did you know my
father? Alas! he is dead."

"Dead! What! Is that so? Then the world is the poorer by one good
man. And you are his son, and called by his name! What are you
doing away from home? Are you not master there?"

"No," answered Tom, with a flush on his cheek. "I am to see the
world first. My mother will rule for me till I be five and twenty.
I have money given me, and I am to seek fame and fortune afar. That
is what I said to you. Take my money from me, and I must needs
return to the life I have left--and I would sooner die!"

"Tut, tut, boy. Speak not so wildly; nor think that I will touch a
penny of your good father's gold. I am not sunk so low as that. Did
he ever speak to you of Captain Jack, whom he once saved from the
gallows?"

Tom shook his head. His father had not been a talking man.

"It was years ago now," said the man thoughtfully, "and I did try
for long after that to lead a different life; but in the end I came
back to the one I love the best--the free life of the road. But
believe me, Tom Tufton, your father's act of clemency has never
been forgotten. I too have shown mercy many a time and oft. I have
my own code of honour and chivalry. I want money badly enough; but
I will touch none of yours. I want a good horse; but I will lay no
finger on yours. Go your way in peace, and drink your fill of the
world's pleasures; but remember that if the time should come when
you want a friend and a place of refuge, ask at The Three Ravens
tavern on the skirts of this forest for news of Captain Jack, and
whensoever you may come to me, I will share my last penny and my
last crust with you, for love of the good man your father, who
saved my unworthy life."

The man spoke with visible emotion and Tom was moved also, he
scarce knew why. A sudden sense of liking--almost of love--sprang
up in his heart towards this freebooter. He laid a hand upon his
arm.

"Take me clear of this forest," he said, "and I will leave Wildfire
in your hands as a token of gratitude. I have bethought me often
that in London town he would pine his heart away. He loves the
green glades of the woodland, and the free air of the fields and
forests. Methinks you would be a kind master; and he is a loving
and faithful creature. I might even lose him in London, where, they
tell me, rogues abound. I would sooner leave him in your hands; and
if I want him back some day, I will ask him of Captain Jack."

The bargain was struck. Captain Jack accompanied Tom to the
farthest limits of the forest, giving him meantime much information
about life in London, and astonishing him by the intimate knowledge
he possessed of life in every grade of society.

Tom listened in wonder and amaze; but Captain Jack answered his
questions in such a way as to leave him little the wiser. He
managed, however, to make friends with Wildfire almost as quickly
as with his master; for the two men rode by turns, and Captain
Jack's horsemanship was of that finished kind which every horse
understands and responds to.

"You are right not to take such a creature into London," said
Captain Jack, after trying the paces of Wildfire over a stretch of
springy turf. "Some sharper would soon make away with him; but it
will be a clever man who filches him from me! I will guard him as
my greatest treasure, and he will be worth more to me than the
guineas you carry in your bag."

"And his brother is somewhere in the forest," said Tom; and he told
the story of Robin and Wildgoose, to which Captain Jack listened
with a look of amusement.

"Clever fellow! clever fellow!" he muttered, "he will make one of
the brotherhood one of these days!"

Tom began to realize, with a grim sense of humour, that he was
aiding and abetting the mischievous schemes of some notorious
highwayman, and that his father's two favourite young horses, by
which he set such store, were destined to become the property of
the gentlemen of the road!

At the limits of the forest Tom and his companion parted. He had
been put upon the highroad, and given careful instructions as to
the way he must take. Moreover, Captain Jack had given him a
password, which, he said, would protect him from molestation;
although a traveller on foot was not in the same danger as one who
rode a fine horse.

It cost Tom a pang to turn his back on Wildfire; but he felt so
certain that the horse would pine in London, or be stolen away,
that he preferred to leave him in the hands of a kind master who
would treat him well.

"Take your fill of life. Keep open eyes, and believe every man to
be a rogue till he prove himself an honest fellow," was the parting
advice of his companion, for whom he had already taken rather a
strong liking; "and if ever town becomes too hot, come and join
Captain Jack; and if ever you should chance to knock up against
Lord Claud, tell him that his old master sends him greeting and
felicitations, and is watching his career with admiration and
delight."

With that the captain turned and galloped away; and Tom was left
looking after him, wondering what the meaning of this last charge
could be.



CHAPTER III. IN GAY LONDON TOWN.


Tom Tufton walked through Bishopsgate, and along the crowded dirty
thoroughfare towards the Poultry, with a jaunty air of unconcern
that did credit to his powers of dissimulation.

It was Captain Jack's parting word to him to dissemble all outward
signs of astonishment at what he might see when he entered the
city; to walk on without stopping to stare or gape, to look as
though such sights were of everyday occurrence in his life, and to
bear himself with a bold and self-sufficient air, as much as to
tell the world at large that he was very well able to take care of
himself, and that roisterers and bullies had better let him alone.

Tom acted his part with considerable acumen; but within he was
consumed by astonished bewilderment, which increased as he turned
westward towards Cheapside, and approached the still fashionable
regions of Holborn and its environments.

The streets appeared to the country-bred youth to teem with life.
Everything he set eyes on was strange and wonderful. The shops with
their wares displayed, and noisy apprentices crying out to buyers,
or exchanging fisticuffs with each other by way of interlude; the
coaches carrying fine ladies hither and thither, tightly laced,
swelled out with hoops, their hair so towering in its lace and
powder as to provoke the query as to how it had ever attained such
gigantic proportions; the gay gallants in their enormous perukes of
powdered hair, and their wonderful flowered vests and gold-laced
coats--all these things provoked the keenest wonder and amazement
in Tom's breast; albeit he walked on without pausing to examine one
more than another, or to exchange a word with any save some
honest-looking shopman, of whom he would ask the way to Master
Cale's shop just off Holborn.

If Tom had lost on the way to London his servant and both his
horses, he had at least gained some information which might be of
more value to him than all the rest of his possessions; for Captain
Jack had told him to go to Master Cale's and lodge with him,
telling him who had sent him, and had added that he would put him
in the way of becoming a proper gentleman of fashion, without
fleecing him and rooking him, as would inevitably be the case if he
fell into the clutches of those birds of prey always on the lookout
for young squires from the country coming up to learn the ways of
the world, with a plentiful supply of guineas and inexperience.

Master Cale seemed to be well known, and he was directed to his
house in almost the same words by each person he asked. Master Cale
was a perruquier of no small popularity, who had risen through
honesty and ingenuity to be one of the most fashionable tradesmen
of the day. He also sold vests or waistcoats, lace-edged neck
cloths, gloves, sword scarfs and girdles, generally of his own
design; yet though his shop was regularly crowded with gallants and
courtiers, the man himself managed to preserve much of the honesty
and simplicity which had been his making in the days gone by.
Everybody liked and trusted Master Cale, and he was said to be the
best-informed man in London town on matters connected with the
court and its fashionable throng of hangers on.

As Tom walked onwards he realized for the first time in his life
what a rustic-looking fellow he must appear. He had felt himself
smart enough at home in his leather breeches, brown frieze
double-breasted coat, scarlet vest, and riding boots, his hair tied
behind with a scarlet riband to match the vest. But as he beheld
the fine gentlemen lounging arm in arm along the streets in their
huge curled wigs, gorgeous waistcoats reaching sometimes to the
knees, gold embroidered coats, with huge cuffs turned back almost
to the elbows, and scarfs of every hue of the rainbow supporting
their swords, he felt himself a mere boor and bumpkin, and wondered
much whether Master Cale would ever be able to turn him out a fine
gentleman, fit to associate with those he saw in the streets.

As he pursued his way westward, he met parties of young rakes and
roisterers setting out for the theatres, the play being then an
earlier function than it has become of late years.

These men were swaggering along arm in arm, exchanging ribald jests
with each other, and insulting the inoffensive passers by with
coarse remarks interlarded with oaths, and, whenever occasion
offered, tripping them up with their swords or canes and landing
them in the gutter.

Some of these worthies wore cockades or badges, and later on Tom
learned to know them as Darby captains, Tash captains, or
Cock-and-bottle captains, according to the special sort of
marauding which they favoured. He met one party of the dreaded
Mohocks, or Mohawks, reeling along half intoxicated already, and
ripe for any offensive mischief, which later in the day they were
certain to perpetrate. They eyed the young rustic askance as it
was, and Tom heard a whisper go through their ranks:

"Pity 'tis so early i' the day, or we'd sweat him rarely."

But he held his head high, and swaggered along as though he felt
himself a match for all and any who might attack him. Yet inwardly
he felt that he would never go abroad in town without a sword at
his girdle. What the "sweating" might be, he knew not; but he was
assured that it was some sort of assault upon his person.

At length he reached his destination, which was a shop of fine
appearance in Drury Lane, just off the main thoroughfare of
Holborn. It was then a street of some pretensions, albeit a narrow
one, and Tom's eyes soon espied the name he was in search of over
the door of a shop round which a score or more of gallants were
lounging. In the doorway itself stood a very fine youth, at least
he was fine as to his raiment, although he wore no wig and was but
an apprentice of better figure and deportment than most. He was
displaying to the admiring crowd a mighty fine waistcoat of
