[Illustration I: SOME HIEROGLYPHIC SIGNS LIABLE TO BE CONFUSED WITH
EACH OTHER]

 6. Photography.

The camera and material have been described under outfit.

Lighting and preparation of objects is a main element of success.
When first looking over any ruins, make a list of every view wanted,
with the time of day when the sun will be right for it. Then follow
the time-table, and so get the best lighting all in one day.

For movable stones or figures place them in half-shade, as a doorway,
and then tilt every way until the best lighting is found, fix them in
that position, and then set up the camera square with them.

The camera should usually be fixed to look downward vertically, and
then variation up to 40 degrees can be got by the legs. Hold the
camera in the right position, keeping the legs off the ground, and
then drop the legs to find their own place; thus very skew positions
can be fixed quickly.

Small objects are best laid on black velvet, and taken vertically.
Scraps of charcoal are useful to prop them in exact positions. A
sheet of white paper stuck on a leg of the stand may be useful to
prevent shadows being too heavy. Where outline, and not flat detail,
is wanted, then a light ground is best; the most perfect is a sheet
of ground glass with white paper a foot or two below it. If the
ground glass cannot be had, a good substitute-also useful for a
camera glass-is plain glass with a sheet of tissue paper (or the
packing paper of films) stuck on with paraffin wax.

The dressing of objects to show up clearly is often needful. Incised
objects can be filled in with charcoal powder if light, or chalk if
dark; in any case a coarse powder, so as not to stain the object. For
faint cutting on glass or crystal go over the lines with 'China ink
in a pen, so as to cover them. Harden the ink in the sun, and then
gently wipe with a damp finger until all the excess is removed and
only the roughness of the lines remains black. On large objects light
dust or sand is often useful, to make relief clearer.

For objects in a bad light, or in the interior of tombs, reflected
light must be used. Lids of biscuit tins serve well; a lid in the sun
sixty feet off, and another lid reflecting the light on to a wall,
will suffice for a two minutes' exposure of a slow plate. Three or
four successive reflections into a totally dark chamber will suffice
in five or six minutes.

When an important subject cannot be revisited it is well to take
duplicates; the camera should be shifted laterally a few inches for a
near object, or a few feet for a distant view, and then the two films
will form a stereograph, if both succeed.

In arranging groups of small objects, put together what will go in a
three-inch circle, and minor pieces around, and then the best in the
middle can be printed direct on lantern slides.

 7. Preservation and Packing.

While travelling little can be done for preserving objects. Papyrus
rolls should be wrapped at once in a damp handkerchief, to be
carried, and then wrapped in paper, packed in a tin box, and filled
round with cotton wool. Small papyri can be safely damped in a wet
cloth, and flattened out between the leaves of a book; secure one
edge straight in the hinge, and gradually press flat and secure by
advancing leaves over it. Glass, if perfect, should be packed in tins
with wool; old food or tobacco tins do well for tender things.

Flint implements and coins, though hardy, should be saved from
grinding by wrapping in waste paper.

Ivory, if it has been buried, is very liable to flake. The cure is to
soak it in paraffin wax; but temporarily it is secured by winding
cotton thread round it in many directions. Some anoint it with
vaseline, but if vaseline penetrates the ivory, it will not take up
paraffin or gelatine later. Tender wood may be likewise saved.

A much-cracked glazed jar was packed by winding string round it in
all directions, with tufts of wool under the string.

A whole mummy in most fragile condition, so that it could not be
lifted, was made up solid with 40 lb. of paraffin wax which was
melted out of it afterwards in England, making hardly any change. If
contracted burials should be preserved, dust carefully, splash on
about 5 lb. of paraffin wax heated to smoking-point. When cold,
detach from soil, turn over, paraffin the lower side, and build up
weak parts with a sludge of melted paraffin and sand, nearly chilled.
About 8 to 10 lb. of wax will do the whole. The skull should be
packed separately. Pad all hollows of the body with soft rag to
spread pressure in packing. Paraffin wax is the best preservative as
it is tough, and may be used as a coat over an object for safety.
When not needed it can be cut away, or melted away, and cleaned off
completely with benzol. It should be melted in an iron saucepan, as
solder will give way if it is superheated. As it melts at about 120
degrees F., and boils at about 600 degrees F., it can be greatly
superheated, and used when smoking, so as to penetrate deeply into
wood or porous material. It is perfect for strengthening skulls; most
rotten examples slopped with paraffin, and finally soused for a few
seconds so as entirely to cover the bone in and out, will travel
safely, if not crushed.

Boxes must always have corner posts, inside or out; see that the
sides are nailed up to the edges to the posts, or the lid or bottom
may part by the side splitting. See that all nails--except for the
lid--are driven slanting alternately one way and reversed, this
prevents sides or bottom drawing off. Nail the lid with many short
nails, so that it can be raised without splitting.

To secure heavy objects in a mixed box, an inverted rough stool is
the best, the cross piece on the object below, and the sides coming
up to the lid. If cross bars are nailed in a box, damage may be done
to an object in forcing the bars loose. It is often best to put heavy
and light things in the same box, to equalize weights in journeying;
if well secured, a mixed boxful travels well. Be very careful that a
wedge-shaped stone cannot force itself loose by repeated jolts, or it
may split a box.

Slabs of stone ire best packed in open shallow boxes face down on
straw or wool, secured by a few diagonal cross bars on the top, as
then they do not need to be opened for customs. All stones of regular
form should be supported at a fifth of the length from each end. No
bedding on a box is worth anything, as the box will bend more than
the stone, and the strain will all come on the middle. Very heavy
blocks are best with sacking on the face, and roped round in various
parts.

Pottery is most difficult to pack safely. For large jars, mark the
points of contact on the box, and nail on cushions of old cloth
stuffed hard with straw, so as to pad the jar on all sides; make sure
that it cannot twist about into a diagonal position off the pads.
Long boxes, five or six feet, with three or four cross divisions, are
best. Begin packing, say four pots with straw, at one end of the box,
press up a cross board tight on them, and nail through the sides:
then another batch likewise; about one inch thick of hard-pressed
straw is needful at each contact. Twist straw into rough bands, and
wind it round each pot. Fill up corners to prevent the bands shifting
loose. Empty small tins make good stuffing for blank spaces. Old
newspapers torn to bits and rolled into balls make good packing for
pots and hold them firmly, but this method is dangerous if the
packing becomes wetted. Pots should always be packed tight. Old
sacking or cotton stuff may be tied on over the mouth of large pots,
to prevent straw slipping in, and loosening the packing.

Bronzes and coins should not be cleaned in any way, till in a settled
work place.

 8. Forgeries and. Buying.

Most travellers wish to buy some things of interest, and in remote
districts they may do good service in rescuing important objects
which may be wanted in museums. Forgeries are ubiquitous, even in
most obscure places in the hands of peasants, either supplied by
dealers, or casually obtained, often in good faith. It is best to
inquire of local collectors and museums as to the kinds of forgeries
met with. The following notes are to show the novice how far he may
go safely.

Bronze figures with a thick red patina, which scales off readily
sometimes, or with thick green patina cracked, or hard green or brown
patina, are safe. Thin green patina, or bare brown or black metal is
dubious.

Papyri in roll, flexible though fragile, in known Greek or Egyptian
writing, are fairly safe. Lumps stuck together, brown and scrappy,
are made up.

Coins cannot be safely bought unless patinated, copper or silver.
Only an expert can judge of gold or 'clean silver.

Jewellery of small size, as earrings and bracelets, is generally
safe, if the age of the design is known. Modern wire is always drawn,
ancient is irregular. Look for concretions of lime in the hollows,
and for the dull face of old gold. If once cleaned there is little to
distinguish old from modern gold.

Stone vases if turned are Roman or modern. The ancient irregularities
should be studied from specimens.

Scarabs with nacreous or decomposed glaze in the hollows (as in the
deep cuts at the side) are safe; also, if there are natural cracks by
age, which would prevent modern cutting. There is a large variety of
skilful forgeries.

Stone statuettes: a skilled forger may be paid up to 100 pounds for a
figure to order. Only an expert can judge.

Never buy in the dusk or in dark rooms. When buying never have any
one at hand who calls attention to things, nor let any attendant
interfere. Seem entirely unconcerned.

Get the reputation of never advancing on offers, or bargaining; let
taking or leaving things at once be the rule. Time and delays are
money to the traveller, and it is worth much to save time in
haggling. Your donkey-boy will soon spread your character.

When offering for single things to a peasant, put the money by the
side of the antiquity, and say that he must take one or the other:
fingering the cash is irresistible, and no time is lost.

If it is likely that the source of an object will not be truly
stated, the way is to make the best guess you can, and say it
dogmatically: the pleasure of setting you right will often bring out
the truth, or if you guessed right it will gain you credit and break
down reserve.

As a principle it is well to be looked on as a liberal buyer, so as
to encourage the offer of antiquities. A little more thus spent will
be a trifling extra on the whole journey, and may largely increase
the results in objects and information for future work.

Though prices can only be learned by practice, and they vary in time
and place, yet the following scale may be taken as fairly safe.

Bronze figures if good work, inches high squared = shillings: except
in bad state, or Osiris, or bad clumsy work, or votive animals.

Papyri or parchment, continuous text, 1 pound a square foot,
accounts, half or a third.

Jewellery, between weight in coin and double that, according to work.

Scarabs, common but fair 2s., names 2s.-5s.; up to 5 pounds or 10
pounds if beautiful. Engraved gems, small common Roman, 2s.-4s. in
London, more in East; for a fair Greek 1 pound-10 pounds.

Coins often higher in the East than in London. In Greek lands copper
coins may be bought by weight, and picked over at leisure, and the
worthless coins rejected. For single coins fix a price, say half a
franc, and offers of large numbers may come in, from which the best
can be chosen and the rest refused.

Glass vases, blown, inches high squared at 4d. or 6d. each. Coloured
glass double or triple.

Ushabtis, poor 1s.-4s., fair 5s.-10s., fine blue or engraved 1 pound-
10 pounds.




LIST OF THE CHIEF BRITISH INSTITUTIONS AND SOCIETIES CONCERNED WITH
THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE NEAR AND MIDDLE EAST.

LONDON.

BRITISH MUSEUM, Bloomsbury, W.C.1.
Director, Sir F. G. Kenyon, K.C.B., P.B.A.
Keeper of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities, Sir Ernest Wallis Budge,
Litt.D.
Keeper of British and Mediaeval Antiquities (including Prehistoric
Antiquities, Ethnology, and Oriental Antiquities) Sir Hercules Read,
F.B.A., P.S.A.
Keeper of Greek and Roman Antiquities, A. H. Smith M.A.
Keeper of Coins, G. F. Hill, F.B.A.
Keeper of MSS., J. P. Gilson, M.A.
Keeper of Oriental MSS. and Printed Books. L. D. Barnett, Litt.D.

VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM, S. Kensington, S.W.7.
Director, Sir Cecil Harcourt Smith, C.V.O.
Assistant Keeper of Architecture and Sculpture, E. R. D. Maclagan.
Assistant Keeper of Ceramics, C. H. Wylde.
Keeper of Metalwork, W. W. Watts.
Keeper of Textiles, A. F. Kendrick.
Keeper of Woodwork, E. F. Strange, C.B.E.

BRITISH ACADEMY, Burlington House, Piccadilly, W.1.
Secretary, Sir I. Gollancz, Litt.D.

BRITISH SCHOOL AT ATHENS, 19 Bloomsbury Square, W.C.1,
Secretary, John Penoyre, C.B.E.

BRITISH SCHOOL IN JERUSALEM, c/o. Palestine Exploration Fund,
2 Hinde St., Manchester Square, W. 1. Secretary, Miss R. Woodley.

BRITISH SCHOOL AT ROME, 19 Bloomsbury Square, W.C.1.
Secretary of the Faculty of Archaeology, History and Letters,
E. J. Forsdyke.

PALESTINE EXPLORATION FUND, 2 Hinde St., Manchester Square, W.1
Secretary, E. W. G. Masterman, M.D.

EGYPT EXPLORATION SOCIETY, 13 Tavistock Square, W.C.1.
Secretary, Miss Jonas.

EGYPTIAN RESEARCH ACCOUNT AND BRITISH SCHOOL OF ARCHAEOLOGY IN EGYPT.
Hon. Director, Prof. W. M. F. Petrie, F.R.S., F.B.A., University
College, Gower St., W.C.1.

SOCIETY OF ANTIQUARIES OF LONDON, Burlington House, W.1.
Secretary, C. R. Peers, F.S.A.

ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY, 74 Grosvenor St., W. 1.
Secretary, Miss Eleanor Hull.

SOCIETY FOR THE PROMOTION OF HELLENIC STUDIES, 19 Bloomsbury Square,
W.C.1. Secretary and Librarian, John Penoyre, C.B.E.

ROYAL INSTITUTE OF BRITISH ARCHITECTS, 9 Conduit St., W.1.
Secretary, Ian MacAlister.

SOCIETY FOR THE PROMOTION OF ROMAN STUDIES, 19 Bloomsbury Square,
W.C.1. Secretary, Miss Margaret Ramsay.

ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE, 50 Gt. Russell St., W.C.1.
Secretaries, H. S. Harrison, T. A. Joyce, O.B.E.

ROYAL NUMISMATIC SOCIETY, 22 Russell Square, W.C.1.
Secretaries, J. Allan, Lt. Col. W. Morrieson.

ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY, Lowther Lodge, Kensington Gore, S. W. 7.
Secretary, A. R. Hinks, F.R.S.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL JOINT COMMITTEE. Hon. Secretary, G. F. Hill, British
Museum, W.C.1.


CAMBRIDGE.

MUSEUM OF ARCHAEOLOGY AND ETHNOLOGY. Curator, Baron A. von Hugel.

FITZWILLIAM MUSEUM. Director, S. C. Cockerell, M.A.


OXFORD.

ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM. Keeper, D. G. Hogarth, C.M.G., F.B.A.


ATHENS.

BRITISH SCHOOL. Director, A. J. B. Wace.


JERUSALEM.

BRITISH SCHOOL. Director, Prof. J. Garstang.


ROME.

BRITISH SCHOOL, Valle Giulia. Director, Thomas Ashby, D.Litt.



THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL JOINT COMMITTEE

Society or other Body.                     Representatives.


British Academy                            Sir F. G. Kenyon,  K.C.B.
                                           (Chairman of Committee).
                                           Prof. Percy Gardner.
                                           Sir W. M. Ramsay.

Royal Anthropological Institute            Sir Everard Im Thurn.
                                           Prof. Arthur Keith.

Society of Antiquaries                     Sir Arthur Evans.
                                           Sir Hercules Read.

Royal Institute of British Architects      Prof. W. R. Lethaby.
                                           Prof. A. G. Dickie.

Royal Asiatic Society                      F. Legge.
                                           R. Sewell.

British School at Athens                   J. P. Droop.


Byzantine Research Fund                    Sir Hercules Read.

Egypt Exploration Society                  Sir F. G. Kenyon, K.C.B.
                                           Dr. Alan Gardiner.

Egyptian Research Account                  Prof. Flinders Petrie.
                                           Prof. Ernest Gardner.

Society for the Promotion                  A. H. Smith.
of Hellenic Studies                        G. F. Hill (Hon. Sec. of
                                           Committee).

British School at Jerusalem                Prof. Flinders Petrie.
                                           D. G. Hogarth, C.M.G.

Royal Numismatic Society                   Prof. C. Oman, M.P.
                                           G. F. Hill.

Palestine Exploration Fund                 Dr. G. Buchanan Gray.
                                           Prof. A. G. Dickie

Society for the Promotion of               Miss Gertrude Bell.
Roman Studies                              O. M. Dalton.

    --------------------------------------------

British Museum                             Sir F. G. Kenyon, K.C.B.

Victoria and Albert Museum                 Sir Cecil Harcourt Smith,
                                           C.V.O.



PART II

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The aim of the special sections contained in Chapters III-VIII is to
describe, not the objects usually to be seen in Museums, but only
such things as will be found lying out on mounds and sites, and as
are more or less distinctive of a period. Thus certain comparatively
trivial objects are named, because they are peculiar to a period, and
likely to be found in a casual passage over a site, whereas other
objects, common to several periods, are ignored. Only the
distinctive, key objects are mentioned. The great features of Greek
Art, for instance, are not dealt with in Chapter II; nor are coins,
the probabilities of finding them being too slender, and the
possibilities too wide. Nevertheless, coins when found should be
carefully quoted. Pottery naturally takes the largest place, as it
was abundant, and its fragments are a good guide to period, and being
practically indestructible and of no intrinsic value are most likely
to be met with. The difference between pottery made with the use of
the wheel and that made without is important to be noted. The use of
the wheel can usually be detected through the slight inequalities of
the clay that make a series of parallel lines on the inner surface.
The diagrammatic representations of the pot-forms characteristic of
various periods or of other objects ranging through a civilization
the main features of which can be shown in outline will, it is hoped,
be found useful. Simplified tables of alphabets, intended to make it
possible roughly to identify the script, if not the date, of an
inscription, are also given.



