they hear my story, will hold you dear to them. Ingvar is the eldest,
Hubba, the next, and the third, Halfden, is three-and-twenty, and so
about your own age, as I take it, as he is also about your equal in
build and strength. Yet I would sooner see a ship of mine steered by
you than by him, for he is not your equal in that matter."

Now that praise pleased me well, as it did also my father. For we
hold the Danes as first of all peoples in the knowledge of sea
craft; and we had seen that this man was a master therein. But
though at this time I thought of naught but the words of praise,
hereafter I was to remember the words that Jarl Lodbrok spoke of
the way in which these sons of his would hold me when the tale was
told them.

At last we hailed the shore through the creeping dusk, and the
shore lines were thrown out. Then were we alongside our staithe
{iii}, and Lodbrok the Dane had come to Reedham.

Now it may seem but a little thing that a seafarer should be driven
to a strange coast, and be tended there in friendly wise by those
who saved him from the breakers, for such is a common hap on our
island shores. Yet, from this day forward, all my life of the time
yet before me was to be moulded by what came of that cast of line
to one in peril. Aye, and there are those who hold that the fate of
our England herself was in hand that day, though it seems to me
that that is saying overmuch. Yet one cannot tell, and maybe those
who will read this story of mine will be able to judge.

What I do know certainly is this, that all which makes my tale
worth the telling comes from this beginning.



CHAPTER II. HOW LODBROK SPOKE WITH BEORN THE FALCONER.


So soon as we had stepped ashore there came in haste one of our
housecarles with word from my mother that Eadmund, the king, had
that day come to our house from Caistor; so at once my father bade
the man return and bring changes of clothes for himself and me and
Lodbrok to our steward's house, that we might appear in more decent
trim before our guest and master.

So we waited for a little while, watching the men as they berthed
the ship; and as we stood there a word went round among the knot of
people watching with us, and they parted, making a little lane, as
they said, "The king comes". And then I heard the well-known voice
of Eadmund calling gaily to us:

"Ho, friend Elfric, here have I come to see what a man fresh from a
stormy voyage looks like, if light will serve me."

And so saying, I being nearest to him, the king turned me round
with his strong hands, and scanned my rough, wet garments and fur
cap.

"Truly, son Wulfric," he cried, laughing, "I think these things
suit you as well as war gear, and better than court finery, in this
dim light at least. Now let me see the thane himself."

Then my father would have him come back to the house at once, out
of the stormy weather, for the rain was coming now as the wind
fell; and we went, not waiting for the change of garments, for that
the king would not suffer.

As we turned away from the staithe, Lodbrok took my arm, asking me
where he might find shelter.

"Why, come with us, surely!" I answered, having no thought but that
he would have done so as our guest.

"Thanks," he said; "I knew not if your help could go so far as that
to a man whose story might well be too strange for belief."

Now it had seemed to me that no one could doubt such a man, and so
I told him that we had no doubt of him at all in that matter. And
he thanked me gravely again, walking, as I thought, more freely
beside me, as knowing that he was held to be a true man.

We followed my father, who walked with the king, at a little
distance because of this small delay; and presently Lodbrok asked
me if this was the King of all England.

"No," I answered; "though, indeed, he is the only king we know
aught of. This is Eadmund of East Anglia."

"You know him well, as one may see by his way with you," said the
jarl.

"Surely, for he is my father's close friend. They were comrades
together in King Offa's court until the old king laid down his
crown and gave the kingdom into Eadmund's hands; and they are the
same to each other now as ever. He is my godfather; and I was in
his court till I was eighteen. Moreover, I am one of his armour
bearers yet when need is."

So I spoke plainly enough, for I think that I had, and ever shall
have, reason to be proud of our nearness to the king, of whom no
man had but good to say since he, almost as a boy, came to the
throne.

"So then it seems that fate has brought me to court," said the
Dane.

"Yes, in a way," I told him; "for the king will ever bide with us
when he would visit this side of his kingdom."

"I think that I have seen this king before," said Lodbrok
presently; "for he is a man the like of whom one sees not twice."

"Then," said I, "he will surely remember you, for he never forgets
one whom he has had reason to notice."

Whereat the jarl laughed a little to himself; but I had no time to
ask why, for now we were come to the great door; and when my father
would have let the king go in first Eadmund laughed at him, and
took his arm and drew him in with him, so that there was a little
delay, and we drew close.

Very bright and welcome looked the great oaken hall as we came in
from the dark, rainy night. A great fire burnt on its stone hearth
in the centre, and the long tables were already set above and below
it. The bright arms and shields on the walls shone below the heads
of deer and wolf and boar, and the gust of wind that came in with
us flew round the wall, making a sort of ripple of changing colour
run along the bright woven stuffs that covered them to more than a
man's height from the floor. No one in all East Anglia had so well
dight a hall as had Elfric, the rich Thane of Reedham.

Well used was I to all this, but never seemed it more homelike to
me than when I came in fresh from the the cold, gray sea.

And now there stood on the high place to welcome us those whose
presence made the place yet more beautiful to me--my mother, and
Eadgyth my sister, and beside them were Bishop Humbert, our own
bishop, and many thanes of the court, and some of the bishop's
clergy. Such a gathering my father, and, indeed, all of us, loved,
for all were well known to us.

Now I went to greet these dear ones and friends, and there was
pleasant jest and laughter at us for coming thus sea clad and spray
stained into the midst of that gay company. So that for a little
time I forgot Lodbrok, who had not followed me beyond the hearth.

Then Eadgyth said to me:

"Who is that noble-looking man who stands so sadly and alone by the
fire?"

I turned, blaming myself for this forgetfulness, and there was the
Dane gazing into the flames, and seeming heedless of all that was
going on. Nor do I think that I had ever seen one look so sad as
looked that homeless man, as he forgot the busy talk and movement
around him in some thoughts of his own.

So I went to him, touching his arm gently, and he started a little.
Then his grave smile came, and he said:

"Truly, Wulfric, I had forgotten all things but my own home, and
when I woke from my dream at your touch, half thought I that you
were Halfden--that youngest son of mine of whom I told you."

Then so wistfully looked he at me that I could not forbear saying
to him:

"You must hold me as in Halfden's place, for this will be your
house, if you will, until there comes a ship that will take you
home. Gladly will some of the Frisians we know take you at least to
the right side of the broad seas."

"Aye, gladly would some have Lodbrok the Jarl with them," he
answered, smiling strangely.

What he meant, beyond that he might pilot them well, I knew not,
nor, indeed, thought that any hidden meaning lay in his words. So
that his saying passed from my mind, until one day when I should
have cause to understand it well enough.

I would have taken him now to present him to my mother, but she was
gone, and there came to us one of the steward's men, who stared at
the Dane as if he were some marvel, having doubtless heard his
story from one of the seamen, but covered his wonder by bowing low
and bidding him to an inner room where the thane had prepared
change of garment for him. For my father, having the same full
belief and trust in the stranger's word, would no more than I treat
him in any wise but as an honoured guest.

Then said Lodbrok:

"Good shall surely ever be to the house that will thus treat a
wanderer. Hardly would a castaway meet with so great kindness in my
own land. Nor do I think that we Danes have made our name so well
loved among English folk that we should look for the like among
them."

But I answered that we of East Anglia had no cause to blame his
people, who had made peace with us and kept it faithfully.

So the man led Lodbrok away, and I too went to seek gear more
courtly than salt-stained and tar-spotted blue cloth of Lavenham.

There are few thanes' houses which have so many chambers as ours,
for because of the king's friendship with us, my father had added,
as it were, house to house, building fresh chambers out around the
great hall itself, till all one might see was its long roof among
the many that clustered round and against its walls, so that the
thanes who came with him, or to see him, might have no cause to
complain of ill lodging with Elfric of Reedham. So it had come to
pass that our house was often the place where the court lay, and I
know that many of the poorer thanes thanked my father for thus
using his riches, since he saved them many a time the heavy
expenses of housing king and court when their turn should have
come. Yet my father would ever put aside those thanks, saying that
he loved to see his house full, though I myself know that this
saving of others less rich was in his mind.

One part of all these buildings we called "the king's house", for
it was set apart for him, and between that and the great hall was a
square and large chamber which Eadmund would use for his private
audiences, and sometimes for council room. And there we used to
gather from all parts of the place that we might enter the great
hall in his train at supper time, for there was a door which led to
the high table thence, so that the king need not go through the
crowd of housecarles and lesser folk who sat, below the salt, along
the walls. And in that chamber was a chimney to the fire, so that
the hearth was against the wall, which was a marvel to many, but
made the place more meet for the king. Ingild the merchant, my
other godfather, whose home was in London, had brought men thence
to make it for us, having the like in his own house after some
foreign pattern.

There were two men only in this room when I returned ready for the
feast. Both stood before the fire, and both were brightly dressed,
and hardly, but for the drowsy hawk which sat unhooded on his hand,
should I have known Lodbrok in the rich dress my father had had
prepared for him. The other was Beorn, the king's falconer, who
went everywhere with his master. These two were speaking together
as they stood before the fire, and I thought that what Beorn said
was not pleasing to the Dane, for he turned away a little, and
answered shortly.

When they saw me both turned, Lodbrok with a smile of welcome, and
Beorn with a loud, rough voice crying to me:

"Ho, Wulfric, here is a strange thing! This gold ring have I
offered to your stranger here for his falcon--which has three wing
feathers missing, moreover--and he will not sell, though I trow
that a man cast ashore must needs want gold more than a bird which
he may not fly save I gain him leave from the king."

"The bird is Wulfric's," said Lodbrok quietly.

"Nay, Jarl," I answered, "I would not take so loving a hawk from
her master, and over all our manors you may surely fly her."

"See you there!" cried Beorn, with a sort of delight, not heeding
my last words, "Wulfric will not have her! Now will you sell?"

Then Lodbrok looked at me with a short glance that I could not but
understand, and said that it would surely grieve him if I would not
take the falcon.

Pleased enough I was, though half unwilling to take what seemed as
a forced gift. Yet to quiet Beorn--whom I never liked, as he was
both overbearing and boastful, though of great skill in his art of
falconry--I thanked the Dane, and went to where a hawking glove
hung on the wall, for my arm would feel the marks of those strong
talons for many a day, already. As I put it on I said that I feared
the bird would hardly come to me, leaving her master.

"Once I would have said that she would not," said Lodbrok; "for
until today she would bide with no man but myself and her keeper.
But today she has sat on your wrist, so that I know she will love
you well, for reasons that are beyond my guessing."

And so he shifted the falcon lightly from his wrist to mine, and
there she sat quietly, looking from him to me as though she would
own us both.

Then said Beorn, holding out his hand, on which he wore his
embroidered state glove of office:

"This is foolishness. The bird will perch on any wrist that is
rightly held out to her, so she be properly called," and he
whistled shrill, trying to edge the falcon from my hand.

In a moment she roused herself, and her great wings flew out,
striking his arm and face as he pushed them forward; and had he not
drawn back swiftly, her iron beak would surely have rent his gay
green coat.

"Plague on the kite!" he said; "surely she is bewitched! And if her
master is, as they say, a wizard, that is likely--"

"Enough, Master Falconer," I said, growing angry. "Lodbrok is our
guest, and this, moreover, is the court for the time. Why, the bird
is drowsy, and has been with me already. There is no wonder in the
matter, surely?"

But Beorn scowled, and one might see that his pride of falconry was
hurt. Maybe he would have answered again, but I spoke to Lodbrok,
asking him what the falcon was, as she was like none of ours, for
this was a thing I knew Beorn would be glad to know, while his
pride would not let him ask.

And Lodbrok answered that she was an Iceland gerfalcon from the far
northern ocean, and went on to tell us of her powers of flight, and
at what game she was best, and how she would take her quarry, and
the like. And Beorn sat down and feigned to pay no heed to us.

Presently the Dane said that he had known gerfalcons to fly from
Iceland to Norway in a day, and at that Beorn laughed as in scorn.

"Who shouted from Norway to Iceland to say that a lost hawk had
come over?" he said.

The Dane laughed a little also, as at a jest; though one could tell
that Beorn rather meant insult.

"Why," he answered, "the bird got loose from her master's ship as
he sailed out of port in Iceland, and he found her at home in
Nidaros at his journey's ending; and they knew well on what day she
came, which was the same as that on which she got free."

Then I said, lest Beorn should scoff again:

"Now, if this falcon got free from here, surely she will go home to
your land."

"Aye, and so my sons will think me dead, seeing her come without
me. Wherefore keep her safely mewed until she has learnt that this
is her home, for I would not have that mischance happen."

That I promised easily, for I prized the bird highly. And that I
might not leave him with the surly Beorn, I asked the jarl to come
and see her safely bestowed, and left the room with him.
