
"We are all born for love," said Morley. "It is the principle of
existence, and its only end. And love of you, Sybil," he continued, in
a tone of impassioned pathos, "has been to me for years the hoarded
treasure of my life. For this I have haunted your hearth and hovered
round your home; for this I have served your father like a slave, and
embarked in a cause with which I have little sympathy, and which can
meet with no success. It is your image that has stimulated my ambition,
developed my powers, sustained me in the hour of humiliation, and
secured me that material prosperity which I can now command. Oh! deign
to share it; share it with the impassioned heart and the devoted life
that now bow before you; and do not shrink from them, because they are
the feelings and the fortunes of the People."

"You astound, you overwhelm me," said Sybil, agitated. "You came for
another purpose, we were speaking of other feelings; it is the hour of
exigency you choose for these strange, these startling words."

"I also have my hour of exigency," said Morley, "and its minutes are now
numbering. Upon it all depends."

"Another time," said Sybil, in a low and deprecatory voice; "speak of
these things another time!"

"The caverns of my mind are open," said Morley, "and they will not
close."

"Stephen," said Sybil, "dear Stephen, I am grateful for your kind
feelings: but indeed this is not the time for such passages: cease, my
friend!"

"I came to know my fate," said Morley, doggedly.

"It is a sacrilege of sentiment," said Sybil, unable any longer to
restrain her emotion, "to obtrude its expression on a daughter at such a
moment."

"You would not deem it so if you loved, or if you could love me, Sybil,"
said Morley, mournfully. "Why it's a moment of deep feeling, and suited
for the expression of deep feeling. You would not have answered thus, if
he who had been kneeling here had been named Egremont."

"He would not have adopted a course," said Sybil, unable any longer to
restrain her displeasure, "so selfish, so indecent."

"Ah! she loves him!" exclaimed Morley, springing on his legs, and with a
demoniac laugh.

There was a pause. Under ordinary circumstances Sybil would have left
the room and terminated a distressing interview, but in the present
instance that was impossible; for on the continuance of that interview
any hope of assisting her father depended. Morley had thrown himself
into a chair opposite her, leaning back in silence with his face
covered; Sybil was disinclined to revive the conversation about her
father, because she had already perceived that Morley was only too much
aware of the command which the subject gave him over her feelings and
even conduct. Yet time, time now full of terror, time was stealing
on. It was evident that Morley would not break the silence. At length,
unable any longer to repress her tortured heart, Sybil said, "Stephen,
be generous; speak to me of your friend."

"I have no friend," said Morley, without taking his hands from his face.

"The Saints in heaven have mercy on me," said Sybil, "for I am very
wretched."

"No, no, no," said Morley, rising rapidly from his seat, and again
kneeling at her side, "not wretched; not that tone of anguish! What can
I do? what say? Sybil, dearest Sybil, I love you so much, so fervently,
so devotedly; none can love you as I do: say not you are wretched!"

"Alas! alas!" said Sybil.

"What shall I do? what say?" said Morley.

"You know what I would have you say," said Sybil. "Speak of one who
is my father, if no longer your friend: you know what I would have you
do--save him: save him from death and me from despair."

"I am ready," said Morley; "I came for that. Listen. There is a meeting
to-night at half-past eight o'clock; they meet to arrange a general
rising in the country: their intention is known to the government; they
will be arrested. Now it is in my power, which it was not when I saw
your father this morning, to convince him of the truth of this, and
were I to see him before eight o'clock, which I could easily do, I could
prevent his attendance, certainly prevent his attendance, and he
would be saved; for the government depend much upon the papers, some
proclamations, and things of that kind, which will be signed this
evening, for their proofs. Well, I am ready to save Gerard, my friend,
for so I'll call him as you wish it; one I have served before and long;
one whom I came up from Mowbray this day to serve and save; I am ready
to do that which you require; you yourself admit it is no light deed;
and coming from one you have known so long, and, as you confess, so
much regarded, should be doubly cherished; I am ready to do this great
service; to save the father from death and the daughter from despair.
--if she would but only say to me, 'I have but one reward, and it is
yours.'"

"I have read of something of this sort," said Sybil, speaking in a
murmuring tone, and looking round her with a wild expression, "this
bargaining of blood, and shall I call it love? But that was ever between
the oppressors and the oppressed. This is the first time that a child
of the people has been so assailed by one of her own class, and who
exercises his power from the confidence which the sympathy of their
sorrows alone caused. It is bitter; bitter for me and mine--but for you,
pollution."

"Am I answered?" said Morley.

"Yes," said Sybil, "in the name of the holy Virgin."

"Good night, then," said Morley, and he approached the door. His hand
was on it. The voice of Sybil made him turn his head.

"Where do they meet to-night?" she inquired, in a smothered tone.

"I am bound to secrecy," said Morley.

"There is no softness in your spirit," said Sybil.

"I am met with none."

"We have ever been your friends."

"A blossom that has brought no fruit."

"This hour will be remembered at the judgment-seat," said Sybil.

"The holy Virgin will perhaps interpose for me," said Morley, with a
sneer.

"We have merited this," said Sybil, "who have taken an infidel to our
hearts."

"If he had only been a heretic, like Egremont!" said Morley. Sybil burst
into tears. Morley sprang to her. "Swear by the holy Virgin, swear by
all the saints, swear by your hope of heaven and by your own sweet name;
without equivocation, without reserve, with fulness and with truth, that
you will never give your heart or hand to Egremont;--and I will save
your father."

As in a low voice, but with a terrible earnestness, Morley dictated
this oath, Sybil, already pale, became white as the marble saint of some
sacred niche. Her large dark eyes seemed fixed; a fleet expression of
agony flitted over her beautiful brow like a cloud; and she said, "I
swear that I will never give my hand to--"

"And your heart, your heart," said Morley eagerly. "Omit not that.
Swear by the holy oaths again you do not love him. She falters! Ah! she
blushes!" For a burning brightness now suffused the cheek of Sybil. "She
loves him," exclaimed Morley, wildly, and he rushed franticly from the
room.




Book 5 Chapter 5



Agitated and overcome by these unexpected and passionate appeals, and
these outrageous ebullitions acting on her at a time when she herself
was labouring under no ordinary excitement, and was distracted with
disturbing thoughts, the mind of Sybil seemed for a moment to desert
her; neither by sound nor gesture did she signify her sense of Morley's
last words and departure; and it was not until the loud closing of the
street door echoing through the long passage recalled her to herself,
that she was aware how much was at stake in that incident. She darted
out of the room to recall him; to make one more effort for her father;
but in vain. By the side of their house was an intricate passage leading
into a labyrinth of small streets. Through this Morley had disappeared;
and his name, more than once sounded in a voice of anguish in that
silent and most obsolete Smith's Square, received no echo.

Darkness and terror came over the spirit of Sybil; a sense of
confounding and confusing woe, with which it was in vain to cope. The
conviction of her helplessness prostrated her. She sate her down upon
the steps before the door of that dreary house, within the railings of
that gloomy court, and buried her face in her hands: a wild vision
of the past and the future, without thought or feeling, coherence
or consequence: sunset gleams of vanished bliss, and stormy gusts of
impending doom.

The clock of St John's struck seven.

It was the only thing that spoke in that still and dreary square; it was
the only voice that there seemed ever to sound; but it was a voice from
heaven; it was the voice of St John.

Sybil looked up: she looked up at the holy building. Sybil listened:
she listened to the holy sounds. St John told her that the danger of her
father was yet so much advanced. Oh! why are there saints in heaven if
they cannot aid the saintly! The oath that Morley would have enforced
came whispering in the ear of Sybil--"Swear by the holy Virgin and by
all the saints."

And shall she not pray to the holy Virgin and all the saints? Sybil
prayed: she prayed to the holy Virgin and all the saints; and especially
to the beloved St John: most favoured among Hebrew men, on whose breast
reposed the divine Friend.

Brightness and courage returned to the spirit of Sybil: a sense of
animating and exalting faith that could move mountains, and combat
without fear a thousand perils. The conviction of celestial aid inspired
her. She rose from her sad resting-place and re-entered the house: only,
however, to provide herself with her walking attire, and then alone and
without a guide, the shades of evening already descending, this child of
innocence and divine thoughts, born in a cottage and bred in a cloister,
she went forth, on a great enterprise of duty and devotion, into the
busiest and the wildest haunts of the greatest of modern cities.

Sybil knew well her way to Palace Yard. This point was soon reached: she
desired the cabman to drive her to a Street in the Strand in which was
a coffee-house, where during the last weeks of their stay in London the
scanty remnants of the National Convention had held their sittings. It
was by a mere accident that Sybil had learnt this circumstance, for when
she had attended the meetings of the Convention in order to hear her
father's speeches, it was in the prime of their gathering and when their
numbers were great, and when they met in audacious rivalry opposite
that St Stephen's which they wished to supersede. This accidental
recollection however was her only clue in the urgent adventure on which
she had embarked.

She cast an anxious glance at the clock of St Martin's as she passed
that church: the hand was approaching the half hour of seven. She urged
on the driver; they were in the Strand; there was an agitating stoppage;
she was about to descend when the obstacle was removed; and in a few
minutes they turned down the street which she sought.

"What number. Ma'am?" asked the cabman.

"'Tis a coffee-house; I know not the number nor the name of him who
keeps it. 'Tis a coffee-house. Can you see one? Look, look, I pray you!
I am much pressed."

"Here's a coffee-house, Ma'am," said the man in a hoarse voice.

372

"How good you are! Yes; I will get out. You will wait for me, I am
sure?"

"All right," said the cabman, as Sybil entered the illumined door. "Poor
young thing! she's wery anxious about summut."

Sybil at once stepped into a rather capacious room, fitted up in the
old-fashioned style of coffee-rooms, with mahogany boxes, in several of
which were men drinking coffee and reading newspapers by a painful glare
of gas. There was a waiter in the middle of the room who was throwing
some fresh sand upon the floor, but who stared immensely when looking up
he beheld Sybil.

"Now, Ma'am, if you please," said the waiter inquiringly.

"Is Mr Gerard here?" said Sybil.

"No. Ma'am; Mr Gerard has not been here to-day, nor yesterday
neither"--and he went on throwing the sand.

"I should like to see the master of the house," said Sybil very humbly.

"Should you, Ma'am?" said the waiter, but he gave no indication of
assisting her in the fulfilment of her wish.

Sybil repeated that wish, and this time the waiter said nothing. This
vulgar and insolent neglect to which she was so little accustomed
depressed her spirit. She could have encountered tyranny and oppression,
and she would have tried to struggle with them; but this insolence of
the insignificant made her feel her insignificance; and the absorption
all this time of the guests in their newspapers aggravated her nervous
sense of her utter helplessness. All her feminine reserve and modesty
came over her; alone in this room among men, she felt overpowered,
and she was about to make a precipitate retreat when the clock of the
coffee-room sounded the half hour. In a paroxysm of nervous excitement
she exclaimed, "Is there not one among you who will assist me?"

All the newspaper readers put down their journals and stared.

"Hoity-toity," said the waiter, and he left off throwing the sand.

"Well, what's the matter now?" said one of the guests.

"I wish to see the master of the house on business of urgency," said
Sybil, "to himself and to one of his friends, and his servant here will
not even reply to my inquiries."

"I say, Saul, why don't you answer the young lady?" said another guest.

"So I did," said Saul. "Did you call for coffee, Ma'am?"

"Here's Mr Tanner, if you want him, my dear." said the first guest, as
a lean black-looking individual, with grizzled hair and a red nose,
entered the coffee-room from the interior. "Tanner, here's a lady wants
you."

"And a very pretty girl too," whispered one to another.

"What's your pleasure?" said Mr Tanner abruptly.

"I wish to speak to you alone," said Sybil: and advancing towards him
she said in a low voice, "'Tis about Walter Gerard I would speak to
you."

"Well, you can step in here if you like," said Tanner very
discourteously; "there's only my wife:" and he led the way to the
inner room, a small close parlour adorned with portraits of Tom Paine,
Cobbett, Thistlewood, and General Jackson; with a fire, though it was
a hot July, and a very fat woman affording still more heat, and who
was drinking shrub and water and reading the police reports. She stared
rudely at Sybil as she entered following Tanner, who himself when the
door was closed said, "Well, now what have you got to say?"

"I wish to see Walter Gerard."

"Do you indeed!"

"And," continued Sybil notwithstanding his sneering remark, "I come here
that you may tell me where I may find him."

"I believe he lives somewhere in Westminster," said Tanner, "that's all
I know about him; and if this be all you had to say it might have been
said in the coffee-room."

"It is not all that I have to say," said Sybil; "and I beseech you, sir,
listen to me. I know where Gerard lives: I am his daughter, and the same
roof covers our heads. But I wish to know where they meet to-night--you
understand me;" and she looked at his wife, who had resumed her police
reports; "'tis urgent.

"I don't know nothing about Gerard," said Tanner, "except that he comes
here and goes away again."

"The matter on which I would see him," said Sybil, "is as urgent as the
imagination can conceive, and it concerns you as well as himself; but
if you know not where I can find him"--and she moved as if about to
retire--"'tis of no use."

"Stop." said Tanner, "you can tell it to me."

"Why so? You know not where he is; you cannot tell it to him."

"I don't know that," said Tanner. "Come, let's have it out; and if it
will do him any good. I'll see if we can't manage to find him."

"I can impart my news to him and no one else," said Sybil. "I am
solemnly bound."

"You can't have a better counseller than Tanner," urged his wife,
getting curious; "you had better tell us."

"I want no counsel; I want that which you can give me if you
choose--information. My father instructed me that if certain
circumstances occurred it was a matter of the last urgency that I should
see him this evening and before nine o'clock, I was to call here and
obtain from you the direction where to find him; the direction," she
added in a lowered tone, and looking Tanner full in the face, "where
they hold their secret council to-night."

"Hem!" said Tanner: "I see you're on the free-list. And pray how am I
to know you _are_ Gerard's daughter?"

"You do not doubt I am his daughter!" said Sybil proudly.

"Hem!" said Tanner: "I do not know that I do very much," and he
whispered to his wife. Sybil removed from them as far as she was able.

"And this news is very urgent," resumed Tanner; "and concerns me you
say?"

"Concerns you all," said Sybil; "and every minute is of the last
importance."

"I should like to have gone with you myself, and then there could have
been no mistake," said Tanner; "but that can't be; we have a meeting
here at half-past eight in our great room. I don't much like breaking
rules, especially in such a business; and yet, concerning all of us,
as you say, and so very urgent, I don't see how it could do harm; and I
might--I wish I was quite sure you were the party.

"How can I satisfy you?" said Sybil, distressed.

"Perhaps the young person have got her mark on her linen," suggested
the wife. "Have you got a handkerchief Ma'am?" and she took Sybil's
handkerchief and looked at it, and examined it at every corner. It had
no mark. And this unforeseen circumstance of great suspicion might have
destroyed everything, had not the production of the handkerchief by
Sybil also brought forth a letter addressed to her from Hatton.

"It seems to be the party," said the wife.

"Well," said Tanner, "you know St Martin's Lane I suppose? Well, you go
up St Martin's Lane to a certain point, and then you will get into Seven
Dials; and then you'll go on. However it is impossible to direct you;
you must find your way. Hunt Street, going out of Silver Street, No. 22.
'Tis what you call a blind street, with no thoroughfare, and then you go
down an alley. Can you recollect that?"

"Fear not."

"No. 22 Hunt Street, going out of Silver Street. Remember the alley.
It's an ugly neighbourhood; but you go of your own accord."

"Yes, yes. Good night."




Book 5 Chapter 6



Urged by Sybil's entreaties the cab-driver hurried on. With all the
skilled experience of a thorough cockney charioteer he tried to conquer
time and space by his rare knowledge of short cuts and fine acquaintance
with unknown thoroughfares. He seemed to avoid every street which
was the customary passage of mankind. The houses, the population, the
costume, the manners, the language through which they whirled their way,
were of a different state and nation to those with which the dwellers
in the dainty quarters of this city are acquainted. Now dark streets of
frippery and old stores, new market-places of entrails and carrion with
gutters running gore, sometimes the way was enveloped in the yeasty
fumes of a colossal brewery, and sometimes they plunged into a
labyrinth of lanes teeming with life, and where the dog-stealer and the
pick-pocket, the burglar and the assassin, found a sympathetic multitude
of all ages; comrades for every enterprise; and a market for every
booty.

The long summer twilight was just expiring, the pale shadows of the moon
were just stealing on; the gas was beginning to glare in the shops of
tripe and bacon, and the paper lanthorns to adorn the stall and the
stand. They crossed a broad street which seemed the metropolis of the
district; it flamed with gin-palaces; a multitude were sauntering in the
mild though tainted air; bargaining, blaspheming, drinking, wrangling:
and varying their business and their potations, their fierce strife and
their impious irreverence, with flashes of rich humour, gleams of native
wit, and racy phrases of idiomatic slang.

Absorbed in her great mission Sybil was almost insensible to the scenes
through which she passed, and her innocence was thus spared many a sight
and sound that might have startled her vision or alarmed her ear. They
could not now he very distant from the spot; they were crossing this
broad way, and then were about to enter another series of small obscure
dingy streets, when the cab-driver giving a flank to his steed to
stimulate it to a last effort, the horse sprang forward, and the wheel
of the cab came off.

Sybil extricated herself from the vehicle unhurt; a group immediately
formed round the cab, a knot of young thieves, almost young enough for
infant schools, a dustman, a woman nearly naked and very drunk, and two
unshorn ruffians with brutality stamped on every feature, with pipes in
their mouths, and their hands in their pockets.

"I can take you no further," said the cabman: "my fare is three
shillings."

"What am I to do?" said Sybil, taking out her purse.

"The best thing the young lady can do," said the dustman, in a hoarse
voice, "is to stand something to us all."

"That's your time o'day," squeaked a young thief.

"I'll drink your health with very great pleasure my dear," hiccupped the
woman.

"How much have you got there?" said the young thief making a dash at the
purse, but he was not quite tall enough, and failed.

"No wiolence," said one of the ruffians taking his pipe out of his mouth
and sending a volume of smoke into Sybil's face, "we'll take the young
lady to Mother Poppy's, and then we'll make a night of it."

But at this moment appeared a policeman, one of the permanent garrison
of the quarter, who seeing one of her Majesty's carriages in trouble
thought he must interfere. "Hilloa," he said, "what's all this?" And the
cabman, who was a good fellow though in too much trouble to aid Sybil,
explained in the terse and picturesque language of Cockaigne, doing full
justice to his late fare, the whole circumstances.

"Oh! that's it," said the policeman, "the lady's respectable is
she? Then I'd advise you and Hell Fire Dick to stir your chalks,
Splinter-legs. Keep moving's the time of day, Madam; you get on. Come;"
and taking the woman by her shoulder he gave her a spin that sent her
many a good yard. "And what do you want?" he asked gruffly of the lads.

"We wants a ticket for the Mendicity Society," said the captain of the
infant hand putting his thumb to his nose and running away, followed by
his troop.

"And so you want to go to Silver Street?" said her official preserver to
Sybil, for she had not thought it wise to confess her ultimate purpose,
and indicate under the apprehended circumstances the place of rendezvous
to a member of the police.

"Well; that's not very difficult now. Go a-head; take the second turning
to your right, and the third to your left, and you're landed."

Aided by these instructions, Sybil hastened on, avoiding notice as much
as was in her power, and assisted in some degree by the advancing gloom
of night. She had reached Silver Street; a long, narrow, hilly Street;
and now she was at fault. There were not many persons about, and there
were few shops here; yet one was at last at hand, and she entered
to enquire her way. The person at the counter was engaged, and many
customers awaited him: time was very precious: Sybil had made the
enquiry and received only a supercilious stare from the shopman, who was
weighing with precision some article that he was serving. A young man,
shabby, but of a very superior appearance to the people of this quarter,
good-looking, though with a dissolute air, and who seemed waiting for a
customer in attendance, addressed Sybil. "I am going to Hunt Street," he
said, "shall I show you the way?"

She accepted this offer most thankfully. "It is close at hand, I
believe?"

"Here it is," he said; and he turned down a street. "What is your
house?"

"No. 22: a printing-office." said Sybil; for the street she had entered
was so dark she despaired of finding her way, and ventured to trust so
far a guide who was not a policeman.

"The very house I am going to," said the stranger: "I am a printer." And
they walked on some way, until they at length stopped before a glass
and illumined door, covered with a red curtain. Before it was a group
of several men and women brawling, but who did not notice Sybil and her
companion.

"Here we are," said the man; and he pushed the door open, inviting Sybil
to enter. She hesitated; it did not agree with the description that
had been given her by the coffee-house keeper, but she had seen so much
since, and felt so much, and gone through so much, that she had not at
the moment that clear command of her memory for which she was otherwise
remarkable; but while she faltered, an inner door was violently thrown
open, and Sybil moving aside, two girls, still beautiful in spite of gin
and paint, stepped into the Street.

"This cannot be the house," exclaimed Sybil starting back, overwhelmed
with shame and terror. "O! holy Virgin aid me!"

"And that's a blessed word to hear in this heathen land," exclaimed an
Irishman, who was one of the group on the outside.

"If you be of our holy church," said Sybil appealing to the man who
had thus spoken and whom she gently drew aside, "I beseech you, by
everything we hold sacred, to aid me."

"And will I not?" said the man; "and I should like to see the arm that
would hurt you;" and he looked round, but the young man had disappeared.
"You are not a countrywoman I am thinking," he added.

"No, but a sister in Christ," said Sybil; "listen to me, good friend.
I hasten to my father,--he is in great danger,--in Hunt Street,--I
know not my way,--every moment is precious,--guide me, I beseech
you,--honestly and truly guide me!"

"Will I not? Don't you be afraid my dear. And her poor father is ill! I
wish I had such a daughter! We have not far to go. You should have taken
the next turning. We must walk up this again for 'tis a small street
with no thoroughfare. Come on without fear."

Nor did Sybil fear; for the description of the street which the honest
man had incidentally given, tallied with her instructions. Encouraging
her with many kind words, and full of rough courtesies, the good
Irishman led her to the spot she had so long sought. There was the court
she was told to enter. It was well lit, and descending the steps she
stopped at the first door on her left, and knocked.




Book 5 Chapter 7



On the same night that Sybil was encountering so many dangers, the
saloons of Deloraine House blazed with a thousand lights to welcome
the world of power and fashion to a festival of almost unprecedented
magnificence. Fronting a royal park, its long lines of illumined windows
and the bursts of gay and fantastic music that floated from its walls
attracted the admiration and curiosity of another party that was
assembled in the same fashionable quarter, beneath a canopy not less
bright and reclining on a couch scarcely less luxurious, for they were
lit by the stars and reposed upon the grass.

"I say, Jim," said a young genius of fourteen stretching himself upon
the turf, "I pity them ere jarvies a sitting on their boxes all the
night and waiting for the nobs what is dancing. They as no repose."

"But they as porter," replied his friend, a sedater spirit with the
advantage of an additional year or two of experience. "They takes their
pot of half-and-half by turns, and if their name is called, the link
what they subscribe for to pay, sings out 'here;' and that's the way
their guvners is done."

"I think I should like to be a link Jim," said the young one.

"I wish you may get it," was the response: "it's the next best thing to
a crossing: it's what every one looks to when he enters public life, but
he soon finds 'taint to be done without a deal of interest. They keeps
it to themselves, and never lets any one in unless he makes himself very
troublesome and gets up a party agin 'em."

"I wonder what the nobs has for supper," said the young one pensively.
"Lots of kidneys I dare say."

"Oh! no; sweets is the time of day in these here blowouts: syllabubs
like blazes, and snapdragon as makes the flunkys quite pale."

"I would thank you, sir, not to tread upon this child," said a widow.
