sinews; and it fell prone on both its horns. Their comrades quickly
severed the victims' throats, and flayed the hides: they sundered the
joints and carved the flesh, then cut out the sacred thigh bones, and
covering them all together closely with fat burnt them upon cloven wood.
And Aeson's son poured out pure libations, and Idmon rejoiced beholding
the flame as it gleamed on every side from the sacrifice, and the smoke
of it mounting up with good omen in dark spiral columns; and quickly he
spake outright the will of Leto's son:

"For you it is the will of heaven and destiny that ye shall return here
with the fleece; but meanwhile both going and returning, countless
trials await you. But it is my lot, by the hateful decree of a god, to
die somewhere afar off on the mainland of Asia. Thus, though I learnt my
fate from evil omens even before now, I have left my fatherland to
embark on the ship, that so after my embarking fair fame may be left me
in my house."

Thus he spake; and the youths hearing the divine utterance rejoiced at
their return, but grief seized them for the fate of Idmon. Now at the
hour when the sun passes his noon-tide halt and the ploughlands are just
being shadowed by the rocks, as the sun slopes towards the evening dusk,
at that hour all the heroes spread leaves thickly upon the sand and lay
down in rows in front of the hoary surf-line; and near them were spread
vast stores of viands and sweet wine, which the cupbearers had drawn off
in pitchers; afterwards they told tales one to another in turn, such as
youths often tell when at the feast and the bowl they take delightful
pastime, and insatiable insolence is far away. But here the son of
Aeson, all helpless, was brooding over each event in his mind, like one
oppressed with thought. And Idas noted him and assailed him with loud
voice:

"Son of Aeson, what is this plan thou art turning over in mind. Speak
out thy thought in the midst. Does fear come on and master thee, fear,
that confounds cowards? Be witness now my impetuous spear, wherewith in
wars I win renown beyond all others (nor does Zeus aid me so much as my
own spear), that no woe will be fatal, no venture will be unachieved,
while Idas follows, even though a god should oppose thee. Such a
helpmeet am I that thou bringest from Arene."

He spake, and holding a brimming goblet in both hands drank off the
unmixed sweet wine; and his lips and dark cheeks were drenched with it;
and all the heroes clamoured together and Idmon spoke out openly:

"Vain wretch, thou art devising destruction for thyself before the time.
Does the pure wine cause thy bold heart to swell in thy breast to thy
ruin, and has it set thee on to dishonour the gods? Other words of
comfort there are with which a man might encourage his comrade; but thou
hast spoken with utter recklessness. Such taunts, the tale goes, did the
sons of Aloeus once blurt out against the blessed gods, and thou dost no
wise equal them in valour; nevertheless they were both slain by the
swift arrows of Leto's son, mighty though they were."

Thus he spake, and Aphareian Idas laughed out, loud and long, and eyeing
him askance replied with biting words:

"Come now, tell me this by thy prophetic art, whether for me too the
gods will bring to pass such doom as thy father promised for the sons of
Aloeus. And bethink thee how thou wilt escape from my hands alive, if
thou art caught making a prophecy vain as the idle wind."

Thus in wrath Idas reviled him, and the strife would have gone further
had not their comrades and Aeson's son himself with indignant cry
restrained the contending chiefs; and Orpheus lifted his lyre in his
left hand and made essay to sing.

He sang how the earth, the heaven and the sea, once mingled together in
one form, after deadly strife were separated each from other; and how
the stars and the moon and the paths of the sun ever keep their fixed
place in the sky; and how the mountains rose, and how the resounding
rivers with their nymphs came into being and all creeping things. And he
sang how first of all Ophion and Eurynome, daughter of Ocean, held the
sway of snowy Olympus, and how through strength of arm one yielded his
prerogative to Cronos and the other to Rhea, and how they fell into the
waves of Ocean; but the other two meanwhile ruled over the blessed
Titan-gods, while Zeus, still a child and with the thoughts of a child,
dwelt in the Dictaean cave; and the earthborn Cyclopes had not yet armed
him with the bolt, with thunder and lightning; for these things give
renown to Zeus.

He ended, and stayed his lyre and divine voice. But though he had ceased
they still bent forward with eagerness all hushed to quiet, with ears
intent on the enchanting strain; such a charm of song had he left behind
in their hearts. Not long after they mixed libations in honour of Zeus,
with pious rites as is customary, and poured them upon the burning
tongues, and bethought them of sleep in the darkness.

Now when gleaming dawn with bright eyes beheld the lofty peaks of
Pelion, and the calm headlands were being drenched as the sea was
ruffled by the winds, then Tiphys awoke from sleep; and at once he
roused his comrades to go on board and make ready the oars. And a
strange cry did the harbour of Pagasae utter, yea and Pelian Argo
herself, urging them to set forth. For in her a beam divine had been
laid which Athena had brought from an oak of Dodona and fitted in the
middle of the stem. And the heroes went to the benches one after the
other, as they had previously assigned for each to row in his place, and
took their seats in due order near their fighting gear. In the middle
sat Ancaeus and mighty Heracles, and near him he laid his club, and
beneath his tread the ship's keel sank deep. And now the hawsers were
being slipped and they poured wine on the sea. But Jason with tears held
his eyes away from his fatherland. And just as youths set up a dance in
honour of Phoebus either in Pytho or haply in Ortygia, or by the waters
of Ismenus, and to the sound of the lyre round his altar all together in
time beat the earth with swiftly-moving feet; so they to the sound of
Orpheus' lyre smote with their oars the rushing sea-water, and the surge
broke over the blades; and on this side and on that the dark brine
seethed with foam, boiling terribly through the might of the sturdy
heroes. And their arms shone in the sun like flame as the ship sped on;
and ever their wake gleamed white far behind, like a path seen over a
green plain. On that day all the gods looked down from heaven upon the
ship and the might of the heroes, half-divine, the bravest of men then
sailing the sea; and on the topmost heights the nymphs of Pelion
wondered as they beheld the work of Itonian Athena, and the heroes
themselves wielding the oars. And there came down from the mountain-top
to the sea Chiron, son of Philyra, and where the white surf broke he
dipped his feet, and, often waving with his broad hand, cried out to
them at their departure, "Good speed and a sorrowless home-return!" And
with him his wife, bearing Peleus' son Achilles on her arm, showed the
child to his dear father.

Now when they had left the curving shore of the harbour through the
cunning and counsel of prudent Tiphys son of Hagnias, who skilfully
handled the well-polished helm that he might guide them steadfastly,
then at length they set up the tall mast in the mast-box, and secured it
with forestays, drawing them taut on each side, and from it they let
down the sail when they had hauled it to the top-mast. And a breeze came
down piping shrilly; and upon the deck they fastened the ropes
separately round the well-polished pins, and ran quietly past the long
Tisaean headland. And for them the son of Oeagrus touched his lyre and
sang in rhythmical song of Artemis, saviour of ships, child of a
glorious sire, who hath in her keeping those peaks by the sea, and the
land of Iolcos; and the fishes came darting through the deep sea, great
mixed with small, and followed gambolling along the watery paths. And as
when in the track of the shepherd, their master, countless sheep follow
to the fold that have fed to the full of grass, and he goes before gaily
piping a shepherd's strain on his shrill reed; so these fishes followed;
and a chasing breeze ever bore the ship onward.

And straightway the misty land of the Pelasgians, rich in cornfields,
sank out of sight, and ever speeding onward they passed the rugged sides
of Pelion; and the Sepian headland sank away, and Sciathus appeared in
the sea, and far off appeared Piresiae and the calm shore of Magnesia on
the mainland and the tomb of Dolops; here then in the evening, as the
wind blew against them, they put to land, and paying honour to him at
nightfall burnt sheep as victims, while the sea was tossed by the swell:
and for two days they lingered on the shore, but on the third day they
put forth the ship, spreading on high the broad sail. And even now men
call that beach Aphetae[1] of Argo.

[Footnote 1: i.e. The Starting.]

Thence going forward they ran past Meliboea, escaping a stormy beach and
surf-line. And in the morning they saw Homole close at hand leaning on
the sea, and skirted it, and not long after they were about to pass by
the outfall of the river Amyrus. From there they beheld Eurymenae and
the sea-washed ravines of Ossa and Olympus; next they reached the slopes
of Pallene, beyond the headland of Canastra, running all night with the
wind. And at dawn before them as they journeyed rose Athos, the Thracian
mountain, which with its topmost peak overshadows Lemnos, even as far as
Myrine, though it lies as far off as the space that a well-trimmed
merchantship would traverse up to mid-day. For them on that day, till
darkness fell, the breeze blew exceedingly fresh, and the sails of the
ship strained to it. But with the setting of the sun the wind left them,
and it was by the oars that they reached Lemnos, the Sintian isle.

Here the whole of the men of the people together had been ruthlessly
slain through the transgressions of the women in the year gone by. For
the men had rejected their lawful wives, loathing them, and had
conceived a fierce passion for captive maids whom they themselves
brought across the sea from their forays in Thrace; for the terrible
wrath of Cypris came upon them, because for a long time they had grudged
her the honours due. O hapless women, and insatiate in jealousy to their
own ruin! Not their husbands alone with the captives did they slay on
account of the marriage-bed, but all the males at the same time, that
they might thereafter pay no retribution for the grim murder. And of all
the women, Hypsipyle alone spared her aged father Thoas, who was king
over the people; and she sent him in a hollow chest to drift over the
sea, if haply he should escape. And fishermen dragged him to shore at
the island of Oenoe, formerly Oenoe, but afterwards called Sicinus from
Sicinus, whom the water-nymph Oenoe bore to Thoas. Now for all the women
to tend kine, to don armour of bronze, and to cleave with the
plough-share the wheat-bearing fields, was easier than the works of
Athena, with which they were busied aforetime. Yet for all that did they
often gaze over the broad sea, in grievous fear against the Thracians'
coming. So when they saw Argo being rowed near the island, straightway
crowding in multitude from the gates of Myrine and clad in their harness
of war, they poured forth to the beach like ravening Thyiades; for they
deemed that the Thracians were come; and with them Hypsipyle, daughter
of Thoas, donned her father's harness. And they streamed down speechless
with dismay; such fear was wafted about them.

Meantime from the ship the chiefs had sent Aethalides the swift herald,
to whose care they entrusted their messages and the wand of Hermes, his
sire, who had granted him a memory of all things, that never grew dim;
and not even now, though he has entered the unspeakable whirlpools of
Acheron, has forgetfulness swept over his soul, but its fixed doom is to
be ever changing its abode; at one time to be numbered among the
dwellers beneath the earth, at another to be in the light of the sun
among living men. But why need I tell at length tales of Aethalides? He
at that time persuaded Hypsipyle to receive the new-comers as the day
was waning into darkness; nor yet at dawn did they loose the ship's
hawsers to the breath of the north wind.

Now the Lemnian women fared through the city and sat down to the
assembly, for Hypsipyle herself had so bidden. And when they were all
gathered together in one great throng straightway she spake among them
with stirring words:

"O friends, come let us grant these men gifts to their hearts' desire,
such as it is fitting that they should take on ship-board, food and
sweet wine, in order that they may steadfastly remain outside our
towers, and may not, passing among us for need's sake, get to know us
all too well, and so an evil report be widely spread; for we have
wrought a terrible deed and in nowise will it be to their liking, should
they learn it. Such is our counsel now, but if any of you can devise a
better plan let her rise, for it was on this account that I summoned you
hither."

Thus she spake and sat upon her father's seat of stone, and then rose up
her dear nurse Polyxo, for very age halting upon her withered feet,
bowed over a staff, and she was eager to address them. Near her were
seated four virgins, unwedded, crowned with white hair. And she stood in
the midst of the assembly and from her bent back she feebly raised her
neck and spake thus:

"Gifts, as Hypsipyle herself wishes, let us send to the strangers, for
it is better to give them. But for you what device have ye to get profit
of your life if the Thracian host fall upon us, or some other foe, as
often happens among men, even as now this company is come unforeseen?
But if one of the blessed gods should turn this aside yet countless
other woes worse than battle, remain behind, when the aged women die off
and ye younger ones, without children, reach hateful old age. How then
will ye live, hapless ones? Will your oxen of their own accord yoke
themselves for the deep ploughlands and draw the earth-cleaving share
through the fallow, and forthwith, as the year comes round, reap the
harvest? Assuredly, though the fates till now have shunned me in horror,
I deem that in the coming year I shall put on the garment of earth, when
I have received my meed of burial even so as is right, before the evil
days draw near. But I bid you who are younger give good heed to this.
For now at your feet a way of escape lies open, if ye trust to the
strangers the care of your homes and all your stock and your glorious
city."

Thus she spake, and the assembly was filled with clamour. For the word
pleased them. And after her straightway Hypsipyle rose up again, and
thus spake in reply.

"If this purpose please you all, now will I even send a messenger to the
ship."

She spake and addressed Iphinoe close at hand: "Go, Iphinoe, and beg
yonder man, whoever it is that leads this array, to come to our land
that I may tell him a word that pleases the heart of my people, and bid
the men themselves, if they wish, boldly enter the land and the city
with friendly intent."

She spake, and dismissed the assembly, and thereafter started to return
home. And so Iphinoe came to the Minyae; and they asked with what intent
she had come among them. And quickly she addressed her questioners with
all speed in these words:

"The maiden Hypsipyle daughter of Thoas, sent me on my way here to you,
to summon the captain of your ship, whoever he be, that she may tell him
a word that pleases the heart of the people, and she bids yourselves, if
ye wish it, straightway enter the land and the city with friendly
intent."

Thus she spake and the speech of good omen pleased all. And they deemed
that Thoas was dead and that his beloved daughter Hypsipyle was queen,
and quickly they sent Jason on his way and themselves made ready to go.

Now he had buckled round his shoulders a purple mantle of double fold,
the work of the Tritonian goddess, which Pallas had given him when she
first laid the keel-props of the ship Argo and taught him how to measure
timbers with the rule. More easily wouldst thou cast thy eyes upon the
sun at its rising than behold that blazing splendour. For indeed in the
middle the fashion thereof was red, but at the ends it was all purple,
and on each margin many separate devices had been skilfully inwoven.

In it were the Cyclops seated at their imperishable work, forging a
thunderbolt for King Zeus; by now it was almost finished in its
brightness and still it wanted but one ray, which they were beating out
with their iron hammers as it spurted forth a breath of raging flame.

In it too were the twin sons of Antiope, daughter of Asopus, Amphion and
Zethus, and Thebe still ungirt with towers was lying near, whose
foundations they were just then laying in eager haste. Zethus on his
shoulders was lifting the peak of a steep mountain, like a man toiling
hard, and Amphion after him, singing loud and clear on his golden lyre,
moved on, and a rock twice as large followed his footsteps.

Next in order had been wrought Cytherea with drooping tresses, wielding
the swift shield of Ares; and from her shoulder to her left arm the
fastening of her tunic was loosed beneath her breast; and opposite in
the shield of bronze her image appeared clear to view as she stood.

And in it there was a well-wooded pasturage of oxen; and about the oxen
the Teleboae and the sons of Electryon were fighting; the one party
defending themselves, the others, the Taphian raiders, longing to rob
them; and the dewy meadow was drenched with their blood, and the many
were overmastering the few herdsmen.

And therein were fashioned two chariots, racing, and the one in front
Pelops was guiding, as he shook the reins, and with him was Hippodameia
at his side, and in pursuit Myrtilus urged his steeds, and with him
Oenomaus had grasped his couched spear, but fell as the axle swerved and
broke in the nave, while he was eager to pierce the back of Pelops.

And in it was wrought Phoebus Apollo, a stripling not yet grown up, in
the act of shooting at mighty Tityos who was boldly dragging his mother
by her veil, Tityos whom glorious Elare bare, but Earth nursed him and
gave him second birth.

And in it was Phrixus the Minyan as though he were in very deed
listening to the ram, while it was like one speaking. Beholding them
thou wouldst be silent and wouldst cheat thy soul with the hope of
hearing some wise speech from them, and long wouldst thou gaze with that
hope.

Such then were the gifts of the Tritonian goddess Athena. And in his
right hand Jason held a far-darting spear, which Atalanta gave him once
as a gift of hospitality in Maenalus as she met him gladly; for she
eagerly desired to follow on that quest; but he himself of his own
accord prevented the maid, for he feared bitter strife on account of her
love.

And he went on his way to the city like to a bright star, which maidens,
pent up in new-built chambers, behold as it rises above their homes, and
through the dark air it charms their eyes with its fair red gleam and
the maid rejoices, love-sick for the youth who is far away amid
strangers, for whom her parents are keeping her to be his bride; like to
that star the hero trod the way to the city. And when they had passed
within the gates and the city, the women of the people surged behind
them, delighting in the stranger, but he with his eyes fixed on the
ground fared straight on, till he reached the glorious palace of
Hypsipyle; and when he appeared the maids opened the folding doors,
fitted with well-fashioned panels. Here Iphinoe leading him quickly
through a fair porch set him upon a shining seat opposite her mistress,
but Hypsipyle turned her eyes aside and a blush covered her maiden
cheeks, yet for all her modesty she addressed him with crafty words:

"Stranger, why stay ye so long outside our towers? for the city is not
inhabited by the men, but they, as sojourners, plough the wheat-bearing
fields of the Thracian mainland. And I will tell out truly all our evil
plight, that ye yourselves too may know it well. When my father Thoas
reigned over the citizens, then our folk starting from their homes used
to plunder from their ships the dwellings of the Thracians who live
opposite, and they brought back hither measureless booty and maidens
too. But the counsel of the baneful goddess Cypris was working out its
accomplishment, who brought upon them soul destroying infatuation. For
they hated their lawful wives, and, yielding to their own mad folly,
drove them from their homes; and they took to their beds the captives of
their spear, cruel ones. Long in truth we endured it, if haply again,
though late, they might change their purpose, but ever the bitter woe
grew, twofold. And the lawful children were being dishonoured in their
halls, and a bastard race was rising. And thus unmarried maidens and
widowed mothers too wandered uncared for through the city; no father
heeded his daughter ever so little even though he should see her done to
death before his eyes at the hands of an insolent step-dame, nor did
sons, as before, defend their mother against unseemly outrage; nor did
brothers care at heart for their sister. But in their homes, in the
dance, in the assembly and the banquet all their thought was only for
their captive maidens; until some god put desperate courage in our
hearts no more to receive our lords on their return from Thrace within
our towers so that they might either heed the right or might depart and
begone elsewhither, they and their captives. So they begged of us all
the male children that were left in the city and went back to where even
now they dwell on the snowy tilths of Thrace. Do ye therefore stay and
settle with us; and shouldst them desire to dwell here, and this finds
favour with thee, assuredly thou shalt have the prerogative of my father
Thoas; and I deem that thou wilt not scorn our land at all; for it is
deep-soiled beyond all other islands that lie in the Aegaean sea. But
come now, return to the ship and relate my words to thy comrades, and
stay not outside our city."

She spoke, glozing over the murder that had been wrought upon the men;
and Jason addressed her in answer:

"Hypsipyle, very dear to our hearts is the help we shall meet with,
which thou grantest to us who need thee. And I will return again to the
city when I have told everything in order due. But let the sovereignty
of the island be thine; it is not in scorn I yield it up, but grievous
trials urge me on."

He spake, and touched her right hand; and quickly he turned to go back:
