produced a puny progeny that degenerates from generation to generation.
Nay, I have been told, that there is another motive perhaps more
powerful than all these, that induces people to cultivate this
inclination; namely, the exquisite pleasure attending its success."

From this discourse I began to be apprehensive that his lordship,
finding I had travelled, was afraid I might have been infected with this
spurious and sordid desire abroad, and took this method of sounding my
sentiments on the subject. Fired at this supposed suspicion, I argued
against it with great warmth, as an appetite unnatural, absurd, and of
pernicious consequence; and declared my utter detestation and abhorrence
of it in these lines of the satirist:--


Eternal infamy the wretch confound Who planted first that vice on
British ground! A vice! That spite of nature and sense reigns, And
poisons genial love, and manhood stains.

The earl smiled at my indignation, and told me he was glad to find my
opinion of the matter so conformable to his own, and that what he had
advanced was only to provoke me to an answer, with which he professed
himself perfectly well pleased. After I had enjoyed a long audience, I
happened to look at my watch, in order to regulate my motions by it; and
his lordship, observing the chased case, desired to see the device,
and examine the exception, which he approved with some expressions of
admiration. Considering the obligations I lay under to his lordship,
I thought there could not be a fitter opportunity than the present to
manifest, in some shape, my gratitude; I therefore begged he would do
me the honour to accept of the watch as a small testimony of the sense
I had of his lordship's generosity; but, he refused it in a peremptory
manner, and said he was sorry I should entertain such a mercenary
opinion of him; observing at the same time, that it was the most
beautiful piece of workmanship he had ever seen, and desiring to know
where he could have such another. I begged a thousand pardons for the
freedom I had taken, which I hoped he would impute to nothing else than
the highest veneration for his person--told him, that, as it came to my
hand by accident in France, I could give him no information about
the maker, for there was no name on the inside; and once more humbly
entreated that he would indulge me so far as to use it for my sake. He
was still positive in refusing it; but was pleased to thank me for
my generous offer, saying, it was a present that no nobleman need
be ashamed of receiving: though he was resolved to show his
disinterestedness with regard to me, for whom he had conceived a
particular friendship; and insisted (if I were willing to part with the
watch) upon knowing what it had cost, that he might at least indemnify
me, by refunding the money. On the other hand, I assured his lordship
that I should look upon it as an uncommon mark of distinction, if he
would take it without further question; and, rather than disoblige
me, he was at last persuaded to put it in his pocket, to my no small
satisfaction, who took my leave immediately, after having received a
kind squeeze, and an injunction to depend upon his promise.

Buoyed up with this reception, my heart opened; I gave away a guinea,
among the lacqueys, who escorted me to the door, flew to the lodgings of
Lord Straddle, upon whom I forced my diamond ring as an acknowledgment
for the great service he had done me, and from thence hied me home,
with an intent of sharing my happiness with honest Strap. I determined,
however, to heighten his pleasure, by depressing his spirits at first,
and then bringing in good news with double relish. For this purpose, I
affected the appearance of disappointment and chagrin, and told him in
an abrupt manner that I had lost the watch and diamond. Poor Hugh, who
had been already harassed into a consumption by intelligence of this
sort, no sooner heard these words, than, unable to contain himself, he
cried, with distraction in his looks, "God in heaven forbid!" I could
carry on the farce no longer; but, laughing in his face, told him
everything that had passed, as above recited. His features were
immediately unbended, and the transition was so affecting, that he
wept with joy, calling my Lord Strutwell by the appellations of Jewel,
Phoenix, Rara avis; and praising God, that there was still some virtue
left among our nobility. Our mutual congratulations being over, we gave
way to our imagination, and anticipated our happiness by prosecuting our
success through the different steps of promotion, till I arrived at the
rank of a prime minister, and he to that of my first secretary.

Intoxicated with these ideas, I went to the ordinary, where, meeting
with Banter, I communicated the whole affair in confidence to him,
concluding with an assurance that I would do him all the service in my
power. He heard me to an end with great patience, then regarding me
a good while with a look of disdain, pronounced, "So your business is
done, you think?" "As good as done. I believe," said I. "I'll tell you,"
replied he, "what will do it still more effectually--a halter! 'Sdeath!
if I had been such a gull to two such scoundrels as Strutwell and
Straddle, I would, without any more ado, tuck myself up." Shocked at
this exclamation, I desired him with some confusion to explain
himself; upon which he gave me to understand that Straddle was a
poor contemptible wretch, who lived by borrowing and pimping for
his fellow-peers; that in consequence of this last capacity, he had
doubtless introduced me to Strutwell, who was so notorious for a passion
for his own sex that he was amazed his character had never reached my
ears; and that, far from being able to obtain for me the post he had
promised, his interest at court was so low, that he could scarce provide
for a superannuated footman once a year in the customs or excise; that
it was a common thing for him to amuse strangers, whom his jackals ran
down, with such assurances and caresses as he had bestowed on me, until
he had stripped them of their cash, and everything valuable about them,
very often of their chastity, and then leave them a prey to want and
infamy: that he allowed his servants no other wages than that part of
the spoil which they could glean by their industry; and the whole of
his conduct towards me was so glaring, that nobody who knew anything of
mankind could have been imposed upon by his insinuations.

I leave the reader to judge how I relished this piece of information,
which precipitated me from the most exalted pinnacle of hope to the
lowest abyss of despondence, and well nigh determined me to take
Banter's advice and finish my chagrin with a halter. I had no room to
suspect the veracity of my friend, because, upon recollection, I found
every circumstance of Strutwell's behaviour exactly tallying with the
character he had described; his hugs, embraces, squeezes, and eager
looks, were now no longer a mystery; no more than his defence of
Petronius, and the jealous frown of his valet-de-chambre, who, it seems,
had been the favourite pathic of his lord.






CHAPTER LII

I attempt to recover my Watch and Jewel, but to no Purpose--resolve to
revenge myself on Strutwell by my Importunity--am reduced to my
last Guinea--obliged to inform Strap of my Necessity, who is almost
distracted with the News, but nevertheless obliged to pawn my best Sword
for present Subsistence--that small Supply being exhausted, I am almost
stupified with my Misfortunes--go to the Gaming Table by the Advice
of Banter, and come off with unexpected Success--Strap's Ecstacy--Mrs.
Gawky waits upon me, professes Remorse for her Perfidy, and implores my
Assistance--I do myself a Piece of Justice by her Means, and afterwards
reconcile her to her Father

I was so confounded that I could make no reply to Banter, who reproached
me with great indignation for having thrown away upon rascals that
which, had it been converted into ready money, would have supported the
rank of a gentleman for some months, and enabled me, at the same time,
to oblige my friends. Stupified as I was, I could easily divine the
source of his concern, but sneaked away in a solitary manner, without
yielding the least answer to his expostulations; and began to deliberate
within myself in what manner I should attempt to retrieve the movables I
had so foolishly lost. I should have thought it no robbery to take
them again by force, could I have done it without any danger of being
detected; but, as I could have no such opportunity, I resolved to work
by finesse, and go immediately to the lodgings of Straddle, where I
was so fortunate as to find him. "My Lord," said I, "I have just now
recollected, that the diamond I had the honour of presenting to you
is loosened a little in the socket, and there is a young fellow just
arrived from Paris, who is reckoned the best jeweller in Europe; I knew
him in France; and, if your lordship will give me leave, will carry the
ring to him to be set to rights." His lordship was not to be caught
in this snare; he thanked me for my offer, and told me, that, having
himself observed the defect, he had sent it to his own jeweller to be
mended; and, indeed, by this time I believe it was in the jeweller's
hands, though not in order to be mended, for it stood in need of no
alteration.

Balked in this piece of politics, I cursed my simplicity; but resolved
to play a surer game with the earl, which I thus devised. I did not
doubt of being admitted into familiar conversation with him, as before,
and hoped by some means to get the watch into my hand; then, on pretence
of winding or playing with it, drop it on the floor, when, in all
probability, the fall would disorder the work so as to stop its motion;
this event would furnish me with an opportunity of insisting upon
carrying it away in order to be repaired, and then I should be in no
hurry to bring it back. What pity it was I could not find an occasion of
putting this fine scheme in execution! When I went to renew my visit to
his lordship, my access to the parlour was as free as ever; but after I
had waited for some time, the valet-de-chambre came in with his lord's
compliments, and a desire to see me to-morrow at his levee, he being at
present so much indisposed that he could not see company. I interpreted
this message into a bad omen, and came away muttering curses against his
lordship's politeness, and ready to go to loggerheads with myself for
being so egregiously duped. But, that I might have some satisfaction for
the loss I had sustained, I besieged him so closely at his levee, and
persecuted him with my solicitations; not without faint hopes, indeed,
of reaping something more from my industry than the bare pleasure of
making him uneasy; though I could never obtain another private hearing
the whole course of my attendance; neither had I resolution enough
to undeceive Strap, whose looks in a little time were so whetted with
impatience, that whenever I came home, his eyes devoured me, as it were,
with eagerness of attention.

At length, however, finding myself reduced to my last guinea, I was
compelled to disclose my necessity, though I endeavoured to sweeten the
discovery by rehearsing to him the daily assurances I received from my
patron. But these promises were not of efficacy sufficient to support
the spirits of my friend, who no sooner understood the lowness of my
finances, than, uttering a dreadful groan, he exclaimed, "In the name of
God, what shall we do?" In order to comfort him, I said, that many of
my acquaintances, who were in a worse condition than we, supported,
notwithstanding, the character of gentlemen; and advising him to thank
God that as yet we had incurred no debt, proposed he should pawn my
sword of steel, inlaid with gold, and trust to my discretion for the
rest. This expedient was wormwood and gall to poor Strap, who, in spite
of his invincible affection for me, still retained notions of economy
and expense suitable to the narrowness of his education; nevertheless
he complied with my request, and raised seven pieces on the sword in a
twinkling. This supply, inconsiderable as it was, made me as happy for
the present, as if I had kept five hundred pounds in bank; for by
this time I was so well skilled in procrastinating every troublesome
reflection, that the prospect of want seldom affected me very much, let
it be ever so near. And now indeed it was nearer than I imagined. My
landlord, having occasion for money, put me in mind of my being indebted
to him five guineas in lodging; and, telling me he had a sum to make up,
begged I would excuse his importunity, and discharge the debt. Though I
could ill spare so much cash, my pride took the resolution of disbursing
it. This I did in a cavalier manner, after he had written a discharge,
telling him with an air of scorn and resentment, I saw he was resolved
that I should not be long in his books; while Strap, who stood by, and
knew my circumstances, wrung his hands in secret, gnawed his nether lip,
and turned yellow with despair. Whatever appearance of indifference my
vanity enabled me to put on, I was thunderstruck with this demand, which
I had no sooner satisfied, than I hastened into company, with a view of
beguiling my cares with conversation, or drowning them with wine.

After dinner, a party was accordingly made in the coffee-house, from
whence we adjourned to the tavern, where, instead of sharing the mirth
of the company, I was as much chagrined at their good humour as a damned
soul in hell would be at a glimpse of heaven. In vain did I swallow
bumper after bumper! the wine had lost its effect upon me, and, far from
raising my dejected spirits, could not even lay me asleep. Banter, who
was the only intimate I had (Strap excepted), perceived my anxiety, and,
when we broke up, reproached me with pusillanimity, for being cast
down at my disappointment that such a rascal as Strutwell could be the
occasion of. I told him I did not at all see how Strutwell's being a
rascal alleviated my misfortune; and gave him to understand that my
present grief did not so much proceed from that disappointment, as from
the low ebb of my fortune, which was sunk to something less than two
guineas. At this declaration he cried, "Psha! is that all?" and assured
me there were a thousand ways of living in town without a fortune, he
himself having subsisted many years entirely by his wit. I expressed
an eager desire of being acquainted with some of these methods, and he,
without farther expostulation, bade me follow him. He conducted me to a
house under the piazzas in Covert Garden, which we entered, and having
delivered our swords to a grim fellow who demanded them at the foot of
the staircase, ascended to the second story, where I saw multitudes of
people standing round two gaming-tables, loaded, in a manner, with gold
and silver. My conductor told me this was the house of a worthy Scotch
lord, who, using the privilege of his peerage, had set up public gaming
tables, from the profits of which he drew a comfortable livelihood.
He then explained the difference between the sitters and the bettors;
characterised the first as old rooks, and the last as bubbles; and
advised me to try my fortune at the silver table, by betting a crown at
a time. Before I would venture anything, I considered the company more
particularly, and there appeared such a group of villanous faces, that
I was struck with horror and astonishment at the sight! I signified
my surprise to Banter, who whispered in my ear, that the bulk of
those present were sharpers, highwaymen, and apprentices, who, having
embezzled their master's cash, made a desperate push in this place to
make up their deficiencies. This account did not encourage me to hazard
any part of my small pittance: but, at length, being teased by the
importunities of my friend, who assured me there was no danger of being
ill-used, because people were hired by the owner to see justice done to
everybody, I began by risking one shilling, and, in less than an hour,
my winning amounted to thirty. Convinced by this time of the fairness
of the game, and animated with success, there was no need of further
persuasion to continue the play: I lent Banter (who seldom had any money
in his pocket) a guinea, which he carried to the gold table, and lost
in a moment. He would have borrowed another, but finding me deaf to his
arguments, went away in a pet. Meanwhile my gain advanced to six pieces,
and my desire of more increased in proportion: so that I moved to the
higher table, where I laid half-a-guinea on every throw, and fortune
still favouring me, I became a sitter, in which capacity I remained
until it was broad day; when I found myself, after many vicissitudes,
one hundred and fifty guineas in pocket.

Thinking it now high time to retire with my booty, I asked if anybody
would take my place, and made a notion to rise; upon which an old
Gascon, who sat opposite to me, and of whom I had won a little money,
started up with fury in his looks, crying, "Restez, foutre, restez! il
faut donner moi mon ravanchio!" At the same time, a Jew, who sat near
the other, insinuated that I was more beholden to art than fortune for
what I had got; that he had observed me wipe the table very often,
and that some of the divisions appeared to be greasy. This intimation
produced a great deal of clamour against me, especially among the
losers, who threatened with many oaths and imprecations, to take me
up by a warrant as a sharper, unless I would compromise the affair by
refunding the greatest part of my winning. Though I was far from being
easy under his accusation, I relied upon my innocence, threatened in my
turn to prosecute the Jew, for defamation, and boldly offered to submit
my cause to the examination of any justice in Westminster; but they knew
themselves too well to put their characters on that issue, and finding
that I was not to be intimidated into any concession, dropped their
plea, and made way for me to withdraw. I would not, however, stir from
the table until the Israelite had retracted what he had said to my
disadvantage, and asked pardon before the whole assembly.

As I marched out with my prize, I happened to tread on the toes of a
tall raw-boned fellow, with a hooked nose, fierce eyes, black thick
eyebrows, a pigtail wig of the same colour, and a formidable hat pulled
over his forehead, who stood gnawing his fingers in the crowd, and he
sooner felt the application of my shoe heel, than he roared out in a
tremendous voice, "Blood and wounds! you son of a whore, what's that
for?" I asked pardon with a great deal of submission, and protested I
had no intention of hurting him; but the more I humbled myself the more
he stormed, and insisted on gentlemanly satisfaction, at the same time
provoking me with scandalous names that I could not put up with; so that
I gave loose to my passion, returned his Billingsgate, and challenged
him down to the piazzas. His indignation cooling as mine warmed, he
refused my invitation, saying he would choose his own time, and returned
towards the table muttering threats, which I neither dreaded nor
distinctly heard; but, descending with great deliberation, received my
sword from the door-keeper, whom I gratified with a guinea, according to
the custom of the place, and went home in a rapture of joy.

My faithful valet, who had set up all night in the utmost uneasiness on
my account, let me in with his face beslubbered with tears, and followed
me to my chamber, where he stood silent like a condemned criminal, in
expectation of hearing that every shilling was spent, I guessed the
situation of his thoughts, and, assuming a sullen look, bade him fetch
me some water to wash. He replied, without lifting his eyes from the
ground, "In my simple conjecture, you have more occasion for rest, not
having (I suppose) slept these four-and-twenty hours." "Bring me
some water!" said I, in a peremptory tone; upon which he sneaked away
shrugging his shoulders. Before he returned, I had spread my whole stock
on the table in the most ostentatious manner; so that, when it first
saluted his view, he stood like one entranced; and, having rubbed his
eyes more than once, to assure himself of his being awake, broke out
into, "Lord have mercy upon us, what a vast treasure is here!" "'Tis all
our own, Strap," said I; "take what is necessary, and redeem the sword
immediately." He advanced towards the table, stopped short by the
way, looked at the money and me by turns, and with a wildness in his
countenance, produced from joy checked by distrust, cried, "I dare say
it is honestly come by." To remove his scruples, I made him acquainted
with the whole story of my success, which, when he heard, he danced
about the room in an ecstacy, crying, "God be praised!--a white
stone!--God be praised!--a white stone!" So that I was afraid the change
of fortune had disordered his intellects, and that he was run mad with
joy. Extremely concerned at this event, I attempted to reason him out
of his frenzy, but to no purpose; for without regarding what I said,
he continued to frisk up and down, and repeat his rhapsody, of "God be
praised!--a white stone!" At last, I rose in the utmost consternation,
and, laying violent hands upon him, put a stop to his extravagance
by fixing him down to a settee that was in the room. This constraint
banished his delirium; he started as if just awoke, and terrified at my
behaviour, cried, "What is the matter!" When he learned the cause of
my apprehension, he was ashamed of his transports, and told me, that in
mentioning the white stone, he alluded to the Dies fasti of the Romans,
albo lapide notati.

Having no inclination to sleep, I secured my cash, dressed, and was
just going abroad, when the servant of the house told me, there was a
gentlewoman at the door who wanted to speak with me. Surprised at this
information, I made Strap show her up, and in less than a minute, saw
a young woman of a shabby decayed appearance enter my room. After
half-a-dozen curtsies, she began to sob, and told me her name was Gawky;
upon which information I immediately recollected the features of Miss
Levement, who had been the first occasion of my misfortunes. Though I
had all the reason in the world to resent her treacherous behaviour to
me, I was moved at her distress, and professing my sorrow at seeing her
so reduced desired her to sit, and inquired into the particulars of her
situation. She fell upon her knees and implored my forgiveness for the
injuries she had done me, protesting before God, that she was forced,
against her inclination, into that hellish conspiracy which had almost
deprived me of my life, by the entreaties of her husband, who, having
been afterwards renounced by his father on account of his marriage with
her, and unable to support a family on his pay, left his wife at her
father's house, and went with the regiment to Germany, where he was
broke for misbehaviour at the battle of Dettingen; since which time she
had heard no tidings of him. She then gave me to understand, with many
symptoms of penitence, that it was her misfortune to bear a child four
months after marriage, by which event her parents were so incensed, that
she was turned out of doors with the infant, that died soon after: and
had hitherto subsisted in a miserable indigent manner, on the extorted
charity of a few friends, who were now quite tired of giving; that, not
knowing where or how to support herself one day longer, she had fled for
succour even to me, who, of all mankind, had the least cause to assist
her, relying upon the generosity of my disposition, which, she hoped,
would be pleased with this opportunity of avenging itself in the noblest
manner on the wretch who had wronged me. I was very much affected with
her discourse and, having no cause to suspect the sincerity of her
repentance, raised her up, freely pardoned all she had done against me,
and promised to befriend her as much as lay in my power.

Since my last arrival in London, I had made no advances to the
apothecary, imagining it would be impossible for me to make my innocence
appear, so unhappily was my accusation circumstanced: Strap indeed had
laboured to justify me to the schoolmaster; but, far from succeeding
in his attempt, Mr. Concordance dropped all correspondence with him,
because he refused to quit his connection with me. Things being in this
situation, I thought a fairer opportunity of vindicating my character
could not offer than that which now presented itself; I therefore
stipulated with Mrs. Gawky, that before I would yield her the least
assistance, she should do me the justice to clear my reputation by
explaining upon oath before a magistrate the whole of the conspiracy,
as it had been executed against me. When she had given me this
satisfaction, I presented her with five guineas, a sum so much above her
expectation, that she could scarce believe the evidence of her senses,
and was ready to worship me for my benevolence. The declaration, signed
with her own hand, I sent to her father, who, upon recollecting and
comparing the circumstances of my charge, was convinced of my integrity,
and waited on me next day, in company with his friend the schoolmaster,
to whom he had communicated my vindication. After mutual salutation,
Monsieur Lavement began a long apology for the unjust treatment I had
received; but I saved him a good deal of breath by interrupting his
harangue, and assuring him that, far from entertaining a resentment
against him, I thought myself obliged to his lenity, which allowed me to
escape, after such strong assumptions of guilt appeared against me. Mr.
Concordance, thinking it now his turn to speak, observed that Mr. Random
had too much candour and sagacity to be disobliged at their conduct,
which, all things considered, could not have been otherwise with
any honesty of intention. "Indeed," said he, "if the plot had been
unravelled to us by any supernatural intelligence; if it had been
whispered by a genius, communicated by dream, or revealed by an
angel from on high, we should have been to blame in crediting ocular
demonstration; but as we were left in the midst of mortality, it cannot
be expected we should be incapable of imposition. I must assure you,
Mr. Random, no man on earth is more pleased than I am at this triumph
of your character: and, as the news of your misfortune panged me to the
very entrails, this manifestation of your innocence makes my midriff
quiver with joy." I thanked him for this concern, desired them to
undeceive those of their acquaintance who judged harshly of me, and,
having treated them with a glass of wine, represented to Lavement
the deplorable condition of his daughter, and pleaded her cause so
effectually, that he consented to settle a small annuity on her for
life: but could not be persuaded to take her home, because her mother
was so much incensed, that she would never see her.






CHAPTER LIII

I purchase new Clothes--reprimand Strutwell and Straddle--Banter
proposes another matrimonial Scheme--I accept of his Terms--set out
to Bath in the Stage-coach with the young Lady and her Mother--the
Behaviour of an Officer and Lawyer--our fellow Travellers described--a
smart dialogue between my Mistress and the Captain

Having finished this affair to my satisfaction, I found myself perfectly
at ease; and, looking upon the gaming-table as a certain resource for a
gentleman in want, became more gay than ever. Although my clothes were
almost as good as new, I grew ashamed of wearing them, because I thought
everybody by this time had got an inventory of my wardrobe. For which
reason I disposed of a good part of my apparel to a salesman in Monmouth
Street for half the value, and bought two new suits with the money. I
likewise purchased a plain gold watch, despairing of recovering that
which I had so foolishly given to Strutwell, whom, notwithstanding,
I still continued to visit at his levee, until the ambassador he had
mentioned set out with a secretary of his own choosing. I thought myself
then at liberty to expostulate with his lordship, whom I treated with
great freedom in a letter, for amusing me with vain hopes, when he
neither had the power nor inclination to provide for me. Nor was I less
reserved with Straddle, whom I in person reproached for misrepresenting
to me the character of Strutwell, which I did not scruple to aver was
infamous in every respect. He seemed very much enraged at my freedom,
talked a great deal about his quality and honour, and began to make some
comparisons which I thought so injurious to mine, that I demanded an
explanation with great warmth, and he was mean enough to equivocate, and
condescend in such a manner that I left him with a hearty contempt of
his behaviour.

About this time, Banter, who had observed a surprising and sudden
alteration in my appearance and disposition, began to inquire very
minutely into the cause, and, as I did not think fit to let him know the
true state of the affair, lest he might make free with my purse, on the
strength of having proposed the scheme that filled it, I told him that
I had received a small supply from a relation in the country, who at the
same time had proffered to use all his interest (which was not small) in
soliciting some post for me that should make me easy for life. "If that
be the case," said Banter, "perhaps you won't care to mortify yourself
a little in making your fortune another way. I have a relation who is to
set out for Bath next week, with an only daughter, who being sickly and
decrepit, intends to drink the waters for the recovery of her health.
Her father, who was a rich Turkey merchant, died about a year ago,
and left her with a fortune of twenty thousand pounds, under the sole
management of her mother, who is my kinswoman. I would have put in for
the plate myself, but there is a breach at present between the old woman
and me. You must know, that some time ago I borrowed a small sum of
her and promised, it seems, to pay it before a certain time; but being
disappointed in my expectation of money from the country, the day
elapsed without my being able to take up my note; upon which she wrote
a peremptory letter, threatening to arrest me, if I did not pay the debt
immediately. Nettled at this precise behaviour, I sent a d--d severe
answer, which enraged her so much that she actually took out a writ
against me. Whereupon, finding the thing grow serious, I got a friend
to advance the money for me, discharged the debt, went to her house,
and abused her for her unfriendly dealing. She was provoked by my
reproaches, and scolded in her turn. The little deformed urchin joined
her mother with such virulence and volubility of tongue, that I was
fain to make a retreat, after having been honoured with a great many
scandalous epithets, which gave me plainly to understand that I had
nothing to hope from the esteem of the one, or the affection of the
other. As they are both utter strangers to life, it is a thousand to one
that the girl will be picked up by some scoundrel or other at Bath, if I
don't provide for her otherwise. You are a well-looking fellow,
Random, and can behave as demurely as a quaker. If you will give me
an obligation of five hundred pounds, to be paid six months after your
marriage, I will put you in a method of carrying her in spite of all
opposition."

This proposal was too advantageous for me to be refused. The writing was
immediately drawn up and executed; and Banter, giving me notice of the
time when, and the stage coach in which they were to set out, I bespoke
a place in the same convenience; and, having hired a horse for Strap,
who was chagrined with the prospect, set forward accordingly.

As we embarked before day, I had not the pleasure for some time of
seeing Miss Snapper (that was the name of my mistress), nor even of
perceiving the number and sex of my fellow travellers, although I
guessed that the coach was full, by the difficulty I found in seating
myself. The first five minutes passed in a general silence, when, all of
a sudden, the coach heeling to one side, a boisterous voice pronounced,
"To the right and left, cover your flanks, d--me! whiz!" I easily
discovered by the tone and matter of this exclamation that it was
uttered by a son of Mars; neither was it hard to conceive the profession
of another person who sat opposite to me, and observed that we ought
to have been well satisfied of our security before we entered upon the
premises. These two sallies had not the desired effect. We continued a
good while as mute as before, till at length the gentleman of the sword,
impatient of longer silence, made a second effort, by swearing he had
got into a meeting of quakers. "I believe so too," said a shrill female
voice at my left hand, "for the spirit of folly begins to move." "Out
with it then, madam!" replied the soldier. "You seem to have no occasion
for a midwife," cried the lady. "D--mn my blood!" exclaimed the other,
"a man can't talk to a woman, but she immediately thinks of a midwife."
"True sir," said she, "I long to be delivered." "What of--a mouse,
madam?" said he. "No, Sir," said she, "of a fool." "Are you far gone
with a fool?" said he. "Little more than two miles," said she. "By
Gad, you're a wit, madam," cried the officer, "I wish I could with any
justice return the compliment," said the lady. "Zounds, I have done,"
said he. "Your bolt is soon shot, according to the old proverb," said
she. The warrior's powder was quite spent; the lawyer advised him to
drop the prosecution, and a grave matron, who sat on the left hand of
the victorious wit, told her she must not let her tongue run so fast
among strangers. This reprimand, softened with the appellation of child,
convinced me that the satirical lady was no other than Miss Snapper,
and I resolved to regulate my conduct accordingly. The champion, finding
himself so smartly handled, changed his battery, and began to expatiate
on his own exploits. "You talk of shot, madam," said he; "d--me! I
have both given and received some shot in my time--I was wounded in the
shoulder by a pistol ball at Dettingen, where--I say nothing--but by
G--d! if it had not been for me--all's one for that--I despise boasting,
d-me! whiz!" So saying, he whistled one part and hummed another, of
the Black Joke; then, addressing himself to the lawyer, went on thus;
"Wouldn't you think it d--d hard, after having, at the risk of your
life, recovered the standard of a regiment that had been lost, to
receive no preferment for your pains? I don't choose to name no names,
sink me! but, howsomever, this I will refer, by G--d! and that is
this--a musketeer of the French guards, having a standard from a certain
cornet of a certain regiment, d--e! was retreating with his prize
as fast as his horse's heels could carry him, sink me! Upon which, I
snatched up firelock that belonged to a dead man, d--me! Whiz! and shot
his horse under him, d--n my blood! The fellow got upon his feet, and
began to repose me, upon which I charged my bayonet breast high, and
ran him through the body by G--! One of his comrades, coming to his
assistance, shot me in the shoulder, as I told you before; and another
gave me a contusion on the head with the butt-end of his carbine; but,
d--me, that did not signify. I killed one, put the other to flight, and
taking up the standard, carried it off very deliberately. But the best
joke of all was the son of a b--ch of a cornet, who had surrendered it
in a cowardly manner, seeing it in my possession, demanded it from me in
the front of the line. "D--n my blood!" says he, "where did you find my
standard?" says he. "D--n my blood!" said I, "where," said I, "did you
lose it?" said I. "That's nothing to you," says he, "'tis my standard,"
says he" and by G--d I'll have it," says he. "D--nation seize me,"
says I, "if you shall," says I, "till I have first delivered it to the
general," says I; and accordingly I went to the headquarters after the
battle, and delivered it to my Lord Stair, who promised to do for me.
But I am no more than a poor lieutenant still, d--n my blood."

Having vented this repetition of expletives, the lawyer owned he had not
been requited according to his deserts; observed that the labourer is
always worthy of his hire, and asked if the promise was made before
witnesses, because in that case the law would compel the general to
perform it; but understanding that the promise was made over a bottle,
without being restricted to time or terms, he pronounced it not valid
in law, proceeded to inquire into the particulars of the battle, and
affirmed that, although the English had drawn themselves into premunire
at first, the French managed their cause so lamely in the course of
the dispute, that they would have been utterly nonsuited, had they not
obtained a nolli prosequi. In spite of these enlivening touches, the
conversation was like to suffer another long interruption, when the
lieutenant, unwilling to conceal any of his accomplishments that could
be displayed in his present situation, offered to regale the company
with a song; and, interpreting our silence into a desire of hearing,
began to warble a fashionable air the first stanza of which he
pronounced thus:


