Be raised to God; now let me only hear,
Again and full, the marvel and the joy.

CLYTEMNESTRA.

Now, even now, the Achaian holdeth Troy!
Methinks there is a crying in her streets
That makes no concord. When sweet unguent meets
With vinegar in one phial, I warrant none
Shall lay those wranglers lovingly at one.
So conquerors and conquered shalt thou hear,
Two sundered tones, two lives of joy or fear.
  Here women in the dust about their slain,
Husbands or brethren, and by dead old men
Pale children who shall never more be free,
For all they loved on earth cry desolately.
And hard beside them war-stained Greeks, whom stark
Battle and then long searching through the dark
Hath gathered, ravenous, in the dawn, to feast
At last on all the plenty Troy possessed,
No portion in that feast nor ordinance,
But each man clutching at the prize of chance.
Aye, there at last under good roofs they lie
Of men spear-quelled, no frosts beneath the sky,
No watches more, no bitter moony dew....
How blessed they will sleep the whole night through!
Oh, if these days they keep them free from sin
Toward Ilion's conquered shrines and Them within
Who watch unconquered, maybe not again
The smiter shall be smit, the taker ta'en.
May God but grant there fall not on that host
The greed of gold that maddeneth and the lust
To spoil inviolate things! But half the race
Is run which windeth back to home and peace.
Yea, though of God they pass unchallenged,
Methinks the wound of all those desolate dead
Might waken, groping for its will....
                                  Ye hear
A woman's word, belike a woman's fear.
May good but conquer in the last incline
Of the balance! Of all prayers that prayer is mine.

LEADER.

O Woman, like a man faithful and wise
Thou speakest. I accept thy testimonies
And turn to God with praising, for a gain
Is won this day that pays for all our pain.

  [CLYTEMNESTRA _returns to the Palace. The_ CHORUS _take up their
position for the Second Stasimon._

AN ELDER.

0 Zeus, All-ruler, and Night the Aid,
Gainer of glories, and hast thou thrown
Over the towers of Ilion
  Thy net close-laid,
That none so nimble and none so tall
Shall escape withal
The snare of the slaver that claspeth all?

ANOTHER.

And Zeus the Watcher of Friend and Friend
I also praise, who hath wrought this end.
Long since on Paris his shaft he drew,
  And hath aimed true,
Not too soon falling nor yet too far,
The fire of the avenging star.

CHORUS.

(_This is God's judgement upon Troy. May it not be too fierce! Gold cannot
save one who spurneth Justice_.)

The stroke of Zeus hath found them! Clear this day
  The tale, and plain to trace.
He judged, and Troy hath fallen.--And have men said
That God not deigns to mark man's hardihead,
  Trampling to earth the grace
Of holy and delicate things?--Sin lies that way.
For visibly Pride doth breed its own return
  On prideful men, who, when their houses swell
    With happy wealth, breathe ever wrath and blood.
Yet not too fierce let the due vengeance burn;
  Only as deemeth well
    One wise of mood.

    Never shall state nor gold
      Shelter his heart from aching
    Whoso the Altar of Justice old
      Spurneth to Night unwaking.

(_The Sinner suffers in his longing till at last Temptation overcomes him;
as longing for Helen overcame Paris._)

The tempting of misery forceth him, the dread
  Child of fore-scheming Woe!
And help is vain; the fell desire within
Is veiled not, but shineth bright like Sin:
  And as false gold will show
Black where the touchstone trieth, so doth fade
His honour in God's ordeal. Like a child,
  Forgetting all, he hath chased his winged bird,
    And planted amid his people a sharp thorn.
  And no God hears his prayer, or, have they heard,
    The man so base-beguiled
      They cast to scorn.

      Paris to Argos came;
        Love of a woman led him;
      So God's altar he brought to shame,
        Robbing the hand that fed him.

(_Helen's flight; the visions seen by the King's seers; the phantom of
Helen and the King's grief._)

She hath left among her people a noise of shield and sword,
A tramp of men armed where the long ships are moored;
She hath ta'en in her goings Desolation as a dower;
She hath stept, stept quickly, through the great gated Tower,
    And the thing that could not be, it hath been!
And the Seers they saw visions, and they spoke of strange ill:
  "A Palace, a Palace; and a great King thereof:
  A bed, a bed empty, that was once pressed in love:
And thou, thou, what art thou?  Let us be, thou so still,
  Beyond wrath, beyond beseeching, to the lips reft of thee!"
  For she whom he desireth is beyond the deep sea,
    And a ghost in his castle shall be queen.

Images in sweet guise
  Carven shall move him never,
Where is Love amid empty eyes?
  Gone, gone for ever!

(_His dreams and his suffering; but the War that he made caused greater
and wider suffering._)

But a shape that is a dream, 'mid the phantoms of the night,
Cometh near, full of tears, bringing vain vain delight:
For in vain when, desiring, he can feel the joy's breath
--Nevermore! Nevermore!--from his arms it vanisheth,
    On wings down the pathways of sleep.

In the mid castle hall, on the hearthstone of the Kings,
These griefs there be, and griefs passing these,
But in each man's dwelling of the host that sailed the seas,
A sad woman waits; she has thoughts of many things,
    And patience in her heart lieth deep.

Knoweth she them she sent,
  Knoweth she? Lo, returning,
Comes in stead of the man that went
  Armour and dust of burning.

(_The return of the funeral urns; the murmurs of the People._)

And the gold-changer, Ares, who changeth quick for dead,
Who poiseth his scale in the striving of the spears,
Back from Troy sendeth dust, heavy dust, wet with tears,
Sendeth ashes with men's names in his urns neatly spread.
And they weep over the men, and they praise them one by one,
How this was a wise fighter, and this nobly-slain--
    "Fighting to win back another's wife!"
Till a murmur is begun,
  And there steals an angry pain
    Against Kings too forward in the strife.

      There by Ilion's gate
        Many a soldier sleepeth,
      Young men beautiful; fast in hate
        Troy her conqueror keepeth.

(_For the Shedder of Blood is in great peril, and not unmarked by God. May
I never be a Sacker of Cities!_)

But the rumour of the People, it is heavy, it is chill;
And tho' no curse be spoken, like a curse doth it brood;
And my heart waits some tiding which the dark holdeth still,
For of God not unmarked is the shedder of much blood.
And who conquers beyond right ... Lo, the life of man decays;
  There be Watchers dim his light in the wasting of the years;
    He falls, he is forgotten, and hope dies.
There is peril in the praise
  Over-praised that he hears;
    For the thunder it is hurled from God's eyes.

      Glory that breedeth strife,
        Pride of the Sacker of Cities;
      Yea, and the conquered captive's life,
        Spare me, O God of Pities!

DIVERS ELDERS.

--The fire of good tidings it hath sped the city through,
But who knows if a god mocketh? Or who knows if all be true?
    'Twere the fashion of a child,
    Or a brain dream-beguiled,
    To be kindled by the first
    Torch's message as it burst,
And thereafter, as it dies, to die too.

--'Tis like a woman's sceptre, to ordain
Welcome to joy before the end is plain!

--Too lightly opened are a woman's ears;
Her fence downtrod by many trespassers,
  And quickly crossed; but quickly lost
The burden of a woman's hopes or fears.

[_Here a break occurs in the action, like the descent of the curtain in a
modern theatre. A space of some days is assumed to have passed and we find
the Elders again assembled_.

LEADER.

Soon surely shall we read the message right;
Were fire and beacon-call and lamps of light
True speakers, or but happy lights, that seem
And are not, like sweet voices in a dream.
I see a Herald yonder by the shore,
Shadowed with olive sprays. And from his sore
Rent raiment cries a witness from afar,
Dry Dust, born brother to the Mire of war,
That mute he comes not, neither through the smoke
Of mountain forests shall his tale be spoke;
But either shouting for a joyful day,
Or else.... But other thoughts I cast away.
As good hath dawned, may good shine on, we pray!

--And whoso for this City prayeth aught
  Else, let him reap the harvest of his thought!

  [_Enter the_ HERALD, _running. His garments are torn and war-stained. He
falls upon his knees and kisses the Earth, and salutes each Altar in
turn._

HERALD.

Land of my fathers! Argos! Am I here ...
Home, home at this tenth shining of the year,
And all Hope's anchors broken save this one!
For scarcely dared I dream, here in mine own
Argos at last to fold me to my rest....
But now--All Hail, O Earth! O Sunlight blest!
And Zeus Most High!
    [_Checking himself as he sees the altar of Apollo._
                  And thou, O Pythian Lord;
No more on us be thy swift arrows poured!
Beside Scamander well we learned how true
Thy hate is. Oh, as thou art Healer too,
Heal us! As thou art Saviour of the Lost,
Save also us, Apollo, being so tossed
With tempest! ... All ye Daemons of the Pale!
And Hermes! Hermes, mine own guardian, hail!
Herald beloved, to whom all heralds bow....
Ye Blessed Dead that sent us, receive now
In love your children whom the spear hath spared.
  O House of Kings, O roof-tree thrice-endeared,
O solemn thrones! O gods that face the sun!
Now, now, if ever in the days foregone,
After these many years, with eyes that burn,
Give hail and glory to your King's return!
For Agamemnon cometh! A great light
Cometh to men and gods out of the night.
  Grand greeting give him--aye, it need be grand--
Who, God's avenging mattock in his hand,
Hath wrecked Troy's towers and digged her soil beneath,
Till her gods' houses, they are things of death;
Her altars waste, and blasted every seed
Whence life might rise! So perfect is his deed,
So dire the yoke on Ilion he hath cast,
The first Atreides, King of Kings at last,
And happy among men! To whom we give
Honour most high above all things that live.
  For Paris nor his guilty land can score
The deed they wrought above the pain they bore.
"Spoiler and thief," he heard God's judgement pass;
Whereby he lost his plunder, and like grass
Mowed down his father's house and all his land;
And Troy pays twofold for the sin she planned.

LEADER.

Be glad, thou Herald of the Greek from Troy!

HERALD.

So glad, I am ready, if God will, to die!

LEADER.

Did love of this land work thee such distress?

HERALD.

The tears stand in mine eyes for happiness.

LEADER.

Sweet sorrow was it, then, that on you fell.

HERALD.

How sweet? I cannot read thy parable.

LEADER.

To pine again for them that loved you true.

HERALD.

Did ye then pine for us, as we for you?

LEADER.

The whole land's heart was dark, and groaned for thee.

HERALD.

Dark? For what cause? Why should such darkness be?

LEADER.

Silence in wrong is our best medicine here.

HERALD.

Your kings were gone. What others need you fear?

LEADER.

'Tis past! Like thee now, I could gladly die.

HERALD.

Even so! 'Tis past, and all is victory.
And, for our life in those long years, there were
Doubtless some grievous days, and some were fair.
Who but a god goes woundless all his way?....
  Oh, could I tell the sick toil of the day,
The evil nights, scant decks ill-blanketed;
The rage and cursing when our daily bread
Came not! And then on land 'twas worse than all.
Our quarters close beneath the enemy's wall;
And rain--and from the ground the river dew--Wet,
always wet! Into our clothes it grew,
Plague-like, and bred foul beasts in every hair.
  Would I could tell how ghastly midwinter
Stole down from Ida till the birds dropped dead!
Or the still heat, when on his noonday bed
The breathless blue sea sank without a wave!....
  Why think of it? They are past and in the grave,
All those long troubles. For I think the slain
Care little if they sleep or rise again;
And we, the living, wherefore should we ache
With counting all our lost ones, till we wake
The old malignant fortunes? If Good-bye
Comes from their side, Why, let them go, say I.
Surely for us, who live, good doth prevail
Unchallenged, with no wavering of the scale;
Wherefore we vaunt unto these shining skies,
As wide o'er sea and land our glory flies:
"By men of Argolis who conquered Troy,
These spoils, a memory and an ancient joy,
Are nailed in the gods' houses throughout Greece."
Which whoso readeth shall with praise increase
Our land, our kings, and God's grace manifold
Which made these marvels be.--My tale is told.

LEADER.

Indeed thou conquerest me. Men say, the light
In old men's eyes yet serves to learn aright.
But Clytemnestra and the House should hear
These tidings first, though I their health may share.

  [_During the last words_ CLYTEMNESTRA _has entered from the Palace_.
