Austro-Italians stood in a crescent line--the ominous form of incipient
military insubordination. Their officers stormed at them, and called for
Count Karl and for Weisspriess. The latter replied like a man stifling,
but Count Karl's voice was silent.

"Weisspriess! here, to me!" the captain sang out in Italian.

"Ammiani! here, to me!" was replied.

Vittoria struck her hands together in electrical gladness at her lover's
voice and name. It rang most cheerfully. Her home was in the conflict
where her lover fought, and she muttered with ecstasy, "We have met!
we have met!" The sound of the keen steel, so exciting to dream of,
paralyzed her nerves in a way that powder, more terrible for a woman's
imagination, would not have done, and she could only feebly advance. It
was a spacious moonlight, but the moonlight appeared to have got of a
brassy hue to her eyes, though the sparkle of the steel was white; and
she felt too, and wondered at it, that the cries and the noise went to
her throat, as if threatening to choke her. Very soon she found herself
standing there, watching for the issue of the strife, almost as dead as
a weight in scales, incapable of clear vision.

Matched against the Tyrolese alone, the volunteers had an equal fight
in point of numbers, and the advantage of possessing a leader; for Count
Karl was down, and Weisspriess was still entangled in the woman's arms.
When at last Wilfrid got him free, the unsupported Tyrolese were giving
ground before Carlo Ammiani and his followers. These fought with stern
fury, keeping close up to their enemy, rarely shouting. They presented
something like the line of a classic bow, with its arrow-head; while the
Tyrolese were huddled in groups, and clubbed at them, and fell back for
space, and ultimately crashed upon their betraying brothers in arms,
swinging rifles and flying. The Austro-Italians rang out a Viva for
Italy, and let them fly: they were swept from the scene.

Vittoria heard her lover addressing his followers. Then he and Angelo
stood over Count Karl, whom she had forgotten. Angelo ran up to her, but
gave place the moment Carlo came; and Carlo drew her by the hand swiftly
to an obscure bend of the rolling ground, and stuck his sword in the
earth, and there put his arms round her and held her fast.

"Obey me now," were his first words.

"Yes," she answered.

He was harsh of eye and tongue, not like the gentle youth she had been
torn from at the door of La Scala.

"Return; make your way to Brescia. My mother is in Brescia. Milan is
hateful. I throw myself into Vicenza. Can I trust you to obey?"

"Carlo, what evil have you heard of me?"

"I listen to no tales."

"Let me follow you to Vicenza and be your handmaid, my beloved."

"Say that you obey."

"I have said it."

He seemed to shut her in his heart, so closely was she enfolded.

"Since La Scala," she murmured; and he bent his lips to her ear,
whispering, "Not one thought of another woman! and never till I die."

"And I only of you, Carlo, and for you, my lover, my lover!"

"You love me absolutely?"

"I belong to you."

"I could be a coward and pray for life to live to hear you say it."

"I feel I breathe another life when you are away from me."

"You belong to me; you are my own?"

"You take my voice, beloved."

"And when I claim you, I am to have you?"

"Am I not in your hands?"

"The very instant I make my claim you will say yes?"

"I shall not have strength for more than to nod."

Carlo shuddered at the delicious image of her weakness.

"My Sandra! Vittoria, my soul! my bride!"

"O my Carlo! Do you go to Vicenza? And did you know I was among these
people?"

"You will hear everything from little Leone Rufo, who is wounded and
accompanies you to Brescia. Speak of nothing. Speak my name, and look at
me. I deserve two minutes of blessedness."

"Ah! my dearest, if I am sweet to you, you might have many!"

"No; they begin to hum a reproach at me already, for I must be marching.
Vicenza will soon bubble on a fire, I suspect. Comfort my mother; she
wants a young heart at her elbow. If she is alone, she feeds on every
rumour; other women scatter in emotions what poisons her. And when my
bride is with her, I am between them."

"Yes, Carlo, I will go," said Vittoria, seeing her duty at last through
tenderness.

Carlo sprang from her side to meet Angelo, with whom he exchanged some
quick words. The bugle was sounding, and Barto Rizzo audible. Luigi came
to, her, ruefully announcing that the volunteers had sacked the carriage
behaved worse than the Austrians; and that his padrone, the signor
Antonio-Pericles, was off like a gossamer. Angelo induced her to remain
on the spot where she stood till the carriage was seen on the Schio
road, when he led her to it, saying that Carlo had serious work to do.
Count Karl Lenkenstein was lying in the carriage, supported by Wilfrid
and by young Leone Rufo, who sat laughing, with one eye under a
cross-bandage and an arm slung in a handkerchief. Vittoria desired to
wait that she might see her lover once more; but Angelo entreated her
that she should depart, too earnestly to leave her in doubt of there
being good reason for it and for her lover's absence. He pointed to
Wilfrid: "Barto Rizzo captured this man; Carlo has released him. Take
him with you to attend on his superior officer." She drew Angelo's
observation to the first morning colours over the peaks. He looked up,
and she knew that he remembered that morning of their flight from the
inn. Perhaps he then had the image of his brother in his mind, for the
colours seemed to be plucking at his heart, and he said, "I have lost
him."

"God help you, my friend!" said Vittoria, her throat choking.

Angelo pointed at the insensible nobleman: "These live. I do not grudge
him his breath or his chances; but why should these men take so much
killing? Weisspriess has risen, as though I struck the blow of a babe.
But we one shot does for us! Nevertheless, signorina," Angelo smiled
firmly, "I complain of nothing while we march forward."

He kissed his hand to her, and turned back to his troop. The carriage
was soon under the shadows of the mountains.




CHAPTER XXXIV

EPISODES OF THE REVOLT AND THE WAR THE DEEDS OF BARTO RIZZO--THE MEETING
AT ROVEREDO

At Schio there was no medical attendance to be obtained for Count Karl,
and he begged so piteously to be taken on to Roveredo, that, on his
promising to give Leone Rufo a pass, Vittoria decided to work her way
round to Brescia by the Alpine route. She supposed Pericles to have gone
off among the Tyrolese, and wished in her heart that Wilfrid had gone
likewise, for he continued to wear that look of sad stupefaction which
was the harshest reproach to her. Leone was unconquerably gay in spite
of his wounds. He narrated the doings of the volunteers, with proud
eulogies of Carlo Ammiani's gallant leadership; but the devices of Barto
Rizzo appeared to have struck his imagination most. "He is positively a
cat--a great cat," Leone said. "He can run a day; he can fast a week;
he can climb a house; he can drop from a crag; and he never lets go his
hold. If he says a thing to his wife, she goes true as a bullet to the
mark. The two make a complete piece of artillery. We are all for Barto,
though our captain Carlo is often enraged with him. But there's no
getting on without him. We have found that."

Rinaldo and Angelo Guidascarpi and Barto Rizzo had done many daring
feats. They had first, heading about a couple of dozen out of a force
of sixty, endeavoured to surprise the fortress Rocca d'Anfo in Lake
Idro--an insane enterprise that touched on success, and would have been
an achievement had all the men who followed them been made of the same
desperate stuff. Beaten off, they escaped up the Val di Ledro, and
secretly entered Trent, where they hoped to spread revolt, but the
Austrian commandant knew what a quantity of dry wood was in the city,
and stamped his heel on sparks. A revolt was prepared notwithstanding
the proclamation of imprisonment and death. Barto undertook to lead
a troop against the Buon Consiglio barracks, while Angelo and
Rinaldo cleared the ramparts. It chanced, whether from treachery or
extra-vigilance was unknown, that the troops paid domiciliary visits an
hour before the intended outbreak, and the three were left to accomplish
their task alone. They remained in the city several days, hunted from
house to house, and finally they were brought to bay at night on the
roof of a palace where the Lenkenstein ladies were residing. Barto
took his dagger between his teeth and dropped to the balcony of Lena's
chamber. The brothers soon after found the rooftrap opened to them, and
Lena and Anna conducted them to the postern-door. There Angelo asked
whom they had to thank. The terrified ladies gave their name; upon
hearing which, Rinaldo turned and said that he would pay for a
charitable deed to the extent of his power, and would not meanly allow
them to befriend persons who were to continue strangers to them. He gave
the name of Guidascarpi, and relieved his brother, as well as himself,
of a load of obligation, for the ladies raised wild screams on the
instant. In falling from the walls to the road, Rinaldo hurt his foot.
Barto lifted him on his back, and journeyed with him so till at the
appointed place he met his wife, who dressed the foot, and led them
out of the line of pursuit, herself bending under the beloved load. Her
adoration of Rinaldo was deep as a mother's, pure as a virgin's, fiery
as a saint's. Leone Rufo dwelt on it the more fervidly from seeing
Vittoria's expression of astonishment. The woman led them to a cave in
the rocks, where she had stored provision and sat two days expecting the
signal from Trent. They saw numerous bands of soldiers set out along the
valleys--merry men whom it was Barto's pleasure to beguile by shouts, as
a relief for his parched weariness upon the baking rock. Accident made
it an indiscretion. A glass was levelled at them by a mounted officer,
and they had quickly to be moving. Angelo knew the voice of Weisspriess
in the word of command to the soldiers, and the call to him to
surrender. Weisspriess followed them across the mountain track,
keeping at their heels, though they doubled and adopted all possible
contrivances to shake him off. He was joined by Count Karl Lenkenstein
on the day when Carlo Ammiani encountered them, with the rear of
Colonel Corte's band marching for Vicenza. In the collision between
the Austrians and the volunteers, Rinaldo was taken fighting upon his
knee-cap. Leone cursed the disabled foot which had carried the hero in
action, to cast him at the mercy of his enemies; but recollection of
that sight of Rinaldo fighting far ahead and alone, half-down-like a
scuttled ship, stood like a flower in the lad's memory. The volunteers
devoted themselves to liberate or avenge him. It was then that Barto
Rizzo sent his wife upon her mission. Leone assured Vittoria that Angelo
was aware of its nature, and approved it--hoped that the same might
be done for himself. He shook his head when she asked if Count Ammiani
approved it likewise.

"Signorina, Count Ammiani has a grudge against Barto, though he can't
help making use of him. Our captain Carlo is too much of a mere soldier.
He would have allowed Rinaldo to be strung up, and Barto does not owe
him obedience in those things."

"But why did this Barto Rizzo employ a woman's hand?"

"The woman was capable. No man could have got permission to move freely
among the rascal Austrians, even in the character of a deserter. She
did, and she saved him from the shame of execution. And besides, it was
her punishment. You are astonished? Barto Rizzo punishes royally. He
never forgives, and he never persecutes; he waits for his opportunity.
That woman disobeyed him once--once only; but once was enough.
It occurred in Milan, I believe. She released an Austrian, or did
something--I don't know the story exactly--and Barto said to her, 'Now
you can wash out your crime and send your boy to heaven unspotted, with
one blow.' I saw her set out to do it. She was all teeth and eyes, like
a frightened horse; she walked like a Muse in a garden."

Vittoria discovered that her presence among the Austrians had been known
to Carlo. Leone alluded slightly to Barto Rizzo's confirmed suspicion
of her, saying that it was his weakness to be suspicious of women. The
volunteers, however, were all in her favour, and had jeered at Barto on
his declaring that she might, in proof of her willingness to serve the
cause, have used her voice for the purpose of subjugating the wavering
Austro-Italians, who wanted as much coaxing as women. Count Karl had
been struck to earth by Barto Rizzo. "Not with his boasted neatness, I
imagine," Leone said. In fact, the dagger had grazed an ivory portrait
of a fair Italian head wreathed with violets in Count Karl's breast.

Vittoria recognized the features of Violetta d'Isorella as the original
of the portrait.

They arrived at Roveredo late in the evening. The wounded man again
entreated Vittoria to remain by him till a messenger should bring one
of his sisters from Trent. "See," she said to Leone, "how I give grounds
for suspicion of me; I nurse an enemy."

"Here is a case where Barto is distinctly to blame," the lad replied.
"The poor fellow must want nursing, for he can't smoke."

Anna von Lenkenstein came from Trent to her brother's summons. Vittoria
was by his bedside, and the sufferer had fallen asleep with his head
upon her arm. Anna looked upon this scene with more hateful amazement
than her dull eyelids could express. She beckoned imperiously for her
to come away, but Vittoria would not allow him to be disturbed, and Anna
sat and faced her. The sleep was long. The eyes of the two women met
from time to time, and Vittoria thought that Barto Rizzo's wife, though
more terrible, was pleasanter to behold, and less brutal, than Anna.
The moment her brother stirred, Anna repeated her imperious gesture,
murmuring, "Away! out of my sight!" With great delicacy of touch she
drew the arm from the pillow and thrust it back, and then motioning in
an undisguised horror, said, "Go." Vittoria rose to go.

"Is it my Lena?" came from Karl's faint lips.

"It is your Anna."

"I should have known," he moaned.

Vittoria left them.

Some hours later, Countess Lena appeared, bringing a Trentino doctor.
She said when she beheld Vittoria, "Are you our evil genius, then?"
Vittoria felt that she must necessarily wear that aspect to them.

Still greater was Lena's amazement when she looked on Wilfrid. She
passed him without a sign.

Vittoria had to submit to an interview with both sisters before her
departure. Apart from her distress on their behalf, they had always
seemed as very weak, flippant young women to her, and she could have
smiled in her heart when Anna pointed to a day of retribution in the
future.

"I shall not seek to have you assassinated," Anna said; "do not suppose
that I mean the knife or the pistol. But your day will come, and I can
wait for it. You murdered my brother Paul: you have tried to murder
my brother Karl. I wish you to leave this place convinced of one
thing:--you shall be repaid for it."

There was no direct allusion either to Weisspriess or to Wilfrid.

Lena spoke of the army. "You think our cause is ruined because we have
insurrection on all sides of us: you do not know our army. We can fight
the Hungarians with one hand, and you Italians with the other--with a
little finger. On what spot have we given way? We have to weep, it is
true; but tears do not testify to defeat; and already I am inclined to
pity those fools who have taken part against us. Some have experienced
the fruits of their folly."

This was the nearest approach to a hint at Wilfrid's misconduct.

Lena handed Leone's pass to Vittoria, and drawing out a little pocket
almanac, said, "You proceed to Milan, I presume. I do not love your
society; mademoiselle Belloni or Campa: yet I do not mind making an
appointment--the doctor says a month will set my brother on his feet
again,--I will make an appointment to meet you in Milan or Como, or
anywhere in your present territories, during the month of August. That
affords time for a short siege and two pitched battles."

She appeared to be expecting a retort.

Vittoria replied, "I could beg one thing on my knees of you, Countess
Lena."

"And that is--?" Lena threw her head up superbly.

"Pardon my old friend the service he did me through friendship."

The sisters interchanged looks. Lena flushed angrily.

Anna said, "The person to whom you allude is here."

"He is attending on your brother."

"Did he help this last assassin to escape, perchance?"

Vittoria sickened at the cruel irony, and felt that she had perhaps done
ill in beginning to plead for Wilfrid.

"He is here; let him speak for himself: but listen to him, Countess
Lena."

"A dishonourable man had better be dumb," interposed Anna.

"Ah! it is I who have offended you."

"Is that his excuse?"

Vittoria kept her eyes on the fiercer sister, who now declined to speak.

"I will not excuse my own deeds; perhaps I cannot. We Italians are in a
hurricane; I cannot reflect. It may be that I do not act more thinkingly
than a wild beast."

"You have spoken it," Anna exclaimed.

"Countess Lena, he fights in your ranks as a common soldier. He
encounters more than a common soldier's risks."

"The man is brave,--we knew that," said Anna.

"He is more than brave, he is devoted. He fights against us, without
hope of reward from you. Have I utterly ruined him?"

"I imagine that you may regard it as a fact that you have utterly ruined
him," said Anna, moving to break up the parting interview. Lena turned
to follow her.

"Ladies, if it is I who have hardened your hearts, I am more guilty than
I thought." Vittoria said no more. She knew that she had been speaking
badly, or ineffectually, by a haunting flatness of sound, as of
an unstrung instrument, in her ears: she was herself unstrung and
dispirited, while the recollection of Anna's voice was like a sombre
conquering monotony on a low chord, with which she felt insufficient to
compete.

Leone was waiting in the carriage to drive to the ferry across the
Adige. There was news in Roveredo of the king's advance upon Rivoli;
and Leone sat trying to lift and straighten out his wounded arm, with
grimaces of laughter at the pain of the effort, which resolutely refused
to acknowledge him to be an able combatant. At the carriage-door Wilfrid
bowed once over Vittoria's hand.

"You see that," Anna remarked to her sister.

"I should have despised him if he had acted indifference," replied Lena.

She would have suspected him--that was what her heart meant; the artful
show of indifference had deceived her once. The anger within her
drew its springs much more fully from his refusal to respond to her
affection, when she had in a fit of feminine weakness abased herself
before him on the night of the Milanese revolt, than from the
recollection of their days together in Meran. She had nothing of her
sister's unforgivingness. And she was besides keenly curious to discover
the nature of the charm Vittoria threw on him, and not on him solely.
Vittoria left Wilfrid to better chances than she supposed. "Continue
fighting with your army," she said, when they parted. The deeper shade
which traversed his features told her that, if she pleased, her sway
might still be active; but she had no emotion to spare for sentimental
regrets. She asked herself whether a woman who has cast her lot in
scenes of strife does not lose much of her womanhood and something of
her truth; and while her imagination remained depressed, her answer
was sad. In that mood she pitied Wilfrid with a reckless sense of her
inability to repay him for the harm she had done him. The tragedies
written in fresh blood all about her, together with that ever-present
image of the fate of Italy hanging in the balance, drew her away from
personal reflections. She felt as one in a war-chariot, who has not time
to cast more than a glance on the fallen. At the place where the ferry
is, she was rejoiced by hearing positive news of the proximity of the
Royal army. There were none to tell her that Charles Albert had here
made his worst move by leaving Vicenza to the operations of the enemy,
that he might become master of a point worthless when Vicenza fell into
the enemy's hands. The old Austrian Field-Marshal had eluded him at
Mantua on that very night when Vittoria had seen his troops in motion.
The daring Austrian flank-march on Vicenza, behind the fortresses of the
Quadrilateral, was the capital stroke of the campaign. But the presence
of a Piedmontese vanguard at Rivoli flushed the Adige with confidence,
and Vittoria went on her way sharing the people's delight. She reached
Brescia to hear that Vicenza had fallen. The city was like a landscape
smitten black by the thunder-cloud. Vittoria found Countess Ammiani at
her husband's tomb, stiff, colourless, lifeless as a monument attached
to the tomb.




CHAPTER XXXV

CLOSE OF THE LOMBARD CAMPAIGN--VITTORIA'S PERPLEXITY

The fall of Vicenza turned a tide that had overflowed its barriers with
force enough to roll it to the Adriatic. From that day it was as if a
violent wind blew East over Lombardy; flood and wind breaking here
and there a tree, bowing everything before them. City, fortress, and
battle-field resisted as the eddy whirls. Venice kept her brave colours
streaming aloft in a mighty grasp despite the storm, but between Venice
and Milan there was this unutterable devastation,--so sudden a change,
so complete a reversal of the shield, that the Lombards were at first
incredulous even in their agony, and set their faces against it as at a
monstrous eclipse, as though the heavens were taking false oath of its
being night when it was day. From Vicenza and Rivoli, to Sommacampagna,
and across Monte Godio to Custozza, to Volta on the right of the Mincio,
up to the gates of Milan, the line of fire travelled, with a fantastic
overbearing swiftness that, upon the map, looks like the zig-zag
elbowing of a field-rocket. Vicenza fell on the 11th of June; the
Austrians entered Milan on the 6th of August. Within that short time the
Lombards were struck to the dust.

Countess Ammiani quitted Brescia for Bergamo before the worst had
happened; when nothing but the king's retreat upon the Lombard capital,
after the good fight at Volta, was known. According to the king's
proclamation the Piedmontese army was to defend Milan, and hope was not
dead. Vittoria succeeded in repressing all useless signs of grief in
the presence of the venerable lady, who herself showed none, but simply
recommended her accepted daughter to pray daily. "I can neither confess
nor pray," Vittoria said to the priest, a comfortable, irritable
ecclesiastic, long attached to the family, and little able to deal with
this rebel before Providence, that would not let her swollen spirit
be bled. Yet she admitted to him that the countess possessed resources
which she could find nowhere; and she saw the full beauty of such
inimitable grave endurance. Vittoria's foolish trick of thinking for
herself made her believe, nevertheless, that the countess suffered
more than she betrayed, was less consoled than her spiritual comforter
imagined. She continued obstinate and unrepentant, saying, "If my
punishment is to come, it will at least bring experience with it, and I
shall know why I am punished. The misery now is that I do not know, and
do not see, the justice of the sentence."

Countess Ammiani thought better of her case than the priest did; or
she was more indulgent, or half indifferent. This girl was Carlo's
choice;--a strange choice, but the times were strange, and the girl was
robust. The channels of her own and her husband's house were drying on
all sides; the house wanted resuscitating. There was promise that the
girl would bear children of strong blood. Countess Ammiani would not for
one moment have allowed the spiritual welfare of the children to hang
in dubitation, awaiting their experience of life; but a certain
satisfaction was shown in her faint smile when her confessor lamented
over Vittoria's proud stony state of moral revolt. She said to her
accepted daughter, "I shall expect you to be prepared to espouse my son
as soon as I have him by my side;" nor did Vittoria's silent bowing of
her face assure her that strict obedience was implied. Precise words--"I
will," and "I will not fail"--were exacted. The countess showed some
emotion after Vittoria had spoken. "Now, may God end this war quickly,
if it is to go against us," she exclaimed, trembling in her chair
visibly a half-minute, with dropped eyelids and lips moving.

Carlo had sent word that he would join his mother as early as he was
disengaged from active service, and meantime requested her to proceed to
a villa on Lago Maggiore. Vittoria obtained permission from the countess
to order the route of the carriage through Milan, where she wished to
take up her mother and her maid Giacinta. For other reasons she would
have avoided the city. The thought of entering it was painful with the
shrewdest pain. Dante's profoundly human line seemed branded on the
forehead of Milan.

The morning was dark when they drove through the streets of Bergamo.
Passing one of the open places, Vittoria beheld a great concourse of
volunteer youth and citizens, all of them listening to the voice of one
who stood a few steps above them holding a banner. She gave an outcry
of bitter joy. It was the Chief. On one side of him was Agostino, in the
midst of memorable heads that were unknown to her. The countess refused
to stay, though Vittoria strained her hands together in extreme entreaty
that she might for a few moments hear what the others were hearing. "I
speak for my son, and I forbid it," Countess Ammiani said. Vittoria fell
back and closed her eyes to cherish the vision. All those faces raised
to the one speaker under the dark sky were beautiful. He had breathed
some new glory of hope in them, making them shine beneath the overcast
heavens, as when the sun breaks from an evening cloud and flushes the
stems of a company of pine-trees.

Along the road to Milan she kept imagining his utterance until her heart
rose with music. A delicious stream of music, thin as poor tears, passed
through her frame, like a life reviving. She reached Milan in a mood to
bear the idea of temporary defeat. Music had forsaken her so long that
celestial reassurance seemed to return with it.

Her mother was at Zotti's, very querulous, but determined not to
leave the house and the few people she knew. She had, as she told her
daughter, fretted so much on her account that she hardly knew whether
she was glad to see her. Tea, of course, she had given up all thoughts
of; but now coffee was rising, and the boasted sweet bread of Lombardy
was something to look at! She trusted that Emilia would soon think of
singing no more, and letting people rest: she might sing when she wanted
money. A letter recently received from Mr. Pericles said that Italy was
her child's ruin, and she hoped Emilia was ready to do as he advised,
and hurry to England, where singing did not upset people, and people
lived like real Christians, not----Vittoria flapped her hand, and
would not hear of the unchristian crimes of the South. As regarded the
expected defence of Milan, the little woman said, that if it brought on
a bombardment, she would call it unpardonable wickedness, and only hoped
that her daughter would repent.

Zotti stood by, interpreting the English to himself by tones. "The
amiable donnina is not of our persuasion," he observed. "She remains
dissatisfied with patriotic Milan. I have exhibited to her my dabs of
bread through all the processes of making and baking. It is in vain. She
rejects analogy. She is wilful as a principessina: 'Tis so! 'tis not so!
'tis my will! be silent, thou! Signora, I have been treated in that way
by your excellent mother."

"Zotti has not been paid for three weeks, and he certainly has not
mentioned it or looked it, I will say, Emilia."

"Zotti has had something to think of during the last three weeks," said
Vittoria, touching him kindly on the arm.

The confectioner lifted his fingers and his big brown eyes after them,
expressive of the unutterable thoughts. He informed her that he had laid
in a stock of flour, in the expectation that Carlo Alberto would defend
the city: The Milanese were ready to aid him, though some, as Zotti
confessed, had ceased to effervesce; and a great number who were
perfectly ready to fight regarded his tardy appeal to Italian patriotism
very coldly. Zotti set out in person to discover Giacinta. The girl
could hardly fetch her breath when she saw her mistress. She was in
Laura's service, and said that Laura had brought a wounded Englishman
from the field of Custozza. Vittoria hurried to Laura, with whom she
found Merthyr, blue-white as a corpse, having been shot through the
body. His sister was in one of the Lombard hamlets, unaware of his fall;
Beppo had been sent to her.

They noticed one another's embrowned complexions, but embraced silently.
"Twice widowed!" Laura said when they sat together. Laura hushed all
speaking of the war or allusion to a single incident of the miserable
campaign, beyond the bare recital of Vittoria's adventures; yet when
Vicenza by chance was mentioned, she burst out: "They are not cities,
they are living shrieks. They have been made impious for ever. Burn them
to ashes, that they may not breathe foul upon heaven!" She had clung to
the skirts of the army as far as the field of Custozza. "He," she said,
pointing to the room where Merthyr lay,--"he groans less than the others
I have nursed. Generally, when they looked at me, they appeared obliged
to recollect that it was not I who had hurt them. Poor souls! some ended
in great torment. 'I think of them as the happiest; for pain is a cloak
that wraps you about, and I remember one middle-aged man who died softly
at Custozza, and said, 'Beaten!' To take that thought as your travelling
companion into the gulf, must be worse than dying of agony; at least, I
think so."

Vittoria was too well used to Laura's way of meeting disaster to expect
from her other than this ironical fortitude, in which the fortitude
leaned so much upon the irony. What really astonished her was the
conception Laura had taken of the might of Austria. Laura did not
directly speak of it, but shadowed it in allusive hints, much as if
she had in her mind the image of an iron roller going over a field of
flowers--hateful, imminent, irresistible. She felt as a leaf that has
been flying before the gale.

Merthyr's wound was severe: Vittoria could not leave him. Her resolution
to stay in Milan brought her into collision with Countess Ammiani, when
the countess reminded her of her promise, sedately informing her that
she was no longer her own mistress, and had a primary duty to fulfil.
She offered to wait three days, or until the safety of the wounded man
was medically certified to. It was incomprehensible to her that Vittoria
should reject her terms; and though it was true that she would not have
listened to a reason, she was indignant at not hearing one given in
mitigation of the offence. She set out alone on her journey, deeply
hurt. The reason was a feminine sentiment, and Vittoria was naturally
unable to speak it. She shrank with pathetic horror from the thought of
Merthyr's rising from his couch to find her a married woman, and desired
most earnestly that her marriage should be witnessed by him. Young women
will know how to reconcile the opposition of the sentiment. Had Merthyr
been only slightly wounded, and sound enough to seem to be able to bear
a bitter shock, she would not have allowed her personal feelings to
cause chagrin to the noble lady. The sight of her dear steadfast friend
prostrate in the cause of Italy, and who, if he lived to rise again,
might not have his natural strength to bear the thought of her loss with
his old brave firmness, made it impossible for her to act decisively in
one direct line of conduct.

Countess Ammiani wrote brief letters from Luino and Pallanza on Lago
Maggiore. She said that Carlo was in the Como mountains; he would expect
to find his bride, and would accuse his mother; "but his mother will be
spared those reproaches," she added, "if the last shot fired kills, as
it generally does, the bravest and the dearest."

"If it should!"--the thought rose on a quick breath in Vittoria's bosom,
and the sentiment which held her away dispersed like a feeble smoke, and
showed her another view of her features. She wept with longing for love
and dependence. She was sick of personal freedom, tired of the exercise
of her will, only too eager to give herself to her beloved. The
blessedness of marriage, of peace and dependence, came on her
imagination like a soft breeze from a hidden garden, like sleep. But
this very longing created the resistance to it in the depths of her
soul. 'There was a light as of reviving life, or of pain comforted, when
it was she who was sitting by Merthyr's side, and when at times she saw
the hopeless effort of his hand to reach to hers, or during the long
still hours she laid her head on his pillow, and knew that he breathed
gratefully. The sweetness of helping him, and of making his breathing
pleasant to him, closed much of the world which lay beyond her windows
to her thoughts, and surprised her with an unknown emotion, so strange
to her that when it first swept up her veins she had the fancy of her
having been touched by a supernatural hand, and heard a flying accord of
instruments. She was praying before she knew what prayer was. A crucifix
hung over Merthyr's head. She had looked on it many times, and looked on
it still, without seeing more than the old sorrow. In the night it was
dim. She found herself trying to read the features of the thorn-crowned
Head in the solitary night. She and it were alone with a life that
was faint above the engulphing darkness. She prayed for the life, and
trembled, and shed tears, and would have checked them; they seemed to
be bearing away her little remaining strength. The tears streamed. No
answer was given to her question, "Why do I weep?" She wept when Merthyr
had passed the danger, as she had wept when the hours went by, with
shrouded visages; and though she felt the difference m the springs of
her tears, she thought them but a simple form of weakness showing shade
and light.

These tears were a vanward wave of the sea to follow; the rising of her
voice to heaven was no more than a twitter of the earliest dawn before
the coming of her soul's outcry.

"I have had a weeping fit," she thought, and resolved to remember it
tenderly, as being associated with her friend's recovery, and a singular
masterful power absolutely to look on the Austrians marching up the
streets of Milan, and not to feel the surging hatred, or the nerveless
despair, which she had supposed must be her alternatives.

It is a mean image to say that the entry of the Austrians into the
reconquered city was like a river of oil permeating a lake of vinegar,
but it presents the fact in every sense. They demanded nothing more than
submission, and placed a gentle foot upon the fallen enemy; and wherever
they appeared they were isolated. The deepest wrath of the city was,
nevertheless, not directed against them, but against Carlo Alberto,
who had pledged his honour to defend it, and had forsaken it. Vittoria
committed a public indiscretion on the day when the king left Milan to
its fate: word whereof was conveyed to Carlo Ammiani, and he wrote to
her.

"It is right that I should tell you what I have heard," the letter said.
"I have heard that my bride drove up to the crowned traitor, after he
had unmasked himself, and when he was quitting the Greppi palace, and
that she kissed his hand before the people--poor bleeding people of
Milan! This is what I hear in the Val d'Intelvi:--that she despised
the misery and just anger of the people, and, by virtue of her name and
mine, obtained a way for him. How can she have acted so as to give a
colour to this infamous scandal? True or false, it does not affect my
love for her. Still, my dearest, what shall I say? You keep me divided
in two halves. My heart is out of me; and if I had a will, I think I
should be harsh with you. You are absent from my mother at a time when
we are about to strike another blow. Go to her. It is kindness; it is
charity: I do not say duty. I remember that I did write harshly to you
from Brescia. Then our march was so clear in view that a little thing
ruffled me. Was it a little thing? But to applaud the Traitor now! To
uphold him who has spilt our blood only to hand the country over to the
old gaolers! He lent us his army like a Jew, for huge interest. Can
you not read him? If not, cease, I implore you, to think at all for
yourself.

"Is this a lover's letter? I know that my beloved will see the love in
it. To me your acts are fair and good as the chronicle of a saint. I
find you creating suspicion--almost justifying it in others, and putting
your name in the mouth of a madman who denounces you. I shall not speak
more of him. Remember that my faith in you is unchangeable, and I pray
you to have the same in me.

"I sent you a greeting from the Chief. He marched in the ranks from
Bergamo. I saw him on the line of march strip off his coat to shelter a
young lad from the heavy rain. He is not discouraged; none are who have
been near him.

"Angelo is here, and so is our Agostino; and I assure you he loads and
fires a carbine much more deliberately than he composes a sonnet. I am
afraid that your adored Antonio-Pericles fared badly among our fellows,
but I could gather no particulars.

"Oh! the bright two minutes when I held you right in my heart. That spot
on the Vicentino is alone unclouded. If I live I will have that bit of
ground. I will make a temple of it. I could reach it blindfolded."

A townsman of Milan brought this letter to Vittoria. She despatched
Luigi with her reply, which met the charge in a straightforward
affirmative.
