
To turn the current of his feelings, Edward inquired if he had
heard anything lately of the Chieftain of Glennaquoich.

'Not one word,' answered Macwheeble, 'but that he was still in
Carlisle Castle, and was soon to be panelled for his life. I dinna
wish the young gentleman ill,' he said, 'but I hope that they that
hae got him will keep him, and no let him back to this Hieland
border to plague us wi' black-mail and a' manner o' violent,
wrongous, and masterfu' oppression and spoliation, both by himself
and others of his causing, sending, and hounding out; and he
couldna tak care o' the siller when he had gotten it neither, but
flung it a' into yon idle quean's lap at Edinburgh; but light come
light gane. For my part, I never wish to see a kilt in the country
again, nor a red-coat, nor a gun, for that matter, unless it were
to shoot a paitrick; they're a' tarr'd wi' ae stick. And when they
have done ye wrang, even when ye hae gotten decreet of spuilzie,
oppression, and violent profits against them, what better are ye?
They hae na a plack to pay ye; ye need never extract it.'

With such discourse, and the intervening topics of business, the
time passed until dinner, Macwheeble meanwhile promising to devise
some mode of introducing Edward at the Duchran, where Rose at
present resided, without risk of danger or suspicion; which seemed
no very easy task, since the laird was a very zealous friend to
government. The poultry-yard had been laid under requisition, and
cockyleeky and Scotch collops soon reeked in the Bailie's little
parlour. The landlord's cork-screw was just introduced into the
muzzle of a pint bottle of claret (cribbed possibly from the
cellars of Tully-Veolan), when the sight of the grey pony passing
the window at full trot induced the Bailie, but with due
precaution, to place it aside for the moment. Enter Jock Scriever
with a packet for Mr. Stanley; it is Colonel Talbot's seal, and
Edward's ringers tremble as he undoes it. Two official papers,
folded, signed, and sealed in all formality, drop out. They were
hastily picked up by the Bailie, who had a natural respect for
everything resembling a deed, and, glancing slily on their titles,
his eyes, or rather spectacles, are greeted with 'Protection by
his Royal Highness to the person of Cosmo Comyne Bradwardine,
Esq., of that ilk, commonly called Baron of Bradwardine, forfeited
for his accession to the late rebellion.' The other proves to be a
protection of the same tenor in favour of Edward Waverley, Esq.
Colonel Talbot's letter was in these words:--

'My DEAR EDWARD,

'I am just arrived here, and yet I have finished my business; it
has cost me some trouble though, as you shall hear. I waited upon
his Royal Highness immediately on my arrival, and found him in no
very good humour for my purpose. Three or four Scotch gentlemen
were just leaving his levee. After he had expressed himself to me
very courteously; "Would you think it," he said, "Talbot, here
have been half a dozen of the most respectable gentlemen and best
friends to government north of the Forth, Major Melville of
Cairnvreckan, Rubrick of Duchran, and others, who have fairly
wrung from me, by their downright importunity, a present
protection and the promise of a future pardon for that stubborn
old rebel whom they call Baron of Bradwardine. They allege that
his high personal character, and the clemency which he showed to
such of our people as fell into the rebels' hands, should weigh in
his favour, especially as the loss of his estate is likely to be a
severe enough punishment. Rubrick has undertaken to keep him at
his own house till things are settled in the country; but it's a
little hard to be forced in a manner to pardon such a mortal enemy
to the House of Brunswick." This was no favourable moment for
opening my business; however, I said I was rejoiced to learn that
his Royal Highness was in the course of granting such requests, as
it emboldened me to present one of the like nature in my own name.
He was very angry, but I persisted; I mentioned the uniform
support of our three votes in, the house, touched modestly on
services abroad, though valuable only in his Royal Highness's
having been pleased kindly to accept them, and founded pretty
strongly on his own expressions of friendship and good-will. He
was embarrassed, but obstinate. I hinted the policy of detaching,
on all future occasions, the heir of such a fortune as your
uncle's from the machinations of the disaffected. But I made no
impression. I mentioned the obligations which I lay under to Sir
Everard and to you personally, and claimed, as the sole reward of
my services, that he would be pleased to afford me the means of
evincing my gratitude. I perceived that he still meditated a
refusal, and, taking my commission from my pocket, I said (as a
last resource) that, as his Royal Highness did not, under these
pressing circumstances, think me worthy of a favour which he had
not scrupled to grant to other gentlemen whose services I could
hardly judge more important than my own, I must beg leave to
deposit, with all humility, my commission in his Royal Highness's
hands, and to retire from the service. He was not prepared for
this; he told me to take up my commission, said some handsome
things of my services, and granted my request. You are therefore
once more a free man, and I have promised for you that you will be
a good boy in future, and remember what you owe to the lenity of
government. Thus you see my prince can be as generous as yours. I
do not pretend, indeed, that he confers a favour with all the
foreign graces and compliments of your Chevalier errant; but he
has a plain English manner, and the evident reluctance with which
he grants your request indicates the sacrifice which he makes of
his own inclination to your wishes. My friend, the adjutant-
general, has procured me a duplicate of the Baron's protection
(the original being in Major Melville's possession), which I send
to you, as I know that if you can find him you will have pleasure
in being the first to communicate the joyful intelligence. He will
of course repair to the Duchran without loss of time, there to
ride quarantine for a few weeks. As for you, I give you leave to
escort him thither, and to stay a week there, as I understand a
certain fair lady is in that quarter. And I have the pleasure to
tell you that whatever progress you can make in her good graces
will be highly agreeable to Sir Everard and Mrs. Rachel, who will
never believe your views and prospects settled, and the three
ermines passant in actual safety, until you present them with a
Mrs. Edward Waverley. Now, certain love-affairs of my own--a good
many years since--interrupted some measures which were then
proposed in favour of the three ermines passant; so I am bound in
honour to make them amends. Therefore make good use of your time,
for, when your week is expired, it will be necessary that you go
to London to plead your pardon in the law courts.

'Ever, dear Waverley, yours most truly, 'PHILIP TALBOT.'





CHAPTER LXVII

    Happy's the wooing
    That's not long a doing


When the first rapturous sensation occasioned by these excellent
tidings had somewhat subsided, Edward proposed instantly to go
down to the glen to acquaint the Baron with their import. But the
cautious Bailie justly observed that, if the Baron were to appear
instantly in public, the tenantry and villagers might become
riotous in expressing their joy, and give offence to 'the powers
that be,' a sort of persons for whom the Bailie always had
unlimited respect. He therefore proposed that Mr. Waverley should
go to Janet Gellatley's and bring the Baron up under cloud of
night to Little Veolan, where he might once more enjoy the luxury
of a good bed. In the meanwhile, he said, he himself would go to
Captain Foster and show him the Baron's protection, and obtain his
countenance for harbouring him that night, and he would have
horses ready on the morrow to set him on his way to the Duchran
along with Mr. Stanley, 'whilk denomination, I apprehend, your
honour will for the present retain,' said the Bailie.

'Certainly, Mr. Macwheeble; but will you not go down to the glen
yourself in the evening to meet your patron?'

'That I wad wi' a' my heart; and mickle obliged to your honour for
putting me in mind o' mybounden duty. But it will be past sunset
afore I get back frae the Captain's, and at these unsonsy hours
the glen has a bad name; there's something no that canny about
auld Janet Gellatley. The Laird he'll no believe thae things, but
he was aye ower rash and venturesome, and feared neither man nor
deevil, an sae's seen o't. But right sure am I Sir George
Mackenyie says, that no divine can doubt there are witches, since
the Bible says thou shalt not suffer them to live; and that no
lawyer in Scotland can doubt it, since it is punishable with death
by our law. So there's baith law and gospel for it. An his honour
winna believe the Leviticus, he might aye believe the Statute-
book; but he may tak his ain way o't; it's a' ane to Duncan
Macwheeble. However, I shall send to ask up auld Janet this e'en;
it's best no to lightly them that have that character; and we'll
want Davie to turn the spit, for I'll gar Eppie put down a fat
goose to the fire for your honours to your supper.'

When it was near sunset Waverley hastened to the hut; and he could
not but allow that superstition had chosen no improper locality,
or unfit object, for the foundation of her fantastic terrors. It
resembled exactly the description of Spenser:--

    There, in a gloomy hollow glen, she found
    A little cottage built of sticks and reeds,
    In homely wise, and wall'd with sods around,
    In which a witch did dwell in loathly weeds,
    And wilful want, all careless of her needs,
    So choosing solitary to abide
    Far from all neighbours, that her devilish deeds,
    And hellish arts, from people she might hide,
    And hurt far off, unknown, whomsoever she espied.

He entered the cottage with these verses in his memory. Poor old
Janet, bent double with age and bleared with peat-smoke, was
tottering about the hut with a birch broom, muttering to herself
as she endeavoured to make her hearth and floor a little clean for
the reception of her expected guests. Waverley's step made her
start, look up, and fall a-trembling, so much had her nerves been
on the rack for her patron's safety. With difficulty Waverley made
her comprehend that the Baron was now safe from personal danger;
and when her mind had admitted that joyful news, it was equally
hard to make her believe that he was not to enter again upon
possession of his estate. 'It behoved to be,' she said, 'he wad
get it back again; naebody wad be sae gripple as to tak his gear
after they had gi'en him a pardon: and for that Inch-Grabbit, I
could whiles wish mysell a witch for his sake, if I werena feared
the Enemy wad tak me at my word.' Waverley then gave her some
money, and promised that her fidelity should be rewarded. 'How can
I be rewarded, sir, sae weel as just to see my auld maister and
Miss Rose come back and bruik their ain?'

Waverley now took leave of Janet, and soon stood beneath the
Baron's Patmos. At a low whistle he observed the veteran peeping
out to reconnoitre, like an old badger with his head out of his
hole. 'Ye hae come rather early, my good lad,' said he,
descending; 'I question if the red-coats hae beat the tattoo yet,
and we're not safe till then.'

'Good news cannot be told too soon,' said Waverley; and with
infinite joy communicated to him the happy tidings. The old man
stood for a moment in silent devotion, then exclaimed, 'Praise be
to God! I shall see my bairn again.'

'And never, I hope, to part with her more,' said Waverley.

'I trust in God not, unless it be to win the means of supporting
her; for my things are but in a bruckle state;--but what signifies
warld's gear?'

'And if,' said Waverley modestly, 'there were a situation in life
which would put Miss Bradwardine beyond the uncertainty of
fortune, and in the rank to which she was born, would you object
to it, my dear Baron, because it would make one of your friends
the happiest man in the world?' The Baron turned and looked at him
with great earnestness. 'Yes,' continued Edward, 'I shall not
consider my sentence of banishment as repealed unless you will
give me permission to accompany you to the Duchran, and--'

The Baron seemed collecting all his dignity to make a suitable
reply to what, at another time, he would have treated as the
propounding a treaty of alliance between the houses of Bradwardine
and Waverley. But his efforts were in vain; the father was too
mighty for the Baron; the pride of birth and rank were swept away;
in the joyful surprise a slight convulsion passed rapidly over his
features, as he gave way to the feelings of nature, threw his arms
around Waverley's neck, and sobbed out--'My son, my son! if I had
been to search the world, I would have made my choice here.'
Edward returned the embrace with great sympathy of feeling, and
for a little while they both kept silence. At length it was broken
by Edward. 'But Miss Bradwardine?'

'She had never a will but her old father's; besides, you are a
likely youth, of honest principles and high birth; no, she never
had any other will than mine, and in my proudest days I could not
have wished a mair eligible espousal for her than the nephew of my
excellent old friend, Sir Everard. But I hope, young man, ye deal
na rashly in this matter? I hope ye hae secured the approbation of
your ain friends and allies, particularly of your uncle, who is in
loco parentis? Ah! we maun tak heed o' that.' Edward assured him
that Sir Everard would think himself highly honoured in the
flattering reception his proposal had met with, and that it had
his entire approbation; in evidence of which he put Colonel
Talbot's letter into the Baron's hand. The Baron read it with
great attention. 'Sir Everard,' he said, 'always despised wealth
in comparison of honour and birth; and indeed he hath no occasion
to court the Diva Pecunia. Yet I now wish, since this Malcolm
turns out such a parricide, for I can call him no better, as to
think of alienating the family inheritance--I now wish (his eyes
fixed on a part of the roof which was visible above the trees)
that I could have left Rose the auld hurley-house and the riggs
belanging to it. And yet,' said he, resuming more cheerfully,
'it's maybe as weel as it is; for, as Baron of Bradwardine, I
might have thought it my duty to insist upon certain compliances
respecting name and bearings, whilk now, as a landless laird wi' a
tocherless daughter, no one can blame me for departing from.'

'Now, Heaven be praised!' thought Edward,'that Sir Everard does
not hear these scruples! The three ermines passant and rampant
bear would certainly have gone together by the ears.' He then,
with all the ardour of a young lover, assured the Baron that he
sought for his happiness only in Rose's heart and hand, and
thought himself as happy in her father's simple approbation as if
he had settled an earldom upon his daughter.

They now reached Little Veolan. The goose was smoking on the
table, and the Bailie brandished his knife and fork. A joyous
greeting took place between him and his patron. The kitchen, too,
had its company. Auld Janet was established at the ingle-nook;
Davie had turned the spit to his immortal honour; and even Ban and
Buscar, in the liberality of Macwheeble's joy, had been stuffed to
the throat with food, and now lay snoring on the floor.

The next day conducted the Baron and his young friend to the
Duchran, where the former was expected, in consequence of the
success of the nearly unanimous application of the Scottish
friends of government in his favour. This had been so general and
so powerful that it was almost thought his estate might have been
saved, had it not passed into the rapacious hands of his unworthy
kinsman, whose right, arising out of the Baron's attainder, could
not be affected by a pardon from the crown. The old gentleman,
however, said, with his usual spirit, he was more gratified by the
hold he possessed in the good opinion of his neighbours than he
would have been in being rehabilitated and restored in integrum,
had it been found practicable.'

We shall not attempt to describe the meeting of the father and
daughter, loving each other so affectionately, and separated under
such perilous circumstances. Still less shall we attempt to
analyse the deep blush of Rose at receiving the compliments of
Waverley, or stop to inquire whether she had any curiosity
respecting the particular cause of his journey to Scotland at that
period. We shall not even trouble the reader with the humdrum
details of a courtship Sixty Years Since. It is enough to say
that, under so strict a martinet as the Baron, all things were
conducted in due form. He took upon himself, the morning after
their arrival, the task of announcing the proposal of Waverley to
Rose, which she heard with a proper degree of maiden timidity.
Fame does, however, say that Waverley had the evening before found
five minutes to apprise her of what was coming, while the rest of
the company were looking at three twisted serpents which formed a,
jet d'eau in the garden.

My fair readers will judge for themselves; but, for my part, I
cannot conceive how so important an affair could be communicated
in so short a space of time; at least, it certainly took a full
hour in the Baron's mode of conveying it.

Waverley was now considered as a received lover in all the forms.
He was made, by dint of smirking and nodding on the part of the
lady of the house, to sit next Miss Bradwardine at dinner, to be
Miss Bradwardine's partner at cards. If he came into the room, she
of the four Miss Rubricks who chanced to be next Rose was sure to
recollect that her thimble or her scissors were at the other end
of the room, in order to leave the seat nearest to Miss
Bradwardine vacant for his occupation. And sometimes, if papa and
mamma were not in the way to keep them on their good behaviour,
the misses would titter a little. The old Laird of Duchran would
also have his occasional jest, and the old lady her remark. Even
the Baron could not refrain; but here Rose escaped every
embarrassment but that of conjecture, for his wit was usually
couched in a Latin quotation. The very footmen sometimes grinned
too broadly, the maidservants giggled mayhap too loud, and a
provoking air of intelligence seemed to pervade the whole family.
Alice Bean, the pretty maid of the cavern, who, after her father's
misfortune, as she called it, had attended Rose as fille-de-
chambre, smiled and smirked with the best of them. Rose and
Edward, however, endured all these little vexatious circumstances
as other folks have done before and since, and probably contrived
to obtain some indemnification, since they are not supposed, on
the whole, to have been particularly unhappy during Waverley's six
days' stay at the Duchran.

It was finally arranged that Edward should go to Waverley-Honour
to make the necessary arrangements for his marriage, thence to
London to take the proper measures for pleading his pardon, and
return as soon as possible to claim the hand of his plighted
bride. He also intended in his journey to visit Colonel Talbot;
but, above all, it was his most important object to learn the fate
of the unfortunate Chief of Glennaquoich; to visit him at
Carlisle, and to try whether anything could be done for procuring,
if not a pardon, a commutation at least, or alleviation, of the
punishment to which he was almost certain of being condemned; and,
in case of the worst, to offer the miserable Flora an asylum with
Rose, or otherwise to assist her views in any mode which might
seem possible. The fate of Fergus seemed hard to be averted.
Edward had already striven to interest his friend, Colonel Talbot,
in his behalf; but had been given distinctly to understand by his
reply that his credit in matters of that nature was totally
exhausted.

The Colonel was still in Edinburgh, and proposed to wait there for
some months upon business confided to him by the Duke of
Cumberland. He was to be joined by Lady Emily, to whom easy
travelling and goat's whey were recommended, and who was to
journey northward under the escort of Francis Stanley. Edward,
therefore, met the Colonel at Edinburgh, who wished him joy in the
kindest manner on his approaching happiness, and cheerfully
