wrath is poured out without mixture in the cup of indignation, and
a day when the land should give testimony against popery, and
prelacy, and quakerism, and independency, and supremacy, and
erastianism, and antinomianism, and a' the errors of the church?'

'And that's a' your Whiggery,' reechoed the Jacobite heroine;
'that's a' your Whiggery, and your presbytery, ye cut-lugged,
graning carles! What! d' ye think the lads wi' the kilts will care
for yer synods and yer presbyteries, and yer buttock-mail, and yer
stool o' repentance? Vengeance on the black face o't! mony an
honester woman's been set upon it than streeks doon beside ony
Whig in the country. I mysell--'

Here John Mucklewrath, who dreaded her entering upon a detail of
personal experience, interposed his matrimonial authority. 'Gae
hame, and be d--(that I should say sae), and put on the sowens
for supper.'

'And you, ye doil'd dotard,' replied his gentle helpmate, her
wrath, which had hitherto wandered abroad over the whole assembly,
being at once and violently impelled into its natural channel, 'YE
stand there hammering dog-heads for fules that will never snap
them at a Highlandman, instead of earning bread for your family
and shoeing this winsome young gentleman's horse that's just come
frae the north! I'se warrant him nane of your whingeing King
George folk, but a gallant Gordon, at the least o' him.'

The eyes of the assembly were now turned upon Waverley, who took
the opportunity to beg the smith to shoe his guide's horse with
all speed, as he wished to proceed on his journey; for he had
heard enough to make him sensible that there would be danger in
delaying long in this place. The smith's eyes rested on him with a
look of displeasure and suspicion, not lessened by the eagerness
with which his wife enforced Waverley's mandate. 'D'ye hear what
the weel-favoured young gentleman says, ye drunken ne'er-do-good?'

'And what may your name be, sir?' quoth Mucklewrath.

'It is of no consequence to you, my friend, provided I pay your
labour.'

'But it may be of consequence to the state, sir,' replied an old
farmer, smelling strongly of whisky and peat-smoke; 'and I doubt
we maun delay your journey till you have seen the Laird.'

'You certainly,' said Waverley, haughtily, 'will find it both
difficult and dangerous to detain me, unless you can produce some
proper authority.'

There was a pause and a whisper among the crowd--'Secretary
Murray'--'Lord Lewis Gordon'--'Maybe the Chevalier himsell!' Such
were the surmises that passed hurriedly among them, and there was
obviously an increased disposition to resist Waverley's departure.
He attempted to argue mildly with them, but his voluntary ally,
Mrs. Mucklewrath, broke in upon and drowned his expostulations,
taking his part with an abusive violence which was all set down to
Edward's account by those on whom it was bestowed. 'YE'LL stop ony
gentleman that's the Prince's freend?' for she too, though with
other feelings, had adopted the general opinion respecting
Waverley. 'I daur ye to touch him,' spreading abroad her long and
muscular fingers, garnished with claws which a vulture might have
envied. 'I'll set my ten commandments in the face o' the first
loon that lays a finger on him.'

'Gae hame, gudewife,' quoth the farmer aforesaid; 'it wad better
set you to be nursing the gudeman's bairns than to be deaving us
here.'

'HIS bairns?' retorted the Amazon, regarding her husband with a
grin of ineffable contempt--'HIS bairns!

    O gin ye were dead, gudeman,
      And a green turf on your head, gudeman!
    Then I wad ware my widowhood
      Upon a ranting Highlandman'

This canticle, which excited a suppressed titter among the younger
part of the audience, totally overcame the patience of the taunted
man of the anvil. 'Deil be in me but I'll put this het gad down
her throat!' cried he in an ecstasy of wrath, snatching a bar from
the forge; and he might have executed his threat, had he not been
withheld by a part of the mob, while the rest endeavoured to force
the termagant out of his presence.

Waverley meditated a retreat in the confusion, but his horse was
nowhere to be seen. At length he observed at some distance his
faithful attendant, Ebenezer, who, as soon as he had perceived the
turn matters were likely to take, had withdrawn both horses from
the press, and, mounted on the one and holding the other, answered
the loud and repeated calls of Waverley for his horse. 'Na, na! if
ye are nae friend to kirk and the king, and are detained as siccan
a person, ye maun answer to honest men of the country for breach
of contract; and I maun keep the naig and the walise for damage
and expense, in respect my horse and mysell will lose to-morrow's
day's wark, besides the afternoon preaching.'

Edward, out of patience, hemmed in and hustled by the rabble on
every side, and every moment expecting personal violence, resolved
to try measures of intimidation, and at length drew a pocket-
pistol, threatening, on the one hand, to shoot whomsoever dared to
stop him, and, on the other, menacing Ebenezer with a similar doom
if he stirred a foot with the horses. The sapient Partridge says
that one man with a pistol is equal to a hundred unarmed, because,
though he can shoot but one of the multitude, yet no one knows but
that he himself may be that luckless individual. The levy en masse
of Cairnvreckan would therefore probably have given way, nor would
Ebenezer, whose natural paleness had waxed three shades more
cadaverous, have ventured to dispute a mandate so enforced, had
not the Vulcan of the village, eager to discharge upon some more
worthy object the fury which his helpmate had provoked, and not
ill satisfied to find such an object in Waverley, rushed at him
with the red-hot bar of iron with such determination as made the
discharge of his pistol an act of self-defence. The unfortunate
man fell; and while Edward, thrilled with a natural horror at the
incident, neither had presence of mind to unsheathe his sword nor
to draw his remaining pistol, the populace threw themselves upon
him, disarmed him, and were about to use him with great violence,
when the appearance of a venerable clergyman, the pastor of the
parish, put a curb on their fury.

This worthy man (none of the Goukthrapples or Rentowels)
maintained his character with the common people, although he
preached the practical fruits of Christian faith as well as its
abstract tenets, and was respected by the higher orders,
notwithstanding he declined soothing their speculative errors by
converting the pulpit of the gospel into a school of heathen
morality. Perhaps it is owing to this mixture of faith and
practice in his doctrine that, although his memory has formed a
sort of era in the annals of Cairnvreckan, so that the
parishioners, to denote what befell Sixty Years Since, still say
it happened 'in good Mr. Morton's time,' I have never been able to
discover which he belonged to, the evangelical or the moderate
party in the kirk. Nor do I hold the circumstance of much moment,
since, in my own remembrance, the one was headed by an Erskine,
the other by a Robertson.

[Footnote: The Reverend John Erskine, D. D, an eminent Scottish
divine and a most excellent man, headed the Evangelical party in
the Church of Scotland at the time when the celebrated Doctor
Robertson, the historian, was the leader of the Moderate party.
These two distinguished persons were colleagues in the Old Grey
Friars' Church, Edinburgh; and, however much they differed in
church politics, preserved the most perfect harmony as private
friends and as clergymen serving the same cure]

Mr. Morton had been alarmed by the discharge of the pistol and the
increasing hubbub around the smithy. His first attention, after he
had directed the bystanders to detain Waverley, but to abstain
from injuring him, was turned to the body of Mucklewrath, over
which his wife, in a revulsion of feeling, was weeping, howling,
and tearing her elf-locks in a state little short of distraction.
On raising up the smith, the first discovery was that he was
alive; and the next that he was likely to live as long as if he
had never heard the report of a pistol in his life. He had made a
narrow escape, however; the bullet had grazed his head and stunned
him for a moment or two, which trance terror and confusion of
spirit had prolonged somewhat longer. He now arose to demand
vengeance on the person of Waverley, and with difficulty
acquiesced in the proposal of Mr. Morton that he should be carried
before the Laird, as a justice of peace, and placed at his
disposal. The rest of the assistants unanimously agreed to the
measure recommended; even Mrs. Mucklewrath, who had begun to
recover from her hysterics, whimpered forth, 'She wadna say
naething against what the minister proposed; he was e'en ower gude
for his trade, and she hoped to see him wi' a dainty decent
bishop's gown on his back; a comelier sight than your Geneva
cloaks and bands, I wis.'

All controversy being thus laid aside, Waverley, escorted by the
whole inhabitants of the village who were not bed-ridden, was
conducted to the house of Cairnvreckan, which was about half a
mile distant.





CHAPTER XXXI

AN EXAMINATION


Major Melville of Cairnvreckan, an elderly gentleman, who had
spent his youth in the military service, received Mr. Morton with
great kindness, and our hero with civility, which the equivocal
circumstances wherein Edward was placed rendered constrained and
distant.

The nature of the smith's hurt was inquired into, and, as the
actual injury was likely to prove trifling, and the circumstances
in which it was received rendered the infliction on Edward's part
a natural act of self-defence, the Major conceived he might
dismiss that matter on Waverley's depositing in his hands a small
sum for the benefit of the wounded person.

'I could wish, sir,' continued the Major, 'that my duty terminated
here; but it is necessary that we should have some further inquiry
into the cause of your journey through the country at this
unfortunate and distracted time.'

Mr. Ebenezer Cruickshanks now stood forth, and communicated to the
magistrate all he knew or suspected from the reserve of Waverley
and the evasions of Callum Beg. The horse upon which Edward rode,
he said, he knew to belong to Vich Ian Vohr, though he dared not
tax Edward's former attendant with the fact, lest he should have
his house and stables burnt over his head some night by that
godless gang, the Mac-Ivors. He concluded by exaggerating his own
services to kirk and state, as having been the means, under God
(as he modestly qualified the assertion), of attaching this
suspicious and formidable delinquent. He intimated hopes of future
reward, and of instant reimbursement for loss of time, and even of
character, by travelling on the state business on the fast-day.

To this Major Melville answered, with great composure, that so far
from claiming any merit in this affair, Mr. Cruickshanks ought to
deprecate the imposition of a very heavy fine for neglecting to
lodge, in terms of the recent proclamation, an account with the
nearest magistrate of any stranger who came to his inn; that, as
Mr. Cruickshanks boasted so much of religion and loyalty, he
should not impute this conduct to disaffection, but only suppose
that his zeal for kirk and state had been lulled asleep by the
opportunity of charging a stranger with double horse-hire; that,
however, feeling himself incompetent to decide singly upon the
conduct of a person of such importance, he should reserve it for
consideration of the next quarter-sessions. Now our history for
the present saith no more of him of the Candlestick, who wended
dolorous and malcontent back to his own dwelling.

Major Melville then commanded the villagers to return to their
homes, excepting two, who officiated as constables, and whom he
directed to wait below. The apartment was thus cleared of every
person but Mr. Morton, whom the Major invited to remain; a sort of
factor, who acted as clerk; and Waverley himself. There ensued a
painful and embarrassed pause, till Major Melville, looking upon
Waverley with much compassion, and often consulting a paper or
memorandum which he held in his hand, requested to know his name.

'Edward Waverley.'

'I thought so; late of the--dragoons, and nephew of Sir Everard
Waverley of Waverley-Honour?'

'The same.'

'Young gentleman, I am extremely sorry that this painful duty has
fallen to my lot.'

'Duty, Major Melville, renders apologies superfluous.'

'True, sir; permit me, therefore, to ask you how your time has
been disposed of since you obtained leave of absence from your
regiment, several weeks ago, until the present moment?'

'My reply,' said Waverley, 'to so general a question must be
guided by the nature of the charge which renders it necessary. I
request to know what that charge is, and upon what authority I am
forcibly detained to reply to it?'

'The charge, Mr. Waverley, I grieve to say, is of a very high
nature, and affects your character both as a soldier and a
subject. In the former capacity you are charged with spreading
mutiny and rebellion among the men you commanded, and setting them
the example of desertion, by prolonging your own absence from the
regiment, contrary to the express orders of your commanding
officer. The civil crime of which you stand accused is that of
high treason and levying war against the king, the highest
delinquency of which a subject can be guilty.'

'And by what authority am I detained to reply to such heinous
calumnies?'

'By one which you must not dispute, nor I disobey.'

He handed to Waverley a warrant from the Supreme Criminal Court of
Scotland, in full form, for apprehending and securing the person
of Edward Waverley, Esq., suspected of treasonable practices and
other high crimes and misdemeanours.

The astonishment which Waverley expressed at this communication
was imputed by Major Melville to conscious guilt, while Mr. Morton
was rather disposed to construe it into the surprise of innocence
unjustly suspected. There was something true in both conjectures;
for although Edward's mind acquitted him of the crime with which
he was charged, yet a hasty review of his own conduct convinced
him he might have great difficulty in establishing his innocence
to the satisfaction of others.

'It is a very painful part of this painful business,' said Major
Melville, after a pause, 'that, under so grave a charge, I must
necessarily request to see such papers as you have on your
person.'

'You shall, sir, without reserve,' said Edward, throwing his
pocket-book and memorandums upon the table; 'there is but one with
which I could wish you would dispense.'

'I am afraid, Mr. Waverley, I can indulge you with no
reservation,'

'You shall see it then, sir; and as it can be of no service, I beg
it may be returned.'

He took from his bosom the lines he had that morning received, and
presented them with the envelope. The Major perused them in
silence, and directed his clerk to make a copy of them. He then
wrapped the copy in the envelope, and placing it on the table
before him, returned the original to Waverley, with an air of
melancholy gravity.

After indulging the prisoner, for such our hero must now be
considered, with what he thought a reasonable time for reflection,
Major Melville resumed his examination, premising that, as Mr.
Waverley seemed to object to general questions, his
interrogatories should be as specific as his information
permitted. He then proceeded in his investigation, dictating, as
he went on, the import of the questions and answers to the
amanuensis, by whom it was written down.

'Did Mr. Waverley know one Humphry Houghton, a non-commissioned
officer in Gardiner's dragoons?'

'Certainly; he was sergeant of my troop, and son of a tenant of my
uncle.'

'Exactly--and had a considerable share of your confidence, and an
influence among his comrades?'

'I had never occasion to repose confidence in a person of his
description,' answered Waverley. 'I favoured Sergeant Houghton as
a clever, active young fellow, and I believe his fellow-soldiers
respected him accordingly.'

'But you used through this man,' answered Major Melville, 'to
communicate with such of your troop as were recruited upon
Waverley-Honour?'

'Certainly; the poor fellows, finding themselves in a regiment
chiefly composed of Scotch or Irish, looked up to me in any of
their little distresses, and naturally made their countryman and
sergeant their spokesman on such occasions.'

'Sergeant Houghton's influence,' continued the Major, 'extended,
then, particularly over those soldiers who followed you to the
regiment from your uncle's estate?'

'Surely; but what is that to the present purpose?'

'To that I am just coming, and I beseech your candid reply. Have
you, since leaving the regiment, held any correspondence, direct
or indirect, with this Sergeant Houghton?'

'I!--I hold correspondence with a man of his rank and situation!
How, or for what purpose?'

'That you are to explain. But did you not, for example, send to
him for some books?'

'You remind me of a trifling commission,' said Waverley, 'which I
gave Sergeant Houghton, because my servant could not read. I do
recollect I bade him, by letter, select some books, of which I
sent him a list, and send them to me at Tully-Veolan.'

'And of what description were those books?'

'They related almost entirely to elegant literature; they were
designed for a lady's perusal.'

'Were there not, Mr. Waverley, treasonable tracts and pamphlets
among them?'

'There were some political treatises, into which I hardly looked.
They had been sent to me by the officiousness of a kind friend,
whose heart is more to be esteemed than his prudence or political
sagacity; they seemed to be dull compositions.'

'That friend,' continued the persevering inquirer, 'was a Mr.
Pembroke, a nonjuring clergyman, the author of two treasonable
works, of which the manuscripts were found among your baggage?'

'But of which, I give you my honour as a gentleman,' replied
Waverley, 'I never read six pages.'

'I am not your judge, Mr. Waverley; your examination will be
transmitted elsewhere. And now to proceed. Do you know a person
that passes by the name of Wily Will, or Will Ruthven?'

'I never heard of such a name till this moment.'

'Did you never through such a person, or any other person,
communicate with Sergeant Humphry Houghton, instigating him to
desert, with as many of his comrades as he could seduce to join
him, and unite with the Highlanders and other rebels now in arms
under the command of the Young Pretender?'

'I assure you I am not only entirely guiltless of the plot you
have laid to my charge, but I detest it from the very bottom of my
soul, nor would I be guilty of such treachery to gain a throne,
either for myself or any other man alive.'

'Yet when I consider this envelope in the handwriting of one of
those misguided gentlemen who are now in arms against their
country, and the verses which it enclosed, I cannot but find some
analogy between the enterprise I have mentioned and the exploit of
Wogan, which the writer seems to expect you should imitate.'

Waverley was struck with the coincidence, but denied that the
wishes or expectations of the letter-writer were to be regarded as
proofs of a charge otherwise chimerical.

'But, if I am rightly informed, your time was spent, during your
absence from the regiment, between the house of this Highland
Chieftain and that of Mr. Bradwardine of Bradwardine, also in arms
for this unfortunate cause?'

'I do not mean to disguise it; but I do deny, most resolutely,
being privy to any of their designs against the government.'

'You do not, however, I presume, intend to deny that you attended
your host Glennaquoich to a rendezvous, where, under a pretence of
a general hunting match, most of the accomplices of his treason
were assembled to concert measures for taking arms?'

'I acknowledge having been at such a meeting,' said Waverley; 'but
I neither heard nor saw anything which could give it the character
you affix to it.'

'From thence you proceeded,' continued the magistrate, 'with
Glennaquoich and a part of his clan to join the army of the Young
Pretender, and returned, after having paid your homage to him, to
discipline and arm the remainder, and unite them to his bands on
their way southward?'

'I never went with Glennaquoich on such an errand. I never so much
as heard that the person whom you mention was in the country.'

He then detailed the history of his misfortune at the hunting
match, and added, that on his return he found himself suddenly
deprived of his commission, and did not deny that he then, for the
first time, observed symptoms which indicated a disposition in the
Highlanders to take arms; but added that, having no inclination to
join their cause, and no longer any reason for remaining in
Scotland, he was now on his return to his native country, to which
he had been summoned by those who had a right to direct his
motions, as Major Melville would perceive from the letters on the
table.
