
Paul sped away on his mission with a light heart He was elated
above measure by his day's adventure, and his head was brimming
over with plans and dreams of the future, which was to be so
glorious and so distinguished.

He the chosen comrade of their future king! he the loyal upholder
of that king's rights, the bulwark of the throne, the trusted
noble, the shrewd counsellor, the valiant warrior! A boy's ambition
is boundless--innocent of envy or evil, but wild in its flights.

Paul went on his way with glowing cheeks and sparkling eyes, till a
stealthy sound in the bushes beside him made him stop short,
listening intently. He heard voices in cautious whisper.

"He cannot be far away. He certainly came to the wood. Long Peter
says he had another boy with him; but be that as it may, he is
here, and close at hand. We must lose no time. The alarm will be
given if he is missed. Take one, or take both, it matters not if we
but get the prince into our hands. He may be known by his ostrich
plume and his golden curls, and the jewelled collar he wears about
his neck."

Paul heard these words plainly, and it seemed as if his heart were
in his mouth. It beat so violently that he fancied the conspirators
must surely hear. The words he had heard but yesterday flashed back
into his mind.

It was true then. There was a conspiracy to carry off the young
prince, and the band of men pledged to the deed were actually on
their track and close at hand. How could he warn the prince in
time? How could he save him from their hands?

For a moment the boy's courage seemed to desert him. A cold sweat
broke out on his face, his knees trembled beneath him. But his fear
was not a selfish or unworthy one; it was all for the royal child,
whose peril was so imminent.

And then, with a sudden revulsion of feeling, he recollected that
he himself wore the cap with the white plume, the jewelled collar
of royalty, and the dagger the little prince habitually carried in
his girdle. And had he not the same floating golden curls, the same
cast of features, the same active figure, and almost the same
stature? Might he not save the real prince by playing his part to
some purpose for the time being? The men would not distinguish
between the pair--he felt certain of that; they would at once make
off with their prize. Later on, of course, they would discover the
trick, but then the prince would be safe. His own followers would
have long since discovered him. Yes, he would do it--he would save
the prince at all cost. What did it matter if his own life were the
forfeit? The heir of England would be saved.

It was no small act of heroism to which the boy made up his mind in
those few moments. Those were lawless days, and human life was held
very cheap. The band of fierce men who had believed they were
carrying off a prince, would think nothing of running him through
with their swords when they discovered how they had been tricked,
and that by a mere child. Paul set his teeth hard and braced
himself up for the task he had set himself. He knew his peril-he
realized it too; but he was a soldier's son, and had he not said he
would live and die for the prince? Would he ever be worthy of the
knighthood every lad looked forward to as the goal of his ambition,
if he shrank now from the task he had set himself?

Hardly had that resolution been taken before there sprang out from
the thick underwood two or three fierce-looking men, armed to the
teeth.

"Ha, my young springal! well met, in sooth," cried the foremost of
the band, laying a firm hand upon the boy's shoulder. "We have been
looking long for you.

"To horse, brave fellows! we have our prize. We may not linger
here."

"Hands off, varlet!" cried Paul, throwing himself into the
character of prince with great energy and goodwill. "Know you to
whom you speak--whom ye thus rough handle? Have a care; the Prince
of Wales is not thus to be treated."

"Pardon, sweet prince," cried the leader, with ironical courtesy,
his grasp not relaxing one whit from the boy's arm. "Time leaves us
scant opportunity for the smooth speech of the court. We must use
all despatch in conveying your worshipful presence hence, to the
safe custody of England's friends.

"Nay, struggle not, boy. We would not harm you. You are safe with
us--"

"I know you not. I will not be thus insulted. I will to my royal
parents," cried Paul in well-feigned indignation.

But remonstrance and resistance were alike useless. At the sound of
a peculiar whistle from one of the party, there immediately
appeared some half score of mounted troopers, leading other horses
with them. The boy was swung upon the saddle of one of the horses
and fastened there by means of thongs, which, although not
incommoding him whilst riding, utterly precluded all idea of
escape. Moreover the steed was placed between those of two of the
stalwart troopers, each of whom kept a hand upon the reins of the
supposed prince; and thus, silently but rapidly, the little band
threaded the intricacies of the wood, by paths evidently known to
them, and ere the dusk had fully come, had cleared the forest
altogether, and were galloping steadily and fast across the open
country toward the north.

Paul had not spoken another word. He had been in terror lest by
some inadvertent phrase he might betray himself, and let those
fierce men know that he was not the prince; in which case not only
might his own life be forfeit, but the real prince might fall into
their hands. But now as the dusk overtook them, and still they were
flying farther and farther away from the city where the prince lay,
his heart rose, and beat with a generous triumph; for though his
own fate might be a speedy death, the heir of England was safe.

It was dark before the lights of a wayside hostelry became visible
across the dreary waste they were traversing. The leader of the
band turned and addressed a few words to the troopers who had the
care of the captive; and at once he felt himself deprived of the
tell-tale cap and collar, the former of which was replaced by a
cloth cap belonging to one of the men, which almost concealed the
boy's features. He was also wrapped in a mantle that further
disguised him; and thus they rode up to the inn.

A ruddy stream of light poured out from that comfortable hostelry,
and Paul saw, seated on his stout nag, with three of his servants
behind him, the well-known figure of a neighbouring farmer, whom
business often took to a town many miles from his native place.

The troopers were dismounting and hurrying into the inn. Two only
remained with their prize. Paul's resolution was quickly taken. He
threw off the encumbering mantle and cap, and cried aloud:

"Gaffer Hood, Gaffer Hood, come and help me! These men have carried
me off, and are taking me I know not whither. Come and help me to
get free, and my father will richly reward you. They think I am the
Prince of Wales, who was playing with me but this afternoon. Tell
them who I really am, and they will let me go."

"By the mass, if that be not the voice of little Paul Stukely!"
exclaimed the honest farmer in great amazement, as he brought his
stout nag alongside the animal that carried the child. The troopers
drew their swords as if to interpose (and in those days it was
considered better to leave these reckless gentlemen alone when they
had booty in their hands, however come by, and no doubt they were
in league with the host of the inn); but the character of the
dialogue between the farmer and the child was so astounding that
the men remained mute and motionless, whilst the leader of the
gang, who had heard something of the words, came hurrying to the
spot, to see that his prize was safe.

He was quite prepared to make short work of farmer and men alike if
there should be any futile attempt at rescue. The man knew his
trade, and long habit had made him utterly reckless of human life.
But the words he heard exchanged between the child and the farmer
held him spellbound, too.

"I was playing with the prince," cried Paul, loud enough for all to
hear. "He bid me take his collar and cap and be prince in fantasy,
whilst he was my esquire. Afterwards, when he was weary, he lay
down to rest, and these fellows caught me and carried me off,
thinking I was prince indeed. I would not tell them what they had
done, lest they should return and capture him. But bid them loose
me now, good Gaffer, and give them all the money in your pouch as
my ransom, and I warrant my father will repay you double.

"It is the heir of the House of Lancaster you want, gentlemen, not
a poor knight's youngest son, a lad of no account. This good man
will pay you some broad gold pieces if you will let me go; but if
you are resolved to take my life as the price of my deceit, why,
take it now. I am not afraid to die in a good cause, and this
worthy man will perchance take home my body to my mother, that it
may lie in time beside hers."

"Nay, lad, we will all die ere they shall touch a hair of thy bonny
head," cried the honest farmer, signing to his men to come and be
ready. "If there's a man in this troop dastard enough to lay a hand
upon thee, he shall settle accounts with Gaffer Hood ere he leaves
the place. A farmer can fight, ay, and give good strong blows, too.

"Now, gentlemen, which of you will lay hands on that gallant child?
for he will have to do it across my dead body first."

"Tush, man, put up thy sword," cried the leader of the band, who,
being a man prompt both in action and thought, had taken in the
bearings of the situation with great rapidity, and upon whom the
simple heroism of the child had not been thrown away.

Rough and self-seeking and cruel as lawless times had made such
men, they were not devoid of all better feelings; and although, had
there been no interposition on his behalf, Paul might have been a
victim to their irritation at being thus duped, as it was his life
was now safe enough.

"We war not with babes and children. The boy has borne himself
gallantly, and we will take the gold pieces and let him go free.
Our chance may come another time, and we want not the cumbrance of
children on our march. He would not be hostage worth having, so
ransom him and begone. We have the prince's jewels if we have not
the lad himself.

"Go your way, boy; you will make a soldier in time. You have the
right grit in you. Farewell! one day we may meet again."

And thinking, perhaps, that he and his band had better not linger
longer, the captain gave the word to mount; and as soon as Paul's
thongs were cut and the ransom paid over, the troopers set spurs to
their horses' sides and vanished away in the darkness.

Once again little Paul Stukely stood in the presence of royalty.
The prince's arm was about his neck, the proud queen's eyes--moist
now with tears--were bent upon him in loving gratitude, whilst from
the king's lips he was receiving words of praise that set the hot
blood mounting to his brow. Behind him stood his father, all around
were the attendants of the royal family; and Paul, unaccustomed to
be thus the centre of attention, almost wished the ground would
open to hide him, although his heart could not but beat high in
gratification and loving loyalty.

All the city was ringing with the daring attempt that had been made
to carry off the young Prince of Wales, and the gallantry of the
boy who had dared to brave the consequences, and take upon himself
the personality of the youthful Edward. The child himself, the
farmer who had been the means of his restoration, and the knight
who owned so brave a son, all had been heroes of the past
six-and-thirty hours.

A special mass of thanksgiving had been sung in the cathedral on
the Sunday. The captain of the town, who had heard a rumour which
had sent him flying into the forest the previous afternoon, to find
the true prince vainly seeking his missing comrade, could not make
enough of the boy whose simple-hearted gallantry had saved him from
a lasting remorse, and perhaps a lasting disgrace. Indeed, Sir
James Stukely had had to hurry his child home in haste to his
mother's care, lest he should hear too much of his own prowess;
and, thrusting him into her loving arms, had said, in a voice which
quivered in spite of himself:

"Here, dame, take the boy and give him a kiss to show that he has
been a good lad. He has done his duty, as a Stukely ought to do,
and that should be enough for all of us. But let us have no
nonsense talked. What will the country come to if everyone who does
his duty as it should be done expects to be called a hero, and I
know not what besides? The prince is safe, and the boy likewise.
Now off to bed with him, and no more nonsense to be talked in my
hearing.

"God bless you, child! You'll live yet to be a credit to the name
you bear."

And Paul was made happier by that one word from his stern though
loving sire than by all the praises he had heard lavished upon
himself during the past hours. For there was no one in the wide
world that the child so reverenced as his dark-browed father, who
seldom praised his children, and was inflexible in his punishments
whenever they were deserved. To be told by him that he had done his
duty, and would be a credit to his house, was happiness far beyond
his deserts, he thought; and he registered a mental vow, deep down
in his brave little heart, that he would never in time to come give
the world cause to say he had not lived up to the promise of his
boyhood.

The loving sympathy with which his mother listened to his story,
the caresses she showered upon him in thought of the deadly peril
in which he had stood, and the hearty approbation of his brothers
and the retainers and servants in his father's halls, were a small
pleasure as compared with those few brief, almost stern, words from
that father himself. Even the notification that he was to present
himself on the Monday before the king and queen added little to his
happiness, although the idea of seeing once again his admired
little prince could not but fill him with gratification.

His father led him to the royal presence, and bowed low on hearing
himself thanked for having brought up sons who so well demonstrated
the loyalty and devotion which had been born and bred in them. But
Paul scarce heard what passed, for the little prince dashed forward
to take him round the neck, kissing him with all the natural grace
of childhood, whilst half rebuking him for having denied him his
own legitimate share in the adventure.

"If we had but been together we would have achieved our own
liberty," he said, his bright eyes flashing with the spirit of his
ancestors. "We would have shown them what Plantagenet blood could
do. I would I had been there. I would I had shared the adventure
with you. It would have been a thing for our bards to write of, for
our soldiers to sing over their campfires. But now I shall have
none of the glory. I was sleeping in a tree. It was you who were
the hero, the prince."

"Ah, sweet prince, had they once laid hold on the true prize,
methinks neither you nor I would so easily have escaped," said
Paul, who had vivid recollections of the iron hands that had been
laid upon him by the stern men who had carried him off. "I know not
how I could have escaped, had it not been that they were willing to
be quit of me when they found out I was not him whom they sought."

But the prince was hardly satisfied with the rather tame ending to
the adventure.

"To be rescued by a farmer, and carried home on his nag!" he said,
tossing back his curls with a gesture of hauteur. "Paul, I would
that you had cut your way through the very heart of them. I would
you had left at least one or two dead upon the spot. Had we been
together--" He clenched his hands for a moment, but then laughed a
little, and said in a whisper--"But no matter, Paul; they all say
that you played the hero, and I will not envy you for it. We shall
be men one day, and then I shall come and claim your promise. You
will be my faithful esquire, and I will be your liege lord.
Together we will roam the world in search of adventure, and well I
know that we shall meet with such as will not disgrace the royal
house of the Plantagenet."

The child's eyes flashed, and an answering spark was kindled in the
breast of the hardy little Paul. He put his hand within that of the
prince, and cried loud enough to be heard by those who stood by:

"Dear my lord, I will serve you to the death. I will go with you to
the world's end."

Sir James laid a warning hand upon his son's shoulder.

"Boy," he said in a low voice, "it becomes thee not thus to put
thyself forward in the presence of royalty. Be silent before thy
betters, and show thy loyalty by thy deeds, not by high-sounding
