huge success--that he, the inexorable one, was now the inexorable
indeed?

There were greatly trusting hearts that could withstand the weight of
this terrible pressure, and thinking minds which saw that good would
come out of this great evil; but such hearts and such minds were not
to be looked for among the suffering poor; and were not, perhaps,
often found even among those who were not poor or suffering. It was
very hard to be thus trusting and thoughtful while everything around
was full of awe and agony.

The people, however, were conscious of God's work, and were becoming
dull and apathetic. They clustered about the roads, working lazily
while their strength lasted them; and afterwards, when strength
failed them for this, they clustered more largely in the poor-houses.
And in every town--in every assemblage of houses which in England
would be called a village, there was a poor-house. Any big barrack of
a tenement that could be obtained at a moment's notice, whatever the
rent, became a poor-house in the course of twelve hours;--in twelve,
nay, in two hours. What was necessary but the bare walls, and a
supply of yellow meal? Bad provision this for all a man's wants,--as
was said often enough by irrational philanthropists; but better
provision than no shelter and no yellow meal! It was bad that men
should be locked up at night without any of the appliances of
decency; bad that they should be herded together for day after day
with no resource but the eating twice a day of enough unsavoury
food to keep life and soul together;--very bad, ye philanthropical
irrationalists! But is not a choice of evils all that is left to us
in many a contingency? Was not even this better than that life and
soul should be allowed to part, without any effort at preserving
their union?

And thus life and soul were kept together, the government of the day
having wisely seen what, at so short a notice, was possible for them
to do, and what was absolutely impossible. It is in such emergencies
as these that the watching and the wisdom of a government are
necessary; and I shall always think--as I did think then--that the
wisdom of its action and the wisdom of its abstinence from action
were very good. And now again the fields in Ireland are green,
and the markets are busy, and money is chucked to and fro like a
weathercock which the players do not wish to have abiding with them;
and the tardy speculator going over to look for a bit of land comes
back muttering angrily that fancy prices are demanded. "They'll run
you up to thirty-three years' purchase," says the tardy speculator,
thinking, as it seems, that he is specially ill used. Agricultural
wages have been nearly doubled in Ireland during the last fifteen
years. Think of that, Master Brook. Work for which, at six shillings
a week, there would be a hundred hungry claimants in 1845,--in the
good old days before the famine, when repeal was so immediately
expected--will now fetch ten shillings, the claimants being by no
means numerous. In 1843 and 1844, I knew men to work for fourpence
a day--something over the dole on which we are told, being mostly
incredulous as we hear it, that a Coolie labourer can feed himself
with rice in India;--not one man or two men, the broken down
incapables of the parish, but the best labour of the country. One and
twopence is now about the cheapest rate at which a man can be hired
for agricultural purposes. While this is so, and while the prices
are progressing, there is no cause for fear, let Bishops A and B,
and Archbishops C and D fret and fume with never so great vexation
touching the clipped honours of their father the Pope.

But again; Quo Musa tendis? I could write on this subject for a week
were it not that Rhadamanthus awaits me, Rhadamanthus the critic; and
Rhadamanthus is, of all things, impatient of an episode.

Life and soul were kept together in those terrible days;--that is,
the Irish life and soul generally. There were many slips, in which
the union was violently dissolved,--many cases in which the yellow
meal allowed was not sufficient, or in which it did not reach the
sufferer in time to prevent such dissolution,--cases which when
numbered together amounted to thousands. And then the pestilence
came, taking its victims by tens of thousands,--but that was after
the time with which we shall have concern here; and immigration
followed, taking those who were saved by hundreds of thousands.
But the millions are still there, a thriving people; for His mercy
endureth for ever.

During this month, the month ensuing upon the death of Sir Thomas
Fitzgerald, Herbert could of course pay no outward attention to the
wants or relief of the people. He could make no offer of assistance,
for nothing belonged to him; nor could he aid in the councils of
the committees, for no one could have defined the position of the
speaker. And during that month nothing was defined about Castle
Richmond. Lady Fitzgerald was still always called by her title. The
people of the country, including the tradesmen of the neighbouring
towns, addressed the owner of Hap House as Sir Owen; and gradually
the name was working itself into common use, though he had taken no
steps to make himself legally entitled to wear it. But no one spoke
of Sir Herbert. The story was so generally known, that none were so
ignorant as to suppose him to be his father's heir. The servants
about the place still called him Mr. Herbert, orders to that effect
having been specially given; and the peasants of the country, with
that tact which graces them, and with that anxiety to abstain from
giving pain which always accompanies them unless when angered,
carefully called him by no name. They knew that he was not Sir
Herbert; but they would not believe but what, perchance, he might
be so yet on some future day. So they took off their old hats to
him, and passed him silently in his sorrow; or if they spoke to him,
addressed his honour simply, omitting all mention of that Christian
name, which the poor Irishman is generally so fond of using. "Mister
Blake" sounds cold and unkindly in his ears. It is the "Masther,"
or "His honour," or if possible "Misther Thady." Or if there be any
handle, that is used with avidity. Pat is a happy man when he can
address his landlord as "Sir Patrick."

But now the "ould masther's son" could be called by no name. Men knew
not what he was to be, though they knew well that he was not that
which he ought to be. And there were some who attempted to worship
Owen as the rising sun; but for such of them as had never worshipped
him before that game was rather hopeless. In those days he was not
much seen, neither hunting nor entertaining company; but when seen he
was rough enough with those who made any deep attempt to ingratiate
themselves with his coming mightiness. And during this month he
went over to London, having been specially invited so to do by Mr.
Prendergast; but very little came of his visit there, except that it
was certified to him that he was beyond all doubt the baronet. "And
there shall be no unnecessary delay, Sir Owen," said Mr. Prendergast,
"in putting you into full possession of all your rights." In answer
to which Owen had replied that he was not anxious to be put in
possession of any rights. That as far as any active doing of his own
was concerned, the title might lie in abeyance, and that regarding
the property he would make known his wish to Mr. Prendergast very
quickly after his return to Ireland. But he intimated at the same
time that there could be no ground for disturbing Lady Fitzgerald,
as he had no intention under any circumstances of living at Castle
Richmond.

"Had you not better tell Lady Fitzgerald that yourself?" said Mr.
Prendergast, catching at the idea that his friend's widow--my readers
will allow me so to call her--might be allowed to live undisturbed at
the family mansion, if not for life, at any rate for a few years. If
this young man were so generous, why should it not be so? He would
not want the big house, at any rate, till he were married.

"It would be better that you should say so," said Owen. "I have
particular reasons for not wishing to go there."

"But allow me to say, my dear young friend--and I hope I may call you
so, for I greatly admire the way in which you have taken all these
tidings--that I would venture to advise you to drop the remembrance
of any unpleasantness that may have existed. You should now feel
yourself to be the closest friend of that family."

"So I would if--," and then Owen stopped short, though Mr.
Prendergast gave him plenty of time to finish his sentence were he
minded to do so.

"In your present position," continued the lawyer, "your influence
will be very great."

"I can't explain it all," said Owen; "but I don't think my influence
will be great at all. And what is more, I do not want any influence
of that sort. I wish Lady Fitzgerald to understand that she is at
perfect liberty to stay where she is,--as far as I am concerned. Not
as a favour from me, mind; for I do not think that she would take a
favour from my hands."

"But, my dear sir!"

"Therefore you had better write to her about remaining there."

Mr. Prendergast did write to her, or rather to Herbert: but in doing
so he thought it right to say that the permission to live at Castle
Richmond should be regarded as a kindness granted them by their
relative. "It is a kindness which, under the circumstances, your
mother may, I think, accept without compunction; at any rate, for
some time to come,--till she shall have suited herself without
hurrying her choice; but, nevertheless, it must be regarded as a
generous offer on his part; and I do hope, my dear Herbert, that you
and he will be fast friends."

But Mr. Prendergast did not in the least comprehend the workings of
Owen's mind; and Herbert, who knew more of them than any one else,
did not understand them altogether. Owen had no idea of granting any
favour to his relatives, who, as he thought, had never granted any to
him. What Owen wanted,--or what he told himself that he wanted,--was
justice. It was his duty as a just man to abstain from taking hold of
those acres, and he was prepared to do his duty. But it was equally
Herbert's duty as a just man to abstain from taking hold of Clara
Desmond, and he was resolved that he would never be Herbert's friend
if Herbert did not perform that duty. And then, though he felt
himself bound to give up the acres,--though he did regard this as an
imperative duty, he nevertheless felt also that something was due
to him for his readiness to perform such a duty,--that some reward
should be conceded to him; what this reward was to be, or rather what
he wished it to be, we all know.

Herbert had utterly refused to engage in any such negotiation; but
Owen, nevertheless, would not cease to think that something might yet
be done. Who was so generous as Clara, and would not Clara herself
speak out if she knew how much her old lover was prepared to do for
this newer lover? Half a dozen times Owen made up his mind to explain
the whole thing to Mr. Prendergast; but when he found himself in the
presence of the lawyer, he could not talk about love. Young men are
so apt to think that their seniors in age cannot understand romance,
or acknowledge the force of a passion. But here they are wrong, for
there would be as much romance after forty as before, I take it, were
it not checked by the fear of ridicule. So Owen stayed a week in
London, seeing Mr. Prendergast every day; and then he returned to Hap
House.

In the mean time life went on at a very sad pace at Desmond Court.
There was no concord whatever between the two ladies residing there.
The mother was silent, gloomy, and sometimes bitter, seldom saying a
word about Herbert Fitzgerald or his prospects, but saying that word
with great fixity of purpose when it was spoken. "No one," she said,
"should attribute to her the poverty and misery of her child. That
marriage should not take place from her house, or with her consent."
And Clara for the most part was silent also. In answer to such words
as the above she would say nothing; but when, as did happen once or
twice, she was forced to speak, she declared openly enough that no
earthly consideration should induce her to give up her engagement.

And then the young earl came home, brought away from his school in
order that his authority might have effect on his sister. To speak
the truth, he was unwilling enough to interfere, and would have
declined to come at all could he have dared to do so. Eton was now
more pleasant to him than Desmond Court, which, indeed, had but
little of pleasantness to offer to a lad such as he was now. He
was sixteen, and manly for his age; but the question in dispute
at Desmond Court offered little attraction even to a manly boy of
sixteen. In that former question as to Owen he had said a word or
two, knowing that Owen could not be looked upon as a fitting husband
for his sister; but now he knew not how to counsel her again as to
Herbert, seeing that it was but the other day that he had written a
long letter, congratulating her on that connection.

Towards the end of the month, however, he did arrive, making glad his
mother's heart as she looked at his strong limbs and his handsome
open face. And Clara, too, threw herself so warmly into his arms that
he did feel glad that he had come to her. "Oh, Patrick, it is so
sweet to have you here!" she said, before his mother had had time to
speak to him.

"Dearest Clara!"

"But, Patrick, you must not be cruel to me. Look here, Patrick; you
are my only brother, and I so love you that I would not offend you
or turn you against me for worlds. You are the head of our family,
too, and nothing should be done that you do not like. But if so much
depends on you, you must think well before you decide on anything."

He opened his young eyes and looked intently into her face, for there
was an earnestness in her words that almost frightened him. "You must
think well of it all before you speak, Patrick; and remember this,
you and I must be honest and honourable, whether we be poor or no.
You remember about Owen Fitzgerald, how I gave way then because I
could do so without dishonour. But now--"

"But, Clara, I do not understand it all as yet."

"No; you cannot,--not as yet--and I will let mamma tell you the
story. All I ask is this, that you will think of my honour before you
say a word that can favour either her or me." And then he promised
her that he would do so; and his mother, when on the following
morning she told him all the history, found him reserved and silent.

"Look at his position," said the mother, pleading her cause before
her son. "He is illegitimate, and--"

"Yes, but mother--"

"I know all that, my dear; I know what you would say; and no one can
pity Mr. Fitzgerald's position more than I do; but you would not on
that account have your sister ruined. It is romance on her part."

"But what does he say?"

"He is quite willing to give up the match. He has told me so, and
said as much to his aunt, whom I have seen three times on the
subject."

"Do you mean that he wishes to give it up?"

"No,--at least I don't know. If he does, he cannot express such a
wish, because Clara is so headstrong. Patrick, in my heart I do not
believe that she cares for him. I have doubted it for some time."

"But you wanted her to marry him."

"So I did. It was an excellent match, and in a certain way she did
like him; and then, you know, there was that great danger about poor
Owen. It was a great danger then. But now she is so determined about
this, because she thinks it would be ungenerous to go back from her
word; and in this way she will ruin the very man she wishes to serve.
Of course he cannot break off the match if she persists in it. What
I want you to perceive is this, that he, utterly penniless as he is,
will have to begin the world with a clog round his neck, because she
is so obstinate. What could possibly be worse for him than a titled
wife without a penny?" And in this way the countess pleaded her side
of the question before her son.

It was quite true that she had been three times to Castle Richmond,
and had thrice driven Aunt Letty into a state bordering on
distraction. If she could only get the Castle Richmond people to take
it up as they ought to do! It was thus she argued with herself,--and
with Aunt Letty also, endeavouring to persuade her that these two
young people would undoubtedly ruin each other, unless those who were
really wise and prudent, and who understood the world--such as Aunt
Letty, for instance--would interfere to prevent it.

Aunt Letty on the whole did agree with her, though she greatly
disliked her. Miss Fitzgerald had strongly planted within her bosom
the prudent old-world notion, that young gentlefolks should not
love each other unless they have plenty of money; and that, if
unfortunately such did love each other, it was better that they
should suffer all the pangs of hopeless love than marry and trust to
God and their wits for bread and cheese. To which opinion of Aunt
Letty's, as well as to some others entertained by that lady with much
pertinacity, I cannot subscribe myself as an adherent.

Lady Desmond had wit enough to discover that Aunt Letty did agree
with her in the main, and on this account she was eager in seeking
her assistance. Lady Fitzgerald of course could not be seen, and
there was no one else at Castle Richmond who could be supposed to
have any weight with Herbert. And therefore Lady Desmond was very
eloquent with Aunt Letty, talking much of the future miseries of the
two young people, till the old lady had promised to use her best
efforts in enlisting Lady Fitzgerald on the same side. "You cannot
wonder, Miss Fitzgerald, that I should wish to put an end to the
cruel position in which my poor girl is placed. You know how much a
girl suffers from that kind of thing."

Aunt Letty did dislike Lady Desmond very much; but, nevertheless, she
could not deny the truth of all this; and therefore it may be said
that the visits of the countess to Castle Richmond were on the whole
successful.

And the month wore itself away also in that sad household, and the
Fitzgeralds were gradually becoming used to their position. Family
discussions were held among them as to what they should do, and where
they should live in future. Mr. Prendergast had written, seeing
that Owen had persisted in refusing to make the offer personally
himself--saying that there was no hurry for any removal. "Sir Owen,"
he said,--having considered deeply whether or no he would call him
by the title or no, and having resolved that it would be best to do
so at once--"Sir Owen was inclined to behave very generously. Lady
Fitzgerald could have the house and demesne at any rate for twelve
months, and by that time the personal property left by Sir Thomas
would be realized, and there would be enough," Mr. Prendergast
said, "for the three ladies to live 'in decent quiet comfort.'" Mr.
Prendergast had taken care before he left Castle Richmond that a will
should be made and duly executed by Sir Thomas, leaving what money
he had to his three children by name,--in trust for their mother's
use. Till the girls should be of age that trust would be vested in
Herbert.

"Decent quiet comfort!" said Mary to her brother and sister as they
conned the letter over; "how comfortless it sounds!"

And so the first month after the death of Sir Thomas passed by,
and the misfortunes of the Fitzgerald family ceased to be the only
subject spoken of by the inhabitants of county Cork.




CHAPTER XXXII.

PREPARATIONS FOR GOING.


At the end of the month, Herbert began to prepare himself for facing
the world. The first question to be answered was that one which is
so frequently asked in most families, but which had never yet been
necessary in this--What profession would he follow? All manners of
ways by which an educated man can earn his bread had been turned over
in his mind, and in the minds of those who loved him, beginning with
the revenues of the Archbishop of Armagh, which was Aunt Letty's
idea, and ending with a seat at a government desk, which was his own.
Mr. Prendergast had counselled the law; not his own lower branch of
the profession, but a barrister's full-blown wig, adding, in his
letter to Lady Fitzgerald, that if Herbert would come to London, and
settle in chambers, he, Mr. Prendergast, would see that his life
was made agreeable to him. But Mr. Somers gave other advice. In
those days Assistant Poor-Law Commissioners were being appointed in
Ireland, almost by the score, and Mr. Somers declared that Herbert
had only to signify his wish for such a position, and he would get
it. The interest which he had taken in the welfare of the poor around
him was well known, and as his own story was well known also, there
could be no doubt that the government would be willing to assist one
so circumstanced, and who when assisted would make himself so useful.
Such was the advice of Mr. Somers; and he might have been right but
for this, that both Herbert and Lady Fitzgerald felt that it would
be well for them to move out of that neighbourhood,--out of Ireland
altogether, if such could be possible.

Aunt Letty was strong for the Church. A young man who had
distinguished himself at the University so signally as her nephew
had done, taking his degree at the very first attempt, and that in
so high a class of honour as the fourth, would not fail to succeed
in the Church. He might not perhaps succeed as to Armagh; that she
admitted, but there were some thirty other bishoprics to be had, and
it would be odd if, with his talents, he did not get one of them.
Think what it would be if he were to return to his own country as
Bishop of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross, as to which amalgamation of sees,
however, Aunt Letty had her own ideas. He was slightly tainted with
the venom of Puseyism, Aunt Letty said to herself; but nothing
would dispel this with so much certainty as the theological studies
necessary for ordination. And then Aunt Letty talked it over by the
hour together with Mrs. Townsend, and both those ladies were agreed
that Herbert should get himself ordained as quickly as possible;--not
in England, where there might be danger even in ordination, but
in good, wholesome, Protestant Ireland, where a Church of England
clergyman was a clergyman of the Church of England, and not a priest,
slipping about in the mud half way between England and Rome.

Herbert himself was anxious to get some employment by which he might
immediately earn his bread, but not unnaturally wished that London
should be the scene of his work. Anywhere in Ireland he would be
known as the Fitzgerald who ought to have been Fitzgerald of Castle
Richmond. And then too, he, as other young men, had an undefined
idea, that as he must earn his bread London should be his ground.
He had at first been not ill inclined to that Church project, and
had thus given a sort of ground on which Aunt Letty was able to
stand,--had, as it were, given her some authority for carrying on an
agitation in furtherance of her own views; but Herbert himself soon
gave up this idea. A man, he thought, to be a clergyman should have
a very strong predilection in favour of that profession; and so he
gradually abandoned that idea,--actuated, as poor Aunt Letty feared,
by the agency of the evil one, working through the means of Puseyism.

His mother and sisters were in favour of Mr. Prendergast's views, and
as it was gradually found by them all that there would not be any
immediate pressure as regarded pecuniary means, that seemed at last
to be their decision. Herbert would remain yet for three or four
weeks at Castle Richmond, till matters there were somewhat more
thoroughly settled, and would then put himself into the hands of Mr.
Prendergast in London. Mr. Prendergast would select a legal tutor
for him, and proper legal chambers; and then not long afterwards his
mother and sisters should follow, and they would live together at
some small villa residence near St. John's Wood Road, or perhaps out
at Brompton.

It is astonishing how quickly in this world of ours chaos will settle
itself into decent and graceful order, when it is properly looked
in the face, and handled with a steady hand which is not sparing of
the broom. Some three months since, everything at Castle Richmond
was ruin; such ruin, indeed, that the very power of living under it
seemed to be doubtful. When first Mr. Prendergast arrived there, a
feeling came upon them all as though they might hardly dare to live
in a world which would look at them as so thoroughly degraded. As
regards means, they would be beggars! and as regards position, so
much worse than beggars! A broken world was in truth falling about
their ears, and it was felt to be impossible that they should endure
its convulsions and yet live.

But now the world had fallen, the ruin had come, and they were
already strong in future hopes. They had dared to look at their
chaos, and found that it still contained the elements of order.
There was much still that marred their happiness, and forbade the
joyousness of other days. Their poor father had gone from them in
their misery, and the house was still a house of mourning; and their
mother too, though she bore up so wonderfully against her fate, and
for their sakes hoped and planned and listened to their wishes, was a
stricken woman. That she would never smile again with any heartfelt
joy they were all sure. But, nevertheless, their chaos was conquered,
and there was hope that the fields of life would again show
themselves green and fruitful.

On one subject their mother never spoke to them, nor had even Herbert
dared to speak to her: not a word had been said in that house since
Mr. Prendergast left it as to the future whereabouts or future doings
of that man to whom she had once given her hand at the altar. But
she had ventured to ask by letter a question of Mr. Prendergast. Her
question had been this: What must I do that he may not come to me or
to my children? In answer to this Mr. Prendergast had told her, after
some delay, that he believed she need fear nothing. He had seen the
man, and he thought that he might assure her that she would not be
troubled in that respect.

"It is possible," said Mr. Prendergast, "that he may apply to you by
letter for money. If so, give him no answer whatever, but send his
letters to me."

"And are you all going?" asked Mrs. Townsend of Aunt Letty, with a
lachrymose voice soon after the fate of the family was decided.
They were sitting together with their knees over the fire in Mrs.
Townsend's dining-parlour, in which the perilous state of the country
had been discussed by them for many a pleasant hour together.

"Well, I think we shall; you see, my sister would never be happy
here."

"No, no; the shock and the change would be too great for her. Poor
Lady Fitzgerald! And when is that man coming into the house?"

"What, Owen?"

"Yes! Sir Owen I suppose he is now."

"Well, I don't know; he does not seem to be in any hurry. I believe
that he has said that my sister may continue to live there if she
pleases. But of course she cannot do that."

"They do say about the country," whispered Mrs. Townsend, "that he
refuses to be the heir at all. He certainly has not had any cards
printed with the title on them--I know that as a fact."

"He is a very singular man, very. You know I never could bear him,"
said Aunt Letty.

"No, nor I either. He has not been to our church once these six
months. But it's very odd, isn't it? Of course you know the story?"

"What story?" asked Aunt Letty.

"About Lady Clara. Owen Fitzgerald was dreadfully in love with her
before your Herbert had ever seen her. And they do say that he has
sworn his cousin shall never live if he marries her."

"They can never marry now, you know. Only think of it. There would be
three hundred a year between them.--Not at present, that is," added
Aunt Letty, looking forward to a future period after her own death.

"That is very little, very little indeed," said Mrs. Townsend,
remembering, however, that she herself had married on less. "But,
Miss Fitzgerald, if Herbert does not marry her do you think this Owen
will?"

"I don't think she'd have him. I am quite sure she would not."

"Not when he has all the property, and the title too?"

"No, nor double as much. What would people say of her if she did?
But, however, there is no fear, for she declares that nothing shall
induce her to give up her engagement with our Herbert."

And so they discussed it backward and forward in every way, each
having her own theory as to that singular rumour which was going
about the country, signifying that Owen had declined to accept the
title. Aunt Letty, however, would not believe that any good could
come from so polluted a source, and declared that he had his own
reasons for the delay. "It's not for any love of us," she said, "if
he refuses to take either that or the estate." And in this she was
right. But she would have been more surprised still had she learned
that Owen's forbearance arose from a strong anxiety to do what was
just in the matter.

"And so Herbert won't go into the Church?"

And Letty shook her head sorrowing.

"Aeneas would have been so glad to have taken him for a twelvemonth's
reading," said Mrs. Townsend. "He could have come here, you know,
when you went away, and been ordained at Cork, and got a curacy close
in the neighbourhood, where he was known. It would have been so nice;
wouldn't it?"

Aunt Letty would not exactly have advised the scheme as suggested by
Mrs. Townsend. Her ideas as to Herbert's clerical studies would have
been higher than this. Trinity College, Dublin, was in her estimation
the only place left for good Church of England ecclesiastical
teaching. But as Herbert was obstinately bent on declining sacerdotal
life, there was no use in dispelling Mrs. Townsend's bright vision.

"It's all of no use," she said; "he is determined to go to the bar."

"The bar is very respectable," said Mrs. Townsend, kindly.

"And you mean to go with them, too?" said Mrs. Townsend, after
another pause. "You'll hardly be happy, I'm thinking, so far away
from your old home."

"It is sad to change at my time of life," said Aunt Letty,
plaintively. "I'm sixty-two now."

"Nonsense," said Mrs. Townsend, who, however, knew her age to a day.

"Sixty-two if I live another week, and I have never yet had any home
but Castle Richmond. There I was born, and till the other day I
had every reason to trust that there I might die. But what does it
matter?"

"No, that's true of course; what does it matter where we are while we
linger in this vale of tears? But couldn't you get a little place for
yourself somewhere near here? There's Callaghan's cottage, with the
two-acre piece for a cow, and as nice a spot of a garden as there is
in the county Cork."

"I wouldn't separate myself from her now," said Aunt Letty, "for
all the cottages and all the gardens in Ireland. The Lord has been
pleased to throw us together, and together we will finish our
pilgrimage. Whither she goes, I will go, and where she lodges, I will
lodge; her people shall be my people, and her God my God." And then
Mrs. Townsend said nothing further of Callaghan's pretty cottage, or
of the two-acre piece.

But one reason for her going Aunt Letty did not give, even to her
friend Mrs. Townsend. Her income, that which belonged exclusively
to herself, was in no way affected by these sad Castle Richmond
revolutions. This was a comfortable,--we may say a generous provision
for an old maiden lady, amounting to some six hundred a year, settled
upon her for life, and this, if added to what could be saved and
scraped together, would enable them to live comfortably as far as
means were concerned, in that suburban villa to which they were
looking forward. But without Aunt Letty's income that suburban villa
must be but a poor home. Mr. Prendergast had calculated that some
fourteen thousand pounds would represent the remaining property of
the family, with which it would be necessary to purchase government
stock. Such being the case, Aunt Letty's income was very material to
them.

"I trust you will be able to find some one there who will preach the
gospel to you," said Mrs. Townsend, in a tone that showed how serious
were her misgivings on the subject.

"I will search for such a one at any rate," said Aunt Letty. "You
need not be afraid that I shall be a backslider."

"But they have crosses now over the communion tables in the churches
in England," said Mrs. Townsend.

"I know it is very bad," said Aunt Letty. "But there will always be a
remnant left. The Lord will not utterly desert us." And then she took
her departure, leaving Mrs. Townsend with the conviction that the
land to which her friend was going was one in which the light of the
gospel no longer shone in its purity.

It was not wonderful that they should all be anxious to get away
from Castle Richmond, for the house there was now not a pleasant one
in which to live. Let all those who have houses and the adjuncts
of houses think how considerable a part of their life's pleasures
consists in their interest in the things around them. When will the
sea-kale be fit to cut, and when will the crocuses come up? will the
violets be sweeter than ever? and the geranium cuttings, are they
thriving? we have dug, and manured, and sown, and we look forward to
the reaping, and to see our garners full. The very furniture which
ministers to our daily uses is loved and petted; and in decorating
our rooms we educate ourselves in design. The place in church which
has been our own for years,--is not that dear to us, and the voice
that has told us of God's tidings--even though the drone become
more evident as it waxes in years, and though it grows feeble and
indolent? And the faces of those who have lived around us, do we not
love them too, the servants who have worked for us, and the children
who have first toddled beneath our eyes and prattled in our ears, and
now run their strong races, screaming loudly, splashing us as they
pass--very unpleasantly? Do we not love them all? Do they not all
contribute to the great sum of our enjoyment? All men love such
things, more or less, even though they know it not. And women love
them even more than men.

And the Fitzgeralds were about to leave them all. The early buds of
spring were now showing themselves, but how was it possible that
they should look to them? One loves the bud because one expects the
flower. The sea-kale now was beyond their notice, and though they
plucked the crocuses, they did so with tears upon their cheeks.
After much consideration the church had been abandoned by all except
Aunt Letty and Herbert. That Lady Fitzgerald should go there was
impossible, and the girls were only too glad to be allowed to stay
with their mother. And the schools in which they had taught since the
first day in which teaching had been possible for them, had to be
abandoned with such true pangs of heartfelt sorrow.

From the time when their misery first came upon them, from the days
when it first began to be understood that the world had gone wrong at
Castle Richmond, this separation from the schools had commenced. The
work had been dropped for a while, but the dropping had in fact been
final, and there was nothing further to be done than the saddest of
all leavetaking. The girls had sent word to the children, perhaps
imprudently, that they would go down and say a word of adieu to their
pupils. The children had of course told their mothers, and when the
girls reached the two neat buildings which stood at the corner of the
park, there were there to meet them, not unnaturally, a concourse of
women and children.

In former prosperous days the people about Castle Richmond had, as
a rule, been better to do than their neighbours. Money wages had
been more plentiful, and there had been little or no subletting of
land; the children had been somewhat more neatly clothed, and the
women less haggard in their faces; but this difference was hardly
perceptible any longer. To them, the Miss Fitzgeralds, looking at
the poverty-stricken assemblage, it almost seemed as though the
misfortune of their house had brought down its immediate consequences
on all who had lived within their circle; but this was the work
of the famine. In those days one could rarely see any member of a
peasant's family bearing in his face a look of health. The yellow
meal was a useful food--the most useful, doubtless, which could at
that time be found; but it was not one that was gratifying either to
the eye or palate.

The girls had almost regretted their offer before they had left the
house. It would have been better, they said to themselves, to have
had the children up in the hall, and there to have spoken their
farewells, and made their little presents. The very entering those
schoolrooms again would almost be too much for them; but this
consideration was now too late, and when they got to the corner of
the gate, they found that there was a crowd to receive them. "Mary,
I must go back," said Emmeline, when she first saw them; but Aunt
Letty, who was with them, stepped forward, and they soon found
themselves in the schoolroom.

"We have come to say good-bye to you all," said Aunt Letty, trying to
begin a speech.

"May the heavens be yer bed then, the lot of yez, for ye war always
good to the poor. May the Blessed Virgin guide and protect ye
wherever ye be;"--a blessing against which Aunt Letty at once entered
a little inward protest, perturbed though she was in spirit. "May the
heavens rain glory on yer heads, for ye war always the finest family
that war ever in the county Cork!"

"You know, I dare say, that we are going to leave you," continued
Aunt Letty.

"We knows it, we knows it; sorrow come to them as did it all. Faix,
an' there'll niver be any good in the counthry, at all at all, when
you're gone, Miss Emmeline; an' what'll we do at all for the want
of yez, and when shall we see the likes of yez? Eh, Miss Letty, but
there'll be sore eyes weeping for ye; and for her leddyship too; may
the Lord Almighty bless her, and presarve her, and carry her sowl
to glory when she dies; for av there war iver a good woman on God's
'arth, that woman is Leddy Fitzgerald."

And then Aunt Letty found that there was no necessity for her to
continue her speech, and indeed no possibility of her doing so even
if she were so minded. The children began to wail and cry, and
the mothers also mixed loud sobbings with their loud prayers; and
Emmeline and Mary, dissolved in tears, sat themselves down, drawing
to them the youngest bairns and those whom they had loved the best,
kissing their sallow, famine-stricken, unwholesome faces, and weeping
over them with a love of which hitherto they had been hardly
conscious.

There was not much more in the way of speech possible to any of
them, for even Aunt Letty was far gone in tender wailing; and it
was wonderful to see the liberties that were taken even with that
venerable bonnet. The women had first of all taken hold of her hands
to kiss them, and had kissed her feet, and her garments, and her
shoulders, and then behind her back they had made crosses on her,
although they knew how dreadfully she would have raged had she caught
them polluting her by such doings; and they grasped her arms and
embraced them, till at last, those who were more daring, reached her
forehead and her face, and poor old Aunt Letty, who in her emotion
could not now utter a syllable, was almost pulled to pieces among
them.

Mary and Emmeline had altogether surrendered themselves, and were
the centres of clusters of children who hung upon them. And the sobs
now were no longer low and tearful, but they had grown into long,
protracted groanings, and loud wailings, and clapping of hands, and
tearings of the hair. O, my reader, have you ever seen a railway
train taking its departure from an Irish station, with a freight
of Irish emigrants? if so, you know how the hair is torn, and how
the hands are clapped, and how the low moanings gradually swell
into notes of loud lamentation. It means nothing, I have heard men
say,--men and women too. But such men and women are wrong. It means
much; it means this: that those who are separated, not only love each
other, but are anxious to tell each other that they so love. We have
all heard of demonstrative people. A demonstrative person, I take
it, is he who is desirous of speaking out what is in his heart. For
