'A lover, my dear Lady Betty,' said Flora, 'may, I conceive, persevere in
his suit under very discouraging circumstances. Affection can (now and
then) withstand very severe storms of rigour, but not a long polar frost
of downright indifference. Don't, even with YOUR attractions, try the
experiment upon any lover whose faith you value. Love will subsist on
wonderfully little hope, but not altogether without it.'

'It will be just like Duncan Mac-Girdie's mare,' said Evan, 'if your
ladyships please, he wanted to use her by degrees to live without meat,
and just as he had put her on a straw a day the poor thing died!'

Evan's illustration set the company a-laughing, and the discourse took a
different turn. Shortly afterwards the party broke up, and Edward
returned home, musing on what Flora had said. 'I will love my Rosalind no
more,' said he; 'she has given me a broad enough hint for that; and I
will speak to her brother and resign my suit. But for a Juliet--would it
be handsome to interfere with Fergus's pretensions? though it is
impossible they can ever succeed; and should they miscarry, what then?
why then alors comme alors.' And with this resolution of being guided by
circumstances did our hero commit himself to repose.




CHAPTER XXVI

A BRAVE MAN IN SORROW


If my fair readers should be of opinion that my hero's levity in love is
altogether unpardonable, I must remind them that all his griefs and
difficulties did not arise from that sentimental source. Even the lyric
poet who complains so feelingly of the pains of love could not forget,
that at the same time he was 'in debt and in drink,' which, doubtless,
were great aggravations of his distress. There were, indeed, whole days
in which Waverley thought neither of Flora nor Rose Bradwardine, but
which were spent in melancholy conjectures on the probable state of
matters at Waverley-Honour, and the dubious issue of the civil contest in
which he was pledged. Colonel Talbot often engaged him in discussions
upon the justice of the cause he had espoused. 'Not,' he said, 'that it
is possible for you to quit it at this present moment, for, come what
will, you must stand by your rash engagement. But I wish you to be aware
that the right is not with you; that you are fighting against the real
interests of your country; and that you ought, as an Englishman and a
patriot, to take the first opportunity to leave this unhappy expedition
before the snowball melts.'

In such political disputes Waverley usually opposed the common arguments
of his party, with which it is unnecessary to trouble the reader. But he
had little to say when the Colonel urged him to compare the strength by
which they had undertaken to overthrow the government with that which was
now assembling very rapidly for its support. To this statement Waverley
had but one answer: 'If the cause I have undertaken be perilous, there
would be the greater disgrace in abandoning it.' And in his turn he
generally silenced Colonel Talbot, and succeeded in changing the subject.

One night, when, after a long dispute of this nature, the friends had
separated and our hero had retired to bed, he was awakened about midnight
by a suppressed groan. He started up and listened; it came from the
apartment of Colonel Talbot, which was divided from his own by a
wainscotted partition, with a door of communication. Waverley approached
this door and distinctly heard one or two deep-drawn sighs. What could be
the matter? The Colonel had parted from him apparently in his usual state
of spirits. He must have been taken suddenly ill. Under this impression
he opened the door of communication very gently, and perceived the
Colonel, in his night-gown, seated by a table, on which lay a letter and
a picture. He raised his head hastily, as Edward stood uncertain whether
to advance or retire, and Waverley perceived that his cheeks were stained
with tears.

As if ashamed at being found giving way to such emotion, Colonel Talbot
rose with apparent displeasure and said, with some sternness, 'I think,
Mr. Waverley, my own apartment and the hour might have secured even a
prisoner against--'

'Do not say INTRUSION, Colonel Talbot; I heard you breathe hard and
feared you were ill; that alone could have induced me to break in upon
you.'

'I am well,' said the Colonel, 'perfectly well.'

'But you are distressed,' said Edward; 'is there anything can be done?'

'Nothing, Mr. Waverley; I was only thinking of home, and some unpleasant
occurrences there.'

'Good God, my uncle!' exclaimed Waverley.

'No, it is a grief entirely my own. I am ashamed you should have seen it
disarm me so much; but it must have its course at times, that it may be
at others more decently supported. I would have kept it secret from you;
for I think it will grieve you, and yet you can administer no
consolation. But you have surprised me,--I see you are surprised
yourself,--and I hate mystery. Read that letter.'

The letter was from Colonel Talbot's sister, and in these words:--

'I received yours, my dearest brother, by Hodges. Sir E. W. and Mr. R.
are still at large, but are not permitted to leave London. I wish to
Heaven I could give you as good an account of matters in the square. But
the news of the unhappy affair at Preston came upon us, with the dreadful
addition that you were among the fallen. You know Lady Emily's state of
health, when your friendship for Sir E. induced you to leave her. She was
much harassed with the sad accounts from Scotland of the rebellion having
broken out; but kept up her spirits, as, she said, it became your wife,
and for the sake of the future heir, so long hoped for in vain. Alas, my
dear brother, these hopes are now ended! Notwithstanding all my watchful
care, this unhappy rumour reached her without preparation. She was taken
ill immediately; and the poor infant scarce survived its birth. Would to
God this were all! But although the contradiction of the horrible report
by your own letter has greatly revived her spirits, yet Dr.
----apprehends, I grieve to say, serious, and even dangerous,
consequences to her health, especially from the uncertainty in which she
must necessarily remain for some time, aggravated by the ideas she has
formed of the ferocity of those with whom you are a prisoner.

'Do therefore, my dear brother, as soon as this reaches you, endeavour to
gain your release, by parole, by ransom, or any way that is practicable.
I do not exaggerate Lady Emily's state of health; but I must not--dare
not--suppress the truth. Ever, my dear Philip, your most affectionate
sister,

'Lucy TALBOT.'

Edward stood motionless when he had perused this letter; for the
conclusion was inevitable, that, by the Colonel's journey in quest of
him, he had incurred this heavy calamity. It was severe enough, even in
its irremediable part; for Colonel Talbot and Lady Emily, long without a
family, had fondly exulted in the hopes which were now blasted. But this
disappointment was nothing to the extent of the threatened evil; and
Edward, with horror, regarded himself as the original cause of both.

Ere he could collect himself sufficiently to speak, Colonel Talbot had
recovered his usual composure of manner, though his troubled eye denoted
his mental agony.

'She is a woman, my young friend, who may justify even a soldier's
tears.' He reached him the miniature, exhibiting features which fully
justified the eulogium; 'and yet, God knows, what you see of her there is
the least of the charms she possesses--possessed, I should perhaps
say--but God's will be done.'

'You must fly--you must fly instantly to her relief. It is not--it shall
not be too late.'

'Fly? how is it possible? I am a prisoner, upon parole.'

'I am your keeper; I restore your parole; I am to answer for you.'

'You cannot do so consistently with your duty; nor can I accept a
discharge from you, with due regard to my own honour; you would be made
responsible.'

'I will answer it with my head, if necessary,' said Waverley impetuously.
'I have been the unhappy cause of the loss of your child, make me not the
murderer of your wife.'

'No, my dear Edward,' said Talbot, taking him kindly by the hand, 'you
are in no respect to blame; and if I concealed this domestic distress for
two days, it was lest your sensibility should view it in that light. You
could not think of me, hardly knew of my existence, when I left England
in quest of you. It is a responsibility, Heaven knows, sufficiently heavy
for mortality, that we must answer for the foreseen and direct result of
our actions; for their indirect and consequential operation the great and
good Being, who alone can foresee the dependence of human events on each
other, hath not pronounced his frail creatures liable.'

'But that you should have left Lady Emily,' said Waverley, with much
emotion, 'in the situation of all others the most interesting to a
husband, to seek a--'

'I only did my duty,' answered Colonel Talbot, calmly, 'and I do not,
ought not, to regret it. If the path of gratitude and honour were always
smooth and easy, there would be little merit in following it; but it
moves often in contradiction to our interest and passions, and sometimes
to our better affections. These are the trials of life, and this, though
not the least bitter' (the tears came unbidden to his eyes), 'is not the
first which it has been my fate to encounter. But we will talk of this
to-morrow,' he said, wringing Waverley's hands. 'Good-night; strive to
forget it for a few hours. It will dawn, I think, by six, and it is now
past two. Good-night.'

Edward retired, without trusting his voice with a reply.




CHAPTER XXVII

EXERTION


When Colonel Talbot entered the breakfast-parlour next morning, he
learned from Waverley's servant that our hero had been abroad at an early
hour and was not yet returned. The morning was well advanced before he
again appeared. He arrived out of breath, but with an air of joy that
astonished Colonel Talbot.

'There,' said he, throwing a paper on the table, 'there is my morning's
work. Alick, pack up the Colonel's clothes. Make haste, make haste.'

The Colonel examined the paper with astonishment. It was a pass from the
Chevalier to Colonel Talbot, to repair to Leith, or any other port in
possession of his Royal Highness's troops, and there to embark for
England or elsewhere, at his free pleasure; he only giving his parole of
honour not to bear arms against the house of Stuart for the space of a
twelve-month.

'In the name of God,' said the Colonel, his eyes sparkling with
eagerness, 'how did you obtain this?'

'I was at the Chevalier's levee as soon as he usually rises. He was gone
to the camp at Duddingston. I pursued him thither, asked and obtained an
audience--but I will tell you not a word more, unless I see you begin to
pack.'

'Before I know whether I can avail myself of this passport, or how it was
obtained?'

'O, you can take out the things again, you know. Now I see you busy, I
will go on. When I first mentioned your name, his eyes sparkled almost as
bright as yours did two minutes since. "Had you," he earnestly asked,
"shown any sentiments favourable to his cause?" "Not in the least, nor
was there any hope you would do so." His countenance fell. I requested
your freedom. "Impossible," he said; "your importance as a friend and
confidant of such and such personages made my request altogether
extravagant." I told him my own story and yours; and asked him to judge
what my feelings must be by his own. He has a heart, and a kind one,
Colonel Talbot, you may say what you please. He took a sheet of paper and
wrote the pass with his own hand. "I will not trust myself with my
council," he said; "they will argue me out of what is right. I will not
endure that a friend, valued as I value you, should be loaded with the
painful reflections which must afflict you in case of further misfortune
in Colonel Talbot's family; nor will I keep a brave enemy a prisoner
under such circumstances. Besides," said he, "I think I can justify
myself to my prudent advisers by pleading the good effect such lenity
will produce on the minds of the great English families with whom Colonel
Talbot is connected."'

'There the politician peeped out,' said the Colonel.

'Well, at least he concluded like a king's son: "Take the passport; I
have added a condition for form's sake; but if the Colonel objects to it,
let him depart without giving any parole whatever. I come here to war
with men, but not to distress or endanger women."'

'Well, I never thought to have been so much indebted to the Pretend--'

'To the Prince,' said Waverley, smiling.

'To the Chevalier,' said the Colonel; 'it is a good travelling name, and
which we may both freely use. Did he say anything more?'

'Only asked if there was anything else he could oblige me in; and when I
replied in the negative, he shook me by the hand, and wished all his
followers were as considerate, since some friends of mine not only asked
all he had to bestow, but many things which were entirely out of his
power, or that of the greatest sovereign upon earth. Indeed, he said, no
prince seemed, in the eyes of his followers, so like the Deity as
himself, if you were to judge from the extravagant requests which they
daily preferred to him.'

'Poor young gentleman,' said the Colonel, 'I suppose he begins to feel
the difficulties of his situation. Well, dear Waverley, this is more than
kind, and shall not be forgotten while Philip Talbot can remember
anything. My life--pshaw--let Emily thank you for that; this is a favour
worth fifty lives. I cannot hesitate on giving my parole in the
circumstances; there it is (he wrote it out in form). And now, how am I
to get off?'

'All that is settled: your baggage is packed, my horses wait, and a boat
has been engaged, by the Prince's permission, to put you on board the Fox
frigate. I sent a messenger down to Leith on purpose.'

'That will do excellently well. Captain Beaver is my particular friend;
he will put me ashore at Berwick or Shields, from whence I can ride post
to London; and you must entrust me with the packet of papers which you
recovered by means of your Miss Bean Lean. I may have an opportunity of
using them to your advantage. But I see your Highland friend, Glen ----
what do you call his barbarous name? and his orderly with him; I must not
call him his orderly cut-throat any more, I suppose. See how he walks as
if the world were his own, with the bonnet on one side of his head and
his plaid puffed out across his breast! I should like now to meet that
youth where my hands were not tied: I would tame his pride, or he should
tame mine.'

'For shame, Colonel Talbot! you swell at sight of tartan as the bull is
said to do at scarlet. You and Mac-Ivor have some points not much unlike,
so far as national prejudice is concerned.'

The latter part of this discourse took place in the street. They passed
the Chief, the Colonel and he sternly and punctiliously greeting each
other, like two duellists before they take their ground. It was evident
the dislike was mutual. 'I never see that surly fellow that dogs his
heels,' said the Colonel, after he had mounted his horse, 'but he reminds
me of lines I have somewhere heard--upon the stage, I think:--

    Close behind him
    Stalks sullen Bertram, like a sorcerer's fiend,
    Pressing to be employed.

'I assure you, Colonel,' said Waverley, 'that you judge too harshly of the
Highlanders.'

'Not a whit, not a whit; I cannot spare them a jot; I cannot bate them an
ace. Let them stay in their own barren mountains, and puff and swell, and
hang their bonnets on the horns of the moon, if they have a mind; but
what business have they to come where people wear breeches, and speak an
intelligible language? I mean intelligible in comparison to their
gibberish, for even the Lowlanders talk a kind of English little better
than the Negroes in Jamaica. I could pity the Pr----, I mean the,
Chevalier himself, for having so many desperadoes about him. And they
learn their trade so early. There is a kind of subaltern imp, for
example, a sort of sucking devil, whom your friend Glena----Glenamuck
there, has sometimes in his train. To look at him, he is about fifteen
years; but he is a century old in mischief and villainy. He was playing
at quoits the other day in the court; a gentleman, a decent-looking
person enough, came past, and as a quoit hit his shin, he lifted his
cane; but my young bravo whips out his pistol, like Beau Clincher in the
"Trip to the Jubilee," and had not a scream of Gardez l'eau from an upper
window set all parties a-scampering for fear of the inevitable
consequences, the poor gentleman would have lost his life by the hands of
that little cockatrice.'

'A fine character you'll give of Scotland upon your return, Colonel
Talbot.'

'O, Justice Shallow,' said the Colonel, 'will save me the
trouble--"Barren, barren, beggars all, beggars all. Marry, good
air,"--and that only when you are fairly out of Edinburgh, and not yet
come to Leith, as is our case at present.'

In a short time they arrived at the seaport.

The boat rock'd at the pier of Leith, Full loud the wind blew down the
ferry; The ship rode at the Berwick Law.

'Farewell, Colonel; may you find all as you would wish it! Perhaps we may
meet sooner than you expect; they talk of an immediate route to England.'

'Tell me nothing of that,' said Talbot; 'I wish to carry no news of your
motions.'

'Simply, then, adieu. Say, with a thousand kind greetings, all that is
dutiful and affectionate to Sir Everard and Aunt Rachel. Think of me as
kindly as you can, speak of me as indulgently as your conscience will
permit, and once more adieu.'

'And adieu, my dear Waverley; many, many thanks for your kindness.
Unplaid yourself on the first opportunity. I shall ever think on you with
gratitude, and the worst of my censure shall be, Que diable alloit-il
faire dans cette galere?'

And thus they parted, Colonel Talbot going on board of the boat and
Waverley returning to Edinburgh.




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE MARCH


It is not our purpose to intrude upon the province of history. We shall
therefore only remind our readers that about the beginning of November
the Young Chevalier, at the head of about six thousand men at the utmost,
resolved to peril his cause on an attempt to penetrate into the centre of
England, although aware of the mighty preparations which were made for
his reception. They set forward on this crusade in weather which would
have rendered any other troops incapable of marching, but which in
reality gave these active mountaineers advantages over a less hardy
enemy. In defiance of a superior army lying upon the Borders, under
Field-Marshal Wade, they besieged and took Carlisle, and soon afterwards
prosecuted their daring march to the southward.

As Colonel Mac-Ivor's regiment marched in the van of the clans, he and
Waverley, who now equalled any Highlander in the endurance of fatigue,
and was become somewhat acquainted with their language, were perpetually
at its head. They marked the progress of the army, however, with very
different eyes. Fergus, all air and fire, and confident against the world
in arms, measured nothing but that every step was a yard nearer London.
He neither asked, expected, nor desired any aid except that of the clans
to place the Stuarts once more on the throne; and when by chance a few
adherents joined the standard, he always considered them in the light of
new claimants upon the favours of the future monarch, who, he concluded,
must therefore subtract for their gratification so much of the bounty
which ought to be shared among his Highland followers.

Edward's views were very different. He could not but observe that in
those towns in which they proclaimed James the Third, 'no man cried, God
bless him.' The mob stared and listened, heartless, stupefied, and dull,
but gave few signs even of that boisterous spirit which induces them to
shout upon all occasions for the mere exercise of their most sweet
voices. The Jacobites had been taught to believe that the north-western
counties abounded with wealthy squires and hardy yeomen, devoted to the
cause of the White Rose. But of the wealthier Tories they saw little.
Some fled from their houses, some feigned themselves sick, some
surrendered themselves to the government as suspected persons. Of such as
remained, the ignorant gazed with astonishment, mixed with horror and
aversion, at the wild appearance, unknown language, and singular garb of
the Scottish clans. And to the more prudent their scanty numbers,
apparent deficiency in discipline, and poverty of equipment seemed
certain tokens of the calamitous termination of their rash undertaking.
Thus the few who joined them were such as bigotry of political principle
blinded to consequences, or whose broken fortunes induced them to hazard
all on a risk so desperate.

The Baron of Bradwardine, being asked what he thought of these recruits,
took a long pinch of snuff, and answered drily,'that he could not but
have an excellent opinion of them, since they resembled precisely the
followers who attached themselves to the good King David at the cave of
Adullam--videlicet, every one that was in distress, and every one that
was in debt, and every one that was discontented, which the vulgate
renders bitter of soul; and doubtless,' he said, 'they will prove mighty
men of their hands, and there is much need that they should, for I have
seen many a sour look cast upon us.'

But none of these considerations moved Fergus. He admired the luxuriant
beauty of the country, and the situation of many of the seats which they
passed. 'Is Waverley-Honour like that house, Edward?'

'It is one-half larger.'

'Is your uncle's park as fine a one as that?'

'It is three times as extensive, and rather resembles a forest than a
mere park.'

'Flora will be a happy woman.'

'I hope Miss Mac-Ivor will have much reason for happiness unconnected
with Waverley-Honour.'

'I hope so too; but to be mistress of such a place will be a pretty
addition to the sum total.'

'An addition, the want of which, I trust, will be amply supplied by some
other means.'

'How,' said Fergus, stopping short and turning upon Waverley--'how am I
to understand that, Mr. Waverley? Had I the pleasure to hear you aright?'

'Perfectly right, Fergus.'

'And am I to understand that you no longer desire my alliance and my
sister's hand?'

'Your sister has refused mine,' said Waverley, 'both directly and by all
the usual means by which ladies repress undesired attentions.'

'I have no idea,' answered the Chieftain, 'of a lady dismissing or a
gentleman withdrawing his suit, after it has been approved of by her
legal guardian, without giving him an opportunity of talking the matter
over with the lady. You did not, I suppose, expect my sister to drop into
your mouth like a ripe plum the first moment you chose to open it?'

'As to the lady's title to dismiss her lover, Colonel,' replied Edward,
'it is a point which you must argue with her, as I am ignorant of the
customs of the Highlands in that particular. But as to my title to
acquiesce in a rejection from her without an appeal to your interest, I
will tell you plainly, without meaning to undervalue Miss Mac-Ivor's
admitted beauty and accomplishments, that I would not take the hand of an
angel, with an empire for her dowry, if her consent were extorted by the
importunity of friends and guardians, and did not flow from her own free
inclination.'

'An angel, with the dowry of an empire,' repeated Fergus, in a tone of
bitter irony, 'is not very likely to be pressed upon a ----shire squire.
But, sir,' changing his tone, 'if Flora Mac-Ivor have not the dowry of an
empire, she is MY sister; and that is sufficient at least to secure her
against being treated with anything approaching to levity.'

'She is Flora Mac-Ivor, sir,' said Waverley, with firmness, 'which to me,
were I capable of treating ANY woman with levity, would be a more
effectual protection.'

The brow of the Chieftain was now fully clouded; but Edward felt too
indignant at the unreasonable tone which he had adopted to avert the
storm by the least concession. They both stood still while this short
dialogue passed, and Fergus seemed half disposed to say something more
violent, but, by a strong effort, suppressed his passion, and, turning
his face forward, walked sullenly on. As they had always hitherto walked
together, and almost constantly side by side, Waverley pursued his course
silently in the same direction, determined to let the Chief take his own
time in recovering the good-humour which he had so unreasonably
discarded, and firm in his resolution not to bate him an inch of dignity.

After they had marched on in this sullen manner about a mile, Fergus
resumed the discourse in a different tone. 'I believe I was warm, my dear
Edward, but you provoke me with your want of knowledge of the world. You
have taken pet at some of Flora's prudery, or high-flying notions of
loyalty, and now, like a child, you quarrel with the plaything you have
been crying for, and beat me, your faithful keeper, because my arm cannot
reach to Edinburgh to hand it to you. I am sure, if I was passionate, the
mortification of losing the alliance of such a friend, after your
arrangement had been the talk of both Highlands and Lowlands, and that
without so much as knowing why or wherefore, might well provoke calmer
blood than mine. I shall write to Edinburgh and put all to rights; that
is, if you desire I should do so; as indeed I cannot suppose that your
good opinion of Flora, it being such as you have often expressed to me,
can be at once laid aside.'

'Colonel Mac-Ivor,' said Edward, who had no mind to be hurried farther or
faster than he chose in a matter which he had already considered as
broken off, 'I am fully sensible of the value of your good offices; and
certainly, by your zeal on my behalf in such an affair, you do me no
small honour. But as Miss Mac-Ivor has made her election freely and
voluntarily, and as all my attentions in Edinburgh were received with
more than coldness, I cannot, in justice either to her or myself, consent
that she should again be harassed upon this topic. I would have mentioned
this to you some time since, but you saw the footing upon which we stood
together, and must have understood it. Had I thought otherwise I would
have earlier spoken; but I had a natural reluctance to enter upon a
subject so painful to us both.'

'O, very well, Mr. Waverley,' said Fergus, haughtily, 'the thing is at an
end. I have no occasion to press my sister upon any man.'

'Nor have I any occasion to court repeated rejection from the same young
lady,' answered Edward, in the same tone.

'I shall make due inquiry, however,' said the Chieftain, without noticing
the interruption, 'and learn what my sister thinks of all this, we will
then see whether it is to end here.'

'Respecting such inquiries, you will of course be guided by your own
judgment,' said Waverley. 'It is, I am aware, impossible Miss Mac-Ivor
can change her mind; and were such an unsupposable case to happen, it is
certain I will not change mine. I only mention this to prevent any
possibility of future misconstruction.'

Gladly at this moment would Mac-Ivor have put their quarrel to a personal
arbitrement, his eye flashed fire, and he measured Edward as if to choose
where he might best plant a mortal wound. But although we do not now
quarrel according to the modes and figures of Caranza or Vincent Saviola,
no one knew better than Fergus that there must be some decent pretext for
a mortal duel. For instance, you may challenge a man for treading on your
corn in a crowd, or for pushing you up to the wall, or for taking your
seat in the theatre; but the modern code of honour will not permit you to
found a quarrel upon your right of compelling a man to continue addresses
to a female relative which the fair lady has already refused. So that
Fergus was compelled to stomach this supposed affront until the whirligig
of time, whose motion he promised himself he would watch most sedulously,
should bring about an opportunity of revenge.

Waverley's servant always led a saddle-horse for him in the rear of the
battalion to which he was attached, though his master seldom rode. But
now, incensed at the domineering and unreasonable conduct of his late
friend, he fell behind the column and mounted his horse, resolving to
seek the Baron of Bradwardine, and request permission to volunteer in his
troop instead of the Mac-Ivor regiment.

'A happy time of it I should have had,' thought he, after he was mounted,
'to have been so closely allied to this superb specimen of pride and
self-opinion and passion. A colonel! why, he should have been a
generalissimo. A petty chief of three or four hundred men! his pride
might suffice for the Cham of Tartary--the Grand Seignior--the Great
Mogul! I am well free of him. Were Flora an angel, she would bring with
her a second Lucifer of ambition and wrath for a brother-in-law.'

The Baron, whose learning (like Sancho's jests while in the Sierra
Morena) seemed to grow mouldy for want of exercise, joyfully embraced the
opportunity of Waverley's offering his service in his regiment, to bring
it into some exertion. The good-natured old gentleman, however, laboured
to effect a reconciliation between the two quondam friends. Fergus turned
a cold ear to his remonstrances, though he gave them a respectful
hearing; and as for Waverley, he saw no reason why he should be the first
in courting a renewal of the intimacy which the Chieftain had so
unreasonably disturbed. The Baron then mentioned the matter to the
Prince, who, anxious to prevent quarrels in his little army, declared he
would himself remonstrate with Colonel Mac-Ivor on the unreasonableness
of his conduct. But, in the hurry of their march, it was a day or two
before he had an opportunity to exert his influence in the manner
proposed.

In the meanwhile Waverley turned the instructions he had received while
in Gardiner's dragoons to some account, and assisted the Baron in his
command as a sort of adjutant. 'Parmi les aveugles un borgne est roi,'
says the French proverb; and the cavalry, which consisted chiefly of
Lowland gentlemen, their tenants and servants, formed a high opinion of
Waverley's skill and a great attachment to his person. This was indeed
partly owing to the satisfaction which they felt at the distinguished
English volunteer's leaving the Highlanders to rank among them; for there
was a latent grudge between the horse and foot, not only owing to the
difference of the services, but because most of the gentlemen, living
near the Highlands, had at one time or other had quarrels with the tribes
in their vicinity, and all of them looked with a jealous eye on the
Highlanders' avowed pretensions to superior valour and utility in the
Prince's service.




CHAPTER XXIX

THE CONFUSION OF KING AGRAMANT'S CAMP


Itwas Waverley's custom sometimes to ride a little apart from the main
body, to look at any object of curiosity which occurred on the march.
They were now in Lancashire, when, attracted by a castellated old hall,
he left the squadron for half an hour to take a survey and slight sketch
of it. As he returned down the avenue he was met by Ensign Maccombich.
This man had contracted a sort of regard for Edward since the day of his
first seeing him at Tully-Veolan and introducing him to the Highlands. He
seemed to loiter, as if on purpose to meet with our hero. Yet, as he
passed him, he only approached his stirrup and pronounced the single word
'Beware!' and then walked swiftly on, shunning all further communication.

Edward, somewhat surprised at this hint, followed with his eyes the
course of Evan, who speedily disappeared among the trees. His servant,
Alick Polwarth, who was in attendance, also looked after the Highlander,
and then riding up close to his master, said,--

'The ne'er be in me, sir, if I think you're safe amang thae Highland
rinthereouts.'

'What do you mean, Alick?' said Waverley.

'The Mac-Ivors, sir, hae gotten it into their heads that ye hae affronted
their young leddy, Miss Flora; and I hae heard mae than ane say, they
wadna tak muckle to mak a black-cock o' ye; and ye ken weel eneugh
there's mony o' them wadna mind a bawbee the weising a ball through the
Prince himsell, an the Chief gae them the wink, or whether he did or no,
if they thought it a thing that would please him when it was dune.'

Waverley, though confident that Fergus Mac-Ivor was incapable of such
treachery, was by no means equally sure of the forbearance of his
followers. He knew that, where the honour of the Chief or his family was
supposed to be touched, the happiest man would be he that could first
avenge the stigma; and he had often heard them quote a proverb, 'That the
best revenge was the most speedy and most safe.' Coupling this with the
hint of Evan, he judged it most prudent to set spurs to his horse and
ride briskly back to the squadron. Ere he reached the end of the long
avenue, however, a ball whistled past him, and the report of a pistol was
heard.

'It was that deevil's buckle, Callum Beg,' said Alick; 'I saw him whisk
away through amang the reises.'

Edward, justly incensed at this act of treachery, galloped out of the
avenue, and observed the battalion of Mac-Ivor at some distance moving
along the common in which it terminated. He also saw an individual
running very fast to join the party; this he concluded was the intended
assassin, who, by leaping an enclosure, might easily make a much shorter
path to the main body than he could find on horseback. Unable to contain
himself, he commanded Alick to go to the Baron of Bradwardine, who was at
the head of his regiment about half a mile in front, and acquaint him
with what had happened. He himself immediately rode up to Fergus's
regiment. The Chief himself was in the act of joining them. He was on
horseback, having returned from waiting on the Prince. On perceiving
Edward approaching, he put his horse in motion towards him.

'Colonel Mac-Ivor,' said Waverley, without any farther salutation, 'I
have to inform you that one of your people has this instant fired at me
from a lurking-place.'

'As that,' answered Mac-Ivor, 'excepting the circumstance of a
lurking-place, is a pleasure which I presently propose to myself, I
should be glad to know which of my clansmen dared to anticipate me.'

'I shall certainly be at your command whenever you please; the gentleman
who took your office upon himself is your page there, Callum Beg.'

'Stand forth from the ranks, Callum! Did you fire at Mr. Waverley?'

'No,' answered the unblushing Callum.

'You did,' said Alick Polwarth, who was already returned, having met a
trooper by whom he despatched an account of what was going forward to the
Baron of Bradwardine, while he himself returned to his master at full
gallop, neither sparing the rowels of his spurs nor the sides of his
horse. 'You did; I saw you as plainly as I ever saw the auld kirk at
Coudingham.'

'You lie,' replied Callum, with his usual impenetrable obstinacy. The
combat between the knights would certainly, as in the days of chivalry,
have been preceded by an encounter between the squires (for Alick was a
stout-hearted Merseman, and feared the bow of Cupid far more than a
Highlander's dirk or claymore), but Fergus, with his usual tone of
decision, demanded Callum's pistol. The cock was down, the pan and muzzle
were black with the smoke; it had been that instant fired.

'Take that,' said Fergus, striking the boy upon the head with the heavy
pistol-butt with his whole force--'take that for acting without orders,
and lying to disguise it.' Callum received the blow without appearing to
flinch from it, and fell without sign of life. 'Stand still, upon your
lives!' said Fergus to the rest of the clan; 'I blow out the brains of
the first man who interferes between Mr. Waverley and me.' They stood
motionless; Evan Dhu alone showed symptoms of vexation and anxiety.
Callum lay on the ground bleeding copiously, but no one ventured to give
him any assistance. It seemed as if he had gotten his death-blow.

'And now for you, Mr. Waverley; please to turn your horse twenty yards
with me upon the common.' Waverley complied; and Fergus, confronting him
when they were a little way from the line of march, said, with great
affected coolness, 'I could not but wonder, sir, at the fickleness of
taste which you were pleased to express the other day. But it was not an
angel, as you justly observed, who had charms for you, unless she brought
an empire for her fortune. I have now an excellent commentary upon that
obscure text.'

'I am at a loss even to guess at your meaning, Colonel Mac-Ivor, unless
it seems plain that you intend to fasten a quarrel upon me.'

'Your affected ignorance shall not serve you, sir. The Prince--the Prince
himself has acquainted me with your manoeuvres. I little thought that
your engagements with Miss Bradwardine were the reason of your breaking
off your intended match with my sister. I suppose the information that
the Baron had altered the destination of his estate was quite a
sufficient reason for slighting your friend's sister and carrying off
your friend's mistress.'

'Did the Prince tell you I was engaged to Miss Bradwardine?' said
Waverley. 'Impossible.'

'He did, sir,' answered Mac-Ivor; 'so, either draw and defend yourself or
resign your pretensions to the lady.' 'This is absolute madness,'
exclaimed Waverley, 'or some strange mistake!'

'O! no evasion! draw your sword!' said the infuriated Chieftain, his own
already unsheathed.

'Must I fight in a madman's quarrel?'

'Then give up now, and forever, all pretensions to Miss Bradwardine's
hand.'

'What title have you,' cried Waverley, utterly losing command of
himself--'what title have you, or any man living, to dictate such terms
to me?' And he also drew his sword.

At this moment the Baron of Bradwardine, followed by several of his
troop, came up on the spur, some from curiosity, others to take part in
the quarrel which they indistinctly understood had broken out between the
Mac-Ivors and their corps. The clan, seeing them approach, put themselves
in motion to support their Chieftain, and a scene of confusion commenced
which seamed likely to terminate in bloodshed. A hundred tongues were in
motion at once. The Baron lectured, the Chieftain stormed, the
Highlanders screamed in Gaelic, the horsemen cursed and swore in Lowland
Scotch. At length matters came to such a pass that the Baron threatened
to charge the Mac-Ivors unless they resumed their ranks, and many of
them, in return, presented their firearms at him and the other troopers.
The confusion was privately fostered by old Ballenkeiroch, who made no
doubt that his own day of vengeance was arrived, when, behold! a cry
arose of 'Room! make way! place a Monseigneur! place a Monseigneur!' This
announced the approach of the Prince, who came up with a party of
Fitz-James's foreign dragoons that acted as his body-guard. His arrival
produced some degree of order. The Highlanders reassumed their ranks, the
cavalry fell in and formed squadron, and the Baron and Chieftain were
silent.

The Prince called them and Waverley before him. Having heard the original
cause of the quarrel through the villainy of Callum Beg, he ordered him
into custody of the provost-marshal for immediate execution, in the event
of his surviving the chastisement inflicted by his Chieftain. Fergus,
however, in a tone betwixt claiming a right and asking a favour,
requested he might be left to his disposal, and promised his punishment
should be exemplary. To deny this might have seemed to encroach on the
patriarchal authority of the Chieftains, of which they were very jealous,
and they were not persons to be disobliged. Callum was therefore left to
the justice of his own tribe.
