inquired of the French galley, which was the vessel nearest his,
"Whence does this fleet come?" They answered, "From France." "What are
you doing here?" said the Adelantado. "This is the territory of King
Philip II. I order you to leave directly; for I neither know who you
are nor what you want here."

The French commander then replied, "I am bringing soldiers and
supplies to the fort of the King of France." He then asked the name of
the general of our fleet, and was told, "Pedro Menendez de Aviles,
Captain-general of the King of Spain, who have come to hang all
Lutherans I find here." Our general then asked him the name of his
commander, and he replied, "Lord Gasto." While this parleying was
going on, a long-boat was sent from the galley to the flag-ship. The
person charged with this errand managed to do it so secretly that we
could not hear what was said; but we understood the reply of the
French to be, "I am the admiral," which made us think he wished to
surrender, as they were in so small a force. Scarcely had the French
made this reply, when they slipped their cables, spread their sails,
and passed through our midst. Our admiral, seeing this, followed the
French commander, and called upon him to lower his sails, in the name
of King Philip, to which he received an impertinent answer. Immediatly
our admiral gave an order to discharge a small culverin, the ball from
which struck the vessel amidship, and I thought she was going to
founder. We gave chase, and some time after he again called on them to
lower their sails. "I would sooner die first than surrender!" replied
the French commander. The order was given to fire a second shot, which
carried off five or six men; but, as these miserable devils are very
good sailors, they maneuvered so well that we could not take one of
them; and, notwithstanding all the guns we fired at them, we did not
sink one of their ships. We only got possession of one of their large
boats, which was of great service to us afterward. During the whole
night our flag-ship (the _San Pelayo_) and the galley chased the
French flag-ship (_Trinity_) and galley....

The next morning, being fully persuaded that the storm had made a
wreck of our galley, or that, at least, she had been driven a hundred
leagues out to sea, we decided that so soon as daylight came we would
weigh anchor, and withdraw in good order, to a river (Seloy) which was
below the French colony, and there disembark, and construct a fort,
which we would defend until assistance came to us.

On Thursday, just as day appeared, we sailed toward the vessel at
anchor, passed very close to her, and would certainly have captured
her, when we saw another vessel appear on the open sea, which we
thought was one of ours. At the same moment, however, we thought we
recognized the French admiral's ship. We perceived the ship on the
open sea: it was the French galley of which we had been in pursuit.
Finding ourselves between these two vessels, we decided to direct our
course toward the galley, for the sake of deceiving them and
preventing them from attacking us, so as not to give them any time to
wait. This bold maneuver having succeeded, we sought the river Seloy
and port, of which I have spoken, where we had the good fortune to
find our galley, and another vessel which had planned the same thing
we had. Two companies of infantry now disembarked: that of Captain
Andres Soyez Patino, and that of Captain Juan de San Vincente, who is
a very distinguished gentleman. They were well received by the
Indians, who gave them a large house belonging to a chief, and
situated near the shore of a river. Immediately Captain Patino and
Captain San Vincente, both men of talent and energy, ordered an
intrenchment to be built around this house, with a slope of earth and
fascines, these being the only means of defense possible in that
country, where stones are nowhere to be found. Up to to-day we have
disembarked twenty-four pieces of bronze guns of different calibers,
of which the least weighed fifteen hundred weight. Our fort is at a
distance of about fifteen leagues from that of the enemy (Fort
Carolin). The energy and talents of those two brave captains, joined
to the efforts of their brave soldiers, who had no tools with which to
work the earth, accomplished the construction of this fortress of
defence; and, when the general disembarked he was quite surprized with
what had been done.

On Saturday, the 8th, the general landed with many banners spread, to
the sound of trumpets and salutes of artillery. As I had gone ashore
the evening before, I took a cross and went to meet him, singing the
hymn _Te Deum laudamus_. The general marched up to the cross, followed
by all who accompanied him, and there they all kneeled and embraced
the cross. A large number of Indians watched these proceedings and
imitated all they saw done. The same day the general took formal
possession of the country in the name of his Majesty, and all the
captains took the oath of allegiance to him, as their general and
governor of the country....

Our general was very bold in all military matters, and a great enemy
of the French. He immediately assembled his captains and planned an
expedition to attack the French settlement and fort on the river with
five hundred men; and, in spite of the opinion of a majority of them,
and of my judgment and of another priest, he ordered his plan to be
carried out. Accordingly, on Monday, September 17, he set out with
five hundred men, well provided with fire-arms and pikes, each soldier
carrying with him a sack of bread and supply of wine for the journey.
They also took with them two Indian chiefs, who were the implacable
enemies of the French, to serve as guides....

I have previously stated that our brave captain-general set out on the
17th of September with five hundred arquebusiers and pikemen, under
the guidance of two Indian chiefs, who showed them the route to the
enemy's fort. They marched the whole distance until Tuesday evening,
the 17th of September, 1565, when they arrived within a quarter of a
league of the enemy's fort (Carolin), where they remained all night up
to their waists in water. When daylight came, Captains Lopez, Patino,
and Martin Ochoa had already been to examine the fort, but, when they
went to attack the fort, a greater part of the soldiers were so
confused they scarcely knew what they were about.

On Thursday morning our good captain-general, accompanied by his
son-in-law, Don Pedro de Valdes, and Captain Patino, went to inspect
the fort. He showed so much vivacity that he did not seem to have
suffered by any of the hardships to which he had been exposed, and,
seeing him march off so brisk, the others took courage, and without
exception followed his example. It appears the enemy did not perceive
their approach until the very moment of the attack, as it was very
early in the morning and had rained in torrents. The greater part of
the soldiers of the fort were still in bed. Some arose in their
shirts, and others, quite naked, begged for quarter; but, in spite of
that, more than one hundred and forty were killed. A great Lutheran
cosmographer and magician was found among the dead. The rest,
numbering about three hundred, scaled the walls, and either took
refuge in the forest or on their ships floating in the river, laden
with treasures, so that in an hour's time the fort was in our
possession, without our having lost a single man, or even had one
wounded. There were six vessels on the river at the time. They took
one brig, and an unfinished galley and another vessel, which had been
just discharged of a load of rich merchandise, and sunk. These vessels
were placed at the entrance to the bar to blockade the harbor, as they
expected we would come by sea. Another, laden with wine and
merchandise, was near the port. She refused to surrender, and spread
her sails, when they fired on her from the fort, and sunk her in a
spot where neither the vessel nor cargo will be lost.

The taking of this fort gained us many valuable objects, namely, two
hundred pikes, a hundred and twenty helmets, a quantity of arquebuses
and shields, a quantity of clothing, linen, fine cloths, two hundred
tons of flour, a good many barrels of biscuit, two hundred bushels of
wheat, three horses, four asses, and two she-asses, hogs, tallow,
books, furnace, flour-mill, and many other things of little value. But
the greatest advantage of this victory is certainly the triumph which
our Lord has granted us, and which will be the means of the holy
Gospel being introduced into this country, a thing necessary to
prevent the loss of many souls....

When we had reached the sea, we went about three leagues along the
coast in search of our comrades. It was about ten o'clock at night
when we met them, and there was a mutual rejoicing at having found
each other. Not far off we saw the camp fires of our enemies, and our
general ordered two of our soldiers to go and reconnoiter them,
concealing themselves in the bushes, and to observe well the ground
where they were encamped, so as to know what could be done. About two
o'clock the men returned, saying that the enemy was on the other side
of the river, and that we could not get at them. Immediately the
general ordered two soldiers and four sailors to return to where we
bad left the boats, and bring them down the river, so that we might
pass over to where the enemy was. Then he marched his troops forward
to the river, and we arrived before daylight. We concealed ourselves
in a hollow between the sandhills, with the Indians who were with us;
and, when it became light, we saw a great many of the enemy go down to
the river to get shell-fish for food. Soon after we saw a flag
hoisted, as a war-signal.

Our general, who was observing all that, enlightened by the Holy
Spirit, said to us, "I intend to change these clothes for those of a
sailor, and take a Frenchman with me (one of those whom we had brought
with us from Spain), and we will go and talk with these Frenchmen.
Perhaps they are without supplies, and would be glad to surrender
without fighting." He had scarcely finished speaking before he put his
plan into execution. As soon as he had called to them, one of them
swam toward and spoke to him; told him of their having been
shipwrecked, and the distress they were in; that they had not eaten
bread for eight or ten days; and, what is more, stated that all, or at
least the greater part of them, were Lutherans. Immediately the
general sent him back to his countrymen, to say they must surrender,
and give up their arms, or he would put them all to death. A French
gentleman, who was a sergeant, brought back the reply that they would
surrender on condition their lives should be spared. After having
parleyed a long time, our brave captain-general answered "that he
would make no promises, that they must surrender unconditionally, and
lay down their arms, because, if he spared their lives, he wanted them
to be grateful for it, and, if they were put to death, that there
should be no cause for complaint." Seeing that there was nothing else
left for them to do, the sergeant returned to the camp; and soon after
he brought all their arms and flags, and gave them up to the general,
and surrendered unconditionally. Finding they were all Lutherans, the
captain-general ordered them all to be put to death; but, as I was a
priest, and had bowels of mercy, I begged him to grant me the favor of
sparing those whom we might find to be Christians. He granted it; and
I made investigations, and found ten or twelve of the men Roman
Catholics, whom we brought back. All the others were executed, because
they were Lutherans and enemies of our Holy Catholic faith. All this
took place on Saturday (St. Michael's Day), September 29, 1565.[3]

    [1] Francisco Lopez de Mendoza was the chaplain of the expedition.
    His account is printed in "Old South Leaflets."

    [2] These ships, commanded by Ribault,--seven in number, with 500
    men besides families of artizans on board,--had arrived at the
    mouth of the St. John's River on August 29, 1565. The four left
    outside, as seen by Menendez, were at the time disembarking their
    passengers.

    [3] When the French Government learned of this massacre, the event
    did not arouse any particular interest. Indeed, the colony seems
    not to have had any special protection from the home authorities.
    Had the contrary been the case, it would have been easily possible
    for the French to have built up a flourishing colony in America
    nearly half a century before the English were ever established in
    the new world.




SIR WALTER RALEIGH'S VIRGINIA COLONIES

(1584-1587)

I

THE ACCOUNT BY JOHN A. DOYLE[1]


The task in which Gilbert[2] had failed was to be undertaken by one
better qualified to carry it out. If any Englishman in that age seemed
to be marked out as the founder of a colonial empire, it was Raleigh.
Like Gilbert, he had studied books; like Drake, he could rule men. The
pupil of Coligny, the friend of Spenser, traveler-soldier, scholar,
courtier, statesman, Raleigh with all his varied graces and powers
rises before us, the type and personification of the age in which he
lived. The associations of his youth, and the training of his early
manhood, fitted him to sympathize with the aims of his half-brother
Gilbert, and there is little reason to doubt that Raleigh had a share
in his undertaking and his failure.

In 1584 he obtained a patent precisely similar to Gilbert's. His first
step showed the thoughtful and well-planned system on which he began
his task. Two ships were sent out, not with any idea of settlement,
but to examine and report upon the country. Their commanders were
Arthur Barlow and Philip Amidas. To the former we owe the extant
record of the voyage: the name of the latter would suggest that he was
a foreigner. Whether by chance or design, they took a more southerly
course than any of their predecessors....

Coasting along for about a hundred and twenty miles the voyagers
reached an inlet and with some difficulty entered. They solemnly took
possession of the land in the Queen's name, and then delivered it over
to Raleigh according to his patent. They soon discovered that the land
upon which they had touched was an island about twenty miles long and
not above six broad, named, as they afterward learned, Roanoke.
Beyond, separating them from the mainland, lay an enclosed sea,
studded with more than a hundred fertile and well-wooded islets....

Barlow and Amidas returned to England in the middle of September. With
them they brought two of the savages, named Wanchese and Manteo. A
probable tradition tells us that the Queen herself named the country
Virginia, and that Raleigh's knighthood was the reward and
acknowledgement of his success. On the strength of this report Raleigh
at once made preparations for a settlement. A fleet of seven ships was
provided for the conveyance of a hundred and eight settlers. The fleet
was under the command of Sir Richard Grenville, who was to establish
the settlement and leave it under the charge of Ralph Lane....

On the 20th of June the fleet reached the coast of Florida, and three
days later narrowly escaped being cast away off Cape Fear. In a few
days more they anchored at Wococon, an island near Roanoke. In
entering the harbor the largest ship, the _Tiger_, struck a sand-bar,
and was nearly lost, either through the clumsiness or treachery of the
pilot, Simon Fernando, a Portuguese. On the 11th of July Grenville,
with forty others, including Lane, Amidas, and the chief men of the
expedition, crossed over to the mainland. Taking northerly direction,
they explored the coast as far as Secotan, an Indian town some sixty
miles mouth of Roanoke, where they were hospitably received by the
savages. It is melancholy, after the bright picture of the intercourse
between the natives and the English drawn by Barlow, to have to record
hostilities, in which by far the greater share of blame lay with our
countrymen. On the voyage back to Roanoke a silver cup was stolen from
the English at one of the Indian villages. In revenge the English put
the inhabitants to flight, burnt the village and destroyed the crops.
On the 3d of August one ship sailed home, and on the 25th Grenville
left the colony, followed, as it would seem, during the course of the
next month by the rest of the fleet[3]....

The site of the settlement was at the northeast corner of the island
of Roanoke, whence the settlers could command the strait. There, even
now, choked by vines and underwood, and here and there broken by the
crumbling remains of an earthen bastion, may be traced the outlines of
the ditch which enclosed the camp, some forty yards square, the home
of the first English settlers in the New World....

If the failure of his colony was likely to deter Raleigh from further
efforts, this was more than outweighed by the good report of the
country given both by Lane and Heriot. Accordingly, in the very next
year, Raleigh put out another and a larger expedition under the
leadership of John White. The constitution of White's expedition would
seem to show that it was designed to be more a colony, properly
speaking, than Lane's settlement at Roanoke. A government was formed
by Raleigh, consisting of White and twelve others, incorporated as the
governor and assistants of the city of Raleigh. Of the hundred and
fifty settlers seventeen were women, of whom seven seem to have been
unmarried. The emigrants evidently did not go as mere explorers or
adventurers; they were to be the seed of a commonwealth....

On the 2d of July the fleet reached Haterask, the port at which
Grenville had landed on his last voyage. There White took fifty men
ashore to search for the fifteen whom Grenville had left there. They
found nothing but the bones of one man, slain, as they afterward
learned, by the Indians. The rest had disappeared, and it was not till
some time afterward that their countrymen learned any tidings of their
fate. Ignorant, no doubt, of the altered feelings of the natives,
Grenvile's men had lived carelessly, and kept no watch. Pemissapan's
warriors had seized the opportunity to revenge the death of their
chief, and had sent a party of thirty men against the English
settlement. Two of the chief men were sent forward to demand a parley
with two of the English. The latter fell into the trap, and sent out
two of their number. One of these was instantly seized and killed,
