which has ever been a mystery to me, unless, as some of the learned
think, all women are naturally lovers of wickedness, if strength and
courage go with it.  What by wheedling, what by bullying, what by tales
of pilgrimages to holy shrines (he was coming from Jerusalem by way of
Rome, so he told all we met), he ever won a welcome.

Other more devilish cantrips he played, one of them at the peasant's
house where we rested on the first night of our common travel.  The
Lenten supper which they gave us, with no little kindness, was ended, and
we were sitting in the firelight, Brother Thomas discoursing largely of
his pilgrimages, and of his favour among the high clergy.  Thus, at I
know not what convent of the Clarisses, {5} in Italy, the holy Sisters
had pressed on him a relic of Monsieur St. Aignan, the patron of the good
town of Orleans.  To see this relic, the farmer, his wife, and his sons
and daughters crowded eagerly; it was but a little blackened finger bone,
yet they were fain to touch it, as is the custom.  But this he would not
yet allow.

"Perchance some of you," he said, "are already corrupt, not knowing it,
with the poisonous breath of that damnable Hussite heresy, which is
blowing from the east like wind of the pestilence, and ye may have doubts
concerning the verity of this most holy and miraculous relic?"

They all crossed themselves, protesting that no such wicked whisper of
Sathanas had ever come into their minds, nor had they so much as heard of
Huss and his blasphemies.

"Nay," said Brother Thomas, "I could scarcely blame you if it were partly
as I said.  For in this latter time of the world, when I have myself met
Jews flocking to Babylon expecting the birth of Antichrist, there be many
false brethren, who carry about feigned relics, to deceive the simple.  We
should believe no man, if he be, as I am, a stranger, unless he shows us
a sign, such as now I will show you.  Give me, of your grace, a kerchief,
or a napkin."  The goodwife gave him a clean white napkin from her
aumbry, and he tore it up before their eyes, she not daring to stay his
hand.

"Now note this holy relic and its wonderful power," he said, holding the
blackened bone high in his left hand, and all our eyes were fixed on it.
"Now mark," he said again, passing it over the napkin; and lo! there was
a clean white napkin in his hands, and of the torn shreds not a trace!

We were still gaping, and crossing ourselves with blessings on this happy
day and our unworthy eyes that beheld a miracle, when he did a thing yet
more marvellous, if that might be, which I scarce expect any man will
believe.  Going to the table, and catching up a glass vessel on which the
goodwife set great store, he threw it against the wall, and we all
plainly heard it shiver into tinkling pieces.  Then, crossing the room
into the corner, that was dusky enough, he faced us, again holding the
blessed relic, whereon we stared, in holy fear.  Then he rose, and in his
hand was the goodwife's glass vessel, without crack or flaw! {6}

"Such," he said, "are the properties of this miraculous relic; there is
nothing broken but it will mend, ay, a broken limb, as I can prove on my
own sinful body,"--thrusting out his great brown leg, whereon, assuredly,
were signs of a fracture; "ay, a broken leg, or, my dear daughters, a
broken heart."  At this, of course, they were all eager to touch the
blessed relic with their poor rings of base metal, such as they wear who
are not rich.  Nay, but first, he said, they must give their mites for a
convent of the Clarisses, that was building at Castres, by the care of
the holy Colette, whom he might call his patroness, unworthy as he was.

Then he showed us a safe-conduct, signed with that blessed woman's own
hand, such as she was wont to give to the religious of the Order of St.
Francis.  By virtue of this, he said (and, by miracle, for once he said
truly, as I had but too good cause to learn), he could go freely in and
out among the camps of French, English, and Burgundians.

You may conceive how joyous they were in that poor cottage, on a night so
blessed, and how Brother Thomas told us of the holy Colette, that famous
nun and Mother in Christ, as he that had often been in her company.  He
had seen her body lifted in the air while she remained in a pious
ecstasy, her mind soaring aloft and her fleshly body following it some
way.

He had often watched that snow-white beast which followed her, such a
creature as is known in no country of the sinful world, but is a thing of
Paradise.  And he had tried to caress this wondrous creature of God, but
vainly, for none but the holy sister Colette may handle it.  Concerning
her miracles of healing, too, he told us, all of which we already knew
for very truth, and still know on better warranty than his.

Ye may believe that, late and at last, Brother Thomas had his choice of
the warmest place to sleep in--by the "four," as is the wont of pilgrims,
for in his humility this holy man would not suffer the farmer's wife and
the farmer to give him their bed, as they desired.  I, too, was very
kindly entreated by the young lads, but I could scarcely sleep for
marvelling at these miracles done by one so unworthy; and great, indeed,
I deemed, must be the virtue of that relic which wrought such signs in
the hands of an evil man.  But I have since held that he feigned all by
art magic and very sorcery, for, as we wended next morning on our road,
he plainly told me, truly or falsely, that he had picked up the blackened
finger-bone out of the loathly ashes of the dead in the burned castle
near Ruffec.

Wherefore I consider that when Brother Thomas sold the grace of his
relic, by the touching of rings, he dealt in a devilish black simony,
vending to simple Christians no grace but that of his master, Sathanas.
Thus he was not only evil (if I guess aright, which I submit to the
judgment of my ecclesiastical superiors, and of the Church), but he had
even found out a new kind of wickedness, such as I never read of in any
books of theology wherein is much to be learned.  I have spoken with
some, however, knights and men of this world, who deemed that he did but
beguile our eyes by craft and sleight-of-hand.

This other hellish art he had, by direct inspiration, as I hold, of his
master Behemoth, that he could throw his voice whither he would, so that,
in all seeming, it came from above, or from below, or from a corner of a
room, fashioning it to resemble the voice of whom he would, yet none
might see his lips move.  With this craft he would affray the peasants
about the fire in the little inns where we sometimes rested, when he
would be telling tales of bogles and eldritch fantasies, and of fiends
that rout and rap, and make the tables and firkins dance.  Such art of
speech, I am advised, is spoken of by St. Jerome, in his comment on the
holy prophet the saint Isaiah, and they that use it he calls
"ventriloqui," in the Latin, or "belly-speakers," and he takes an
unfavourable sense of them and their doings.  So much I have from the
learned William de Boyis, Prior of Pluscarden, where now I write; with
whom I have conversed of these matters privately, and he thinks this art
a thing that men may learn by practice, without dealing in nigromancy and
the black magic.  This question I am content to leave, as is fitting, to
the judgment of my superiors.  And indeed, as at that time, Brother
Thomas spake not in his belly except to make sport and affray the simple
people, soon turning their fears to mirth.  Certainly the country folk
never misdoubted him, the women for a holy man, the men for a good
fellow; though all they of his own cloth shrank from him, and I have seen
them cross themselves in his presence, but to no avail.  He would say a
word or two in their ears, and they straightway left the place where he
might be.  None the less, with his tales and arts, Brother Thomas
commonly so wrought that we seldom slept "a la belle etoile" in that
bitter spring weather, but we ordinarily had leave to lie by the hearth,
and got a supper and a breakfast.  The good peasants would find their hen-
roosts the poorer often, for all that he could snap up was to him fortune
of war.

I loved these manners little, but leave him I could not.  His eye was
ever on me; if I stirred in the night he was awake and watching me, and
by day he never let me out of a bolt's flight.  To cut the string of his
wicked weapon was a thought often in my mind, but he was too vigilant.  My
face was his passport, he said; my face, indeed, being innocent enough,
as was no shame to me, but an endless cause of mirth and mockery to him.
Yet, by reason of the serviceableness of the man in that perilous
country, and my constant surprise and wonder at what he did and said, and
might do next (which no man could guess beforehand), and a kind of
foolish pride in his very wickedness, so much beyond what I had ever
dreamed of, and for pure fear of him also, I found myself following with
him day by day, ever thinking to escape, and never escaping.

I have since deemed that, just as his wickedness was to a boy (for I was
little more), a kind of charm, made up of a sort of admiring hate and
fear, so my guilelessness (as it seemed to him) also wrought on him
strangely.  For in part it made sport for him to see my open mouth and
staring eyes at the spectacle of his devilries, and in part he really
hated me, and hated my very virtue of simplicity, which it was his desire
and delight to surprise and corrupt.

On these strange terms, then, now drawn each to other, and now forced
apart, we wended by Poictiers towards Chinon, where the Dauphin and his
Court then lay.  So we fared northwards, through Poitou, where we found
evil news enough.  For, walking into a village, we saw men, women, and
children, all gathered, gaping about one that stood beside a horse nearly
foundered, its legs thrust wide, its nostrils all foam and blood.  The
man, who seemed as weary as his horse, held a paper in his hands, which
the priest of that parish took from him and read aloud to us.  The rider
was a royal messenger, one Thomas Scott of Easter Buccleuch, in Rankel
Burn, whom I knew later, and his tidings were evil.  The Dauphin bade his
good towns know that, on the 12th of February, Sir John Stewart,
constable of the Scottish forces in France, had fallen in battle at
Rouvray, with very many of his company, and some Frenchmen.  They had
beset a convoy under Sir John Fastolf, that was bringing meat to the
English leaguered about Orleans.  But Fastolf had wholly routed them (by
treachery, as we later learned of the Comte de Clermont), and Sir John
Stewart, with his brother Sir William, were slain.  Wherefore the Dauphin
bade the good towns send him money and men, or all was lost.

Such were the evil tidings, which put me in sore fear for my brother
Robin, one that, in such an onfall, would go far, as beseemed his blood.
But as touching his fortunes, Thomas Scott could tell me neither good nor
bad, though he knew Robin, and gave him a good name for a stout man-at-
arms.  It was of some comfort to me to hear a Scots tongue; but, for the
rest, I travelled on with a heavier heart, deeming that Orleans must
indeed fall ere I could seek my brother in that town.




CHAPTER III--WHAT BEFELL OUTSIDE OF CHINON TOWN


My old nurse, when I was a child, used to tell me a long story of a
prince who, wandering through the world, made friends with many strange
companions.  One she called Lynx-eye, that could see through a mountain;
one was Swift-foot, that could outrun the wind; one was Fine-ear, that
could hear the grass growing; and there was Greedy-gut, that could
swallow a river.  All these were very serviceable to this gracious
prince, of I know not what country, in his adventures; and they were
often brought into my mind by the companions whom we picked up on the
grass-grown roads.

These wanderers were as strange as the friends of the prince, and were as
variously, but scarce as honourably, gifted.  There was the one-armed
soldier, who showed his stump very piteously when it was a question of
begging from a burgess, but was as well furnished with limbs as other men
when no burgess was in sight.  There was a wretched woman violer, with
her jackanapes, and with her husband, a hang-dog ruffian, she bearing the
mark of his fist on her eye, and commonly trailing far behind him with
her brat on her back.  There was a blind man, with his staff, who might
well enough answer to Keen-eye, that is, when no strangers were in sight.
There was a layman, wearing cope and stole and selling indulgences, but
our captain, Brother Thomas, soon banished him from our company, for that
he divided the trade.  Others there were, each one of them a Greedy-gut,
a crew of broken men, who marched with us on the roads; but we never
entered a town or a house with these discreditable attendants.

Now, it may seem strange, but the nearer we drew to Chinon and the Court,
the poorer grew the country, for the Court and the men-at-arms had
stripped it bare, like a flight of locusts.  For this reason the Dauphin
could seldom abide long at one place, for he was so much better known
than trusted that the very cordwainer would not let him march off in a
new pair of boots without seeing his money, and, as the song said, he
even greased his old clouted shoon, and made them last as long as he
might.  For head-gear he was as ill provided, seeing that he had pawned
the fleurons of his crown.  There were days when his treasurer at Tours
(as I myself have heard him say) did not reckon three ducats in his
coffers, and the heir of France borrowed money from his very cook.  So
the people told us, and I have often marvelled how, despite this poverty,
kings and nobles, when I have seen them, go always in cloth of gold, with
rich jewels.  But, as you may guess, near the Court of a beggar Dauphin
the country-folk too were sour and beggarly.

We had to tighten our belts before we came to the wood wherein
cross-roads meet, from north, south, and east, within five miles of the
town of Chinon.  There was not a white coin among us; night was falling,
and it seemed as if we must lie out under the stars, and be fed, like the
wolves we heard howling, on wind.  By the roadside, at the crossways, but
not in view of the road, a council of our ragged regiment was held in a
deep ditch.  It would be late ere we reached the town, gates would scarce
open for us, we could not fee the warders, houses would be shut and dark;
the King's archers were apt to bear them unfriendly to wandering men with
the devil dancing in their pouches.  Resource we saw none; if there was a
cottage, dogs, like wolves for hunger and fierceness, were baying round
it.  As for Brother Thomas, an evil bruit had gone before us concerning a
cordelier that the fowls and geese were fain to follow, as wilder things,
they say, follow the blessed St. Francis.  So there sat Brother Thomas at
the cross-roads, footsore, hungry, and sullen, in the midst of us, who
dared not speak, he twanging at the string of his arbalest.  He called
himself our Moses, in his blasphemous way, and the blind man having
girded at him for not leading us into the land of plenty, he had struck
the man till he bled, and now stood stanching his wound.

Suddenly Brother Thomas ceased from his twanging, and holding up his hand
for silence, leaned his ear to the ground.  The night was still, though a
cold wind came very stealthily from the east.

"Horses!" he said.

"It is but the noise of the brook by the way," said the blind man,
sullenly.

Brother Thomas listened again.

"No, it is horses," he whispered.  "My men, they that ride horses can
spare somewhat out of their abundance to feed the poor."  And with that
he began winding up his arbalest hastily.  "Aymeric," he said to one of
our afflicted company, "you draw a good bow for a blind man; hide
yourself in the opposite ditch, and be ready when I give the word 'Pax
vobiscum.'  You, Giles," he spoke to the one-armed soldier, "go with him,
and, do you hear, aim low, at the third man's horse.  From the sound
there are not more than five or six of them.  We can but fail, at worst,
and the wood is thick behind us, where none may pursue.  You, Norman de
Pitcullo, have your whinger ready, and fasten this rope tightly to yonder
birch-tree stem, and then cross and give it a turn or two about that oak
sapling on the other side of the way.  That trap will bring down a horse
or twain.  Be quick, you Scotch wine-bag!"

I had seen many ill things done, and, to my shame, had held my peace.  But
a Leslie of Pitcullo does not take purses on the high-road.  Therefore my
heart rose in sudden anger, I having all day hated him more and more for
his bitter tongue, and I was opening my mouth to cry "A secours!"--a
warning to them who were approaching, when, quick as lightning, Brother
Thomas caught me behind the knee-joints, and I was on the ground with his
weight above me.  One cry I had uttered, when his hand was on my mouth.

"Give him the steel in his guts!" whispered the blind man.

"Slit his weasand, the Scotch pig!" said the one-armed soldier.

They were all on me now.

"No, I keep him for better sport," snarled Brother Thomas.  "He shall
learn the Scots for 'ecorcheurs' (flayers of men) "when we have filled
our pouches."

With that he crammed a great napkin in my mouth, so that I could not cry,
made it fast with a piece of cord, trussed me with the rope which he had
bidden me tie across the path to trip the horses, and with a kick sent me
flying to the bottom of the ditch, my face being turned from the road.

I could hear Giles and Aymeric steal across the way, and the rustling of
boughs as they settled on the opposite side.  I could hear the trampling
hoofs of horses coming slowly and wearily from the east.  At this moment
chanced a thing that has ever seemed strange to me: I felt the hand of
the violer woman laid lightly and kindly on my hair.  I had ever pitied
her, and, as I might, had been kind to her and her bairn; and now, as it
appears, she pitied me.  But there could be no help in her, nor did she
dare to raise her voice and give an alarm.  So I could but gnaw at my
gag, trying to find scope for my tongue to cry, for now it was not only
the travellers that I would save, but my own life, and my escape from a
death of torment lay on my success.  But my mouth was as dry as a kiln,
my tongue was doubled back till I thought that I should have choked.  The
night was now deadly still, and the ring of the weary hoofs drew nearer
and nearer.  I heard a stumble, and the scramble of a tired horse as he
recovered himself; for the rest, all was silent, though the beating of my
own heart sounded heavy and husky in my ears.

Closer and closer the travellers drew, and soon it was plain that they
rode not carelessly, nor as men who deemed themselves secure, for the
tramp of one horse singled itself out in front of the others, and this,
doubtless, was ridden by an "eclaireur," sent forward to see that the way
ahead was safe.  Now I heard a low growl of a curse from Brother Thomas,
and my heart took some comfort.  They might be warned, if the Brother
shot at the foremost man; or, at worst, if he was permitted to pass, the
man would bear swift tidings to Chinon, and we might be avenged, the
travellers and I, for I now felt that they and I were in the same peril.

The single rider drew near, and passed, and there came no cry of "Pax
vobiscum" from the friar.  But the foremost rider had, perchance, the
best horse, and the least wearied, for there was even too great a gap
between him and the rest of his company.

And now their voices might be heard, as they talked by the way, yet not
so loud that, straining my ears as I did, I could hear any words.  But
the sounds waxed louder, with words spoken, ring of hoofs, and rattle of
scabbard on stirrup, and so I knew, at least, that they who rode so late
were men armed.  Brother Thomas, too, knew it, and cursed again very low.

Nearer, nearer they came, then almost opposite, and now, as I listened to
hear the traitorous signal of murder--"Pax vobiscum"--and the twang of
bow-strings, on the night there rang a voice, a woman's voice, soft but
wondrous clear, such as never I knew from any lips but hers who then
spoke; that voice I heard in its last word, "Jesus!" and still it is
sounding in my ears.

That voice said--

"Nous voila presqu'arrives, grace a mes Freres de Paradis."

Instantly, I knew not how, at the sound of that blessed voice, and the
courage in it, I felt my fear slip from me, as when we awaken from a
dreadful dream, and in its place came happiness and peace.  Scarce
otherwise might he feel who dies in fear and wakes in Paradise.

On the forest boughs above me, my face being turned from the road,
