
In the Memorie of the Somerville family, a curious instance occurs of
this fashionable species of extravagance. In the year 1537, when James
V. brought over his shortlived bride from France, the Lord Somerville
of the day was so profuse in the expense of his apparel, that the money
which he borrowed on the occasion was compensated by a perpetual annuity
of threescore pounds Scottish, payable out of the barony of Carnwarth
till doomsday, which was assigned by the creditor to Saint Magdalen's
Chapel. By this deep expense the Lord Somerville had rendered himself so
glorious in apparel, that the King, who saw so brave a gallant enter the
gate of Holyrood, followed, by only two pages, called upon several of
the courtiers to ascertain who it could be who was so richly dressed
and so slightly attended, and he was not recognised until he entered the
presence-chamber. "You are very brave, my lord," said the King, as he
received his homage; "but where are all your men and attendants?" The
Lord Somerville readily answered, "If it please your Majesty, here they
are," pointing to the lace that was on his own and his pages' clothes:
whereat the King laughed heartily, and having surveyed the finery more
nearly, bade him have away with it all, and let him have his stout band
of spears again.

There is a scene in Jonson's "Every Man out of his Humour," (Act IV.
Scene 6.) in which a Euphuist of the time gives an account of the
effects of a duel on the clothes of himself and his opponent, and never
departs a syllable from the catalogue of his wardrobe. We shall insert
it in evidence that the foppery of our ancestors was not inferior to
that of our own time.

"_Fastidius_. Good faith, Signior, now you speak of a quarrel, I'll
acquaint you with a difference that happened between a gallant and
myself, Sir Puntarvolo. You know him if I should name him--Signor
Luculento.

"_Punt_. Luculento! What inauspicious chance interposed itself to your
two lives?

"_Fast_. Faith, sir, the same that sundered Agamemnon, and great Thetis'
son; but let the cause escape, sir. He sent me a challenge, mixt with
some few braves, which I restored; and, in fine, we met. Now indeed,
sir, I must tell you, he did offer at first very desperately, but
without judgment; for look you, sir, I cast myself into this figure;
now he came violently on, and withal advancing his rapier to strike, I
thought to have took his arm, for he had left his body to my election,
and I was sure he could not recover his guard. Sir, I mist my purpose in
his arm, rashed his doublet sleeves, ran him close by the left cheek
and through his hair. He, again, light me here--I had on a gold cable
hat-band, then new come up, about a murrey French hat I had; cuts my
hat-band, and yet it was massy goldsmith's work, cuts my brim, which,
by good fortune, being thick embroidered with gold twist and spangles,
disappointed the force of the blow; nevertheless it grazed on my
shoulder, takes me away six purls of an Italian cut-work band I wore,
cost me three pounds in the Exchange but three days before.

"_Punt_. This was a strange encounter.

"_Fast_. Nay, you shall hear, sir. With this, we both fell out and
breathed. Now, upon the second sign of his assault, I betook me to my
former manner of defence; he, on the other side, abandoned his body to
the same danger as before, and follows me still with blows; but I, being
loath to take the deadly advantage that lay before me of his left side,
made a kind of stramazoun, ran him up to the hilt through the doublet,
through the shirt, and yet missed the skin. He, making a reverse blow,
falls upon my embossed girdle,--I had thrown off the hangers a little
before,--strikes off a skirt of a thick-laced satin doublet I had, lined
with four taffetas, cuts off two panes embroidered with pearl, rends
through the drawings-out of tissue, enters the linings, and spiks the
flesh.

"_Car_. I wonder he speaks not of his wrought shirt.

"_Fast_. Here, in the opinion of mutual damage, we paused. But, ere
I proceed, I must tell you, signior, that in the last encounter, not
having leisure to put off my silver spurs, one of the rowels catched
hold of the ruffles of my boot, and, being Spanish leather and subject
to tear, overthrows me, rends me two pair of silk stockings that I put
on, being somewhat of a raw morning, a peach colour and another, and
strikes me some half-inch deep into the side of the calf: He, seeing the
blood come, presently takes horse and away; I having bound up my wound
with a piece of my wrought shirt--

"_Car_. O, comes it in there.

"_Fast_. Ride after him, and, lighting at the court gate both together,
embraced, and marched hand in hand up into the presence. Was not this
business well carried?

"_Maci_. Well! yes; and by this we can guess what apparel the gentleman
wore.

"_Punt_. 'Fore valour! it was a designment begun with much resolution,
maintained with as much prowess, and ended with more humanity."]

"Ay, ay," said the monk, muttering as he went up the winding stair,
"carry him his trumpery with all despatch. Alas! that man, with so many
noble objects of pursuit, will amuse himself like a jackanape, with a
laced jerkin and a cap and bells!--I must now to the melancholy work of
consoling that which is well-nigh inconsolable, a mother weeping for her
first-born."

Advancing, after a gentle knock, into the apartment of the women, he
found that Mary Avenel had retired to bed, extremely indisposed, and
that Dame Glendinning and Tibb were indulging their sorrows by the side
of a decaying fire, and by the light of a small iron lamp, or cruize,
as it was termed. Poor Elspeth's apron was thrown over her head, and
bitterly did she sob and weep for "her beautiful, her brave,--the very
image of her dear Simon Glendinning, the stay of her widowhood and the
support of her old age."

The faithful Tibb echoed her complaints, and, more violently clamorous,
made deep promises of revenge on Sir Piercie Shafton, "if there were a
man left in the south who could draw a whinger, or a woman that could
thraw a rape." The presence of the Sub-Prior imposed silence on these
clamours. He sate down by the unfortunate mother, and essayed, by such
topics as his religion and reason suggested, to interrupt the current of
Dame Glendinning's feelings; but the attempt was in vain. She listened,
indeed, with some little interest, while he pledged his word and
his influence with the Abbot, that the family which had lost their
eldest-born by means of a guest received at his command, should
experience particular protection at the hands of the community; and
that the fief which belonged to Simon Glendinning should, with extended
bounds and added privileges, be conferred on Edward.

But it was only for a very brief space that the mother's sobs were
apparently softer, and her grief more mild. She soon blamed herself
for casting a moment's thought upon world's gear while poor Halbert
was lying stretched in his bloody shirt. The Sub-Prior was not more
fortunate, when he promised that Halbert's body "should be removed to
hallowed ground, and his soul secured by the prayers of the Church in
his behalf." Grief would have its natural course, and the voice of the
comforter was wasted in vain.




Chapter the Twenty-Eighth.


  He is at liberty, I have ventured for him!
  -----------------------------if the law
  Find and condemn me for't, some living wenches,
  Some honest-hearted maids will sing my dirge,
  And tell to memory my death was noble,
  Dying almost a martyr.
                            THE TWO NOBLE KINSMEN.

The Sub-Prior of Saint Mary's, in taking his departure from the spence
which Sir Piercie Shafton was confined, and in which some preparations
were made for his passing the night as the room which might be most
conveniently guarded, left more than one perplexed person behind him.
There was connected with this chamber, and opening into it, a small
_outshot_, or projecting part of the building, occupied by a sleeping
apartment, which upon ordinary occasions, was that of Mary Avenel, and
which, in the unusual number of guests who had come to the tower on
the former evening, had also accommodated Mysie Happer, the Miller's
daughter; for anciently, as well as in the present day, a Scottish house
was always rather too narrow and limited for the extent of the owner's
hospitality, and some shift and contrivance was necessary, upon any
unusual occasion, to ensure the accommodation of all the guests.

The fatal news of Halbert Glendinning's death had thrown all former
arrangements into confusion. Mary Avenel, whose case required immediate
attention, had been transported into the apartment hitherto occupied by
Halbert and his brother, as the latter proposed to watch all night,
in order to prevent the escape of the prisoner. Poor Mysie had been
altogether overlooked, and had naturally enough betaken herself to the
little apartment which she had hitherto occupied, ignorant that the
spence, through which lay the only access to it, was to be the sleeping
chamber of Sir Piercie Shafton. The measures taken for securing him
there had been so sudden, that she was not aware of it, until she
found that the other females had been removed from the spence by
the Sub-Prior's direction, and having once missed the opportunity of
retreating along with them, bashfulness, and the high respect which she
was taught to bear to the monks, prevented her venturing forth alone,
and intruding herself on the presence of Father Eustace, while in secret
conference with the Southron. There appeared no remedy but to wait till
their interview was over; and, as the door was thin, and did not shut
very closely, she could hear every word that passed betwixt them.

It thus happened, that without any intended intrusion on her part, she
became privy to the whole conversation of the Sub-Prior and the English
knight, and could also observe from the window of her little retreat,
that more than one of the young men summoned by Edward arrived
successively at the tower. These circumstances led her to entertain most
serious apprehension that the life of Sir Piercie Shafton was in great
and instant peril.

Woman is naturally compassionate, and not less willingly so when youth
and fair features are on the side of him who claims her sympathy. The
handsome presence, elaborate dress and address, of Sir Piercie Shafton,
which had failed to make any favorable impression on the grave and lofty
character of Mary Avenel, had completely dazzled and bewildered the poor
Maid of the Mill. The knight had perceived this result, and, flattered
by seeing that his merit was not universally underrated, he had bestowed
on Mysie a good deal more of his courtesy than in his opinion her rank
warranted. It was not cast away, but received with a devout sense of his
condescension, and with gratitude for his personal notice, which,
joined to her fears for his safety, and the natural tenderness of her
disposition, began to make wild work in her heart.

"To be sure it was very wrong in him to slay Halbert Glendinning," (it
was thus she argued the case with herself,) "but then he was a gentleman
born, and a soldier, and so gentle and courteous withal, that she was
sure the quarrel had been all of young Glendinning's own seeking; for
it was well known that both these lads were so taken up with that Mary
Avenel, that they never looked at another lass in the Halidome, more
than if they were of a different degree. And then Halbert's dress was
as clownish as his manners were haughty; and this poor young gentleman,
(who was habited like any prince,) banished from his own land, was first
drawn into a quarrel by a rude brangler, and then persecuted and like to
be put to death by his kin and allies."

Mysie wept bitterly at the thought, and then her heart rising against
such cruelty and oppression to a defenceless stranger, who dressed
with so much skill, and spoke with so much grace, she began to consider
whether she could not render him some assistance in this extremity.

Her mind was now entirely altered from its original purpose. At first
her only anxiety had been to find the means of escaping from the
interior apartment, without being noticed by any one; but now she began
to think that Heaven had placed her there for the safety and protection
of the persecuted stranger. She was of a simple and affectionate, but at
the same time an alert and enterprising character, possessing more
than female strength of body, and more than female courage, though with
feelings as capable of being bewildered with gallantry of dress and
language, as a fine gentleman of any generation would have desired to
exercise his talents upon. "I will save him," she thought, "that is the
first thing to be resolved--and then I wonder what he will say to the
poor Miller's maiden, that has done for him what all the dainty dames in
London or Holyrood would have been afraid to venture upon."

Prudence began to pull her sleeve as she indulged speculations so
hazardous, and hinted to her that the warmer Sir Piercie Shafton's
gratitude might prove, it was the more likely to be fraught with danger
to his benefactress. Alas! poor Prudence, thou mayest say with our moral
teacher,

  "I preach for ever, but I preach in vain."

The Miller's maiden, while you pour your warning into her unwilling
bosom, has glanced her eye on the small mirror by which she has placed
her little lamp, and it returns to her a countenance and eyes, pretty
and sparkling at all times, but ennobled at present with the energy of
expression proper to those who have dared to form, and stand prepared
to execute, deeds of generous audacity. "Will these features--will
these eyes, joined to the benefit I am about to confer upon Sir Piercie
Shafton, do nothing towards removing the distance of rank between us?"

Such was the question which female vanity asked of fancy; and though
even fancy dared not answer in a ready affirmative, a middle conclusion
was adopted--"Let me first succour the gallant youth, and trust to
fortune for the rest."

Banishing, therefore, from her mind every thing that was personal to
herself, the rash but generous girl turned her whole thoughts to the
means of executing this enterprise.

The difficulties which interposed were of no ordinary nature. The
vengeance of the men of that country, in cases of deadly feud, that
is, in cases of a quarrel excited by the slaughter of any of their
relations, was one of their most marked characteristics; and Edward,
however gentle in other respects, was so fond of his brother, that
there could be no doubt that he would be as signal in his revenge as
the customs of the country authorized. There were to be passed the inner
door of the apartment, the two gates of the tower itself, and the gate
of the court-yard, ere the prisoner was at liberty; and then a guide
and means of flight were to be provided, otherwise ultimate escape
was impossible. But where the will of woman is strongly bent on
the accomplishment of such a purpose, her wit is seldom baffled by
difficulties, however embarrassing.

The Sub-Prior had not long left the apartment, ere Mysie had devised a
scheme for Sir Piercie Shafton's freedom, daring, indeed, but likely to
be successful, if dexterously conducted. It was necessary, however, that
she should remain where she was till so late an hour, that all in the
tower should have betaken themselves to repose, excepting those whose
duty made them watchers. The interval she employed in observing
the movements of the person in whose service she was thus boldly a
volunteer.

She could hear Sir Piercie Shafton pace the floor to and fro, in
reflection doubtless on his own untoward fate and precarious situation.
By and by she heard him making a rustling among his trunks, which,
agreeable to the order of the Sub-Prior, had been placed in the
apartment to which he was confined, and which he was probably amusing
more melancholy thoughts by examining and arranging. Then she could hear
him resume his walk through the room, and, as if his spirits had been
somewhat relieved and elevated by the survey of his wardrobe, she could
distinguish that at one turn he half recited a sonnet, at another half
whistled a galliard, and at the third hummed a saraband. At length she
could understand that he extended himself on the temporary couch which
had been allotted to him, after muttering his prayers hastily, and in a
short time she concluded he must be fast asleep.

She employed the moment which intervened in considering her enterprise
under every different aspect; and dangerous as it was, the steady review
which she took of the various perils accompanying her purpose, furnished
her with plausible devices for obviating them. Love and generous
compassion, which give singly such powerful impulse to the female heart,
were in this case united, and championed her to the last extremity of
hazard.

It was an hour past midnight. All in the tower slept sound but those who
had undertaken to guard the English prisoner; or if sorrow and suffering
drove sleep from the bed of Dame Glendinning and her foster-daughter,
they were too much wrapt in their own griefs to attend to external
sounds. The means of striking light were at hand in the small apartment,
and thus the Miller's maiden was enabled to light and trim a small lamp.
With a trembling step and throbbing heart, she undid the door which
separated her from the apartment in which the Southron knight was
confined, and almost flinched from her fixed purpose, when she found
herself in the same room with the sleeping prisoner. She scarcely
trusted herself to look upon him, as he lay wrapped in his cloak, and
fast asleep upon the pallet bed, but turned her eyes away while she
gently pulled his mantle with no more force than was just equal to
awaken him. He moved not until she had twitched his cloak a second and
a third time, and then at length looking up, was about to make an
exclamation in the suddenness of his surprise.

Mysie's bashfulness was conquered by her fear. She placed her fingers
on her lips, in token that he must observe the most strict silence, and
then pointed to the door to intimate that it was watched.

Sir Piercie Shafton now collected himself and sat upright on his couch.
He gazed with surprise on the graceful figure of the young woman who
stood before him; her well-formed person, her flowing hair, and the
outline of her features, showed dimly, and yet to advantage, by the
partial and feeble light which she held in her hand. The romantic
imagination of the gallant would soon have coined some compliment proper
for the occasion, but Mysie left him not time.

"I come," she said, "to save your life, which is else in great peril--if
you answer me, speak as low as you can, for they have sentinelled your
door with armed men."

"Comeliest of miller's daughters," answered Sir Piercie, who by this
time was sitting upright on his couch, "dread nothing for my safety.
Credit me, that, as in very truth, I have not spilled the red puddle
(which these villagios call the blood) of their most uncivil relation,
so I am under no apprehension whatever for the issue of this restraint,
seeing that it cannot but be harmless to me. Natheless, to thee, O most
Molendinar beauty, I return the thanks which thy courtesy may justly
claim."

"Nay, but, Sir Knight," answered the maiden, in a whisper as low as it
was tremulous, "I deserve no thanks unless you will act by my counsel.
Edward Glendinning hath sent for Dan of the Howlet-hirst, and young Adie
of Aikenshaw, and they are come with three men more, and with bow, and
jack, and spear, and I heard them say to each other, and to Edward, as
they alighted in the court, that they would have amends for the death of
their kinsman, if the monk's cowl should smoke for it--And the vassals
are so wilful now, that the Abbot himself dare not control them, for
fear they turn heretics, and refuse to pay their feu-duties."

"In faith," said Sir Piercie Shafton, "it may be a shrewd temptation,
and perchance the monks may rid themselves of trouble and cumber,
by handing me over the march to Sir John Foster or Lord Hundson, the
English wardens, and so make peace with their vassals and with England
at once. Fairest Molinara, I will for once walk by thy rede, and if thou
dost contrive to extricate me from this vile kennel, I will so celebrate
thy wit and beauty, that the Baker's nymph of Raphael d'Urbino shall
seem but a gipsey in comparison of my Molinara."

"I pray you, then, be silent," said the Miller's daughter; "for if your
speech betrays that you are awake, my scheme fails utterly, and it is
Heaven's mercy and Our Lady's that we are not already overheard and
discovered."

"I am silent," replied the Southron, "even as the starless night--but
yet--if this contrivance of thine should endanger thy safety, fair and
no less kind than fair damsel, it were utterly unworthy of me to accept
it at thy hand."

"Do not think of me," said Mysie, hastily; "I am safe--I will take
thought for myself, if I once saw you out of this dangerous dwelling--if
you would provide yourself with any part of your apparel or goods, lose
no time."

The knight _did_, however, lose some time, ere he could settle in his
own mind what to take and what to abandon of his wardrobe, each article
of which seemed endeared to him by recollection of the feasts and revels
at which it had been exhibited. For some little while Mysie left him
to make his selections at leisure, for she herself had also some
preparations to make for flight. But when, returning from the chamber
into which she had retired, with a small bundle in her hand, she found
him still indecisive, she insisted in plain terms, that he should either
make up his baggage for the enterprise, or give it up entirely. Thus
urged, the disconsolate knight hastily made up a few clothes into a
bundle, regarded his trunk-mails with a mute expression of parting
sorrow, and intimated his readiness to wait upon his kind guide.

She led the way to the door of the apartment, having first carefully
extinguished her lamp, and motioning to the knight to stand close behind
her, tapped once or twice at the door. She was at length answered by
Edward Glendinning, who demanded to know who knocked within, and what
was desired.

"Speak low," said Mysie Happer, "or you will awaken the English knight.
It is I, Mysie Happer, who knock--I wish to get out--you have locked me
up--and I was obliged to wait till the Southron slept."

"Locked you up!" replied Edward, in surprise.

"Yes," answered the Miller's daughter, "you have locked me up into this
room--I was in Mary Avenel's sleeping apartment."

"And can you not remain there till morning," replied Edward, "since it
has so chanced?"

"What!" said the Miller's daughter, in a tone of offended delicacy, "I
remain here a moment longer than I can get out without discovery!--I
would not, for all the Halidome of St. Mary's, remain a minute longer in
the neighbourhood of a man's apartment than I can help it--For whom,
or for what do you hold me? I promise you my father's daughter has been
better brought up than to put in peril her good name."

"Come forth then, and get to thy chamber in silence," said Edward. So
saying, he undid the bolt. The staircase without was in utter darkness,
as Mysie had before ascertained. So soon as she stept out, she took hold
of Edward as if to support herself, thus interposing her person betwixt
him and Sir Piercie Shaffcon, by whom she was closely followed. Thus
screened from observation, the Englishman slipped past on tiptoe, unshod
and in silence, while the damsel complained to Edward that she wanted a
light.

"I cannot get you a light," said he, "for I cannot leave this post; but
there is a fire below."

"I will sit below till morning," said the Maid of the Mill; and,
tripping down stairs, heard Edward bolt and bar the door of the now
tenantless apartment with vain caution.

At the foot of the stair which she descended, she found the object of
her care waiting her farther directions. She recommended to him the most
absolute silence, which, for once in his life, he seemed not unwilling
to observe, conducted him, with as much caution as if he were walking on
cracked ice, to a dark recess, used for depositing wood, and instructed
him to ensconce himself behind the fagots. She herself lighted her lamp
once more at the kitchen fire, and took her distaff and spindle, that
she might not seem to be unemployed, in case any one came into the
apartment.

From time to time, however, she stole towards the window on tiptoe, to
catch the first glance of the dawn, for the farther prosecution of her
adventurous project. At length she saw, to her great joy, the first peep
of the morning brighten upon the gray clouds of the east, and, clasping
her hands together, thanked Our Lady for the sight, and implored
protection during the remainder of her enterprise. Ere she had finished
her prayer, she started at feeling a man's arm across her shoulder,
while a rough voice spoke in her ear--"What! menseful Mysie of the Mill
so soon at her prayers?--now, benison on the bonny eyes that open so
early!--I'll have a kiss for good morrow's sake."

Dan of the Howlet-hirst, for he was the gallant who paid Mysie this
compliment, suited the action with the word, and the action, as is usual
in such cases of rustic gallantry, was rewarded with a cuff, which
Dan received as a fine gentleman receives a tap with a fan, but which,
delivered by the energetic arm of the Miller's maiden, would have
certainly astonished a less robust gallant.

"How now, Sir Coxcomb!" said she, "and must you be away from your guard
over the English knight, to plague quiet folks with your horse-tricks!"

"Truly you are mistaken, pretty Mysie," said the clown, "for I have not
yet relieved Edward at his post; and were it not a shame to let him stay
any longer, by my faith, I could find it in my heart not to quit you
these two hours."

"Oh, you have hours and hours enough to see any one," said Mysie; "but
you must think of the distress of the household even now, and get Edward
to sleep for a while, for he has kept watch this whole night."

"I will have another kiss first," answered Dan of the Howlet-hirst.

But Mysie was now on her guard, and, conscious of the vicinity of the
wood-hole, offered such strenuous resistance, that the swain cursed the
nymph's bad humour with very unpastoral phrase and emphasis, and ran up
stairs to relieve the guard of his comrade. Stealing to the door, she
heard the new sentinel hold a brief conversation with Edward, after
which the latter withdrew, and the former entered upon the duties of his
watch.

Mysie suffered him to walk there a little while undisturbed, until the
dawning became more general, by which time she supposed he might have
digested her coyness, and then presenting herself before the watchful
sentinel, demanded of him "the keys of the outer tower, and of the
courtyard gate."

"And for what purpose?" answered the warder.

"To milk the cows, and drive them out to their pasture," said Mysie;
"you would not have the poor beasts kept in the byre a' morning, and the
family in such distress, that there is na ane fit to do a turn but the
byre-woman and myself?"

"And where is the byre-woman?" said Dan.

"Sitting with me in the kitchen, in case these distressed folks want any
thing."

"There are the keys, then, Mysie Dorts," said the sentinel.

"Many thanks, Dan Ne'er-do-weel," answered the Maid of the Mill, and
escaped down stairs in a moment.

To hasten to the wood-hole, and there to robe the English knight in a
short gown and petticoat, which she had provided for the purpose, was
the work of another moment. She then undid the gates of the tower, and
made towards the byre, or cow-house, which stood in one corner of the
courtyard. Sir Piercie Shafton remonstrated against the delay which this
would occasion.

"Fair and generous Molinara," he said, "had we not better undo the
outward gate, and make the best of our way hence, even like a pair of
sea-mews who make towards shelter of the rocks as the storm waxes high?"

"We must drive out the cows first," said Mysie, "for a sin it were to
spoil the poor widow's cattle, both for her sake and the poor beasts'
own; and I have no mind any one shall leave the tower in a hurry to
follow us. Besides, you must have your horse, for you will need a fleet
one ere all be done."

So saying, she locked and double-locked both the inward and outward door
of the tower, proceeded to the cow-house, turned out the cattle, and,
giving the knight his own horse to lead, drove them before her out at
the court-yard gate, intending to return for her own palfrey. But the
noise attending the first operation caught the wakeful attention of
Edward, who, starting to the bartizan, called to know what the matter
was.

Mysie answered with great readiness, that "she was driving out the cows,
for that they would be spoiled for want of looking to."

"I thank thee, kind maiden," said Edward--"and yet," he added, after a
moment's pause, "what damsel is that thou hast with thee?"

Mysie was about to answer, when Sir Piercie Shafton, who apparently
did not desire that the great work of his liberation should be executed
without the interposition of his own ingenuity, exclaimed from beneath,
"I am she, O most bucolical juvenal, under whose charge are placed the
milky mothers of the herd."

"Hell and darkness!" exclaimed Edward, in a transport of fury
and astonishment, "it is Piercie Shafton--What! treason!
treason!--ho!--Dan--Jasper--Martin--the villain escapes!"

"To horse! to horse!" cried Mysie, and in an instant mounted behind the
knight, who was already in the saddle.

Edward caught up a cross-bow, and let fly a bolt, which whistled so
near Mysie's ear, that she called to her companion,--"Spur--spur, Sir
Knight!--the next will not miss us.--Had it been Halbert instead of
Edward who bent that bow, we had been dead."

The knight pressed his horse, which dashed past the cows, and down the
knoll on which the tower was situated. Then taking the road down the
valley, the gallant animal, reckless of its double burden, soon conveyed
them out of hearing of the tumult and alarm with which their departure
filled the Tower of Glendearg.

Thus it strangely happened, that two men were flying in different
directions at the same time, each accused of being the other's murderer.




Chapter the Twenty-Ninth.


  -------------Sure he cannot
  Be so unmanly as to leave me here;
  If he do, maids will not so easily
  Trust men again.
                  THE TWO NOBLE KINSMEN.

The knight continued to keep the good horse at a pace as quick as the
road permitted, until they had cleared the valley of Glendearg, and
entered upon the broad dale of the Tweed, which now rolled before
them in crystal beauty, displaying on its opposite bank the huge gray
Monastery of St. Mary's, whose towers and pinnacles were scarce yet
touched by the newly-risen sun, so deeply the edifice lies shrouded
under the mountains which rise to the southward.

Turning to the left, the knight continued his road down to the northern
bank of the river, until they arrived nearly opposite to the weir,
or dam-dike, where Father Philip concluded his extraordinary aquatic
excursion.

Sir Piercie Shafton, whose brain seldom admitted more than one idea at
a time, had hitherto pushed forward without very distinctly considering
where he was going. But the sight of the Monastery so near to him,
reminded, him that he was still on dangerous ground, and that he must
necessarily provide for his safety by choosing some settled plan of
escape. The situation of his guide and deliverer also occurred to him,
for he was far from being either selfish or ungrateful. He listened, and
discovered that the Miller's daughter was sobbing and weeping bitterly
as she rested her head on his shoulder.

"What ails thee," he said, "my generous Molinara?--is there aught that
Piercie Shafton can do which may show his gratitude to his deliverer?"
Mysie pointed with her finger across the river, but ventured not to
turn her eyes in that direction. "Nay, but speak plain, most generous
damsel," said the knight, who, for once, was puzzled as much as his own
elegance of speech was wont to puzzle others, "for I swear to you that I
comprehend nought by the extension of thy fair digit."

"Yonder is my father's house," said Mysie, in a voice interrupted by the
increased burst of her sorrow.

"And I was carrying thee discourteously to a distance from thy
habitation?" said Shafton, imagining he had found out the source of her
grief. "Wo worth the hour that Piercie Shafton, in attention to his own
safety, neglected the accommodation of any female, far less of his most
beneficent liberatrice! Dismount, then, O lovely Molinara, unless thou
wouldst rather that I should transport thee on horseback to the house of
thy molendinary father, which, if thou sayest the word, I am prompt to
do, defying all dangers which may arise to me personally, whether by
monk or miller."

Mysie suppressed her sobs, and with considerable difficulty muttered her
