  Not understood; she, watchful, had observed,
  In consultation close with Jove engaged                        660
  Thetis, bright-footed daughter of the deep,
  And keen the son of Saturn thus reproved.
    Shrewd as thou art, who now hath had thine ear?
  Thy joy is ever such, from me apart
  To plan and plot clandestine, and thy thoughts,                665
  Think what thou may'st, are always barred to me.
    To whom the father, thus, of heaven and earth.
  Expect not, Juno, that thou shalt partake
  My counsels at all times, which oft in height
  And depth, thy comprehension far exceed,                       670
  Jove's consort as thou art. When aught occurs
  Meet for thine ear, to none will I impart
  Of Gods or men more free than to thyself.
  But for my secret thoughts, which I withhold
  From all in heaven beside, them search not thou                675
  With irksome curiosity and vain.
    Him answer'd then the Goddess ample-eyed.[36]
  What word hath passed thy lips, Saturnian Jove,
  Thou most severe! I never search thy thoughts,
  Nor the serenity of thy profound                               680
  Intentions trouble; they are safe from me:
  But now there seems a cause. Deeply I dread
  Lest Thetis, silver-footed daughter fair
  Of Ocean's hoary Sovereign, here arrived
  At early dawn to practise on thee, Jove!                       685
  I noticed her a suitress at thy knees,
  And much misdeem or promise-bound thou stand'st
  To Thetis past recall, to exalt her son,
  And Greeks to slaughter thousands at the ships.
    To whom the cloud-assembler God, incensed.                   690
  Ah subtle! ever teeming with surmise,
  And fathomer of my concealed designs,
  Thy toil is vain, or (which is worse for thee,)
  Shall but estrange thee from mine heart the more.
  And be it as thou sayest,--I am well pleased                   695
  That so it should be. Be advised, desist,
  Hold thou thy peace. Else, if my glorious hands
  Once reach thee, the Olympian Powers combined
  To rescue thee, shall interfere in vain.
    He said,--whom Juno, awful Goddess, heard                    700
  Appall'd, and mute submitted to his will.
  But through the courts of Jove the heavenly Powers
  All felt displeasure; when to them arose
  Vulcan, illustrious artist, who with speech
  Conciliatory interposed to sooth                               705
  His white-armed mother Juno, Goddess dread.
    Hard doom is ours, and not to be endured,
  If feast and merriment must pause in heaven
  While ye such clamor raise tumultuous here
  For man's unworthy sake: yet thus we speed                     710
  Ever, when evil overpoises good.
  But I exhort my mother, though herself
  Already warn'd, that meekly she submit
  To Jove our father, lest our father chide
  More roughly, and confusion mar the feast.                     715
  For the Olympian Thunderer could with ease
  Us from our thrones precipitate, so far
  He reigns to all superior. Seek to assuage
  His anger therefore; so shall he with smiles
  Cheer thee, nor thee alone, but all in heaven.                 720
    So Vulcan, and, upstarting, placed a cup
  Full-charged between his mother's hands, and said,
    My mother, be advised, and, though aggrieved,
  Yet patient; lest I see thee whom I love
  So dear, with stripes chastised before my face,                725
  Willing, but impotent to give thee aid.[37]
  Who can resist the Thunderer? Me, when once
  I flew to save thee, by the foot he seized
  And hurl'd me through the portal of the skies.
  "From morn to eve I fell, a summer's day,"                     730
  And dropped, at last, in Lemnos. There half-dead
  The Sintians found me, and with succor prompt
  And hospitable, entertained me fallen.
    So He; then Juno smiled, Goddess white-arm'd,
  And smiling still, from his unwonted hand[38]                  735
  Received the goblet. He from right to left
  Rich nectar from the beaker drawn, alert
  Distributed to all the powers divine.
  Heaven rang with laughter inextinguishable
  Peal after peal, such pleasure all conceived                   740
  At sight of Vulcan in his new employ.
    So spent they in festivity the day,
  And all were cheered; nor was Apollo's harp
  Silent, nor did the Muses spare to add
  Responsive melody of vocal sweets.                             745
  But when the sun's bright orb had now declined,
  Each to his mansion, wheresoever built
  By the lame matchless Architect, withdrew.[39]
  Jove also, kindler of the fires of heaven,
  His couch ascending as at other times                          750
  When gentle sleep approach'd him, slept serene,
  With golden-sceptred Juno at his side.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The first book contains the preliminaries to the commencement of
serious action. First, the visit of the priest of Apollo to ransom his
captive daughter, the refusal of Agamemnon to yield her up, and the
pestilence sent by the god upon the Grecian army in consequence.
Secondly, the restoration, the propitiation of Apollo, the quarrel of
Agamemnon and Achilles, and the withdrawing of the latter from the
Grecian army. Thirdly, the intercession of Thetis with Jupiter; his
promise, unwillingly given, to avenge Achilles; and the assembly of
the gods, in which the promise is angrily alluded to by Juno, and the
discussion peremptorily checked by Jupiter. The poet, throughout this
book, maintains a simple, unadorned style, but highly descriptive, and
happily adapted to the nature of the subject.--FELTON.




                              THE ILIAD.

                               BOOK II.




                     ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND BOOK.


Jupiter, in pursuance of his purpose to distress the Grecians in
answer to the prayer of Thetis, deceives Agamemnon by a dream. He, in
consequence of it, calls a council, the result of which is that the
army shall go forth to battle. Thersites is mutinous, and is chastised
by Ulysses. Ulysses, Nestor, and Agamemnon, harangue the people; and
preparation is made for battle. An exact account follows of the forces
on both sides.




                               BOOK II.


  [1]All night both Gods and Chiefs equestrian slept,
  But not the Sire of all. He, waking soon,
  Mused how to exalt Achilles, and destroy
  No few in battle at the Grecian fleet.
  This counsel, at the last, as best he chose                      5
  And likeliest; to dispatch an evil Dream
  To Agamemnon's tent, and to his side
  The phantom summoning, him thus addressed.
    Haste, evil Dream! Fly to the Grecian fleet,
  And, entering royal Agamemnon's tent,                           10
  His ear possess thou thus, omitting nought
  Of all that I enjoin thee. Bid him arm
  His universal host, for that the time
  When the Achaians shall at length possess
  Wide Ilium, hath arrived. The Gods above                        15
  No longer dwell at variance. The request
  Of Juno hath prevail'd; now, wo to Troy!
  So charged, the Dream departed. At the ships
  Well-built arriving of Achaia's host,
  He Agamemnon, son of Atreus, sought.                            20
  Him sleeping in his tent he found, immersed
  In soft repose ambrosial. At his head
  The shadow stood, similitude exact
  Of Nestor, son of Neleus; sage, with whom
  In Agamemnon's thought might none compare.                      25
  His form assumed, the sacred Dream began.
    Oh son of Atreus the renown'd in arms
  And in the race! Sleep'st thou? It ill behoves
  To sleep all night the man of high employ,
  And charged, as thou art, with a people's care.                 30
  Now, therefore, mark me well, who, sent from Jove,
  Inform thee, that although so far remote,
  He yet compassionates and thinks on thee
  With kind solicitude. He bids thee arm
  Thy universal host, for that the time                           35
  When the Achaians shall at length possess
  Wide Ilium, hath arrived. The Gods above
  No longer dwell at variance. The requests
  Of Juno have prevail'd. Now, wo to Troy
  From Jove himself! Her fate is on the wing.                     40
  Awaking from thy dewy slumbers, hold
  In firm remembrance all that thou hast heard.
    So spake the Dream, and vanishing, him left
  In false hopes occupied and musings vain.
  Full sure he thought, ignorant of the plan                      45
  By Jove design'd, that day the last of Troy.
  Fond thought! For toils and agonies to Greeks
  And Trojans both, in many a bloody field
  To be endured, the Thunderer yet ordain'd.
  Starting he woke, and seeming still to hear                     50
  The warning voice divine, with hasty leap
  Sprang from his bed, and sat.[2] His fleecy vest
  New-woven he put on, and mantle wide;
  His sandals fair to his unsullied feet
  He braced, and slung his argent-studded sword.                  55
  Then, incorruptible for evermore
  The sceptre of his sires he took, with which
  He issued forth into the camp of Greece.
    Aurora now on the Olympian heights
  Proclaiming stood new day to all in heaven,                     60
  When he his clear-voiced heralds bade convene
  The Greeks in council. Went the summons forth
  Into all quarters, and the throng began.
  First, at the ship of Nestor, Pylian King,[3]
  The senior Chiefs for high exploits renown'd                    65
  He gather'd, whom he prudent thus address'd.
    My fellow warriors, hear! A dream from heaven,
  Amid the stillness of the vacant night
  Approach'd me, semblance close in stature, bulk,
  And air, of noble Nestor. At mine head                          70
  The shadow took his stand, and thus he spake.
    Oh son of Atreus the renown'd in arms
  And in the race, sleep'st thou? It ill behoves
  To sleep all night the man of high employ,
  And charged as thou art with a people's care.                   75
  Now, therefore, mark me well, who, sent from Jove,
  Inform thee, that although so far remote,
  He yet compassionates and thinks on thee
  With kind solicitude. He bids thee arm
  Thy universal host; for that the time                           80
  When the Achaians shall at length possess
  Wide Ilium, hath arrived. The Gods above
  No longer dwell at variance. The requests
  Of Juno have prevail'd. Now, wo to Troy
  From Jove himself! Her fate is on the wing.                     85
  Charge this on thy remembrance. Thus he spake,
  Then vanished suddenly, and I awoke.
  Haste therefore, let us arm, if arm we may,[4]
  The warlike sons of Greece; but first, myself
  Will prove them, recommending instant flight                    90
  With all our ships, and ye throughout the host
  Dispersed, shall, next, encourage all to stay.
    He ceased, and sat; when in the midst arose
  Of highest fame for wisdom, Nestor, King
  Of sandy Pylus, who them thus bespake.                          95
    Friends, Counsellors, and Leaders of the Greeks!
  Had any meaner Argive told his dream,
  We had pronounced it false, and should the more
  Have shrunk from battle; but the dream is his
  Who boasts himself our highest in command.                     100
  Haste, arm we, if we may, the sons of Greece.
    So saying, he left the council; him, at once
  The sceptred Chiefs, obedient to his voice,
  Arising, follow'd; and the throng began.
  As from the hollow rock bees stream abroad,                    105
  And in succession endless seek the fields,
  Now clustering, and now scattered far and near,
  In spring-time, among all the new-blown flowers,
  So they to council swarm'd, troop after troop,
  Grecians of every tribe, from camp and fleet                   110
  Assembling orderly o'er all the plain
  Beside the shore of Ocean. In the midst
  A kindling rumor, messenger of Jove,
  Impell'd them, and they went. Loud was the din
  Of the assembling thousands; groan'd the earth                 115
  When down they sat, and murmurs ran around.
  Nine heralds cried aloud--Will ye restrain
  Your clamors, that your heaven-taught Kings may speak?
  Scarce were they settled, and the clang had ceased,
  When Agamemnon, sovereign o'er them all,                       120
  Sceptre in hand, arose. (That sceptre erst
  Vulcan with labor forged, and to the hand
  Consign'd it of the King, Saturnian Jove;
  Jove to the vanquisher[5] of Ino's[6] guard,
  And he to Pelops; Pelops in his turn,                          125
  To royal Atreus; Atreus at his death
  Bequeath'd it to Thyestes rich in flocks,
  And rich Thyestes left it to be borne
  By Agamemnon, symbol of his right
  To empire over Argos and her isles)                            130
  On that he lean'd, and rapid, thus began.[7]
    Friends, Grecian Heroes, ministers of Mars!
  Ye see me here entangled in the snares
  Of unpropitious Jove. He promised once,
  And with a nod confirm'd it, that with spoils                  135
  Of Ilium laden, we should hence return;
  But now, devising ill, he sends me shamed,
  And with diminished numbers, home to Greece.
  So stands his sovereign pleasure, who hath laid
  The bulwarks of full many a city low,                          140
  And more shall level, matchless in his might.
  That such a numerous host of Greeks as we,
  Warring with fewer than ourselves, should find
  No fruit of all our toil, (and none appears)
  Will make us vile with ages yet to come.                       145
  For should we now strike truce, till Greece and Troy
  Might number each her own, and were the Greeks
  Distributed in bands, ten Greeks in each,
  Our banded decads should exceed so far
  Their units, that all Troy could not supply                    150
  For every ten, a man, to fill us wine;
  So far the Achaians, in my thought, surpass
  The native Trojans. But in Troy are those
  Who baffle much my purpose; aids derived
  From other states, spear-arm'd auxiliars, firm                 155
  In the defence of Ilium's lofty towers.
  Nine years have passed us over, nine long years;
  Our ships are rotted, and our tackle marr'd,
  And all our wives and little-ones at home
  Sit watching our return, while this attempt                    160
  Hangs still in doubt, for which that home we left.
  Accept ye then my counsel. Fly we swift
  With all our fleet back to our native land,
  Hopeless of Troy, not yet to be subdued.
    So spake the King, whom all the concourse heard              165
  With minds in tumult toss'd; all, save the few,
  Partners of his intent. Commotion shook
  The whole assembly, such as heaves the flood
  Of the Icarian Deep, when South and East
  Burst forth together from the clouds of Jove.                  170
  And as when vehement the West-wind falls
  On standing corn mature, the loaded ears
  Innumerable bow before the gale,
  So was the council shaken. With a shout
  All flew toward the ships; uprais'd, the dust                  175
  Stood o'er them; universal was the cry,
  "Now clear the passages, strike down the props,
  Set every vessel free, launch, and away!"
  Heaven rang with exclamation of the host
  All homeward bent, and launching glad the fleet.               180
  Then baffled Fate had the Achaians seen
  Returning premature, but Juno thus,
  With admonition quick to Pallas spake.
    Unconquer'd daughter of Jove AEgis-arm'd!
  Ah foul dishonor! Is it thus at last                           185
  That the Achaians on the billows borne,
  Shall seek again their country, leaving here,
  To be the vaunt of Ilium and her King,
  Helen of Argos, in whose cause the Greeks
  Have numerous perish'd from their home remote?                 190
  Haste! Seek the mail-arm'd multitude, by force
  Detain them of thy soothing speech, ere yet
  All launch their oary barks into the flood.
    She spake, nor did Minerva not comply,
  But darting swift from the Olympian heights,                   195
  Reach'd soon Achaia's fleet. There, she perceived
  Prudent as Jove himself, Ulysses; firm
  He stood; he touch'd not even with his hand
  His sable bark, for sorrow whelm'd his soul.
  The Athenaean Goddess azure-eyed                                200
  Beside him stood, and thus the Chief bespake.
    Laertes' noble son, for wiles renown'd!
  Why seek ye, thus precipitate, your ships?
  Intend ye flight? And is it thus at last,
  That the Achaians on the billows borne,                        205
  Shall seek again their country, leaving here,
  To be the vaunt of Ilium and her King,
  Helen of Argos, in whose cause the Greeks
  Have numerous perish'd from their home remote?
  Delay not. Rush into the throng; by force                      210
  Detain them of thy soothing speech, ere yet
  All launch their oary barks into the flood.
    She ceased, whom by her voice Ulysses knew,
  Casting his mantle from him, which his friend
  Eurybates the Ithacensian caught,                              215
  He ran; and in his course meeting the son
  Of Atreus, Agamemnon, from his hand
  The everlasting sceptre quick received,
  Which bearing, through Achaia's fleet he pass'd.
  What King soever, or distinguish'd Greek                       220
  He found, approaching to his side, in terms
  Of gentle sort he stay'd him. Sir, he cried,
  It is unseemly that a man renown'd
  As thou, should tremble. Go--Resume the seat
  Which thou hast left, and bid the people sit.                  225
  Thou know'st not clearly yet the monarch's mind.
  He proves us now, but soon he will chastize.
  All were not present; few of us have heard
  His speech this day in council. Oh, beware,
  Lest in resentment of this hasty course                        230
  Irregular, he let his anger loose.
  Dread is the anger of a King; he reigns
  By Jove's own ordinance, and is dear to Jove,
    But what plebeian base soe'er he heard
  Stretching his throat to swell the general cry,                235
  He laid the sceptre smartly on his back,
  With reprimand severe. Fellow, he said,
  Sit still; hear others; thy superiors hear.
  For who art thou? A dastard and a drone,
  Of none account in council, or in arms.                        240
  By no means may we all alike bear sway
  At Ilium; such plurality of Kings
  Were evil. One suffices. One, to whom
  The son of politic Saturn hath assign'd
  The sceptre, and inforcement of the laws,                      245
  That he may rule us as a monarch ought.[8]
    With such authority the troubled host
  He sway'd; they, quitting camp and fleet again
  Rush'd back to council; deafening was the sound
  As when a billow of the boisterous deep                        250
  Some broad beach dashes, and the Ocean roars.
    The host all seated, and the benches fill'd,
  Thersites only of loquacious tongue
  Ungovern'd, clamor'd mutinous; a wretch
  Of utterance prompt, but in coarse phrase obscene              255
  Deep learn'd alone, with which to slander Kings.
  Might he but set the rabble in a roar,
  He cared not with what jest; of all from Greece
  To Ilium sent, his country's chief reproach.
  Cross-eyed he was, and halting moved on legs                   260
  Ill-pair'd; his gibbous shoulders o'er his breast
  Contracted, pinch'd it; to a peak his head
  Was moulded sharp, and sprinkled thin with hair
  Of starveling length, flimsy and soft as down.
  Achilles and Ulysses had incurr'd                              265
  Most his aversion; them he never spared;
  But now, imperial Agamemnon 'self
  In piercing accents stridulous he charged
  With foul reproach. The Grecians with contempt
  Listen'd, and indignation, while with voice                    270
  At highest pitch, he thus the monarch mock'd.
    What wouldst thou now? Whereof is thy complaint
  Now, Agamemnon? Thou hast fill'd thy tents
  With treasure, and the Grecians, when they take
  A city, choose the loveliest girls for thee.                   275
  Is gold thy wish? More gold? A ransom brought
  By some chief Trojan for his son's release
  Whom I, or other valiant Greek may bind?
  Or wouldst thou yet a virgin, one, by right
  Another's claim, but made by force thine own?                  280
  It was not well, great Sir, that thou shouldst bring
  A plague on the Achaians, as of late.
  But come, my Grecian sisters, soldiers named
  Unfitly, of a sex too soft for war,
  Come, let us homeward: let him here digest                     285
  What he shall gorge, alone; that he may learn
  If our assistance profit him or not.
  For when he shamed Achilles, he disgraced
  A Chief far worthier than himself, whose prize
  He now withholds. But tush,--Achilles lacks                    290
  Himself the spirit of a man; no gall
  Hath he within him, or his hand long since
  Had stopp'd that mouth,[9] that it should scoff no more.
    Thus, mocking royal Agamemnon, spake
  Thersites. Instant starting to his side,                       295
  Noble Ulysses with indignant brows
  Survey'd him, and him thus reproved severe.
    Thersites! Railer!--peace. Think not thyself,
  Although thus eloquent, alone exempt
  From obligation not to slander Kings.                          300
  I deem thee most contemptible, the worst
  Of Agamemnon's followers to the war;
  Presume not then to take the names revered
  Of Sovereigns on thy sordid lips, to asperse
  Their sacred character, and to appoint                         305
  The Greeks a time when they shall voyage home.
  How soon, how late, with what success at last
  We shall return, we know not: but because
  Achaia's heroes numerous spoils allot
  To Agamemnon, Leader of the host,                              310
  Thou therefore from thy seat revilest the King.
  But mark me. If I find thee, as even now,
  Raving and foaming at the lips again,
  May never man behold Ulysses' head
  On these my shoulders more, and may my son                     315
  Prove the begotten of another Sire,
  If I not strip thee to that hide of thine
  As bare as thou wast born, and whip thee hence
  Home to thy galley, sniveling like a boy.
    He ceased, and with his sceptre on the back                  320
  And shoulders smote him. Writhing to and fro,
  He wept profuse, while many a bloody whelk
  Protuberant beneath the sceptre sprang.
  Awe-quell'd he sat, and from his visage mean,
  Deep-sighing, wiped the rheums. It was no time                 325
  For mirth, yet mirth illumined every face,
  And laughing, thus they spake. A thousand acts
  Illustrious, both by well-concerted plans
  And prudent disposition of the host
  Ulysses hath achieved, but this by far                         330
  Transcends his former praise, that he hath quell'd
  Such contumelious rhetoric profuse.
  The valiant talker shall not soon, we judge,
  Take liberties with royal names again.[10]
  So spake the multitude. Then, stretching forth                 335
  The sceptre, city-spoiler Chief, arose
  Ulysses. Him beside, herald in form,
  Appeared Minerva. Silence she enjoined
  To all, that all Achaia's sons might hear,
  Foremost and rearmost, and might weigh his words.              340
  He then his counsel, prudent, thus proposed.
    Atrides! Monarch! The Achaians seek
  To make thee ignominious above all
  In sight of all mankind. None recollects
  His promise more in steed-famed Argos pledged,                 345
  Here to abide till Ilium wall'd to heaven
  Should vanquish'd sink, and all her wealth be ours.
  No--now, like widow'd women, or weak boys,
  They whimper to each other, wishing home.
  And home, I grant, to the afflicted soul                       350
  Seems pleasant.[11] The poor seaman from his wife
  One month detain'd, cheerless his ship and sad
  Possesses, by the force of wintry blasts,
  And by the billows of the troubled deep
  Fast lock'd in port. But us the ninth long year                355
  Revolving, finds camp'd under Ilium still.
  I therefore blame not, if they mourn beside
  Their sable barks, the Grecians. Yet the shame
  That must attend us after absence long
  Returning unsuccessful, who can bear?                          360
  Be patient, friends! wait only till we learn
  If Calchas truly prophesied, or not;
  For well we know, and I to all appeal,
  Whom Fate hath not already snatch'd away,
  (It seems but yesterday, or at the most                        365
  A day or two before) that when the ships
  Wo-fraught for Priam, and the race of Troy,
  At Aulis met, and we beside the fount
  With perfect hecatombs the Gods adored
  Beneath the plane-tree, from whose root a stream               370
  Ran crystal-clear, there we beheld a sign
  Wonderful in all eyes. A serpent huge,
  Tremendous spectacle! with crimson spots
  His back all dappled, by Olympian Jove
  Himself protruded, from the altar's foot                       375
  Slipp'd into light, and glided to the tree.
  There on the topmost bough, close-cover'd sat
  With foliage broad, eight sparrows, younglings all,
  Then newly feather'd, with their dam, the ninth.
  The little ones lamenting shrill he gorged,                    380
  While, wheeling o'er his head, with screams the dam
  Bewail'd her darling brood. Her also next,
  Hovering and clamoring, he by the wing
  Within his spiry folds drew, and devoured.
  All eaten thus, the nestlings and the dam,                     385
  The God who sent him, signalized him too,
  For him Saturnian Jove transform'd to stone.
  We wondering stood, to see that strange portent
  Intrude itself into our holy rites,
  When Calchas, instant, thus the sign explain'd.                390
    Why stand ye, Greeks, astonish'd? Ye behold
  A prodigy by Jove himself produced,
  An omen, whose accomplishment indeed
  Is distant, but whose fame shall never die.[12]
  E'en as this serpent in your sight devour'd                    395
  Eight youngling sparrows, with their dam, the ninth,
  So we nine years must war on yonder plain,
  And in the tenth, wide-bulwark'd Troy is ours.
    So spake the seer, and as he spake, is done.
  Wait, therefore, brave Achaians! go not hence                  400
  Till Priam's spacious city be your prize.
    He ceased, and such a shout ensued, that all
  The hollow ships the deafening roar return'd
  Of acclamation, every voice the speech
  Extolling of Ulysses, glorious Chief.                          405
    Then Nestor the Gerenian,[13] warrior old,
  Arising, spake; and, by the Gods, he said,
  Ye more resemble children inexpert
  In war, than disciplined and prudent men.
  Where now are all your promises and vows,                      410
  Councils, libations, right-hand covenants?[14]
  Burn them, since all our occupation here
  Is to debate and wrangle, whereof end
  Or fruit though long we wait, shall none be found.
  But, Sovereign, be not thou appall'd. Be firm.                 415
  Relax not aught of thine accustomed sway,
  But set the battle forth as thou art wont.
  And if there be a Grecian, here and there,
  One,[15] adverse to the general voice, let such
  Wither alone. He shall not see his wish                        420
  Gratified, neither will we hence return
  To Argos, ere events shall yet have proved
  Jove's promise false or true. For when we climb'd
  Our gallant barks full-charged with Ilium's fate,
  Saturnian Jove omnipotent, that day,                           425
  (Omen propitious!) thunder'd on the right.
  Let no man therefore pant for home, till each
  Possess a Trojan spouse, and from her lips
  Take sweet revenge for Helen's pangs of heart.
  Who then? What soldier languishes and sighs                    430
  To leave us? Let him dare to lay his hand
  On his own vessel, and he dies the first.
  But hear, O King! I shall suggest a course
  Not trivial. Agamemnon! sort the Greeks
  By districts and by tribes, that tribe may tribe               435
  Support, and each his fellow. This performed,
  And with consent of all, thou shalt discern
  With ease what Chief, what private man deserts,
  And who performs his part. The base, the brave,
  Such disposition made, shall both appear;                      440
  And thou shalt also know, if heaven or we,
  The Gods, or our supineness, succor Troy.
    To whom Atrides, King of men, replied.
  Old Chief! Thou passest all Achaia's sons
  In consultation; would to Jove our Sire,                       445
  To Athenaean Pallas, and Apollo!
  That I had ten such coadjutors, wise
  As thou art, and the royal city soon
  Of Priam, with her wealth, should all be ours.[16]
  But me the son of Saturn, Jove supreme                         450
  Himself afflicts, who in contentious broils
  Involves me, and in altercation vain.
  Thence all that wordy tempest for a girl
  Achilles and myself between, and I
  The fierce aggressor. Be that breach but heal'd!               455
  And Troy's reprieve thenceforth is at an end.
  Go--take refreshment now that we may march
  Forth to our enemies. Let each whet well
  His spear, brace well his shield, well feed his brisk
  High-mettled horses, well survey and search                    460
  His chariot on all sides, that no defect
  Disgrace his bright habiliments of war.
  So will we give the day from morn to eve
  To dreadful battle. Pause there shall be none
  Till night divide us. Every buckler's thong                    465
  Shall sweat on the toil'd bosom, every hand
  That shakes the spear shall ache, and every steed
  Shall smoke that whirls the chariot o'er the plain.
  Wo then to whom I shall discover here
  Loitering among the tents; let him escape                      470
  My vengeance if he can. The vulture's maw
  Shall have his carcase, and the dogs his bones.
    He spake; whom all applauded with a shout
  Loud as against some headland cliff the waves
  Roll'd by the stormy South o'er rocks that shoot               475
  Afar into the deep, which in all winds
  The flood still overspreads, blow whence they may.
  Arising, forth they rush'd, among the ships
  All scatter'd; smoke from every tent arose,
  The host their food preparing; next, his God                   480
  Each man invoked (of the Immortals him
  Whom he preferr'd) with sacrifice and prayer
  For safe escape from danger and from death.
  But Agamemnon to Saturnian Jove
  Omnipotent, an ox of the fifth year                            485
  Full-flesh'd devoted, and the Princes call'd
  Noblest of all the Grecians to his feast.
  First, Nestor with Idomeneus the King,
  Then either Ajax, and the son he call'd
  Of Tydeus, with Ulysses sixth and last,                        490
  Jove's peer in wisdom. Menelaus went,
  Heroic Chief! unbidden, for he knew
  His brother's mind with weight of care oppress'd.
  The ox encircling, and their hands with meal
  Of consecration fill'd, the assembly stood,                    495
  When Agamemnon thus his prayer preferred.
    Almighty Father! Glorious above all!
  Cloud-girt, who dwell'st in heaven thy throne sublime,
  Let not the sun go down, till Priam's roof
  Fall flat into the flames; till I shall burn                   500
  His gates with fire; till I shall hew away
  His hack'd and riven corslet from the breast
  Of Hector, and till numerous Chiefs, his friends,
  Around him, prone in dust, shall bite the ground.
    So prayed he, but with none effect, The God                  505
  Received his offering, but to double toil
  Doom'd them, and sorrow more than all the past.
    They then, the triturated barley grain
  First duly sprinkling, the sharp steel infix'd
  Deep in the victim's neck reversed, then stripp'd              510
  The carcase, and divided at their joint
  The thighs, which in the double caul involved
  They spread with slices crude, and burn'd with fire
  Ascending fierce from billets sere and dry.
  The spitted entrails next they o'er the coals                  515
  Suspended held. The thighs with fire consumed,
  They gave to each his portion of the maw,
  Then slash'd the remnant, pierced it with the spits,
  And managing with culinary skill
  The roast, withdrew it from the spits again.                   520
  Thus, all their task accomplished, and the board
  Set forth, they feasted, and were all sufficed.
  When neither hunger more nor thirst remain'd
  Unsatisfied, Gerenian Nestor spake.
    Atrides! Agamemnon! King of men!                             525
  No longer waste we time in useless words,
  Nor to a distant hour postpone the work
  To which heaven calls thee. Send thine heralds forth.
  Who shall convene the Achaians at the fleet,
  That we, the Chiefs assembled here, may range,                 530
  Together, the imbattled multitude,
  And edge their spirits for immediate fight.
    He spake, nor Agamemnon not complied.
  At once he bade his clear-voiced heralds call
  The Greeks to battle. They the summons loud                    535
  Gave forth, and at the sound the people throng'd.
  Then Agamemnon and the Kings of Greece
  Dispatchful drew them into order just,
  With whom Minerva azure-eyed advanced,
  The inestimable AEgis on her arm,                               540
  Immortal, unobnoxious to decay
  A hundred braids, close twisted, all of gold,
  Each valued at a hundred beeves,[17] around
  Dependent fringed it. She from side to side
  Her eyes cerulean rolled, infusing thirst                      545
  Of battle endless into every breast.
  War won them now, war sweeter now to each
  Than gales to waft them over ocean home.[18]
  As when devouring flames some forest seize
  On the high mountains, splendid from afar                      550
  The blaze appears, so, moving on the plain,
  The steel-clad host innumerous flash'd to heaven.
  And as a multitude of fowls in flocks
  Assembled various, geese, or cranes, or swans
  Lithe-neck'd, long hovering o'er Cayster's banks               555
  On wanton plumes, successive on the mead
  Alight at last, and with a clang so loud
  That all the hollow vale of Asius rings;
  In number such from ships and tents effused,
  They cover'd the Scamandrian plain; the earth                  560
  Rebellow'd to the feet of steeds and men.
  They overspread Scamander's grassy vale,
  Myriads, as leaves, or as the flowers of spring.
  As in the hovel where the peasant milks
  His kine in spring-time, when his pails are fill'd,            565
  Thick clouds of humming insects on the wing
  Swarm all around him, so the Grecians swarm'd
  An unsumm'd multitude o'er all the plain,
  Bright arm'd, high crested, and athirst for war.
  As goat-herds separate their numerous flocks                   570
  With ease, though fed promiscuous, with like ease
  Their leaders them on every side reduced
  To martial order glorious;[19] among whom
  Stood Agamemnon "with an eye like Jove's,
  To threaten or command," like Mars in girth,                   575
  And with the port of Neptune. As the bull
  Conspicuous among all the herd appears,
  For he surpasses all, such Jove ordain'd
  That day the son of Atreus, in the midst
  Of Heroes, eminent above them all.                             580
    Tell me, (for ye are are heavenly, and beheld[20]
  A scene, whereof the faint report alone
  Hath reached our ears, remote and ill-informed,)
  Tell me, ye Muses, under whom, beneath
  What Chiefs of royal or of humbler note                        585
  Stood forth the embattled Greeks? The host at large;
  _They_ were a multitude in number more
  Than with ten tongues, and with ten mouths, each mouth
  Made vocal with a trumpet's throat of brass
  I might declare, unless the Olympian nine,                     590
  Jove's daughters, would the chronicle themselves
  Indite, of all assembled, under Troy.
  I will rehearse the Captains and their fleets.
    [21]Boeotia's sturdy sons Peneleus led,
  And Leitus, whose partners in command                          595
  Arcesilaus and Prothoenor came,
  And Clonius. Them the dwellers on the rocks
  Of Aulis followed, with the hardy clans
  Of Hyrie, Schoenos, Scholos, and the hills
  Of Eteon; Thespia, Graea, and the plains                        600
  Of Mycalessus them, and Harma served,
  Eleon, Erythrae, Peteon; Hyle them,
  Hesius and Ocalea, and the strength
  Of Medeon; Copae also in their train
  Marched, with Eutresis and the mighty men                      605
  Of Thisbe famed for doves; nor pass unnamed
  Whom Coronaea, and the grassy land
  Of Haliartus added to the war,
  Nor whom Plataea, nor whom Glissa bred,
  And Hypothebae,[22] and thy sacred groves                       610
  To Neptune, dark Onchestus. Arne claims
  A record next for her illustrious sons,
  Vine-bearing Arne. Thou wast also there
  Mideia, and thou Nissa; nor be thine
  Though last, Anthedon, a forgotten name.                       615
  These in Boeotia's fair and gallant fleet
  Of fifty ships, each bearing o'er the waves
  Thrice forty warriors, had arrived at Troy.
    In thirty ships deep-laden with the brave,
  Aspledon and Orchomenos had sent                               620
  Their chosen youth; them ruled a noble pair,
  Sons of Astyoche; she, lovely nymph,
  Received by stealth, on Actor's stately roof,
  The embraces of a God, and bore to Mars
  Twins like himself, Ascalaphus the bold,                       625
  And bold Iaelmenus, expert in arms.
    Beneath Epistrophus and Schedius, took
  Their destined station on Boeotia's left,
  The brave Phocensians; they in forty ships
  From Cyparissus came, and from the rocks                       630
  Of Python, and from Crissa the divine;
  From Anemoria, Daulis, Panopeus,
  And from Hyampolis, and from the banks
  Of the Cephissus, sacred stream, and from
  Lilaea, seated at its fountain-head.                            635
    Next from beyond Euboea's happy isle
  In forty ships conveyed, stood forth well armed
  The Locrians; dwellers in Augeia some
  The pleasant, some of Opoeis possessed,
  Some of Calliarus; these Scarpha sent,                         640
  And Cynus those; from Bessa came the rest,
  From Tarpha, Thronius, and from the brink
  Of loud Boagrius; Ajax them, the swift,
  Son of Oileus led, not such as he
  From Telamon, big-boned and lofty built,                       645
  But small of limb, and of an humbler crest;
  Yet he, competitor had none throughout
  The Grecians of what land soe'er, for skill
