thou wilt go to merry London, as I would were I a man with mine own
fortune to carve out, methinks I can give thee a letter to one
there that will secure thee all that thou needest in the present,
and may lead to advancement and good luck."

Kate's thoughts always worked like magic. No sooner was an idea
formed in her busy brain than she saw the whole story unwinding
itself in glowing colours; and to hear her bright chatter as the
three pursued their way to the house, one would have thought her
cousin's fortune already made. A soft red glow had stolen into her
cheeks as she had spoken of the missive she could furnish, and
Philip gave her a quick glance, a smile crossing his face.

Cuthbert was too faint and bewildered to take in all the sense of
Kate's words, but he understood that for the moment he was to be
cared for and concealed, and that was enough. Philip echoed his
sister's invitation to his father's house as his first stage on his
journey, and all that the lad remembered of the next few hours was
the dancing of lights before his dazzled eyes, the sound of
friendly voices in his ears, and the gentle ministrations of kindly
hands, as he was helped to bed and cosseted up, and speedily made
so comfortable that he fell off almost immediately into a calm
refreshing sleep that was like to be the best medicine he could
have.

When Sir Richard rejoined his family, it was with a stern
expression on his face.

"The boy has been grossly maltreated," he said. "It is no mere
paternal chastisement he has received this day, but such a flogging
as none but the lowest vagabond would receive at the hands of the
law. The very bone is in one place laid bare, and there be many
traces of savage handling before this. Were he not mine own uncle,
bearing mine own name, I would not let so gross an outrage pass.
But at least we can do this much--shelter the lad and send him
forth, when he is fit for the saddle, in such sort that he may
reach London in easy fashion, as becomes one of his race. The lad
has brains and many excellent qualities. There is no reason why he
should not make his way in life."

"If he can be cured of his Papist beliefs," said Lady Frances; "but
no man holding them gets on in these days, and Cuthbert has been
bred up in the very worst of such tenets."

"So bad that he is half disgusted with them before he can rightly
say why," answered Sir Richard with a smile. "There is too much
hatred and bitterness in Nicholas Trevlyn's religion to endear it
to his children. The boy has had the wit to see that the
Established Church of the land uses the same creeds and holds the
same cardinal doctrines as he has been bred up in. For the Pope he
cares no whit; his British blood causes him to think scorn of any
foreign potentate, temporal or spiritual. He has the making of a
good churchman in him. He only wants training and teaching.
Methinks it were no bad thing to send him to his mother's kindred
for that. They are as stanch to the one party as old Nicholas to
the other. The lad will learn all he needs there of argument and
controversy, and will be able to weigh the new notions against the
old.

"Verily, the more I think of it the better I like the plan. He is
scarce fit for a battle with the world on his own account. Food and
shelter and a home of some sort will be welcome to him whilst he
tries the strength of his wings and fits them for a wider flight."

"His mother's kindred," repeated Kate quickly, and with a shade of
hauteur in her manner. "Why, father, I have ever thought that on
their mother's side our cousins had little cause to be proud of
their parentage. Was not their mother--"

"The daughter of a wool stapler, one Martin Holt, foster brother to
my venerated father, the third Earl of Andover," said Lady Frances,
quietly. "Truly, my daughter, these good folks are not in birth our
equal, and would be the first to say so; nevertheless they are
worthy and honest people, and I can remember that Bridget, my
mother's maid, who astonished us and deeply offended her relations
by a sudden and ill-judged marriage with Nicholas Trevlyn, was a
wonderfully well-looking woman. How and why such a marriage was
made none may rightly know now. I can remember that the dark-browed
Nicholas, who was but little loved at our house, took some heed to
this girl, greatly younger than himself, though herself of ripening
age when she let herself be persuaded into that loveless wedlock.
It was whispered that he had made a convert of her; the Jesuits and
seminary priests were hard at work, striving to win back their lost
power by increasing the number of their flock and recruiting from
all classes of the people. Nicholas was then a blind tool in the
hands of these men, and I always suspected that this was one of his
chief motives for so ill judged a step. At any rate, Bridget
pronounced herself a Romanist, and was married by a priest of that
Church according to its laws. Her family cast her off, and Nicholas
would let us have no dealings with her. Poor Bridget! I trow she
lived to rue the day; and the change of her faith was but a passing
thing, for I know she returned to her old beliefs when time had
allowed her to see things more clearly.

"But to return to the beginning. If Bridget's brother, Martin Holt,
yet lives and carries on his father's business, as is most like, on
London Bridge, his house would be no bad shelter for this poor lad,
who will scarce have means or breeding as yet to take his place
with those of higher quality."

"That is very true," said Sir Richard. "The lad is a right honest
lad, and his gentle blood shows in a thousand little ways; but his
upbringing has not fitted him for mingling with the high ones of
the world, and it would be well for him to rub off something of his
rustic shyness and awkwardness ere he tries to cut a fine figure. I
doubt not that Martin Holt would receive his sister's son."

"A wool stapler!" muttered Kate, with a slight pout of her pretty
lips. "I was going to have sent him to Culverhouse with a letter,
to see what he would do for my cousin."

"Lord Culverhouse could not do much," answered her father, with a
smile. "He is but a stripling himself, and has his own way yet to
make. And remember too, dear Lady Disdain, that in these times of
change and upheaval it boots not to speak thus scornfully of honest
city folks, be they wool staplers or what you will, who gain their
wealth by trading on the high seas and with foreign lands. Bethink
you that even the King himself, despite his fine phrases on divine
right, has to sue something humbly to his good citizens of London
and his lowlier subjects for those very supplies that insure his
kingly pomp. So, saucy girl, put not into young Cuthbert's head
notions that ill befit one who has naught to call his own save the
clothes upon his back. If he goes to these kinsfolk, as I believe
it will be well for him to do, it will behove him to go right
humbly and reverently. Remember this in talking with him. It were
an ill thing to do to teach him to despise the home where his
mother first saw light, and the kinsfolks who are called by her
name."

Kate's sound sense and good feeling showed her the truth of her
father's words, and she dutifully promised not to transgress; but
she did not altogether relish the thought of the prospect in store
for her cousin, and as she went upstairs with Bessie to the
comfortable bed chamber they shared together, she whispered, with a
mischievous light dancing in her eyes:

"Ah, it is one thing for the grave and reverend elders to plan, but
it is another for the young to obey. Methinks Cuthbert will need no
hint from me to despise the home of the honest wool stapler. He has
been bred in woods and forests. He has the blood of the Trevlyns in
his veins. I trow the shop on London Bridge will have small charms
for him. Were it me, I would sooner--tenfold sooner--join myself to
one of those bands of freebooters who ravage the roads, and fatten
upon sleek and well-fed travellers, than content myself with the
pottering life of a trader! Ah, we shall see, we shall see! I will
keep my word to my father. But for all that I scarce think that
when Cuthbert starts forth again it will be for London Bridge that
he will be bound!"



Chapter 3: The Lost Treasure.


"And so it is to London thou wilt go--to the worthy wool stapler on
the Bridge?" and Kate, mindful of her promise to her parents,
strove to suppress the little grimace with which she was disposed
to accompany her words--"at least so my father saith."

"Yes: he has been giving me good counsel, and methinks that were a
good beginning. I would gladly see London. Men talk of its wonders,
and I can but sit and gape. I am aweary of the life of the
forest--the dreary life of the Gate House. In London I shall see
men--books--all the things my heart yearns after. And my mother's
kindred will scarce deny me a home with them till I can find
somewhat to do; albeit I barely know so much as their name, and my
father has held no manner of communication with them these many
years."

"Perchance they will not receive thee," suggested Kate, with a
laughing look in her eyes. "Then, good Cuthbert, thou wilt be
forced to trust to thine own mother wit for a livelihood. Then
perchance thou wilt not despise my poor little letter to my good
cousin Lord Culverhouse."

"Despise aught of yours, sweet Kate! Who has dared to say such a
thing?" asked Cuthbert hotly. "Any missive delivered to my keeping
by your hands shall be doubly precious. I will deliver it without
fail, be it to mine own advancement or no."

"Belike I shall claim your good offices yet, Master Letter
Carrier," answered Kate, with a laugh and a blush; "and I trow my
cousin will like you none the less for being bearer of my epistle.
But I am not to commend you to his good graces, as once I meant. It
is to your relatives you are first to look for help. It is like
rubbing the bloom off a ripe peach--all the romance is gone in a
moment! I had hoped that a career of adventure and glory lay before
you, and behold the goal is a home beneath a wool stapler's roof!"

But there Kate caught herself up and blushed, bethinking what her
parents would say could they hear her words.

But Cuthbert did not read the underlying scorn in merry Kate's
tones. He was a very simple-minded youth, and his life and training
had not been such as to teach him much about the various grades in
the world, or how greatly these grades differed one from the other.
He was looking at his cousin's bright face with thoughtful,
questioning eyes, so much so that the girl asked him of what he was
thinking.

"Marry of thee, Mistress Kate," he answered; for though encouraged
to speak on terms of equality with his kinsfolk, he found some
difficulty in remembering to do so, and they certainly appeared to
him in the light of beings from another and a higher sphere than
his own. "I was longing to ask of thee a question."

"Ask on, good Master Cuthbert," was the ready reply; "I will answer
to the best of my humble ability."

"I have heard of this Lord Culverhouse from many beneath this roof
since I have been here. I would fain know who he is."

"That is easy told. He is the eldest son of mine uncle, my mother's
brother, the fourth Earl of Andover. His eldest son bears the title
of Viscount Culverhouse, and he is, of course, our cousin. When we
were in London we saw much of these relatives of ours, and were
grieved to part from them when we left. Now, is it understood?"

"Yes, verily. And tell me this one thing more, fair cousin, if it
be not a malapert question. Is it not true that thou art to wed
with this Lord Culverhouse one day?"

Kate's face was dyed by a most becoming blush. Her eyes sparkled in
a charming fashion. Her expression, half arch, half grave, was
bewitching to see, but she laid her fingers on her lips as she
whispered:

"Hush, hush! who told thee that, good Cuthbert? Methinks thou hast
over-sharp eyes and ears."

"I prithee pardon me if I have seen and heard too much," answered
Cuthbert; "but I had a fancy--"

He stopped, stammering, blushing, and Kate took pity on his
confusion.

"I am not vexed," she said, smiling; "and in very sooth thou hast
divined what is in part the truth. But we do not dare talk of it
yet. There be so many weighty matters against us."

Cuthbert looked keenly interested. He was very fond of this
sprightly cousin of his, who was so amusing, so kindly, and so
sisterly in her ways. She had more ease of manner, as well as
brightness of temperament, than her sisters, and her company had
been a source of great pleasure to him. The girl saw the look of
sympathetic curiosity upon his face, and she drew her chair a
little nearer to that which he occupied, stirring up the logs upon
the glowing hearth into a brighter blaze.

"I' faith, Cuthbert, I will gladly tell thee all there is to know,
it is not much; and I like thee well, and trust thee to boot. Nor
is it such a mighty secret that Culverhouse would fain make me his
bride, and that I would give myself to him tomorrow an I might. I
am not ashamed of loving him," cried the girl, her dark eyes
flashing as she threw hack her dainty head with a gesture of pride
and womanly dignity, "for he is a right noble gentleman, and worthy
of any maiden's love; but whether we shall ever be united in
wedlock--ah, that is a vastly different matter!" and she heaved a
quick little sigh.

"But wherefore not?" asked Cuthbert quickly. "Where could he find a
more beauteous or worthy wife?"

Kate gave him a little bow of acknowledgment for his compliment,
but her face was slightly more grave as she made answer:

"It is not, alack! a question of dislike to me. Were that all, I
might hope to win the favour of stern hearts, and bring the matter
to a happy conclusion. But no; mine uncle of Andover likes me well.
He openly says as much, and he has been a kind friend to us. And
yet I may not wed his son; and his kindness makes it the harder for
Culverhouse to do aught to vex or defy him."

"But why may you not?" asked Cuthbert quickly.

"There be more reasons than one, but I will tell you all in brief.
My own father mislikes the thought of the match, for that we are
cousins of the first degree; and though we Trevlyns of the older
branch no longer call ourselves the servants and followers of Rome,
yet old traditions linger long in the blood, and my father has
always set his face against a marriage betwixt cousins nearest
akin."

Cuthbert looked thoughtful. That certainly was a difficulty hard to
be got over. He made no comment, but merely asked:

"And my Lord of Andover--is that the objection with him?"

"Not near so much. He would easily overlook that. There are no such
strict rules with Protestants, and his family have been for many
generations of the Reformed faith. But there is just as weighty an
argument on his side--namely, that my father can give me but a
scanty dower, and it is a very needful thing for Culverhouse to wed
with one who will fill his coffers with broad gold pieces. The
Trevlyns, as thou doubtless knowest, have been sorely impoverished
ever since the loss of the treasure. My father can give no rich
dower with his daughters; wherefore they be no match for the nobles
of the land. Oh, why was that treasure lost? Why could no man be
wise enough to trace and find it, when sure there must have been
many in the secret? Now that a generation has gone by, what hope is
there left? But for that loss my Lord of Andover would have
welcomed me gladly. The lost treasure of Trevlyn has much to answer
for."

Kate spoke half laughingly, half impatiently, and tapped the
rush-strewn floor with the point of her shoe. Into Cuthbert's eyes
a sudden light had sprung, and leaning forward in the firelight, he
laid his hand upon his cousin's.

"Kate," he said, in a low voice, "I have said naught of it
before--I feared it would sound but an idle boast, an idle dream;
but I am pledged to the search after the lost treasure. If it yet
lies hid, as men say it does, Cuthbert Trevlyn will find it."

Kate gazed at him with wide-open eyes; but there was no trace of
mockery in them, rather an eager delight and excitement that was in
itself encouragement and stimulus.

"Cuthbert, what meanest thou?"

"Verily no more and no less than I say. Listen, Kate. I too am a
like sufferer with others of the race of Trevlyn. I have nor
wealth, nor hope, nor future, save what I may carve out for myself;
and my heritage, as well as yours, lies buried somewhere in these
great woods, no man may say where. It came upon me as I sat in pain
and darkness, the last hour I passed beneath my father's roof, that
this might be the work given to me to do--to restore to the house
of Trevlyn the treasure whose loss has been so sore a blow. I said
as much to my sister when we bid each other adieu in the moonlit
chantry; and she bid me, ere I started on the quest, come hither to
you and ask the story of that loss. We know but little ourselves;
our father tells us naught, and it is but a word here and a word
there we have gathered. But you know--"

"We know well. We have been told the story by our mother from the
days of our childhood. I trow we know all there is to know. Why
hast thou not asked before, Cuthbert?"

The lad blushed a little at the question.

"Methought it would sound but folly in your ears," he said. "It was
easier to speak to Petronella in the dark chantry. Kate, wilt thou
tell me all thou knowest of this lost treasure? How and wherefore
was it lost, and why has no man since been able to find it?"

"Ay, wherefore? that is what we all ask," answered Kate, with eyes
that flashed and glowed. "When we were children and stayed once a
few months here, we spent days together scouring the woods and
digging after it. We were sure we should succeed where others had
failed; but the forest yet keeps its secret, and the treasure has
never seen the light. Again and yet again have I said to Philip
that were I a man I would never rest till it was found. But he
shakes his wise head and says that our grandfather and father and
many another have wasted time and expended large sums of money on
the work of discovery, and without success. All of our name begin
to give credence to the story that the concealed treasure was found
and spirited away by the gipsy folks, who hated our house, and that
it has long since been carried beyond the seas and melted into coin
there. Father and Philip alike believe that the Trevlyns will see
it again no more."

"Dost thou believe that, too?"

"Nay, not I. I believe it will yet come back to us, albeit not
without due search and travail and labour. O Cuthbert, thy words
rejoice me. Would I were a man, to fare forth with thee on the
quest! What wilt thou do? How wilt thou begin? And how canst thou
search for the lost treasure an thou goest to thine uncle's house
in London?"

"I must fain do that for a while," answered Cuthbert; "I dare not
linger so close to my father's home at this time. Moreover, the
winter is fast coming upon us, when the ground will be deep in
snow, and no man not bred to it could make shift to live in the
forest. To London must I go first. I trow the time will not be
wasted; for I will earn money in honest fashion, that I may have
the wherewithal to live when I go to seek this lost treasure.

"And now, my cousin, tell me all the tale. I know not rightly how
the treasure was lost, and I have never heard of the gipsy folks or
their hatred to our house. It behoves me to know all ere I embark
on the quest."

"Yea, verily; and I will tell thee all I know. Thou knowest well
that of old the Trevlyns were stanch sons to the Church of Rome,
and that in the days of Bloody Mary, as men call her now (and well
she merits the name), the Trevlyns helped might and main in hunting
down wretched Protestants and sending them to prison and the
stake?"

"I have heard my father speak of these things," answered Cuthbert,
with a light shudder, calling to mind his father's fierce and
terrible descriptions of the scenes he had witnessed and taken part
in during those short but fearful years of Mary's reign, "but I
knew not it had aught to do with the loss of the treasure."

"It had this much to do," answered Kate, "that my grandfather and
your father, who of course were brothers, were so vehemently hated
by the Protestant families, many of whose members had been betrayed
to death by their means--your father in particular was relentless
in his efforts to hunt down and spy out miserable victims--that
when the Queen was known to be dead, and her successor and
Protestant sister had been proclaimed in London, the Trevlyns felt
that they had cause to tremble for their own safety. They had
stirred up relentless enmity by their own relentless conduct, and
the sudden turn in fortune's wheel had given these enemies the
upper hand."

"Ah!" breathed Cuthbert, "I begin to see."

"The Trevlyns had not served the Bloody Queen and her minions
without reward," continued Kate, with flashing eyes; "they had
heaped together no small treasure whilst this traffic in treachery
had been going on, and in many cases the valuables of the victims
they had betrayed to death had passed into the keeping of the
betrayer.

"Oh, it is a detestable thing to think of!" cried the girl,
stamping her foot. "No wonder the judgment of God fell upon that
unhallowed treasure, and that it was taken from its possessors! No
wonder it was doomed to lie hidden away till those who had gotten
it had passed to their last account, and could never enjoy the
ill-gotten gain. And they were punished too--ay, they were well
punished. They were fined terrible sums; they had to give back sums
equal to the spoil they had filched from others. Thy father, as
thou knowest, was ruined; and we still feel that pinch of poverty
that will be slow to depart altogether from our house. Yet it
serves us right--it serves us right! It is meet that the children
should suffer for the sins of their parents. I have not complained,
and I will not complain;" and Kate threw back her head, whilst her
eyes flashed with the stress of her feeling.

"But the treasure?" questioned Cuthbert, eager to know more; "I
have not yet heard how it was lost."

Thus recalled to her subject, Kate took up her narrative again.

"You doubtless know that Queen Mary died in November of the year of
grace fifteen hundred and fifty-eight. In that year, some months
earlier, my father was born, and at the time of the proclamation of
the new Queen he was a tender infant. My grandfather was in London
about the Court, and his wife and child were here in this
house--the sumptuous mansion he and his father had built--not
dreaming of harm or ill. They had not heard of the death of one
Queen or the proclamation of the other till one dark winter's night
when, just as the household were about to retire to bed, my
grandfather and your father, Cuthbert, arrived at the house, their
faces pale with anxiety and apprehension, their clothes stained
with travel; the state of both riders and horses showing the speed
with which they had travelled, and betraying plainly that something
urgent had happened. The news was quickly told. Queen Mary was
dead. Bonfires in London streets were blazing in honour of
Elizabeth. The Protestants were everywhere in a transport of joy
and triumph. The Papists were trembling for their lives and for
their fortunes. No one knew the policy of the new Queen. All felt
that it was like enough she would inflict bloody chastisement on
those who had been the enemies of herself and of her Protestant
subjects. Even as the Trevlyn brothers had passed through the
streets of the city on their way out, they had been hissed and
hooted and even pelted by the crowd, some amongst which knew well
the part they had played in the recent persecutions. They had been
not a little alarmed by threats and menaces hurled at them even in
the precincts of St. James's, and it had become very plain to them
that they would speedily become the objects of private if not of
public vengeance. That being so, my grandfather was eager and
anxious to return to the Chase, to place his wife and child in some
place of safety; whilst your father's fear was all for the treasure
in gold and plate and valuables stored up in the house, which might
well fall an easy prey to the rapacious hands of spoilers, should
such (as was but too likely) swoop down upon the house to strive to
recover the jewels and gold taken from them when they were helpless
to oppose or resent such spoliation."

"Then it was all laid by at the Chase--all the money and precious
things taken from others?"

"Yes, and a vast quantity of silver and gold plate which had come
into the possession of former Trevlyns ever since the rise of the
family in the early days of the Tudors. The seventh Henry and the
eighth alike enriched our forefathers, and I know not what wealth
was stored up in the treasure room of this house now so drearily
void. But I mind well the story our grandam told us when we were
little children, standing at her knee in the ruddy firelight, of
that night when all this treasure was packed up in great chests and
boxes, and carried at dead of night by trusty servants into the
heart of the forest, and buried beneath a certain giant oak many
times pointed out to us, and well-nigh killed in after years by the
diggings around it in search of the missing hoard. To secure this
treasure, and bury it out of the reach of rapacious and covetous
hands, was the aim and object of that hurried journey taken on the
evening of the Queen's decease. None were in the secret save three
old servants, whose faithful loyalty to the family had been tested
in a thousand different ways. Those three, together with my
grandfather and your father, packed and transported with their own
hands this great treasure into the wood, and there entombed it.
None else knew of that night's work. No other eye saw what was
done. They worked the whole night through, and by the tardy dawn
all was done, and even the soil of the forest so cleverly arranged
that none could guess at the existence of that deep grave. And who
would guess the secret of that tangled forest? Even were it thought
that the gold and silver had been hid, who would have such skill as
to guess the spot, and go and filch it thence? And yet it must have
been carried away full soon. For Nicholas Trevlyn, in his anxious
greed, visited the spot not many weeks later--visited it by
stealth, for he and his brother were alike in hiding, waiting for
the first burst of vengeful fury to be over--and he found it gone!
He thought on the first survey that all was well; but on more
closely examining the ground his heart misgave him, for it appeared
to him as if the soil had been moved. With anxious haste he began
to dig, and soon his spade struck the lid of one of the chests. For
a moment he breathed again; but he was impelled to carry his search
farther. He uncovered the chest and raised the lid--it was empty!
In a wild fear and fury he dug again and again, and with the same
result. Every chest or box was in its place, but every one was
empty! The treasure had been spirited away by some spoiler's hand;
the treasure of Trevlyn was lost from that night forward!"

Cuthbert was leaning forward drinking all in with eager curiosity.

"My father discovered the loss--my father?"

Kate nodded her head, and seemed to divine the thought in his mind,
for she answered as if he had spoken it aloud.

"We have all thought of that. I know it is sometimes in my father's
mind as he looks at his kinsman's grim face; but our grand sire
never suspected him for a moment--nay, he vowed he was certain he
had had no part nor lot in the matter. For there was nothing but
accord between the brothers; they shared good and evil hap alike.
It was with his son, my father, who abjured the old faith and
became a Protestant, that your father picked a quarrel. He hated
his brother's wife, it is true; but he never appeared to hate his
brother. And he suffered more than any in the years that followed.
He lost his all, and has been a ruined man since. If he had a
secret hoard, sure he would scarce live the life he does now."

