personage of importance.

"This is fortunate, indeed," Geoffrey went on. "No doubt she is
intended for the transport of your daughter. Her crew consists of
a captain and five men, but at present they are living ashore; and
as we shall be going backwards and forwards to her, we ought to
have little difficulty in getting on board and hiding away in the
hold before she starts. I think everything promises well for the
success of our scheme."

The bey's superintendent came down the next day to see how matters
were going on on board the vessel. The painting was finished that
evening, and the next day two slaves brought down a quantity of
hangings and cushions, which Geoffrey and his companion assisted
the superintendent to hang up and place in order. Provisions and
water had already been taken on board, and they learnt that the
party who were to sail in her would come off early the next morning.

At midnight Geoffrey, Boldero, and the Spaniard came down to the
little port, embarked in a fisherman's boat moored at the stairs,
and noiselessly rowed off to the vessel. They mounted on to her
deck barefooted. Boldero was the last to leave the boat, giving her
a vigorous push with his foot in the direction of the shore, from
which the vessel was but some forty yards away. They descended
into the hold, where they remained perfectly quiet until the first
light of dawn enabled them to see what they were doing, and then
moved some baskets full of vegetables, and concealed themselves
behind them.

A quarter of an hour later they heard a boat come alongside, and
the voices of the sailors. Then they heard the creaking of cordage
as the sails were let fall in readiness for a start. Half an hour
later another boat came alongside. There was a trampling of feet
on the deck above them, and the bey's voice giving orders. A few
minutes later the anchor was raised, there was more talking on
deck, and then they heard a boat push off, and knew by the rustle
of water against the planks beside them that the vessel was under
way.

The wind was light and the sea perfectly calm, and beyond the
slight murmur of the water, those below would not have known that
the ship was in motion. It was very hot down in the hold, but
fortunately the crew had not taken the trouble to put on the hatches,
and at times a faint breath of air could be felt below. Geoffrey
and his companion talked occasionally in low tones; but the Spaniard
was so absorbed by his anxiety as to the approaching struggle, and
the thought that he might soon clasp his daughter to his arms, that
he seldom spoke.

No plans could be formed as to the course they were to take, for
they could not tell whether those of the crew off duty would retire
to sleep in the little forecastle or would lie down on deck. Then,
too, they were ignorant as to the number of men who had come on
board with the captive. The overseer had mentioned the day before
that he was going, and it was probable that three or four others
would accompany him. Therefore they had to reckon upon ten opponents.
Their only weapons were three heavy iron bolts, some two feet
long. These Boldero had purchased in exchange for a few fish, when
a prize brought in was broken up as being useless for the purposes
of the Moors.

"What I reckon is," he said, "that you and I ought to be able to
settle two apiece of these fellows before they fairly know what is
happening. The Don ought very well to account for another. So that
only leaves five of them; and five against three are no odds worth
speaking of, especially when the five are woke up by a sudden
attack, and ain't sure how many there are against them. I don't
expect much trouble over the affair."

"I don't want to kill more of the poor fellows than I can help,"
Geoffrey said.

"No more do I; but you see it's got to be either killing or being
killed, and I am perfectly certain which I prefer. Still, as you
say, if the beggars are at all reasonable I ain't for hurting them,
but the first few we have got to hit hard. When we get matters a
little even, we can speak them fair."

The day passed slowly, and in spite of their bent and cramped position
Geoffrey and Stephen Boldero dozed frequently. The Spaniard never
closed an eye. He was quite prepared to take his part in the
struggle; and as he was not yet fifty years of age, his assistance
was not to be despised. But the light hearted carelessness of
his companions, who joked under their breath, and laughed and ate
unconcernedly with a life and death struggle against heavy odds
before them, surprised him much.

As darkness came on the party below became wakeful. Their time was
coming now, and they had no doubt whatever as to the result. Their
most formidable opponents would be the men who had come on board
with the bey's superintendent, as these, no doubt, would be fully
armed. As for the sailors, they might have arms on board, but these
would not be ready to hand, and it was really only with the guards
they would have to deal.

"I tell you what I think would be a good plan, Stephen," Geoffrey
said suddenly. "You see, there is plenty of spare line down here;
if we wait until they are all asleep we can go round and tie their
legs together, or put ropes round their ankles and fasten them to
ring bolts. If we could manage that without waking them, we might
capture the craft without shedding any blood, and might get them
down into the hold one after the other."

"I think that is a very good plan," Stephen agreed. "I do not like
the thought of knocking sleeping men on the head any more than you
do; and if we are careful, we might get them all tied up before
an alarm is given. There, the anchor has gone down. I thought very
likely they would not sail at night. That is capital. You may be
sure that they will be pretty close inshore, and they probably will
have only one man on watch; and as likely as not even one, for they
will not dream of any possible danger."

For another two hours the sound of talk on deck went on, but at
last all became perfectly quiet. The party below waited for another
half hour, and then noiselessly ascended the ladder to the deck,
holding in one hand a cudgel, in the other a number of lengths of
line cut about six feet long. Each as he reached the deck lay down
flat. The Spaniard had been told to remain perfectly quiet while
the other two went about their task.

First they crawled aft, for the bey's guards would, they knew,
be sleeping at that end, and working together they tied the legs
of these men without rousing them. The ropes could not be tightly
pulled, as this would at once have disturbed them. They were therefore
fastened somewhat in the fashion of manacles, so that although the
men might rise to their feet they would fall headlong the moment
they tried to walk. In addition other ropes were fastened to these
and taken from one man to another. Then their swords were drawn
from the sheaths and their knives from their sashes.

The operation was a long one, as it had to be conducted with the
greatest care and caution. They then crept back to the hatchway and
told the Spaniard that the most formidable enemies had been made
safe.

"Here are a sword and a knife for you, senor; and now as we are
all armed I consider the ship as good as won, for the sailors are
not likely to make much resistance by themselves. However, we will
secure some of them. The moon will be up in half an hour, and that
will be an advantage to us.

The captain and three of the sailors were soon tied up like the
others. Two men were standing in the bow of the vessel leaning
against the bulwarks, and when the moon rose it could be seen by
their attitude that both were asleep.

"Now, we may as well begin," Geoffrey said. "Let us take those two
fellows in the bow by surprise. Hold a knife to their throats, and
tell them if they utter the least sound we will kill them. Then we
will make them go down into the forecastle and fasten them there."

"I am ready," Stephen said, and they stole forward to the two
sleeping men. They grasped them suddenly by the throat and held a
knife before their eyes, Boldero telling them in a stern whisper
that if they uttered a cry they would be stabbed to the heart.
Paralysed by the sudden attack they did not make the slightest
struggle, but accompanied their unknown assailants to the forecastle
and were there fastened in. Joined now by the Spaniard, Geoffrey
and his companion went aft and roused one of the sleepers there
with a threat similar to that which had silenced the sailors.

He was, however, a man of different stuff. He gave a loud shout and
grappled with Boldero, who struck him a heavy blow with his fist in
the face, and this for a moment silenced him; but the alarm being
given, the superintendent and the two men struggled to their feet,
only however to fall prostrate as soon as they tried to walk.

"Lie quiet and keep silence!" Boldero shouted in a threatening
voice.

"You are unarmed and at our mercy. Your feet are bound and you are
perfectly helpless. We do not wish to take your lives, but unless
you are quiet we shall be compelled to do so."

The men had discovered by this time that their arms had gone, and
were utterly disconcerted by the heavy and unexpected fall they
had just had. Feeling that they were indeed at the mercy of their
captors, they lay quiet.

"Now then," Boldero went on, "one at a time. Keep quiet, you rascals
there!" he broke off shouting to the sailors who were rolling and
tumbling on the deck forward, "or I will cut all your throats for
you. Now then, Geoffrey, do you and the senor cut the rope that
fastens that man on the port side to his comrades. March him to
the hatchway and make him go down into the hold. Keep your knives
ready and kill him at once if he offers the slightest resistance."

One by one the superintendent, the three guards, the captain and
sailors were all made to descend into the hold, and the hatches
were put over it and fastened down.

"Now, senor," Geoffrey said, "we can spare you."

The Spaniard hurried to the cabin, opened the door, and called
out his daughter's name. There was a scream of delight within as
Dolores Mendez, who had been awakened by the tumult, recognized her
father's voice, and leaping up from her couch threw herself into
his arms. Geoffrey and his companion now opened the door of the
forecastle and called the two sailors out.

"Now," Boldero said, "if you want to save your lives you have got to
obey our orders. First of all fall to work and get up the anchor,
and then shake out the sails again. I will take the helm, Geoffrey,
and do you keep your eye on these two fellows. There is no fear of
their playing any tricks now that they see they are alone on deck,
but they might, if your back were turned, unfasten the hatches.
However, I do not think we need fear trouble that way, as for aught
they know we may have cut the throats of all the others."

A few minutes later the vessel was moving slowly through the water
with her head to the northwest.

"We must be out of sight of land if we can by the morning," Stephen
said, when Geoffrey two hours later came to take his place at the
helm; "at any rate until we have passed the place we started from.
Once beyond that it does not matter much; but it will be best either
to keep out of sight of land altogether, or else to sail pretty
close to it, so that they can see the boat is one of their own
craft. We can choose which we will do when we see which way the
breeze sets in in the morning."

It came strongly from the south, and they therefore determined to
sail direct for Carthagena.



CHAPTER XVII

A SPANISH MERCHANT


As soon as the sails had been set, and the vessel was under way,
the Spaniard came out from the cabin.

"My daughter is attiring herself, senor," he said to Stephen Boldero,
for Geoffrey was at the time at the helm. "She is longing to see
you, and to thank you for the inestimable services you have rendered
to us both. But for you I should now be dying or dead, my daughter
a slave for life in the palace of the bey. What astonishes us both
is that such noble service should have been rendered to us by two
absolute strangers, and not strangers only, but by Englishmen--a
people with whom Spain is at war--and who assuredly can have
no reason to love us. How came you first to think of interesting
yourself on our behalf?"

"To tell you the truth, senor," Stephen Boldero said bluntly, "it
was the sight of your daughter and not of yourself that made us
resolve to save you if possible, or rather, I should say, made my
friend Geoffrey do so. After ten years in the galleys one's heart
gets pretty rough, and although even I felt a deep pity for your
daughter, I own it would never have entered my mind to risk my
neck in order to save her. But Geoffrey is younger and more easily
touched, and when he saw her as she landed pale and white and grief
stricken, and yet looking as if her own fate touched her less than
the parting from you, my good friend Geoffrey Vickars was well nigh
mad, and declared that in some way or other, and at whatever risk
to ourselves, you must both be saved. In this matter I have been
but a passive instrument in his hands; as indeed it was only right
that I should be, seeing that he is of gentle blood and an esquire
serving under Captain Vere in the army of the queen, while I am
but a rough sailor. What I have done I have done partly because his
heart was in the matter, partly because the adventure promised, if
successful, to restore me to freedom, and partly also, senor, for
the sake of your brave young daughter."

"You are modest, sir," the Spaniard said. "You are one of those
who belittle your own good deeds. I feel indeed more grateful than
I can express to you as well as to your friend."

The merchant's daughter now appeared at the door of the cabin. Her
father took her hand and led her up to Boldero. "This, Dolores,
is one of the two Englishmen who have at the risk of their lives
saved me from death and you from worse than death. Thank him, my
child, and to the end of your life never cease to remember him in
your prayers."

"I am glad to have been of assistance, senora," Boldero said as the
girl began to speak; "but as I have just been telling your father,
I have played but a small part in the business, it is my friend
Don Geoffrey Vickars who has been the leader in the matter. He saw
you as you landed at the boat, and then and there swore to save
you, and all that has been done has been under his direction. It
was he who followed and rescued your father, and I have really had
nothing to do with the affair beyond hiding myself in the hole and
helping to tie up your Moors."

"Ah, sir," the girl said, laying her hands earnestly upon the sailor's
shoulder, "it is useless for you to try to lessen the services you
have rendered us. Think of what I was but an hour since--a captive
with the most horrible of all fates before me, and with the belief
that my father was dying by inches in the hands of some cruel
taskmaster, and now he is beside me and I am free. This has been
done by two strangers, men of a nation which I have been taught to
regard as an enemy. It seems to me that no words that I can speak
could tell you even faintly what I feel, and it is God alone who
can reward you for what you have done."

Leaving Boldero the Spaniard and his daughter went to the stern,
where Geoffrey was standing at the helm.

"My daughter and I have come to thank you, senor, for having saved
us from the worst of fates and restored us to each other. Your
friend tells me that it is to you it is chiefly due that this has
come about, for that you were so moved to pity at the sight of my
daughter when we first landed, that you declared at once that you
would save her from her fate at whatever risk to yourself, and that
since then he has been but following your directions."

"Then if he says that, senor, he belies himself. I was, it is true,
the first to declare that we must save your daughter at any cost
if it were possible to do so; but had I not said so, I doubt not
he would have announced the same resolution. Since then we have
planned everything together; and as he is older and more experienced
than I am, it was upon his opinion that we principally acted. We
had long made up our minds to escape when the opportunity came.
Had it not been that we were stirred into action by seeing your
daughter in the hands of the Moors, it might have been years before
we decided to run the risks. Therefore if you owe your freedom to
us, to some extent we owe ours to you; and if we have been your
protectors so far, we hope that when we arrive in Spain you will
be our protectors there, for to us Spain is as much an enemy's
country as Barbary."

"That you can assuredly rely upon," the trader replied. "All that
I have is at your disposal."

For an hour they stood talking. Dolores said but little. She had
felt no shyness with the stalwart sailor, but to this youth who had
done her such signal service she felt unable so frankly to express
her feelings of thankfulness.

By morning the coast of Africa was but a faint line on the horizon,
and the ship was headed west. Except when any alteration of the
sails was required, the two Moors who acted as the crew were made
to retire into the forecastle, and were there fastened in, Geoffrey
and Boldero sleeping by turns.

After breakfast the little party gathered round the helm, and at
the request of Juan Mendez, Geoffrey and Stephen both related how
it befell that they had become slaves to the Moors.

"Your adventures are both singular," the trader said when they had
finished. "Yours, Don Geoffrey, are extraordinary. It is marvellous
that you should have been picked up in that terrible fight, and
should have shared in all the perils of that awful voyage back
to Spain without its being ever suspected that you were English.
Once landed in the service as you say of Senor Burke, it is not
so surprising that you should have gone freely about Spain. But
your other adventures are wonderful, and you and your friend were
fortunate indeed in succeeding as you did in carrying off the lady
he loved; and deeply they must have mourned your supposed death
on the deck of the Moorish galley. And now tell me what are your
plans when you arrive in Spain?"

"We have no fixed plans, save that we hope some day to be able to
return home," Geoffrey said. "Stephen here could pass well enough
as a Spaniard when once ashore without being questioned, and his
idea is, if there is no possibility of getting on board an English
or Dutch ship at Cadiz, to ship on board a Spaniard, and to take
his chance of leaving her at some port at which she may touch. As
for myself, although I speak Spanish fluently, my accent would at
once betray me to be a foreigner. But if you will take me into your
house for a time until I can see a chance of escaping, my past need
not be inquired into. You could of course mention, were it asked,
that I was English by birth, but had sailed in the Armada with my
patron, Mr. Burke, and it would be naturally supposed that I was
an exile from England."

"That can certainly be managed," the trader said. "I fear that it
will be difficult to get you on board a ship either of your countrymen
or of the Hollanders; these are most closely watched lest fugitives
from the law or from the Inquisition should escape on board them.
Still, some opportunity may sooner or later occur; and the later
the better pleased shall I be, for it will indeed be a pleasure to
me to have you with me."

In the afternoon Geoffrey said to Stephen, "I have been thinking,
Stephen, about the men in the hold, and I should be glad for them
to return to their homes. If they go with us to Spain they will be
made galley slaves, and this I should not like, especially in the
case of the bey's superintendent. The bey was most kind to us, and
this man himself always spoke in our favour to him, and behaved
well to us. I think, therefore, that out of gratitude to the bey
we should let them go. The wind is fair, and there are, so far as
I can see, no signs of any change of weather. By tomorrow night
the coast of Spain will be in sight. I see no reason, therefore,
why we should not be able to navigate her until we get near the
land, when Mendez can engage the crew of some fishing boat to take
us into a port. If we put them into the boat with plenty of water
and provisions, they will make the coast by morning; and as I
should guess that we must at present be somewhere abreast of the
port from which we started, they will not be very far from home
when they land."

"I have no objection whatever, Geoffrey. As you say we were not
treated badly, at any rate from the day when the bey had us up to
his house; and after ten years in the galleys, I do not wish my
worst enemies such a fate. We must, of course, be careful how we
get them into the boat."

"There will be three of us with swords and pistols, and they will
be unarmed," Geoffrey said. "We will put the two men now in the
forecastle into the boat first, and let the others come up one by
one and take their places. We will have a talk with the superintendent
first, and give him a message to the bey, saying that we are not
ungrateful for his kindness to us, but that of course we seized
the opportunity that presented itself of making our escape, as he
would himself have done in similar circumstances; nevertheless that
as a proof of our gratitude to him, we for his sake release the
whole party on board, and give them the means of safely returning."

An hour later the boat, pulled by four oars, left the side of the
ship with the crew, the superintendent and guards, and the two
women who had come on board to attend upon Dolores upon the voyage.

The next morning the vessel was within a few miles of the Spanish
coast. An hour later a fishing-boat was hailed, and an arrangement
made with the crew to take the vessel down to Carthagena, which
was, they learned, some fifty miles distant. The wind was now very
light, and it was not until the following day that they entered
the port. As it was at once perceived that the little vessel was
Moorish in rigging and appearance, a boat immediately came alongside
to inquire whence she came.

Juan Mendez had no difficulty in satisfying the officer as to his
identity, he being well known to several traders in the town. His
story of the attack upon his ship by Barbary pirates, its capture,
and his own escape and that of his daughter by the aid of two
Christian captives, excited great interest as soon as it became
known in the town; for it was rare, indeed, that a captive ever
succeeded in making his escape from the hands of the Moors. It
had already been arranged that, in telling his story, the trader
should make as little as possible of his companions' share in the
