"Oh, Mrs. Morley! you cannot guess how deeply that interest touched me."

"I should not have presumed so far," continued Mrs. Morley, unheeding
the interruption, "if I had not been altogether in error as to the
nature of your sentiments in a certain quarter. In this you must blame
my American rearing. With us there are many flirtations between boys and
girls which come to nothing; but when in my country a man like you meets
with a woman like Mademoiselle Cicogna, there cannot be flirtation. His
attentions, his looks, his manner, reveal to the eyes of those who care
enough for him to watch, one of two things--either he coldly admires
and esteems, or he loves with his whole heart and soul a woman worthy to
inspire such a love. Well, I did watch, and I was absurdly mistaken. I
imagined that I saw love, and rejoiced for the sake of both of you to
think so. I know that in all countries, our own as well as yours, love
is so morbidly sensitive and jealous that it is always apt to invent
imaginary foes to itself. Esteem and admiration never do that. I thought
that some misunderstanding, easily removed by the intervention of a
third person, might have impeded the impulse of two hearts towards each
other--and so I wrote. I had assumed that you loved--I am humbled to the
last degree--you only admired and esteemed."

"Your irony is very keen, Mrs. Morley, and to you it may seem very
just."

"Don't call me Mrs. Morley in that haughty tone of voice,--can't
you talk to me as you would talk to a friend? You only esteemed and
admired--there is an end of it."

"No, there is not an end of it," cried Graham, giving way to an
impetuosity of passion, which rarely, indeed, before another, escaped
his self-control; "the end of it to me is a life out of which is ever
stricken such love as I could feel for woman. To me true love can only
come once. It came with my first look on that fatal face--it has never
left me in thought by day, in dreams by night. The end of it to me
is farewell to all such happiness as the one love of a life can
promise--but--"

"But what?" asked Mrs. Morley, softly, and very much moved by the
passionate earnestness of Graham's voice and words.

"But," he continued with a forced smile, "we Englishmen are trained to
the resistance of absolute authority; we cannot submit all the elements
that make up our being to the sway of a single despot. Love is the
painter of existence, it should not be its sculptor."

"I do not understand the metaphor."

"Love colours our life, it should not chisel its form."

"My dear Mr. Vane, that is very cleverly said, but the human heart is
too large and too restless to be quietly packed up in an aphorism. Do
you mean to tell me that if you found you had destroyed Isaura Cicogna's
happiness as well as resigned your own, that thought would not somewhat
deform the very shape you would give to your life? Is it colour alone
that your life would lose?"

"Ah, Mrs. Morley, do not lower your friend into an ordinary girl in whom
idleness exaggerates the strength of any fancy over which it dreamily
broods. Isaura Cicogna has her occupations--her genius--her fame--her
career. Honestly speaking, I think that in these she will find a
happiness that no quiet hearth could bestow. I will say no more. I feel
persuaded that were we two united I could not make her happy. With the
irresistible impulse that urges the genius of the writer towards its
vent in public sympathy and applause, she would chafe if I said, 'Be
contented to be wholly mine.' And if I said it not, and felt I had no
right to say it, and allowed the full scope to her natural ambition,
what then? She would chafe yet more to find that I had no fellowship in
her aims and ends--that where I should feel pride, I felt humiliation.
It would be so; I cannot help it, 'tis my nature."

"So be it then. When, next year perhaps, you visit Paris, you will
be safe from my officious interference! Isaura will be the wife of
another."

Graham pressed his hand to his heart with the sudden movement of one who
feels there an agonising spasm--his cheek, his very lips were bloodless.

"I told you," he said bitterly, "that your fears of my influence over
the happiness of one so gifted, and so strong in such gifts, were
groundless; you allow that I should be very soon forgotten?"

"I allow no such thing--I wish I could. But do you know so little of a
woman's heart (and in matters of heart, I never yet heard that genius
had a talisman against emotion),--do you know so little of a woman's
heart as not to know that the very moment in which she may accept a
marriage the least fitted to render her happy, is that in which she has
lost all hope of happiness in another?"

"Is it indeed so?" murmured Graham--"Ay, I can conceive it."

"And have you so little comprehension of the necessities which that
fame, that career to which you allow she is impelled by the instincts of
genius, impose on this girl, young, beautiful, fatherless, motherless?
No matter how pure her life, can she guard it from the slander of
envious tongues? Will not all her truest friends--would not you, if you
were her brother--press upon her by all the arguments that have most
weight with the woman who asserts independence in her modes of life, and
yet is wise enough to know that the world can only judge of virtue by
its shadow--reputation, not to dispense with the protection which a
husband can alone secure? And that is why I warn you, if it be yet time,
that in resigning your own happiness you may destroy Isaura's. She will
wed another, but she will not be happy. What a chimera or dread your
egotism as man conjures up! Oh! forsooth, the qualities that charm and
delight a world are to unfit a woman to be helpmate to a man. Fie on
you!--fie!"

Whatever answer Graham might have made to these impassioned reproaches
was here checked.

Two men on horseback stopped the carriage. One was Enguerrand de
Vandemar, the other was the Algerine Colonel whom we met at the supper
given at the Maison Doree by Frederic Lemercier.

"Pardon, Madame Morley," said Enguerrand; "but there are symptoms of a
mob-epidemic a little further up the fever began at Belleville, and is
threatening the health of the Champs Elysees. Don't be alarmed--it may
be nothing, though it may be much. In Paris, one can never calculate
an hour beforehand the exact progress of a politico-epidemic fever. At
present I say, 'Bah! a pack of ragged boys, gamins de Paris;' but my
friend the Colonel, twisting his moustache en souriant amerement, says,
'It is the indignation of Paris at the apathy of the Government under
insult to the honour of France;' and Heaven only knows how rapidly
French gamins grow into giants when Colonels talk about the indignation
of Paris and the honour of France!"

"But what has happened?" asked Mrs. Morley, turning to the Colonel.

"Madame," replied the warrior, "it is rumoured that the King of Prussia
has turned his back upon the ambassador of France; and that the pekin
who is for peace at any price--M. Ollivier--will say tomorrow in the
Chamber, that France submits to a slap in the face."

"Please, Monsieur de Vandemar, to tell my coachman to drive home," said
Mrs. Morley.

The carriage turned and went homeward. The Colonel lifted his hat, and
rode back to see what the gamins were about. Enguerrand, who had no
interest in the gamins, and who looked on the Colonel as a bore, rode by
the side of the carriage.

"Is there anything serious in this?" asked Mrs. Morley.

"At this moment, nothing. What it may be this hour to-morrow I cannot
say. Ah! Monsieur Vane, bon jour I did not recognise you at first. Once,
in a visit at the chateau of one of your distinguished countrymen, I saw
two game-cocks turned out facing each other: they needed no pretext for
quarrelling--neither do France and Prussia--no matter which game-cock
gave the last offence, the two game-cocks must have it out. All that
Ollivier can do, if he be wise, is to see that the French cock has
his steel spurs as long as the Prussians. But this I do say, that if
Ollivier attempts to put the French cock back into its bag, the Empire
is gone in forty-eight hours. That to me is a trifle--I care nothing for
the Empire; but that which is not a trifle is anarchy and chaos. Better
war and the Empire than peace and Jules Favre. But let us seize the
present hour, Mr. Vane; whatever happens to-morrow, shall we dine
together to-day? Name your restaurant."

"I am so grieved," answered Graham, rousing himself, "I am here only on
business, and engaged all the evening."

"What a wonderful thing is this life of ours!" said Enguerrand. "The
destiny of France at this moment hangs on a thread--I, a Frenchman,
say to an English friend, 'Let us dine--a cutlet to-day and a fig for
to-morrow;' and my English friend, distinguished native of a country
with which we have the closest alliance, tells me that in this crisis
of France he has business to attend to! My father is quite right; he
accepts the Voltairean philosophy, and cries, Vivent les indifferents!"

"My dear M. de Vandemar," said Graham, "in every country you will find
the same thing. All individuals massed together constitute public life.
Each individual has a life of his own, the claims and the habits and
the needs of which do not suppress his sympathies with public life,
but imperiously overrule them. Mrs. Morley, permit me to pull the
check-string--I get out here."

"I like that man," said Enguerrand, as he continued to ride by the fair
American, "in language and esprit he is so French."

"I use to like him better than you can," answered Mrs. Morley, "but
in prejudice and stupidity he is so English. As it seems you are
disengaged, come and partake, pot au feu, with Frank and me."

"Charmed to do so," answered the cleverest and best bred of all Parisian
beaux garcons, "but forgive me if I quit you soon. This poor France!
Entre nous, I am very uneasy about the Parisian fever. I must run away
after dinner to clubs and cafes to learn the last bulletins."

"We have nothing like that French Legitimist in the States," said the
fair American to herself, "unless we should ever be so silly as to make
Legitimists of the ruined gentlemen of the South."

Meanwhile Graham Vane went slowly back to his apartment. No false excuse
had he made to Enguerrand; this evening was devoted to M. Renard, who
told him little he had not known before; but his private life overruled
his public, and all that night he, professed politician, thought
sleeplessly, not over the crisis to France, which might alter the
conditions of Europe, but the talk on his private life of that
intermeddling American woman.




CHAPTER IV.

The next day, Wednesday, July 6th, commenced one of those eras in
the world's history in which private life would vainly boast that it
overrules Life Public. How many private lives does such a terrible time
influence, absorb, darken with sorrow, crush into graves?

It was the day when the Duc de Gramont uttered the fatal speech which
determined the die between peace and war. No one not at Paris on that
day can conceive the popular enthusiasm with which that speech was
hailed--the greater because the warlike tone of it was not anticipated;
because there had been a rumour amidst circles the best informed that
a speech of pacific moderation was to be the result of the Imperial
Council. Rapturous indeed were the applauses with which the sentences
that breathed haughty defiance were hailed by the Assembly. The ladies
in the tribune rose with one accord, waving their handkerchiefs. Tall,
stalwart, dark, with Roman features and lofty presence, the Minister
of France seemed to say with Catiline in the fine tragedy: "Lo! where I
stand, I am war!"

Paris had been hungering for some hero of the hour--the Duc de Gramont
became at once raised to that eminence. All the journals, save the
very few which were friendly to peace, because hostile to the Emperor,
resounded with praise, not only of the speech, but of the speaker. It is
with a melancholy sense of amusement that one recalls now to mind those
organs of public opinion--with what romantic fondness they dwelt on the
personal graces of the man who had at last given voice to the chivalry
of France: "The charming gravity of his countenance--the mysterious
expression of his eye!"

As the crowd poured from the Chambers, Victor de Mauleon and Savarin,
who had been among the listeners, encountered.

"No chance for my friends the Orleanists now," said Savarin. "You who
mock at all parties are, I suppose, at heart for the Republican--small
chance, too, for that."

"I do not agree with you. Violent impulses have quick reactions."

"But what reaction could shake the Emperor after he returns a conqueror,
bringing in his pocket the left bank of the Rhine?"

"None--when he does that. Will he do it? Does he himself think he will
do it? I doubt--"

"Doubt the French army against the Prussian?"

"Against the German people united--yes, very much."

"But war will disunite the German people. Bavaria will surely assist
us--Hanover will rise against the spoliator--Austria at our first
successes must shake off her present enforced neutrality?"

"You have not been in Germany, and I have. What yesterday was a Prussian
army, to-morrow will be a German population; far exceeding our own in
numbers, in hardihood of body, in cultivated intellect, in military
discipline. But talk of something else. How is my ex-editor--poor
Gustave Rameau?"

"Still very weak, but on the mend. You may have him back in his office
soon."

"Impossible! even in his sick-bed his vanity was more vigorous than
ever. He issued a war-song, which has gone the round of the war journals
signed by his own name. He must have known very well that the name of
such a Tyrtaeus cannot reappear as the editor of Le Sens Commun; that in
launching his little firebrand he burned all vessels that could waft him
back to the port he had quitted. But I dare say he has done well for his
own interests; I doubt if Le Sens Commun can much longer hold its ground
in the midst of the prevalent lunacy."

"What! it has lost subscribers?--gone off in sale already, since it
declared for peace?"

"Of course it has; and after the article which, if I live over to-night,
will appear to-morrow, I should wonder if it sell enough to cover the
cost of the print and paper."

"Martyr to principle! I revere, but I do not envy thee."

"Martyrdom is not my ambition. If Louis Napoleon be defeated, what then?
Perhaps he may be the martyr; and the Favres and Gambettas may roast
their own eggs on the gridiron they heat for his majesty."

Here an English gentleman, who was the very able correspondent to a
very eminent journal, and in that capacity had made acquaintance with De
Mauleon, joined the two Frenchmen; Savarin, however, after an exchange
of salutations, went his way.

"May I ask a frank answer to a somewhat rude question, M. le Vicomte?"
said the Englishman. "Suppose that the Imperial Government had to-day
given in their adhesion to the peace party, how long would it have been
before their orators in the Chamber and their organs in the press would
have said that France was governed by poltrons?"

"Probably for most of the twenty-four hours. But there are a few who are
honest in their convictions; of that few I am one."

"And would have supported the Emperor and his Government?"

"No, Monsieur--I do not say that."

"Then the Emperor would have turned many friends into enemies, and no
enemies into friends."

"Monsieur--you in England know that a party in opposition is not
propitiated when the party in power steals its measures. Ha!--pardon
me, who is that gentleman, evidently your countryman, whom I see yonder
talking to the Secretary of your Embassy?"

"He.--Mr. Vane-Graham Vane. Do you not know him? He has been much in
Paris, attached to our Embassy formerly; a clever man--much is expected
from him."

"Ah! I think I have seen him before, but am not quite sure. Did you
say Vane? I once knew a Monsieur Vane, a distinguished parliamentary
orator."

"That gentleman is his son--would you like to be introduced to him?"

"Not to-day--I am in some hurry." Here Victor lifted his hat in parting
salutation, and as he walked away cast at Graham another glance keen
and scrutinising. "I have seen that man before," he muttered,
"where?--when?--can it be only a family likeness to the father? No, the
features are different; the profile is--ha!--Mr. Lamb, Mr. Lamb--but why
call himself by that name?--why disguised?--what can he have to do
with poor Louise? Bah--these are not questions I can think of now. This
war--this war--can it yet be prevented? How it will prostrate all the
plans my ambition so carefully schemed! Oh!--at least if I were but in
the Chamber. Perhaps I yet may be before the war is ended--the Clavignys
have great interest in their department."




CHAPTER V.

Graham had left a note with Rochebriant's concierge requesting an
interview on the Marquis's return to Paris, and on the evening after
the day just commemorated he received a line, saying that Alain had come
back, and would be at home at nine o'clock. Graham found himself in the
Breton's apartment punctually at the hour indicated.

Alain was in high spirits: he burst at once into enthusiastic
exclamations on the virtual announcement of war.

"Congratulate me, mon cher!" he cried--"the news was a joyous surprise
to me. Only so recently as yesterday morning I was under the gloomy
apprehension that the Imperial Cabinet would continue to back Ollivier's
craven declaration 'that France had not been affronted!' The Duchesse
de Tarascon, at whose campagne I was a guest, is (as you doubtless know)
very much in the confidence of the Tuileries. On the first signs of war,
I wrote to her, saying that whatever the objections of my pride to enter
the army as a private in time of peace, such objections ceased on the
moment when all distinctions of France must vanish in the eyes of sons
eager to defend her banners. The Duchesse in reply begged me to come to
her campagne and talk over the matter. I went; she then said that if
war should break out it was the intention to organise the Mobiles and
officer them with men of birth and education, irrespective of previous
military service, and in that case I might count on my epaulets. But
only two nights ago she received a letter--I know not of course from
whom--evidently from some high authority--that induced her to think the
moderation of the Council would avert the war, and leave the swords of
the Mobiles in their sheaths. I suspect the decision of yesterday must
have been a very sudden one. Ce cher Gramont! See what it is to have a
well-born man in a sovereign's councils."

"If war must come, I at least wish all renown to yourself. But--"

"Oh! spare me your 'buts'; the English are always too full of them where
her own interests do not appeal to her. She had no 'buts' for war in
India or a march into Abyssinia."

Alain spoke petulantly; at that moment the French were very much
irritated by the monitory tone of the English journals. Graham prudently
avoided the chance of rousing the wrath of a young hero yearning for his
epaulets.

"I am English enough," said he, with good-humoured courtesy, "to care
for English interests; and England has no interest abroad dearer to her
than the welfare and dignity of France. And now let me tell you why
I presumed on an acquaintance less intimate than I could desire, to
solicit this interview on a matter which concerns myself, and in which
you could perhaps render me a considerable service."

"If I can, count it rendered; move to this sofa--join me in a cigar, and
let us talk at ease comme de vieux amis, whose fathers or brothers might
have fought side by side in the Crimea." Graham removed to the sofa
beside Rochebriant, and after one or two whiffs laid aside the cigar and
began:

"Among the correspondence which Monsieur your father has left, are there
any letters of no distant date signed Marigny--Madame Marigny? Pardon
me, I should state my motive in putting this question. I am intrusted
with a charge, the fulfilment of which may prove to the benefit of this
lady or her child; such fulfilment is a task imposed upon my honour. But
all the researches to discover this lady which I have instituted stop
at a certain date, with this information,--viz., that she corresponded
occasionally with the late Marquis de Rochebriant; that he habitually
preserved the letters of his correspondents; and that these letters were
severally transmitted to you at his decease."

Alain's face had taken a very grave expression while Graham spoke, and
he now replied with a mixture of haughtiness and embarrassment:

"The boxes containing the letters my father received and preserved
were sent to me as you say--the larger portion of them were from
ladies--sorted and labelled, so that in glancing at any letter in each
packet I could judge of the general tenor of these in the same packet
without the necessity of reading them. All packets of that kind,
Monsieur Vane, I burned. I do not remember any letters signed 'Marigny!"

"I perfectly understand, my dear Marquis, that you would destroy all
letters which your father himself would have destroyed if his last
illness had been sufficiently prolonged. But I do not think the letters
I mean would have come under that classification; probably they were
short, and on matters of business relating to some third person--some
person, for instance, of the name of Louise, or of Duval!"

"Stop! let me think. I have a vague remembrance of one or two letters
which rather perplexed me, they were labelled, 'Louise D--. Mem.: to
make further inquiries as to the fate of her uncle.'"

"Marquis, these are the letters I seek. Thank heaven, you have not
destroyed them?"

"No; there was no reason why I should destroy, though I really cannot
state precisely any reason why I kept them. I have a very vague
recollection of their existence."

"I entreat you to allow me at least a glance at the handwriting, and
compare it with that of a letter I have about me; and if the several
handwritings correspond, I would ask you to let me have the address,
which, according to your father's memorandum, will be found in the
letters you have preserved."

"To compliance with such a request I not only cannot demur, but perhaps
it may free me from some responsibility which I might have thought the
letters devolved upon my executorship. I am sure they did not concern
the honour of any woman of any family, for in that case I must have
burned them."

"Ah, Marquis, shake hands there! In such concord between man and man,
there is more entente cordiale between England and France than there was
at Sebastopol. Now let me compare the handwritings."

"The box that contained the letters is not here--I left it at
Rochebriant; I will telegraph to my aunt to send it; the day after
to-morrow it will no doubt arrive. Breakfast with me that day--say at
one o'clock, and after breakfast the Box!"

"How can I thank you?"

"Thank me! but you said your honour was concerned in your
request--requests affecting honour between men comma il faut is a
ceremony of course, like a bow between them. One bows, the other returns
the bow--no thanks on either side. Now that we have done with that
matter, let me say that I thought your wish for our interview originated
in a very different cause."

"What could that be?"

"Nay, do you not recollect that last talk between us, when with such
loyalty you spoke to me about Mademoiselle Cicogna, and supposing that
there might be rivalship between us, retracted all that you might have
before said to warn me against fostering the sentiment with which she
had inspired me; even at the first slight glance of a face which cannot
be lightly forgotten by those who have once seen it."

"I recollect perfectly every word of that talk, Marquis," answered
Graham, calmly, but with his hand concealed within his vest and pressed
tightly to his heart. The warning of Mrs. Morley flashed upon him. "Was
this the man to seize the prize he had put aside--this man, younger than
himself--handsomer than himself--higher in rank?"

"I recollect that talk, Marquis! Well, what then?"

"In my self-conceit I supposed that you might have heard how much I
admired Mademoiselle Cicogna--how, having not long since met her at the
house of Duplessis (who by the way writes me word that I shall meet you
chez lui tomorrow), I have since sought her society wherever there was a
chance to find it. You may have heard, at our club, or elsewhere, how I
adore her genius--how, I say, that nothing so Breton--that is, so
pure and so lofty--has appeared and won readers since the days of
Chateaubriand,--and--you, knowing that les absents ont toujours tort,
come to me and ask Monsieur de Rochebriant, Are we rivals? I expected a
challenge--you relieve my mind--you abandon the field to me?"

At the first I warned the reader how improved from his old mauvaise
honte a year or so of Paris life would make our beau Marquis. How a year
or two of London life with its horsey slang and its fast girls of the
period would have vulgarised an English Rochebriant! Graham gnawed his
lips and replied quietly, "I do not challenge! Am I to congratulate
you?"

"No, that brilliant victory is not for me. I thought that was made clear
in the conversation I have referred to. But if you have done me the
honour to be jealous I am exceedingly flattered. Speaking, seriously, if
I admired Mademoiselle Cicogna when you and I last met, the admiration
is increased by the respect with which I regard a character so simply
noble. How many women older than she would have been spoiled by the
adulation that has followed her literary success!--how few women so
young, placed in a position so critical, having the courage to lead
a life so independent, would have maintained the dignity of their
character free from a single indiscretion! I speak not from my own
knowledge, but from the report of all, who would be pleased enough to
censure if they could find a cause. Good society is the paradise of
mauvaises langues."

Graham caught Alain's hand and pressed it, but made no answer.

The young Marquis continued:

"You will pardon me for speaking thus freely in the way that I would
wish any friend to speak of the demoiselle who might become my wife.
I owe you much, not only for the loyalty with which you address me in
reference to this young lady, but for words affecting my own position
in France, which sank deep into my mind--saved me from deeming myself
a proscrit in my own land--filled me with a manly ambition, not stifled
amidst the thick of many effeminate follies--and, in fact, led me to the
career which is about to open before me, and in which my ancestors have
left me no undistinguished examples. Let us speak, then, a coeur ouvert,
as one friend to another. Has there been any misunderstanding between
you and Mademoiselle Cicogna which has delayed your return to Paris? If
so, is it over now?"

"There has been no such misunderstanding."

"Do you doubt whether the sentiments you expressed in regard to her when
we met last year, are returned?"

"I have no right to conjecture her sentiments. You mistake altogether."

"I do not believe that I am dunce enough to mistake your feelings
towards Mademoiselle--they may be read in your face at this moment.
Of course I do not presume to hazard a conjecture as to those of
Mademoiselle towards yourself. But when I met her not long since at the
house of Duplessis, with whose daughter she is intimate, I chanced to
speak to her of you; and if I may judge, by looks and manner, I chose no
displeasing theme. You turn away--I offend you?"

"Offend!--no, indeed; but on this subject I am not prepared to converse.
I came to Paris on matters of business much complicated and which ought
to absorb my attention. I cannot longer trespass on your evening. The
day after to-morrow, then, I will be with you at one o'clock."

"Yes, I hope then to have the letters you wish to consult; and,
meanwhile, we meet to-morrow at the Hotel Duplessis."




CHAPTER VI.

Graham had scarcely quitted Alain, and the young Marquis was about to
saunter forth to his club, when Duplessis was announced.

These two men had naturally seen much of each other since Duplessis had
returned from Bretagne and delivered Alain from the gripe of Louvier.
Scarcely a day had passed but what Alain had been summoned to enter into
the financier's plans for the aggrandisement of the Rochebriant
estates, and delicately made to feel that he had become a partner in
speculations, which, thanks to the capital and the abilities Duplessis
brought to bear, seemed likely to result in the ultimate freedom of his
property from all burdens, and the restoration of his inheritance to a
splendour correspondent with the dignity of his rank.

On the plea that his mornings were chiefly devoted to professional
business, Duplessis arranged that these consultations should take place
in the evenings. From those consultations Valerie was not banished;
Duplessis took her into the council as a matter of course. "Valerie,"
said the financier to Alain, "though so young, has a very clear head for
business, and she is so interested in all that interests myself, that
even where I do not take her opinion, I at least feel my own made
livelier and brighter by her sympathy."

So the girl was in the habit of taking her work or her book into the
cabinet de travail, and never obtruding a suggestion unasked, still,
when appealed to, speaking with a modest good sense which justified her
father's confidence and praise; and a propos of her book, she had taken
Chateaubriand into peculiar favour. Alain had respectfully presented to
her beautifully bound copies of Atala and Ls Genie du Christianisme;
it is astonishing, indeed, how he had already contrived to regulate
her tastes in literature. The charms of those quiet family evenings had
stolen into the young Breton's heart.

He yearned for none of the gayer reunions in which he had before sought
for a pleasure that his nature had not found; for, amidst the amusements
of Paris, Alain remained intensely Breton--viz., formed eminently for
the simple joys of domestic life, associating the sacred hearthstone
with the antique religion of his fathers; gathering round it all the
images of pure and noble affections which the romance of a poetic
temperament had evoked from the solitude which had surrounded a
melancholy boyhood-an uncontaminated youth.

Duplessis entered abruptly, and with a countenance much disturbed from
its wonted saturnine composure.

"Marquis, what is this I have just heard from the Duchesse de Tarascon?
Can it be? You ask military service in this ill-omened war?--you?"

"My dear and best friend," said Alain, very much startled, "I should
have thought that you, of all men in the world, would have most approved
of my request--you, so devoted an Imperialist--you, indignant that the
representative of one of these families, which the First Napoleon
so eagerly and so vainly courted, should ask for the grade of
sous-lieutenant in the armies of Napoleon the Third--you, who of all men
know how ruined are the fortunes of a Rochebriant--you, feel surprised
that he clings to the noblest heritage his ancestors have left to
him--their sword! I do not understand you."

"Marquis," said Duplessis, seating himself, and regarding Alain with
a look in which were blended the sort of admiration and the sort of
contempt with which a practical man of the world, who, having himself
gone through certain credulous follies, has learned to despise the
follies, but retains a reminiscence of sympathy with the fools they
bewitch, "Marquis, pardon me; you talk finely, but you do not talk
common sense. I should be extremely pleased if your Legitimist scruples
had allowed you to solicit, or rather to accept, a civil appointment
not unsuited to your rank, under the ablest sovereign, as a civilian,
to whom France can look for rational liberty combined with established
order. Such openings to a suitable career you have rejected; but who
on earth could expect you, never trained to military service, to draw
a sword hitherto sacred to the Bourbons, on behalf of a cause which
the madness, I do not say of France but of Paris, has enforced on a
sovereign against whom you would fight to-morrow if you had a chance of
placing the descendant of Henry IV. on his throne."

"I am not about to fight for any sovereign, but for my country against
the foreigner."

"An excellent answer if the foreigner had invaded your country; but
it seems that your country is going to invade the foreigner--a very
different thing. Chut! all this discussion is most painful to me. I feel
for the Emperor a personal loyalty, and for the hazards he is about to
encounter a prophetic dread, as an ancestor of yours might have felt for
Francis I. could he have foreseen Pavia. Let us talk of ourselves and
the effect the war should have upon our individual action. You are
aware, of course, that, though M. Louvier has had notice of our
intention to pay off his mortgage, that intention cannot be carried into
effect for six months; if the money be not then forthcoming his hold on
Rochebriant remains unshaken--the sum is large."

"Alas! yes."

"The war must greatly disturb the money-market, affect many speculative
adventures and operations when at the very moment credit may be most
needed. It is absolutely necessary that I should be daily at my post
on the Bourse, and hourly watch the ebb and flow of events. Under these
circumstances I had counted, permit me to count still, on your presence
in Bretagne. We have already begun negotiations on a somewhat extensive
scale, whether as regards the improvement of forests and orchards, or
the plans for building allotments, as soon as the lands are free for
disposal--for all these the eye of a master is required. I entreat you,
then, to take up your residence at Rochebriant."

"My dear friend, this is but a kindly and delicate mode of relieving me
from the dangers of war. I have, as you must be conscious, no practical
knowledge of business. Hebert can be implicitly trusted, and will carry
out your views with a zeal equal to mine, and with infinitely more
ability."

"Marquis, pray neither to Hercules nor to Hebert; if you wish to get
your own cart out of the ruts, put your own shoulder to the wheel."

Alain coloured high, unaccustomed to be so bluntly addressed, but he
replied with a kind of dignified meekness: "I shall ever remain grateful
for what you have done, and wish to do for me. But, assuming that you
suppose rightly, the estates of Rochebriant would, in your hands, become
a profitable investment, and more than redeem the mortgage, and the sum
you have paid Louvier on my account, let it pass to you irrespectively
of me. I shall console myself in the knowledge that the old place will
be restored, and those who honoured its old owners prosper in hands so
strong, guided by a heart so generous."

Duplessis was deeply affected by these simple words; they seized him on
the tenderest side of his character--for his heart was generous, and
no one, except his lost wife and his loving child, had ever before
discovered it to be so. Has it ever happened to you, reader, to be
appreciated on the one point of the good or the great that is in you--on
which secretly you value yourself most--but for which nobody, not
admitted into your heart of hearts, has given you credit? If that
has happened to you, judge what Duplessis felt when the fittest
representative of that divine chivalry which, if sometimes deficient
in head, owes all that exalts it to riches of heart, spoke thus to the
professional moneymaker, whose qualities of head were so acknowledged
that a compliment to them would be a hollow impertinence, and whose
qualities of heart had never yet received a compliment!

Duplessis started from his seat and embraced Alain, murmuring, "Listen
to me, I love you--I never had a son--be mine--Rochebriant shall be my
daughter's dot."

Alain returned the embrace, and then recoiling, said: "Father, your
first desire must be honour for your son. You have guessed my secret--I
have learned to love Valerie. Seeing her out in the world, she seemed
like other girls, fair and commonplace--seeing her--at your house, I
have said to myself, 'There is the one girl fairer than all others in my
eyes, and the one individual to whom all other girls are commonplace.'"

"Is that true?--is it?"

"True! does a gentilhomme ever lie? And out of that love for her has
grown this immovable desire to be something worthy of her--something
that may lift me from the vulgar platform of men who owe all to
ancestors, nothing to themselves. Do you suppose for one moment that I,
saved from ruin and penury by Valerie's father, could be base enough
to say to her, 'In return be Madame la Marquise de Rochebriant'? Do you
suppose that I, whom you would love and respect as son, could come
to you and say: 'I am oppressed by your favours--I am crippled with
debts--give me your millions and we are quits.' No, Duplessis! You, so
well descended yourself--so superior as man amongst men that you
would have won name and position had you been born the son of a
shoeblack,--you would eternally despise the noble who, in days when
all that we Bretons deem holy in noblesse are subjected to ridicule and
contempt, should so vilely forget the only motto which the scutcheons
of all gentilhommes have in common, 'Noblesse oblige.' War, with all
its perils and all its grandeur,--war lifts on high the banners of
France,--war, in which every ancestor of mine whom I care to recall
aggrandised the name that descends to me. Let me then do as those before
me have done; let me prove that I am worth something in myself, and
then you and I are equals; and I can say with no humbled crest, 'Your
benefits are accepted:' the man who has fought not ignobly for France
may aspire to the hand of her daughter. Give me Valerie; as to her
dot,--be it so, Rochebriant,--it will pass to her children."

"Alain! Alain! my friend! my son!--but if you fall."

"Valerie will give you a nobler son."

Duplessis moved away, sighing heavily; but he said no more in
deprecation of Alain's martial resolves.

A Frenchman, however practical, however worldly, however philosophical
he may be, who does not sympathise with the follies of honour--who
does not concede indulgence to the hot blood of youth when he says, "My
country is insulted and her banner is unfurled," may certainly be a man
of excellent common sense; but if such men had been in the majority,
Gaul would never have been France--Gaul would have been a province of
Germany.

And as Duplessis walked homeward--he the calmest and most far-seeing of
all authorities on the Bourse--the man who, excepting only De Mauleon,
most decidedly deemed the cause of the war a blunder, and most
forebodingly anticipated its issues, caught the prevalent enthusiasm.
Everywhere he was stopped by cordial hands, everywhere met by
congratulating smiles. "How right you have been, Duplessis, when you
have laughed at those who have said, 'The Emperor is ill, decrepit, done
up.'"

"Vive l'Empereur! at least we shall be face to face with those insolent
Prussians!"

Before he arrived at his home, passing along the Boulevards, greeted by
all the groups enjoying the cool night air before the cafes, Duplessis
had caught the war epidemic.

Entering his hotel, he went at once to Valerie's chamber. "Sleep well
to-night, child; Alain has told me that he adores thee, and if he will
go to the war, it is that he may lay his laurels at thy feet. Bless
thee, my child, thou couldst not have made a nobler choice."

Whether, after these words, Valerie slept well or not 'tis not for me
to say; but if she did sleep, I venture to guess that her dreams were
rose-coloured.




CHAPTER VII.

All the earlier part of that next day, Graham Vane remained in-doors--a
lovely day at Paris that 8th of July, and with that summer day
all hearts at Paris were in unison. Discontent was charmed into
enthusiasm--Belleville and Montmartre forgot the visions of Communism
and Socialism and other "isms" not to be realised except in some
undiscovered Atlantis!

The Emperor was the idol of the day--the names of Jules Favre and
Gambetta were by-words of scorn. Even Armand Monnier, still out of work,
beginning to feel the pinch of want, and fierce for any revolution that
might turn topsy-turvy the conditions of labour,--even Armand Monnier
was found among groups that were laying immortelles at the foot of the
column in the Place Vendome, and heard to say to a fellow malcontent,
with eyes uplifted to the statue of the First Napoleon, "Do you not
feel at this moment that no Frenchman can be long angry with the Little
Corporal? He denied La Liberte, but he gave La Gloire."

Heeding not the stir of the world without, Graham was compelling into
one resolve the doubts and scruples which had so long warred against the
heart which they ravaged, but could not wholly subdue.

The conversations with Mrs. Morley and Rochebriant had placed in a light
in which he had not before regarded it, the image of Isaura.

He had reasoned from the starting-point of his love for her, and had
sought to convince himself that against that love it was his duty to
strive.

But now a new question was addressed to his conscience as well as to
his heart. What though he had never formally declared to her his
affection--never, in open words, wooed her as his own--never even
hinted to her the hopes of a union which at one time he had fondly
entertained,--still was it true that his love had been too transparent
not to be detected by her, and not to have led her on to return it?

Certainly he had, as we know, divined that he was not indifferent to
her: at Enghien, a year ago, that he had gained her esteem, and perhaps
interested her fancy.

We know also how he had tried to persuade himself that the artistic
temperament, especially when developed in women, is too elastic to
suffer the things of real life to have lasting influence over happiness
or sorrow,--that in the pursuits in which her thought and imagination
found employ, in the excitement they sustained, and the fame to which
they conduced, Isaura would be readily consoled for a momentary pang
of disappointed affection. And that a man so alien as himself, both by
nature and by habit, from the artistic world, was the very last person
who could maintain deep and permanent impression on her actual life or
her ideal dreams. But what if, as he gathered from the words of the fair
American--what if, in all these assumptions, she was wholly mistaken?
What if, in previously revealing his own heart, he had decoyed
hers--what if, by a desertion she had no right to anticipate, he had
blighted her future? What if this brilliant child of genius could love
as warmly, as deeply, as enduringly as any simple village girl to whom
there is no poetry except love? If this were so--what became the first
claim on his honour, his conscience, his duty?

The force which but a few days ago his reasonings had given to the
arguments that forbade him to think of Isaura, became weaker and weaker,
as now in an altered mood of reflection he resummoned and reweighed
them.

All those prejudices--which had seemed to him such rational common-sense
truths, when translated from his own mind into the words of Lady Janet's
letter,--was not Mrs. Morley right in denouncing them as the crotchets
of an insolent egotism? Was it not rather to the favour than to the
disparagement of Isaura, regarded even in the man's narrow-minded view
of woman's dignity, that this orphan girl could, with character so
unscathed, pass through the trying ordeal of the public babble, the
public gaze-command alike the esteem of a woman so pure as Mrs. Morley,
the reverence of a man so chivalrously sensitive to honour as Alain de
Rochebriant?

Musing thus, Graham's countenance at last brightened--a glorious joy
entered into and possessed him. He felt as a man who had burst asunder
the swathes and trammels which had kept him galled and miserable with
the sense of captivity, and from which some wizard spell that took
strength from his own superstition had forbidden to struggle.

He was free!--and that freedom was rapture!--yes, his resolve was taken.

The day was now far advanced. He should have just time before the dinner
with Duplessis to drive to A------, where he still supposed Isaura
resided. How, as his fiacre rolled along the well-remembered road--how
completely he lived in that world of romance of which he denied himself
to be a denizen.

Arrived at the little villa, he found it occupied only by workmen--it
was under repair. No one could tell him to what residence the ladies who
occupied it the last year had removed.

"I shall learn from Mrs. Morley," thought Graham, and at her house he
called in going back, but Mrs. Morley was not at home; he had only just
time, after regaining his apartment, to change his dress for the
dinner to which he was invited. As it was, he arrived late, and
while apologising to his host for his want of punctuality, his tongue
faltered. At the farther end of the room he saw a face, paler and
thinner than when he had seen it last--a face across which a something
of grief had gone.

The servant announced that dinner was served.

"Mr. Vane," said Duplessis, "will you take into dinner Mademoiselle
Cicogna?"





BOOK XI.




CHAPTER I.

Amoung the frets and checks to the course that "never did run smooth,"
there is one which is sufficiently frequent, for many a reader will
remember the irritation it caused him. You have counted on a meeting
with the beloved one unwitnessed by others, an interchange of
confessions and vows which others may not hear. You have arranged almost
the words in which your innermost heart is to be expressed; pictured to
yourself the very looks by which those words will have their sweetest
reply. The scene you have thus imagined appears to you vivid and
distinct, as if foreshown in a magic glass. And suddenly, after long
absence, the meeting takes place in the midst of a common companionship:
nothing that you wished to say can be said. The scene you pictured is
