is taken directly from Dio all scholars are ready to allow. In regard
to the latter set there have been, and perhaps still are, diverse
opinions. The trouble is that on the one hand these passages do not
end with the reign of Alexander Severus, where Dio manifestly ended
his history, but continue down to Constantine and (since the
manuscript has lost some sheets at the close) possibly much farther:
and on the other hand the style and diction differ considerably from
Dio's own. It was once the fashion to say that as many of the
fragments as come before the reign of Valerian (A.D. 253)[3] came from
Dio's composition, but that the remainder were written by an unknown
author. Now, however, it is generally agreed that all the excerpts of
the second set were the work of one man, whether John of Antioch, or
Peter Patricius, or some third individual. Still, though not direct
quotations from Dio, they are regarded as of value in filling out both
his account and that of Xiphilinus. The words are different, but the
facts remain undoubtedly true.

[Footnote 3: This would give Dio a considerably longer life than is
commonly allowed him.]

The _Excerpts Concerning Embassies_ are contained in somewhat less
than a dozen manuscripts, all of which prove to have sprung from a
Spanish archetype (since destroyed by fire) that Juan Paez de Castro
owned in the sixteenth century. Many of the copies were made by
Andreas Darmarius. The first publisher of these selections was Fulvio
Orsini (= Ursinus), who brought them out at Antwerp in 1582. As their
name indicates, they are accounts of embassies sent either by the
Romans to foreign tribes or by foreign tribes to the Romans. Some of
them are taken from Cassius Dio; hence their importance here.

Now it was the custom of the earlier editors to arrange the (early)
fragments of Dio according to the groups from which they were taken:
(1) the so-called Fragmenta Valesia (pickings from grammarians,
lexicographers, scholiasts), edited by the same Henri de Valois above
mentioned; (2) the Fragmenta Peiresciana (= Excerpts Concerning
Virtues and Vices); (3) the Fragmenta Ursina (= Excerpts Concerning
Embassies); and finally, in the edition of Sturz[4] (4) Excerpta
Vaticana (= Excerpts Concerning Judgments and the now rejected
"Planudean Excerpts"). The above grouping has been abandoned and a
strictly chronological order followed in all the later editions,
including Bekker, Dindorf, Melber, Boissevain.

[Footnote 4: See p. 22.]

The body of Fragments preceding Book Thirty-six cites, in addition to
the collections mentioned, the following works or authors:

Anecdota Graeca of Immanuel Bekker (1785-1871), a scholar of vast
attainments and profound learning in classical literature. These
Anecdota are excerpts made from various Greek manuscripts found in the
course of travels extending through France, Italy, England, and
Germany. There were three volumes, appearing from 1814 to 1821.

Antonio Melissa.--A Greek monk living between 700 and 1100 A.D. He
collected two books of quotations from early Christian Fathers (one
hundred and seventy-six titles) on the general subject of Virtues and
Vices.

Arsenius.--Archbishop of Monembasia: age of the Revival of Learning.

Cedrenus.--A Greek monk of the eleventh century who compiled a
historical work ([Greek: Synopsis historion]) the scope of which
extended from the creation to 1057 A.D. He gives no evidence of
historical knowledge or the critical sense, but rather of great
credulity and a fondness for legends. His treatise is, moreover,
largely plagiarized from the _Annals_ of Ioannes Scylitzes
Curopalates.

Cramer, J.A.--An Oxford scholar who published two collections of
excerpts (similar to those of Bekker) between 1835 and 1841. The
collection referred to in our text had its source in manuscripts of
the Royal Library in Paris. It was in three octavo volumes.

Etymologicum Magnum.--A lexicon of uncertain date, after Photius (886
A.D.) and before Eustathius. This dictionary contains many valuable
citations from lost Greek works. First edition, Venice, 1499.

Eustathius.--Archbishop of Thessalonica and the most learned man of
his age (latter half of the twelfth century). His most important
composition is his _Commentary on Homer's Iliad and Odyssey_ in which
he quotes vast numbers of authors unknown to us now except by name.
First edition, Rome, 1542-1550.

Glossary of C. Labbaeus, the editor of Ancient Glosses of Law Terms,
published in Paris, 1606.

John of Antioch.--Author of a work called "Chronological History from
Adam" quoted in the _Excerpts Concerning Virtues and Vices_ (vid.
supra). Internal evidence indicates that the book was written after
610 and before 900 A.D.

John of Damascus.--A voluminous ecclesiastical writer belonging to the
reigns of Leo Isauricus and Constantine VII. (approximately from 700
to 750 A.D.). He was an opponent of the iconoclastic movement. The
best edition of his works was published at Paris in 1712. The passage
cited in our Fragments is from [Greek: peri Drakonton], a mutilated
essay on dragons standing between a "Dialogue Between a Saracen and a
Christian" and a "Discussion of the Holy Trinity."

John Laurentius Lydus.--A Byzantine writer, born at Philadelphia (the
city of Revelation, III, 7), in 490 A.D. Although he was famed during
his lifetime as a poet, all his verses have perished. The work cited
in our Fragments,--"Concerning the Offices of the Roman Republic, in
Three Books,"--had a curious history. For centuries it was regarded as
lost, but about 1785 nine tenths of it was discovered by De Villoison
in a MS. in the suburbs of Constantinople. It was published in Paris,
1811.--Laurentius in the course of his career held important political
posts and received two important literary appointments from the
Emperor Justinian I.

Suidas.--A lexicographer of the tenth century, composer of the most
comprehensive Greek dictionary of early times. It is a manual at once
of language and of antiquities. Inestimable as its value is, the
workmanship is careless and uneven. The arrangement is alphabetical.

John Tzetzes.--A Greek grammarian of the twelfth century. His learning
was great but scarcely equaled his self-conceit, as repeatedly
displayed in passages of his works. Many of his writings are still
extant. One of these is called _Chiliades_ (or _Thousands_), a name
bestowed by its first editor, who divided the work into sections of
one thousand lines each. The subject-matter consists of the most
miscellaneous historical or mythological narratives or anecdotes,
absolutely without connection. Tzetzes copied these accounts from
upward of four hundred writers,--one of them being Cassius Dio. The
_Chiliades_ is written in the so-called _Versus politicus_, or
"political verse," which is really not verse at all, but a kind of
decadent doggerel.--A minor treatise by the same author is the
_Exegesis of the Iliad of Homer_, published by Hermann (Leipzig,
1812).

Isaac Tzetzes, who has attracted less attention than his brother John,
is best known as the author of a commentary on the _Cassandra_ of
Lycophron (a poem of 1474 iambic verses by a post-classical tragedian,
about 285 B.C., embodying the warnings of the royal prophetess and
couched in appropriately incomprehensible expressions). It was hardly
worth all the care that Tzetzes lavished upon it. From manuscript
evidence and various claims of John Tzetzes it seems that John worked
over, improved, and enlarged the commentary of his brother. Isaac's
name, however, still remains associated with this particular
exposition.

We are now at length placed in a position to consider the condition
of the ultimate portion of the work, i.e., the last twenty books,
Sixty-one to Eighty inclusive. In general it may be said that for this
section of the history we are thrown back upon an epitome of Ioannes
Xiphilinus, who lived about fifty years earlier than the Ioannes
Zonaras recently under discussion. To this general statement there are
two important exceptions. First, even as early as Xiphilinus wrote
(eleventh century) nearly two books of this last portion had perished.
Book Seventy, containing the reign of Antoninus Pius, was entirely
gone save a few miserable chapters, and Book Seventy-one had suffered
the same fate in its beginning, so that our account of the renowned
Marcus Aurelius begins practically with the year 172 instead of 161.
The gap thus created has been partially filled by extracts of every
conceivable quality and merit, from Suidas, from John of Antioch, even
from Asinius Quadratus. This on the side of loss: on the side of gain
there are numerous little excerpts (just as in the case of the early
books) that may serve to fill crevices or cover scars, and above all
there exists a parchment manuscript, known as Vaticanus 1288, older
than Mediceus A, older than Venetus A, and containing Books
Seventy-eight and Seventy-nine probably very much as Dio wrote them,
save that the account is mutilated at beginning and end.

Boissevain concludes (by comparing the Table of Contents found with a
remark of Photius) that this particular piece of salvage was
originally Books Seventy-nine and Eighty (instead of Seventy-eight and
Seventy-nine), that Book Eighty of Dio was really what is now
commonly called Seventy-nine _and_ Eighty, and that the so-called Book
Eighty (of only five chapters) was but a kind of epilogue to the whole
work. Whatever we may decide respecting the merits of his argument,
the important fact is that here for a short distance we have Dio's
original narrative, as in Books Thirty-six to Sixty, and are no longer
obliged to depend upon epitomes.

A word of explanation about Xiphilinus must come next. This Xiphilinus
was a native of Trapezos (Trebizond) and became a monk at
Constantinople. Here, at the behest of Michael VII. Ducas (1071-1078)
he made an abridgment of Books Thirty-six to Eighty of Dio; thus it is
his version of the lost books Sixty-one to Eighty on which we are
compelled to rely. His task was accomplished with an even greater
degree of carelessness than is customary in such compositions, and it
may be said that his ability or, at least, his good will is not nearly
so great as that of Zonaras. Yet he is largely a _pis aller_ for the
would-be reader of Cassius Dio.

Whereas the original was divided arbitrarily into books, Xiphilinus
divided his condensation into "sections," each containing the life of
one emperor. Readers must further note that the present division of
Books Seventy-one to Eighty dates only from Leunclavius (1592, first
edition) and is not necessarily correct. Improvements in arrangement
by Boissevain (latest editor of Dio entire) are indicated in the
present translation, though for convenience of reference the old
headlines are still retained.

Before speaking of the editions through which Dio's _Roman History_
has passed it seems desirable to summarize briefly the condition of
the whole as explained in the preceding pages. Here is a bird's-eye
view of the whole situation.

Books  1-21 exist in Zonaras and various fragments.
  "   22-35 exist in fragments only.
  "   36-54 exist in Dio's own words, and are
              found in universally approved MSS.
  "   54-60 exist in generally approved MSS.
  "   60-69 exist in Xiphilinus and excerpts.
Book     70 exists in fragments only.
Books 71-77 exist in Xiphilinus and excerpts.
  "  78, 79 exist in Dio's own words (oldest MS).
Book     80 exists in Xiphilinus.


EDITIONS.

A brief list of important editions of this author is appended; the
order is chronological.

1. N. Leonicenus.--Italian translation of Books 35 to 60. Venice,
1533. Free, and with many errors.

2. R. Stephanus.--Greek text of Books 35 to 60. Paris, 1548. Work well
done, but based on a poor MS.

3. Xylander.--Latin translation of Books 35 to 60, with a brief Latin
index. Basle, 1557. This version was made from No. 2.

4. Baldelli.--Italian translation of Books 35 to 60. Venice, 1562.

5. H. Stephanus.--A second edition of No. 2 with Latin translation of
No. 2 added. A few corrections have been made and the Latin index is a
little fuller. Paris, 1591.

6. Leunclavius.--A second edition of No. 3, somewhat emended, _and
with Books 61 to 80 (Xiphilinus) added_; also containing _Orsini's
Excerpts Concerning Embassies_ (in Greek and Latin), notes of
Leunclavius, and a still fuller Latin index. Frankfurt, 1592.

7. Leunclavius.--Posthumous edition. Text of Dio and of Xiphilinus
(the latter from Nero to Alexander Severus). Corrections of R.
Stephanus in Dio proper, and of Xylander in both Dio and Xiphilinus,
notes of Leunclavius on Dio, and notes of Orsini on _Excerpts
Concerning Embassies_. Same Latin index as in No. 6. Hanover, 1606.

8. REIMAR. (Important. All previous editions are taken from codex
Parisinus B. Reimar, assisted by Gronovius (father and son) and by
Quirinus, employed Mediceus A (the standard codex) together with
Vaticanus A and Vaticanus B.) Text of Dio and Xiphilinus (Books 36 to
80), the Xylander-Leunclavius Latin version, the _Excerpts Concerning
Virtues and Vices_, and fragments collected from various sources by
Henri de Valois. Reimar used not only the three MSS. mentioned above,
but three copies of previous editions,--one of No. 2 (with notes of
Turnebus and others), one of No. 5 (with, notes of Oddey), and one of
No. 7 (with notes of an unknown individual of much learning, cited by
Reimar and in this edition as _N_). Finally he gathered all possible
emendations from as many as fourteen scholars who had suggested
improvements in the text. Hamburg, 1750.

9. J.A. Wagner.--German translation in five volumes. Frankfurt, 1783.

10. Penzel.--German translation with notes. Four volumes. Leipzig,
1786-1818.

11. Morellius.--Fragments of Dio, with new readings of the same.
Emphasizes the importance of codex Venetus A and has some remarks on
Venetus B. Published in 1793.

12. Sturz.--New edition of Dio based on No. 8, improved by a new
collation of the Medicean manuscripts and with collation of the codex
Turinensis, besides emendations gathered from many new sources. Eight
volumes. Leipzig, 1824-5. (Volume IX in 1843, containing Mai's
_Excerpts Concerning Judgments_.)

13. Tauchnitz text.--Stereotyped edition, four volumes, Leipzig, 1829.
New impression, Leipzig, 1870-77. (Originally used as a basis for the
present translation after Book Fifty: later, wholesale revisions were
undertaken to make the English for the most part conform to the text
of Boissevain.)

14. Tafel.--German translation, three volumes. Stuttgart, 1831-1844.

15. J. Bekker.--Dio entire. (With new collation of the old MS.
containing most of Books Seventy-eight and Seventy-nine, and with many
new and brilliant conjectural emendations by the editor.) Two volumes.
Leipzig, 1849.

16. Gros-Boissee.--French translation together with the Greek text and
copious notes. (With new collation of the Vatican, Medicean, and
Venetian codices, besides use of Parisinus A and Vesontinus;
manuscripts of the Fragments, especially the Tours manuscript
(concerning Virtues and Vices) have been carefully gone over.) Ten
volumes. Gros edited the first four; Boissee the last six. Paris,
1845-1870.

17. Dindorf.--Teubner text. Dindorf was the first to perceive the
relation of the manuscripts and their respective values. He used
Herwerden's new collation of the Vatican palimpsest containing
_Excerpts Concerning Judgments_. From making fuller notes and
emendations he was prevented by untimely death. Five volumes. Leipzig,
1863-1865.

18. Melber.--Teubner text, being a new recension of Dindorf, with
numerous additions. To consist of five volumes. Leipzig, from 1890.
The first two volumes, all that were available, have been used for
this translation.

19. Boissevain.--The most modern, accurate, and artistic edition of
Dio. The editor is very conservative in the matter of manuscript
tradition. He personally read in Italy many of the MSS., and had the
aid of numerous friends at home and abroad in collating MSS., besides
the help of a few in the suggestion of new readings. In the later
portion of the text he makes a new division of books, and essays also
to assign the early fragments to their respective books. Three
volumes. Berlin, 1895, 1898, 1901. Vol. I, pp. 359 + cxxvi; Vol. II,
pp. 690 + xxxi; Vol. III, pp. 800 + xviii. The second volume contains
two phototype facsimiles of pages of the Laurentian and Marcian MSS.,
and the third volume three similar specimens of the Codex Vaticanus.
In the appendix of the last volume are found, in the order named, the
following aids to the study of Dio.

     1. The _entire_ epitome of Xiphilinus (Books 36-80).

     2. Vatican Excerpts of Peter Patricius (Nos. 1-38), compared
     with Dio's wording.

     3. Vatican Excerpts of Peter Patricius (Nos. 156-191),
     containing that portion of the Historia Augusta which is
     subsequent to Dio's narrative.

     4. Excerpts by John of Antioch, taken from Dio.
