    Wrapt a thick mist, a mantle of dark air,
    That none should see them, none should touch nor stay,
    Nor, urging idle questions, breed delay.
    Then back, rejoicing, through the liquid air
    To Paphos and her home she flies away,
    Where, steaming with Sabaean incense rare,
An hundred altars breathe with garlands fresh and fair.

LVI. They by the path their forward steps pursued,
    And climbed a hill, whose fronting summit frowned
    Steep o'er the town. Amazed, AEneas viewed
    Tall structures rise, where whilom huts were found,
    The streets, the gates, the bustle and the sound.
    Hotly the Tyrians are at work. These draw
    The bastions' lines, roll stones and trench the ground;
    Or build the citadel; those clothe with awe
The Senate; there they choose the judges for the law.

LVII. These delve the port; the broad foundations there
    They lay for theatres of ample space,
    And columns, hewn from marble rocks, prepare,
    Tall ornaments, the future stage to grace.
    As bees in early summer swarm apace
    Through flowery fields, when forth from dale and dell
    They lead the full-grown offspring of the race,
    Or with the liquid honey store each cell,
And make the teeming hive with nectarous sweets to swell.

LVIII. These ease the comers of their loads, those drive
    The drones afar. The busy work each plies,
    And sweet with thyme and honey smells the hive.
    "O happy ye, whose walls already rise!"
    Exclaimed AEneas, and with envious eyes
    Looked up where pinnacles and roof-tops showed
    The new-born city; then in wondrous wise,
    Clothed in the covering of the friendly cloud,
Passed through the midst unseen, and mingled with the crowd.

LIX. A grove stood in the city, rich in shade,
    Where storm-tost Tyrians, past the perilous brine,
    Dug from the ground, by royal Juno's aid,
    A war-steed's head, to far-off days a sign
    That wealth and prowess should adorn the line.
    Here, by the goddess and her gifts renowned,
    Sidonian Dido built a stately shrine.
    All brazen rose the threshold; brass was round
The door-posts; brazen doors on grating hinges sound.

LX. Here a new sight AEneas' hopes upraised,
    And fear was softened, and his heart was mann'd.
    For while, the queen awaiting, round he gazed,
    And marvelled at the happy town, and scanned
    The rival labours of each craftsman's hand,
    Behold, Troy's battles on the walls appear,
    The war, since noised through many a distant land,
    There Priam and th' Atridae twain, and here
Achilles, fierce to both, still ruthless and severe.

LXI. Pensive he stood, and with a rising tear,
    "What lands, Achates, on the earth, but know
    Our labours? See our Priam! Even here
    Worth wins her due, and there are tears to flow,
    And human hearts to feel for human woe.
    Fear not," he cries, "Troy's glory yet shall gain
    Some safety." Thus upon the empty show
    He feeds his soul, while ever and again
Deeply he sighs, and tears run down his cheeks like rain.

LXII. He sees, how, fighting round the Trojan wall,
    Here fled the Greeks, the Trojan youth pursue,
    Here fled the Phrygians, and, with helmet tall,
    Achilles in his chariot stormed and slew.
    Not far, with tears, the snowy tents he knew
    Of Rhesus, where Tydides, bathed in blood,
    Broke in at midnight with his murderous crew,
    And drove the hot steeds campward, ere the food
Of Trojan plains they browsed, or drank the Xanthian flood.

LXIII. There, reft of arms, poor Troilus, rash to dare
    Achilles, by his horses dragged amain,
    Hangs from his empty chariot. Neck and hair
    Trail on the ground; his hand still grasps the rein;
    The spear inverted scores the dusty plain.
    Meanwhile, with beaten breasts and streaming hair,
    The Trojan dames, a sad and suppliant train,
    The veil to partial Pallas' temple bear.
Stern, with averted eyes the Goddess spurns their prayer.

LXIV. Thrice had Achilles round the Trojan wall
    Dragged Hector; there the slayer sells the slain.
    Sighing he sees him, chariot, arms and all,
    And Priam, spreading helpless hands in vain.
    Himself he knows among the Greeks again,
    Black Memnon's arms, and all his Eastern clan,
    Penthesilea's Amazonian train
    With moony shields. Bare-breasted, in the van,
Girt with a golden zone, the maiden fights with man.

LXV. Thus while AEneas, with set gaze and long,
    Hangs, mute with wonder, on the wildering scene,
    Lo! to the temple, with a numerous throng
    Of youthful followers, moves the beauteous Queen.
    Such as Diana, with her Oreads seen
    On swift Eurotas' banks or Cynthus' crest,
    Leading the dances. She, in form and mien,
    Armed with her quiver, towers above the rest,
And tranquil pleasure thrills Latona's silent breast.

LXVI. E'en such was Dido; so with joyous mien,
    Urging the business of her rising state,
    Among the concourse passed the Tyrian queen;
    Then, girt with guards, within the temple's gate
    Beneath the centre of the dome she sate.
    There, ministering justice, she presides,
    And deals the law, and from her throne of state,
    As choice determines or as chance decides,
To each, in equal share, his separate task divides.

LXVII. Sudden, behold a concourse. Looking down,
    His late-lost friends AEneas sees again,
    Sergestus, brave Cloanthus of renown,
    Antheus and others of the Trojan train,
    Whom the black squall had scattered o'er the main,
    And driven afar upon an alien strand.
    At once, 'twixt joy and terror rent in twain,
    Amazed, AEneas and Achates stand,
And long to greet old friends and clasp a comrade's hand.

LXVIII. Yet wildering wonder at so strange a scene
    Still holds them mute, while anxious thoughts divide
    Their doubtful minds, and in the cloud unseen,
    Wrapt in its hollow covering, they abide
    And note what fortune did their friends betide,
    And whence they come, and why for grace they sue,
    And on what shore they left the fleet to bide,
    For chosen captains came from every crew,
And towards the sacred fane with clamorous cries they drew.

LXIX. Then, audience granted, as the fane they filled,
    Thus calmly spake the eldest of the train,
    Ilioneus: "O queen, whom Jove hath willed
    To found this new-born city, here to reign,
    And stubborn tribes with justice to refrain,
    We, Troy's poor fugitives, implore thy grace,
    Storm-tost and wandering over every main,--
    Forbid the flames our vessels to deface,
Mark our afflicted plight, and spare a pious race.

LXX. "We come not hither with the sword to rend
    Your Libyan homes, and shoreward drive the prey.
    Nay, no such violence our thoughts intend,
    Such pride suits not the vanquished. Far away
    There lies a place--Greeks style the land to-day
    Hesperia--fruitful and of ancient fame
    And strong in arms. OEnotrian folk, they say,
    First tilled the soil. Italian is the name
Borne by the later race, with Italus who came.

LXXI. "Thither we sailed, when, rising with the wave,
    Orion dashed us on the shoals, the prey
    Of wanton winds, and mastering billows drave
    Our vessels on the pathless rocks astray.
    We few have floated to your shore. O say,
    What manner of mankind is here? What land
    Is this, to treat us in this barbarous way?
    They grudge the very shelter of the sand,
And call to arms and bar our footsteps from the strand!

LXXII. "If human kind and mortal arms ye scorn,
    Think of the Gods, who judge the wrong and right.
    A king was ours, AEneas; ne'er was born
    A man more just, more valiant in the fight,
    More famed for piety and deeds of might.
    If yet he lives and looks upon the sun,
    Nor cruel death hath snatched him from the light,
    No fear have we, nor need hast thou to shun
A Trojan guest, or rue kind offices begun.

LXXIII. "Towns yet for us in Sicily remain,
    And arms, and, sprung from Trojan sires of yore,
    Our kinsman there, Acestes, holds his reign.
    Grant us to draw our scattered fleet ashore,
    And fit new planks and branches for the oar.
    So, if with king and comrades brought again,
    The Fates allow us to reach Italia's shore,
    Italia gladly and the Latian plain
Seek we; but else, if thoughts of safety be in vain,

LXXIV. "If thee, dear Sire, the Libyan deep doth hide,
    Nor hopes of young Iulus more can cheer,
    Back let our barks to the Sicanian tide
    And proffered homes and king Acestes steer."
    He spake; the Dardans answered with a cheer.
    Then Dido thus, with downcast look sedate;
    "Take courage, Trojans, and dismiss your fear.
    My kingdom's newness and the stress of Fate
Force me to guard far off the frontiers of my state.

LXXV. "Who knows not Troy, th' AEneian house of fame,
    The deeds and doers, and the war's renown
    That fired the world? Not hearts so dull and tame
    Have Punic folk; not so is Phoebus known
    To turn his back upon our Tyrian town.
    Whether ye sail to great Hesperia's shore
    And Saturn's fields, or seek the realms that own
    Acestes' sway, where Eryx reigned of yore,
Safe will I send you hence, and speed you with my store.

LXXVI. "Else, would ye settle in this realm, the town
    I build is yours; draw up your ships to land.
    Trojan and Tyrian will I treat as one.
    Would that your king AEneas here could stand,
    Driven by the gale that drove you to this strand!
    Natheless, to scour the country, will I send
    Some trusty messengers, with strict command
    To search through Libya to the furthest end,
Lest, cast ashore, through town or lonely wood he wend."

LXXVII. Roused by these words, long since the sire of Troy
    Yearned, like his friend, their comrades to surprise
    And burst the cloud. Then first with eager joy
    "O Goddess-born," the bold Achates cries,
    "How now--what purpose doth thy mind devise?
    Lo! all are safe--ships, comrades brought again;
    One only fails us, who before our eyes
    Sank in the midst of the engulfing main.
All else confirms the tale thy mother told thee plain."

LXXVIII. Scarce had he said, when straight the ambient cloud
    Broke open, melting into day's clear light,
    And bathed in sunshine stood the chief, endowed
    With shape and features most divinely bright.
    For graceful tresses and the purple light
    Of youth did Venus in her child unfold,
    And sprightly lustre breathed upon his sight,
    Beauteous as ivory, or when artists mould
Silver or Parian stone, enchased in yellow gold.

LXXIX. Then to the queen, all wondering, he exclaimed,
    "Behold me, Troy's AEneas; I am here,
    The man ye seek, from Libyan waves reclaimed.
    Thou, who alone Troy's sorrows deign'st to hear,
    And us, the gleanings of the Danaan spear,
    Poor world-wide wanderers and in desperate case,
    Hast ta'en to share thy city and thy cheer,
    Meet thanks nor we, nor what of Dardan race
Yet roams the earth, can give to recompense thy grace.

LXXX. "The gods, if gods the good and just regard,
    And thy own conscience, that approves the right,
    Grant thee due guerdon and a fit reward.
    What happy ages did thy birth delight?
    What godlike parents bore a child so bright?
    While running rivers hasten to the main,
    While yon pure ether feeds the stars with light,
    While shadows round the hill-slopes wax and wane,
Thy fame, where'er I go, thy praises shall remain."

LXXXI. So saying AEneas with his left hand pressed
    Serestus, and Ilioneus with his right,
    Brave Gyas, brave Cloanthus and the rest.
    Then Dido, struck with wonder at the sight
    Of one so great and in so strange a plight,
    "O Goddess-born! what fate through dangers sore,
    What force to savage coasts compels thy flight?
    Art thou, then, that AEneas, whom of yore
Venus on Simois' banks to old Anchises bore?

LXXXII. "Ay, well I mind me how in days of yore
    To Sidon exiled Teucer crossed the main,
    To seek new kingdoms and the aid implore
    Of Belus. He, my father Belus, then
    Ruled Cyprus, victor of the wasted plain,
    Since then thy name and Ilion's fate are known,
    And all the princes of Pelasgia's reign.
    Himself, a foe, oft lauded Troy's renown,
And claimed the Teucrian sires as kinsmen of his own.

LXXXIII. "Welcome, then, heroes! Me hath Fortune willed
    Long tost, like you, through sufferings, here to rest
    And find at length a refuge. Not unskilled
    In woe, I learn to succour the distrest."
    So to the palace she escorts her guest,
    And calls for festal honours in the shrine.
    Then shoreward sends beeves twenty to the rest,
    A hundred boars, of broad and bristly chine,
A hundred lambs and ewes and gladdening gifts of wine.

LXXXIV. Meanwhile with regal splendour they arrayed
    The palace-hall, where feast and banquet high
    All in the centre of the space is laid,
    And forth they bring the broidered tapestry,
    With purple dyed and wrought full cunningly.
    The tables groan with silver; there are told
    The deeds of prowess for the gazer's eye,
    A long, long series, of their sires of old,
Traced from the nation's birth, and graven in the gold.

LXXXV. But good AEneas--for a father's care
    No rest allows him--to the ships sends down
    Achates, to Ascanius charged to bear
    The welcome news, and bring him to the town.
    The father's fondness centres on the son.
    Rich presents, too, he sends for, saved of old
    From Troy, a veil, whose saffron edges shone
    Fringed with acanthus, glorious to behold,
A broidered mantle, stiff with figures wrought in gold.

LXXXVI. Fair Helen's ornaments, from Argos brought,
    The gift of Leda, when the Trojan shore
    And lawless nuptials o'er the waves she sought.
    Therewith the royal sceptre, which of yore
    Ilione, Priam's eldest daughter, bore;
    Her shining necklace, strung with costly beads,
    And diadem, rimmed with gold and studded o'er
    With sparkling gems. Thus charged, Achates heeds,
And towards the ships forthwith in eager haste proceeds.

LXXXVII. But crafty Cytherea planned meanwhile
    New arts, new schemes,--that Cupid should conspire,
    In likeness of Ascanius, to beguile
    The queen with gifts, and kindle fierce desire,
    And turn the marrow of her bones to fire.
    Fierce Juno's hatred rankles in her breast;
    The two-faced house, the double tongues of Tyre
    She fears, and with the night returns unrest;
So now to winged Love this mandate she addressed:

LXXXVIII. "O son, sole source of all my strength and power,
    Who durst high Jove's Typhoean bolts disdain,
    To thee I fly, thy deity implore.
    Thou know'st, who oft hast sorrowed with my pain,
    How, tost by Juno's rancour, o'er the main
    Thy brother wanders. Him with speeches fair
    And sweet allurements doth the queen detain;
    But Juno's hospitality I fear;
Scarce at an hour like this will she her hand forbear.

LXXXIX. "Soft snares I purpose round the queen to weave,
    And wrap her soul in flames, that power malign
    Shall never change her, but her heart shall cleave
    Fast to AEneas with a love like mine.
    Now learn, how best to compass my design.
    To Tyrian Carthage hastes the princely boy,
    Prompt at the summons of his sire divine,
    My prime solicitude, my chiefest joy,
Fraught with brave store of gifts, saved from the flames of Troy.

XC. "Him on Idalia, lulled into a dream,
    Will I secrete, or on the sacred height
    Of lone Cythera, lest he learn the scheme,
    Or by his sudden presence mar the sleight.
    Take thou his likeness, only for a night,
    And wear the boyish features that are thine;
    And when the queen, in rapture of delight,
    Amid the royal banquet and the wine,
Shall lock thee in her arms, and press her lips to thine,

XCI. "Then steal into her bosom, and inspire
    Through all her veins with unsuspected sleight
    The poisoned sting of passion and desire."
    Young Love obeys, and doffs his plumage light,
    And, like Iulus, trips forth with delight.
    She o'er Ascanius rains a soft repose,
    And gently bears him to Idalia's height,
    Where breathing marjoram around him throws
Sweet shade, and odorous flowers his slumbering limbs compose.

XCII. Forth Cupid, at his mother's word, repairs,
    And merrily, for brave Achates led,
    The royal presents to the Tyrians bears.
    There, under gorgeous curtains, at the head
    Sate Dido, throned upon a golden bed.
    There, flocking in, the Trojans and their King
    Recline on purple coverlets outspread.
    Bread, heaped in baskets, the attendants bring,
Towels with smooth-shorn nap, and water from the spring.

XCIII. Within are fifty maidens, charged with care
    To dress the food, and nurse the flames divine.
    A hundred more, and youths like-aged, prepare
    To load the tables and arrange the wine.
    There, entering too, on broidered seats recline
    The Tyrians, crowding through the festive court.
    They praise the boy, his glowing looks divine,
    The words he feigned, the royal gifts he brought,
The robe, the saffron veil with bright acanthus wrought.

XCIV. Doomed to devouring Love, the hapless queen
    Burns as she gazes, with insatiate fire,
    Charmed by his presents and his youthful mien:
    He, fondly clinging to his fancied sire,
    Gave all the love that parents' hearts desire,
    Then seeks the queen. She, fixing on the boy
    Her eyes, her soul, impatient to admire,
    Now, fondling, folds him to her lap with joy;
Weetless, alas! what god is plotting to destroy.

XCV. True to his Paphian mother, trace by trace,
    Slowly the Love-god with prevenient art,
    Begins the lost Sychaeus to efface,
    And living passion to a breast impart
    Long dead to feeling, and a vacant heart.
    Now, hushed the banquet and the tables all
    Removed, huge wine-bowls for each guest apart
    They wreathe with flowers. The noise of festival
Rings through the spacious courts, and rolls along the hall.

XCVI. There, blazing from the gilded roof, are seen
    Bright lamps, and torches turn the night to day.
    Now for the ponderous goblet called the Queen,
    Of jewelled gold, which Belus used and they
    Of Belus' line, and poured the wine straightway,
    And prayed, while silence filled the crowded hall:
    "Great Jove, the host's lawgiver, bless this day
    To these my Tyrians and the Trojans all.
Long may our children's sons this solemn feast recall.

XCVII. "Come, jolly Bacchus, giver of delight;
    Kind Juno, come; and ye with fair accord
    And friendly spirit hold the feast aright."
    So spake the Queen, and on the festal board
    The prime libation to the gods outpoured,
    Then lightly to her lips the goblet pressed,
    And gave to Bitias. Challenged by the word,
    He dived into the brimming gold with zest,
And quaffed the foaming bowl, and after him, the rest.

XCVIII. His golden lyre long-haired Iopas tunes,
    And sings what Atlas taught in loftiest strain;
    The suns' eclipses and the changing moons,
    Whence man and beast, whence lightning and the rain,
    Arcturus, watery Hyads and the Wain;
    What causes make the winter nights so long,
    Why sinks the sun so quickly in the main;
    All this he sings, and ravished at the song,
Tyrians and Trojan guests the loud applause prolong.

XCIX. With various talk the night poor Dido wore,
    And drank deep love, and nursed her inward flame,
    Of Priam much she asks, of Hector more,
    Now in what arms Aurora's offspring came,
    Of Diomede's horses and Achilles' fame.
    "Tell me," she says, "thy wanderings; stranger, come,
    Thy friends' mishaps and Danaan wiles proclaim;
    For seven long summers now have seen thee roam
O'er every land and sea, far from thy native home."




BOOK TWO


ARGUMENT

AEneas' story.--The Greeks, baffled in battle, built a wooden horse,
in which their leaders took ambush. Their fleet sailed to Tenedos.
The Trojans, but for Capys and Laocoon, had dragged the horse
forthwith as a trophy into Troy (1-72). Sinon, a Greek, brought
before Priam, feigns righteous indignation against Greece. The
Trojans sympathise and believe his story of wrongs done him by
Ulysses (73-126). "When Greek plans of flight had often," says Sinon,
"been foiled by storms, oracles foretold that only a human sacrifice
could purchase their escape." Chosen for victim, Sinon had fled. He
solemnly declares the horse to be an offering to Pallas. "Destroy
it, and you are lost. Preserve it in your citadel, your revenge is
assured" (127-222). Treachery triumphs. Laocoon's cruel fate is
ascribed to his sacrilegious attack upon the horse, which is brought
with rejoicing into Troy, despite a last warning, from Cassandra
(223-288). While Troy sleeps, the fleet returns, and Sinon releases
the Greeks from the horse (289-315). Hector's wraith warns AEneas
in a dream to flee with the sacred vessels and images (316-351), and
Panthus brings news of Sinon's treachery. The city is in flames.
AEneas heads a forlorn hope of rescue (352-441). He and his followers
exchange armour with certain Greeks slain in the darkness. The ruse
succeeds until they are taken for enemies by their friends. The
Greeks rally. The Trojans scatter. At Priam's palace a last stand
is made, but Pyrrhus forces the great gates, and the defenders are
massacred (442-603). Priam's fate.--The sight of his headless corpse
draws AEneas' thoughts to his own father's danger. Hastening
homewards he espies Helen, and is pausing to take vengeance and her
life, when (604-711) Venus intervening opens his eyes to see the gods
aiding the Greeks (712-756). AEneas regains his home. Anchises
obstinately refuses to flee, until a halo is seen about the head of
Ascanius (757-828), whereupon he accepts the omen and yields. The
escape.--In a sudden panic Creusa is lost (829-900). AEneas, at peril
of his life, is seeking her throughout the city, when her wraith
appears and bids him away. "She is dead in Troytown: in Italy empire
awaits him." She vanishes: day dawns: and AEneas, with Anchises and
the surviving Trojans, flees to the hills (901-972).


I.  All hushed intent, when from his lofty seat
    Troy's sire began, "O queen, a tale too true,
    Too sad for words, thou biddest me repeat;
    How Ilion perished, and the Danaan crew
    Her power and all her wailful realm o'erthrew:
    The woes I saw, thrice piteous to behold,
    And largely shared. What Myrmidon, or who
    Of stern Ulysses' warriors can withhold
His tears, to tell such things, as thou would'st have re-told?

