
"My Lord of Risingham," she cried, "hear me, in justice.  I am here in
this man's custody by mere force, reft from mine own people.  Since that
day I had never pity, countenance, nor comfort from the face of man--but
from him only--Richard Shelton--whom they now accuse and labour to undo.
My lord, if he was yesternight in Sir Daniel's mansion, it was I that
brought him there; he came but at my prayer, and thought to do no hurt.
While yet Sir Daniel was a good lord to him, he fought with them of the
Black Arrow loyally; but when his foul guardian sought his life by
practices, and he fled by night, for his soul's sake, out of that bloody
house, whither was he to turn--he, helpless and penniless?  Or if he be
fallen among ill company, whom should ye blame--the lad that was unjustly
handled, or the guardian that did abuse his trust?"

And then the short young lady fell on her knees by Joanna's side.

"And I, my good lord and natural uncle," she added, "I can bear
testimony, on my conscience and before the face of all, that what this
maiden saith is true.  It was I, unworthy, that did lead the young man
in."

Earl Risingham had heard in silence, and when the voices ceased, he still
stood silent for a space.  Then he gave Joanna his hand to arise, though
it was to be observed that he did not offer the like courtesy to her who
had called herself his niece.

"Sir Daniel," he said, "here is a right intricate affair, the which, with
your good leave, it shall be mine to examine and adjust.  Content ye,
then; your business is in careful hands; justice shall be done you; and
in the meanwhile, get ye incontinently home, and have your hurts
attended.  The air is shrewd, and I would not ye took cold upon these
scratches."

He made a sign with his hand; it was passed down the nave by obsequious
servants, who waited there upon his smallest gesture.  Instantly, without
the church, a tucket sounded shrill, and through the open portal archers
and men-at-arms, uniformly arrayed in the colours and wearing the badge
of Lord Risingham, began to file into the church, took Dick and Lawless
from those who still detained them, and, closing their files about the
prisoners, marched forth again and disappeared.

As they were passing, Joanna held both her hands to Dick and cried him
her farewell; and the bridesmaid, nothing downcast by her uncle's evident
displeasure, blew him a kiss, with a "Keep your heart up, lion-driver!"
that for the first time since the accident called up a smile to the faces
of the crowd.



CHAPTER V--EARL RISINGHAM


Earl Risingham, although by far the most important person then in
Shoreby, was poorly lodged in the house of a private gentleman upon the
extreme outskirts of the town.  Nothing but the armed men at the doors,
and the mounted messengers that kept arriving and departing, announced
the temporary residence of a great lord.

Thus it was that, from lack of space, Dick and Lawless were clapped into
the same apartment.

"Well spoken, Master Richard," said the outlaw; "it was excellently well
spoken, and, for my part, I thank you cordially.  Here we are in good
hands; we shall be justly tried, and, some time this evening, decently
hanged on the same tree."

"Indeed, my poor friend, I do believe it," answered Dick.

"Yet have we a string to our bow," returned Lawless.  "Ellis Duckworth is
a man out of ten thousand; he holdeth you right near his heart, both for
your own and for your father's sake; and knowing you guiltless of this
fact, he will stir earth and heaven to bear you clear."

"It may not be," said Dick.  "What can he do?  He hath but a handful.
Alack, if it were but to-morrow--could I but keep a certain tryst an hour
before noon to-morrow--all were, I think, otherwise.  But now there is no
help."

"Well," concluded Lawless, "an ye will stand to it for my innocence, I
will stand to it for yours, and that stoutly.  It shall naught avail us;
but an I be to hang, it shall not be for lack of swearing."

And then, while Dick gave himself over to his reflections, the old rogue
curled himself down into a corner, pulled his monkish hood about his
face, and composed himself to sleep.  Soon he was loudly snoring, so
utterly had his long life of hardship and adventure blunted the sense of
apprehension.

It was long after noon, and the day was already failing, before the door
was opened and Dick taken forth and led up-stairs to where, in a warm
cabinet, Earl Risingham sat musing over the fire.

On his captive's entrance he looked up.

"Sir," he said, "I knew your father, who was a man of honour, and this
inclineth me to be the more lenient; but I may not hide from you that
heavy charges lie against your character.  Ye do consort with murderers
and robbers; upon a clear probation ye have carried war against the
king's peace; ye are suspected to have piratically seized upon a ship; ye
are found skulking with a counterfeit presentment in your enemy's house;
a man is slain that very evening--"

"An it like you, my lord," Dick interposed, "I will at once avow my
guilt, such as it is.  I slew this fellow Rutter; and to the
proof"--searching in his bosom--"here is a letter from his wallet."

Lord Risingham took the letter, and opened and read it twice.

"Ye have read this?" he inquired.

"I have read it," answered Dick.

"Are ye for York or Lancaster?" the earl demanded.

"My lord, it was but a little while back that I was asked that question,
and knew not how to answer it," said Dick; "but having answered once, I
will not vary.  My lord, I am for York."

The earl nodded approvingly.

"Honestly replied," he said.  "But wherefore, then, deliver me this
letter?"

"Nay, but against traitors, my lord, are not all sides arrayed?" cried
Dick.

"I would they were, young gentleman," returned the earl; "and I do at
least approve your saying.  There is more youth than guile in you, I do
perceive; and were not Sir Daniel a mighty man upon our side, I were
half-tempted to espouse your quarrel.  For I have inquired, and it
appears ye have been hardly dealt with, and have much excuse.  But look
ye, sir, I am, before all else, a leader in the queen's interest; and
though by nature a just man, as I believe, and leaning even to the excess
of mercy, yet must I order my goings for my party's interest, and, to
keep Sir Daniel, I would go far about."

"My lord," returned Dick, "ye will think me very bold to counsel you; but
do ye count upon Sir Daniel's faith?  Methought he had changed sides
intolerably often."

"Nay, it is the way of England.  What would ye have?" the earl demanded.
"But ye are unjust to the knight of Tunstall; and as faith goes, in this
unfaithful generation, he hath of late been honourably true to us of
Lancaster.  Even in our last reverses he stood firm."

"An it pleased you, then," said Dick, "to cast your eye upon this letter,
ye might somewhat change your thought of him;" and he handed to the earl
Sir Daniel's letter to Lord Wensleydale.

The effect upon the earl's countenance was instant; he lowered like an
angry lion, and his hand, with a sudden movement, clutched at his dagger.

"Ye have read this also?" he asked.

"Even so," said Dick.  "It is your lordship's own estate he offers to
Lord Wensleydale?"

"It is my own estate, even as ye say!" returned the earl.  "I am your
bedesman for this letter.  It hath shown me a fox's hole.  Command me,
Master Shelton; I will not be backward in gratitude, and to begin with,
York or Lancaster, true man or thief, I do now set you at freedom.  Go, a
Mary's name!  But judge it right that I retain and hang your fellow,
Lawless.  The crime hath been most open, and it were fitting that some
open punishment should follow."

"My lord, I make it my first suit to you to spare him also," pleaded
Dick.

"It is an old, condemned rogue, thief, and vagabond, Master Shelton,"
said the earl.  "He hath been gallows-ripe this score of years.  And,
whether for one thing or another, whether to-morrow or the day after,
where is the great choice?"

"Yet, my lord, it was through love to me that he came hither," answered
Dick, "and I were churlish and thankless to desert him."

"Master Shelton, ye are troublesome," replied the earl, severely.  "It is
an evil way to prosper in this world.  Howbeit, and to be quit of your
importunity, I will once more humour you.  Go, then, together; but go
warily, and get swiftly out of Shoreby town.  For this Sir Daniel (whom
may the saints confound!) thirsteth most greedily to have your blood."

"My lord, I do now offer you in words my gratitude, trusting at some
brief date to pay you some of it in service," replied Dick, as he turned
from the apartment.



CHAPTER VI--ARBLASTER AGAIN


When Dick and Lawless were suffered to steal, by a back way, out of the
house where Lord Risingham held his garrison, the evening had already
come.

They paused in shelter of the garden wall to consult on their best
course.  The danger was extreme.  If one of Sir Daniel's men caught sight
of them and raised the view-hallo, they would be run down and butchered
instantly.  And not only was the town of Shoreby a mere net of peril for
their lives, but to make for the open country was to run the risk of the
patrols.

A little way off, upon some open ground, they spied a windmill standing;
and hard by that, a very large granary with open doors.

"How if we lay there until the night fall?" Dick proposed.

And Lawless having no better suggestion to offer, they made a straight
push for the granary at a run, and concealed themselves behind the door
among some straw.  The daylight rapidly departed; and presently the moon
was silvering the frozen snow.  Now or never was their opportunity to
gain the Goat and Bagpipes unobserved and change their tell-tale
garments.  Yet even then it was advisable to go round by the outskirts,
and not run the gauntlet of the market-place, where, in the concourse of
people, they stood the more imminent peril to be recognised and slain.

This course was a long one.  It took them not far from the house by the
beach, now lying dark and silent, and brought them forth at last by the
margin of the harbour.  Many of the ships, as they could see by the clear
moonshine, had weighed anchor, and, profiting by the calm sky, proceeded
for more distant parts; answerably to this, the rude alehouses along the
beach (although in defiance of the curfew law, they still shone with fire
and candle) were no longer thronged with customers, and no longer echoed
to the chorus of sea-songs.

Hastily, half-running, with their monkish raiment kilted to the knee,
they plunged through the deep snow and threaded the labyrinth of marine
lumber; and they were already more than half way round the harbour when,
as they were passing close before an alehouse, the door suddenly opened
and let out a gush of light upon their fleeting figures.

Instantly they stopped, and made believe to be engaged in earnest
conversation.

Three men, one after another, came out of the ale-house, and the last
closed the door behind him.  All three were unsteady upon their feet, as
if they had passed the day in deep potations, and they now stood wavering
in the moonlight, like men who knew not what they would be after.  The
tallest of the three was talking in a loud, lamentable voice.

"Seven pieces of as good Gascony as ever a tapster broached," he was
saying, "the best ship out o' the port o' Dartmouth, a Virgin Mary
parcel-gilt, thirteen pounds of good gold money--"

"I have bad losses, too," interrupted one of the others.  "I have had
losses of mine own, gossip Arblaster.  I was robbed at Martinmas of five
shillings and a leather wallet well worth ninepence farthing."

Dick's heart smote him at what he heard.  Until that moment he had not
perhaps thought twice of the poor skipper who had been ruined by the loss
of the Good Hope; so careless, in those days, were men who wore arms of
the goods and interests of their inferiors.  But this sudden encounter
reminded him sharply of the high-handed manner and ill-ending of his
enterprise; and both he and Lawless turned their heads the other way, to
avoid the chance of recognition.

The ship's dog had, however, made his escape from the wreck and found his
way back again to Shoreby.  He was now at Arblaster's heels, and suddenly
sniffing and pricking his ears, he darted forward and began to bark
furiously at the two sham friars.

His master unsteadily followed him.

"Hey, shipmates!" he cried.  "Have ye ever a penny pie for a poor old
shipman, clean destroyed by pirates?  I am a man that would have paid for
you both o' Thursday morning; and now here I be, o' Saturday night,
begging for a flagon of ale!  Ask my man Tom, if ye misdoubt me.  Seven
pieces of good Gascon wine, a ship that was mine own, and was my father's
before me, a Blessed Mary of plane-tree wood and parcel-gilt, and
thirteen pounds in gold and silver.  Hey! what say ye?  A man that fought
the French, too; for I have fought the French; I have cut more French
throats upon the high seas than ever a man that sails out of Dartmouth.
Come, a penny piece."

Neither Dick nor Lawless durst answer him a word, lest he should
recognise their voices; and they stood there as helpless as a ship
ashore, not knowing where to turn nor what to hope.

"Are ye dumb, boy?" inquired the skipper.  "Mates," he added, with a
hiccup, "they be dumb.  I like not this manner of discourtesy; for an a
man be dumb, so be as he's courteous, he will still speak when he was
spoken to, methinks."

By this time the sailor, Tom, who was a man of great personal strength,
seemed to have conceived some suspicion of these two speechless figures;
and being soberer than his captain, stepped suddenly before him, took
Lawless roughly by the shoulder, and asked him, with an oath, what ailed
him that he held his tongue.  To this the outlaw, thinking all was over,
made answer by a wrestling feint that stretched the sailor on the sand,
and, calling upon Dick to follow him, took to his heels among the lumber.

The affair passed in a second.  Before Dick could run at all, Arblaster
had him in his arms; Tom, crawling on his face, had caught him by one
foot, and the third man had a drawn cutlass brandishing above his head.

It was not so much the danger, it was not so much the annoyance, that now
bowed down the spirits of young Shelton; it was the profound humiliation
to have escaped Sir Daniel, convinced Lord Risingham, and now fall
helpless in the hands of this old, drunken sailor; and not merely
helpless, but, as his conscience loudly told him when it was too late,
actually guilty--actually the bankrupt debtor of the man whose ship he
had stolen and lost.

"Bring me him back into the alehouse, till I see his face," said
Arblaster.

"Nay, nay," returned Tom; "but let us first unload his wallet, lest the
other lads cry share."

But though he was searched from head to foot, not a penny was found upon
him; nothing but Lord Foxham's signet, which they plucked savagely from
his finger.

"Turn me him to the moon," said the skipper; and taking Dick by the chin,
he cruelly jerked his head into the air.  "Blessed Virgin!" he cried, "it
is the pirate!"
