might be lost. The Americans, attacked by this fresh foe, wavered; but
Stark rallied his line, and putting in Warner, with one hundred and
fifty Vermont men who had just come on the field, stopped Breymann's
advance, and finally forced him to retreat with a loss of nearly one
half his men. The Americans lost in killed and wounded some seventy men,
and the Germans and British about twice as many, but the Americans took
about seven hundred prisoners, and completely wrecked the forces of Baum
and Breymann.

The blow was a severe one, and Burgoyne's army never recovered from
it. Not only had he lost nearly a thousand of his best troops, besides
cannon, arms, and munitions of war, but the defeat affected the spirits
of his army and destroyed his hold over his Indian allies, who began
to desert in large numbers. Bennington, in fact, was one of the most
important fights of the Revolution, contributing as it did so largely to
the final surrender of Burgoyne's whole army at Saratoga, and the utter
ruin of the British invasion from the North. It is also interesting as
an extremely gallant bit of fighting. As has been said, there was no
strategy displayed, and there were no military operations of the higher
kind. There stood the enemy strongly intrenched on a hill, and Stark,
calling his undisciplined levies about him, went at them. He himself was
a man of the highest courage and a reckless fighter. It was Stark who
held the railfence at Bunker Hill, and who led the van when Sullivan's
division poured into Trenton from the river road. He was admirably
adapted for the precise work which was necessary at Bennington, and he
and his men fought well their hand-to-hand fight on that hot August day,
and carried the intrenchments filled with regular troops and defended by
artillery. It was a daring feat of arms, as well as a battle which had
an important effect upon the course of history and upon the fate of the
British empire in America.




KING'S MOUNTAIN

     Our fortress is the good greenwood,
      Our tent the cypress tree;
     We know the forest round us
      As seamen know the sea.
     We know its walls of thorny vines,
      Its glades of reedy grass,
     Its safe and silent islands
      Within the dark morass.
                    --Bryant.


The close of the year 1780 was, in the Southern States, the darkest time
of the Revolutionary struggle. Cornwallis had just destroyed the army of
Gates at Camden, and his two formidable lieutenants, Tarlton the light
horseman, and Ferguson the skilled rifleman, had destroyed or scattered
all the smaller bands that had been fighting for the patriot cause. The
red dragoons rode hither and thither, and all through Georgia and
South Carolina none dared lift their heads to oppose them, while North
Carolina lay at the feet of Cornwallis, as he started through it with
his army to march into Virginia. There was no organized force against
him, and the cause of the patriots seemed hopeless. It was at this hour
that the wild backwoodsmen of the western border gathered to strike a
blow for liberty.

When Cornwallis invaded North Carolina he sent Ferguson into the western
part of the State to crush out any of the patriot forces that might
still be lingering among the foot-hills. Ferguson was a very gallant and
able officer, and a man of much influence with the people wherever
he went, so that he was peculiarly fitted for this scrambling border
warfare. He had under him a battalion of regular troops and several
other battalions of Tory militia, in all eleven or twelve hundred men.
He shattered and drove the small bands of Whigs that were yet in arms,
and finally pushed to the foot of the mountain wall, till he could see
in his front the high ranges of the Great Smokies. Here he learned for
the first time that beyond the mountains there lay a few hamlets of
frontiersmen, whose homes were on what were then called the Western
Waters, that is, the waters which flowed into the Mississippi. To these
he sent word that if they did not prove loyal to the king, he would
cross their mountains, hang their leaders, and burn their villages.

Beyond the, mountains, in the valleys of the Holston and Watauga, dwelt
men who were stout of heart and mighty in battle, and when they heard
the threats of Ferguson they burned with a sullen flame of anger.
Hitherto the foes against whom they had warred had been not the British,
but the Indian allies of the British, Creek, and Cherokee, and Shawnee.
Now that the army of the king had come to their thresholds, they turned
to meet it as fiercely as they had met his Indian allies. Among the
backwoodsmen of this region there were at that time three men of special
note: Sevier, who afterward became governor of Tennessee; Shelby, who
afterward became governor of Kentucky; and Campbell, the Virginian, who
died in the Revolutionary War. Sevier had given a great barbecue, where
oxen and deer were roasted whole, while horseraces were run, and the
backwoodsmen tried their skill as marksmen and wrestlers. In the midst
of the feasting Shelby appeared, hot with hard riding, to tell of the
approach of Ferguson and the British. Immediately the feasting was
stopped, and the feasters made ready for war. Sevier and Shelby sent
word to Campbell to rouse the men of his own district and come without
delay, and they sent messengers to and fro in their own neighborhood to
summon the settlers from their log huts on the stump-dotted clearings
and the hunters from their smoky cabins in the deep woods.

The meeting-place was at the Sycamore Shoals. On the appointed day the
backwoodsmen gathered sixteen hundred strong, each man carrying a long
rifle, and mounted on a tough, shaggy horse. They were a wild and fierce
people, accustomed to the chase and to warfare with the Indians. Their
hunting-shirts of buckskin or homespun were girded in by bead-worked
belts, and the trappings of their horses were stained red and yellow.
At the gathering there was a black-frocked Presbyterian preacher, and
before they started he addressed the tall riflemen in words of burning
zeal, urging them to stand stoutly in the battle, and to smite with the
sword of the Lord and of Gideon. Then the army started, the backwoods
colonels riding in front. Two or three days later, word was brought to
Ferguson that the Back-water men had come over the mountains; that the
Indian-fighters of the frontier, leaving unguarded their homes on the
Western Waters, had crossed by wooded and precipitous defiles to the
help of the beaten men of the plains. Ferguson at once fell back,
sending out messengers for help. When he came to King's Mountain,
a wooded, hog-back hill on the border line between North and South
Carolina, he camped on its top, deeming that there he was safe, for he
supposed that before the backwoodsmen could come near enough to attack
him help would reach him. But the backwoods leaders felt as keenly as
he the need of haste, and choosing out nine hundred picked men, the best
warriors of their force, and the best mounted and armed, they made a
long forced march to assail Ferguson before help could come to him. All
night long they rode the dim forest trails and splashed across the fords
of the rushing rivers. All the next day, October 16, they rode, until in
mid-afternoon, just as a heavy shower cleared away, they came in sight
of King's Mountain. The little armies were about equal in numbers.
Ferguson's regulars were armed with the bayonet, and so were some of his
Tory militia, whereas the Americans had not a bayonet among them; but
they were picked men, confident in their skill as riflemen, and they
were so sure of victory that their aim was not only to defeat the
British but to capture their whole force. The backwoods colonels,
counseling together as they rode at the head of the column, decided to
surround the mountain and assail it on all sides. Accordingly the bands
of frontiersmen split one from the other, and soon circled the craggy
hill where Ferguson's forces were encamped. They left their horses in
the rear and immediately began the battle, swarming forward on foot,
their commanders leading the attack.

The march had been so quick and the attack so sudden that Ferguson had
barely time to marshal his men before the assault was made. Most of
his militia he scattered around the top of the hill to fire down at the
Americans as they came up, while with his regulars and with a few picked
militia he charged with the bayonet in person, first down one side of
the mountain and then down the other. Sevier, Shelby, Campbell, and
the other colonels of the frontiersmen, led each his force of riflemen
straight toward the summit. Each body in turn when charged by the
regulars was forced to give way, for there were no bayonets wherewith to
meet the foe; but the backwoodsmen retreated only so long as the charge
lasted, and the minute that it stopped they stopped too, and came
back ever closer to the ridge and ever with a deadlier fire. Ferguson,
blowing a silver whistle as a signal to his men, led these charges,
sword in hand, on horseback. At last, just as he was once again rallying
his men, the riflemen of Sevier and Shelby crowned the top of the ridge.
The gallant British commander became a fair target for the backwoodsmen,
and as for the last time he led his men against them, seven bullets
entered his body and he fell dead. With his fall resistance ceased.
The regulars and Tories huddled together in a confused mass, while the
exultant Americans rushed forward. A flag of truce was hoisted, and all
the British who were not dead surrendered.

The victory was complete, and the backwoodsmen at once started to return
to their log hamlets and rough, lonely farms. They could not stay, for
they dared not leave their homes at the mercy of the Indians. They had
rendered a great service; for Cornwallis, when he heard of the disaster
to his trusted lieutenant, abandoned his march northward, and retired to
South Carolina. When he again resumed the offensive, he found his path
barred by stubborn General Greene and his troops of the Continental
line.




THE STORMING OF STONY POINT

      In their ragged regimentals
      Stood the old Continentals,
       Yielding not,
      When the grenadiers were lunging,
      And like hail fell the plunging
       Cannon-shot;
       When the files
       Of the isles
   From the smoky night encampment bore the banner of the rampant
   Unicorn,
   And grummer, grummer, grummer, rolled the roll of the drummer,
       Through the morn!

      Then with eyes to the front all,
      And with guns horizontal,
       Stood our sires;
      And the balls whistled deadly,
      And in streams flashing redly
       Blazed the fires;
       As the roar
       On the shore
   Swept the strong battle-breakers o'er the green-sodded acres
       Of the plain;
   And louder, louder, louder cracked the black gunpowder,
       Cracked amain!
                       --Guy Humphrey McMaster.


One of the heroic figures of the Revolution was Anthony Wayne,
Major-General of the Continental line. With the exception of Washington,
and perhaps Greene, he was the best general the Americans developed in
the contest; and without exception he showed himself to be the hardest
fighter produced on either side. He belongs, as regards this latter
characteristic, with the men like Winfield Scott, Phil Kearney, Hancock,
and Forrest, who reveled in the danger and the actual shock of arms.
Indeed, his eager love of battle, and splendid disregard of peril,
have made many writers forget his really great qualities as a general.
Soldiers are always prompt to recognize the prime virtue of physical
courage, and Wayne's followers christened their daring commander "Mad
Anthony," in loving allusion to his reckless bravery. It is perfectly
true that Wayne had this courage, and that he was a born fighter;
otherwise, he never would have been a great commander. A man who lacks
the fondness for fighting, the eager desire to punish his adversary,
and the willingness to suffer punishment in return, may be a great
organizer, like McClellan, but can never become a great general or win
great victories. There are, however, plenty of men who, though they
possess these fine manly traits, yet lack the head to command an army;
but Wayne had not only the heart and the hand but the head likewise.
No man could dare as greatly as he did without incurring the risk of an
occasional check; but he was an able and bold tactician, a vigilant
and cautious leader, well fitted to bear the terrible burden of
responsibility which rests upon a commander-in-chief.

Of course, at times he had some rather severe lessons. Quite early in
his career, just after the battle of the Brandywine, when he was set to
watch the enemy, he was surprised at night by the British general Grey,
a redoubtable fighter, who attacked him with the bayonet, killed a
number of his men, and forced him to fall back some distance from the
field of action. This mortifying experience had no effect whatever on
Wayne's courage or self-reliance, but it did give him a valuable lesson
in caution. He showed what he had learned by the skill with which, many
years later, he conducted the famous campaign in which he overthrew the
Northwestern Indians at the Fight of the Fallen Timbers.

Wayne's favorite weapon was the bayonet, and, like Scott he taught his
troops, until they were able in the shock of hand-to-hand conflict to
overthrow the renowned British infantry, who have always justly prided
themselves on their prowess with cold steel. At the battle of Germantown
it was Wayne's troops who, falling on with the bayonet, drove the
Hessians and the British light infantry, and only retreated under orders
when the attack had failed elsewhere. At Monmouth it was Wayne and his
Continentals who first checked the British advance by repulsing the
bayonet charge of the guards and grenadiers.

Washington, a true leader of men, was prompt to recognize in Wayne a
soldier to whom could be intrusted any especially difficult enterprise
which called for the exercise alike of intelligence and of cool daring.
In the summer of 1780 he was very anxious to capture the British fort at
Stony Point, which commanded the Hudson. It was impracticable to attack
it by regular siege while the British frigates lay in the river, and the
defenses ere so strong that open assault by daylight was equally out of
the question. Accordingly Washington suggested to Wayne that he try a
night attack. Wayne eagerly caught at the idea. It was exactly the kind
of enterprise in which he delighted. The fort was on a rocky promontory,
surrounded on three sides by water, and on the fourth by a neck of land,
which was for the most part mere morass. It was across this neck of
land that any attacking column had to move. The garrison was six hundred
strong. To deliver the assault Wayne took nine hundred men. The
American army was camped about fourteen miles from Stony Point. One July
afternoon Wayne started, and led his troops in single file along the
narrow rocky roads, reaching the hills on the mainland near the fort
after nightfall. He divided his force into two columns, to advance one
along each side of the neck, detaching two companies of North Carolina
troops to move in between the two columns and make a false attack.
The rest of the force consisted of New Englanders, Pennsylvanians,
and Virginians. Each attacking column was divided into three parts, a
forlorn hope of twenty men leading, which was followed by an advance
guard of one hundred and twenty, and then by the main body. At the time
commanding officers still carried spontoons, and other old-time weapons,
and Wayne, who himself led the right column, directed its movements
spear in hand. It was nearly midnight when the Americans began to press
along the causeways toward the fort. Before they were near the walls
they were discovered, and the British opened a heavy fire of great guns
and musketry, to which the Carolinians, who were advancing between the
two columns, responded in their turn, according to orders; but the men
in the columns were forbidden to fire. Wayne had warned them that their
work must be done with the bayonet, and their muskets were not even
loaded. Moreover, so strict was the discipline that no one was allowed
to leave the ranks, and when one of the men did so an officer promptly
ran him through the body.

No sooner had the British opened fire than the charging columns broke
into a run, and in a moment the forlorn hopes plunged into the abattis
of fallen timber which the British had constructed just without the
walls. On the left, the forlorn hope was very roughly handled, no less
than seventeen of the twenty men being either killed or wounded, but as
the columns came up both burst through the down timber and swarmed up
the long, sloping embankments of the fort. The British fought well,
cheering loudly as their volley's rang, but the Americans would not be
denied, and pushed silently on to end the contest with the bayonet. A
bullet struck Wayne in the head. He fell, but struggled to his feet and
forward, two of his officers supporting him. A rumor went among the
men that he was dead, but it only impelled them to charge home, more
fiercely than ever.

With a rush the troops swept to the top of the wall. A fierce but
short fight followed in the intense darkness, which was lit only by the
flashes from the British muskets. The Americans did not fire, trusting
solely to the bayonet. The two columns had kept almost equal pace, and
they swept into the fort from opposite sides at the same moment. The
three men who first got over the walls were all wounded, but one of
them hauled down the British flag. The Americans had the advantage
which always comes from delivering an attack that is thrust home. Their
muskets were unloaded and they could not hesitate; so, running boldly
into close quarters, they fought hand to hand with their foes and
speedily overthrew them. For a moment the bayonets flashed and played;
then the British lines broke as their assailants thronged against them,
and the struggle was over. The Americans had lost a hundred in killed
and wounded. Of the British sixty-three had been slain and very many
wounded, every one of the dead or disabled having suffered from the
bayonet. A curious coincidence was that the number of the dead happened
to be exactly equal to the number of Wayne's men who had been killed in
the night attack by the English general, Grey.

There was great rejoicing among the Americans over the successful issue
of the attack. Wayne speedily recovered from his wound, and in the joy
of his victory it weighed but slightly. He had performed a most notable
feat. No night attack of the kind was ever delivered with greater
boldness, skill, and success. When the Revolutionary War broke out the
American armies were composed merely of armed yeomen, stalwart men,
of good courage, and fairly proficient in the use of their weapons, but
entirely without the training which alone could enable them to withstand
the attack of the British regulars in the open, or to deliver an attack
themselves. Washington's victory at Trenton was the first encounter
which showed that the Americans were to be feared when they took the
offensive. With the exception of the battle of Trenton, and perhaps of
Greene's fight at Eutaw Springs, Wayne's feat was the most successful
illustration of daring and victorious attack by an American army that
occurred during the war; and, unlike Greene, who was only able to fight
a drawn battle, Wayne's triumph was complete. At Monmouth he had shown,
as he afterward showed against Cornwallis, that his troops could meet
the renowned British regulars on even terms in the open. At Stony Point
he showed that he could lead them to a triumphant assault with the
bayonet against regulars who held a fortified place of strength. No
American commander has ever displayed greater energy and daring, a
more resolute courage, or readier resource, than the chief of the
hard-fighting Revolutionary generals, Mad Anthony Wayne.




GOUVERNEUR MORRIS

GOUVERNEUR MORRIS. PARIS. AUGUST 10, 1792.

     Justum et tenacem propositi virum
     Non civium ardor prava jubentium,
      Non vultus instantis tyranni
        Mente quatit solida, neque Auster
     Dux inquieti turbidus Hadriae,
     Nec fulminantis magna manus Jovis:
      Si fractus illabatur orbis,
        Impavidum ferient ruinae.
                   --Hor., Lib. III. Carm. III.


The 10th of August, 1792, was one of the most memorable days of the
French Revolution. It was the day on which the French monarchy received
its death-blow, and was accompanied by fighting and bloodshed which
filled Paris with terror. In the morning before daybreak the tocsin had
sounded, and not long after the mob of Paris, headed by the Marseillais,
"Six hundred men not afraid to die," who had been summoned there by
Barbaroux, were marching upon the Tuileries. The king, or rather the
queen, had at last determined to make a stand and to defend the throne.
The Swiss Guards were there at the palace, well posted to protect the
inner court; and there, too, were the National Guards, who were expected
to uphold the government and guard the king. The tide of people poured
on through the streets, gathering strength as they went the Marseillais,
the armed bands, the Sections, and a vast floating mob. The crowd drew
nearer and nearer, but the squadrons of the National Guards, who were to
check the advance, did not stir. It is not apparent, indeed, that they
made any resistance, and the king and his family at eight o'clock lost
heart and deserted the Tuileries, to take refuge with the National
Convention. The multitude then passed into the court of the Carrousel,
unchecked by the National Guards, and were face to face with the Swiss.
Deserted by their king, the Swiss knew not how to act, but still stood
their ground. There was some parleying, and at last the Marseillais
fired a cannon. Then the Swiss fired. They were disciplined troops,
and their fire was effective. There was a heavy slaughter and the
mob recoiled, leaving their cannon, which the Swiss seized. The
Revolutionists, however, returned to the charge, and the fight raged on
both sides, the Swiss holding their ground firmly.

Suddenly, from the legislative hall, came an order from the king to
the Swiss to cease firing. It was their death warrant. Paralyzed by
the order, they knew not what to do. The mob poured in, and most of the
gallant Swiss were slaughtered where they stood. Others escaped from the
Tuileries only to meet their death in the street. The palace was sacked
and the raging mob was in possession of the city. No man's life was
safe, least of all those who were known to be friends of the king, who
were nobles, or who had any connection with the court. Some of these
people whose lives were thus in peril at the hands of the bloodstained
and furious mob had been the allies of the United States, and had fought
under Washington in the war for American independence. In their anguish
and distress their thoughts recurred to the country which they had
served in its hour of trial, three thousand miles away. They sought the
legation of the United States and turned to the American minister for
protection.

Such an exercise of humanity at that moment was not a duty that any man
craved. In those terrible days in Paris, the representatives of foreign
governments were hardly safer than any one else. Many of the ambassadors
and ministers had already left the country, and others were even then
abandoning their posts, which it seemed impossible to hold at such a
time. But the American minister stood his ground. Gouverneur Morris
was not a man to shrink from what he knew to be his duty. He had been
a leading patriot in our revolution; he had served in the Continental
Congress, and with Robert Morris in the difficult work of the Treasury,
when all our resources seemed to be at their lowest ebb. In 1788 he had
gone abroad on private business, and had been much in Paris, where
he had witnessed the beginning of the French Revolution and had been
consulted by men on both sides. In 1790, by Washington's direction, he
had gone to London and had consulted the ministry there as to whether
they would receive an American minister. Thence he had returned to
Paris, and at the beginning Of 1792 Washington appointed him minister of
the United States to France.

As an American, Morris's sympathies had run strongly in favor of the
movement to relieve France from the despotism under which she was
sinking, and to give her a better and more liberal government. But,
as the Revolution progressed, he became outraged and disgusted by
the methods employed. He felt a profound contempt for both sides. The
inability of those who were conducting the Revolution to carry out
intelligent plans or maintain order, and the feebleness of the king and
his advisers, were alike odious to the man with American conceptions
of ordered liberty. He was especially revolted by the bloodshed and
cruelty, constantly gathering in strength, which were displayed by
the revolutionists, and he had gone to the very verge of diplomatic
propriety in advising the ministers of the king in regard to the
policies to be pursued, and, as he foresaw what was coming, in urging
the king himself to leave France. All his efforts and all his advice,
like those of other intelligent men who kept their heads during the
whirl of the Revolution, were alike vain.

On August 10 the gathering storm broke with full force, and the populace
rose in arms to sweep away the tottering throne. Then it was that these
people, fleeing for their lives, came to the representative of the
country for which many of them had fought, and on both public and
private grounds besought the protection of the American minister. Let me
tell what happened in the words of an eye-witness, an American gentleman
who was in Paris at that time, and who published the following account
of his experiences:

On the ever memorable 10th of August, after viewing the destruction of
the Royal Swiss Guards and the dispersion of the Paris militia by a band
of foreign and native incendiaries, the writer thought it his duty
to visit the Minister, who had not been out of his hotel since the
insurrection began, and, as was to be expected, would be anxious to
learn what was passing without doors. He was surrounded by the old Count
d'Estaing, and about a dozen other persons of distinction, of different
sexes, who had, from their connection with the United States, been his
most intimate acquaintances at Paris, and who had taken refuge with
him for protection from the bloodhounds which, in the forms of men and
women, were prowling in the streets at the time. All was silence here,
except that silence was occasionally interrupted by the crying of
the women and children. As I retired, the Minister took me aside, and
observed: "I have no doubt, sir, but there are persons on the watch who
would find fault with my conduct as Minister in receiving and protecting
these people, but I call on you to witness the declaration which I now
make, and that is that they were not invited to my house, but came of
their own accord. Whether my house will be a protection to them or to
me, God only knows, but I will not turn them out of it, let what will
happen to me," to which he added, "you see, sir, they are all persons to
whom our country is more or less indebted, and it would be inhuman to
force them into the hands of the assassins, had they no such claim
upon me."

Nothing can be added to this simple account, and no American can read
it or repeat the words of Mr. Morris without feeling even now, a hundred
years after the event, a glow of pride that such words were uttered at
such a time by the man who represented the United States.

After August 10, when matters in Paris became still worse, Mr. Morris
still stayed at his post. Let me give, in his own words, what he did and
his reasons for it:

The different ambassadors and ministers are all taking their flight,
and if I stay I shall be alone. I mean, however, to stay, unless
circumstances should command me away, because, in the admitted case that
my letters of credence are to the monarchy, and not to the Republic of
France, it becomes a matter of indifference whether I remain in this
country or go to England during the time which may be needful to obtain
your orders, or to produce a settlement of affairs here. Going hence,
however, would look like taking part against the late Revolution, and I
am not only unauthorized in this respect, but I am bound to suppose that
if the great majority of the nation adhere to the new form, the United
States will approve thereof; because, in the first place, we have no
right to prescribe to this country the government they shall adopt,
and next, because the basis of our own Constitution is the indefeasible
right of the people to establish it.

Among those who are leaving Paris is the Venetian ambassador. He was
furnished with passports from the Office of Foreign Affairs, but he
was, nevertheless, stopped at the barrier, was conducted to the Hotel
de Ville, was there questioned for hours, and his carriages examined and
searched. This violation of the rights of ambassadors could not fail, as
you may suppose, to make an impression. It has been broadly hinted to me
that the honor of my country and my own require that I should go away.
But I am of a different opinion, and rather think that those who give
such hints are somewhat influenced by fear. It is true that the position
is not without danger, but I presume that when the President did me the
honor of naming me to this embassy, it was not for my personal pleasure
or safety, but to promote the interests of my country. These, therefore,
I shall continue to pursue to the best of my judgment, and as to
consequences, they are in the hand of God.

He remained there until his successor arrived. When all others fled, he
was faithful, and such conduct should never be forgotten. Mr. Morris
not only risked his life, but he took a heavy responsibility, and laid
himself open to severe attack for having protected defenseless people
against the assaults of the mob. But his courageous humanity is
something which should ever be remembered, and ought always to be
characteristic of the men who represent the United States in foreign
countries. When we recall the French Revolution, it is cheering to think
of that fearless figure of the American minister, standing firm and calm
in the midst of those awful scenes, with sacked palaces, slaughtered
soldiers, and a bloodstained mob about him, regardless of danger to
himself, determined to do his duty to his country, and to those to whom
his country was indebted.




THE BURNING OF THE "PHILADELPHIA"

     And say besides, that in Aleppo once,
     Where a malignant and a turban'd Turk
     Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,
     I took by the throat the circumcised dog
     And smote him, thus.
                        --Othello.


It is difficult to conceive that there ever was a time when the United
States paid a money tribute to anybody. It is even more difficult to
imagine the United States paying blackmail to a set of small piratical
tribes on the coast of Africa. Yet this is precisely what we once did
with the Barbary powers, as they were called the States of Morocco,
Tunis, Tripoli, and Algiers, lying along the northern coast of Africa.
The only excuse to be made for such action was that we merely followed
the example of Christendom. The civilized people of the world were then
in the habit of paying sums of money to these miserable pirates,
in order to secure immunity for their merchant vessels in the
Mediterranean. For this purpose Congress appropriated money, and
treaties were made by the President and ratified by the Senate. On one
occasion, at least, Congress actually revoked the authorization of some
new ships for the navy, and appropriated more money than was required
to build the men-of-war in order to buy off the Barbary powers. The fund
for this disgraceful purpose was known as the "Mediterranean fund," and
was intrusted to the Secretary of State to be disbursed by him in his
discretion. After we had our brush with France, however, in 1798, and
after Truxtun's brilliant victory over the French frigate L'Insurgente
