    Such a ninny, a fool is he; witless even as any
      Two years' urchin, across papa's elbow drowsily swaying.

2.

    For though wed to a maiden in spring-tide youthfully budding,
      Maiden crisp as a petulant kid, as airily wanton,               15
      Sweets more privy to guard than e'er grape-bunch shadowy-purpling;
      He, he leaves her alone to romp idly, cares not a fouter.
      Nor leans to her at all, the man's part; but helpless as alder
      Lies, new-fell'd in a ditch, beneath axe Ligurian ham-strung,
      As alive to the world, as if world nor wife were at issue.      20

    Such this gaby, my own, my arch fool; he sees not, he hears not
      Who himself is, or if the self is, or is not, he knows not.

      Him I'd gladly be lowering down thy bridge to the bottom,
      If from stupor inanimate peradventure he wake him,
    Leaving muddy behind him his sluggish heart's hesitation,         25
      As some mule in a glutinous sludge her rondel of iron.


XXI.

    Sire and prince-patriarch of hungry starvelings,
      Lean Aurelius, all that are, that have been,
      That shall ever in after years be famish'd;

      Wouldst thou lewdly my dainty love to folly
      Tempt, and visibly? thou be near, be joking                      5
    Cling and fondle, a hundred arts redouble?

    O presume not: a wily wit defeated
      Pays in scandalous incapacitation.

    Yet didst folly to fulness add, 'twere all one;
      Now shall beauty to thirst be train'd or hunger's               10
      Grim necessity; this is all my sorrow.

    Then hold, wanton, upon the verge; to-morrow
    Comes preposterous incapacitation.


XXII.

    Suffenus, he, dear Varus, whom, methinks, you know,
      Has sense, a ready tongue to talk, a wit urbane,
      And writes a world of verses, on my life no less.

    Ten times a thousand he, believe me, ten or more,
      Keeps fairly written; not on any palimpsest,                     5
      As often, enter'd, paper extra-fine, sheets new,
      New every roller, red the strings, the parchment-case
      Lead-rul'd, with even pumice all alike complete.

    You read them: our choice spirit, our refin'd rare wit,
      Suffenus, O no ditcher e'er appeared more rude,                 10
      No looby coarser; such a shock, a change is there.

    How then resolve this puzzle? He the birthday-wit,
      For so we thought him--keener yet, if aught is so--
      Becomes a dunce more boorish e'en than hedge-born boor,
      If e'er he faults on verses; yet in heart is then               15
      Most happy, writing verses, happy past compare,
      So sweet his own self, such a world at home finds he.

    Friend, 'tis the common error; all alike are wrong,
    Not one, but in some trifle you shall eye him true
    Suffenus; each man bears from heaven the fault they send, 20
    None sees within the wallet hung behind, our own.


XXIII.

    Needy Furius, house nor hoard possessing,
      Bug or spider, or any fire to thaw you,
      Yet most blest in a father and a step-dame,
      Each for penury fit to tooth a flint-stone:
      Is not happiness yours? a home united?                           5
      Son, sire, mother, a lathy dame to match him.

    Who can wonder? in all is health, digestion,
      Pure and vigorous, hours without a trouble.
      Fires ye fear not, or house's heavy downfal,
      Deeds unnatural, art in act to poison,                          10
      Dangers myriad accidents befalling.

    Then your bodies? in every limb a shrivell'd
      Horn, all dryness in all the world whatever,
      Tann'd or frozen or icy-lean with ages.
      Sure superlative happiness surrounds thee.                      15
      Thee sweat frets not, an o'er-saliva frets not,
    Frets not snivel or oozy rheumy nostril.

    Yet such purity lacks not e'en a purer.
      White those haunches as any cleanly-silver'd
      Salt, it takes you a month to barely dirt them.                 20
      Then like beans, or inert as e'er a pebble,
      Those impeccable heavy loins, a finger's
    Breadth from apathy ne'er seduced to riot.

    Such prosperity, such superb profusion,
    Slight not, Furius, idly nor reject not.                          25
    As for sesterces, all the would-be fortune,
    Cease to wish it; enough, methinks, the present.


XXIV.

    O thou blossom of all the race Juventian
      Not now only, but all as yet arisen,
      All to flower in after-years arising;

      Midas' treasury better you presented
      Him that owns not a slave nor any coffer,                        5
    Ere you suffer his alien arm's presuming.

    What? you fancy him all refin'd perfection?
      Perfect! truly, without a slave, a coffer.

    Slight, reject it, away with it; for all that
      He, he owns not a slave nor any coffer.                         10


XXV.

    Smooth Thallus, inly softer you than any furry rabbit,
      Or glossy goose's oily plumes, or velvet earlap yielding,
      Or feeble age's heavy thighs, or flimsy filthy cobweb;

    And Thallus, hungry rascal you, as hurricane rapacious,
      When winks occasion on the stroke, the gulls agape declaring:    5

    Return the mantle home to me, you watch'd your hour to pilfer,
    The fleecy napkin and the rings from Thynia quaintly graven,
    Whatever you parade as yours, vain fool, a sham reversion:

    Unglue the nails adroit to steal, unclench the spoil, deliver,
      Lest yet that haunch voluptuous, those tender hands caressant,  10
      Should take an ugly print severe, the scourge's heavy branding;

    And strange to bruises you should heave, as heaves in open Ocean,
      Some little hoy surprised adrift, when wails the windy water.


XXVI.

    Draughts, dear Furius, if my villa faces,
    'Tis not showery south, nor airy wester,
    North's grim fury, nor east; 'tis only fifteen
    Thousand sesterces, add two hundred over.
    Draft unspeakable, icy, pestilential!                              5


XXVII.

    Boy, young caterer of Falernian olden,
      Brim me cups of a fiercer harsher essence;
    So Postumia, queen of healths presiding,
      Bids, less thirsty the thirsty grape, the toper.
    But dull water, avaunt. Away the wine-cup's                        5
    Sullen enemy; seek the sour, the solemn!
    Here Thyonius hails his own elixir.


XXVIII.

    Starving company, troop of hungry Piso,
      Light of luggage, of outfit expeditious,
      You, Veranius, you, my own Fabullus,

    Say, what fortune? enough of empty masters,
    Frost and famine, a lingering probation?                           5

    Stands your diary fair? is any profit
      Enter'd _given_? as I to serve a praetor
      Count each beggarly gift a timely profit.

    Trust me, Memmius, you did aptly finger
    My passivity, fool'd me most supinely.                            10

    Friends, confess it; in e'en as hard a fortune
      You stand mulcted, on you a like abashless
      Rake rides heavily. Court the great who wills it!

    Gods and goddesses evil heap upon ye,
    Rogues to Romulus and to Remus outcast.                           15


XXIX.

    Can any brook to see it, any tamely bear--
      If any, gamester, epicure, a wanton, he--
      Mamurra's own whatever all the curly Gauls
      Did else inherit, or the lonely Briton isle?
    Can you look on, look idly, filthy Romulus?                        5

    Shall he, in o'er-assumption, o'er-repletion he,
      Sedately saunter every dainty couch along,
      A bright Adonis, as the snowy dove serene?
      Can you look on, look idly, filthy Romulus?
    Look idly, gamester, epicure, a wanton, you.                      10

    Unique commander, and was only this the plea
      Detain'd you in that islet angle of the west,
      To gorge the shrunk seducer irreclaimable
      With haply twice a million, add a million yet?
    What else was e'er unhealthy prodigality?                         15

    The waste? to lust a little? on the belly less?
      Begin; a glutted hoard paternal; ebb the first.
      To this, the booty Pontic; add the spoil from out
      Iberia, known to Tagus' amber ory stream.
    Not only Gaul, nor only quail the Briton isles.                   20

    What help a rogue to fondle? is not all his act
      To swallow monies, empty purses heap on heap?
    But you--to please him only, shame to Rome, to me!
      Could you the son, the father, idly ruin all?


XXX.

    False Alfenus, in all amity frail, duty a prodigal,
    Doth thy pity depart? Shall not a friend, traitor, a friend recal

    Love? what courage is here me to betray, me to repudiate?
        .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

        .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .       5
    Never sure did a lie, never a sin, please the celestials.

    This you heed not; alas! leave me to new misery, desolate.       (5)
    O where now shall a man trust? liveth yet any fidelity?

    You, you only did urge love to be free, life to surrender, you.
    Guiding into the snare, falsely secure, prophet of happiness.     10

    Now you leave me, retract, every deed, every word allow
    Into nullity winds far to remove, vapoury clouds to bear.       (10)

    You forget me, but yet surely the Gods, surely remembereth
    Faith; hereafter again honour awakes, causeth a wretch to rue.


XXXI.

    O thou of islands jewel and of half-islands,
      Fair Sirmio, whatever o'er the lakes' clear rim
      Or waste of ocean, Neptune holds, a two-fold pow'r;
    What joy have I to see thee, and to gaze what glee!

    Scarce yet believing Thunia past, the fair champaign               5
      Bithunian, yet in safety thee to greet once more.
      From cares to part us--where is any joy like this?

    Then drops the soul her fardel, as the travel-tir'd
      World-weary wand'rer touches home, returns, sinks down
      In joy to slumber on the bed desir'd so long.                   10
    This meed, this only counts for e'en an age all toil.

    O take a welcome, lovely Sirmio, thy lord's,
      And greet him happy; greet him all the lake Lydian;
      Laugh out whatever laughter at the hearth rings clear.


XXXII.

    List, I charge thee, my gentle Ipsithilla,
      Lovely ravisher and my dainty mistress,
      Say we'll linger a lazy noon together.

    Suits my company? lend a farther hearing:
      See no jealousy make the gate against me,                        5
      See no fantasy lead thee out a-roaming.
      Keep close chamber; anon in all profusion
      Count me kisses again again returning.

    Bides thy will? with a sudden haste command me;
      Full and wistful, at ease reclin'd, a lover                     10
      Here I languish alone, supinely dreaming.


XXXIII.

    Master-robber of all that haunt the bath-rooms,
      Old Vibennius, and his heir the wanton;
      (His the dirtier hands, the greedy father,
    Yours the filthier heart, his heir as hungry;)

    Please your knaveries hoist a sail for exile,                      5
      Pains and privacy? since by this the father's
      Thefts are palpable, and a rusty favour,
    Son, picks never a penny from the people.


XXXIV.

    Great Diana protecteth us,
    Maids and boyhood in innocence.
    Maidens virtuous, innocent
            Boys, your song be Diana.
    Hail, Latonia, thou that art                                       5
    Throned daughter of enthronis'd
    Jove; near Delian olive of
            Mighty mother y-boren.
    Queen of mountainous heights, of all
    Forests leafy, delightable;                                       10
    Glens in bowery depths remote,
            Rivers wrathfully sounding.
    Thee, Lucina, the travailing
    Mother haileth, a sovereign
    Juno; Trivia thou, the bright                                     15
            Moon, a glory reflected.
    Thou thine annual orb anew,
    Goddess, monthly remeasuring,
    Farmsteads lowly with affluent
            Corn dost fill to the flowing.                            20
    Be thy heavenly name whate'er
    Name shall please thee, in hallowing;
    Still keep safely the glorious
            Race of Romulus olden.


XXXV.

1.

    Take Caecilius, him the tender-hearted
      Bard, my paper, a wish from his Catullus.
      Come from Larius, haste to leave the new-built
    Comum's watery city, seek Verona.

    Some particular intimate reflexions                                5
    One would tell thee, a friend we love together.

2.

    So he'll quickly devour the way, if only
      He's no booby; for all a snowy maiden
      Chide imperious, and her hands around him
    Both in jealousy clasp'd, refuse departure.                       10

    She, if only report the truth bely not,
    Doats, as hardly within her own possession.

3.

    For since lately she read his high-preluding
      Queen of Dindymus, all her heart is ever
      Melting inly with ardour and with anguish.                      15

    Maiden, laudable is that high emotion,
      Muse more rapturous, you, than any Sappho.
      The Great Mother he surely sings divinely.


XXXVI.

1.

    Vilest paper of all dishonour, annals
      Of Volusius, hear my lovely lady's

    Vow, and pay it; awhile she swore to Venus
      And fond Cupid, if ever I returning
      Ceased from enmity, left to launch iambics,                      5

    She would surely devote the sorry poet's
      Choicest rarities unto sooty Vulcan,
      The lame deity, there to blaze lamenting.

    With such drollery, such supreme defiance,
      Swore strange oath to the gods the naughty wanton.              10

2.

    Now, O heavenly child of azure Ocean,
      Queen of Idaly, queen of Urian highlands,

    Who Ancona the fair, the reedy Cnidos
      Hauntest, Amathus and the lawny Golgi,
      Or Dyrrhachium, hostel Adriatic;                                15

    Hear thy votaress, answer her petition;
      'Tis most graceful, a dainty thought to charm thee.

    But ye verses, away to fire, to burning,
      Rank rusticities, empty vapid annals
      Of Volusius, heap of all dishonour.                             20


XXXVII.

1.

    O frowsy tavern, frowsy fellowship therein,
      Ninth post in order next beyond the twins cap-crown'd,

    Shall manly service none but you alone employ,
      Shall you alone whatever in the world smiles fair,
      Possess it, every other hold to lack esteem?                     5

    Or if in idiot impotence arow you sit,
      One hundred, yes two hundred, am not I, think you,
      A man to bring mine action on your whole row there?

    So think not, he that likes not; answer how you may,
      With scorpion I, with emblem all your haunt will scrawl.        10

2.

    For she the bright one, lately fled beyond these arms,
      The maid belov'd as maiden is belov'd no more,
      Whom I to win, stood often in the breach, fought long,

    Has sat amongst you. Her the grand, the great, all, all
      Do dearly love her; yea, beshrew the damned wrong,              15
      Each slight seducer, every lounger highway-born,

    You chiefly, peerless paragon of the tribe long-lock'd,
      Rude Celtiberia's child, the bushy rabbit-den,

    Egnatius, so modish in the big bush-beard,
      And teeth a native lotion hardly scours quite pure.             20


XXXVIII.

    Cornificius, ill is your Catullus,
      Ill, ah heaven, a weary weight of anguish,
      More more weary with every day, with each hour.

    You deny me the least, the very lightest
      Help, one whisper of happy thought to cheer me.                  5

    Nay, I'm sorrowful. You to slight my passion?
      Ah! one word, but a tiny word to cheer me,
      Sad as ever a tear Simonidean.


XXXIX.

1.

