
He went out into the street, so surrounded and hemmed in on every side
by soldiers, that he could see nothing; but he knew there was a great
crowd of people, by the murmur; and that they were not friendly to the
soldiers, was soon rendered evident by their yells and hisses. How often
and how eagerly he listened for the voice of Hugh! There was not a voice
he knew among them all. Was Hugh a prisoner too? Was there no hope!

As they came nearer and nearer to the prison, the hootings of the people
grew more violent; stones were thrown; and every now and then, a rush
was made against the soldiers, which they staggered under. One of them,
close before him, smarting under a blow upon the temple, levelled his
musket, but the officer struck it upwards with his sword, and ordered
him on peril of his life to desist. This was the last thing he saw
with any distinctness, for directly afterwards he was tossed about,
and beaten to and fro, as though in a tempestuous sea. But go where
he would, there were the same guards about him. Twice or thrice he was
thrown down, and so were they; but even then, he could not elude their
vigilance for a moment. They were up again, and had closed about him,
before he, with his wrists so tightly bound, could scramble to his feet.
Fenced in, thus, he felt himself hoisted to the top of a low flight of
steps, and then for a moment he caught a glimpse of the fighting in
the crowd, and of a few red coats sprinkled together, here and there,
struggling to rejoin their fellows. Next moment, everything was dark and
gloomy, and he was standing in the prison lobby; the centre of a group
of men.

A smith was speedily in attendance, who riveted upon him a set of heavy
irons. Stumbling on as well as he could, beneath the unusual burden of
these fetters, he was conducted to a strong stone cell, where, fastening
the door with locks, and bolts, and chains, they left him, well secured;
having first, unseen by him, thrust in Grip, who, with his head drooping
and his deep black plumes rough and rumpled, appeared to comprehend and
to partake, his master's fallen fortunes.



Chapter 59


It is necessary at this juncture to return to Hugh, who, having, as we
have seen, called to the rioters to disperse from about the Warren, and
meet again as usual, glided back into the darkness from which he had
emerged, and reappeared no more that night.

He paused in the copse which sheltered him from the observation of his
mad companions, and waited to ascertain whether they drew off at his
bidding, or still lingered and called to him to join them. Some few, he
saw, were indisposed to go away without him, and made towards the spot
where he stood concealed as though they were about to follow in his
footsteps, and urge him to come back; but these men, being in their turn
called to by their friends, and in truth not greatly caring to venture
into the dark parts of the grounds, where they might be easily surprised
and taken, if any of the neighbours or retainers of the family were
watching them from among the trees, soon abandoned the idea, and hastily
assembling such men as they found of their mind at the moment, straggled
off.

When he was satisfied that the great mass of the insurgents were
imitating this example, and that the ground was rapidly clearing, he
plunged into the thickest portion of the little wood; and, crashing the
branches as he went, made straight towards a distant light: guided by
that, and by the sullen glow of the fire behind him.

As he drew nearer and nearer to the twinkling beacon towards which he
bent his course, the red glare of a few torches began to reveal itself,
and the voices of men speaking together in a subdued tone broke the
silence which, save for a distant shouting now and then, already
prevailed. At length he cleared the wood, and, springing across a ditch,
stood in a dark lane, where a small body of ill-looking vagabonds, whom
he had left there some twenty minutes before, waited his coming with
impatience.

They were gathered round an old post-chaise or chariot, driven by one of
themselves, who sat postilion-wise upon the near horse. The blinds were
drawn up, and Mr Tappertit and Dennis kept guard at the two windows. The
former assumed the command of the party, for he challenged Hugh as he
advanced towards them; and when he did so, those who were resting on the
ground about the carriage rose to their feet and clustered round him.

'Well!' said Simon, in a low voice; 'is all right?'

'Right enough,' replied Hugh, in the same tone. 'They're dispersing
now--had begun before I came away.'

'And is the coast clear?'

'Clear enough before our men, I take it,' said Hugh. 'There are not many
who, knowing of their work over yonder, will want to meddle with 'em
to-night.--Who's got some drink here?'

Everybody had some plunder from the cellar; half-a-dozen flasks and
bottles were offered directly. He selected the largest, and putting it
to his mouth, sent the wine gurgling down his throat. Having emptied
it, he threw it down, and stretched out his hand for another, which he
emptied likewise, at a draught. Another was given him, and this he half
emptied too. Reserving what remained to finish with, he asked:

'Have you got anything to eat, any of you? I'm as ravenous as a hungry
wolf. Which of you was in the larder--come?'

'I was, brother,' said Dennis, pulling off his hat, and fumbling in
the crown. 'There's a matter of cold venison pasty somewhere or another
here, if that'll do.'

'Do!' cried Hugh, seating himself on the pathway. 'Bring it out! Quick!
Show a light here, and gather round! Let me sup in state, my lads! Ha ha
ha!'

Entering into his boisterous humour, for they all had drunk deeply, and
were as wild as he, they crowded about him, while two of their number
who had torches, held them up, one on either side of him, that his
banquet might not be despatched in the dark. Mr Dennis, having by this
time succeeded in extricating from his hat a great mass of pasty, which
had been wedged in so tightly that it was not easily got out, put it
before him; and Hugh, having borrowed a notched and jagged knife from
one of the company, fell to work upon it vigorously.

'I should recommend you to swallow a little fire every day, about an
hour afore dinner, brother,' said Dennis, after a pause. 'It seems to
agree with you, and to stimulate your appetite.'

Hugh looked at him, and at the blackened faces by which he was
surrounded, and, stopping for a moment to flourish his knife above his
head, answered with a roar of laughter.

'Keep order, there, will you?' said Simon Tappertit.

'Why, isn't a man allowed to regale himself, noble captain,' retorted
his lieutenant, parting the men who stood between them, with his knife,
that he might see him,--'to regale himself a little bit after such work
as mine? What a hard captain! What a strict captain! What a tyrannical
captain! Ha ha ha!'

'I wish one of you fellers would hold a bottle to his mouth to keep him
quiet,' said Simon, 'unless you want the military to be down upon us.'

'And what if they are down upon us!' retorted Hugh. 'Who cares? Who's
afraid? Let 'em come, I say, let 'em come. The more, the merrier. Give
me bold Barnaby at my side, and we two will settle the military, without
troubling any of you. Barnaby's the man for the military. Barnaby's
health!'

But as the majority of those present were by no means anxious for a
second engagement that night, being already weary and exhausted, they
sided with Mr Tappertit, and pressed him to make haste with his supper,
for they had already delayed too long. Knowing, even in the height of
his frenzy, that they incurred great danger by lingering so near the
scene of the late outrages, Hugh made an end of his meal without more
remonstrance, and rising, stepped up to Mr Tappertit, and smote him on
the back.

'Now then,' he cried, 'I'm ready. There are brave birds inside this
cage, eh? Delicate birds,--tender, loving, little doves. I caged 'em--I
caged 'em--one more peep!'

He thrust the little man aside as he spoke, and mounting on the steps,
which were half let down, pulled down the blind by force, and stared
into the chaise like an ogre into his larder.

'Ha ha ha! and did you scratch, and pinch, and struggle, pretty
mistress?' he cried, as he grasped a little hand that sought in vain to
free itself from his grip: 'you, so bright-eyed, and cherry-lipped, and
daintily made? But I love you better for it, mistress. Ay, I do. You
should stab me and welcome, so that it pleased you, and you had to
cure me afterwards. I love to see you proud and scornful. It makes you
handsomer than ever; and who so handsome as you at any time, my pretty
one!'

'Come!' said Mr Tappertit, who had waited during this speech with
considerable impatience. 'There's enough of that. Come down.'

The little hand seconded this admonition by thrusting Hugh's great head
away with all its force, and drawing up the blind, amidst his noisy
laughter, and vows that he must have another look, for the last glimpse
of that sweet face had provoked him past all bearing. However, as the
suppressed impatience of the party now broke out into open murmurs,
he abandoned this design, and taking his seat upon the bar, contented
himself with tapping at the front windows of the carriage, and trying to
steal a glance inside; Mr Tappertit, mounting the steps and hanging on
by the door, issued his directions to the driver with a commanding
voice and attitude; the rest got up behind, or ran by the side of the
carriage, as they could; some, in imitation of Hugh, endeavoured to
see the face he had praised so highly, and were reminded of their
impertinence by hints from the cudgel of Mr Tappertit. Thus they pursued
their journey by circuitous and winding roads; preserving, except when
they halted to take breath, or to quarrel about the best way of reaching
London, pretty good order and tolerable silence.

In the mean time, Dolly--beautiful, bewitching, captivating little
Dolly--her hair dishevelled, her dress torn, her dark eyelashes wet with
tears, her bosom heaving--her face, now pale with fear, now crimsoned
with indignation--her whole self a hundred times more beautiful in
this heightened aspect than ever she had been before--vainly strove to
comfort Emma Haredale, and to impart to her the consolation of which she
stood in so much need herself. The soldiers were sure to come; they must
be rescued; it would be impossible to convey them through the streets
of London when they set the threats of their guards at defiance, and
shrieked to the passengers for help. If they did this when they
came into the more frequented ways, she was certain--she was quite
certain--they must be released. So poor Dolly said, and so poor Dolly
tried to think; but the invariable conclusion of all such arguments was,
that Dolly burst into tears; cried, as she wrung her hands, what would
they do or think, or who would comfort them, at home, at the Golden Key;
and sobbed most piteously.

Miss Haredale, whose feelings were usually of a quieter kind than
Dolly's, and not so much upon the surface, was dreadfully alarmed, and
indeed had only just recovered from a swoon. She was very pale, and the
hand which Dolly held was quite cold; but she bade her, nevertheless,
remember that, under Providence, much must depend upon their own
discretion; that if they remained quiet and lulled the vigilance of the
ruffians into whose hands they had fallen, the chances of their being
able to procure assistance when they reached the town, were very much
increased; that unless society were quite unhinged, a hot pursuit must
be immediately commenced; and that her uncle, she might be sure, would
never rest until he had found them out and rescued them. But as she said
these latter words, the idea that he had fallen in a general massacre of
the Catholics that night--no very wild or improbable supposition after
what they had seen and undergone--struck her dumb; and, lost in the
horrors they had witnessed, and those they might be yet reserved for,
she sat incapable of thought, or speech, or outward show of grief: as
rigid, and almost as white and cold, as marble.

Oh, how many, many times, in that long ride, did Dolly think of her old
lover,--poor, fond, slighted Joe! How many, many times, did she recall
that night when she ran into his arms from the very man now projecting
his hateful gaze into the darkness where she sat, and leering through
the glass in monstrous admiration! And when she thought of Joe, and what
a brave fellow he was, and how he would have rode boldly up, and
dashed in among these villains now, yes, though they were double the
number--and here she clenched her little hand, and pressed her foot upon
the ground--the pride she felt for a moment in having won his heart,
faded in a burst of tears, and she sobbed more bitterly than ever.

As the night wore on, and they proceeded by ways which were quite
unknown to them--for they could recognise none of the objects of which
they sometimes caught a hurried glimpse--their fears increased; nor were
they without good foundation; it was not difficult for two beautiful
young women to find, in their being borne they knew not whither by a
band of daring villains who eyed them as some among these fellows did,
reasons for the worst alarm. When they at last entered London, by a
suburb with which they were wholly unacquainted, it was past midnight,
and the streets were dark and empty. Nor was this the worst, for the
carriage stopping in a lonely spot, Hugh suddenly opened the door,
jumped in, and took his seat between them.

It was in vain they cried for help. He put his arm about the neck of
each, and swore to stifle them with kisses if they were not as silent as
the grave.

'I come here to keep you quiet,' he said, 'and that's the means I shall
take. So don't be quiet, pretty mistresses--make a noise--do--and I
shall like it all the better.'

They were proceeding at a rapid pace, and apparently with fewer
attendants than before, though it was so dark (the torches being
extinguished) that this was mere conjecture. They shrunk from his touch,
each into the farthest corner of the carriage; but shrink as Dolly
would, his arm encircled her waist, and held her fast. She neither cried
nor spoke, for terror and disgust deprived her of the power; but she
plucked at his hand as though she would die in the effort to disengage
herself; and crouching on the ground, with her head averted and held
down, repelled him with a strength she wondered at as much as he. The
carriage stopped again.

'Lift this one out,' said Hugh to the man who opened the door, as
he took Miss Haredale's hand, and felt how heavily it fell. 'She's
fainted.'

'So much the better,' growled Dennis--it was that amiable gentleman.
'She's quiet. I always like 'em to faint, unless they're very tender and
composed.'

'Can you take her by yourself?' asked Hugh.

'I don't know till I try. I ought to be able to; I've lifted up a good
many in my time,' said the hangman. 'Up then! She's no small weight,
brother; none of these here fine gals are. Up again! Now we have her.'

Having by this time hoisted the young lady into his arms, he staggered
off with his burden.

'Look ye, pretty bird,' said Hugh, drawing Dolly towards him. 'Remember
what I told you--a kiss for every cry. Scream, if you love me, darling.
Scream once, mistress. Pretty mistress, only once, if you love me.'

Thrusting his face away with all her force, and holding down her head,
Dolly submitted to be carried out of the chaise, and borne after Miss
Haredale into a miserable cottage, where Hugh, after hugging her to his
breast, set her gently down upon the floor.

Poor Dolly! Do what she would, she only looked the better for it, and
tempted them the more. When her eyes flashed angrily, and her ripe lips
slightly parted, to give her rapid breathing vent, who could resist it?
When she wept and sobbed as though her heart would break, and bemoaned
her miseries in the sweetest voice that ever fell upon a listener's ear,
who could be insensible to the little winning pettishness which now
and then displayed itself, even in the sincerity and earnestness of her
grief? When, forgetful for a moment of herself, as she was now, she fell
on her knees beside her friend, and bent over her, and laid her cheek
to hers, and put her arms about her, what mortal eyes could have avoided
wandering to the delicate bodice, the streaming hair, the neglected
dress, the perfect abandonment and unconsciousness of the blooming
little beauty? Who could look on and see her lavish caresses and
endearments, and not desire to be in Emma Haredale's place; to be either
her or Dolly; either the hugging or the hugged? Not Hugh. Not Dennis.

'I tell you what it is, young women,' said Mr Dennis, 'I an't much of a
lady's man myself, nor am I a party in the present business further than
lending a willing hand to my friends: but if I see much more of this
here sort of thing, I shall become a principal instead of a accessory. I
tell you candid.'

'Why have you brought us here?' said Emma. 'Are we to be murdered?'

'Murdered!' cried Dennis, sitting down upon a stool, and regarding her
with great favour. 'Why, my dear, who'd murder sich chickabiddies as
you? If you was to ask me, now, whether you was brought here to be
married, there might be something in it.'

And here he exchanged a grin with Hugh, who removed his eyes from Dolly
for the purpose.

'No, no,' said Dennis, 'there'll be no murdering, my pets. Nothing of
that sort. Quite the contrairy.'

'You are an older man than your companion, sir,' said Emma, trembling.
'Have you no pity for us? Do you not consider that we are women?'

'I do indeed, my dear,' retorted Dennis. 'It would be very hard not to,
with two such specimens afore my eyes. Ha ha! Oh yes, I consider that.
We all consider that, miss.'

He shook his head waggishly, leered at Hugh again, and laughed very
much, as if he had said a noble thing, and rather thought he was coming
out.

'There'll be no murdering, my dear. Not a bit on it. I tell you what
though, brother,' said Dennis, cocking his hat for the convenience
of scratching his head, and looking gravely at Hugh, 'it's worthy of
notice, as a proof of the amazing equalness and dignity of our law, that
it don't make no distinction between men and women. I've heerd the judge
say, sometimes, to a highwayman or housebreaker as had tied the ladies
neck and heels--you'll excuse me making mention of it, my darlings--and
put 'em in a cellar, that he showed no consideration to women. Now, I
say that there judge didn't know his business, brother; and that if
I had been that there highwayman or housebreaker, I should have made
answer: "What are you a talking of, my lord? I showed the women as much
consideration as the law does, and what more would you have me do?" If
you was to count up in the newspapers the number of females as have
been worked off in this here city alone, in the last ten year,' said Mr
Dennis thoughtfully, 'you'd be surprised at the total--quite amazed, you
would. There's a dignified and equal thing; a beautiful thing! But we've
no security for its lasting. Now that they've begun to favour these here
Papists, I shouldn't wonder if they went and altered even THAT, one of
these days. Upon my soul, I shouldn't.'

The subject, perhaps from being of too exclusive and professional a
nature, failed to interest Hugh as much as his friend had anticipated.
But he had no time to pursue it, for at this crisis Mr Tappertit entered
precipitately; at sight of whom Dolly uttered a scream of joy, and
fairly threw herself into his arms.

'I knew it, I was sure of it!' cried Dolly. 'My dear father's at the
door. Thank God, thank God! Bless you, Sim. Heaven bless you for this!'

Simon Tappertit, who had at first implicitly believed that the
locksmith's daughter, unable any longer to suppress her secret passion
for himself, was about to give it full vent in its intensity, and to
declare that she was his for ever, looked extremely foolish when she
said these words;--the more so, as they were received by Hugh and Dennis
with a loud laugh, which made her draw back, and regard him with a fixed
and earnest look.

'Miss Haredale,' said Sim, after a very awkward silence, 'I hope
you're as comfortable as circumstances will permit of. Dolly Varden,
my darling--my own, my lovely one--I hope YOU'RE pretty comfortable
likewise.'

Poor little Dolly! She saw how it was; hid her face in her hands; and
sobbed more bitterly than ever.

'You meet in me, Miss V.,' said Simon, laying his hand upon his breast,
'not a 'prentice, not a workman, not a slave, not the wictim of your
father's tyrannical behaviour, but the leader of a great people, the
captain of a noble band, in which these gentlemen are, as I may say,
corporals and serjeants. You behold in me, not a private individual, but
a public character; not a mender of locks, but a healer of the wounds of
his unhappy country. Dolly V., sweet Dolly V., for how many years have
I looked forward to this present meeting! For how many years has it been
my intention to exalt and ennoble you! I redeem it. Behold in me, your
husband. Yes, beautiful Dolly--charmer--enslaver--S. Tappertit is all
your own!'

As he said these words he advanced towards her. Dolly retreated till she
could go no farther, and then sank down upon the floor. Thinking it very
possible that this might be maiden modesty, Simon essayed to raise her;
on which Dolly, goaded to desperation, wound her hands in his hair, and
crying out amidst her tears that he was a dreadful little wretch, and
always had been, shook, and pulled, and beat him, until he was fain to
call for help, most lustily. Hugh had never admired her half so much as
at that moment.

'She's in an excited state to-night,' said Simon, as he smoothed his
rumpled feathers, 'and don't know when she's well off. Let her be by
herself till to-morrow, and that'll bring her down a little. Carry her
into the next house!'

Hugh had her in his arms directly. It might be that Mr Tappertit's heart
was really softened by her distress, or it might be that he felt it in
some degree indecorous that his intended bride should be struggling in
the grasp of another man. He commanded him, on second thoughts, to put
her down again, and looked moodily on as she flew to Miss Haredale's
side, and clinging to her dress, hid her flushed face in its folds.

'They shall remain here together till to-morrow,' said Simon, who had
now quite recovered his dignity--'till to-morrow. Come away!'

'Ay!' cried Hugh. 'Come away, captain. Ha ha ha!'

'What are you laughing at?' demanded Simon sternly.

'Nothing, captain, nothing,' Hugh rejoined; and as he spoke, and clapped
his hand upon the shoulder of the little man, he laughed again, for some
unknown reason, with tenfold violence.

Mr Tappertit surveyed him from head to foot with lofty scorn (this only
made him laugh the more), and turning to the prisoners, said:

'You'll take notice, ladies, that this place is well watched on every
side, and that the least noise is certain to be attended with unpleasant
consequences. You'll hear--both of you--more of our intentions
to-morrow. In the mean time, don't show yourselves at the window, or
appeal to any of the people you may see pass it; for if you do, it'll
be known directly that you come from a Catholic house, and all the
exertions our men can make, may not be able to save your lives.'

With this last caution, which was true enough, he turned to the door,
followed by Hugh and Dennis. They paused for a moment, going out, to
look at them clasped in each other's arms, and then left the cottage;
fastening the door, and setting a good watch upon it, and indeed all
round the house.

'I say,' growled Dennis, as they walked away in company, 'that's a
dainty pair. Muster Gashford's one is as handsome as the other, eh?'

'Hush!' said Hugh, hastily. 'Don't you mention names. It's a bad habit.'

'I wouldn't like to be HIM, then (as you don't like names), when he
breaks it out to her; that's all,' said Dennis. 'She's one of them fine,
black-eyed, proud gals, as I wouldn't trust at such times with a knife
too near 'em. I've seen some of that sort, afore now. I recollect one
that was worked off, many year ago--and there was a gentleman in that
case too--that says to me, with her lip a trembling, but her hand as
steady as ever I see one: "Dennis, I'm near my end, but if I had a
dagger in these fingers, and he was within my reach, I'd strike him dead
afore me;"--ah, she did--and she'd have done it too!'

Strike who dead?' demanded Hugh.

'How should I know, brother?' answered Dennis. 'SHE never said; not
she.'

Hugh looked, for a moment, as though he would have made some further
inquiry into this incoherent recollection; but Simon Tappertit, who had
been meditating deeply, gave his thoughts a new direction.

'Hugh!' said Sim. 'You have done well to-day. You shall be rewarded.
So have you, Dennis.--There's no young woman YOU want to carry off, is
there?'

'N--no,' returned that gentleman, stroking his grizzly beard, which was
some two inches long. 'None in partickler, I think.'

'Very good,' said Sim; 'then we'll find some other way of making it up
to you. As to you, old boy'--he turned to Hugh--'you shall have Miggs
(her that I promised you, you know) within three days. Mind. I pass my
word for it.'

Hugh thanked him heartily; and as he did so, his laughing fit returned
with such violence that he was obliged to hold his side with one hand,
and to lean with the other on the shoulder of his small captain, without
whose support he would certainly have rolled upon the ground.



Chapter 60


The three worthies turned their faces towards The Boot, with the
intention of passing the night in that place of rendezvous, and of
seeking the repose they so much needed in the shelter of their old
den; for now that the mischief and destruction they had purposed were
achieved, and their prisoners were safely bestowed for the night, they
began to be conscious of exhaustion, and to feel the wasting effects of
the madness which had led to such deplorable results.

Notwithstanding the lassitude and fatigue which oppressed him now, in
common with his two companions, and indeed with all who had taken an
active share in that night's work, Hugh's boisterous merriment broke out
afresh whenever he looked at Simon Tappertit, and vented itself--much to
that gentleman's indignation--in such shouts of laughter as bade fair to
bring the watch upon them, and involve them in a skirmish, to which in
their present worn-out condition they might prove by no means equal.
Even Mr Dennis, who was not at all particular on the score of gravity
or dignity, and who had a great relish for his young friend's eccentric
humours, took occasion to remonstrate with him on this imprudent
behaviour, which he held to be a species of suicide, tantamount to a
man's working himself off without being overtaken by the law, than which
he could imagine nothing more ridiculous or impertinent.

Not abating one jot of his noisy mirth for these remonstrances, Hugh
reeled along between them, having an arm of each, until they hove in
sight of The Boot, and were within a field or two of that convenient
tavern. He happened by great good luck to have roared and shouted
himself into silence by this time. They were proceeding onward without
noise, when a scout who had been creeping about the ditches all night,
to warn any stragglers from encroaching further on what was now such
dangerous ground, peeped cautiously from his hiding-place, and called to
them to stop.

'Stop! and why?' said Hugh.

Because (the scout replied) the house was filled with constables and
soldiers; having been surprised that afternoon. The inmates had fled
or been taken into custody, he could not say which. He had prevented a
great many people from approaching nearer, and he believed they had
gone to the markets and such places to pass the night. He had seen the
distant fires, but they were all out now. He had heard the people who
passed and repassed, speaking of them too, and could report that the
prevailing opinion was one of apprehension and dismay. He had not heard
a word of Barnaby--didn't even know his name--but it had been said in
his hearing that some man had been taken and carried off to Newgate.
Whether this was true or false, he could not affirm.

The three took counsel together, on hearing this, and debated what it
might be best to do. Hugh, deeming it possible that Barnaby was in the
hands of the soldiers, and at that moment under detention at The Boot,
was for advancing stealthily, and firing the house; but his companions,
who objected to such rash measures unless they had a crowd at their
backs, represented that if Barnaby were taken he had assuredly been
removed to a stronger prison; they would never have dreamed of keeping
him all night in a place so weak and open to attack. Yielding to this
reasoning, and to their persuasions, Hugh consented to turn back and
to repair to Fleet Market; for which place, it seemed, a few of their
boldest associates had shaped their course, on receiving the same
intelligence.

Feeling their strength recruited and their spirits roused, now that
there was a new necessity for action, they hurried away, quite forgetful
of the fatigue under which they had been sinking but a few minutes
before; and soon arrived at their new place of destination.

Fleet Market, at that time, was a long irregular row of wooden sheds
and penthouses, occupying the centre of what is now called Farringdon
Street. They were jumbled together in a most unsightly fashion, in the
middle of the road; to the great obstruction of the thoroughfare and the
annoyance of passengers, who were fain to make their way, as they best
could, among carts, baskets, barrows, trucks, casks, bulks, and benches,
and to jostle with porters, hucksters, waggoners, and a motley crowd
of buyers, sellers, pick-pockets, vagrants, and idlers. The air was
perfumed with the stench of rotten leaves and faded fruit; the refuse of
the butchers' stalls, and offal and garbage of a hundred kinds. It
was indispensable to most public conveniences in those days, that they
should be public nuisances likewise; and Fleet Market maintained the
principle to admiration.

To this place, perhaps because its sheds and baskets were a tolerable
substitute for beds, or perhaps because it afforded the means of a hasty
barricade in case of need, many of the rioters had straggled, not only
that night, but for two or three nights before. It was now broad day,
but the morning being cold, a group of them were gathered round a fire
in a public-house, drinking hot purl, and smoking pipes, and planning
new schemes for to-morrow.

Hugh and his two friends being known to most of these men, were received
with signal marks of approbation, and inducted into the most honourable
seats. The room-door was closed and fastened to keep intruders at a
distance, and then they proceeded to exchange news.

'The soldiers have taken possession of The Boot, I hear,' said Hugh.
'Who knows anything about it?'

Several cried that they did; but the majority of the company having
been engaged in the assault upon the Warren, and all present having been
concerned in one or other of the night's expeditions, it proved that
they knew no more than Hugh himself; having been merely warned by each
other, or by the scout, and knowing nothing of their own knowledge.

'We left a man on guard there to-day,' said Hugh, looking round him,
'who is not here. You know who it is--Barnaby, who brought the soldier
down, at Westminster. Has any man seen or heard of him?'

They shook their heads, and murmured an answer in the negative, as each
man looked round and appealed to his fellow; when a noise was heard
without, and a man was heard to say that he wanted Hugh--that he must
see Hugh.

'He is but one man,' cried Hugh to those who kept the door; 'let him
come in.'

'Ay, ay!' muttered the others. 'Let him come in. Let him come in.'

The door was accordingly unlocked and opened. A one-armed man, with
his head and face tied up with a bloody cloth, as though he had been
severely beaten, his clothes torn, and his remaining hand grasping a
thick stick, rushed in among them, and panting for breath, demanded
which was Hugh.

'Here he is,' replied the person he inquired for. 'I am Hugh. What do
you want with me?'

'I have a message for you,' said the man. 'You know one Barnaby.'

'What of him? Did he send the message?'

'Yes. He's taken. He's in one of the strong cells in Newgate. He
defended himself as well as he could, but was overpowered by numbers.
That's his message.'

'When did you see him?' asked Hugh, hastily.

'On his way to prison, where he was taken by a party of soldiers. They
took a by-road, and not the one we expected. I was one of the few who
tried to rescue him, and he called to me, and told me to tell Hugh where
he was. We made a good struggle, though it failed. Look here!'

He pointed to his dress and to his bandaged head, and still panting for
breath, glanced round the room; then faced towards Hugh again.

'I know you by sight,' he said, 'for I was in the crowd on Friday, and
on Saturday, and yesterday, but I didn't know your name. You're a bold
fellow, I know. So is he. He fought like a lion tonight, but it was of
no use. I did my best, considering that I want this limb.'

Again he glanced inquisitively round the room or seemed to do so, for
his face was nearly hidden by the bandage--and again facing sharply
towards Hugh, grasped his stick as if he half expected to be set upon,
and stood on the defensive.

If he had any such apprehension, however, he was speedily reassured by
the demeanour of all present. None thought of the bearer of the tidings.
He was lost in the news he brought. Oaths, threats, and execrations,
were vented on all sides. Some cried that if they bore this tamely,
another day would see them all in jail; some, that they should have
rescued the other prisoners, and this would not have happened. One man
cried in a loud voice, 'Who'll follow me to Newgate!' and there was a
loud shout and general rush towards the door.

But Hugh and Dennis stood with their backs against it, and kept them
back, until the clamour had so far subsided that their voices could be
heard, when they called to them together that to go now, in broad day,
would be madness; and that if they waited until night and arranged a
plan of attack, they might release, not only their own companions, but
all the prisoners, and burn down the jail.

'Not that jail alone,' cried Hugh, 'but every jail in London. They shall
have no place to put their prisoners in. We'll burn them all down; make
bonfires of them every one! Here!' he cried, catching at the hangman's
hand. 'Let all who're men here, join with us. Shake hands upon it.
Barnaby out of jail, and not a jail left standing! Who joins?'

Every man there. And they swore a great oath to release their friends
from Newgate next night; to force the doors and burn the jail; or perish
in the fire themselves.



Chapter 61


On that same night--events so crowd upon each other in convulsed and
distracted times, that more than the stirring incidents of a whole life
often become compressed into the compass of four-and-twenty hours--on
that same night, Mr Haredale, having strongly bound his prisoner,
with the assistance of the sexton, and forced him to mount his horse,
conducted him to Chigwell; bent upon procuring a conveyance to London
from that place, and carrying him at once before a justice. The
disturbed state of the town would be, he knew, a sufficient reason for
demanding the murderer's committal to prison before daybreak, as no man
could answer for the security of any of the watch-houses or ordinary
places of detention; and to convey a prisoner through the streets when
the mob were again abroad, would not only be a task of great danger and
hazard, but would be to challenge an attempt at rescue. Directing the
sexton to lead the horse, he walked close by the murderer's side, and in
this order they reached the village about the middle of the night.

The people were all awake and up, for they were fearful of being burnt
in their beds, and sought to comfort and assure each other by watching
in company. A few of the stoutest-hearted were armed and gathered in a
body on the green. To these, who knew him well, Mr Haredale addressed
himself, briefly narrating what had happened, and beseeching them to aid
in conveying the criminal to London before the dawn of day.

But not a man among them dared to help him by so much as the motion of
a finger. The rioters, in their passage through the village, had
menaced with their fiercest vengeance, any person who should aid in
extinguishing the fire, or render the least assistance to him, or any
Catholic whomsoever. Their threats extended to their lives and all they
possessed. They were assembled for their own protection, and could not
endanger themselves by lending any aid to him. This they told him, not
without hesitation and regret, as they kept aloof in the moonlight and
glanced fearfully at the ghostly rider, who, with his head drooping on
his breast and his hat slouched down upon his brow, neither moved nor
spoke.

Finding it impossible to persuade them, and indeed hardly knowing how
to do so after what they had seen of the fury of the crowd, Mr Haredale
besought them that at least they would leave him free to act for
himself, and would suffer him to take the only chaise and pair of
horses that the place afforded. This was not acceded to without some
difficulty, but in the end they told him to do what he would, and go
away from them in heaven's name.

Leaving the sexton at the horse's bridle, he drew out the chaise
with his own hands, and would have harnessed the horses, but that the
post-boy of the village--a soft-hearted, good-for-nothing, vagabond kind
of fellow--was moved by his earnestness and passion, and, throwing down
a pitchfork with which he was armed, swore that the rioters might cut
him into mincemeat if they liked, but he would not stand by and see
an honest gentleman who had done no wrong, reduced to such extremity,
without doing what he could to help him. Mr Haredale shook him warmly
by the hand, and thanked him from his heart. In five minutes' time the
chaise was ready, and this good scapegrace in his saddle. The murderer
was put inside, the blinds were drawn up, the sexton took his seat upon
the bar, Mr Haredale mounted his horse and rode close beside the door;
and so they started in the dead of night, and in profound silence, for
London.

The consternation was so extreme that even the horses which had escaped
the flames at the Warren, could find no friends to shelter them. They
passed them on the road, browsing on the stunted grass; and the driver
told them, that the poor beasts had wandered to the village first, but
had been driven away, lest they should bring the vengeance of the crowd
on any of the inhabitants.

Nor was this feeling confined to such small places, where the people
were timid, ignorant, and unprotected. When they came near London they
met, in the grey light of morning, more than one poor Catholic family
who, terrified by the threats and warnings of their neighbours, were
quitting the city on foot, and who told them they could hire no cart or
horse for the removal of their goods, and had been compelled to leave
them behind, at the mercy of the crowd. Near Mile End they passed a
house, the master of which, a Catholic gentleman of small means, having
hired a waggon to remove his furniture by midnight, had had it all
brought down into the street, to wait the vehicle's arrival, and save
time in the packing. But the man with whom he made the bargain, alarmed
by the fires that night, and by the sight of the rioters passing his
door, had refused to keep it: and the poor gentleman, with his wife and
servant and their little children, were sitting trembling among their
goods in the open street, dreading the arrival of day and not knowing
where to turn or what to do.

It was the same, they heard, with the public conveyances. The panic
was so great that the mails and stage-coaches were afraid to carry
passengers who professed the obnoxious religion. If the drivers knew
them, or they admitted that they held that creed, they would not take
them, no, though they offered large sums; and yesterday, people had
been afraid to recognise Catholic acquaintance in the streets, lest
they should be marked by spies, and burnt out, as it was called, in
consequence. One mild old man--a priest, whose chapel was destroyed;
a very feeble, patient, inoffensive creature--who was trudging away,
alone, designing to walk some distance from town, and then try his
fortune with the coaches, told Mr Haredale that he feared he might not
find a magistrate who would have the hardihood to commit a prisoner to
jail, on his complaint. But notwithstanding these discouraging accounts
they went on, and reached the Mansion House soon after sunrise.

Mr Haredale threw himself from his horse, but he had no need to knock
at the door, for it was already open, and there stood upon the step
a portly old man, with a very red, or rather purple face, who with an
anxious expression of countenance, was remonstrating with some unseen
personage upstairs, while the porter essayed to close the door by
degrees and get rid of him. With the intense impatience and excitement
natural to one in his condition, Mr Haredale thrust himself forward and
was about to speak, when the fat old gentleman interposed:

'My good sir,' said he, 'pray let me get an answer. This is the sixth
time I have been here. I was here five times yesterday. My house is
threatened with destruction. It is to be burned down to-night, and was
to have been last night, but they had other business on their hands.
Pray let me get an answer.'

'My good sir,' returned Mr Haredale, shaking his head, 'my house is
burned to the ground. But heaven forbid that yours should be. Get your
answer. Be brief, in mercy to me.'

'Now, you hear this, my lord?'--said the old gentleman, calling up
the stairs, to where the skirt of a dressing-gown fluttered on the
landing-place. 'Here is a gentleman here, whose house was actually burnt
down last night.'

'Dear me, dear me,' replied a testy voice, 'I am very sorry for it, but
what am I to do? I can't build it up again. The chief magistrate of the
city can't go and be a rebuilding of people's houses, my good sir. Stuff
and nonsense!'

'But the chief magistrate of the city can prevent people's houses from
having any need to be rebuilt, if the chief magistrate's a man, and
not a dummy--can't he, my lord?' cried the old gentleman in a choleric
manner.

'You are disrespectable, sir,' said the Lord Mayor--'leastways,
disrespectful I mean.'

'Disrespectful, my lord!' returned the old gentleman. 'I was respectful
five times yesterday. I can't be respectful for ever. Men can't stand
on being respectful when their houses are going to be burnt over their
heads, with them in 'em. What am I to do, my lord? AM I to have any
protection!'

'I told you yesterday, sir,' said the Lord Mayor, 'that you might have
an alderman in your house, if you could get one to come.'

'What the devil's the good of an alderman?' returned the choleric old
gentleman.

'--To awe the crowd, sir,' said the Lord Mayor.

'Oh Lord ha' mercy!' whimpered the old gentleman, as he wiped his
forehead in a state of ludicrous distress, 'to think of sending an
alderman to awe a crowd! Why, my lord, if they were even so many babies,
fed on mother's milk, what do you think they'd care for an alderman!
Will YOU come?'

'I!' said the Lord Mayor, most emphatically: 'Certainly not.'

'Then what,' returned the old gentleman, 'what am I to do? Am I a
citizen of England? Am I to have the benefit of the laws? Am I to have
any return for the King's taxes?'

'I don't know, I am sure,' said the Lord Mayor; 'what a pity it is
you're a Catholic! Why couldn't you be a Protestant, and then you
wouldn't have got yourself into such a mess? I'm sure I don't know
what's to be done.--There are great people at the bottom of these
riots.--Oh dear me, what a thing it is to be a public character!--You
must look in again in the course of the day.--Would a javelin-man
do?--Or there's Philips the constable,--HE'S disengaged,--he's not very
old for a man at his time of life, except in his legs, and if you put
him up at a window he'd look quite young by candle-light, and might
frighten 'em very much.--Oh dear!--well!--we'll see about it.'

'Stop!' cried Mr Haredale, pressing the door open as the porter strove
to shut it, and speaking rapidly, 'My Lord Mayor, I beg you not to go
away. I have a man here, who committed a murder eight-and-twenty years
ago. Half-a-dozen words from me, on oath, will justify you in committing
him to prison for re-examination. I only seek, just now, to have him
consigned to a place of safety. The least delay may involve his being
rescued by the rioters.'

'Oh dear me!' cried the Lord Mayor. 'God bless my soul--and body--oh
Lor!--well I!--there are great people at the bottom of these riots, you
know.--You really mustn't.'

'My lord,' said Mr Haredale, 'the murdered gentleman was my brother; I
succeeded to his inheritance; there were not wanting slanderous tongues
at that time, to whisper that the guilt of this most foul and cruel deed
was mine--mine, who loved him, as he knows, in Heaven, dearly. The time
has come, after all these years of gloom and misery, for avenging him,
and bringing to light a crime so artful and so devilish that it has no
parallel. Every second's delay on your part loosens this man's bloody
hands again, and leads to his escape. My lord, I charge you hear me, and
despatch this matter on the instant.'

'Oh dear me!' cried the chief magistrate; 'these an't business
hours, you know--I wonder at you--how ungentlemanly it is of you--you
mustn't--you really mustn't.--And I suppose you are a Catholic too?'

'I am,' said Mr Haredale.

'God bless my soul, I believe people turn Catholics a'purpose to vex
and worrit me,' cried the Lord Mayor. 'I wish you wouldn't come here;
they'll be setting the Mansion House afire next, and we shall have you
to thank for it. You must lock your prisoner up, sir--give him to a
watchman--and--call again at a proper time. Then we'll see about it!'

Before Mr Haredale could answer, the sharp closing of a door and drawing
of its bolts, gave notice that the Lord Mayor had retreated to his
bedroom, and that further remonstrance would be unavailing. The two
clients retreated likewise, and the porter shut them out into the
street.

'That's the way he puts me off,' said the old gentleman, 'I can get no
redress and no help. What are you going to do, sir?'

'To try elsewhere,' answered Mr Haredale, who was by this time on
horseback.

'I feel for you, I assure you--and well I may, for we are in a common
cause,' said the old gentleman. 'I may not have a house to offer you
to-night; let me tender it while I can. On second thoughts though,' he
added, putting up a pocket-book he had produced while speaking, 'I'll
not give you a card, for if it was found upon you, it might get you
into trouble. Langdale--that's my name--vintner and distiller--Holborn
Hill--you're heartily welcome, if you'll come.'

Mr Haredale bowed, and rode off, close beside the chaise as before;
determining to repair to the house of Sir John Fielding, who had the
reputation of being a bold and active magistrate, and fully resolved, in
case the rioters should come upon them, to do execution on the murderer
with his own hands, rather than suffer him to be released.

They arrived at the magistrate's dwelling, however, without molestation
(for the mob, as we have seen, were then intent on deeper schemes), and
knocked at the door. As it had been pretty generally rumoured that Sir
John was proscribed by the rioters, a body of thief-takers had been
keeping watch in the house all night. To one of them Mr Haredale stated
his business, which appearing to the man of sufficient moment to warrant
his arousing the justice, procured him an immediate audience.

No time was lost in committing the murderer to Newgate; then a new
building, recently completed at a vast expense, and considered to be of
enormous strength. The warrant being made out, three of the thief-takers
bound him afresh (he had been struggling, it seemed, in the chaise, and
had loosened his manacles); gagged him lest they should meet with any
of the mob, and he should call to them for help; and seated themselves,
along with him, in the carriage. These men being all well armed, made
a formidable escort; but they drew up the blinds again, as though the
carriage were empty, and directed Mr Haredale to ride forward, that he
might not attract attention by seeming to belong to it.

