
"You said 'at such a time,' sir."

"I did."

"And why not at this time, as well as another?"

"God bless me! Is it possible you don't know?"

"It is not only possible, but certain."

The Doctor bent his head, pointed up at a window, and whispered; then
went softly up the three steps into the house.

He left the two friends staring at each other.  They stood and stared
at each other for three minutes or more.  Then Captain Barker spoke
in a hoarse whisper.

"Jemmy, do you know anything about this--this kind of business?"

"Nothing.  I was abroad, you know, when my own little maid--"

"Yes, I remember.  But I thought, perhaps--say, I can't go home
till--till I've seen the Doctor again."

"Nor I."

A dull moan sounded within the house.

"Oh, my God!" groaned Captain Runacles; "Meg--Meg!"

A lattice was opened softly above them and the doctor leant out.

"Go away--you two!" he whispered and waved his hand towards the gate.

"But, Doctor--"

"H'sh! I'll come and tell you when it's over.  Where shall you be?"

"At the Three Crowns, down the street here."

"Right."

The lattice was closed again very gently.  Captain Barker laid his
hand upon the tall man's sleeve.

"Jemmy, we're out of this action.  I thought I knew what it meant to
lay-to and have to look on while a fight went forward; but I didn't.
Come--"

They passed out of the courtyard and down the street towards the
Three Crowns.  Beneath the sign of that inn there lounged a knot of
officers wearing the flesh-coloured facings of the Buffs, and within
a young baritone voice was uplifted and trolling, to the
accompaniment of clinking glasses, a song of Mr. Shirley's:

     You virgins that did late despair
        To keep your wealth from cruel men,
     Tie up in silk your careless hair:
        Soft Peace is come again! . . .

There was one sitting-room but no bedroom to be had at the Three
Crowns.  So they ordered up a dinner which they could not touch, but
sat over in silence for two weary hours, drinking very much more
burgundy than they were aware of.  Captain Jemmy, taking up three
bottles one after another and finding them all empty, ordered up
three more, and drew his chair up to the hearth, where he sat kicking
the oaken logs viciously with his long legs.  The little hunchback
stared out on the falling night, rang for candles, and began to pace
the room like a caged beast.

Before midnight Captain Runacles was drunk.  Six fresh bottles stood
on the table.  The man was a cask.  Even in the warm firelight his
face was pale as a sheet, and his lips worked continually.

Captain Barker still walked up and down, but his thin legs would not
always move in a straight line.  His eyes glared like two globes of
green fire, and he began to knock against the furniture.  Few men can
wait helplessly and come out of it with credit.  Every time Captain
John hit himself against the furniture Captain Jemmy cursed him.

     Tie up in silk your careless hair;
        Soft Peace is come again!

--Sang the little man, in a rasping voice.  "Your careless hair," he
hiccoughed; "your careless hair, Meg!"

Then he sat down on the floor and laughed to himself softly, rocking
his distorted body to and fro.

"Bah!" said his friend, without looking round.  "You're drunk."
And he poured out more burgundy.  He was outrageously drunk himself,
but it only affected his temper, not his wits.

"Meg," he said, "will live.  What's more, she'll live to marry me."

"She won't.  She'll die.  Hist! there's a star falling outside."

He picked himself up and crawled upon the window-seat, clutching at
the red curtains to keep his footing.

"Jemmy, she'll die! What was it that old fool said to-day?
The door's closing on us both.  To think of our marching up, just
now, with those two letters; and the very sun in heaven cracking his
cheeks with laughter at us--us two poor scarecrows making love thirty
years after the time!"

His wry head dropped forward on his chest.

After this the two kept silence.  The rest of the house had long
since gone to rest, and the sound of muffled snoring alone marked the
time as it passed, except when Captain Jemmy, catching up another oak
log, drove it into the fire with his heel; or out in the street the
watch went by, chanting the hour; or a tipsy shouting broke out in
some distant street, or the noise of dogs challenging each other from
their kennels across the sleeping town.

A shudder of light ran across the heavens, and over against the
window Captain Barker saw the east grow pale.  For some while the
stars had been blotted out and light showers had fallen at intervals.
Heavy clouds were banked across the river, behind Shotley; and the
roofs began to glisten as they took the dawn.

Footsteps sounded on the roadway outside.  He pushed open the window
and looked out.  Doctor Beckerleg was coming up the street, his hat
pushed back and his neckcloth loosened as he respired the morning
air.

The footsteps paused underneath, by the inn door; but the little
Captain leant back in the window-seat without making a sign.  He had
seen the Doctor's face.  Before the fire Captain Jemmy brooded, with
chin on breast, hands grasping the chair-rail and long legs stretched
out, one on each side of the hearth.  The knocking below did not
rouse him from this posture, nor the creaking of feet on the stairs.


Doctor Beckerleg stood in the doorway and for a moment contemplated
the scene--the empty bottles, the unsnuffed candles guttering down
upon the table, and the grey faces of both drunken men.  Then he
turned and whispered a word to the drawer, who had hurried out of bed
to admit him and now stood behind his shoulder.  The fellow shuffled
downstairs.

Captain Barker struggled with a question that was dried up in his
throat.  Before he could get it out the Doctor shook his head.

"She is dead," he announced, very gravely and simply.

The hunchback shivered.  Captain Runacles neither spoke nor stirred
in his chair.

"A man-child was born at two o'clock.  He is alive: his mother died
two hours later."

Captain Barker shivered again, plucked aimlessly at a rosette in the
window-cushion, and stole a quick glance at his comrade's back.
Then, putting a finger to his lip, he slid down to the floor and
lurched across to the Doctor.

"She was left penniless?" he whispered.

"That, or almost that, 'tis said," replied Dr. Beckerleg in the same
key, though the question obviously surprised him.  "Her father left
his money to the town, as all know--"

"Yes, yes; I knew that.  Her husband--"

"Hadn't a penny-piece, I believe: pawned her own mother's jewels and
gambled 'em away; thereupon left her, as a dog his cleaned bone."

The little man laid a hand on his collar, and as the doctor stooped
whispered low and rapidly in his ear.

Their colloquy was interrupted.

"I'll adopt that child!" said Captain Runacles from the hearth.
He spoke aloud, but without turning his head.

Captain Barker hopped round, as if a pin were stuck into him.

"You!--adopt Meg's boy!"

"I said that."

"But you won't."

"I shall."

"I'm sorry to disappoint you, Jemmy; but I intend to adopt him
myself."

"I know it.  You were whispering as much to the Doctor there."

"You have a little girl already."

"Precisely.  That's where the difference comes in.  This one, you'll
note, is a boy."

"A child of your own!"

"But not of Meg's."

Captain Runacles turned in his chair as he said this, and, reaching a
hand back to the table, drained the last bottle of burgundy into his
glass.  His face was white as a sheet and his jaw set like iron.
"But not of Meg's," he repeated, lifting the glass and nodding over
it at the pair.

His friend swayed into a chair and sat facing him, his chin but
just above the table and his green eyes glaring like an owl's.

"Jemmy Runacles, _I_ adopt that boy!"

"You're cursedly obstinate, Jack."

"Having adopted him, I shall at once quit my profession and devote
the residue of my life to his education.  For a year or two--that is,
until he reaches an age susceptible of tuition--I shall mature a
scheme of discipline, which--"

"My dear sir," the Doctor interposed, "surely all this is somewhat
precipitate."

"Not at all.  My resolution was taken the instant you entered the
room."

"That hardly seems to me to prove--"

The little man waved aside the interruption and continued:
"Tristram--for I shall have him christened by that name--"

"He'll be called Jeremiah," decided Captain Runacles shortly.

"I've settled upon Tristram.  The name is a suitable one, and
signifies that its wearer is a child of sorrow."

"Jeremiah also suggests lamentations, and has the further merit of
being my own name."

"Tristram--"

"Jeremiah--"

"Gentlemen, gentlemen," cried Dr. Beckerleg, "would it not be as well
to see the infant?"

"I can imagine," Captain Barker answered, "nothing in the infant that
is likely to shake my resolution.  My scheme of discipline will be
based--"

"Decidedly, Jack, I shall have to run you through," said his friend
gloomily.  Indeed, the Doctor stood in instant fear of this
catastrophe; for Captain Runacles' temper was a byword, and not even
his customary dark flush looked so dangerous as the lustreless,
sullen eyes now sunk in a face that was drawn and pinched and
absolutely wax-like in colour.  To the Doctor's astonishment,
however, it was the little hunchback who now jumped up and whipped
out his sword.

"Run me through!" he almost screamed, dancing before the other and
threatening him with absurd flourishes--"Run me through?"

"Listen, gentlemen; listen, before blood is spilt!  To me it appears
evident that you are both drunk."

"To me that seems an advantage, since it equalises matters."

"But whichever of you survives, he will be unable to forgive himself;
having sinned not only against God, but also against logic."

"How against logic?"

"Permit me to demonstrate.  Mrs. Salt, whom (as I well know) you
esteemed, is lost to you; and in her place is left a babe whom--
healthy though he undoubtedly is--you cannot possibly esteem without
taking a great deal for granted, especially as you have not yet set
eyes on him.  Now it is evident that, if one of you should kill the
other, a second life of approved worth will be sacrificed for an
infant of purely hypothetical merits.  As a man of business I condemn
the transaction.  As a Christian I deprecate the shedding of blood.
But if somebody's blood must be shed, let us be reasonable and kill
the baby!"

Captain Barker lowered his point.

"Decidedly the question is more difficult than I imagined."

"At least it cannot be settled before eating," said Dr. Beckerleg, as
the drawer entered with a tray.  "You will forgive me that I took the
liberty of ordering breakfast as soon as I looked into this room.
Without asking to see your tongues, I prescribed dried herrings and
home-brewed ale; for myself, a fried sole, a beef-steak reasonably
under-done, a kidney-pie which the drawer commended on his own
motion, with a smoked cheek of pork, perhaps--"

"You wish us to sit still while you devour all this?"

"I am willing to give each side of the argument a fair chance."

"But I find nothing to argue about!" exclaimed Captain Runacles,
pushing his plate from him after a very faint attempt to eat.
"My mind being already made up--"

