measure was voted "Commodiana." Upon himself he bestowed, in addition to
very many other titles, that of Hercules. Rome he termed "the Immortal,"
"the Fortunate," "the Universal Colony of the Earth" (for he wished it to
seem a settlement of his own). In his honor a gold statue was erected of a
thousand pounds' weight, together with a bull and a cow. Finally, all the
months were likewise called after him, so that they were enumerated as
follows: Amazonian, Invincible, Fortunate, Pious, Lucius, Aelius,
Aurelius, Commodus, August, Herculean, Roman, Transcendent. For he had
assumed these different names at different times. "Amazonian" and
"Transcendent," however, he applied exclusively to himself, to indicate
that in absolutely every respect he unapproachably surpassed all mankind.
So extravagantly did the wretch rave. And to the senate he would send a
despatch couched in these terms: "Caesar Imperator, Lucius Aelius Aurelius
Commodus, Augustus, Pius, Beatus, Sarmaticus, Germanicus, Maximus,
Britannicus, Peacemaker of the World, Invincible, Roman Hercules, High
Priest, Holder of Tribunician Authority for the eighteenth term, Imperator
for the eighth time, Consul for the seventh time, Father of the
Fatherland, to consuls, praetors, tribunes and the Commodian Fortunate
Senate, Greeting." Great numbers of statues were erected displaying him in
the garb of Hercules. And it was voted that his age should be called the
"Golden Age" and that entries to correspond with this should in every case
be made in the records.

[Sidenote:--16--] Now this Golden One, this Hercules, this God (such was
another designation of his) one day in the afternoon rode suddenly from
the suburbs with haste into Rome and conducted thirty horse-races in two
hours. These proceedings had much to do with his running short of money.
He was also fond of bestowing gifts and frequently presented the populace
with one hundred and forty denarii apiece. But most of his expenditures
were for the objects that I have mentioned. [So it was that neither his
general income nor what was provided by Cleander (though incalculable in
amount) sufficed him, and he was compelled to bring charges against both
women and men,--charges not serious enough for capital punishment but
prolific in threats and terror.] Some of these persons he murdered, to
others he sold preservation in return for their property [and got
something from them by constraint under the pretence that it was a
voluntary offering]. And finally on his birthday he ordered us, our wives,
and our children each to contribute two aurei [a year as] a kind of
first-fruits, and the senators in all the other cities five denarii per
head. [Of this, too, he saved not the smallest part, but spent it all
disgracefully on beasts and gladiators.]

[Sidenote: A.D. 192 (a.u. 945)] [Sidenote:--17--] In public he nowhere
drove chariots except sometimes on a moonless night. He became very
desirous to play the character also in public, but, being ashamed to be
seen doing this, he kept it up constantly at home, wearing the Green
uniform. Beasts, moreover, in large numbers were slaughtered at his house
and many also in public. Again, he would contend as gladiator: (at home he
killed a man in this way, and, in pretending to shave others, instead of
taking off the hairs he sliced off one man's nose, another's ears, and
some other feature of a third;) but in public his contests were [Footnote:
It is just barely possible that the original gave some different idea from
"his contests were" (cp. the text of Boissee).] minus the steel and human
blood. Before entering the theatre he would put on a cleeved tonic of
silk, white interwoven with gold, and we greeted him standing there in
this attire. When he actually went in he donned a pure purple dress
sprinkled with gold, assuming also a similar chlamys of Greek pattern and
a crown made of Indic gems and gold, and carried such a herald's staff as
Mercury does. The lion skin and club were carried before him along the
streets, and at the theatres were invariably placed on a gilded chair,
whether he was present or absent. He himself would enter the theatre in
the garb of Mercury, and casting off everything else begin his performance
in simple tunic and unshod.

[Sidenote:--18--] On the first day he individually killed a hundred bears
by shooting down at them from the top of the elevated circle. The whole
theatre had been divided up by some diameters built in, which supported a
circular roof and intersected each other, the object being that the
beasts, divided into four herds, might be more easily speared at short
range from any point. In the midst of the struggle he grew weary, and
taking from a woman some sweet wine cooled in a club-shaped cup drank it
down at a gulp. At this both the populace and we on the instant all
shouted this phrase, common at drinking bouts: "Long life to you!"

Let no one think that I sully the dignity of history in noting down such
happenings. In general I should have preferred not to mention it, but
since it was one of the emperor's acts and I was myself present, taking
part in everything seen and heard and spoken, I have judged it proper to
suppress none of the details, but to hand them down to the attention of
those who shall live hereafter, just as I should do in the case of
anything else especially great and important. And, indeed, all the
remaining events that took place in my lifetime I shall polish and
elaborate more than earlier occurrences for the reason that my evidence is
that of a contemporary and I know no one else who has my ability at
reducing notable things to writing that has studied them so exhaustively
as I.

[Sidenote:--19--] It was on the first day, then, that this took place. On
the others he frequently went down from the raised section to the bottom
of the circle and slaughtered all the tame animals that he approached,
some of them also being led to him or brought before him in nets. He also
killed a tiger, a hippopotamus, and an elephant. After accomplishing this,
he retired, but at the conclusion of breakfast fought again as a
gladiator. The form of fighting which he practiced and the armor which he
used was that pertaining to the so-called _secutor:_ in his right
hand he held the shield and in his left the wooden sword. He prided
himself very greatly upon being left-handed. His antagonist would be some
professional athlete, or, perhaps, gladiator, with a cane; this was
sometimes a man that the emperor himself challenged and sometimes one that
the people chose. In this and other matters he acted the same way as the
other gladiators, except that they go in for a very small sum, whereas
Commodus had twenty-five myriads from the gladiatorial fund given him each
day. There stood beside him during the contest Aemilius Laetus, the
prefect, and Eclectus, his cubicularius. He went through a skirmish, and,
of course, conquered, and then, just as he was, he kissed them [Footnote:
Supplying [Greek: ois] (after Reimar).] with his helmet on. After this the
rest did some fighting.--The first day he personally paired all the
combatants, either down below, where he wore all the attire of Mercury,
including a gilded wand, or else from his place on the elevated platform;
and we took his proceeding as an omen. Later he ascended his customary
seat and from that point viewed the remainder of the spectacle with us.
Nothing more was done that resembled child's play, but great numbers of
men were killed. At one place somebody delayed about slaying and he
fastened the various opponents together and bade them all fight at once.
At that the men so bound struggled one against another and some killed
those who did not belong to their group, since the numbers and the limited
space had brought them into proximity.

[Sidenote:--20--] That spectacle as here described lasted fourteen days.
While the contests were going on we senators invariably attended, along
with the knights, save that Claudius Pompeianus the elder never appeared,
but sent his sons, remaining away himself. He chose rather to be put to
death for this than to behold the child of Marcus as emperor conducting
himself so.--Besides all the rest that we did, we shouted whatever we were
bidden and this sentence continuously: "Thou art lord, and thou art
foremost, of all most fortunate: thou dost conquer, thou shalt conquer;
from everlasting, Amazonian, thou dost conquer!"

Of the rest of the people many did not even enter the theatre and some
managed to steal out quietly, for they were partly ashamed of what was
being done and partly afraid. A story was current that he would like to
shoot a few of them as Hercules had the Stymphalian birds. This story was
believed, too, because once he had gathered all the men in the city who by
disease or some other calamity had lost their feet, had fastened some
dragon's extremities about their knees, and after giving them sponges to
throw instead of stones had killed them with blows of a club, on the
pretence that they were giants.

[Sidenote:--21--] This fear was shared by all, both us and the rest. Here
is another way in which he menaced us senators,--an act which he certainly
expected would be the death of us. He had killed an ostrich, and cutting
off its head he came toward where we were sitting. In his left hand he
held the spoils and in the right stretched aloft his bloody sword. He
spoke not a word, but with a grin wagged his head to and fro, intimating
that he would subject us to this same treatment. And many on the spot
would have perished by the sword for laughing at him (for it was laughter
and not grief that overcame us), had I not myself chewed a laurel leaf,
which I got from my garland, and brought the rest who were sitting near me
to munch similar sprigs, so that in the constant motion of our jaws we
might conceal the fact that we were laughing. After this occurrence he
raised our spirits, since before fighting again as a gladiator he bade us
enter the theatre in the equestrian garb and with woolen cloaks. (This was
something we never do when going into the theatre unless some emperor has
passed away). And on the last day his helmet was carried out by the gates
through which the dead are taken out. That made us all without exception
think that he was surely about to meet his end in some way.

[Sidenote:--22--] And he did die (or rather was despatched) before a great
while. Laetus and Eclectus, displeased at the way he acted, and moreover
filled with fear at the threats he uttered against them when he was
checked in any of his whims, formed a plot against him. Commodus was
anxious to slay both the consuls (Erucius Clarus and Sosius Falco) and on
the first of the month to issue as consul and secutor at once from the
place where the gladiators are kept. He had the first cell in their
quarters, as if he were one of them. Let no one be incredulous about this,
for he even cut off the head of the Colossus and put one of his own there
instead; and then, having given it a club and placed a bronze lion at its
feet so as to make it look like Hercules, he inscribed, besides the titles
that belonged to him, also this sentence: "First of secutors to engage;
the only left-handed fighter that has conquered twelve times"--I think it
is--"a thousand."

[Lacuna] was written by Lucius Commodus Hercules, and upon it was
inscribed the well known couplet, viz.: "Hercules I, Jove's son, Lord of
Fair Fame, Not Lucius, howsoe'er constrained thereto."

For these reasons Laetus and Eclectus, making Marcia their confidante,
attacked him. At night on the last of the year, when people were busy with
merry-making, they had Marcia administer poison to him in cooked beef. The
wine he had consumed and his always immoderate use of the baths kept him
from succumbing at once, and instead he vomited; this caused him to
suspect the attempt and he uttered some threats. Then they sent Narcissus,
an athlete, to him and had this man strangle him in the midst of a bath.
This was the end that Commodus met after ruling twelve years, nine months,
and fourteen days. He had lived thirty-one years and four months, and with
him the imperial house of the true Aurelii ceased.

[Sidenote:--23--] After this there occurred most violent wars and
factional disturbances. The compilation of facts in this work of mine has
been due to the following chance. I had written and published a book about
the dreams and signs which caused Severus to expect the imperial power;
and he, happening to look at a copy that was sent him by me, wrote me a
long and complimentary acknowledgment. This letter I received about
nightfall and soon after went to sleep. And in my slumbers Heaven
commanded me that a history be written. So it came about that I wrote the
narrative with which I am at this moment concerned. And because it pleased
Severus himself and other people very much, I then conceived a desire to
compile a record of all other matters of Roman interest. Therefore I
decided no longer to leave that treatise as a separate composition, but to
incorporate it in this present history, in order that in one undertaking I
might write positively everything from the beginning as far as Fortune
sees fit to permit. I have obtained this goddess, it appears, as the guide
of the conduct of my life, and therefore I am dependent on her entirely:
she gives me strength for my historical research when I am respectful and
subdued before her, and wins me back to work by means of dreams when I am
discouraged and give up the task: she grants me delightful hopes in regard
to the future, that time will allow this history to survive and never let
its brightness be dimmed. To gather an account of everything done by the
Romans from the beginning until the death of Severus has taken me ten
years, and to arrange it in literary form twelve years more. The rest will
be written as opportunity offers.

[Sidenote:--24--] Prior to the death of Commodus there were the following
signs. Many ill-boding eagles wandered about the Capitol uttering cries
that portended naught of peace, and an owl hooted there. [Sidenote: A.D.
191 (a.u. 944)] A fire, starting by night in some dwelling, laid hold of
the temple of Peace and spread to the stores of Egyptian and Arabian
wares: then, leaping to a great height, it entered the palace and burned a
very large portion of it, so that the documents belonging to the empire
almost all perished. This as much as anything made it clear that the
injury would not stop in the City but extend over the entire civilized
world. The conflagration could not be extinguished by human hands,
although great numbers of civilians and great numbers of soldiers were
carrying water and Commodus himself came from the suburbs to cheer them
on. Only after it had destroyed everything on which it had fastened did it
spend its force and reach a limit.




DIO'S ROMAN HISTORY
74

Pertinax, through the agency of Eclectus and Laetus, is created emperor by
the soldiers and by the senate (chapter 1).

Commodus is declared an enemy and is made a subject for jest (chapter 2).

Kindness of Pertinax toward Pompeianus, Glabrio, and the senators (chapter
3).

Omens portending supreme power for him (chapter 4).

Pertinax reforms pernicious practices: he sells Commodus's apparatus of
licentiousness (chapter 5, 6).

His moderation with regard to his own family (chapter 7).

At the instigation of Laetus Falco the consul is slated for emperor
(chapter 8).

Death of Pertinax Augustus (chapter 9, 10).

Flavius Sulpicianus and Julianus strive in outbidding each other for the
sovereignty (chapter 11).

Julianus is made emperor contrary to the wishes of the senate and the
Roman people (chapters 12, 13).

About the three leaders, Severus, Niger, Albinus (chapter 14).

Severus forms an alliance with Albinus and proceeds against Julianus
(chapter 15).

Julianus, in the midst of laughable preparations, is killed by order of
the senate (chapters 16, 17).


DURATION OF TIME, five months (from the Calends of January
to the Calends of June), in which the following were consuls:

1. Quintus Sosius Falco, C. Erucius Clarus.

2. Flavius Sulpicianus, Fabius Cilo Septiminus (from the
Calends of March).

3. Silius Messala (from the Calends of May).
(A.D. 193 = a.u. 946).


[Sidenote: A.D. 193 (a.u. 946)] [Sidenote:--1--] Pertinax was one of those
men to whom no exception can be taken, but he ruled only for an
exceedingly brief space of time and was then put out of the way by the
soldiers. While the fate of Commodus was still a secret the party of
Eclectus and Laetus came to him and acknowledged [Footnote: Reading
[Greek: emaenusan] (Dindorf, after H. Stephanus).] what had been done. On
account of his excellence and reputation they were glad to select him. He,
after seeing them and hearing their story, sent his most trustworthy
comrade to view the body of Commodus. When the man confirmed the report of
the act, he was then conveyed secretly into the camp and caused the
soldiers consternation; but through the presence of the adherents of
Laetus and by means of promises [Footnote: Reading [Greek: epaeggeilato]
(Dindorf, after Bekker).] to give them three thousand denarii per man, he
won them over. They would certainly have remained content, had he not
phrased the conclusion of his speech somewhat as follows: "There are many
unpleasant features, fellow-soldiers, in the present situation, but the
rest with your help shall be set right again." On hearing this they took
occasion to suspect that all the irregular privileges granted them by
Commodus would be abolished. Though irritated, they nevertheless remained
quiet, concealing their anger.

On leaving the fortifications he came to the senate-house while it was
still night, and after greeting us (so far as a man might approach him in
the midst of such a jostling throng) he said in an impromptu way: "I have
been named emperor by the soldiers; however, I don't desire the office and
am going to resign it this very day because of my age and health and the
unpleasant condition of affairs." This was no sooner said than we gave the
selection our genuine approbation and chose him in very truth; for he was
noble in spirit and strong in body, except that he walked a little lame.

[Sidenote:--2--] In this way was Pertinax declared emperor and Commodus an
enemy, while both senate and people denounced the latter long and
savagely. They desired to hale away his body and tear it limb from limb,
as they did his images; but, when Pertinax told them that the corpse had
already been interred, they spared his remains but glutted their rage on
his representations, calling him all sorts of names. But "Commodus" or
"emperor" were two that no one applied to him. In stead, they termed him
"wretch" and "tyrant," adding in jest titles like "the gladiator," "the
charioteer," "the left-handed," "the ruptured man." To the senators, who
had been excited most by fear of Commodus, the crowd called out: "Huzza,
huzza, you are saved, you have conquered!" All the shouts that they had
been accustomed to raise with a kind of rhythmic swing to pay court to
Commodus in the theatres they now chanted metamorphosed into the most
ridiculous nonsense. Since they had got rid of one ruler, and as yet had
