
Now there was silence outside, and one saw that the door was free, and
set his foot to it, and flung it open, for it went inwards. And then
Havelok knew that there was a stern fight before him, for the moonlight
showed the grim form of Griffin, the Welsh thane, fully armed and ready.

"Stand back, friend," cried Biorn hastily, fearing for the unarmed man,
and caring nothing that beyond the foremost was a group of some half
dozen more warriors.

But he spoke too late, for as Griffin stepped back a pace on seeing his
enemy himself in the doorway, Havelok had gone a pace forward, and now
was outside, where he had a clear swing of his unhandy weapon.

Now Griffin gathered himself together, and spoke some few words to his
men in his own tongue; but my brother paid no heed to them, for he knew
what the way of the Briton was likely to be. And he was not wrong, for
without warning Griffin flew on him, sword point foremost, and left
handed, for he might not use the right for many a long day yet.

Biorn shouted; but Havelok was ready, and the heavy bar caught and
shivered the light sword, and then swung and hurled the thane back among
his men with a rib broken. Havelok followed that up, falling on the men
even as their leader was among their feet. Two he felled with downright
strokes, and another shrank away in time to save himself from the like
fate. Then a fourth got in under his guard, and wounded Havelok slightly
in the left arm; and unless Biorn had been out and beside him by that
time it would have gone hard with him, for both those who were left were
on him, and another was hanging back for a chance to come.

There was shouting enough now, for the Briton does not fight in silence
as do the northern men, and we had waked. First of all Raven ran down to
the great room, half dazed with sleep, and blaming himself for all this
trouble, for he had seen that a ship was coming in, and he might have
thought it possible that it had brought Griffin and his men, whose
tongue had told him at once what had happened.

Now he called to us to arm quickly, and sought for a weapon for himself;
and in that familiar place he went to the old corner where the oars were
wont to be set. There was one, for I have said that this Biorn was a
fisher, and the place that was handy for us had been so for him. That
was a homely weapon to Raven, and out into the moonlight he came with
it, and swept a Welshman away from Havelok's side as he came. But now
more men were coming--townsfolk who had been roused by the noise--
and they knew nothing of the attackers, and so thought them friends of
ours, who joined us in falling on their sheriff; and there was a wild
confusion when Withelm and I came down armed.

But what we saw first was a dim, white figure in the doorway of the
other room; and there stood Goldberga, wide eyed and trembling.

"My dream, my dream!" she said.

But of that we knew nothing; and we could but tell her to be of good
courage, for we would win through yet, and so went out to the fight.

By this time Griffin was up again, and as I came from the door he was
once more ready to fall on Havelok from behind. So I thought it best to
stay him, and I shouted his name, and he turned and made for me. But
there was no skill in his coming, or he did not think me worth it, for
the axe had the better, and there was an end of Griffin.

Withelm saw at once that Havelok had no weapon but the bar, and he ran
to him and held out his own axe.

"Thanks, brother. Mine is inside the door. Get it for me," said he; but
now he was laughing, and doing not much harm to anyone, and as I got
behind his back I saw why this was.

There was only one of Griffin's men left, and all the rest of the crowd
of half-armed men were townsfolk. Havelok and Raven were keeping these
back with sweeps of their long weapons, and behind them against the wall
was the sheriff, swearing and shouting vainly to bid his people hold off
and listen to him. And the noise was so great that they did but think
that he was calling them to rescue him from these who had taken him
prisoner. It seemed that the Welshman was keeping this up also; but
neither he nor any of the men cared to risk any nearness to the sweep of
bar and long oar in such hands. There were many broken heads in that
crowd; but it was growing greater every minute, and those who were
coming were well armed, having taken their time over it. They say that
there were sixty men there at one time.

Now ran Withelm with the axe, and at that Havelok parted with the door
bar, and ended the last Welshman at the same time, for he hurled it at
him endwise, like a spear, and it took him full in the chest, and he
went down to rise no more. And at that the townsmen ran in, and we were
busy for a space, until once more they were in a howling circle round
us. But they had wounded Havelok again; and Biorn was at his wit's end,
for he had had to take part in the fight this time. The men were mad
with battle, and forgot who he was, as it seemed. And now some raised a
cry for bows.

That was the worst thing that we had to fear, and Raven called to us,
"Into the house, brothers, and keep them out of it till the jarl comes.
He will hear, or be sent for."

So we went back and got into the doorway, and we could not bar it at
first. But Withelm hewed off the blade of Raven's oar, and I went out
and cleared the folk away for a space, and leapt back; and Havelok and I
got the door shut quickly against them as they came back on it, and we
barred it with the oar loom. That was but pine, however, and it would
not last long.

Outside, the people were quiet for a little, wondering, no doubt, how to
rescue Biorn. He wanted to go out to them, but it did not seem safe just
yet. If they grew more reasonable it might be so.

Then, as we rested thus, Goldberga came quickly, for she saw that her
husband was wounded, and she began to bind his hurts with a scarf she
had. She was very pale, but she was not weeping, and her hands did not
shake as she went to work.

"This is my dream," she said. "Was that the voice of Griffin that I
heard? It does not seem possible; but there is none other who speaks in
the old tongue of Britain here, surely."

"There is no more fear of him," said Havelok, looking tenderly at her.
"Your dream has come true so far, if he was in it. How did it end?"

"We fled to a tree," she said, smiling faintly.

Havelok smiled also, for this seemed dream stuff only to all of us--
all of us but Withelm, that is, for at once he said, "This door will be
down with a few blows. What of that tower of yours, Biorn? Might we not
get there and wait till the jarl comes?"

At that Biorn almost shouted.

"That is a good thought, and we can get there easily. Well it will be,
also, for the men are wild now, and there have been too many slain and
hurt for them to listen to reason."

"Bide you here," said Withelm, "for it is we whom they seek. Then you
can talk to them."

But he would not do that, seeing that we had been put in his charge by
the jarl.

"I go with you," he said. "Now, if we climb out of the window that is in
the back of the house we can get to the tower before they know we are gone."

We went into that chamber where Havelok had once been when he was taken
from the sack, and even as I unbarred the heavy shutter and took it
down, the door began to shake with a fresh attack on it. The trees of
the grove were two hundred yards from the house, maybe, and among them
loomed high and black the watchtower I had seen from the sea. A wide
path had been cut to it, and the moonlight shone straight down this to
the door of the building.

Now Biorn went out first, and then he helped out Goldberga, and after
her we made Havelok go; and we called to these three to get to the tower
as Withelm came next, for every moment I looked to see our enemies--if
they are to be called so when I hardly suppose they knew what they were
fighting about--come round to fall on the back of the house.

Because of Goldberga they went; and Biorn opened the tower door, and she
passed into the blackness of its entry, but the two men stayed outside
for us. And we three were all out of the house when the first of the
crowd bethought themselves, and made for the back, and saw us.

At once they raised a shout and a rush, and we did not think it worth
while to wait for them, as they would get between us and the tower,
which was open for us. So we ran, and they were, some twenty of them,
hard at our heels as we reached the door, and half fell inside, for the
winding stairway was close to the entry. I think that Biorn and Havelok
had made their plans as they saw what was coming, for Havelok followed
us and stood in the doorway, while Biorn was just outside with his axe
ready.

"Hold hard, friends!" he called, as the men came up and halted before
him; "what is all this?"

"Stand aside and let us get at them," said the foremost, panting.

"Nay," said Biorn; "what harm have they done?"

"Slain a dozen men and lamed twice as many more," answered several
voices; "have them forth straightway."

"They were attacked, and defended themselves," said the sheriff, "and it
is no fault of theirs that they had to do their best. Get you home, and
I will answer to the jarl for them. They are the jarl's guests."

Then was a howl that was strange, and with it voices which seemed to let
some light on the matter.

"They have slain the jarl's guests."

And then came forward a big black-bearded man whom I had seen in the
crowd already, and he squared up to Biorn.

"Lies are no good, master sheriff, for we know that the outlanders who
spoke the strange tongue must be the guests who came."

"I am no liar," answered Biorn. "Is there not one man here who saw the
ship and her folk this afternoon?"

Now this man seemed not to want that question answered, for he shouted
to the crowd not to waste time in wrangling, but to have out the
murderers; and he took a step towards Biorn, bidding him side no more
with the men, but let the folk deal with them.

"You overdo your business as sheriff!" he said.

It was Biorn who wasted no more time, for he saw that here was deeper
trouble than a common riot. He lifted his axe.

"Come nearer at your peril," he said.

Then the black-bearded man sprang at him, and axe met sword for a parry
or two, flashing white in the moonlight. Then one weapon flashed red
suddenly, and it was Biorn's, and back into the tower he sprang as his
foe fell, and Havelok flung the door to, and I barred it.

"Up," said Biorn; and in the dark we stumbled from stair to stair, while
the crowd howled and beat on the door below us. It was good to get out
into the moonlight on the roof, where we could rest. I was glad that the
tower was there instead of Thor, and also that it was strong. It was no
great height, but wide, and the men below looked comfortably far off at
all events.

"Here is a fine affair," quoth Biorn, sitting himself down with his back
against the high stone wall round the tower top. "It will take me all my
time to set this right."

"You have stood by us well, friend," Havelok said, "and it is a pity
that you have had to share our trouble so far as this. Who was the man
who fell on you?"

"That is the trouble," answered Biorn, "for there will be more noise
over him than all the rest. He was Hodulf's steward, the man who gathers
the scatt, and therefore is not liked. And all men know that there was
no love lost between him and me."

"Hodulf's man," said I; "how long has he been here, and is he a Norseman?"

For I knew him. He was the man who had spoken to me at the boat side
when we had to fly--one, therefore, who knew all of the secret of Havelok.

"Ay, one of the Norsemen who came here with the king at the first, and
is almost the last left of that crew. I suppose that you have heard the
story."

We had, in a way that the honest sheriff did not guess, and I only
nodded. But I thought that we had got rid of an enemy in him, and that
Griffin had fallen in with him on landing, and known him, and taken him
into his counsel about us. He would have gone down to see the vessel and
collect the king's dues from her and from us at the same time. He had
not come into the town till late, as we heard afterwards.

There was no time for asking more now, however, for the shouts of the
men round the door ceased, and someone gave orders, as if there was a
plan to be carried out. So I went and looked over on the side where the
door was to see what was on hand.

It was about what one would have expected. They had got the trunk of a
tree, and were going to batter the door in. But now we were all armed,
for Raven had brought Havelok's gear with him when he fetched his own.
He had thought also for Goldberga, and she was sitting in the corner of
the tower walls wrapped in a great cloak that she had used at sea, with
her eyes on her husband, unfearing, and as it seemed waiting for the end
that her dream foretold.

I called the rest, and we looked down on the men. They saw us, and an
arrow or two flew at us, badly aimed in the moonlight.

"Waste of good arrows," said Havelok; "but we must keep them from the
door somehow."

"Would that the jarl would come," growled Biorn, "for I do not see how
we are to do that."

"If they do break in," said I, "any one can hold a stairway like this
against a crowd."

"I do not want to hurt more of these," answered Havelok, looking round
him. And then his eyes lit up, and he laughed. "Why, we can keep them
back easily enough, after all."

He went to the tower corner, and shouted to the men below. Four or five
had the heavy log that they were to use as a ram, and they were just
about to charge the door with it, and no timber planking can stand that
sort of thing.

"Ho, men," he cried; "set that down, or some of you may get hurt."

They set up a roar of laughter at him as they heard, and then Havelok
laid hold of the great square block of stone that was on the very corner
of the wall, and tore it from its setting.

"Odin!" said Biorn, as he saw that, "where do they breed such men as this?"

"Here," answered Withelm, looking at the sheriff.

Now Havelok hove up the stone over his head, and a sort of gasp went up
from the crowd below. One saw what was coming, and ran to drag back the
men with the beam, and stopped short before he reached them in terror,
crying to them to beware. But their heads were down, and they were
starting into a run.

"Halt!" cried Havelok, but they did not stay. "Stand clear!" he shouted
in the sailor's way.

And then he swung the stone and let it go, while those who watched fled
back as if it was cast at them. Down is crashed on the attackers,
felling the man whom it struck, and dashing the timber from the grasp of
the others, so that one fell with it across his leg and lay howling,
while the rest gathered themselves up and got away from under the tower
as soon as they might.

Now no man dared to come forward, and that angered Havelok.

"Are you going to let these two bide there?" he said. "Pick the poor
knaves from under the stone and timber, and see to them."

But they hung back yet, and he called them "nidring."

Thereat two or three made a step forward, and one said, "Lord, let us do
as you bid us, and harm us not."

"You are safe," he answered, and Biorn laughed and said that this was
the most wholesome word that he had heard tonight.

"Lord, forsooth! Mighty little of that was there five minutes ago."

But it was not the terrible stone throwing only that wrung this from
them, as I think. They had seen Havelok in his arms, with the light of
battle on his face in the broad moonlight, and knew him for a king among
men.

They took the hurt men from under the tower, and then crowded together,
watching us. And some man must needs loose an arrow at us, and it rang
on my mail, and that let loose the crowd again. Soon we had to shelter
under the battlement, but they were not able to lodge any arrows among
us, for that is a bit of skill that needs daylight. Then they dared to
get to the timber once more, and we saw them coming.

Havelok took his helm, and set it on his sword point, and raised it
slowly above the wall, and that drew all the arrows in a moment. Then he
leapt up, and tore the stone from the other corner; and again, but this
time without warning, it fell on the men below, and that wrought more
harm than before. But it stayed them for a time, though not so long, for
now their blood was up, and the berserk spirit was waking in them.
Already the third stone was poised in the mighty hands, and would have
fallen, when there was a cry of, "The jarl! the jarl!" and along the
