
"Jarl Ingvar lets not the grass grow under his feet," I said.

We came to a place where the woodland track broadened out into a
clearing, and there waited the other Danes, and with them, sitting
alone now on the horse, was Eadmund the King.

Pale he was, and all soiled with the stains of war, and with the
moss and greenery of his strange hiding place; but his eye was
bright and fearless, and he sat upright and stately though he was
yet with his hands bound behind him.

I rode past Ingvar and to Eadmund's side, and throwing myself from
my horse stood by him, while the Dane glared at us both without
speaking.

"Why run thus into danger, Wulfric my son?" said the king, speaking
gently; "better have let me be the only victim."

"That you shall not be, my king," I answered; "for if you must die,
I will be with you. But I have come to try to ransom you."

"There are two words concerning that," said Ingvar in his cold
voice. "Maybe I will take no gold for Eadmund."

"What shall we give you then?" I asked, looking earnestly at him.

"You heard what I said this morning before the battle. I have no
other terms but those. And I think they are light--as from the son
of Lodbrok whom this king's servant slew."

Now Eadmund spoke, saying to Ingvar:

"Let me hear what are your terms for my freedom. In the slaying of
Lodbrok my friend I had no part."

"That is easily said," Ingvar answered, frowning. "I have my own
thoughts on that--else had I not been here. But this land is in my
power, therefore I will let you go if you will hold it for me, and
own me as overlord, doing my will."

"My answer is the same as it was this morning. It is not for me to
give over this land into the hands of heathen men to save myself."

That was Eadmund's calm answer, and looking on Ingvar I saw the
same bode written in his face as had been when I would not honour
his gods. Then he spoke slowly, and his words fell like ice from
his lips.

"It seems to me that this land is in the hands of us heathen
without your giving."

"So that may be, for the time," answered Eadmund; "but your time of
power has an end."

"Has it so?" said Ingvar, and his eyes flashed. "Where is your help
to come from? Do you look to Ethelred?--He is busy in Wessex with
more of us heathen. Where is Mercia?--It is ours. Will Kent help
you?"

"Our help is in the name of the Lord, who hath made heaven and
earth," answered Eadmund, lifting his eyes heavenwards so
earnestly, that in spite of himself the wild heathen king followed
their upward gaze for a moment.

It was but for a moment, and that weakness, as he would deem it,
was the spark to light Ingvar's wrath, that as yet he had kept
under.

"Hammer of Thor!" he shouted, "you dare throw that in my face! Now
will I show you if heathen or Christian is stronger."

Then with his face white with rage he turned to his men: "Bind him
to yon tree, and we will speak with him again!"

Now if it is well that I did not die with my king, it was well at
that moment for me that my axe hung at my saddle bow, and that my
horse--to which I had paid no heed in my troubles--had wandered a
little way, for I should surely have fought to prevent this
dishonour being wrought. And I sprung to reach the axe, for the
short sword I wore was of no use against so many. But Raud was
close on me, and he dropped from his saddle on my shoulders as I
passed him, so that I fell, half stunned under him, and one of the
other men ran up, and ere they had stripped and bound the king to a
tree, I was bound hand and foot, and rolled by Raud into a thicket
where I might escape Ingvar's eye. And, indeed, he paid no heed to
me, but watched the king.

So must I lie there with my heart like to break, seeing all that
went on, and I will tell it as best I may.

Ingvar strode to the young oak tree to which they had bound the
king and looked fixedly at him. Then he said, "Scourge this man,"
and his men did so. But the king made no sign by word or motion. I
saw Ingvar's rage growing, and he cried as his men forbore,
shrinking a little from their quiet victim:

"Ask for mercy, Christian, at the hands of Ingvar the godar, the
priest of Odin and Thor, and you shall go free."

But the king met his gaze sadly and firmly, answering:

"That were to own that you have power over me through your false
gods."

"Power I have," said Ingvar; "ask for mercy."

Thereat the king answered no word, though his lips moved, and I
alone knew what his words might be, for though his hands were bound
he moved his noble head in such wise as to make the sign of the
Cross. And I think that he spoke to himself the prayer of
forgiveness that he had learnt therefrom.

Almost then had the Dane smitten him in the face, but to this
cowardice Ingvar the king had not yet fallen. He drew back a few
paces, and took his long dagger from his belt, and at that I
thought that he was going to slay the king, and I closed my eyes,
praying. But he spoke again.

"Ask for peace on the same terms for your people, if you will not
for yourself."

Then the king grew pale, but he set his lips close, still gazing at
Ingvar. Hard was this for him who loved his people so well.

The Dane's dagger flashed, and he hurled it at Eadmund, but so
skilfully that it did but graze his head, sticking firmly into the
tree trunk. And he cried in a voice that shook with rage:

"Answer me!"

But the king held his peace, closing his eyes, and waiting for what
might come, most bravely.

Then Ingvar turned to his men, and bade them unsling their bows and
see if they could make this man find his tongue. Seven of them went
to work with a good will, but Raud and the others would not, but
turned away.

The men shot, and in many places the king was pierced, and lo! he
lifted up his voice and sang gloriously, even as if in the church
and on some high festival, the psalm that begins "De Profundis".
Nor did his voice falter, though now he might move neither hand nor
foot by reason of the piercing of the arrows.

At that the men stayed in amazement, and one threw away his bow and
turned aside to where Raud stood, near where I lay. But Ingvar
ground his teeth with rage, and stamping on the ground, cried to
the men to shoot again.

And again the arrows flew, and now it seemed to me that no more
arrows might find mark in the king's body without slaying him; and
before my eyes was a mist, and my mouth was dry and parched, yet I
could not turn away and look no more. But the men fitted arrows to
the bowstrings once more, while Ingvar stood still and silent with
his strong hands clasped together behind him, gazing at the king,
whose lips moved in prayer, the psalm being ended, and, as I think,
his strength ebbing fast from his many wounds.

Now they were about to shoot once more, unbidden, keeping up their
torture if they might; but there was one more merciful than the
rest. Forward before the bowmen strode Raud, with his sword drawn,
and he cried to Ingvar:

"Let me slay him, king, and end this for pity's sake!"

Ingvar turned his eyes gloomily on him for a moment, and then
answered:

"What know you of pity? Slay him if you will."

Then when he heard that, Eadmund looked at Raud, smiling on him
with a wondrous smile and saying:

"Thanks, good friend."

So Raud slew him in pity, and that was now the best deed that might
be done.

Thereat I cried out once, and my senses left me, and I knew no
more.



CHAPTER XIII. HOW BISHOP HUMBERT JOINED THE KING.


When I began to come to myself it was late afternoon. At first into
my mind came the fancy that I sat on the side of King Eadmund's bed
in the king's chambers at Reedham, and that he told me a wondrous
dream; how that--and then all of a sudden I knew that it was no
shadowy dream, but that I had seen all come to pass, and that
through the arrow storm Eadmund had passed to rest.

All round me the trees dripped with the damp November mist that
creeps from the river, and the smell of dead leaves was in my
nostrils, and for a while I lay still, hardly yet knowing true from
false, dream from deed. So quiet was I that a robin came and
perched close to me on a bramble, whose last leaves were the colour
of the bird's red breast, and there it sang a little, so that I
roused to life with the sound. Then swooped down a merlin with
flash of gray wings on the robin and took it, and that angered me
so that I rose on my elbow to fray it away; and with that the last
cloud left my mind and I knew where I was. Then, too, from where he
waited my waking came Vig, my great Danish dog, who had been tied
at the thane's house, and must have left the flying party to seek
me. And he bounded in gladness about me.

Now I found that my bonds were gone, and next that my weapons were
left me, and that but for cramp and stiffness I had not any tokens
of what had befallen. And at first it seemed to me that Ingvar thus
showed his scorn of me, though soon I thought that he had forgotten
me, and that it was Raud who had freed me.

I heeded not the dog, looking only in one place. But the body of
the king was gone, and his arms and mail were gone. The hoofmarks
of Ingvar's horses were everywhere; but at last I made out that
they had gone on through the wood.

Presently the dog growled, looking towards the village, and I heard
voices coming nearer, and with them I heard the tread of a horse.
But soon the dog ceased, and began to wag his tail as if to welcome
friends, and when the comers entered the clearing, I saw that they
were Egfrid's men, and that it was my horse that they were leading.
My axe was yet at the saddle bow.

"Why, master," said the foremost, "surely we looked to find you
slain. This is well--but what has befallen?"

For I must have looked wildly and strangely on them.

"Well would it be if I were slain," I said. "Why did you seek me?"

"We found the horse coming homewards, and one knew that you had
gone into the wood after the king. Yet we would seek you before we
fled."

I saw that all were armed, and I thanked them. But--

"What ails you, master?" said the leader of the group.

"They have slain Eadmund the king," I answered, "and they have
taken his body away."

Thereat they groaned, wondering and cast down, and one said:

"They will not have carried him far. Let us search."

We did so, and after a long time we found the king's body in a
thicket where it had been cast. But his head we could not find,
though now I bade my dog search also. He led us westward through
the wood, until we came to a rising ground, and there we could go
no further. For thence we saw the Danish horsemen by scores
pressing towards us, searching for cattle and sheep as the army
passed southward. And the farms were blazing in the track that they
had crossed everywhere.

Then said the men:

"We must fly. We who live must save ourselves, and must come back
and end this search when we may."

"Let us bear back the king's body," I said, "and find some hiding
place for it at Hoxne."

So we did, hurriedly, and hid it in a pit near the village,
covering it with boards and gravel as well as we could for haste.
Then I asked the men where they would go.

"By boat down the river," they said, "and so join the thane and his
party wherever they might be. They have gone to Beccles, for they
hear that a ship lies there whose master will gladly take them to
London."

That was good hearing, for so would all be safe. The men pressed me
to come with them, but I would not do so, meaning to hasten on to
the bishop's place and make him fly to Beccles and take ship also,
starting this very night. So I bid them go, and on that their
leader, a stout freeman named Leof, whom I knew well as one of
Egfrid's best men, said that he would come with me. Nor would he
hear of aught else.

"What would Egfrid my master say if I left his brother to go
alone?" he asked me simply; and so I suffered him, and we two went
towards South Elmham together.

Soon Leof saw a horse in a field and caught it, mounting bareback,
and after that we went on well enough.

Darkness fell, and all the low clouds were reddened with the light
of fires behind us, and ever as we looked back would be a fresh
fire and light in the sky, for the Danes were at their work. We
pushed on steadily, but the lanes were rough, and the miles seemed
very long in the darkness; but at last we crossed the Elmham stream
and rode to the stockaded house that was the bishop's, and which
stands pleasant and well placed on a little hill beyond the low
ground, and with no woodland very near it.

We shouted, and at last men fully armed came and let us in. And as
I looked back once before the gates closed after me, I thought that
the fires were nearer. The Danes were not staying their hands for
darkness, for so the terror they spread would be the greater. So
also was the bishop's peril therefore.

"Where is Bishop Humbert?" I asked.

"Master, he is in the church, nor will he leave it," said the old
steward. "He says he must pray for king and land day and night now
till this terror is overpast."

"I will go to him--he must fly," I said.

"Aye, pray him to do so, Wulfric; he will listen to you," said the
old man earnestly.

"Have all things ready," I said. "See--there is little time."

"What of the king, master?" asked he, looking at the fires with a
white face as he once more opened the gate.

"The king has gone where he would wish to be," I answered very
gravely; and he understood me, turning away that I might not see
his weeping.

Then Leof and I splashed back through the stream that ran between
house and church, and came quickly to the porch. The church is very
small and more ancient than I can say, for it is built of flint
bound together with such mortar as the Romans used in their
castles, hard as stone itself, and it stands in the midst of the
Roman camp that guarded the ford, so that maybe it was the first
church in all East Anglia, for we use wood; and, moreover, this
stone church is rounded at the east end, and has a barrier dividing
the body of the building into two, beyond which the as yet
unbaptized must sit, as men say. And so strong and thick are the
walls that I do not know how they can ever fall.

