in the State. For five-and-twenty years, in or out of office, his had
been the dominating influence in Dutch politics; and it was felt on
all sides that the country was the poorer for the loss of a man of
outstanding ability and genuine patriotism.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XXXIV

THE LATER REIGN OF WILLIAM III, AND THE REGENCY OF
QUEEN EMMA, 1872-1898


The death of Thorbecke was the signal for a growing cleavage between the
old _doctrinaire_ school of liberals, who adhered to the principles of
1848, and the advanced liberalism of many of the younger progressive
type. To Gerrit de Vries was entrusted the duty of forming a ministry,
and he had the assistance of the former first minister, F. van de Putte.
His position was weakened by the opposition of the Catholic party, who
became alienated from the liberals, partly on the religious education
question, but more especially because their former allies refused to
protest against the Italian occupation of Rome. The election of 1873 did
not improve matters, for it left the divided liberals to face an
opposition of equal strength, whenever the conservatives,
anti-revolutionaries and Catholics acted together. This same year saw
the first phase of the war with the piratical state of Achin. An
expedition of 3600 men under General Koehler was sent out against the
defiant sultan in April, 1873, but suffered disaster, the General
himself dying of disease. A second stronger expedition under General van
Swieten was then dispatched, which was successful; and the sultan was
deposed in January, 1874. This involved heavy charges on the treasury;
and the ministry, after suffering two reverses in the Second Chamber,
resigned (June, 1874), being succeeded by a Heemskerk coalition
ministry.

Heemskerk in his former premiership had shown himself to be a clever
tactician, and for three years he managed to maintain himself in office
against the combined opposition of the advanced liberals, the
anti-revolutionaries and the Catholics. Groen van Prinsterer died in
May, 1876; and with his death the hitherto aristocratic and exclusive
party, which he had so long led, became transformed. Under its new
leader, Abraham Kuyper, it became democratised, and, by combining its
support of the religious principle in education with that of progressive
reform, was able to exercise a far wider influence in the political
sphere. Kuyper, for many years a Calvinist pastor, undertook in 1872 the
editorship of the anti-revolutionary paper, _De Standdard_. In 1874 he
was elected member for Gouda, but resigned in order to give his whole
time to journalism in the interest of the political principles to which
he now devoted his great abilities.

The Heemskerk ministry had the support of no party, but by the
opportunist skill of its chief it continued in office for three years;
no party was prepared to take its place, and "the government of the king
must be carried on." The measures that were passed in this time were
useful rather than important. An attempt to deal with primary
instruction led to the downfall of the ministry. The elections of 1877
strengthened the liberals; and, an amendment to the speech from the
throne being carried, Heemskerk resigned. His place was taken by Joannes
Kappeyne, leader of the progressive liberals. A new department of State
was now created, that of Waterways and Commerce, whose duties in a
country like Holland, covered with a net-work of dykes and canals, was
of great importance. A measure which denied State support to the
"private" schools was bitterly resisted by the anti-revolutionaries and
the Catholics, whose union in defence of religious education was from
this time forward to become closer. The outlay in connection with the
costly Achin war, which had broken out afresh, led to a considerable
deficit in the budget. In consequence of this a proposal for the
construction of some new canals was rejected by a majority of one. The
financial difficulties, which had necessitated the imposing of unpopular
taxes, had once more led to divisions in the liberal ranks; and
Kappeyne, finding that the king would not support his proposals for a
revision of the Fundamental Law, saw no course open to him but
resignation.

In these circumstances the king decided to ask an anti-revolutionary,
Count van Lynden van Sandenburg, to form a "Ministry of Affairs,"
composed of moderate men of various parties. Van Lynden had a difficult
task, but with the strong support of the king his policy of conciliation
carried him safely through four disquieting and anxious years. The
revolt of the Boers in the Transvaal against British rule caused great
excitement in Holland, and aroused much sympathy. Van Lynden was careful
to avoid any steps which might give umbrage to England, and he was
successful in his efforts. The Achin trouble was, however, still a
cause of much embarrassment. Worst of all was the series of bereavements
which at this time befell the House of Orange-Nassau. In 1877 Queen
Sophie died, affectionately remembered for her interest in art and
science, and her exemplary life. The king's brother, Henry, for thirty
years Stadholder of Luxemburg, died childless early in 1879; and shortly
afterwards in June the Prince of Orange, who had never married, passed
away suddenly at Paris. The two sons of William III's uncle Frederick
predeceased their father, whose death took place in 1881. Alexander, the
younger son of the king, was sickly and feeble-minded; and with his
decease in 1884, the male line of the House of Orange-Nassau became
extinct. Foreseeing such a possibility in January, 1879, the already
aged king took in second wedlock the youthful Princess Emma of
Waldeck-Pyrmont. Great was the joy of the Dutch people, when, on August
31, 1880, she gave birth to a princess, Wilhelmina, who became from this
time forth the hope of a dynasty, whose history for three centuries had
been bound up with that of the nation.

The Van Lynden administration, having steered its way through many
parliamentary crises for four years, was at last beaten upon a proposal
to enlarge the franchise, and resigned (February 26, 1883). To Heemskerk
was confided the formation of a coalition ministry of a neutral
character; and this experienced statesman became for the third time
first minister of the crown. The dissensions in the liberal party
converted the Second Chamber into a meeting-place of hostile factions;
and Heemskerk was better fitted than any other politician to be the head
of a government which, having no majority to support it, had to rely
upon tactful management and expediency. The rise of a socialist party
under the enthusiastic leadership of a former Lutheran pastor, Domela
Nieuwenhuis, added to the perplexities of the position. It soon became
evident that a revision of the Fundamental Law and an extension of the
franchise, which the king no longer opposed, was inevitable. Meanwhile
the death of Prince Alexander and the king's growing infirmities made it
necessary to provide, by a bill passed on August 2,1884, that Queen Emma
should become regent during her daughter's minority.

Everything conspired to beset the path of the Heemskerk ministry with
hindrances to administrative or legislative action. The bad state of the
finances (chiefly owing to the calls for the Achin war) the subdivision
of all parties into groups, the socialist agitation and the weak
health of the king, created something like a parliamentary deadlock. A
revision of the constitution became more and more pressing as the only
remedy, though no party was keenly in its favour. Certain proposals for
revision were made by the government (March, 1885), but the
anti-revolutionaries, the Catholics and the conservatives were united in
opposition, unless concessions were made in the matter of religious
education. Such concessions as were finally offered were rejected
(April, 1886), and Heemskerk offered his resignation. Baron Mackay
(anti-revolutionary) declining office, a dissolution followed. The
result of the elections, however, was inconclusive, the liberals of all
shades having a bare majority of four; but there was no change of
ministry. A more conciliatory spirit fortunately prevailed under stress
of circumstances in the new Chamber; and at last, after many debates,
the law revising the constitution was passed through both Chambers, and
approved by the king (November 30, 1887). It was a compromise measure,
and no violent changes were made. The First Chamber was to consist of 50
members, appointed by the Provincial Councils; the Second Chamber of 100
members, chosen by an electorate of male persons of not less than 25
years of age with a residential qualification and possessing "signs of
fitness and social well-being"--a vague phrase requiring future
definition. The number of electors was increased from (in round numbers)
100,000 to 350,000, but universal male suffrage, the demand of the
socialists and more advanced liberals, was not conceded.

The elections of 1888 were fought on the question of religious education
in the primary schools. The two "Christian" parties, the Calvinist
anti-revolutionaries under the leadership of Dr Kuyper, and the
Catholics, who had found a leader of eloquence and power in Dr
Schaepman, a Catholic priest, coalesced in a common programme for a
revision of Kappeyne's Education Act of 1878. The coalition obtained a
majority, 27 anti-revolutionaries and 25 Catholics being returned as
against 46 liberals of various groups. For the first time a socialist,
Domela Nieuwenhuis, was elected. The conservative party was reduced to
one member. In the First Chamber the liberals still commanded a
majority. In April, 1888, Baron Mackay, an anti-revolutionary of
moderate views, became first minister. The coalition made the revision
of the Education Act of 1878 their first business; and they obtained the
support of some liberals who were anxious to see the school question
out of the way. The so-called "Mackay Law" was passed in 1889. It
provided that "private" schools should receive State support on
condition that they conformed to the official regulations; that the
number of scholars should be not less than twenty-five; and that they
should be under the management of some body, religious or otherwise,
recognised by the State. This settlement was a compromise, but it
offered the solution of an acute controversy and was found to work
satisfactorily.

The death of King William on November 23, 1890, was much mourned by his
people. He was a man of strong and somewhat narrow views, but during his
reign of 41 years his sincere love for his country was never in doubt,
nor did he lose popularity by his anti-liberal attitude on many
occasions, for it was known to arise from honest conviction; and it was
amidst general regret that the last male representative of the House of
Orange-Nassau was laid in his grave.

A proposal by the Catholic minister Borgesius for the introduction of
universal personal military service was displeasing however to many of
his own party, and it was defeated with the help of Catholic dissidents.
An election followed, and the liberals regained a majority. A new
government was formed of a moderate progressive character, the premier
being Cornelis van Tienhoven. It was a ministry of talents, Tak van
Poortvliet (interior) and N.G. Pierson (finance) being men of marked
ability. Pierson had more success than any of his predecessors in
bringing to an end the recurring deficits in the annual balance sheet.
He imposed an income tax on all incomes above 650 florins derived from
salaries or commerce. All other sources of income were capitalised
(funds, investments, farming, etc.); and a tax was placed on all capital
above 13,000 florins. Various duties and customs were lowered, to the
advantage of trade. There was, however, a growing demand for a still
further extension of the franchise, and for an official interpretation
of that puzzling qualification of the Revision of 1889--"signs of
fitness and social well-being." Tak van Poortvliet brought in a measure
which would practically have introduced universal male suffrage, for he
interpreted the words as including all who could write and did not
receive doles from charity. This proposal, brought forward in 1893,
again split up the liberal party. The moderates under the leadership of
Samuel van Houten vigorously opposed such an increase of the electorate;
and they had the support of the more conservative anti-revolutionaries
and a large part of the Catholics. The more democratic followers of
Kuyper and Schaepman and the progressive radicals ranged themselves on
the side of Tak van Poortvliet. All parties were thus broken up into
hostile groups. The election of 1894 was contested no longer on party
lines, but between Takkians and anti-Takkians. The result was adverse to
Tak, his following only mustering 46 votes against 54 for their
opponents.

A new administration therefore came into office (May, 1894) under the
presidency of Jonkheer Johan Roell with Van Houten as minister of the
interior. On Van Houten's shoulders fell the task of preparing a new
electoral law. His proposals were finally approved in 1896. Before this
took place the minister of finance, Spenger van Eyk, had succeeded in
relieving the treasury by the conversion of the public debt from a 3-1/2
to a 3 per cent, security. The Van Houten reform of the franchise was
very complicated, as there were six different categories of persons
entitled to exercise the suffrage: (1) payers of at least one guilder in
direct taxation; (2) householders or lodgers paying a certain minimum
rent and having a residential qualification; (3) proprietors or hirers
of vessels of 24 tons at least; (4) earners of a certain specified wage
or salary; (5) investors of 100 guilders in the public funds or of 50
guilders in a savings bank; (6) persons holding certain educational
diplomas. This very wide and comprehensive franchise raised the number
of electors to about 700,000.

The election of 1897, after first promising a victory to the more
conservative groups, ended by giving a small majority to the liberals,
the progressive section winning a number of seats, and the socialists
increasing their representation in the Chamber. A liberal-concentration
cabinet took the place of the Roell-Van Houten ministry, its leading
members being Pierson (finance) and Goeman-Borgesius (interior). For a
right understanding of the parliamentary situation at this time and
during the years that follow, a brief account of the groups and sections
of groups into which political parties in Holland were divided, must
here interrupt the narrative of events.

It has already been told that the deaths of Thorbecke and Groen
van Prinsterer led to a breaking up of the old parties and the
formation of new groups. The Education Act of 1878 brought about an
alliance of the two parties, who made the question of religious
education in the primary schools the first article of their political
programme--the anti-revolutionaries led by the ex-Calvinist pastor
Dr Abraham Kuyper and the Catholics by Dr Schaepman, a Catholic
priest. Kuyper and Schaepman were alike able journalists, and used
the press with conspicuous success for the propagation of their
views, both being advocates of social reform on democratic lines. The
anti-revolutionaries, however, did not, as a body, follow the lead of
Kuyper. An aristocratic section, whose principles were those of Groen
van Prinsterer, "orthodox" and "conservative," under the appellation of
"Historical Christians," were opposed to the democratic ideas of Kuyper,
and were by tradition anti-Catholic. Their leader was Jonkheer Savornin
Lohman. For some years there was a separate Frisian group of "Historical
Christians," but these finally amalgamated with the larger body. The
liberals meanwhile had split up into three groups: (1) the Old
Independent _(vrij)_ Liberals; (2) the Liberal Progressive Union
_(Unie van vooruitstrevende Liberalen)_; (3) Liberal-Democrats
_(vrijzinnig-democratischen Bond)_. The socialist party was a
development of the _Algemeene Nederlandsche Werklieden Verbond_ founded
in 1871. Ten years later, by the activities of the fiery agitator,
Domela Nieuwenhuis, the Social-Democratic Bond was formed; and the
socialists became a political party. The loss of Nieuwenhuis' seat in
1891 had the effect of making him abandon constitutional methods for a
revolutionary and anti-religious crusade. The result of this was a split
in the socialist party and the formation, under the leadership of
Troelstra, Van Kol and Van der Goes, of the "Social-Democratic Workmen's
Party," which aimed at promoting the welfare of the proletariat on
socialistic lines, but by parliamentary means. The followers of Domela
Nieuwenhuis, whose openly avowed principles were "the destruction of
actual social conditions by all means legal and illegal," were after
1894 known as "the Socialist Bond." This anarchical party, who took as
their motto "neither God nor master," rapidly decreased in number; their
leader, discouraged by his lack of success in 1898, withdrew finally
from the political arena; and the Socialist Bond was dissolved. This
gave an accession of strength to the "Social-Democratic Workmen's
Party," which has since the beginning of the present century gradually
acquired an increasing hold upon the electorate.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XXXV

THE REIGN OF QUEEN WILHELMINA, 1898-1917


THE Pierson-Borgesius ministry had not been long in office when Queen
Wilhelmina attained her majority (August 31, 1898) amidst public
enthusiasm. At the same time the Queen-Mother received many expressions
of high appreciation for the admirable manner in which for eight years
she had discharged her constitutional duties. The measures passed by
this administration dealt with many subjects of importance. Personal
military service was at last, after years of controversy, enforced by
law, ecclesiastics and students alone being excepted. Attendance at
school up to the age of 13 was made obligatory, and the subsidies for
the upkeep of the schools and the payment of teachers were substantially
increased. The year 1899 was memorable for the meeting of the first
Peace Congress (on the initiative of the Tsar Nicholas II) at the _Huis
in't Bosch_. The deliberations and discussions began on May 18 and
lasted until June 29. By the irony of events, a few months later
(October 10) a war broke out, in which the Dutch people felt a great and
sympathetic interest, between the two Boer republics of South Africa and
Great Britain. Bitter feelings were aroused, and the queen did but
reflect the national sentiment when she personally received in the most
friendly manner President Krueger, who arrived in Holland as a fugitive
on board a Dutch man-of-war in the summer of 1900. The official attitude
of the government was however perfectly correct, and there was never any
breach in the relations between Great Britain and the Netherlands.

The marriage of Queen Wilhelmina, on February 7, 1901, with Prince Henry
of Mecklenburg-Schwerin was welcomed by the people, as affording hopes,
for some years to be disappointed, of the birth of an heir to the
throne.

The elections of 1901 found the liberal ministry out of favour through
the laws enforcing military service and obligatory attendance at school.
Against them the indefatigable Dr Kuyper, who had returned to active
politics in 1897, had succeeded in uniting the three "Church"
groups--the democratic anti-revolutionaries, the aristocratic Historical
Christians (both orthodox Calvinists) and the Catholics of all
sections--into a "Christian Coalition" in support of religious teaching
in the schools. The victory lay with the coalition, and Dr Kuyper became
first minister. The new administration introduced a measure on Higher
Education, which was rejected by the First Chamber. A dissolution of
this Chamber led to the majority being reversed, and the measure was
passed. Another measure revised the Mackay Law and conferred a larger
subsidy on "private" schools. The socialist party under the able
leadership of Troelstra had won several seats at the election; and in
1903 a general strike was threatened unless the government conceded the
demands of the socialist labour party. The threat was met with firmness;
an anti-strike law was quickly passed; the military was called out; and
the strike collapsed. The costly war in Achin, which had been
smouldering for some years, burst out again with violence in the years
1902-3, and led to sanguinary reprisals on the part of the Dutch
soldiery, the report of which excited indignation against the
responsible authorities. Various attempts had been made in 1895 and 1899
to introduce protectionist duties, but unsuccessfully.

The quadrennial elections of 1905 found all the liberal groups united in
a combined assault upon the Christian Coalition. A severe electoral
struggle ensued, with the result that 45 liberals and 7 socialists were
returned against 48 coalitionists. Dr Kuyper resigned; and a new
ministry, under the leadership of the moderate liberal, De Meester, took
its place. The De Meester government was however dependent upon the
socialist vote, and possessed no independent majority in either Chamber.
For the first time a ministry of agriculture, industry and trade was
created. Such an administration could only lead a precarious existence,
and in 1907 an adverse vote upon the military estimates led to its
resignation. Th. Heemskerk undertook the task of forming a new cabinet
from the anti-revolutionary and Catholic groups, and at the next general
election of 1909 he won a conclusive victory at the polls. This victory
was obtained by wholesale promises of social reforms, including old age
pensions and poor and sick relief. As so often happens, such a programme
could not be carried into effect without heavy expenditure; and the
means were not forthcoming. To meet the demand a bill was introduced
in August, 1911, by the finance minister, Dr Kolkmar, to increase
considerably the existing duties, and to extend largely the list of
dutiable imports. This bill led to a widespread agitation in the
country, and many petitions were presented against it, with the result
that it was withdrawn. A proposal made by this ministry in 1910 to spend
38,000,000 florins on the fortification of Flushing excited much adverse
criticism in the press of Belgium, England and France, on the ground
that it had been done at the suggestion of the German government, the
object being to prevent the British fleet from seizing Flushing in the
event of the outbreak of an Anglo-German war. The press agitation met,
however, with no countenance on the part of responsible statesmen in any
of the countries named; it led nevertheless to the abandonment of the
original proposal and the passing of a bill in 1912 for the improvement
of the defences of the Dutch sea-ports generally.

The election of 1913 reversed the verdict of 1909. Probably in no
country has the principle of the "swing of the pendulum" been so
systematically verified as it has in Holland in recent times. The
returns were in 1913: Church parties, 41; liberals of all groups, 39;
socialists, 15. The most striking change was the increase in the
socialist vote, their representation being more than doubled; and, as in
1905, they held the balance of parties in their hands. With some
difficulty Dr Cort van den Linden succeeded in forming a liberal
ministry. The outbreak of the Great War in August, 1914, prevented them
from turning their attention to any other matters than those arising
from the maintenance of a strict neutrality in a conflict which placed
them in a most difficult and dangerous position. One of the first
questions on which they had to take a critical decision was the closing
of the Scheldt. As soon as Great Britain declared war on Germany (August
4), Holland refused to allow any belligerent vessels to pass over its
territorial waters. The events of the six years that have since passed
are too near for comment here. The liberal ministry at least deserves
credit for having steered the country safely through perilous waters.
Nevertheless, at the quadrennial election of 1917 there was the
customary swing of the pendulum; and an anti-liberal ministry (September
6) was formed, with a Catholic, M. Ruys de Beerenbronck, as first
minister.

       *       *       *       *       *




EPILOGUE


The dynastic connection of Luxemburg with Holland ceased with the
accession of Queen Wilhelmina. The conditions under which the Belgian
province of Luxemburg was created, by the Treaty of Vienna in 1815, a
grand-duchy under the sovereignty of the head of the House of
Orange-Nassau with succession in default of heirs-male by the family
compact, known as the _Nassauischer Erbverein_, to the nearest male
agnate of the elder branch of the Nassau family, have already been
related. With the death of William III the male line of the House of
Orange-Nassau became extinct; and the succession passed to Adolphus,
Duke of Nassau-Weilburg. How unfortunate and ill-advised was the action
of the Congress of Vienna in the creation of the Grand-Duchy of
Luxemburg was abundantly shown by the difficulties and passions which it
aroused in the course of the negotiations for the erection of Belgium
into an independent state (1830-39). By the treaty of April 19, 1839,
the Walloon portion of Luxemburg became part of the kingdom of Belgium,
but in exchange for this cession the grand-duke obtained the sovereignty
of a strip of the Belgian province of Limburg. This caused a fresh
complication.

Luxemburg in 1815 was not merely severed from the Netherlands; it, as a
sovereign grand-duchy, was made a state of the Germanic confederation.
By virtue of the exchange sanctioned by the treaty of 1839, the ceded
portion of Limburg became a state of the confederation. But with the
revision of the Dutch constitution, which in 1840 followed the final
separation of Holland and Belgium, by the wish of the king his duchy of
Limburg was included in the new Fundamental Law, and thus became
practically a Dutch province. The Limburgers had thus a strange and
ambiguous position. They had to pay taxes, to furnish military
contingents and to send deputies to two different sovereign authorities.
This state of things continued with more or less friction, until the
victory of Prussia over Austria in 1866 led to the dissolution of the
Germanic confederation. At the conference of London, 1867, Luxemburg was
declared to be an independent state, whose neutrality was guaranteed
by the Great Powers, while Limburg became an integral portion of the
kingdom of the Netherlands.

Since the middle of the last century the financial position of Holland
has been continuously improving. The heavy indebtedness of the country,
in the period which followed the separation from Belgium, was gradually
diminished. This was effected for a number of years by the doubtful
expedient of the profits derived from the exploitation of the East
Indian colonies through the "Cultivation System." With the passing of
the revised Fundamental Law of 1848 the control of colonial affairs and
of the colonial budget was placed in the hands of the States-General;
and a considerable section of the Liberal party began henceforth to
agitate for the abolition of a system which was very oppressive to the
Javanese population. It was not, however, until 1871 that the reform was
carried out. Meanwhile, chiefly by the efforts of Thorbecke, the methods
of home finance had been greatly improved by the removal, so far as
possible, of indirect imposts, and the introduction of a free trade
policy, which since his days has been steadily maintained. Such a policy
is admirably suitable to a country which possesses neither minerals nor
coal[15], and whose wealth is mainly due to sea-or river-borne trade, to
dairy farming and to horticulture. For its supply of corn and many other
necessary commodities Holland has to look to other countries. The
fisheries still form one of the staple industries of the land, and
furnish a hardy sea-faring population for the considerable mercantile
marine, which is needed for constant intercourse with a colonial empire
(the third in importance at the present time) consisting chiefly of
islands in a far-distant ocean.

Between 1850 and 1914, 375,430,000 fl. have been devoted to the
reduction of debt; and the Sinking Fund in 1915 was 6,346,000 fl. Since
that date Holland has suffered from the consequences of the Great War,
but, having successfully maintained her neutrality, she has suffered
relatively far less than any of her neighbours. Taxation in Holland has
always been high. It is to a large extent an artificial country; and
vast sums have been expended and must always be expended in the upkeep
of the elaborate system of dykes and canals, by which the waters of the
ocean and the rivers are controlled and prevented from flooding large
areas of land lying below sea level.

Culture in Holland is widely diffused. The well-to-do classes usually
read and speak two or three languages beside their own; and the Dutch
language is a finished literary tongue of great flexibility and
copiousness. The system of education is excellent. Since 1900 attendance
at the primary schools between the ages of six and thirteen is
compulsory. Between the primary schools intermediate education
(_middelbaaronderwijs_) is represented by "burgher night-schools" and
"higher burgher schools." The night-schools are intended for those
engaged in agricultural or industrial work; the "higher schools" for
technical instruction, and much attention is paid to the study of the
_vier talen_--French, English, German and Dutch. In connection with
these there is an admirable School of Agriculture, Horticulture and
Forestry at Wageningen in Gelderland. To the teaching at Wageningen is
largely due the acknowledged supremacy of Holland in scientific
horticulture. There is a branch establishment at Groningen for
agricultural training, and another at Deventer for instruction in
subjects connected with colonial life. The _gymnasia_, which are to be
found in every town, are preparatory to the universities. The course
lasts six years; and the study of Latin and Greek in addition to modern
languages is compulsory. There are four universities, Leyden, Utrecht,
Groningen and Amsterdam. The possession of a doctor's degree at one of
these universities is necessary for magistrates, physicians, advocates,
and for teachers in the _gymnasia_ and higher burgher schools.

In so small a country the literary output is remarkable, and, marked as
it is by scientific and intellectual distinction, deserves to be more
widely read. The Dutch are justly proud of the great part their
forefathers played during the War of Independence, and in the days of
John de Witt and William III. For scientific historical research in the
national archives, and in the publication of documents bearing upon and
illustrating the national annals, Dutch historians can compare
favourably with those of any other country. Special mention should be
made of the labours of Robert Fruin, who may be described as the founder
of a school with many disciples, and whose collected works are a
veritable treasure-house of brilliant historical studies, combining
careful research with acute criticism. Among his many disciples the
names of Dr P.J. Blok and Dr H.T. Colenbrander are perhaps the best
known.

In the department of Biblical criticism there have been in Holland
several writers of European repute, foremost among whom stands the name
of Abraham Kuenen.

Dutch writers of fiction have been and are far more numerous than could
have been expected from the limited number of those able to read their
works. In the second half of the 19th century, J. van Lennep and Mevrouw
Bosboom-Toussaint were the most prolific writers. Both of these were
followers of the Walter Scott tradition, their novels being mainly
patriotic romances based upon episodes illustrating the past history of
the Dutch people. Van Lennep's contributions to literature were,
however, by no means confined to the writing of fiction, as his great
critical edition of Vondel's poetical works testifies. Mevrouw
Bosboom-Toussaint's novels were not only excellent from the literary
point of view, but as reproductions of historical events were most
conscientiously written. Her pictures, for instance, of the difficult
and involved period of Leicester's governor-generalship are admirable.
The writings of Douwes Dekker (under the pseudonym Multatuli) are
noteworthy from the fact that his novel _Max Havelaar_, dealing with
life in Java and setting forth the sufferings of the natives through the
"cultivation system," had a large share in bringing about its abolition.

The 20th century school of Dutch novelists is of a different type from
their predecessors and deals with life and life's problems in every
form. Among the present-day authors of fiction, the foremost place
belongs to Louis Conperus, an idealist and mystic, who as a stylist is
unapproached by any of his contemporaries.

No account of modern Holland would be complete without a notice of the
great revival of Dutch painting, which has taken place in the past half
century. Without exaggeration it may indeed be said that this modern
renascence of painting in Holland is not unworthy to be compared with
that of the days of Rembrandt. The names of Joseph Israels, Hendrik
Mesdag, Vincent van Gogh, Anton Maure, and, not least, of the three
talented brothers Maris, have attained a wide and well-deserved
reputation. And to these must be added others of high merit: Bilders,
Scheffer, Bosboom, Rochussen, Bakhuysen, Du Chattel, De Haas and
Haverman. The traditional representation of the Dutchman as stolid,
unemotional, wholly absorbed in trade and material interests, is a
caricature. These latter-day artists, like those of the 17th century,
conclusively prove that the Dutch race is singularly sensitive to the
poetry of form and colour, and that it possesses an inherited capacity
and power for excelling in the technical qualities of the painter's
art.

       *       *       *       *       *


     FOOTNOTES:

     [Footnote 1: Hollandais, Hollaender, Olandesi, Olandeses,
     etc.]

     [Footnote 2: In French books and documents, Jacqueline.]

     [Footnote 3: Bois-le-duc.]

     [Footnote 4: By English and French writers generally
     translated Grand Pensionary.]

     [Footnote 5: It must be remembered that the States-General
     and the Holland Estates sat in the same building.]

     [Footnote 6: Adam Smith, _Wealth of Nations_, I, 101.]

     [Footnote 7: Busken Huet, _Land van Rembrant_, III, 175.]

     [Footnote 8: _Acte van Seclusie._]

     [Footnote 9: Nassauischer Erbverein.]

     [Footnote 10: Charles White, _The Belgic Revolution_, 1835,
     vol. 1, p. 106.]

     [Footnote 11: _Correspondence secrete des Pays-Bas_. Julian
     received his report of the conversation direct from Count
     Bylandt by permission of the king.]

     [Footnote 12: From Van Maanen's private papers. See
     Colenbrander's _Belgische Omwenteling_, p. 139.]

     [Footnote 13: The ratification by the Powers took place on
     the following dates:--France and Great Britain, January 31;
     Austria and Prussia, April 18; Russia, May 4, 1832.]

     [Footenote 14: The Prince of Orange had married Anna
     Paulovna, sister of Alexander I, in 1816.]

     [Footnote 15: The Belgian coal field extends into Dutch
     Limburg.]

       *       *       *       *       *




BIBLIOGRAPHY


GENERAL

(_a_) ARCHIVALIA. BOOKS OF REFERENCE

AA, A.J. VAN DER. Biographisch woordenboek d. Nederlanden bevatt.
  levensbeschrijvingen der personen, die zich in ons vaderland hebben
  vermaard gemacht, voortgezet door K.J.R. v. Harderwijk en
  G.D.J. Schotel. 27 vols. Haarlem. 1851-70.

BERGH, L. PH.C. VAN DEN. Over MSS betr. onze geschiedenis in het
  Britsch Museum bewaard. Arnhem. 1858.

BLOK, P.J. Onze archieven. Amsterdam. 1891.
  Verslag aangaande een onderzoek in Duitschland naar Archivalia,
  belangrijk voor de geschiedenis van Nederland. 2 vols. The
  Hague. 1888-9.
  Verslag aangaande een voorloopig onderzoek in Engelandt naar
  Archivalia, belangrijk voor de gesch. v.N. The Hague. 1891.
  Verslag aangaande een voorloopig onderzoek in Parijs naar
  Archivalia, belangrijk voor de gesch. v.N. The Hague. 1897.

BRINK, R.C. BAKHUIZEN VAN DEN. Overzigt van het Nederl. Rijk's
  Archief. The Hague. 1854.

KNUTTEL, W.P.C. Nederlandsche bibliographic voor kerkgeschiedenis.
  Amsterdam. 1889.
  Catalogus van de pamfletten-verzameling berustende in de
  koninklijke biblioteek. 6 vols. The Hague. 1899, 1900, 1902.

KOK, J. Vaderlandsch Woordenboek. 35 vols. Amsterdam. 1735-99.

PETIT, LOUIS D. Repertorium der verhandelingen en bijdragen betreff.
  de geschied. des Vaterlands in tijdschriften en mengelwerken tot op
  1900 verschenen. Leyden. 1905.

RIEMSDIJK, TH.V. Het Rijk's Archief te's Gravenhage. The Hague.
  1889.

SCHELTEMA, P. Inventaris van het Amsterdamsch Archief. 3 vols.
  Amsterdam. 1866-74.

UHLENBEEK, C.C. Verslag aangaande een onderzoek in de archieven
  van Rusland ten bate der Nederl. Geschiedenis. The Hague. 1891.


(_b_) GENERAL HISTORY OF THE NETHERLANDS

AREND, J.P. Algemeene Geschiedenis des Vaderlands van de vroegste
  tijden tot op heden, voortgezet.... 13 vols. Amsterdam. 1840-83.

BILDERDIJK, W. Geschiedenis des Vaderlands. 14 vols. Amsterdam.
  1832-53.

BLOK, P.J. Geschiedenis des Vaderlands. 9 vols. Groningen. 1892-1908.
  English translation in five parts. London and New York.

DAVIES, C.M. History of Holland and of the Dutch. 5 vols. London.
  1851.

FRUIN, R. Geschiedenis der Staat-Instellingen in Nederland tot den
  Val der Republiek. The Hague. 1893.

GROEN v. PRINSTERER, G. Handboek der Geschied. des Vaterlands.
  2 vols. Leyden. 1846.

JONGE, J.C. DE. Geschiedenis v. het Nederlandsche Zee-Wesen. 6 vols.
  The Hague. 1833-45.

NIJHOFF, I.A. Staatkundige Geschiedenis van Nederland. 2 vols.
  Zutphen. 1891-3.

RIJSENS, F. Geschiedenis van ons Vaderland. Groningen. 1904.

ROGERS, J.E. THOROLD. History of Holland. London. 1888.

VOS, J.M. Geschiedenis van ons Vaderland van oude tijden tot heden.
  Groningen. 1915.

VREEDE, G.W. Inleiding tot eene Geschiedenis der Nederlandsche
  diplomatie. 6 vols. Utrecht. 1856-65.

WAGENAAR, J. Vaderlandsche Historie. 21 vols. Amsterdam. 1749-59.

WENZELBERGER, K. TH. Geschichte der Niederlande. 2 vols. Gotha.
  1879-86.

WIJNE, J.A. Geschiedenis van het Vaderland. Groningen. 1870.


XVITH CENTURY

(_a_) CONTEMPORARY WORKS AND COLLECTIONS
    OF ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS

BOR, P. Oorspronck, begin en ende aenvang der Nederlandsche oorlogen,
  beroerten ende borgelijcke oneenicheyden. 6 vols. Amsterdam
  and Leyden. 1621.

BRUCE, J. Correspondence of Leicester during his Government in the
  Low Countries. London. 1844.

