breadth, but extending completely round. Beneath this ledge the sides
sloped gradually towards the burning lake, which was, as nearly as we
could judge, 300 or 400 feet lower.

"It was evident that the large crater had been recently filled with
liquid lava up to this black ledge, and had, by some subterraneous
canal, emptied itself into the sea or spread under the low land on the
shore. The gray and in some places apparently calcined sides of the
great crater before us, the fissures which intersected the surface of
the plain on which we were standing, the long banks of sulphur on the
opposite side of the abyss, the vigorous action of the numerous small
craters on its borders, the dense columns of vapor and smoke that rose
at the north and west end of the plain, together with the ridge of steep
rocks by which it was surrounded, rising probably in some places 300
or 400 feet in perpendicular height, presented an immense volcanic
panorama, the effect of which was greatly augmented by the constant
roaring of the vast furnaces below."


MAUNA LOA IN ERUPTION


Of the two great craters of Mauna Loa, the summit one has frequently
in modern times overflowed its crest and poured its molten streams in
glowing rivers over the land. This has rarely been the case with the
lower and incessantly active crater of Kilauea, whose lava, when in
excess, appears to escape by subterranean channels to the sea. We append
descriptions of some of the more recent examples of Mauna Loa's eruptive
energy. The lava from this crater does not alone flow over the crater's
lip, but at times makes its way through fissures far below, the immense
pressure causing it to spout in great flashing fountains high into the
air. In 1852 the fiery fountains reached a height of 500 feet. In some
later eruptions they have leaped 1,000 feet high. The lava is white hot
as it ascends, but it assumes a blood-red tint in its fall, and strikes
the ground with a frightful noise.

The quantities of lava ejected in some of the recent eruptions have been
enormous. The river-like flow of 1855 was remarkable for its extent,
being from two to eight miles wide, with a depth of from three to three
hundred feet, and extending in a winding course for a distance of sixty
miles. The Apostle of Hawaiian volcanoes, the Rev. Titus Coan, who
ventured to the source of this flow while it was in supreme action, thus
describes it:--

"We ascended our rugged pathway amidst steam and smoke and heat which
almost blinded and scathed us. We came to open orifices down which we
looked into the fiery river which rushed madly under our feet. These
fiery vents were frequent, some of them measuring ten, twenty, fifty
or one hundred feet in diameter. In one place we saw the river of lava
uncovered for thirty rods and rushing down a declivity of from ten to
twenty-five degrees. The scene was awful, the momentum incredible, the
fusion perfect (white heat), and the velocity forty miles an hour. The
banks on each side of the stream were red-hot, jagged and overhanging.
As we viewed it rushing out from under its ebon counterpane, and in the
twinkling of an eye diving again into its fiery den, it seemed to say,
'Stand off! Scan me not! I am God's messenger. A work to do. Away!'"

Later he wrote again:--"The great summit fountain is still playing with
fearful energy, and the devouring stream rushes madly down toward us. It
is now about ten miles distant, and heading directly for our bay. In
a few days we may be called to announce the painful fact that our
beauteous Hilo is no more,--that our lovely, our inimitable landscape,
our emerald bowers, our crescent strand and our silver bay are blotted
out. A fiery sword hangs over us. A flood of burning ruin approaches us.
Devouring fires are near us. With sure and solemn progress the glowing
fusion advances through the dark forest and the dense jungle in our
rear, cutting down ancient trees of enormous growth and sweeping away
all vegetable life. For months the great summit furnace on Mauna Loa has
been in awful blast. Floods of burning destruction have swept wildly
and widely over the top and down the sides of the mountain. The wrathful
stream has overcome every obstacle, winding its fiery way from its high
source to the bases of the everlasting hills, spreading in a molten sea
over the plains, penetrating the ancient forests, driving the bellowing
herds, the wild goats and the affrighted birds before its lurid glare,
leaving nothing but ebon blackness and smoldering ruin in its track."

His anticipation of the burial of Hilo under the mighty flow was happily
not realized. It came to an abrupt halt while seven miles distant, the
checked stream standing in a threatening and rugged ridge, with rigid,
beetling front.


THE ERUPTIONS OF 1859 AND 1865


In January, 1859, Mauna Loa was again at its fire-play, throwing up
lava fountains from 800 to 1,000 feet in height. From this great fiery
fountain the lava flowed down in numerous streams, spreading over a
width of five or six miles. One stream, probably formed by the junction
of several smaller, attained a height of from twenty to twenty-five
feet, and a breadth of about an eighth of a mile. Great stones were
thrown up along with the jet of lava, and the volume of seeming smoke,
composed probably of fine volcanic dust, is said to have risen to the
height of 10,000 feet.

An eruption of still greater violence took place in 1865, characterized
by similar phenomena, particularly the throwing up of jets of lava. This
fiery fountain continued to play without intermission for twenty days
and nights, varying only as respects the height to which the jet arose,
which is said to have ranged between 100 and 1,000 feet, the mean
diameter of the jet being about 100 feet. This eruption was accompanied
by explosions so loud as to have been heard at a distance of forty
miles.

A cone of about 300 feet in height, and about a mile in circumference,
was accumulated round the orifice whence the jet ascended. It was
composed of solid matters ejected with the lava, and it continued
to glow like a furnace, notwithstanding its exposure to the air. The
current of lava on this occasion flowed to a distance of thirty-five
miles, burning its way through the forests, and filling the air with
smoke and flames from the ignited timber. The glare from the glowing
lava and the burning trees together was discernible by night at a
distance of 200 miles from the island.


THE LAVA FLOW OF 1880


A succeeding great lava flow was that which began on November 6, 1880.
Mr. David Hitchcock, who was camping on Mauna Kea at the time of this
outbreak, saw a spectacle that few human eyes have ever beheld. "We
stood," writes he, "on the very edge of that flowing river of rock. Oh,
what a sight it was! Not twenty feet from us was this immense bed of
rock slowly moving forward with irresistible force, bearing on its
surface huge rocks and immense boulders of tons' weight as water would
carry a toy-boat. The whole front edge was one bright red mass of solid
rock incessantly breaking off from the towering mass and rolling down
to the foot of it, to be again covered by another avalanche of white-hot
rocks and sand. The whole mass at its front edge was from twelve to
thirty feet in height. Along the entire line of its advance it was
one crash of rolling, sliding, tumbling red-hot rock. We could hear no
explosions while we were near the flow, only a tremendous roaring like
ten thousand blast furnaces all at work at once."

This was the most extensive flow of recent years, and its progress from
the interior plain through the dense forests above Hilo and out on to
the open levels close to the town was startling and menacing enough.
Through the woods especially it was a turbulent, seething mass that
hurled down mammoth trees, and licked up streams of water, and day and
night kept up an unintermitting cannonade of explosions. The steam
and imprisoned gases would burst the congealing surface with loud
detonations that could be heard for many miles. It was not an infrequent
thing for parties to camp out close to the flow over night. Ordinarily a
lava-flow moves sluggishly and congeals rapidly, so that what seems
like hardihood in the narrating is in reality calm judgment, for it is
perfectly safe to be in the close vicinity of a lava-stream, and even to
walk on its surface as soon as one would be inclined to walk on cooling
iron in a foundry. This notable flow finally ceased within half a mile
of Hilo, where its black form is a perpetual reminder of a marvellous
deliverance from destruction.


KILAUEA IN 1840


Kilauea seems never, in historic times, to have filled and overflowed
its vast crater. To do so would need an almost inconceivable volume of
liquid rock material. But it approached this culmination in 1840, when
it became, through its whole extent, a raging sea of fire. The boiling
lava rose in the mighty mountain-cup to a height of from 500 to
600 feet. Then it forced a passage through a subterranean cavity
twenty-seven miles long, and reached the sea forty miles distant, in two
days. The stream where it fell into the sea was half a mile wide, and
the flow kept up for three weeks, heating the ocean twenty miles from
land. An eye-witness of this extraordinary flow thus describes it:

"When the torrent of fire precipitated itself into the ocean, the
scene assumed a character of terrific and indescribable grandeur. The
magnificence of destruction was never more perceptibly displayed than
when these antagonistic elements met in deadly strife. The mightiest of
earth's magazines of fire poured forth its burning billows to meet the
mightiest of oceans. For two score miles it came rolling, tumbling,
swelling forward, an awful agent of death. Rocks melted like wax in its
path; forests crackled and blazed before its fervent heat; the works of
man were to it but as a scroll in the flames. Imagine Niagara's stream,
above the brink of the Falls, with its dashing, whirling, madly-raging
waters hurrying on to their plunge, instantaneously converted into fire;
a gory-hued river of fused minerals; volumes of hissing steam arising;
some curling upward from ten thousand vents, which give utterance to
as many deep-toned mutterings, and sullen, confined clamorings; gases
detonating and shrieking as they burst from their hot prison-house;
the heavens lurid with flame; the atmosphere dark and oppressive; the
horizon murky with vapors and gleaming with the reflected contest!

"Such was the scene as the fiery cataract, leaping a precipice of fifty
feet, poured its flood upon the ocean. The old line of coast, a mass
of compact, indurated lava, whitened, cracked and fell. The waters
recoiled, and sent forth a tempest of spray; they foamed and dashed
around and over the melted rock, they boiled with the heat, and the roar
of the conflicting agencies grew fiercer and louder. The reports of the
exploding gases were distinctly heard twenty-five miles distant, and
were likened to a whole broadside of heavy artillery. Streaks of the
intensest light glanced like lightning in all directions; the outskirts
of the burning lava as it fell, cooled by the shock, were shivered into
millions of fragments, and scattered by the strong wind in sparkling
showers far into the country. For three successive weeks the volcano
disgorged an uninterrupted burning tide, with scarcely any diminution,
into the ocean. On either side, for twenty miles, the sea became heated,
with such rapidity that, on the second day of the junction of the lava
with the ocean, fishes came ashore dead in great numbers, at a point
fifteen miles distant. Six weeks later, at the base of the hills, the
water continued scalding hot, and sent forth steam at every wash of the
waves."


THE SINKING OF KILAUEA'S FIRE-LAKE


In 1866 the great crater of Kilauea presented a new and unlooked-for
spectacle in the sinking and vanishing of its great lava lake. In March
of that year the fires in the ancient cauldron totally disappeared, and
the surrounding lava rock sank to a depth of nearly 600 feet. Mr. Thrum,
in a pamphlet on "The Suspended Activity of Kilauea," says of it:

"Distant rumbling noises were heard, accompanied by a series of
earthquakes, forty-three in number. With the fourth shock the brilliancy
of New Lake disappeared, and towards 3 A. M. the fires in Halemaumau
disappeared also, leaving the whole crater in darkness.

"With the dawn the shocks and noises ceased, and revealed the
changes which Kilauea had undergone in the night. All the high cliffs
surrounding Halemaumau and New Lake, which had become a prominent
feature in the crater, had vanished entirely, and the molten lava of
both lakes had disappeared by some subterranean passage from the bottom
of Halemaumau. There was no material change in the sunken portion of the
crater except a continual falling in of rocks and debris from its
banks as the contraction from its former intense heat loosened their
compactness and sent them hurling some 200 or 300 feet below, giving
forth at times a boom as of distant thunder, followed by clouds
of cinders and ashes shooting up into the air 100 to 300 feet,
proportionate, doubtless, to the size of the newly fallen mass.

"This remarkable recession of the liquid lava in Halemaumau was probably
due to the opening of some deep subterranean passage through which the
lake of lava made its way unseen to the ocean's depths. The Rev. Mr.
Baker, probably the most adventuresome explorer of Hawaiian volcanoes,
actually descended into that crumbling pit to a point within what he
judged to be fifty feet of the bottom. But Halemaumau had only taken
an intermission, for in two short months signs of returning life became
frequent and unmistakable, and, in June, culminated in the sudden
outbreak of a lake that has since then steadily increased in activity."


THE GODDESS PELE


We cannot close this chapter without some reference to the Goddess Pele,
to whom the Hawaiians long imputed the wonder-work of their volcanic
mountains. When there is unusual commotion in Kilauea myriads of
thread-like filaments float in the air and fall upon the cliffs, making
deposits much resembling matted hair. A single filament over fifteen
inches long was picked up on a Hilo veranda, having sailed in the air
a distance of fifty miles. This is the famous Pele's Hair, being the
glass-like product of volcanic fires. It resembles Prince Rupert's
Drops, and the tradition is that whenever the volcano becomes active
it is because Pele, the Goddess of the crater, emerges from her fiery
furnace and shakes her vitreous locks in anger.

This fabled being, according to Emerson, in a paper on "The Lesser
Hawaiian Gods," "could at times assume the appearance of a handsome
young woman, as when Kamapauaa, to his cost, was smitten with her charms
when first he saw her with her sisters at Kilauea." Kamapauaa was a
gigantic hog, who "could appear as a handsome young man, a hog, a fish
or a tree." "At other times the innate character of the fury showed
itself, and Pele appeared in her usual form as an ugly and hateful old
hag, with tattered and fire-burnt garments, scarcely concealing the
filth and nakedness of her person. Her bloodshot eyes and fiendish
countenance paralyzed the beholder, and her touch turned him to stone.
She was a jealous and vindictive monster, delighting in cruelty, and at
the slightest provocation overwhelming the unoffending victims of her
rage in widespread ruin."

The superstition regarding the Goddess Pele was thought to have received
a death blow in 1825, when Kapiolani, an Hawaiian princess and a
Christian convert, ascended, with numerous attendants, to the crater of
Kilauea, where she publicly defied the power and wrath of the goddess.
No response came to her defiance, she descended in safety, and faith in
Pele's power was widely shaken.

Yet as late as 1887 the old superstition revived and claimed an exalted
victim, for in that year the Princess Like Like, the youngest sister of
the king, starved herself to death to appease the anger of the Goddess
Pele, supposed to be manifested in Mauna Loa's eruption of that year,
and to be quieted only by the sacrifice of a victim of royal blood. Thus
slowly do the old superstitions die away.



CHAPTER XXVI.

Popocatapetl and Other Volcanoes of Mexico and Central America.


Mexico is very largely a vast table-land, rising through much of its
extent to an elevation of from 7,000 to 8,000 feet above sea-level, and
bounded east and west by wide strips of torrid lowlands adjoining the
oceans. It is crossed at about 19 degrees north latitude by a range of
volcanic mountains, running in almost a straight line east and west,
upon which are several extinct volcanic cones, and five active or
quiescent volcanoes. The highest of these is Popocatapetl, south of the
city of Mexico and nearly midway between the Atlantic and Pacific.

East of this mountain lies Orizabo, little below it in height, and San
Martin or Tuxtla, 9,700 feet high, on the coast south of Vera Cruz.
West of it is Jorullo, 4,000 feet, and Colima, 12,800, near the Pacific
coast. The volcanic energy continues southward toward the Isthmus,
but decreases north of this volcanic range. These mountains have shown
little signs of activity in recent times. Popocatapetl emits smoke, but
there is no record of an eruption since 1540. Orizabo has been quiet
since 1566. Tuxtla had a violent eruption in 1793, but since then has
remained quiescent. Colima is the only one now active. For ten years
past it has been emitting ashes and smoke. The most remarkable of these
volcanoes is Jorullo, which closely resembled Monte Nuovo, described in
Chapter XIII., in its mode of origin.

Popocatapetl, the hill that smokes, in the Mexican language, the huge
mountain clothed in eternal snows, and regarded by the idolaters of old
as a god, towers up nearly 18,000 feet above the level of the sea, and
in the days of the conquest of Mexico was a volcano in a state of fierce
activity. It was looked upon by the natives with a strange dread, and
they told the white strangers with awe that no man could attempt to
ascend its slopes and yet live; but, from a feeling of vanity, or the
love of adventure, the Spaniards laughed at these fears, and accordingly
a party of ten of the followers of Cortes commenced the ascent,
accompanied by a few Indians. But these latter, after ascending about
13,000 feet to where the last remains of stunted vegetation existed,
became alarmed at the subterranean bellowings of the volcano, and
returned, while the Spaniards still painfully toiled on through
the rarefied atmosphere, their feet crushing over the scoriae and
black-glazed volcanic sand, until they stood in the region of perpetual
snow, amidst the glittering, treacherous glaciers and crevasses, with
vast slippery-pathed precipices yawning round.

Still they toiled on in this wild and wondrous region. A few hours
before they were in a land of perpetual summer; here all was snow. They
suffered the usual distress awarded to those who dare to ascend to these
solitudes of nature but it was not given to them to achieve the summit,
for suddenly, at a higher elevation, after listening to various ominous
threatenings from the interior of the volcano, they encountered so
fierce a storm of smoke, cinders, and sparks, that they were driven back
half suffocated to the lower portions of the mountain.

Some time after another attempt was made; and upon this occasion with
a definite object. The invaders had nearly exhausted their stock of
gunpowder, and Cortes organized a party to ascend to the crater of the
volcano, to seek and bring down sulphur for the manufacture of this
necessary of warfare. This time the party numbered but five, led by
one Francisco Montano; and they experienced no very great difficulty in
winning their way upwards. The region of verdure gave place to the wild,
lava-strewn slope, which was succeeded in its turn by the treacherous
glaciers; and at last the gallant little band stood at the very edge
of the crater, a vast depression of over a league in circumference, and
1,000 feet in depth.


SULPHUR FROM THE CRATER


Flame was issuing from the hideous abysses, and the stoutest man's heart
must have quailed as he peered down into the dim, mysterious cavity to
where the sloping sides were crusted with bright yellow sulphur, and
listened to the mutterings which warned him of the pent-up wrath and
power of the mighty volcano. They knew that at any moment flame and
stifling sulphurous vapor might be belched forth, but now no cowardice
was shown. They had come provided with ropes and baskets, and it only
remained to see who should descend. Lots were therefore drawn, and
it fell to Montano, who was accordingly lowered by his followers in a
basket 400 feet into the treacherous region of eternal fires.

The basket swayed and the rope quivered and vibrated, but the brave
cavalier sturdily held to his task, disdaining to show fear before his
humble companions. The lurid light from beneath flashed upon his tanned
features, and a sulphurous steam rose slowly and condensed upon the
sides; but, whatever were his thoughts, the Spaniard collected as
much sulphur as he could take up with him, breaking off the bright
incrustations, and even dallying with his task as if in contempt of
the danger, till he had leisurely filed his basket, when the signal was
given and he was drawn up. The basket was emptied, and then he once more
descended into the lurid crater, collected another store and was again
drawn up; but far from shrinking from his task, he descended again
several times, till a sufficiency had been obtained, with which the
party descended to the plain.


THE VOLCANO JORULLO


No further back than the middle of the eighteenth century the site of
Jorullo was a level plain, including several highly-cultivated fields,
which formed the farm of Don Pedro di Jorullo. The plain was watered
by two small rivers, called Cuitimba and San Pedro, and was bounded by
mountains composed of basalt--the only indications of former volcanic
action. These fields were well irrigated, and among the most fertile in
the country, producing abundant crops of sugar-cane and indigo.

In the month of June, 1759, the cultivators of the farm began to
be disturbed by strange subterranean noises of an alarming kind,
accompanied by frequent shocks of earthquake, which continued for nearly
a couple of months; but they afterward entirely ceased, so that the
inhabitants of the place were lulled into security. On the night between
the 28th and 29th of September, however, the subterranean noises
were renewed with greater loudness than before, and the ground shook
severely. The Indian servants living on the place started from their
beds in terror, and fled to the neighboring mountains. Thence gazing
upon their master's farm they beheld it, along with a tract of ground
measuring between three and four square miles, in the midst of which it
stood, rise up bodily, as if it had been inflated from beneath like a
bladder. At the edges this tract was uplifted only about 39 feet above
the original surface, but so great was its convexity that toward the
middle it attained a height of no less than 524 feet.

The Indians who beheld this strange phenomenon declared that they saw
flames issuing from several parts of this elevated tract, that the
entire surface became agitated like a stormy sea, that great clouds
of ashes, illuminated by volcanic fires glowing beneath them, rose at
several points, and that white-hot stones were thrown to an immense
height. Vast chasms were at the same time opened in the ground, and
into these the two small rivers above mentioned plunged. Their waters,
instead of extinguishing the subterranean conflagration, seemed only
to add to its intensity. Quantities of mud, enveloping balls of basalt,
were then thrown up, and the surface of the elevated ground became
studded with small cones, from which volumes of dense vapor, chiefly
steam, were emitted, some of the jets rising from 20 to 30 feet in
height.

These cones the Indians called ovens, and in many of them was long heard
a subterranean noise resembling that of water briskly boiling. Out of a
great chasm in the midst of those ovens there were thrown up six larger
elevations, the highest being 1,640 feet above the level of the plain,
4,315 above sea level, and now constituting the principal volcano of
Jorullo. The smallest of the six was 300 feet in height; the others of
intermediate elevation. The highest of these hills had on its summit
a regular volcanic crater, whence there have been thrown up great
quantities of dross and lava, containing fragments of older rocks. The
ashes were transported to immense distances, some of them having fallen
on the houses at Queretaro, more than forty-eight leagues from Jorullo.
The volcano continued in this energetic state of activity for about four
months; in the following years its eruptions became less frequent, but
it still continues to emit volumes of vapor from the principal crater,
as well as from many of the ovens in the upheaved ground.


EFFECT ON THE RIVERS


The two rivers, which disappeared on the first night of this great
eruption, now pursue an underground course for about a mile and a
quarter, and then reappear as hot springs, with a temperature of 126
degrees F.

