far from being dropsical, I am as lank in the belly as a grey-hound;
and, by measuring my ancle with a pack-thread, I find the swelling
subsides every day. From such doctors, good Lord deliver us!--I have not
yet taken any lodgings in Bath; because there we can be accommodated at
a minute's warning, and I shall choose for myself--I need not say your
directions for drinking and bathing will be agreeable to,

Dear Lewis, Yours ever, MAT. BRAMBLE

P.S. I forgot to tell you, that my right ancle pits, a symptom, as I
take it, of its being oedematous, not leucophlegmatic.




To Miss LETTY WILLIS, at Gloucester

HOT WELL, April 21.

MY DEAR LETTY,

I did not intend to trouble you again, till we should be settled at
Bath; but having the occasion of Jarvis, I could not let it slip,
especially as I have something extraordinary to communicate. O, my dear
companion! What shall I tell you? for several days past there was a
Jew-looking man, that plied at the Wells with a box of spectacles; and
he always eyed me so earnestly, that I began to be very uneasy. At last,
he came to our lodgings at Clifton, and lingered about the door, as
if he wanted to speak to somebody--I was seized with an odd kind of
fluttering, and begged Win to throw herself in his way: but the poor
girl has weak nerves, and was afraid of his beard. My uncle, having
occasion for new glasses, called him up stairs, and was trying a pair
of spectacles, when the man, advancing to me, said in a whisper--O
gracious! what d'ye think he said?--'I am Wilson!' His features struck
me that very moment it was Wilson, sure enough! but so disguised, that
it would have been impossible to know him, if my heart had not assisted
in the discovery. I was so surprised, and so frightened that I fainted
away, but soon recovered; and found myself supported by him on the
chair, while my uncle was running about the room, with the spectacles
on his nose, calling for help. I had no opportunity to speak to him; but
looks were sufficiently expressive. He was payed for his glasses, and
went away. Then I told Win who he was, and sent her after him to the
Pump-room; where she spoke to him, and begged him in my name to withdraw
from the place, that he might not incur the suspicion of my uncle or my
brother, if he did not want to see me die of terror and vexation. The
poor youth declared, with tears in his eyes, that he had something
extraordinary to communicate; and asked, if she would deliver a letter
to me: but this she absolutely refused, by my order.--Finding her
obstinate in her refusal, he desired she would tell me that he was no
longer a player, but a gentleman; in which character he would very soon
avow his passion for me, without fear of censure or reproach--Nay,
he even discovered his name and family, which, to my great grief,
the simple girl forgot, in the confusion occasioned by her being seen
talking to him by my brother, who stopt her on the road, and asked
what business she had with that rascally Jew. She pretended she was
cheapening a stay-hook, but was thrown into such a quandary, that she
forgot the most material part of the information; and when she came
home, went into an hysteric fit of laughing. This transaction happened
three days ago, during which he has not appeared, so that I suppose he
has gone. Dear Letty! you see how Fortune takes pleasure in persecuting
your poor friend. If you should see him at Gloucester--or if you have
seen him, and know his real name and family, pray keep me no longer in
suspence--And yet, if he is under no obligation to keep himself longer
concealed, and has a real affection for me, I should hope he will, in a
little time, declare himself to my relations. Sure, if there is
nothing unsuitable in the match, they won't be so cruel as to thwart my
inclinations--O what happiness would then be my portion! I can't help
indulging the thought, and pleasing my fancy with such agreeable ideas;
which after all, perhaps, will never be realized--But, why should I
despair? who knows what will happen?--We set out for Bath to-morrow, and
I am almost sorry for it; as I begin to be in love with solitude, and
this is a charming romantic place. The air is so pure; the Downs are so
agreeable; the furz in full blossom; the ground enamelled with daisies,
and primroses, and cowslips; all the trees bursting into leaves, and the
hedges already clothed with their vernal livery; the mountains covered
with flocks of sheep and tender bleating wanton lambkins playing,
frisking, and skipping from side to side; the groves resound with
the notes of blackbird, thrush, and linnet; and all night long sweet
Philomel pours forth her ravishingly delightful song. Then, for
variety, we go down to the nymph of Bristol spring, where the company is
assembled before dinner; so good natured, so free, so easy; and there we
drink the water so clear, so pure, so mild, so charmingly maukish. There
the fun is so chearful and reviving; the weather so soft; the walk so
agreeable; the prospect so amusing; and the ships and boats going up and
down the river, close under the windows of the Pump-room, afford such an
enchanting variety of Moving Pictures, as require a much abler pen than
mine to describe. To make this place a perfect paradise to me, nothing
is wanting but an agreeable companion and sincere friend; such as
my dear miss Willis hath been, and I hope still will be, to her ever
faithful.

LYDIA MELFORD

Direct for me, still under cover, to Win; and Jarvis will take care to
convey it safe. Adieu.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

BATH, April 24.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

You have, indeed, reason to be surprised, that I should have concealed
my correspondence with miss Blackerby from you, to whom I disclosed all
my other connexions of that nature; but the truth is, I never dreamed
of any such commerce, till your last informed me, that it had produced
something which could not be much longer concealed. It is a lucky
circumstance, however, that her reputation will not suffer any
detriment, but rather derive advantage from the discovery; which
will prove, at least, that it is not quite so rotten as most people
imagined--For my own part, I declare to you, in all the sincerity of
friendship, that, far from having any amorous intercourse with the
object in question, I never had the least acquaintance with her person;
but, if she is really in the condition you describe, I suspect Mansel to
be at the bottom of the whole. His visits to that shrine were no secret;
and this attachment, added to some good offices, which you know he has
done me, since I left Alma-mater, give me a right to believe him capable
of saddling me with this scandal, when my back was turned--Nevertheless,
if my name can be of any service to him, he is welcome to make use of
it; and if the woman should be abandoned enough to swear his banding to
me, I must beg the favour of you to compound with the parish: I shall
pay the penalty without repining; and you will be so good as to draw
upon me immediately for the sum required--On this occasion, I act by the
advice of my uncle; who says I shall have good-luck if I pass through
life without being obliged to make many more compositions of the same
kind. The old gentleman told me last night, with great good-humour, that
betwixt the age of twenty and forty, he had been obliged to provide for
nine bastards, sworn to him by women whom he never saw--Mr Bramble's
character, which seems to interest you greatly, opens and improves upon
me every day. His singularities afford a rich mine of entertainment;
his understanding, so far as I can judge, is well cultivated; his
observations on life are equally just, pertinent, and uncommon. He
affects misanthropy, in order to conceal the sensibility of a heart,
which is tender, even to a degree of weakness. This delicacy of feeling,
or soreness of the mind, makes him timorous and fearful; but then he
is afraid of nothing so much as of dishonour; and although he is
exceedingly cautious of giving offence, he will fire at the least hint
of insolence or ill-breeding.--Respectable as he is, upon the whole,
I can't help being sometimes diverted by his little distresses; which
provoke him to let fly the shafts of his satire, keen and penetrating
as the arrows of Teucer--Our aunt, Tabitha, acts upon him as a perpetual
grind-stone--She is, in all respects, a striking contrast to her
brother--But I reserve her portrait for another occasion.

Three days ago we came hither from the Hot Well, and took possession
of the first floor of a lodging-house, on the South Parade; a situation
which my uncle chose, for its being near the Bath, and remote from the
noise of carriages. He was scarce warm in the lodgings when he called
for his night-cap, his wide shoes, and flannel; and declared himself
invested with the gout in his right foot; though, I believe it had as
yet reached no farther than his imagination. It was not long before he
had reason to repent his premature declaration; for our aunt Tabitha
found means to make such a clamour and confusion, before the flannels
could be produced from the trunk, that one would have imagined the house
was on fire. All this time, uncle sat boiling with impatience, biting
his fingers, throwing up his eyes, and muttering ejaculations; at length
he burst into a kind of convulsive laugh, after which he hummed a song;
and when the hurricane was over, exclaimed 'Blessed be God for all
things!' This, however, was but the beginning of his troubles. Mrs
Tabitha's favourite dog Chowder, having paid his compliments to a female
turnspit of his own species, in the kitchen, involved himself in a
quarrel with no fewer than five rivals, who set upon him at once, and
drove him up stairs to the dining room door, with hideous noise: there
our aunt and her woman, taking arms in his defence, joined the
concert; which became truly diabolical. This fray being with difficulty
suppressed, by the intervention of our own footman and the cook-maid
of the house, the squire had just opened his mouth, to expostulate with
Tabby, when the town-waits, in the passage below, struck up their music
(if music it may be called) with such a sudden burst of sound, as made
him start and stare, with marks of indignation and disquiet. He had
recollection enough to send his servant with some money to silence those
noisy intruders; and they were immediately dismissed, though not without
some opposition on the part of Tabitha, who thought it but reasonable
that he should have more music for his money. Scarce had he settled this
knotty point, when a strange kind of thumping and bouncing was heard
right over-head, in the second story, so loud and violent, as to shake
the whole building. I own I was exceedingly provoked at this new alarm;
and before my uncle had time to express himself on the subject, I ran
up stairs, to see what was the matter. Finding the room-door open, I
entered without ceremony, and perceived an object, which I can not now
recollect without laughing to excess--It was a dancing master, with his
scholar, in the act of teaching. The master was blind of one eye, and
lame of one foot, and led about the room his pupil; who seemed to be
about the age of threescore, stooped mortally, was tall, raw-boned,
hard-favoured, with a woollen night-cap on his head; and he had stript
off his coat, that he might be more nimble in his motions--Finding
himself intruded upon, by a person he did not know, he forthwith girded
himself with a long iron sword, and advancing to me, with a peremptory
air, pronounced, in a true Hibernian accent, 'Mister What d'ye callum,
by my saoul and conscience, I am very glad to sea you, if you are after
coming in the way of friendship; and indeed, and indeed now, I believe
you are my friend sure enough, gra; though I never had the honour to sea
your face before, my dear; for becaase you come like a friend, without
any ceremony at all, at all'--I told him the nature of my visit would
not admit of ceremony; that I was come to desire he would make less
noise, as there was a sick gentleman below, whom he had no right
to disturb with such preposterous doings. 'Why, look-ye now, young
gentleman (replied this original) perhaps, upon another occasion, I
might shivilly request you to explain the maining of that hard word,
prepasterous: but there's a time for all things, honey'--So saying,
he passed me with great agility, and, running down stairs, found our
foot-man at the dining-room door, of whom he demanded admittance, to
pay his respects to the stranger. As the fellow did not think proper
to refuse the request of such a formidable figure, he was immediately
introduced, and addressed himself to my uncle in these words: 'Your
humble servant, good sir,--I'm not so prepasterous, as your son calls
it, but I know the rules of shivility--I'm a poor knight of Ireland,
my name is sir Ulic Mackilligut, of the county of Galway; being your
fellow-lodger, I'm come to pay my respects, and to welcome you to the
South Parade, and to offer my best services to you, and your good lady,
and your pretty daughter; and even to the young gentleman your son,
though he thinks me a prepasterous fellow--You must know I am to have
the honour to open a ball next door to-morrow with lady Mac Manus; and
being rusted in my dancing, I was refreshing my memory with a little
exercise; but if I had known there was a sick person below, by Christ!
I would have sooner danced a hornpipe upon my own head, than walk the
softest minuet over yours.'--My uncle, who was not a little startled at
his first appearance, received his compliment with great complacency,
insisted upon his being seated, thanked him for the honour of his visit,
and reprimanded me for my abrupt expostulation with a gentleman of his
rank and character. Thus tutored, I asked pardon of the knight, who,
forthwith starting up, embraced me so close, that I could hardly
breathe; and assured me, he loved me as his own soul. At length,
recollecting his night-cap, he pulled it off in some confusion; and,
with his bald-pate uncovered, made a thousand apologies to the ladies,
as he retired--At that instant, the Abbey bells, began to ring so
loud, that we could not hear one another speak; and this peal, as
we afterwards learned, was for the honour of Mr Bullock, an eminent
cowkeeper of Tottenham, who had just arrived at Bath, to drink the
waters for indigestion. Mr Bramble had not time to make his remarks upon
the agreeable nature of this serenade, before his ears were saluted with
another concert that interested him more nearly. Two negroes, belonging
to a Creole gentleman, who lodged in the same house, taking their
station at a window in the stair-case, about ten feet from our
dining-room door, began to practise upon the French-horn; and being in
the very first rudiments of execution, produced such discordant sounds,
as might have discomposed the organs of an ass. You may guess what
effect they had upon the irritable nerves of uncle; who, with the most
admirable expression of splenetic surprize in his countenance, sent
his man to silence these dreadful blasts, and desire the musicians to
practise in some other place, as they had no right to stand there and
disturb all the lodgers in the house. Those sable performers, far from
taking the hint, and withdrawing, treated the messenger with great
insolence; bidding him carry his compliments to their master, colonel
Rigworm, who would give him a proper answer, and a good drubbing into
the bargain; in the mean time they continued their noise, and even
endeavoured to make it more disagreeable; laughing between whiles, at
the thoughts of being able to torment their betters with impunity. Our
'squire, incensed at the additional insult, immediately dispatched the
servant, with his compliments to colonel Rigworm, requesting that
he would order his blacks to be quiet, as the noise they made was
altogether intolerable--To this message, the Creole colonel replied,
that his horns had a right to sound on a common staircase; that there
they should play for his diversion; and that those who did not like the
noise, might look for lodgings elsewhere. Mr Bramble no sooner received
this reply, than his eyes began to glisten, his face grew pale, and his
teeth chattered. After a moment's pause, he slipt on his shoes, without
speaking a word, or seeming to feel any further disturbance from the
gout in his toes. Then snatching his cane, he opened the door and
proceeded to the place where the black trumpeters were posted. There,
without further hesitation, he began to belabour them both; and exerted
himself with such astonishing vigour and agility, that both their heads
and horns were broken in a twinkling, and they ran howling down stairs
to their master's parlour-door. The squire, following them half way,
called aloud, that the colonel might hear him, 'Go, rascals, and tell
your master what I have done; if he thinks himself injured, he knows
where to come for satisfaction. As for you, this is but an earnest of
what you shall receive, if ever you presume to blow a horn again here,
while I stay in the house.' So saying, he retired to his apartment, in
expectation of hearing from the West Indian; but the colonel prudently
declined any farther prosecution of the dispute. My sister Liddy was
frighted into a fit, from which she was no sooner recovered, than Mrs
Tabitha began a lecture upon patience; which her brother interrupted
with a most significant grin, 'True, sister, God increase my patience
and your discretion. I wonder (added he) what sort of sonata we are to
expect from this overture, in which the devil, that presides over horrid
sounds, hath given us such variations of discord--The trampling of
porters, the creaking and crashing of trunks, the snarling of curs, the
scolding of women, the squeaking and squalling of fiddles and hautboys
out of tune, the bouncing of the Irish baronet over-head, and the
bursting, belching, and brattling of the French-horns in the passage
(not to mention the harmonious peal that still thunders from the Abbey
steeple) succeeding one another without interruption, like the different
parts of the same concert, have given me such an idea of what a poor
invalid has to expect in this temple, dedicated to Silence and Repose,
that I shall certainly shift my quarters to-morrow, and endeavour to
effectuate my retreat before Sir Ulic opens the ball with my lady Mac
Manus; a conjunction that bodes me no good.' This intimation was by no
means agreeable to Mrs Tabitha, whose ears were not quite so delicate as
those of her brother--She said it would be great folly to move from
such agreeable lodgings, the moment they were comfortably settled. She
wondered he should be such an enemy to music and mirth. She heard no
noise but of his own making: it was impossible to manage a family in
dumb-shew. He might harp as long as he pleased upon her scolding; but
she never scolded, except for his advantage; but he would never be
satisfied, even tho'f she should sweat blood and water in his service--I
have a great notion that our aunt, who is now declining into the most
desperate state of celibacy, had formed some design upon the heart of
Sir Ulic Mackilligut, which she feared might be frustrated by our abrupt
departure from these lodgings. Her brother, eyeing her askance, 'Pardon
me, sister (said he) I should be a savage, indeed, were I insensible of
my own felicity, in having such a mild, complaisant, good-humoured, and
considerate companion and housekeeper; but as I have got a weak head,
and my sense of hearing is painfully acute, before I have recourse to
plugs of wool and cotton, I'll try whether I can't find another lodging,
where I shall have more quiet and less music.' He accordingly dispatched
his man upon this service; and next day he found a small house in
Milsham-street, which he hires by the week. Here, at least, we enjoy
convenience and quiet within doors, as much as Tabby's temper will
allow; but the squire still complains of flying pains in the stomach
and head, for which he bathes and drinks the waters. He is not so bad,
however, but that he goes in person to the pump, the rooms, and the
coffeehouses; where he picks up continual food for ridicule and satire.
If I can glean any thing for your amusement, either from his observation
or my own, you shall have it freely, though I am afraid it will poorly
compensate the trouble of reading these tedious insipid letters of,

Dear Phillips, Yours always, J. MELFORD




To Dr LEWIS. BATH, April 23. DEAR DOCTOR,

If I did not know that the exercise of your profession has habituated
you to the hearing of complaints, I should make a conscience of
troubling you with my correspondence, which may be truly called the
lamentations of Matthew Bramble. Yet I cannot help thinking I have
some right to discharge the overflowings of my spleen upon you, whose
province it is to remove those disorders that occasioned it; and let
me tell you, it is no small alleviation of my grievances, that I have a
sensible friend, to whom I can communicate my crusty humours, which, by
retention, would grow intolerably acrimonious.

You must know, I find nothing but disappointment at Bath; which is
so altered, that I can scarce believe it is the same place that I
frequented about thirty years ago. Methinks I hear you say, 'Altered it
is, without all doubt: but then it is altered for the better; a truth
which, perhaps, you would own without hesitation, if you yourself was
not altered for the worse.' The reflection may, for aught I know, be
just. The inconveniences which I overlooked in the high-day of health,
will naturally strike with exaggerated impression on the irritable
nerves of an invalid, surprised by premature old age, and shattered with
long-suffering--But, I believe, you will not deny, that this place,
which Nature and Providence seem to have intended as a resource
from distemper and disquiet, is become the very centre of racket and
dissipation. Instead of that peace, tranquillity, and case, so necessary
to those who labour under bad health, weak nerves, and irregular
spirits; here we have nothing but noise, tumult, and hurry; with the
fatigue and slavery of maintaining a ceremonial, more stiff, formal, and
oppressive, than the etiquette of a German elector. A national hospital
it may be, but one would imagine that none but lunatics are admitted;
and truly, I will give you leave to call me so, if I stay much longer at
Bath.--But I shall take another opportunity to explain my sentiments
at greater length on this subject--I was impatient to see the boasted
improvements in architecture, for which the upper parts of the town have
been so much celebrated and t'other day I made a circuit of all the new
buildings. The Square, though irregular, is, on the whole, pretty well
laid out, spacious, open, and airy; and, in my opinion, by far the most
wholesome and agreeable situation in Bath, especially the upper side of
it; but the avenues to it are mean, dirty, dangerous, and indirect. Its
communication with the Baths, is through the yard of an inn, where the
poor trembling valetudinarian is carried in a chair, betwixt the heels
of a double row of horses, wincing under the curry-combs of grooms and
postilions, over and above the hazard of being obstructed, or overturned
by the carriages which are continually making their exit or their
entrance--I suppose after some chairmen shall have been maimed, and
a few lives lost by those accidents, the corporation will think, in
earnest, about providing a more safe and commodious passage. The Circus
is a pretty bauble, contrived for shew, and looks like Vespasian's
amphitheatre turned outside in. If we consider it in point of
magnificence, the great number of small doors belonging to the separate
houses, the inconsiderable height of the different orders, the affected
ornaments of the architrave, which are both childish and misplaced,
and the areas projecting into the street, surrounded with iron rails,
destroy a good part of its effect upon the eye; and, perhaps, we shall
find it still more defective, if we view it in the light of convenience.
The figure of each separate dwelling-house, being the segment of a
circle, must spoil the symmetry of the rooms, by contracting them
towards the street windows, and leaving a larger sweep in the space
behind. If, instead of the areas and iron rails, which seem to be of
very little use, there had been a corridore with arcades all round,
as in Covent-garden, the appearance of the whole would have been more
magnificent and striking; those arcades would have afforded an agreeable
covered walk, and sheltered the poor chairmen and their carriages from
the rain, which is here almost perpetual. At present, the chairs stand
soaking in the open street, from morning to night, till they become so
many boxes of wet leather, for the benefit of the gouty and rheumatic,
who are transported in them from place to place. Indeed this is a
shocking inconvenience that extends over the whole city; and, I am
persuaded, it produces infinite mischief to the delicate and infirm;
even the close chairs, contrived for the sick, by standing in the open
air, have their frize linings impregnated like so many spunges, with the
moisture of the atmosphere, and those cases of cold vapour must give
a charming check to the perspiration of a patient, piping hot from the
Bath, with all his pores wide open.

But, to return to the Circus; it is inconvenient from its situation, at
so great a distance from all the markets, baths, and places of public
entertainment. The only entrance to it, through Gay-street, is so
difficult, steep, and slippery, that in wet weather, it must be
exceedingly dangerous, both for those that ride in carriages, and those
that walk a-foot; and when the street is covered with snow, as it was
for fifteen days successively this very winter, I don't see how any
individual could go either up or down, without the most imminent hazard
of broken bones. In blowing weather, I am told, most of the houses in
this hill are smothered with smoke, forced down the chimneys, by the
gusts of wind reverberated from the hill behind, which (I apprehend
likewise) must render the atmosphere here more humid and unwholesome
than it is in the square below; for the clouds, formed by the constant
evaporation from the baths and rivers in the bottom, will, in their
ascent this way, be first attracted and detained by the hill that rises
close behind the Circus, and load the air with a perpetual succession of
vapours: this point, however, may be easily ascertained by means of an
hygrometer, or a paper of salt of tartar exposed to the action of
the atmosphere. The same artist who planned the Circus, has likewise
projected a Crescent; when that is finished, we shall probably have a
Star; and those who are living thirty years hence, may, perhaps, see
all the signs of the Zodiac exhibited in architecture at Bath. These,
however fantastical, are still designs that denote some ingenuity and
knowledge in the architect; but the rage of building has laid hold on
such a number of adventurers, that one sees new houses starting up in
every out-let and every corner of Bath; contrived without judgment,
executed without solidity, and stuck together with so little regard
to plan and propriety, that the different lines of the new rows and
buildings interfere with, and intersect one another in every different
angle of conjunction. They look like the wreck of streets and squares
disjointed by an earthquake, which hath broken the ground into a variety
of holes and hillocks; or as if some Gothic devil had stuffed them
altogether in a bag, and left them to stand higgledy piggledy, just as
chance directed. What sort of a monster Bath will become in a few years,
with those growing excrescences, may be easily conceived: but the want
of beauty and proportion is not the worst effect of these new mansions;
they are built so slight, with the soft crumbling stone found in this
neighbourhood, that I shall never sleep quietly in one of them, when
it blowed (as the sailors say) a cap-full of wind; and, I am persuaded,
that my hind, Roger Williams, or any man of equal strength, would be
able to push his foot through the strongest part of their walls, without
any great exertion of his muscles. All these absurdities arise from the
general tide of luxury, which hath overspread the nation, and swept
away all, even the very dregs of the people. Every upstart of fortune,
harnessed in the trappings of the mode, presents himself at Bath, as in
the very focus of observation--Clerks and factors from the East Indies,
loaded with the spoil of plundered provinces; planters, negro-drivers,
and hucksters from our American plantations, enriched they know not
how; agents, commissaries, and contractors, who have fattened, in two
successive wars, on the blood of the nation; usurers, brokers, and
jobbers of every kind; men of low birth, and no breeding, have found
themselves suddenly translated into a state of affluence, unknown to
former ages; and no wonder that their brains should be intoxicated with
pride, vanity, and presumption. Knowing no other criterion of greatness,
but the ostentation of wealth, they discharge their affluence without
taste or conduct, through every channel of the most absurd extravagance;
and all of them hurry to Bath, because here, without any further
qualification, they can mingle with the princes and nobles of the land.
Even the wives and daughters of low tradesmen, who, like shovel-nosed
sharks, prey upon the blubber of those uncouth whales of fortune, are
infected with the same rage of displaying their importance; and the
slightest indisposition serves them for a pretext to insist upon being
conveyed to Bath, where they may hobble country-dances and cotillons
among lordlings, squires, counsellors, and clergy. These delicate
creatures from Bedfordbury, Butcher-row, Crutched-friers, and
Botolph-lane, cannot breathe in the gross air of the Lower Town, or
conform to the vulgar rules of a common lodging-house; the husband,
therefore, must provide an entire house, or elegant apartments in the
new buildings. Such is the composition of what is called the fashionable
