kind of man to put off accusing any one when he had proof of guilt and
was sure that the law was on his side, and Marietta felt sure that the
evidence against her was overwhelming, for she had yet to learn what
amazing things can be done with impunity by people who have the
reputation of perfect innocence.

Giovanni was telling Pasquale, in a tone which every one might hear,
that he had sent for a gardener, who would soon come with a lad to help
him, that the two must be admitted at once, and that he himself would
be within to receive them; but that no one else was to be allowed to go
in, as he should be extremely busy all the morning. Having said these
things three or four times over, in order to impress them on Pasquale's
mind, he went in. The porter looked up at Marietta's window a moment,
and then followed him and shut the door. It was clear that Giovanni had
no intention of speaking to his sister before the mid-day meal. She
breathed more freely, since she was to have a respite of several hours.

When she was dressed, Nella called the gondolier from her own window,
and met him in the passage when he came up. He at once promised to make
inquiries about Zorzi and went off to the palace to find his friend and
crony, the Governor's head boatman. The latter, it is needless to say,
knew every detail of the supernatural rescue from the archers, who could
talk of nothing else in spite of the Governor's prohibition. They sat in
a row on the stone bench within the main entrance, a rueful crew, their
heads bound up with a pleasing variety of bandages. In an hour the
gondolier returned, laden with the wonderful story which Nella was the
first, but not the last, to hear from him. Her brown eyes seemed to be
starting from her head when she came back to tell it to her mistress.

Marietta listened with a beating heart, though Nella began at once by
saying that Zorzi had mysteriously disappeared, and was certainly not in
prison. When all was told, she drew a long breath, and wished that she
could be alone to think over what she had heard; but Nella's imagination
was roused, and she was prepared to discuss the affair all the morning.
The details of it had become more and more numerous and circumstantial,
as the men with the bandaged heads recalled what they had seen and
heard. The devils that had delivered Zorzi all had blue noses, brass
teeth and fiery tails. A peculiarity of theirs was that they had six
fingers with six iron claws on each hand, and that all their hoofs were
red-hot. As to their numbers, they might be roughly estimated at a
thousand or so, and their roaring was like the howling of the south wind
and the breaking of the sea on the Lido in a winter storm. It was
horrible to hear, and would alone have put all the armies of the
Republic to ignominious flight. Nella thought these things very
interesting. She wished that she might talk with one of the men who had
seen a real devil.

"I do not believe a word of all that nonsense," said Marietta. "The most
important thing is that Zorzi got away from them and is not in prison."

"If he escaped by selling his soul to the fiends," said Nella, shaking
her head, "it is a very evil thing."

Her mistress's disbelief in the blue noses and fiery tails was
disconcerting, and had a chilling effect on Nella's talkative mood. The
gondolier had crossed the bridge, to tell his story to Pasquale, whose
view of the case seemed to differ from Nella's. He listened with
approving interest, but without comment, until the gondolier had
finished.

"I could tell you many such stories," he said. "Things of this kind
often happen at sea."

"Really!" exclaimed the gondolier, who was only a boatman and regarded
real sailors with a sort of professional reverence.

"Yes," answered Pasquale. "Especially on Sundays. You must know that
when the priests are all saying mass, and the people are all praying,
the devils cannot bear it, and are driven out to sea for the day. Very
strange things happen then, I assure you. Some day I will tell you how
the boatswain of a ship I once sailed in rove the end of the devil's
tail through a link of the chain, made a Flemish knot at the end to stop
it, and let go the anchor. So the devil went to the bottom by the run.
We unshackled the chain and wore the ship to the wind, and after that we
had fair weather to the end of the voyage. It happened on a Sunday."

"Marvellous!" cried the gondolier. "I should like to hear the whole
story! But if you will allow me, I will go in and tell the Signor
Giovanni what has happened, for he does not know yet."

Pasquale grinned as he stood in the doorway.

"He has given strict orders that no one is to be admitted this morning,
as he is very busy."

"But this is a very important matter," argued the gondolier, who wished
to have the pleasure of telling the tale.

"I cannot help it," answered Pasquale. "Those are his orders, and I must
obey them. You know what his temper is, when he is not pleased."

Just then a skiff came up the canal at a great rate, so that the quick
strokes of the oar attracted the men's attention. They saw that the boat
was one of those that could be hired everywhere in Venice. The oarsman
backed water with a strong stroke and brought to at the steps before the
glass-house.

"Are you not Messer Angelo Beroviero's gondolier?" he inquired civilly.

"Yes," answered the man addressed, "I am the head gondolier, at your
service."

"Thank you," replied the boatman. "I am to tell you that Messer Angelo
has just arrived in Venice by sea, from Rimini, on board the _Santa
Lucia_, a Neapolitan galliot now at anchor in the Giudecca. He desires
you to bring his gondola at once to fetch him, and I am to bring over
his baggage in my skiff."

The gondolier uttered an exclamation of surprise, and then turned to
Pasquale.

"I go," he said. "Will you tell the Signor Giovanni that his father is
coming home?"

Pasquale grinned again. He was rarely in such a pleasant humour.

"Certainly not," he answered. "The Signor Giovanni is very busy, and has
given strict orders that he is not to be disturbed on any account."

"That is your affair," said the gondolier, hurrying away.




CHAPTER XIX


A little more than an hour later, the gondola came back and stopped
alongside the steps of the house. The gondolier had made such haste to
obey the summons that he had not thought of going into the house to give
the servants warning, and as most of the shutters were already drawn
together against the heat, no one had been looking out when he went
away. He had asked Pasquale to tell the young master, and that was all
that could be expected of him. There was therefore great surprise in the
household when Angelo Beroviero went up the steps of his house, and his
own astonishment that no one should be there to receive him was almost
as great. The gondolier explained, and told him what Pasquale had said.

It was enough to rouse the old man's suspicions at once. He had left
Zorzi in charge of the laboratory, enjoining upon him not to encourage
Giovanni to go there; but now Giovanni was shut up there, presumably
with Zorzi, and had given orders that he was not to be disturbed. The
gondolier had not dared to say anything about the Dalmatian's arrest,
and Beroviero was quite ignorant of all that had happened. He was not a
man who hesitated when his suspicions or his temper were at work, and
now he turned, without even entering his home, and crossed the bridge
to the glass-house. Pasquale was looking through the grating and saw him
coming, and was ready to receive him at the open door. For the third
time on that morning, he grinned from ear to ear. Beroviero was pleased
by the silent welcome of his old and trusted servant.

"You seem glad to see me again," he said, laying his hand kindly on the
old porter's arm as he passed in.

"Others will be glad, too," was the answer.

As he went down the corridor Beroviero heard the sound of spades
striking into the earth and shovelling it away. The gardener and his lad
had been at work nearly two hours, and had turned up most of the earth
in the little flower-beds to a depth of two or three feet during that
time, while Giovanni sat motionless under the plane-tree, watching every
movement of their spades. He rose nervously when he heard footsteps in
the corridor, for he did not wish any one to find him seated there,
apparently watching a most commonplace operation with profound interest.
He had made a step towards the door of the laboratory, when he saw his
father emerge from the dark passage. He was a coward, and he trembled
from head to foot, his teeth chattered in his head, and the cold sweat
moistened his forehead in an instant. The old man stood still four or
five paces from him and looked from him to the men who had been digging.
On seeing the master they stopped working and pulled off their knitted
caps. As a further sign of respect they wiped their dripping faces with
their shirt sleeves.

"What are you doing here?" asked Beroviero in a tone of displeasure.
"The garden was very well as it was."

"I--I thought," stammered Giovanni, "that it would--that it might be
better to dig it--"

"It would not be better," answered the old man. "You may go," he added,
speaking to the men, who were glad enough to be dismissed.

Beroviero passed his son without further words and tried the door of the
laboratory, but found it locked.

"What is this?" he asked angrily. "Where is Zorzi? I told him not to
leave you here alone."

"You had great confidence in him," answered Giovanni, recovering himself
a little. "He is in prison."

He took the key from his wallet and thrust it into the lock as he spoke.

"In prison!" cried Beroviero in a loud voice. "What do you mean?"

Giovanni held the door open for him.

"I will tell you all about Zorzi, if you will come in," he said.

Beroviero entered, stood still a moment and looked about. Everything was
as Zorzi had left it, but the glass-maker's ear missed the low roar of
the furnace. Instinctively he made a step towards the latter, extending
his hand to see whether it was already cold, but at that moment he
caught sight of the silk mantle in the chair. He glanced quickly at his
son.

"Has Marietta been here with you this morning?" he asked sharply.

"Oh no!" answered Giovanni contemptuously. "Zorzi stole that thing and
had not time to hide it when they arrested him last night. I left it
just where it was, that the Governor might see it."

Beroviero's face changed slowly. His fiery brown eyes began to show a
dangerous light and he stroked his long beard quickly, twisting it a
little each time.

"If you say that Zorzi stole Marietta's silk mantle," he said slowly,
"you are either a fool or a liar."

"You are my father," answered Giovanni in some perturbation. "I cannot
answer you."

Beroviero was silent for a long time. He took the mantle from the chair,
examined it and assured himself that it was Marietta's own and no other.
Then he carefully folded it up and laid it on the bench. His brows were
contracted as if he were in great pain, and his face was pale, but his
eyes were still angry.

Giovanni knew the signs of his father's wrath and dared not speak to him
yet..

"Is this the evidence on which you have had my man arrested?" asked
Beroviero, sitting down in the big chair and fixing his gaze on his son.

"By no means," answered Giovanni, with all the coolness he could
command. "If it pleases you to hear my story from the beginning I will
tell you all. If you do not hear all, you cannot possibly understand."

"I am listening," said old Beroviero, leaning back and laying his hands
on the broad wooden arms of the chair.

"I shall tell you everything, exactly as it happened," said Giovanni,
"and I swear that it is all true."

Beroviero reflected that in his experience this was usually the way in
which liars introduced their accounts of events. For truth is like a
work of genius: it carries conviction with it at once, and therefore
needs no recommendation, nor other artificial support.

"After you left," Giovanni continued, "I came here one morning, out of
pure friendliness to Zorzi, and as we talked I chanced to look at those
things on the shelf. When I admired them, he admitted rather reluctantly
that he had made them, and other things which you have in your house."

Beroviero gravely nodded his assent to the statement.

"I asked him to make me something," Giovanni went on to say, "but he
told me that he had no white glass in the furnace, and that what was
there was the result of your experiments."

Again Beroviero bent his head.

"So I asked him to bring his blow-pipe to the main furnace room, where
they were still working at that time, and we went there together. He at
once made a very beautiful piece, and was just finishing it when a bad
accident happened to him. Another man let his blow-pipe fly from his
hand and it fell upon Zorzi's foot with a large lump of hot glass."

Beroviero looked keenly at Giovanni.

"You know as well as I that it could not have been an accident," he
said. "It was done out of spite."

"That may be," replied Giovanni, "for the men do not like him, as you
know. But Zorzi accepted it as being an accident, and said so. He was
badly hurt, and is still lame. Nella dressed the wound, and then
Marietta came with her."

"Are you sure Marietta came here?" asked Beroviero, growing paler.

"Quite sure. They were on their way here together early in the morning
when I stopped them, and asked Marietta where she was going, and she
boldly said she was going to see Zorzi. I could not prevent her, and I
saw them both go in."

"Do you mean to say that although Zorzi was so badly hurt you did not
have him brought to the house?"

"Of course I proposed that at once," Giovanni answered. "But he said
that he would not leave the furnace."

"That was like him," said old Beroviero.

"He knew what he was doing. It was on that same day that a night boy
told me how he had seen you and Zorzi burying something in the
laboratory the night before you left."

Beroviero started and leaned forward. Giovanni smiled thoughtfully, for
he saw how his father was moved, and he knew that the strongest part of
his story was yet untold.

"It would have been better to leave Paolo Godi's manuscript with me," he
said, in a tone of sympathy. "I grew anxious for its safety as soon as I
knew that Zorzi had charge of it. Yesterday morning I came in again.
Zorzi was sitting on the working-stool, finishing a beautiful beaker of
white glass."

"White glass?" repeated Beroviero in evident surprise. "White glass?
Here?"

"Yes," answered Giovanni, enjoying his triumph. "I pointed out that when
I had last come, there had been no white glass in the furnace. He
answered that as one of the experiments had produced a beautiful red
colour which he thought must be valuable, he had removed the crucible.
He also showed me a specimen of it."

"Is it here?" asked Beroviero anxiously. "Where is it?"

Giovanni took the specimen from the table, for Zorzi had left it lying
there, and he handed it to his father. The latter took it, held it up to
the light, and uttered an exclamation of astonishment and anger.

"There is only one way of making that," he said, without hesitation.

"Yes," Giovanni answered coolly. "I supposed it was made according to
one of your secrets."

A quick look was the only reply to this speech. Giovanni continued.

"I asked him to sell me the piece of glass he had been making when he
came in, and at first he pretended that he was not sure whether you
would allow it, but at last he took a piece of gold for it, and I was to
have it as soon as it was annealed. When you see it, you will understand
why I was so anxious to get it."

"Where is it?" asked the old man. "Show it to me."

Giovanni went to the other end of the annealing oven, and came back a
moment later carrying the iron tray on which stood the pieces Zorzi had
made on the previous morning. Beroviero looked at them critically, tried
their weight, and noticed their transparency.

"That is not my glass," he said in a tone of decision.

"No," said Giovanni, "I saw that it was not your ordinary glass. It
seems much better. Now Zorzi must have made it in a new crucible, and if
he did, he made it with some secret of yours, for it is impossible that
he should have discovered it himself. I said to myself that if he had
made it, and the red glass there, he must have opened the book which you
had buried together in this room, and that there was only one way of
hindering him from learning everything in it, and ruining you and us by
setting up a furnace of his own."

Beroviero was looking hard at Giovanni, but he was now thoroughly
alarmed for the safety of his treasured manuscript, and listened with
attention and without any hostility. The proofs seemed at first sight
very strong, and after all Zorzi was only a Dalmatian and a foreigner,
who might have yielded to temptation.

"What did you do?" asked Beroviero.

Giovanni told him the truth, how he had written a letter to the
Governor, and had seen him in person, as well as Jacopo Contarini.

"Of course," Giovanni concluded, "you know best. If you find the book
as you and he hid it together, he must have learned your secrets in some
other way."

"We can easily see," answered old Beroviero, rising quickly. "Come here.
Get the crowbar from the corner, and help me to lift the stone."

Giovanni took pains to look for the crowbar exactly where it was not,
for he thought that this would divert any lingering suspicion from
himself, but Beroviero was only annoyed.

"There, there!" he cried, pointing. "It is in that corner. Quickly!"

"It would be like the clever scoundrel to have copied what he wanted and
then to have put the book back into the hiding-place," said Giovanni,
pausing.

"Do not waste words, my son!" cried Beroviero in the greatest anxiety.
"Here! This is the stone. Get the crowbar in at this side. So. Now we
will both heave. There! Wedge the stone up with that bit of wood. That
will do. Now let us both get our hands under it, and lift it up."

It was done, while he was speaking. A moment later Giovanni had scooped
out the loose earth, and Beroviero was staring down into the empty hole,
just as Giovanni had done on the previous night. Giovanni was almost
consoled for his own disappointment when he saw his father's face.

"It is certainly gone," he said. "You did not bury it deeper, did you?
The soil is hard below."

"No, no! It is gone!" answered the old man in a dull voice. "Zorzi has
got it."

"You see," said Giovanni mercilessly, "when I saw the red and white
glass which he had made himself I was so sure of the truth that I acted
quickly. I saw him arrested, and I do not think he could have had
anything like a book with him, for he was in his doublet and hose. And
as he is safe in prison now, he can be made to tell where he has put the
thing. How big was it?"

"It was in an iron box. It was heavy." Beroviero spoke in low tones,
overcome by his loss, and by the apparent certainty that Zorzi had
betrayed him.

"You see why I should naturally suspect him of having stolen the
mantle," observed Giovanni. "A man who would betray your confidence in
such a way would do anything."

"Yes, yes," answered the old master vaguely. "Yes--I must go and see him
in prison. I was kind to him, and perhaps he may confess everything to
me."

"We might ask Marietta when she first missed her mantle," suggested
Giovanni. "She must have noticed that it was gone."

"She will not remember," answered Beroviero. "Let us go to the
Governor's house at once. There is just time before mid-day. We can
speak to Marietta at dinner."

"But you must be tired, after your journey," objected Giovanni, with
unusual concern for his father's comfort.

"No. I slept well on the ship. I have done nothing to tire me. The
gondola may be still there. Tell Pasquale to call it over, and we will
go directly. Go on! I will follow you."

Giovanni went forward, and Beroviero stayed a moment to look again at
the beautiful objects of white glass, examining them carefully, one by
one. The workmanship was marvellous, and he could not help admiring it,
but it was the glass itself that disturbed him. It was like his own, but
it was better, and the knowledge of its composition and treatment was a
fortune. Then, too, the secret of dropping a piece of copper into a
certain mixture in order to produce a particularly beautiful red colour
was in the book, and the colour could not be mistaken and was not the
one which Beroviero had been trying to produce. He shook his head sadly
as he went out and locked the door behind him, convinced against his
will that he had been betrayed by the man whom he had most trusted in
the world.

