
"Jacob! why, I trow he will but come the more," answered Cherry,
with a saucy gleam in her eye as she looked in Kezzie's grave face.
"He will come to thee for comfort, my sister, and I trow that thou
wilt give it him in full measure."

Keziah's grave face lighted up somewhat.

"Thinkest thou that? Indeed I would gladly try. Jacob is a good lad
and a kind one. I marvel thou dost not treat him better, Cherry."

"I like Jacob; he is very good. We are great friends," answered
Cherry hastily, "but--"

There she broke off and busied herself over her trunk, saying as
she leaned so far into it that her face could not be seen, "Kezzie,
if Cuthbert should come back, thou wilt tell him where I have gone.
Tell him I am with his kinsfolk, and ask him if he goes that way to
pay a visit to them."

"I will," answered Keziah, who had her own ideas about Cuthbert's
sudden and entire disappearance; "but I fear me we shall see
Cuthbert no more. He--"

"Why sayest thou so? What dost thou know? What dost thou mean,
Keziah? Hast thou heard aught of him?"

"Bless the child--no--" answered Keziah hastily "How should I know
aught of him? But, Cherry, my sweet sister, be not angry with me if
I say it. Cuthbert is a Trevlyn, for all that our aunt was his
mother. He is of rank above ours. He may have made friends in his
own walk in life. He may repent him of the friendships he made at
the bridge house. Be not wroth with me for saying it, but men
before him have gone forth and returned not to those who looked for
them. But if he comes I will tell him--I will tell him all. Only do
not too greatly count upon it. I grieve so lest thou shouldest be
disappointed."

Cherry said nothing. She would not even by a word seem to doubt
Cuthbert's fidelity. Keziah, if she did not know how matters stood
betwixt them, knew enough to have a very shrewd suspicion of it.
She had been in some sort Cherry's confidante. Both the sisters had
some knowledge of each other's secret.

The next evening, just before it grew dark, as Cherry was sitting
alone in the upper parlour, exempt from household toil that she
might get her own wardrobe ready, and now having laid her needle
aside because she could no longer see, the door opened, and the
tall, loose figure of Jacob Dyson appeared framed against the dark
background of the staircase behind, and the girl sprang to her feet
with a little exclamation of pleasure and welcome.

"I thought that thou wouldst come to see me, Jacob. Thou hast heard
that I am going away?"

"Ay, I have heard it. Art thou glad to be going, Cherry?"

"Yes, verily I am. I am sick at heart for news of him, and
perchance I may get it where I be going. I shall be near his home
and his kinsfolk."

Jacob had sat down, and was turning his cap round and round in
those large red hands that were such an offence to the girl. After
a few moments of silence he looked up and said:

"Cherry, hast thou ever thought of the things thou hast said to
me--of the promise thou hast given?"

She bent her head low, and the whispered "Yes," was barely audible.

"Thou wilt not go back from thy word?"

She raised her head suddenly and said:

"No, Jacob, I will not go back from my word. Thou hast been very
good and kind and patient; and if in time to come it should be
proved that Cuthbert is dead, or has wed another and been false to
me, then I will say naught against thee, but will do as my father
saith, and strive to make thee a good wife. But I have never
promised to love thee as a wife should love her husband. Thou must
not expect that of me, Jacob."

She lifted her eyes to his with a look that sent a quick thrill
through him. He put out one of his hands and took hers, saying in
very gentle tone, though his gestures were slightly uncouth:

"I will only strive might and main to win thy love, sweetheart.
Methinks if thy heart were once free again thou mightest learn the
lesson."

She shook her head and answered very low:

"Thou couldst learn to love again, good Jacob; but I--never. I
would that thou couldst look around thee, and find a good and
useful wife whom thy mother would welcome; who would love thee
well, and whom thou couldst love without let. There be such--I am
well assured of it. As for me, even though some day thou shouldst
gain my hand, my heart can never be thine."

Jacob looked at her with a wistful, dog-like devotion, and heaved a
heavy sigh. That unselfish and faithful youth was going through a
rather hard probation, such as so often falls upon the best and
warmest hearted of earth's sons, who have been denied those outward
graces that charm the fancy and take the eye. He had long since
divined the secret of the attachment betwixt Cuthbert and Cherry;
and when urged by his father to press his own suit, had been
backward in so doing. On Cuthbert's disappearance he had one day
spoken openly to Cherry of his suspicions, and she had frankly told
him all, begging him to keep their secret, and to hold off his own
suit until Cuthbert's quest should be over, and he could come to
claim her as his own.

Truth to tell, Jacob had little belief in the finding of the lost
treasure; but he did believe in Cuthbert, whom he loved only second
to Cherry, and whom he would any day have set before himself. He
made Cherry a promise that it should be as she desired; that he
would give her time to test Cuthbert's sincerity before he spoke
another word of marriage with her. But he also timidly asked in
return for the sacrifice he was making, and as a reward for his
championship, that if Cuthbert should never return, if harm should
befall him in the forest, or if some other maiden should win his
heart and hand, that then Cherry should become his wife, and let
him try to comfort her by his own devoted and life-long love.

Cherry had given the promise without overmuch persuasion. What good
would life be to her without Cuthbert? she had argued. If she could
make any one else happy, she might as well do it as not. Jacob was
very good. He would be kind to her and patient with her, whilst her
aunt Susan would be just the reverse. Life under such conditions,
beneath that unsympathetic rule, would be well-nigh unendurable. It
would be better for her own sake to wed Jacob and escape from it
all. And when the promise had been given, it seemed so little
likely that she would be called upon to fulfil it! Even now she
scarcely contemplated it seriously, for her heart was filled with
hope. Was she herself not going towards the forest and Cuthbert?
Surely she would hear somewhat of him there!

"I shall ask none other woman to be my wife until I know that thou
canst never be mine, Cherry," answered Jacob, with gentle
obstinacy. "I shall never wish aught of ill to Cuthbert. Thou
knowest that I would stand betwixt him and peril an I might. But
till he stands at thy side and claims thee as his own, I will not
give thee up. I can bide my time--I can wait and watch."

She looked at him with suddenly dilating eyes, as though a qualm of
fear had smitten her.

"But, Jacob, if he were to come hither when I be gone, thou wouldst
not hinder him from finding me; thou wouldst not do him any ill
turn that we might be kept apart? That would not be fair; it would
be an ill thing. It would be--"

She stopped suddenly short, for Jacob had risen, and seemed to
stand towering above her, with something majestic in his air that
she had certainly never observed there before.

"Cherry! for what dost thou take me?" he asked, his voice quivering
with an emotion that showed him to be deeply moved. "Hast thou so
vile an opinion of the man thou mayest some day call thy husband,
the man who bears the name of thy dead mother, that thou canst
think such evil thoughts of him? No, Cherry, I will not hinder him
from finding thee. I will in no wise stand between you. I will aid
him with all that is in my power to find thee. If peril should
menace him and I could stand betwixt him and it, I would do so
gladly. I would lay down my life for him, if by so doing thou and
he might one day be happy. Dost think that I prize my life so high,
since I may not win the crown that would make its happiness? If I
may not live for thee, Cherry, methinks I would sooner die for
thee, if by so doing I might win thee happiness and love. I love
thee and I love Cuthbert. I ask nothing better than that I may in
some sort serve and save you twain."

And with a gesture of rugged dignity of which Cherry was keenly
aware, and which raised Jacob to an altogether different level in
her mind, he held out his hand as if to seal the compact, and
without waiting for her broken words of explanation and apology,
turned and walked out of the room.

Two days later Cherry started forth upon her travels. Her father
went part of the way with her, and left her but seven miles from
the end of her journey. She was escorted by a body of merchants and
their servants, who were transporting some merchandise to
Southampton, and were a goodly company in themselves for fear of
assault from the robbers of the road. As they had quantities of
valuables with them, they intended to travel only during the
daylight hours, and after leaving Cherry at the Cross Way House,
would put up for the night at the nearest town on the southern side
of the forest.

How Cherry's heart beat as her fellow travellers pointed out the
wall and chimneys of her destination, and the whole party reined up
at the door! The Cross Way House was well known to travellers as
being one of the regular landmarks along the road. It was a
hospitable mansion for any wayfarers in distress, and its mistress
was held in high repute, and had never yet been molested or
threatened by the highway bands, who might have been troublesome to
the members of any household whose walls abutted so close upon the
road. Lady Humbert was reaping the reward for the renowned kindness
of heart of the whole Wyvern family towards all the lowly, the
unfortunate, and the oppressed; and though many a fugitive fleeing
from the robbers had found shelter within her walls, these had
proved as safe shelter as the walls of any ancient sanctuary; for
once within Lady Humbert's gates and not even the most hated and
hunted foe need fear further molestation.

Cherry had heard some such words as these as the party had jogged
onwards together; and now she found herself standing timidly at the
back entrance of the house, her box beside her, and one of her
uncle's friends at her side. When the door was opened and her
guardian spoke her name and errand, she was quickly made welcome to
enter, and after saying a hasty goodbye to the kindly merchant,
found herself traversing several long stone passages, till she was
finally ushered into a low parlour, where an elderly woman sat
brewing over the fire some concoction which looked like one of
Mistress Susan's compounds of berries and spice.

"Sure it is my good aunt, Prudence Dyson," said Cherry, as the
woman looked quickly round. "Methinks I should have guessed that
anywhere, thou art so like to my uncle."

The woman came forward and saluted her niece gravely and kindly.

"Thou art Martin Holt's daughter? What is thy name, child? I could
scarce make it out from Susan's letter, for she is no scholar, as
she ofttimes says. I am right glad to welcome thee, and I trust
thou comest to us with a willing heart?"

"A right willing heart," answered the girl, smiling bravely,
despite the strangeness of her surroundings; for there was
something home-like and comforting in the aspect of her aunt and in
the sound of her voice. "I was glad my father's choice lighted on
me, and I will strive to please in all I do. My name is Cherry--at
least that is how I am always called. And who are the ladies upon
whom I am to wait?"

"The one whom thou wilt chiefly serve is Mistress Kate Trevlyn, a
daughter of Sir Richard Trevlyn of the Chase. I know not if thou
knowest aught of the family, but most like thou art aware that thy
aunt Bridget made a luckless marriage with one Nicholas Trevlyn,
whereby she cast herself adrift from all her family. Why, child,
what a colour thou hast! What dost thou know of this matter?"

"I know my cousin Cuthbert Trevlyn," answered Cherry, trying to
speak naturally, though her heart beat wildly all the while. "He
came to us a year ago, and remained beneath my father's roof till
the summer had well-nigh come. From him we learned much of the
family; and right glad am I to think that I may serve Mistress
Kate, who was a kind friend to him in times past. My cousin
Cuthbert was much beloved by all our house whilst he remained
beneath our roof. We have not heard of him this many a day. Dost
thou know aught of him, my aunt?"

Prudence Dyson gave her niece a quick, sharp glance, and then
answered a little evasively:

"Thou must ask that question of Mistress Kate, my dear, if she will
please to talk with thee. She may have had news of him belike. As
for us of this household, we hear but little of what happens in the
world beyond. We are all growing old together."

Had it not been for the earnestness with which they were talking,
the aunt and niece might have heard a light footfall down the
passage. The door was softly pushed open, and a clear voice asked:

"Is Mistress Dowsabel's hot posset ready, Dyson? she has asked for
it more than once."

Both women started and turned round, and Cherry uttered a little
involuntary cry, whilst the name "Cuthbert" sprang to her lips so
fast that she was not sure that she had not uttered it aloud. Her
eyes were fixed upon the face of the dark-eyed girl who had brought
the message.

"I will take it at once," said Dyson, hastily lifting it from the
fire. "I crave my lady's pardon for being late with it; but my
niece from London has but just arrived, and I was hindered for the
moment.

"Cherry, wait here till I return, and then I will speak more with
thee."

Dyson hurried away with the posset, and the two girls stood gazing
at each other, a light of welcome and amaze in both their eyes.

"Cherry! did she call thee Cherry? and from London, too? And Kate
bath ofttimes said that--Oh, why waste words?" cried the girl,
breaking off quickly. "Tell me, art thou Martin Holt's daughter?
art thou my brother Cuthbert's Cherry?"

"Thy brother? then thou art Petronella!" cried Cherry, in a maze of
bewilderment; and even as she spoke the name she felt Petronella's
arms about her, and they were laughing and kissing, questioning and
exclaiming, all in the most incoherent fashion, yet contriving to
make each other understand some fragments of their respective
stories, till at last Petronella drew herself away and laid her
hand on Cherry's arm, saying as she did so:

"But remember that here I am Ellen Wyvern, and not even good Dyson
knows more than that. Be on thy guard, good coz, and only speak
familiarly to me in secret. O Cherry, how I have longed to see
thee--Cuthbert's Cherry, of whom I have heard so much! And how
comest thou hither? Has he sent thee?"

"He? I have not seen him these six months past. Petronella, sweet
cousin, give me good news of him."

"Why, so I can--the very best. He has found the treasure. It is
safely lodged here. And he has gone forth into the forest again,
first to tell the tale to the gipsy queen, who has been his friend
through all, and then to return to London to thy father's house to
seek his Cherry once again, and claim her hand before all the
world."



Chapter 21: The Gipsy's Warning.


"Thy task is done, and it is well done. But now get thee from the
forest with all speed, for there is peril to thee here."

So said Joanna, standing before Cuthbert in the pixies' dell, her
hand upon the low stone wall, her tall figure drawn up to its full
height. She had been looking thoughtfully down into the sparkling
water, which was now filling the well as of old, whilst Cuthbert
told his tale with graphic power. An expression of calm triumph was
on her face as she heard how the long-lost hoard was lying safely
stored within the house of the Wyverns--a house sacred to the
gipsies and safe from any raids of robbers, such was the esteem in
which that name was held. She looked like one whose task is done,
who feels a heavy load lifted from the mind; but the glance fixed
upon Cuthbert's eager face was also one of gravity and meaning.

"The forest is no place for thee now," she said; "get thee hence as
fast as thou canst."

"And wherefore so?" asked Cuthbert, surprised. "Methought the peril
ceased with the death of--"

"Hush!" said the gipsy, almost sternly; "bethink thee that there
may be listeners even now about us in these thick bushes, and guard
thy words with caution. Remember the strange links that bind
together those of the wild gipsy blood; and remember that Long
Robin lies in his bloody grave not far from here."

She lowered her voice as she spoke, and Cuthbert instinctively
followed her example.

"But no man knows that."

"How canst thou tell?"

"None saw the deed. It was done in the dead of night. Ere morning
came he was laid below the earth. Thou thyself knew not what had
befallen him till I spoke the word."

He looked at her as if in momentary distrust; but the calm gaze and
the noble countenance of the gipsy seemed to reassure him. Joanna,
who had read his thought, smiled slightly.

"Nay, boy, thou needst not fear treachery from Joanna, and the
gipsy queen will give thee all protection in her power. Have I not
told thee that upon me, when I received that title, was laid the
charge of seeing the stolen treasure restored to the house of
Trevlyn? To thy courage and resolve and perseverance and skill
belongs it that this charge is now fulfilled. Thou needst not fear
that any ill will or lack of caution on Joanna's part will cause
evil to light upon thy head. But there are others with whom thou
mayest have to reckon. There is Miriam, to whom Long Robin was as
the apple of the eye."

"Yet he was not her husband (he is no aged man), and he can scarce
have been her son."

"No matter. As I have told thee ere this, there be strange bonds
betwixt us of the gipsy blood, binding closer and firmer than ever
ties of kinship do. Miriam loved yon man with a love passing all
others. She has missed him these many weeks. She is frantic with
anxious grief. She is convinced that some ill has befallen him. She
is rousing to anger and vengeance the whole tribe. They have vowed
that they will find Robin, whether he be dead or alive, and that if
dead they will avenge them on his murderer. Already suspicion has
fallen upon thee. Dost think thy many journeys through the forest
have passed unnoted by us?"

"I have never seen a soul; I had not known myself watched."

"Luckily for thee thou hast not been watched, else would little of
the treasure have been placed in safe keeping. Thou hast reaped the
benefit Robin hoped to reap himself alone when he surrounded this
dell as with a barrier that no man might pass. Even the most daring
spirits of our tribe dare not come here; and Miriam, who bids them
scour the forest in all other directions, fears to tell them to
come hither, albeit I well know she will shortly search the spot
herself if Robin come not soon. Then she will find the grave; it
will not escape her eyes. First she will think the lost treasure
lies there, for I am convinced that Robin never told her the full
secret. Then when she looks farther, she will find what that grave
really contains; and thou hadst best be far away ere that day
comes. Thou hast been seen. Thy journeyings in the forest have
provoked wonder and curiosity. Let Miriam once learn that Robin
lies there, and the whole truth will flash upon her; and then look
thou to thyself!"

These words were spoken with such significance that Cuthbert
experienced an involuntary qualm of fear.

"I thank thee for the warning," he said; "I will avail myself of
thy kind counsel. I had thought of journeying to London ere this.
There, it may be, I shall be hidden from their malice."

"Thou wilt be safer there than here," answered the gipsy quietly;
"I will not say thou wilt be truly safe in any spot if Miriam's ire
be once roused against thee. She has a wondrous fierce spirit, and
she has influence with our people second only to mine. And then
there hung about Long Robin a mysterious charm. Men loved him
not--they feared and distrusted him; and yet, were it to be known
that he had met his death by violence, Miriam would have but small
trouble in stirring up the hearts of a score of stout fellows vowed
to vengeance. In the forest thou wilt have small chance of thy
life."

"Perchance they will follow me to London," said Cuthbert; "if so,
it will be small use to fly."

"In London our folks have fears for themselves," answered the gipsy
queen. "Half of them are outlawed; the other half lie beneath the
suspicion of sorcery, which in these days is almost worse. They may
hover about the dens of the city, but they will fear to molest thee
elsewhere. Thou must take heed how thou venturest beyond the city
walls, for Tyrrel and his men may be lurking beyond on the watch."

"Methought Tyrrel and Miriam were no such friends," said Cuthbert,
recollecting the night when he had been brought to the mill. "Will
he take up her quarrel?"

"If she can make him believe that Robin had the secret of the lost
treasure, and that thou didst force the secret from him ere thou
laidest him in his grave, he will take up the quarrel in right good
earnest, and rest not till he has learned where the treasure has
been hid. We of the gipsy tribe have as little believed in that hid
treasure as the house of Trevlyn, hence its safety all these years.
But let Miriam once tell what she knows--which is something, I
warrant--and there may be many who will then believe that the
secret was in Robin's keeping. They will be certain sure that thou
wouldst not have killed the man until thou hadst made sure of the
treasure. It would be acting like the fabled yokel who killed the
goose that laid the golden eggs. Wherefore be gone. Hide thyself in
London town. In a few weeks or months the chase may be over; but
for the time being beware of the forest!"

"I will," answered Cuthbert. "I thank thee for thy good counsel. I
will be speedily gone."

Joanna stood looking reflectively at him.

"Thou wouldst he safest within the walls that shelter the
treasure--with thy kinsfolk of the house of Wyvern."

"Nay, but I must first go to London," answered Cuthbert quickly; "I
have been long absent. My kinsfolk there will be looking for news
of me. And perchance my presence in the house of my kinswomen might
imperil them. I would not be a cause of danger to them."

"Thou art a bold and true-hearted lad," answered Joanna; "and it
may be well that for the nonce thou shouldest keep away from the
Cross Way House. Thy presence there might awaken suspicion; though
I scarce believe that any lust of gold would drive our people to
attack that house. Go then to London, and lose thyself there
awhile. Presently thou mayest return and see how thy sister fareth;
but not too soon--not too soon!"

Cuthbert started.

"My sister!" he said; "how knowest thou that?"

Joanna smiled her lofty smile.

"Ask a gipsy how she knoweth what takes place within the limits of
her domain! Tush, boy! thinkest thou that I do not know all that
passes in the forest? Thy sister has done well to find a shelter
there. She is safer at the Cross Way House than in this dell with
thee."

"If she is safe I can well look to myself," answered Cuthbert, with
the confidence of youth and strength. "To be warned where the peril
lies is half the battle. I will be cautious--I will be wary; and
having naught to keep me in the forest, I will start for London
town this very day."

"Ay, do so, and without an hour's delay. Old Miriam is raging like
a fury. Tyrrel may at any moment return, and I trow she will rouse
him to bitter enmity towards thee. Fly, before any strive to stay
thee. And when thou hast reached the city, go once again to Esther.
Tell her that the deed is done, the treasure found, that it lies in
the house of the Wyverns, and that the luck has come back to the
house, as was always said, through the daughters' sons."

"I will," answered Cuthbert; and bidding a farewell to the gipsy,
to whose protection and goodwill he owed so much, he left the dell
and made his way rapidly through the forest, till he struck the
road which would lead him to London.

He would not turn out of the direct way to go to the Cross Way
House, though he would gladly have seen his sister and Kate and his
aged kinswomen again. He did not wish them to know of the peril
which might threaten his own path, nor did he desire to draw
attention to that house by directing his steps thither in broad
daylight. Plainly his presence in the forest had already excited
remark. He had been seen far oftener than he had known. If he did
not linger, but pursued his way to London without delay, he might
reach it by nightfall, and that was no small inducement to him.
Petronella knew that he was bound thither; she would not reckon on
seeing him again. And there was Cherry at the other end. The
thought of seeing her again that very day drew him onwards like a
magnet. During these long weeks of search and hard toil, the
thought of Cherry had been the best sweetener of his labour. He had
talked of her with his sister, he had dreamed of her when he lay
down to sleep at night, and now he was on his way to see her, to
tell her all the tale, and ask her at her father's hand. The
thought was sweet to intoxication, and his eager anticipation
seemed to put wings to his feet.

How different were his feelings as he drew near to the great city
this second time! It was just about a year since he had entered it
for the first time, a stranger, homeless, well-nigh penniless, and
very uncertain of the reception he should receive from his kinsfolk
on the bridge. Now he stepped towards the region of shining lights
with all confidence and joy. He was rich past his wildest hopes,
for the treasure had proved to be far greater than even his fondest
dreams had credited; and he knew that when division was made, it
would be no niggard portion that would fall to the share of the
finder. He had won for himself such goodwill from his kinsfolk as
would stand him in good stead in days to come. He had enlarged his
scholarship, made for himself a number of friends of all degrees,
and, above all, had won the love of his cousin Cherry, and a
