article. At first he struck out his arms as if fighting, so many
hundred of times; then he took to walking on his hands; and at last
he loosened one of the stones which formed the top of the bed, and
invented all sorts of exercises with it.

"What is the day and month?" he said one day to his gaoler.

"It is the 15th of October."

"It is very dark," Rupert said, "darker than usual."

"It is raining," the jailer said; "raining tremendously."

Late that night Rupert was awoke by the splashing of water. He
leaped to his feet. The cell was already a foot deep in water.

"Ha!" he exclaimed, "it is one thing or the other now."

Rupert had been hoping for a flood; it might bring death, but he
thought that it was possible that it might bring deliverance.

The top of the loophole was some two and a half feet from the
vaulted roof; the top of the door was about on the same level, or
some six inches lower. The roof arched some three feet above the
point whence it sprang.

Rupert had thought it all over, and concluded that it was possible,
nay almost certain, that even should the water outside rise ten
feet above the level of his roof, sufficient air would be pent up
there to prevent the water from rising inside, and to supply him
with sufficient to breathe for many hours. He was more afraid of
the effects of cold than of being drowned. He felt that in a flood
in October the water was likely to be fairly warm, and he
congratulated himself that it was now, instead of in December, that
he should have to pass through the ordeal.

Before commencing the struggle, he kneeled for some time in prayer
on his bed, and then, with a firm heart, rose to his feet and
awaited the rising of the water. This was rapid indeed. It was
already two feet over his bed, and minute by minute it rose higher.

When it reached his chin, which it did in less than a quarter of an
hour from the time when he had first awoke, he swam across to the
loophole, which was now but a few inches above the water, and
through which a stream of water still poured. Impossible as it was
for any human being to get through the narrow slit, an iron bar had
been placed across it. Of this Rupert took hold, and remained
quiescent as the water mounted higher and higher; presently it rose
above the top of the loophole, and Rupert now watched anxiously how
fast it ran. Floating on his back, and keeping a finger at the
water level against the wall, he could feel that the water still
rose. It seemed to him that the rise was slower and slower, and at
last his finger remained against a point in the stones for some
minutes without moving. The rise of the water inside the dungeon
had ceased.

That it continued outside he guessed by a slight but distinct
feeling of pressure in the air, showing that the column of water
outside was compressing it. He had no fear of any bad consequences
from this source, as even a height of twelve feet of water outside
would not give any unbearable pressure. He was more afraid that he
himself would exhaust the air, but he believed that there would be
sufficient; and as he knew that the less he exerted himself the
less air he required, he floated quietly on his back, with his feet
resting on the bar across the loophole, now two feet under water.

He scarcely felt the water cold. The rain had come from a warm
quarter; and the temperature of the water was actually higher than
that of the cold and humid dungeon.

Hour after hour passed. The night appeared interminable. From time
to time Rupert dived so as to look through the loophole, and at
last was rewarded by seeing a faint dull light. Day was beginning;
and Rupert had no doubt that with early morning the sluices would
be opened, and the moat entirely cleared of water.

He had, when talking with his gaoler one day, asked him how they
got rid of the water in the dungeon after a flood, and the man said
that there were pipes from the floor of each dungeon into the moat.
At ordinary times these pipes were closed by wooden plugs, as the
water outside was far above the floor; but that after a flood the
water was entirely let out of the moat, and the plugs removed from
the pipes, which thus emptied the dungeons.

From the way in which the fellow described the various
arrangements, Rupert had little doubt that the sluice gates were at
times purposely left closed, in order to clear off troublesome
prisoners who might otherwise have remained a care and expense to
the state for years to come.

Long as the night had seemed, it seemed even longer before Rupert
felt that the water was sinking. He knew that after the upper
sluice had opened the fosse might take some time to fall to the
level of the water inside the dungeon, and that until it did the
water inside would remain stationary.

He passed the hours by changing his position as much as possible;
sometimes he swam round and round, at other times he trod water,
then he would float quietly, then cling to the bar of the loophole.

The descent of the water came upon him at last as a surprise. He
was swimming round and round, and had not for some time touched the
wall, when suddenly a ray of light flashed in his face. He gave a
cry of joy. The water had fallen below the top of the loophole, and
swimming up to it, he could see across the fosse, and watch the
sunlight sparkling on the water. It was two months since he had
seen the light, and the feeling of joy overpowered him more than
the danger he had faced.

Rapidly the water fell, until it was level with the bottom of the
loophole. Then hours passed away; for the fosse would have to be
emptied before the drain leading from the dungeon could be opened.
However, Rupert hardly felt the time long. With his hands on the
bar and in the loophole, he remained gazing out at the sunlight.

The water in the fosse sank and sank, until he could no longer see
it; but he could see the sun glistening on the wet grass of the
bank, and he was satisfied. At last he was conscious of a strain on
his arm, and withdrawing his gaze from without, he saw that the
water had fallen six inches.

It now sank rapidly; and in an hour he could stand with his head
above it. Then he was able to sit down on his bed; but when the
water sank to a depth of two feet, he again lay on his back and
floated. He knew that a thick deposit of mud would be left, and
that it was essential for his plan that he should drift to the exit
hole of the water, and there be found, with the mud and slime
undisturbed by footsteps or movement. Another ten minutes, and he
lay on his back on the ground in a corner of the dungeon to which
the water had floated him, having taken care towards the end to
sink his head so that his hair floated partly over it, and as the
water drained off remained so. He guessed it to be about midday,
and he expected to be left undisturbed until night.

After a time he slept, and when he awoke it was dark, and soon
after he heard steps coming down the stairs. Now was the moment of
trial. Presently the door opened and four of the gaolers came in.
They bore between them a stretcher.

"This is the fifth," one said, and he recognized the voice of his
own attendant. "It is a pity, he was a fine fellow. Well, there's
one more, and then the job's done."

He bent over Rupert, who ceased breathing.

"He's the only one with his eyes closed," he said. "I expect
there's someone would break her heart if she knew he was lying
here. Well, lift him up, mates."

The two months' imprisonment in the dungeon had done one good
service for Rupert. The absence of light had blanched his face, and
even had he been dead he could hardly have looked more white than
he did. The long hours in the water had made his hands deadly cold,
and the hair matted on his face added to the deathlike aspect.

"Put the stretcher on the ground, and roll him over on to it," one
of the men said. "I don't mind a dead man, but these are so clammy
and slimy that they are horrible to touch. There, stand between him
and the wall, put a foot under him, roll him over. There, nothing
could be better! Now then, off we go with him. The weight's more
than twice as much as the others."

Rupert lay with his face down on the stretcher, and felt himself
carried upstairs, then along several long passages, then through a
door, and felt the fresh evening air. Now by the sound he knew that
he was being carried over the bridge across the moat to the burying
ground. Then the stretcher was laid down.

"Now then, roll him over into the hole," one said, "and let us go
back for the last. Peste! I am sick of this job, and shall need a
bottle of eau de vie to put me straight again."

One side of the stretcher was lifted, and Rupert was rolled over.
The fall was not deep, some three or four feet only, and he fell on
a soft mass, whose nature he could well guess at. A minute later he
heard the retreating footsteps of his gaolers, and leaping from the
grave, stood a free man by its side.

He knew that he was not only free, but safe from any active
pursuit, for he felt sure that the gaolers, when they returned with
their last load, would throw it in and fill up the grave, and that
no suspicion that it contained one short of the number would arise.

This in itself was an immense advantage to him, for on the escape
of a prisoner from Loches--an event which had happened but once or
twice in its records--a gun was fired and the whole country turned
out in pursuit of the prisoner.

Rupert paused for two minutes before commencing his flight, and
kneeling down, thanked God for his escape. Then he climbed the low
ramparts, dropped beyond them, and struck across country. The
exercise soon sent the blood dancing through his hands again, and
by the morning he was thirty-five miles from Loches.

He had stopped once, a mile or two after starting, when he came to
a stream. Into this he had waded, and had washed the muck stains
from his clothes, hair, and face.

With the morning dawn his clothes were dry, and he presented to the
eye an aspect similar to that which he wore when captured at Blois
nearly a year before, of a dilapidated and broken-down soldier, for
he had retained in prison the clothes he wore when captured; but
they had become infinitely more dingy from the wear and tear of
prison, and the soaking had destroyed all vestige of colour.

Presently he came to a mill by a stream.

"Hallo!" the miller said cheerily, from his door. "You seem to have
been in the wars, friend."

"I have in my way," Rupert said. "I was wounded in Flanders. I have
been home to Bordeaux, and got cured again. I started for the army
again, and some tramps who slept in the same room with me robbed me
of my last shilling. To complete my disaster, last night, not
having money to pay for a bed, I tramped on, fell into a stream,
and was nearly drowned."

"Come in," said the miller. "Wife, here is a poor fellow out of
luck. Give him a bowl of hot milk, and some bread."



Chapter 21: Back in Harness.

"You must have had a bad time of it." the miller said, as he
watched Rupert eating his breakfast. "I don't know that I ever saw
anyone so white as you are, and yet you look strong, too."

"I am strong," Rupert said, "but I had an attack, and all my colour
went. It will come back again soon, but I am only just out. You
don't want a man, do you? I am strong and willing. I don't want to
beg my way to the army, and I am ashamed of my clothes. There will
be no fighting till the spring. I don't want high pay, just my food
and enough to get me a suit of rough clothes, and to keep me in
bread and cheese as I go back."

"From what part of France do you come?" the miller asked. "You
don't speak French as people do hereabouts."

"I come from Brittany," Rupert said; "but I learnt to speak the
Paris dialect there, and have almost forgotten my own, I have been
so long away."

"Well, I will speak to my wife," the miller said. "Our last hand
went away three months since, and all the able-bodied men have been
sent to the army. So I can do with you if my wife likes you."

The miller's wife again came and inspected the wanderer, and
declared that if he were not so white he would be well enough, but
that such a colour did not seem natural.

Rupert answered her that it would soon go, and offered that if, at
the end of a week, he did not begin to show signs of colour coming,
he would give up the job.

The bargain was sealed. The miller supplied him with a pair of
canvas trousers and a blouse. Rupert cut off his long hair, and set
to work as the miller's man.

In a week the miller's wife, as well as the miller himself, was
delighted with him. His great strength, his willingness and
cheeriness kept, as they said, the place alive, and the pallor of
his face had so far worn off by the end of the week that the
miller's wife was satisfied that he would, as he said, soon look
like a human being, and not like a walking corpse.

The winter passed off quietly, and Rupert stood higher and higher
in the liking of the worthy couple with whom he lived; the climax
being reached when, in midwinter, a party of marauders--for at that
time the wars of France and the distress of the people had filled
the country with bands of men who set the laws at defiance--five in
number, came to the mill and demanded money.

The miller, who was not of a warlike disposition, would have given
up all the earnings which he had stored away, but Rupert took down
an old sword which hung over the fireplace; and sallying out, ran
through the chief of the party, desperately wounded two others, and
by sheer strength tossed the others into the mill stream, standing
over them when they scrambled out, and forcing them to dig a grave
and bury their dead captain and to carry off their wounded
comrades.

Thus when the spring came, and Rupert said that he must be going,
the regrets of the miller and his wife were deep, and by offer of
higher pay they tried to get him to stay. Rupert however was, of
course, unable to accede to their request, and was glad when they
received a letter from a son in the army, saying that he had been
laid up with fever, and had got his discharge, and was just
starting to settle with them at the mill.

Saying goodbye to his kind employers, Rupert started with a stout
suit of clothes, fifty francs in his pocket, and a document signed
by the Maire of the parish to the effect that Antoine Duprat,
miller's man, had been working through the winter at Evres, and was
now on his way to join his regiment with the army of Flanders.

Determined to run no more risks if he could avoid it, he took a
line which would avoid Paris and all other towns at which he had
ever shown himself. Sometimes he tramped alone, more often with
other soldiers who had been during the winter on leave to recover
from the effects of wounds or of fevers. From their talk Rupert
learned with satisfaction that the campaign which he had missed had
been very uneventful, and that no great battles had taken place. It
was expected that the struggle that would begin in a few weeks
would be a desperate one, both sides having made great efforts to
place a predominating force in the field.

As he had no idea of putting on the French uniform even for a day,
Rupert resolved as he approached the army frontier to abandon his
story that he was a soldier going to take his place in the ranks.

When he reached Amiens he found the streets encumbered with baggage
waggons taking up provisions and stores to the army. The drivers
had all been pressed into the service. Going into a cabaret, he
heard some young fellow lamenting bitterly that he had been dragged
away from home when he was in three weeks to have been married.
Waiting until he left, Rupert followed him, and told him that he
had heard what he had said and was ready to go as his substitute,
if he liked. For a minute or two the poor fellow could hardly
believe his good fortune; but when he found that he was in earnest
he was delighted, and hurried off to the contractor in charge of
the train--Rupert stopping with him by the way to buy a blouse, in
which he looked more fitted for the post.

The contractor, seeing that Rupert was a far more powerful and
useful-looking man than the driver whose place he offered to take,
made no difficulty whatever; and in five minutes Rupert, with a
metal plate with his number hung round his neck, was walking by the
side of a heavily-loaded team, while their late driver, with his
papers of discharge in his pocket, had started for home almost wild
with delight.

For a month Rupert worked backwards and forwards, between the posts
and the depots. As yet the allies had not taken the field, and he
knew that he should have no chance of crossing a wide belt of
country patrolled in every direction by the French cavalry. At the
end of that time the infantry moved out from their quarters and
took the field, and the allied army advanced towards them. The
French army, under Vendome, numbered 100,000 men, while
Marlborough, owing to the intrigues of his enemies at home, and the
dissensions of the allies, was able to bring only 70,000 into the
field.

The French had correspondents in most of the towns in Flanders,
where the rapacity of the Dutch had exasperated the people against
their new masters, and made them long for the return of the French.

A plot was on foot to deliver Antwerp to the French, and Vendome
moved forward to take advantage of it; but Marlborough took post at
Halle, and Vendome halted his army at Soignies, three leagues
distant. Considerable portions of each force moved much closer to
each other, and lay watching each other across a valley but a mile
wide.

Rupert happened to be with the waggons taking ammunition up to the
artillery in an advanced position, and determined, if possible, to
seize the opportunity of rejoining his countrymen. A lane running
between two high hedges led from the foot of the hill where he was
standing, directly across the valley, and Rupert slipping away
unnoticed, made the best of his way down the lane. When nearly half
across the valley, the hedges ceased, and Rupert issued out into
open fields.

Hitherto, knowing that he had not been noticed, he had husbanded
his breath, and had only walked quickly, but as he came into the
open he started at a run. He was already nearly half way between
the armies, and reckoned that before any of the French cavalry
could overtake him he would be within reach of succour by his
friends.

A loud shout from behind him showed that he was seen, and looking
round he saw that a French general officer, accompanied by another
officer and a dragoon, were out in front of their lines
reconnoitring the British position. They, seeing the fugitive, set
spurs to their horses to cut him off. Rupert ran at the top of his
speed, and could hear a roar of encouragement from the troops in
front. He was assured that there was no cavalry at this part of the
lines, and that he must be overtaken long before he could get
within the very short distance that then constituted musket range.

Finding that escape was out of the question, he slackened his
speed, so as to leave himself breath for the conflict. He was armed
only with a heavy stick. The younger officer, better mounted, and
anxious to distinguish himself on so conspicuous an occasion, was
the first to arrive.

Rupert faced round. His cap had fallen off, and grasping the small
end of the stick, he poised himself for the attack.

The French officer drew rein with a sudden cry,

"You!" he exclaimed, "you! What, still alive?"

"Yet no thanks to you, Monsieur le Duc," Rupert said, bitterly.
"Even Loches could not hold me."

His companions were now close at hand, and with a cry of fury the
duke rode at Rupert. The latter gave the horse's nose a sharp blow
as the duke's sweeping blow descended. The animal reared suddenly,
disconcerting the aim, and before its feet touched the ground the
heavy knob of Rupert's stick, driven with the whole strength of his
arm, struck the duke on the forehead.

At the same instant as the duke fell, a lifeless mass, over the
crupper, Rupert leaped to the other side of the horse, placing the
animal between him and the other assailants as they swept down upon
him. Before they could check their horses he vaulted into the
saddle, and with an adroit wheel avoided the rush of the dragoon.

The shouts of the armies, spectators of the singular combat, were
