    Safe-shouting, and with distant darts attack;
    E'en so, of those who burn with righteous hate,
    None dares against Mezentius try his fate.
    But cries are hurled, and distant missiles plied,
    While he, undaunted, but in desperate strait,
    Gnashes his teeth, and from his shield's tough hide
Shakes off the darts in showers, and shifts from side to side.

XCVIII. From ancient Corythus came Acron there,
    A Greek, in exile from his half-won bride.
    Him, dealing havoc in the ranks, elsewhere
    Mezentius marked; the purple plumes he eyed,
    The robe his loved one for her lord had dyed.
    As when a lion, prowling to and fro,
    Sore pinched with hunger, round the fold, hath spied
    A stag tall-antlered, or a timorous roe,
Ghastly he grins, erect his horrid mane doth show;

XCIX. Prone o'er his victim, to the flesh he clings,
    And laps the gore; so, burning in his zeal,
    The fierce Mezentius at his foemen springs.
    Poor Acron falls, and earth with dying heel
    Spurns, and the red blood stains the splintered steel.
    Orodes fled; Mezentius marks his flight,
    And scorns with lance a covert wound to deal,
    But face to face confronts him in the fight,
Courage, not craft, prevails, and might o'ermatches might.

C.  With foot and spear upon him, "See," he cries,
    "Their champion; see the great Orodes slain!"
    All shout applause, but, dying, he replies,
    "Strange foe, not long thy triumph shall remain;
    Like fate awaits thee, on the self-same plain."
    "Die!" said Mezentius, with a smile of spite,
    "Jove cares for me," and plucked the shaft again.
    Grim rest and iron slumber seal his sight;
The drooping eyelids close on everlasting night.

CI. Now Caedicus made great Alcathous fall,
    Sacrator killed Hydaspes; Rapo too
    Parthenius and Orses, strong and tall;
    Messapus Clonius, whom his steed o'erthrew,
    And, foot to foot, Lycaon's son he slew,
    Brave Ericetes. Valerus with a blow
    Felled Agis, Lycia' s warrior. Salius flew
    At Thronius, but Nealces lays him low,
Skilled with the flying dart and far-deceiving bow.

CII. Stern Mars, impartial, weighs in equal scale
    The mutual slaughter, and the ghastly fight
    Raves, as in turn they perish or prevail,
    Vanquished or victor, for none dreams of flight.
    From Heaven the gods look pitying on the sight,
    Such fruitless hate, such scenes of mortal woe.
    Here Venus, there great Juno, filled with spite,
    Sits watching. Pale Tisiphone below
Fierce amid thousands raves, and bids the discord grow.

CIII. His massive spear Mezentius, flown with pride,
    Shakes in his fury, as he towers amain,
    Like huge Orion, when with ample stride
    He cleaves the deep-sea, where the Nereids reign,
    And lifts his lofty shoulders o'er the main,
    Or when, uprooting from the mountain head
    An aged ash, he stalks along the plain,
    And hides his forehead in the clouds; so dread
Mezentius clangs his arms, so terrible his tread.

CIV. AEneas marks him in the files of fight
    Far off, and hastes to meet him in advance.
    Dauntless he waits, collected in his might,
    The noble foe, then, measuring at a glance
    The space his arm can cover with the lance;
    "May this right hand, my deity," cried he,
    "And this poised javelin aid the doubtful chance.
    The spoils, from this false pirate stript, to thee
My Lausus, I devote; his trophy shalt thou be."

CV. So saying, from far his whistling shaft he threw.
    Wide glanced the missile, by the tough shield bent,
    And finding famed Antores, as it flew,
    'Twixt flank and bowels pierced a deadly rent.
    He, friend of Hercules, from Argos sent,
    With king Evander, 'neath Italian skies,
    Had fixed his home. Alas! a wound unmeant
    Hath laid him low. To heaven he lifts his eyes,
And of sweet Argos dreams, his native land, and dies.

CVI. His javelin then the good AEneas cast;
    Flying it pierced the hollow disk, and through
    The plates of brass, thrice welded firm and fast,
    And linen folds, and triple bull-hides flew,
    And in the groin, with failing force but true,
    Lodged deep. At once AEneas, for his eye
    Glistens with joy, the Tuscan's blood to view,
    His trusty sword unfastening from his thigh,
Springs at the faltering foe, and bids Mezentius die.

CVII. Love for his sire stirred Lausus, and the tears
    Rolled down, and heavily he groaned. Thy fate,
    Brave youth! thy prowess, if the far-off years
    Shall give due credence to a deed so great,
    My verse at least shall spare not to relate.
    While backward limped Mezentius, spent and slow,
    His shield still cumbered with the javelin's weight,
    Forth sprang the youth, and grappled with the foe,
And 'neath AEneas' sword, uplifted for the blow,

CVIII. Slipped in, and checked him. Onward press the train
    With shouts, to shelter the retreating sire,
    And distant arrows on the foeman rain.
    Safe-covered stands AEneas, thrilled with ire.
    As when the storm-clouds in a deluge dire
    Pour down the hail, and all the ploughmen fly,
    And scattered hinds from off the fields retire,
    And rock or stream-side shields the passer-by,
Till sunshine calls to toil, and reawakes the sky;

CIX. So, whelmed with darts, the Trojan chief defies
    The cloud of war, till all its storms abate,
    And chides and threatens Lausus. "Fool," he cries,
    "Why rush to death, and dare a deed too great?
    Rash youth! thy love betrays thee." 'Twas too late;
    Rage blinds poor Lausus, and he scorns to stay.
    Then fiercer waxed the Dardan's wrath, and Fate
    The threads had gathered, for their forceful sway
Hilt-deep within his breast the falchion urged its way.

CX. It pierced the shield, light armour and the vest,
    Wrought by his mother with fine golden thread,
    And drenched with gore the tunic and the breast.
    Sweet life, departing, left the limbs outspread,
    And the sad spirit to the ghost-world fled.
    But when the son of great Anchises scanned
    The face, the pallid features of the dead,
    Deeply he groaned, and stretched a pitying hand.
Grief for his own dear sire his noble soul unmanned.

CXI. "Alas! what meed, to match such worth divine,
    Can good AEneas give thee? Take to-day
    The arms wherein thou joyed'st; they are thine.
    Thy corpse--if aught can please the senseless clay--
    Back to thy parents' ashes I repay.
    Poor youth! thy solace be it to be slain
    By great AEneas." Then his friends' delay
    He chides, and lifts young Lausus from the plain,
Dead, and with dainty locks fouled by the crimson stain.

CXII. Meanwhile the sire Mezentius, faint with pain,
    In Tiber's waters bathes the bleeding wound.
    Against a trunk he leans; the boughs sustain
    His brazen helm; his arms upon the ground
    Rest idly, and his comrades stand around.
    Sick, gasping, spent, his weary neck he tends;
    Loose o'er his bosom floats the beard unbound.
    Oft of his son he questions, oft he sends
To bid him quit the field, and seek his sire and friends.

CXIII. But, sad and sorrowful, the Tuscan train
    Bear back the lifeless Lausus from the field,
    Weeping--the mighty by a mightier slain,
    And laid in death upon the warrior's shield.
    Far off, their wailing to the sire revealed
    The grief, that made his boding heart mistrust.
    In agony of vanquish, down he kneeled,
    His hoary hairs disfiguring with the dust,
And, grovelling, clasped the corpse, and both his hands outthrust.

CXIV. "Dear son, was life so tempting to the sire,
    To let thee face the foemen in my room,
    Whom I begot? Shalt thou, my son, expire,
    And I live on, my darling in the tomb,
    Saved by thy wounds, and living by thy doom?
    Ah! woe is me; too well at length I own
    The pangs of exile, and the wound strikes home.
    'Twas I, thy name who tarnished, I alone,
Whom just resentment thrust from sceptre and from throne.

CXV. "Due to my country was the forfeit; yea,
    All deaths Mezentius had deserved to die.
    Yet still I leave, and leave not man and day,
    But leave I will,--the fatal hour is nigh."
    Then, slowly leaning on his crippled thigh
    (Deep was the wound, but dauntless was his breast),
    He rose, and calling for his steed hard by,
    The steed, that oft in victory's hour he pressed,
His solace and his pride, the sorrowing beast addressed:

CXVI. "Rhaebus, full long, if aught of earth be long,
    We two have lived. AEneas' head to-day,
    And spoils, blood-crimsoned to avenge this wrong,
    Back shalt thou bring, or, failing in the fray,
    Bite earth with me, and be the Dardan's prey.
    Not thou would'st brook a foreign lord, I weet,
    Brave heart, or deign a Teucrian to obey."
    He spoke, and, mounting to his well-known seat,
Swift at the ranks spurred forth, his dreaded foe to meet.

CXVII. Each hand a keen dart brandished; o'er his head
    Gleamed the brass helmet with its horse-hair crest.
    Shame for himself, and sorrow for the dead,
    The parent's anguish, and the warrior's zest,
    Thrilled through his veins, and kindled in his breast,
    And thrice he called AEneas. With delight
    AEneas heard him, and his vows addressed:
    "So help me Jove, so Phoebus lend his might,
Come on," and couched his spear, advancing to the fight.

CXVIII. "Wretch," cries Mezentius, "having robbed my son,
    Why scare me now? Thy terrors I defy.
    Only through Lausus were his sire undone.
    I heed not death nor deities, not I;
    Forbear thy taunting; I am here to die,
    But send this gift to greet thee, ere I go."
    He spake, and quickly let a javelin fly,
    Another--and another, as round the foe
In widening orbs he wheels; the good shield bides the blow.

CXIX. Thrice round AEneas leftward he careers,
    Raining his darts. Thrice, shifting round, each way
    The Trojan bears the forest of his spears.
    At length, impatient of the long delay,
    And tired with plucking all the shafts away,
    Pondering awhile, and by the ceaseless blows
    Hard pressed, and chafing at the unequal fray,
    Forth springs AEneas, and betwixt the brows
Full at the warrior-steed a fatal javelin throws.

CXX. Up rears the steed, and paws the air in pain,
    Then, following on his falling rider, lies
    And pins him with his shoulder to the plain.
    Shouts from each host run kindling through the skies.
    Forth springs AEneas, glorying in his prize,
    And plucks the glittering falchion from his thigh,
    "Where now is fierce Mezentius? where," he cries,
    "That fiery spirit?" Then, with upturned eye,
Gasping, with gathered sense, the Tuscan made reply:

CXXI. "Stern foe! why taunt and threaten? 'twere no shame
    To slay me. No such covenant to save
    His sire made Lausus; nor for this I came.
    One boon I ask--if vanquished men may crave
    The victor's grace--a burial for the brave.
    My people hate me; I have lived abhorred;
    Shield me from them with Lausus in the grave."
    This said, his throat he offered to the sword,
And o'er his shining arms life's purple stream was poured.




BOOK ELEVEN


ARGUMENT

AEneas erects a trophy of Mezentius' arms, and sends the body of
Pallas with tears and lamentations to Evander (1-108). A truce for
the burial of the dead is asked by the Latins, and sympathy with the
Trojan cause finds a spokesman in Drances (109-144). The sorrow of
Evander and the funeral rites of Trojans and Latins (145-262). The
ambassadors return from the city of Diomedes and report that he
praises AEneas and counsels submission (263-336). An anxious debate
follows: Latinus suggests terms of peace: Drances inveighs against
Turnus, who replies, protesting his readiness to meet AEneas in
single combat, and presently seizes the opportunity afforded by a
false alarm of impending attack to break up the council. The Latin
mothers and maidens offer gifts and litanies to Pallas. Turnus arms
for battle (337-576). Camilla and Messapus command the Latin horse;
Turnus prepares an ambuscade (577-612). Diana tells the story of
Camilla and charges Opis, one of her nymphs, to avenge her should
she fall (613-684). Opis watches the battle before the city of
Latinus (685-738). The deeds and death of Camilla are recounted:
Aruns, her slayer, is slain by Opis (739-972). The Latins are routed,
and Turnus, learning the news, abandons the ambush and hurries to
the city, closely followed by AEneas (973-1026).


I.  Meanwhile from Ocean peeps the dawning day.
    The Dardan chief, though fain his friends to mourn,
    And pressed with thoughts of burial, hastes to pay
    His vows, as victor, with the rising morn.
    A towering oak-tree, of its branches shorn,
    He plants upon a mound. Aloft, in sight,
    The glittering armour from Mezentius torn,
    His spoils, he hangs,--a trophy to thy might,
Great Mars, the Lord of war, the Ruler of the fight.

II. Thereon he sets the helmet and the crest,
    Bedewed with gore, the javelins snapt in twain,
    And fits the corslet on the warrior's breast,
    Pierced in twelve places through the twisted chain.
    The left arm, as for battle, bears again
    The brazen shield, and from the neck depends
    The ivory-hilted falchion of the slain.
    Around, with shouts of triumph, crowd his friends,
Whom thus the Dardan chief with gladdening words commends:

III. "Comrades, great deeds have been achieved to-day;
    Let not the morrow trouble you. See there
    The tyrant's spoils, the first-fruits of the fray.
    And this my work, Mezentius. Now prepare
    To king Latinus and his walls to fare.
    Let hope forestall, and courage hail the fray,
    So, when the gods shall summon us to bear
    The standards forth, and muster our array,
No fears shall breed dull sloth, nor ignorance delay.

IV. "Our co-mates now commit we to the ground,
    Sole honour that in Acheron below
    Awaits them. Go ye, on these souls renowned,
    Who poured their blood, to purchase from the foe
    This country for our fatherland, bestow
    The last, sad gift, the tribute of a tomb.
    First to Evander's city, whelmed in woe,
    Send Pallas back, whom Death's relentless doom
Hath reft ere manhood's prime, and plunged in early gloom."

V.  He spake, and sought the threshold, weeping sore,
    Where by dead Pallas watched with pious care
    Acoetes; once Evander's arms he bore,
    His squire; since then, with auspices less fair,
    The trusted guardian of his dear-loved heir.
    A crowd of sorrowing menials stand around,
    And Troy's sad matrons, with their streaming hair.
    These, when AEneas at the door is found,
Shriek out, and beat their breasts, and bitter wails resound.

VI. He marked the pillowed head, the snow-white face,
    The smooth breast, gaping with the wound, and cried
    In anguish, while the tears burst forth apace,
    "Poor boy; hath Fortune, in her hour of pride,
    To me thy triumph and return denied?
    Not such my promise to thy sire; not so
    My pledge to him, who, ere I left his side
    In quest of empire, clasped me, boding woe,
And warned the race was fierce, and terrible the foe.

VII. "He haply now, by empty hope betrayed,
    With prayer and presents doth the gods constrain.
    We to the dead, whose debt to Heaven is paid,
    The rites of mourners render, but in vain.
    Unhappy! doomed to see thy darling slain.
    Is this the triumph? this the promise sworn?
    This the return? Yet never thine the pain
    A coward's flight, a coward's scars to mourn;
Not thine to long for death, thy loved one saved with scorn.

VIII. "Ah, weep, Ausonia! thou hast lost to-day
    Thy champion. Weep, Iulus; he is ta'en,
    Thy heart's delight, the bulwark of the fray!"
    Thus he with tears, and bids them lift the slain.
    A thousand men, the choicest of his train,
    He sends as mourners, with the corpse to go,
    And stand between the parent and his pain,
    A scanty solace for so huge a woe,
But such as pity claims, and piety doth owe.

IX. Of oaken twigs and arbutus they wove
    A wattled bier. Soft leaves beneath him made
    His pillow, and with leafy boughs above
    They twined a verdurous canopy of shade.
    There, on his rustic couch the youth is laid,
    Fair as the hyacinth, with drooping head,
    Cropped by the careless fingers of a maid,
    Or tender violet, when life has fled,
That, torn from earth, still blooms, unfaded but unfed.

X.  Two purple mantles, stiff with golden braid,
    AEneas brings, which erst, in loving care,
    Sidonian Dido with her hands had made,
    And pranked with golden tissue, for his wear.
    One, wound in sorrow round the corpse so fair,
    The last, sad honour, shrouds the senseless clay;
    One, ere the burning, veils the warrior's hair.
    Rich spoils, the trophies of Laurentum's fray,
Stript arms and steeds he brings, and bids them pile the prey.

XI. Here march the captives, doomed to feed the flames;
    There, staff in hand, each Dardan chief uprears
    The spoil-decked ensigns, marked with foemen's names.
    There, too, they lead Acoetes, bowed with years,
    He smites his breast, his haggard cheeks he tears,
    Then flings his full length prostrate. There, again,
    The blood-stained chariot, and with big, round tears,
    Stript of his trappings, in the mournful train,
AEthon, the warrior's steed, comes sorrowing for the slain.

XII. These bear the dead man's helmet and his spear;
    All else the victor for his spoils hath ta'en.
    A melancholy phalanx close the rear,
    Teucrians, and Tuscans, and Arcadia's train,
    With arms reversed, and mourning for the slain.
    So passed the pomp, and, while the tear-drops fell,
    AEneas stopped, and, groaning, cried again,
    "Hail, mighty Pallas! us the fates compel
Yet other tears to shed. Farewell! a long farewell!"

XIII. He spake, then, turning, to the camp doth fare.
    Thither Laurentum's envoys found their way.
    Branches of olive in their hands they bear,
    And beg a truce,--a respite from the fray,
    Their slaughtered comrades in the ground to lay,
    And glean the war's sad harvest. Brave men ne'er
    Warred with the dead and vanquished. Once were they
    His hosts and kinsmen; he would surely spare.
Their plea AEneas owns, and thus accosts them fair:

XIV. "What mischief, Latins, hath your minds misled,
    To shun our friendship in the hour of need,
    And rush to arms? Peace ask ye for the dead,
    The War-God's prey, whom folly doomed to bleed?
    Peace to the living would I fain concede.
    I came not hither, but with Heaven to guide.
    Fate chose this country, and this home decreed;
    Nor war I with the race. Your king denied
Our proffered league; 'twas he on Turnus' arms relied.

XV. "'Twere juster then that Turnus hand to hand
    His life had ventured. Dreams he in his pride
    To end the war, and drive us from the land?
    _He_ should have met me; he or I had died,
    As Fate or prowess might the day decide.
    Go, take your dead, and let the bale-fires blaze:
    Ye have your answer." Thus the prince replied,
    And each on each the wondering heralds gaze,
Mute with admiring awe, and wildered with amaze.

XVI. Then Drances, ever fain with gibes and hate
    To vex young Turnus, takes the word and cries,
    "O Trojan, great in fame, in arms more great,
    What praise of mine shall match thee with the skies?
    What most--thy deeds or justice--shall I prize?
    Grateful, this answer to our friends we bear,
    And thee (let Turnus seek his own allies),
    Thee King Latinus shall his friend declare,
And Latium's sons with joy Troy's destined walls prepare."

XVII. He spake; as one, all murmur their assent.
    For twice six days a solemn truce they plight,
    And Teucrians, now, with Latins, freely blent
    In peaceful fellowship, as friends unite,
    And roam the wooded hills. Sharp axes smite
    The sounding ash; these with keen wedges cleave
    Tall oak and scented cedar; those with might
    The pine-tree, soaring to the stars, upheave,
And wains, with groaning wheels, the giant elms receive.

XVIII. Now Rumour, harbinger of woe so great,
    That told of Pallas victor, fills again
    Evander's town. All hurry to the gate,
    With torches snatched, as ancient rites ordain.
    A line of fire, that parts the dusky plain,
    The long road gleams before them, as they go
    To meet the mourners. Soon the wailing train
    The Phrygians join. With shrieks the matrons know
Far off the funeral throng, and fill the town with woe.

XIX. Naught stays Evander; through the midst he springs,
    And falling on the bier, as down they lay
    Dead Pallas, groaning to his child he clings,
    And hangs with tears upon the senseless clay,
    Till speech, half-choked with sorrow, finds a way.
    "Pallas, not such thy promise to thy sire,
    Warely to trust the War-God in the fray.
    I knew what ardour would thy soul inspire,
The charms of new-won fame, and battle's fierce desire.

XX. "O bitter first-fruits of a youth so fair!
    O war's stern prelude! promise dashed to scorn!
    Unheeded vows, and unavailing prayer!
    O happy spouse! not left, like me, to mourn
    A son thus slaughtered, and a life outworn.
    I have o'erlived my destiny; life fled
    When Pallas left me childless and forlorn.
    O, had I fall'n with Trojans in his stead,
And me this pomp brought home, and not my Pallas, dead!

XXI. "Yet, Trojans, you I blame not, nor the hands
    We joined in friendship, nor the league we swore.
    Old age--too old--this cruel lot demands.
    Ah, sweet to think, though falling in his flower,
    He fell, where thousand Volscians fell before,
    Leading Troy's sons to Latium. Thou shalt have
    A Trojan's funeral--can I wish thee more?--
    What rites AEneas offers to the brave,
And all Etruria's hosts shall bear thee to the grave.

XXII. "Proud trophies those who perish by thy hand
    Bear thee, and slaughtered foemen speak thy fame.
    Thou, Turnus, too, an effigy should'st stand,
    Hung round with arms, and Pallas' praise proclaim,
    Had but thine age and Pallas' been the same,
    Like thine the vigour of his years. But O!
    Why, Teucrians, do I keep you? wherefore claim
    An old man's privilege of empty woe?
This message bear your king, and con it as ye go.

XXIII. "If yet I linger on, with Pallas slain,
    Loathing the light, and longing to expire,
    'Tis thy right hand that tempts me to remain,
    That hand from which--thou see'st it--son and sire
    The penalty of Turnus' blood require.
