"To the very meanest of them."

"Oh! sire."

"Let us understand each other, Monsieur Fouquet," said the king,
haughtily. "We no longer live in times when assassination was the only
and the last resource which kings had in their power. No! Heaven be
praised! I have parliaments who sit and judge in my name, and I have
scaffolds on which my supreme authority is carried out."

Fouquet turned pale. "I will take the liberty of observing to your
majesty, that any proceedings instituted respecting these matters would
bring down the greatest scandal upon the dignity of the throne. The
august name of Anne of Austria must never be allowed to pass the lips of
the people accompanied by a smile."

"Justice must be done, however, monsieur."

"Good, sire; but the royal blood cannot be shed on a scaffold."

"The royal blood! you believe that!" cried the king, with fury in his
voice, stamping his foot on the ground. "This double birth is an
invention; and in that invention, particularly, do I see M. d'Herblay's
crime. It is the crime I wish to punish rather than their violence, or
their insult."

"And punish it with death, sire?"

"With death; yes, monsieur."

"Sire," said the surintendant with firmness, as he raised his head
proudly, "your majesty will take the life, if you please, of your
brother Philippe of France; that concerns you alone, and you will
doubtless consult the queen-mother upon the subject. Whatever she may
command will be perfectly correct. I do not wish to mix myself up in it,
not even for the honor of your crown, but I have a favor to ask of you,
and I beg to submit it to you."

"Speak," said the king, in no little degree agitated by his minister's
last words. "What do you require?"

"The pardon of M. d'Herblay and of M. de Valon."

"My assassins."

"Two rebels, sire, that is all."

"Oh! I understand, then, you ask me to forgive your friends."

"My friends!" said Fouquet, deeply wounded.

"Your friends, certainly; but the safety of the state requires that an
exemplary punishment should be inflicted on the guilty."

"I will not permit myself to remind your majesty that I have just
restored you to liberty, and have saved your life."

"Monsieur!"

"I will not allow myself to remind your majesty that had M. d'Herblay
wished to carry out his character of an assassin, he could very easily
have assassinated your majesty this morning in the forest of Senart, and
all would have been over."

The king started.

"A pistol bullet through the head," pursued Fouquet, "and the disfigured
features of Louis XIV., which no one could have recognized, would be M.
d'Herblay's complete and entire justification."

The king turned pale and giddy at the idea of the danger he had escaped.

"If M. d'Herblay," continued Fouquet, "had been an assassin, he had no
occasion to inform me of his plan, in order to succeed. Freed from the
real king, it would have been impossible to guess the false king. And if
the usurper had been recognized by Anne of Austria, he would still have
been a son for her. The usurper, as far as Monsieur d'Herblay's
conscience was concerned, was still a king of the blood of Louis XIII.
Moreover, the conspirator, in that course, would have had security,
secrecy, and impunity. A pistol-bullet would have procured him all that.
For the sake of Heaven, sire, grant me his forgiveness."

The king, instead of being touched by the picture he had drawn, so
faithful in all its details, of Aramis' generosity, felt himself most
painfully and cruelly humiliated by it. His unconquerable pride revolted
at the idea that a man had held suspended at the end of his finger the
thread of his royal life. Every word that fell from Fouquet's lips, and
which he thought most efficacious in procuring his friend's pardon,
seemed to pour another drop of poison into the already ulcerated heart
of Louis XIV. Nothing could bend or soften him. Addressing himself to
Fouquet, he said, "I really don't know, monsieur, why you should solicit
the pardon of these men. What good is there in asking that which can be
obtained without solicitation?"

"I do not understand you, sire."

"It is not difficult either. Where am I now?"

"In the Bastille, sire."

"Yes; in a dungeon. I am looked upon as a madman, am I not?"

"Yes, sire."

"And no one is known here but Marchiali?"

"Certainly."

"Well; change nothing in the position of affairs. Let the madman rot in
the dungeon of the Bastille, and M. d'Herblay and M. de Valon will stand
in no need of my forgiveness. Their new king will absolve them."

"Your majesty does me a great injustice, sire, and you are wrong,"
replied Fouquet, dryly; "I am not child enough, nor is M. d'Herblay
silly enough, to have omitted to make all these inflections; and if I
had wished to make a new king, as you say, I had no occasion to have
come here to force open all the gates and doors of the Bastille, to free
you from this place. That would show a want of common sense even. Your
majesty's mind is disturbed by anger; otherwise you would be far from
offending, groundlessly, the very one of your servants who has rendered
you the most important service of all."

Louis perceived that he had gone too far, that the gates of the Bastille
were still closed upon him; while, by degrees, the flood-gates were
gradually being opened, behind which the generous-hearted Fouquet had
restrained his anger. "I did not say that to humiliate you, Heaven
knows, monsieur," he replied. "Only you are addressing yourself to me,
in order to obtain a pardon, and I answer you according as my conscience
dictates. And so, judging by my conscience, the criminals we speak of
are not worthy of consideration or forgiveness." Fouquet was silent.

"What I do is as generous," added the king, "as what you have done, for
I am in your power. I will even say, it is more generous, inasmuch as
you place before me certain conditions upon which my liberty, my life,
may depend; and to reject which is to make a sacrifice of them both."

"I was wrong, certainly," replied Fouquet. "Yes.--I had the appearance
of extorting a favor; I regret it, and entreat your majesty's
forgiveness."

"And you are forgiven, my dear Monsieur Fouquet," said the king with a
smile, which restored the serene expression of his features which so
many circumstances had altered since the preceding evening.

"I have my own forgiveness," replied the minister, with some degree of
persistence; "but M. d'Herblay, and M. de Valon?"

"They will never obtain theirs, as long as I live," replied the
inflexible king. "Do me the kindness not to speak of it again."

"Your majesty shall be obeyed."

"And you will bear me no ill will for it?"

"Oh! no, sire; for I anticipated it as being most likely."

"You had 'anticipated' that I should refuse to forgive those gentlemen?"

"Certainly; and all my measures were taken in consequence."

"What do you mean to say?" cried the king, surprised.

"M. d'Herblay came, as may be said, to deliver himself into my hands. M.
d'Herblay left to me the happiness of saving my king and my country. I
could not condemn M. d'Herblay to death; nor could I, on the other hand,
expose him to your majesty's most justifiable wrath; it would have been
just the same as if I had killed him myself."

"Well! and what have you done?"

"Sire, I gave M. d'Herblay the best horses in my stables, and four
hours' start over all those your majesty might, probably, dispatch after
him."

"Be it so!" murmured the king. "But still, the world is wide enough and
large enough for those whom I may send to overtake your horses,
notwithstanding the 'four hours' start' which you have given to M.
d'Herblay."

"In giving him those four hours, sire, I knew I was giving him his life,
and he will save his life."

"In what way?"

"After having galloped as hard as possible, with the four hours' start,
before your musketeers, he will reach my chateau of Belle-Isle, where I
have given him a safe asylum."

"That may be! But you forget that you have made me a present of
Belle-Isle."

"But not for you to arrest my friends."

"You take it back again, then?"

"As far as that goes--yes, sire."

"My musketeers will capture it, and the affair will be at an end."

"Neither your musketeers, nor your whole army could take Belle-Isle,"
said Fouquet, coldly. "Belle-Isle is impregnable."

The king became perfectly livid; a lightning flash seemed to dart from
his eyes. Fouquet felt that he was lost, but he was not one to shrink
when the voice of honor spoke loudly within him. He bore the king's
wrathful gaze; the latter swallowed his rage, and after a few moments'
silence, said, "Are we going to return to Vaux?"

"I am at your majesty's orders," replied Fouquet, with a low bow; "but I
think that your majesty can hardly dispense with changing your clothes
previous to appearing before your court."

"We shall pass by the Louvre," said the king. "Come." And they left the
prison, passing before Baisemeaux, who looked completely bewildered as
he saw Marchiali once more leave; and, in his helplessness, tore out the
few remaining hairs he had left. It was perfectly true, however, that
Fouquet wrote and gave him an authority for the prisoner's release, and
that the king wrote beneath it, "Seen and approved. Louis;" a piece of
madness that Baisemeaux, incapable of putting two ideas together,
acknowledged, by giving himself a terrible blow with his fist on his
jaws.




CHAPTER XCVIII.

THE FALSE KING.


In the meantime, usurped royalty was playing out its part bravely at
Vaux. Philippe gave orders that for his _petit lever_, the _grandes
entrees_, already prepared to appear before the king, should be
introduced. He determined to give this order notwithstanding the absence
of M. d'Herblay, who did not return, and our readers know for what
reason. But the prince, not believing that absence could be prolonged,
wished, as all rash spirits do, to try his valor and his fortune when
far from all protection and all counsel. Another reason urged him to
this--Anne of Austria was about to appear; the guilty mother was about
to stand in the presence of her sacrificed son. Philippe was not
willing, if he had a weakness, to render the man a witness of it before
whom he was bound thenceforth to display so much strength. Philippe
opened his folding doors, and several persons entered silently. Philippe
did not stir while his valets-de-chambre dressed him. He had watched,
the evening before, all the habits of his brother, and played the king
in such a manner as to awaken no suspicion. He was then completely
dressed in his hunting costume when he received his visitors. His own
memory and the notes of Aramis announced everybody to him, first of all
Anne of Austria, to whom Monsieur gave his hand, and then Madame with M.
de Saint-Aignan. He smiled at seeing these countenances, but trembled on
recognizing his mother. That figure, so noble, so imposing, ravaged by
pain, pleaded in his heart the cause of that famous queen who had
immolated a child to reasons of state. He found his mother still
handsome. He knew that Louis XIV. loved her, and he promised himself to
love her likewise, and not to prove a cruel chastisement for her old
age. He contemplated his brother with a tenderness easily to be
understood. The latter had usurped nothing over him, had cast no shade
over his life. A separate branch, he allowed the stem to rise without
heeding its elevation or the majesty of its life. Philippe promised
himself to be a kind brother to this prince, who required nothing but
gold to minister to his pleasures. He bowed with a friendly air to
Saint-Aignan, who was all reverences and smiles, and tremblingly held
out his hand to Henrietta, his sister-in-law, whose beauty struck him;
but he saw in the eyes of that princess an expression of coldness which
would facilitate, as he thought, their future relations.

"How much more easy," thought he, "it will be to be the brother of that
woman than her gallant, if she evinces toward me a coldness that my
brother could not have for her, and which is imposed upon me as a duty."
The only visit he dreaded at this moment was that of the queen; his
heart--his mind--had just been shaken by so violent a trial, that in
spite of their firm temperament, they would not, perhaps, support
another shock. Happily the queen did not come. Then commenced, on the
part of Anne of Austria, a political dissertation upon the welcome M.
Fouquet had given to the house of France. She mixed up hostilities with
compliments addressed to the king and questions as to his health, with
little maternal flatteries and diplomatic artifices.

"Well, my son," said she, "are you convinced with regard to Monsieur
Fouquet?"

"Saint-Aignan," said Philippe, "have the goodness to go and inquire
after the queen."

At these words, the first Philippe had pronounced aloud, the slight
difference that there was between his voice and that of the king was
sensible to maternal ears, and Anne of Austria looked earnestly at her
son. Saint-Aignan left the room, and Philippe continued:

"Madame, I do not like to hear M. Fouquet ill-spoken of, you know I do
not--and you have even spoken well of him yourself."

"That is true; therefore I only question you on the state of your
sentiments with respect to him."

"Sire," said Henrietta, "I, on my part, have always liked M. Fouquet. He
is a man of good taste--he is a superior man."

"A surintendant who is never sordid or niggardly," added Monsieur; "and
who pays in gold all the orders I have on him."

"Every one in this thinks too much of himself, and nobody for the
state," said the old queen. "M. Fouquet, it is a fact, M. Fouquet is
ruining the state."

"Well, mother!" replied Philippe, in rather a lower key, "do you
likewise constitute yourself the buckler of M. Colbert?"

"How is that?" replied the old queen, rather surprised.

"Why, in truth," replied Philippe, "you speak that just as your old
friend Madame de Chevreuse would speak."

"Why do you mention Madame de Chevreuse to me!" said she, "and what sort
of humor are you in to-day toward me?"

Philippe continued: "Is not Madame de Chevreuse always in league against
somebody? Has not Madame de Chevreuse been to pay you a visit, mother?"

"Monsieur, you speak to me now in such a manner that I can almost fancy
I am listening to your father."

"My father did not like Madame de Chevreuse, and had good reason for not
liking her," said the prince. "For my part, I like her no better than he
did; and if she thinks proper to come here as she formerly did, to sow
divisions and hatreds under the pretext of begging money--why--"

"Well! what?" said Anne of Austria proudly, herself provoking the storm.

"Well!" replied the young man, firmly, "I will drive Madame de Chevreuse
out of my kingdom--and with her all who meddle with secrets and
mysteries."

He had not calculated the effect of this terrible speech, or perhaps he
wished to judge of the effect of it, like those who, suffering from a
chronic pain, and seeking to break the monotony of that suffering, touch
their wound to procure a sharper pang. Anne of Austria was near
fainting; her eyes, open but meaningless, ceased to see for several
seconds; she stretched out her arms toward her other son, who supported
and embraced her without fear of irritating the king.

"Sire," murmured she, "you treat your mother cruelly."

"In what, madame?" replied he. "I am only speaking of Madame de
Chevreuse; does my mother prefer Madame de Chevreuse to the security of
the state and to the security of my person? Well, then, madame, I tell
you Madame de Chevreuse is returned to France to borrow money, and that
she addressed herself to M. Fouquet to sell him a certain secret."

"A certain secret!" cried Anne of Austria.

"Concerning pretended robberies that Monsieur le Surintendant had
committed, which is false," added Philippe. "M. Fouquet rejected her
offers with indignation, preferring the esteem of the king to all
complicity with intriguers. Then Madame de Chevreuse sold the secret to
M. Colbert, and as she is insatiable, and was not satisfied with having
extorted a hundred thousand crowns from that clerk, she has flown still
higher, and has endeavored to find still deeper springs. Is that true,
madame?"

"You know all, sire," said the queen, more uneasy than irritated.

"Now," continued Philippe, "I have good reason to dislike this fury, who
comes to my court to plan the dishonor of some and the ruin of others.
If God has suffered certain crimes to be committed, and has concealed
them in the shade of His clemency, I will not permit Madame de Chevreuse
to have the power to counteract the designs of God."

The latter part of this speech had so agitated the queen-mother that her
son had pity on her. He took her hand and kissed it tenderly; she did
not feel that in that kiss, given in spite of repulsions and
bitternesses of the heart, there was a pardon for eight years of
horrible suffering. Philippe allowed the silence of a moment to swallow
the emotions that had just developed themselves. Then, with a cheerful
smile:

"We will not go to-day," said he, "I have a plan." And, turning toward
the door, he hoped to see Aramis, whose absence began to alarm him. The
queen-mother wished to leave the room.

"Remain where you are, mother," said he. "I wish you to make your peace
with M. Fouquet."

"I bear no ill-will toward M. Fouquet; I only dreaded his
prodigalities."

"We will put that to rights, and will take nothing of the surintendant
but his good qualities."

"What is your majesty looking for?" said Henrietta, seeing the king's
eyes constantly turned toward the door, and wishing to let fly a little
poisoned arrow at his heart, supposing he was so anxiously expecting
either La Valliere or a letter from her.

"My sister," said the young man, who had divined her thought, thanks to
that marvelous perspicuity of which fortune was from that time about to
allow him the exercise, "my sister, I am expecting a most distinguished
man, a most able counselor, whom I wish to present to you all,
recommending him to your good graces. Ah! come in then, D'Artagnan."

"What does your majesty wish?" said D'Artagnan, appearing.

"Where is Monsieur the bishop of Vannes, your friend?"

"Why, sire--"

"I am waiting for him, and he does not come. Let him be sought for."

D'Artagnan remained for an instant stupefied; but soon, reflecting that
Aramis had left Vaux secretly with a mission from the king, he concluded
that the king wished to preserve the secret of it, "Sire," replied he,
"does your majesty absolutely require M. d'Herblay to be brought to
you?"

"Absolutely is not the word," said Philippe; "I do not want him so
particularly as that; but if he can be found--"

"I thought so," said D'Artagnan to himself.

"Is this M. d'Herblay bishop of Vannes?"

"Yes, madame."

"A friend of M. Fouquet?"

"Yes, madame, an old musketeer."

Anne of Austria blushed.

"One of the four braves who formerly performed such wonders."

The old queen repented of having wished to bite; she broke off the
conversation, in order to preserve the rest of her teeth. "Whatever may
be your choice, sire," said she, "I have no doubt it will be excellent."

All bowed in support of that sentiment.

"You will find in him," continued Philippe, "the depth and penetration
of M. de Richelieu, without the avarice of M. de Mazarin!"

"A prime minister, sire?" said Monsieur in a fright.

"I will tell you all about that, brother; but it is strange that M.
d'Herblay is not here!"

He called out:

"Let M. Fouquet be informed that I wish to speak to him--oh! before you,
before you; do not retire!"

M. de Saint-Aignan returned, bringing satisfactory news of the queen,
who only kept her bed from precaution, and to have strength to carry out
all the king's wishes. While everybody was seeking M. Fouquet and
Aramis, the new king quietly continued his experiments, and everybody,
family, officers, servants, had not the least suspicion, his air, voice,
and manners were so like the king's. On his side, Philippe applying to
all countenances the faithful notice and design furnished by his
accomplice Aramis, conducted himself so as not to give birth to a doubt
in the minds of those who surrounded him. Nothing from that time could
disturb the usurper. With what strange facility had Providence just
reversed the most elevated fortune of the world to substitute the most
humble in its stead! Philippe admired the goodness of God with regard to
himself, and seconded it with all the resources of his admirable nature.
But he felt, at times, something like a shadow gliding between him and
the rays of his new glory. Aramis did not appear. The conversation had
languished in the royal family; Philippe, preoccupied, forgot to dismiss
his brother and Madame Henrietta. The latter were astonished, and began,
by degrees, to lose all patience. Anne of Austria stooped toward her
son's ear, and addressed some words to him in Spanish. Philippe was
completely ignorant of that language, and grew pale at this unexpected
obstacle. But, as if the spirit of the imperturbable Aramis had covered
him with his infallibility, instead of appearing disconcerted, Philippe
rose. "Well! what?" said Anne of Austria.

"What is all that noise?" said Philippe, turning round toward the door
of the second staircase.

And a voice was heard saying, "This way! this way! A few steps more,
sire!"

"The voice of M. Fouquet," said D'Artagnan, who was standing close to
the queen-mother.

"Then M. d'Herblay cannot be far off," added Philippe.

But he then saw what he little thought to see so near to him. All eyes
were turned toward the door at which M. Fouquet was expected to enter;
but it was not M. Fouquet who entered. A terrible cry resounded from all
corners of the chamber, a painful cry uttered by the king and all
present. It is not given to men, even to those whose destiny contains
the strangest elements, and accidents the most wonderful, to contemplate
a spectacle similar to that which presented itself in the royal chamber
at that moment. The half-closed shutters only admitted the entrance of
an uncertain light passing through large velvet curtains lined with
silk. In this soft shade, the eyes were by degrees dilated, and every
one present saw others rather with trust than with positive sight. There
could not, however, escape, in these circumstances, one of the
surrounding details; and the new object which presented itself appeared
as luminous as if it had been enlightened by the sun. So it happened
with Louis XIV., when he showed himself pale and frowning in the doorway
of the secret stairs. The face of Fouquet appeared behind him, impressed
with sorrow and sternness. The queen-mother, who perceived Louis XIV.,
and who held the hand of Philippe, uttered the cry of which we have
spoken, as if she had beheld a phantom. Monsieur was bewildered, and
kept turning his head, in astonishment, from one to the other. Madame
made a step forward, thinking she saw the form of her brother-in-law
reflected in a glass. And, in fact, the illusion was possible. The two
princes, both pale as death--for we renounce the hope of being able to
describe the fearful state of Philippe--both trembling, and clenching
their hands convulsively, measured each other with their looks, and
darted their eyes, like poniards, into each other. Mute, panting,
bending forward, they appeared as if about to spring upon an enemy. The
unheard-of resemblance of countenance, gesture, shape, height, even to
the resemblance of costume, produced by chance--for Louis XIV. had been
to the Louvre and put on a violet-colored dress--the perfect analogy of
the two princes completed the consternation of Anne of Austria. And yet
she did not at once guess the truth. There are misfortunes in life that
no one will accept; people would rather believe in the supernatural and
the impossible. Louis had not reckoned upon these obstacles. He expected
he had only to appear and be acknowledged. A living sun, he could not
endure the suspicion of parity with any one. He did not admit that every
torch should not become darkness at the instant he shone out with his
conquering ray. At the aspect of Philippe, then, he was perhaps more
terrified than any one round him, and his silence, his immobility, were,
this time, a concentration and a calm which precede violent explosions
of passion.

But Fouquet! who could paint his emotion and stupor in presence of this
living portrait of his master! Fouquet thought Aramis was right, that
this newly-arrived was a king as pure in his race as the other, and
that, for having repudiated all participation in this _coup d'etat_, so
skillfully got up by the General of the Jesuits, he must be a mad
enthusiast unworthy of ever again dipping his hands in a political work.
And then it was the blood of Louis XIII. which Fouquet was sacrificing
to the blood of Louis XIII.; it was to a selfish ambition he was
sacrificing a noble ambition; it was to the right of keeping he
sacrificed the right of having. The whole extent of his fault was
revealed to him by the simple sight of the pretender. All which passed
in the mind of Fouquet was lost upon the persons present. He had five
minutes to concentrate his meditations upon this point of the case of
conscience; five minutes, that is to say, five ages, during which the
two kings and their family scarcely found time to breathe after so
terrible a shock. D'Artagnan, leaning against the wall, in front of
Fouquet, with his hand to his brow, asked himself the cause of such a
wonderful prodigy. He could not have said at once why he doubted, but he
knew assuredly that he had reason to doubt, and that in this meeting of
the two Louis XIV.'s lay all the difficulty which during late days had
rendered the conduct of Aramis so suspicious to the musketeer. These
ideas were, however, enveloped in thick veils. The actors in this
assembly seemed to swim in the vapors of a confused waking. Suddenly
Louis XIV., more impatient and more accustomed to command, ran to one of
the shutters, which he opened, tearing the curtains in his eagerness. A
flood of living light entered the chamber, and made Philippe draw back
to the alcove. Louis seized upon this movement with eagerness, and
addressing himself to the queen--

"My mother," said he, "do you not acknowledge your son, since every one
here has forgotten his king!" Anne of Austria started, and raised her
arms toward Heaven, without being able to articulate a single word.

"My mother," said Philippe, with a calm voice, "do you not acknowledge
your son?" And this time, in his turn, Louis drew back.

As to Anne of Austria, struck in both head and heart with remorse, she
lost her equilibrium. No one aiding her, for all were petrified, she
sank back in her fauteuil, breathing a weak, trembling sigh. Louis could
not endure this spectacle and this affront. He bounded toward
D'Artagnan, upon whom the vertigo was beginning to gain, and who
staggered as he caught at the door for support.

"A moi! mousquetaire!" said he. "Look us in the face and say which is
the paler, he or I!"

This cry roused D'Artagnan, and stirred in his heart the fiber of
obedience. He shook his head, and, without more hesitation, he walked
straight up to Philippe, upon whose shoulder he laid his hand, saying,
"Monsieur, you are my prisoner!"

Philippe did not raise his eyes toward Heaven, nor stir from the spot,
where he seemed nailed to the floor, his eye intensely fixed upon the
king his brother. He reproached him by a sublime silence with all his
misfortunes past, with all his tortures to come. Against this language
of the soul the king felt he had no power; he cast down his eyes,
dragging away precipitately his brother and sister, forgetting his
mother sitting motionless within three paces of the son whom she left a
second time to be condemned to death. Philippe approached Anne of
Austria, and said to her, in a soft and nobly agitated voice:

"If I were not your son, I should curse you, my mother, for having
rendered me so unhappy."

D'Artagnan felt a shudder pass through the marrow of his bones. He bowed
respectfully to the young prince, and said, as he bent, "Excuse me,
monseigneur, I am but a soldier, and my oaths are his who has just left
the chamber."

"Thank you, M. d'Artagnan. But what is become of M. d'Herblay?"

"M. d'Herblay is in safety, monseigneur," said a voice behind them; "and
no one, while I live and am free, shall cause a hair to fall from his
head."

"Monsieur Fouquet," said the prince, smiling sadly.

"Pardon me, monseigneur," said Fouquet, kneeling, "but he who is just
gone out from hence was my guest."

"Here are," murmured Philippe, with a sigh, "brave friends and good
hearts. They make me regret the world. On, M. d'Artagnan, I follow you."

At the moment the captain of the musketeers was about to leave the room
with his prisoner, Colbert appeared, and, after remitting an order from
the king to D'Artagnan, retired. D'Artagnan read the paper, and then
crushed it in his hand with rage.

"What is it?" asked the prince.

"Read, monseigneur," replied the musketeer.

Philippe read the following words, hastily traced by the hand of the
king:--"M. d'Artagnan will conduct the prisoner to the Iles
Sainte-Marguerite. He will cover his face with an iron vizor, which the
prisoner cannot raise without peril of his life."

"That is just," said Philippe, with resignation, "I am ready."

"Aramis was right," said Fouquet, in a low voice to the musketeer, "this
one is quite as much of a king as the other."

"More," replied D'Artagnan. "He only wants you and me."




CHAPTER XCIX.

IN WHICH PORTHOS THINKS HE IS PURSUING A DUCHY.


Aramis and Porthos, having profited by the time granted them by Fouquet,
did honor to the French cavalry by their speed. Porthos did not clearly
understand for what kind of mission he was forced to display so much
velocity; but as he saw Aramis spurring on furiously, he, Porthos,
spurred on in the same manner. They had soon, in this manner, placed
twelve leagues between them and Vaux; they were then obliged to change
horses, and organize a sort of post arrangement. It was during a relay
that Porthos ventured to interrogate Aramis discreetly.

"Hush!" replied the latter; "know only that our fortune depends upon
our speed."

As if Porthos had still been the musketeer, without a sou or a _maille_,
of 1626, he pushed forward. The magic word "fortune" always means
something in the human ear. It means _enough_ for those who have
nothing; it means _too much_ for those who have enough.

"I shall be made a duke!" said Porthos, aloud. He was speaking to
himself.

"That is possible," replied Aramis, smiling after his own fashion, as
the horse of Porthos passed him. The head of Aramis was,
notwithstanding, on fire; the activity of the body had not yet succeeded
in subduing that of the mind. All that there is in raging passions, in
severe toothaches, or mortal threats twisted, gnawed, and grumbled in
the thoughts of the vanquished prelate. His countenance exhibited very
visible traces of this rude combat. Free upon the highway to abandon
himself to every impression of the moment, Aramis did not fail to swear
at every start of his horse, at every inequality in the road. Pale, at
times inundated with boiling sweats, then again dry and icy, he beat his
horses and made the blood stream from their sides. Porthos, whose
dominant fault was not sensibility, groaned at this. Thus traveled they
on for eight long hours, and then arrived at Orleans. It was four
o'clock in the afternoon. Aramis, on observing this, judged that nothing
demonstrated pursuit to be possible. It would be without example that a
troop capable of taking him and Porthos should be furnished with relays
sufficient to perform forty leagues in eight hours. Thus, admitting
pursuit, which was not at all manifest, the fugitives were five hours in
advance of their pursuers.

Aramis thought that there might be no imprudence in taking a little
rest; but that to continue would make the matter more certain. Twenty
leagues more performed with the same rapidity, twenty more leagues
devoured, and no one, not even D'Artagnan, could overtake the enemies of
the king. Aramis felt obliged, therefore, to inflict upon Porthos the
pain of mounting on horseback again. They rode on till seven o'clock in
the evening, and had only one post more between them and Blois. But here
a diabolical accident alarmed Aramis greatly. There were no horses at
the post. The prelate asked himself by what infernal machination his
enemies had succeeded in depriving him of the means of going further--he
who never recognized chance as a deity, he who found a cause for every
result, he preferred believing that the refusal of the postmaster, at
such an hour, in such a country, was the consequence of an order
emanating from above; an order given with a view of stopping short the
kingmaker in the midst of his flight. But at the moment he was about to
fly into a passion, so as to procure either a horse or an explanation,
he was struck with the recollection that the Comte de la Fere lived in
the neighborhood.

"I am not traveling," said he; "I do not want horses for a whole stage.
Find me two horses to go and pay a visit to a nobleman of my
acquaintance who resides near this place."

"What nobleman?" asked the postmaster.

"M. le Comte de la Fere."

"Oh!" replied the postmaster, uncovering with respect, "a very worthy
nobleman. But, whatever may be my desire to make myself agreeable to
him, I cannot furnish you with horses, for all mine are engaged by M. le
Duc de Beaufort."

"Indeed!" said Aramis, much disappointed.

"Only," continued the postmaster, "if you will put up with a little
carriage I have, I will harness an old blind horse, who has still his
legs left, and will draw you to the house of M. le Comte de la Fere."

"That is worth a louis," said Aramis.

"No, monsieur, that is never worth more than a crown; that is what M.
Grimaud, the comte's intendant, always pays me when he makes use of that
carriage; and I should not wish the Comte de la Fere to have to reproach
me with having imposed on one of his friends."

"As you please," said Aramis, "particularly as regards disobliging the
Comte de la Fere; only I think I have a right to give you a louis for
your idea."

"Oh! doubtless!" replied the postmaster, with delight. And he himself
harnessed the old horse to the creaking carriage. In the meantime
Porthos was curious to behold. He imagined he had discovered the secret,
and he felt pleased, because a visit to Athos, in the first place,
promised him much satisfaction, and, in the next, gave him the hopes of
finding at the same time a good bed and a good supper. The master,
having got the carriage ready, ordered one of his men to drive the
strangers to La Fere. Porthos took his seat by the side of Aramis,
whispering in his ear, "I understand."

"Ah! ah!" said Aramis, "and what do you understand, my friend?"

"We are going, on the part of the king, to make some great proposal to
Athos."

"Pooh!" said Aramis.

"You need tell me nothing about it," added the worthy Porthos,
endeavoring to place himself so as to avoid the jolting, "you need tell
me nothing, I shall guess."

"Well! do, my friend; guess away."

They arrived at Athos' dwelling about nine o'clock in the evening,
favored by a splendid moon. This cheerful light rejoiced Porthos beyond
expression; but Aramis appeared annoyed by it in an equal degree. He
could not help showing something of this to Porthos, who replied, "Ay!
ay! I guess how it is! the mission is a secret one."

These were his last words in the carriage. The driver interrupted him by
saying, "Gentlemen, you are arrived."

Porthos and his companion alighted before the gate of the little
chateau, where we are about to meet again with Athos and Bragelonne, the
latter of whom had disappeared since the discovery of the infidelity of
La Valliere. If there be one saying more true than another, it is this:
great griefs contain within themselves the germ of their consolation.
This painful wound, inflicted upon Raoul, had drawn him nearer to his
father again; and God knows how sweet were the consolations which
flowed from the eloquent mouth and generous heart of Athos. The wound
was not cicatrized, but Athos, by dint of conversing with his son and
mixing a little more of his life with that of the young man, had brought
him to understand that this pang of a first infidelity is necessary to
every human existence; and that no one has loved without meeting with
it. Raoul listened often, but never understood. Nothing replaces in the
deeply afflicted heart the remembrance and thought of the beloved
object. Raoul then replied to the reasonings of his father:

"Monsieur, all that you tell me is true; I believe that no one has
suffered in the affections of the heart so much as you have; but you are
a man too great from intelligence, and too severely tried by
misfortunes, not to allow for the weakness of the soldier who suffers
for the first time. I am paying a tribute which I shall not pay a second
time; permit me to plunge myself so deeply in my grief that I may forget
myself in it, that I may drown even my reason in it."

"Raoul! Raoul!"

"Listen, monsieur. Never shall I accustom myself to the idea, that
Louise, the most chaste and the most innocent of women, has been able so
basely to deceive a man so honest and so true a lover as I am. Never can
I persuade myself that I see that sweet and good mask change into a
hypocritical and lascivious face. Louise lost! Louise infamous! Ah!
monseigneur, that idea is much more cruel to me than Raoul
abandoned--Raoul unhappy!"

Athos then employed the heroic remedy. He defended Louise against Raoul,
and justified her perfidy by her love. "A woman who would have yielded
to a king, because he is a king," said he, "would deserve to be styled
infamous; but Louise loves Louis. Both young, they have forgotten, he
his rank, she her vows. Love absolves everything, Raoul. The two young
people loved each other with sincerity."

And when he had dealt this severe poniard-thrust, Athos, with a sigh,
saw Raoul bound away under the cruel wound, and fly to the thickest
recesses of the wood, or the solitude of his chamber, whence, an hour
after, he would return, pale, trembling, but subdued. Then, coming up to
Athos with a smile, he would kiss his hand, like the dog who, having
been beaten, caresses a good master, to redeem his fault. Raoul redeemed
nothing but his weakness, and only confessed his grief. Thus passed away
the days that followed that scene in which Athos had so violently shaken
the indomitable pride of the king. Never, when conversing with his son,
did he make any allusion to that scene; never did he give him the
details of that vigorous lecture, which might, perhaps, have consoled
the young man, by showing him his rival humbled. Athos did not wish that
the offended lover should forget the respect due to the king. And when
Bragelonne, ardent, furious, and melancholy, spoke with contempt of
royal words, of the equivocal faith which certain madmen draw from
promises falling from thrones, when, passing over two centuries, with
the rapidity of a bird which traverses a narrow strait, to go from one
world to the other, Raoul ventured to predict the time in which kings
would become less than other men, Athos said to him, in his serene
persuasive voice, "You are right, Raoul; all that you say will happen;
kings will lose their privileges, as stars which have completed their
time lose their splendor. But when that moment shall come, Raoul, we
shall be dead. And remember well what I say to you. In this world, all,
men, women, and kings, must live for the present. We can only live for
the future for God."

This was the manner in which Athos and Raoul were, as usual, conversing,
and walking backward and forward in the long alley of limes in the park,
when the bell which served to announce to the comte either the hour of
dinner or the arrival of a visitor, was rung; and, without attaching any
importance to it, he turned toward the house with his son; and at the
end of the alley they found themselves in the presence of Aramis and
Porthos.




CHAPTER C.

THE LAST ADIEUX.


Raoul uttered a cry, and affectionately embraced Porthos. Aramis and
Athos embraced like old men; and this embrace itself being a question
for Aramis, he immediately said: "My friend, we have not long to remain
with you."

"Ah!" said the comte.

"Only time to tell you of my good fortune," interrupted Porthos.

"Ah!" said Raoul.

Athos looked silently at Aramis, whose somber air had already appeared
to him very little in harmony with the good news Porthos spoke of.

"What is the good fortune that has happened to you? Let us hear it,"
said Raoul, with a smile.

"The king has made me a duke," said the worthy Porthos, with an air of
mystery, in the ear of the young man, "a duke by _brevet_."

But the _asides_ of Porthos were always loud enough to be heard by
everybody. His murmurs were in the diapason of ordinary roaring. Athos
heard him, and uttered an exclamation which made Aramis start. The
latter took Athos by the arm, and, after having asked Porthos'
permission to say a word to his friend in private, "My dear Athos," he
began, "you see me overwhelmed with grief."

"With grief, my dear friend?" cried the comte; "oh, what?"

"In two words. I have raised a conspiracy against the king; that
conspiracy has failed, and, at this moment, I am doubtless pursued."

"You are pursued!--a conspiracy! Eh! my friend, what do you tell me?"

"A sad truth. I am entirely ruined."

"Well, but Porthos--this title of duke--what does all that mean?"

"That is the subject of my severest pain; that is the deepest of my
wounds. I have, believing in an infallible success, drawn Porthos into
my conspiracy. He has thrown himself into it as you know he would do,
with all his strength, without knowing what he was about; and now, he is
as much compromised as myself--as completely ruined as I am."

"Good God!" And Athos turned toward Porthos, who was smiling
complacently.

"I must make you acquainted with the whole. Listen to me," continued
Aramis; and he related the history as we know it. Athos, during the
recital, several times felt the sweat break from his forehead. "It was a
great idea," said he, "but a great error."

"For which I am punished, Athos."

"Therefore I will not tell you my entire thought."

"Tell it, nevertheless."

"It is a crime."

"Capital, I know it is. _Lese majeste_."

"Porthos! poor Porthos!"

"What would you advise me to do? Success, as I have told you, was
certain."

"M. Fouquet is an honest man."

"And I am a fool for having so ill judged of him," said Aramis. "Oh, the
wisdom of man! Oh, vast millstone which grinds a world! and which is one
day stopped by a grain of sand which has fallen, no one knows how, in
its wheels."

"Say, by a diamond, Aramis. But the thing is done. How do you think of
acting?"

"I am taking away Porthos. The king will never believe that that worthy
man has acted innocently. He never can believe that Porthos has thought
he was serving the king, while acting as he has done. His head would pay
for my fault. It shall not be so."

"You are taking him away, whither?"

"To Belle-Isle, at first. That is an impregnable place of refuge. Then I
have the sea, and a vessel to pass over into England, where I have many
relations."

"You? In England?"

"Yes, or else in Spain, where I have still more."

"But, our excellent Porthos! you ruin him, for the king will confiscate
all his property."

"All is provided for. I know how, when once in Spain, to reconcile
myself with Louis XIV. and restore Porthos to favor."

"You have credit, seemingly, Aramis!" said Athos, with a discreet air.

"Much; and at the service of my friends."

These words were accompanied by a warm pressure of the hand.

"Thank you," replied the comte.

"And while we are on that head," said Aramis, "you also are a
malcontent; you also, Raoul, have griefs to lay to the king. Follow our
example; pass over into Belle-Isle. Then we shall see, I guarantee upon
my honor, that in a month there will be war between France and Spain on
the subject of this son of Louis XIII., who is an infante likewise, and
whom France detains inhumanly. Now, as Louis XIV. would have no
inclination for a war on that subject, I will answer for a transaction,
the result of which must bring greatness to Porthos and to me, and a
duchy in France to you, who are already a grandee of Spain. Will you
join us?"

"No; for my part I prefer having something to reproach the king with; it
is a pride natural to my race to pretend to a superiority over royal
races. Doing what you propose, I should become the obliged of the king;
I should certainly be the gainer on that ground, but I should be a loser
in my conscience.--No, thank you!"

"Then, give me two things, Athos--your absolution."

"Oh! I give it you if you have really wished to avenge the weak and the
oppressed against the oppressor."

"That is sufficient for me," said Aramis, with a blush which was lost in
the obscurity of the night. "And now, give me your two best horses to
gain the second post, as I have been refused any under the pretext of
the Duc de Beaufort being traveling in this country."

"You shall have the two best horses, Aramis; and I again recommend
Porthos strongly to you."

"Oh; have no fear on that head. One word more: do you think I am
maneuvering for him as I ought?"

"The evil being committed, yes; for the king would not pardon him, and
you have, whatever may be said, always a supporter in M. Fouquet, who
will not abandon you, he being himself compromised, notwithstanding his
heroic action."

"You are right. And that is why, instead of gaining the sea at once,
which would proclaim my fear and guilt, that is why I remain upon French
ground. But Belle-Isle will be for me whatever ground I wish it to be.
English, Spanish, or Roman; all will consist, with me, in the standard I
shall think proper to unfurl."

"How so?"

"It was I who fortified Belle-Isle; and, while I defend it, nobody can
take Belle-Isle from me. And then, as you have said just now, M. Fouquet
is there. Belle-Isle will not be attacked without the signature of M.
Fouquet."

"That is true. Nevertheless, be prudent. The king is both cunning and
strong." Aramis smiled.

"I again recommend Porthos to you," repeated the comte, with a sort of
cold persistence.

"Whatever becomes of me, comte," replied Aramis, in the same tone, "our
brother Porthos will fare as I do."

Athos bowed while pressing the hand of Aramis, and turned to embrace
Porthos with much emotion.

"I was born lucky, was I not?" murmured the latter, transported with
happiness, as he folded his cloak round him.

"Come, my dear friend," said Aramis.

Raoul was gone out to give orders for the saddling of the horses. The
group was already divided. Athos saw his two friends on the point of
departure, and something like a mist passed before his eyes and weighed
upon his heart.

"It is strange," thought he, "whence comes the inclination I feel to
embrace Porthos once more"--At that moment Porthos turned round, and he
came toward his old friend with open arms. This last endearment was
tender as in youth, as in times when the heart was warm, and life
happy. And then Porthos mounted his horse. Aramis came back once more to
throw his arms round the neck of Athos. The latter watched them along
the high road, elongated by the shade, in their white cloaks. Like two
phantoms they seemed to be enlarged on departing from the earth, and it
was not in the mist, but in the declivity of the ground that they
disappeared. At the end of the perspective, both seemed to have given a
spring with their feet, which made them vanish as if evaporated into the
clouds.

Then Athos, with an oppressed heart, returned toward the house, saying
to Bragelonne, "Raoul, I don't know what it is that has just told me
that I have seen these two men for the last time."

"It does not astonish me, monsieur, that you should have such a
thought," replied the young man, "for I have at this moment the same,
and think also that I shall never see MM. de Valon and d'Herblay again."

"Oh! you," replied the comte, "you speak like a man rendered sad by
another cause; you see everything in black; you are young and if you
chance never to see those old friends again, it will be because they no
longer exist in the world in which you have many years to pass. But I--"

Raoul shook his head sadly, and leaned upon the shoulder of the comte,
without either of them finding another word in their hearts which were
ready to overflow.

All at once a noise of horses and voices, from the extremity of the road
to Blois, attracted their attention that way. Flambeaux-bearers shook
their torches merrily among the trees of their route, and turned round,
from time to time, to avoid distancing the horsemen who followed them.
These flames, this noise, this dust of a dozen richly caparisoned
horses, formed a strange contrast in the middle of the night with the
melancholy funereal disappearance of the two shadows of Aramis and
Porthos. Athos went toward the house; but he had hardly reached the
parterre, when the entrance gate appeared in a blaze; all the flambeaux
stopped and appeared to enflame the road. A cry was heard of "M. le Duc
de Beaufort"--and Athos sprang toward the door of his house. But the duc
had already alighted from his horse, and was looking around him.

"I am here, monseigneur," said Athos.

"Ah! good-evening, dear comte," said the prince, with that frank
cordiality which won him so many hearts. "Is it too late for a friend?"

"Ah! my dear prince--come in!" said the comte.

And, M. de Beaufort leaning on the arm of Athos, they entered the house,
followed by Raoul, who walked respectfully and modestly among the
officers of the prince, with several of whom he was acquainted.




CHAPTER CI.

MONSIEUR DE BEAUFORT.


The prince turned round at the moment when Raoul, in order to leave him
alone with Athos, was shutting the door, and preparing to go with the
other officers into an adjoining apartment.

"Is that the young man I have heard M. le Prince speak so highly of?"
asked M. de Beaufort.

"It is, monseigneur."

"He is quite the soldier; let him stay, comte, we cannot spare him."

"Remain, Raoul, since monseigneur permits it," said Athos.

"Ma foi! he is tall and handsome!" continued the duke. "Will you give
him to me, monseigneur, if I ask him of you?"

"How am I to understand you, monseigneur?" said Athos.

"Why, I call upon you to bid you farewell."

"Farewell!"

"Yes, in good truth. Have you no idea of what I am about to become?"

"Why, I suppose, what you have always been, monseigneur--a valiant
prince and an excellent gentleman."

"I am going to become an African prince--a Bedouin gentleman. The king
is sending me to make conquests among the Arabs."

"What do you tell me, monseigneur?"

"Strange, is it not? I, the Parisian _par essence_--I, who have reigned
in the faubourgs, and have been called King of the Halles--I am going to
pass from the Place Maubert to the minarets of Gigelli: I become from a
Frondeur an adventurer!"

"Oh, monseigneur, if you did not yourself tell me that--"

"It would not be credible, would it? Believe me, nevertheless, and we
have but to bid each other farewell. This is what comes of getting into
favor again."

"Into favor?"

"Yes. You smile. Ah, my dear comte, do you know why I have accepted this
enterprise; can you guess?"

"Because your highness loves glory above everything."

"Oh! no; there is no glory in firing muskets at savages. I see no glory
in that, for my part, and it is more probable that I shall there meet
with something else. But I have wished, and still wish earnestly, my
dear comte, that my life should have that last _facet_, after all the
whimsical exhibitions I have seen myself make during fifty years. For,
in short, you must admit that it is sufficiently strange to be born the
grandson of a king, to have made war against kings, to have been
reckoned among the powers of the age, to have maintained my rank, to
feel Henry IV. within me, to be great admiral of France--and then to go
and get killed at Gigelli, among all those Turks, Saracens, and Moors."

"Monseigneur, you dwell strangely upon that subject," said Athos in an
agitated voice. "How can you suppose that so brilliant a destiny will be
extinguished in that remote and miserable scene?"

"And can you believe, just and simple man as you are, that if I go into
Africa for this ridiculous motive, I will not endeavor to come out of it
without ridicule? Will I not give the world cause to speak of me? And to
be spoken of nowadays, when there are Monsieur le Prince, M. de
Turenne, and many others, my contemporaries, I, admiral of France,
grandson of Henry IV., king of Paris, have I anything left but to get
myself killed! Cordieu! I will be talked of, I tell you; I shall be
killed whether or not; if not there, somewhere else."

"Why, monseigneur, this is only exaggeration; and hitherto you have
demonstrated nothing of that kind but in bravery."

"Peste! my dear friend, there is bravery in facing scurvy, dysentery,
locusts, and poisoned arrows, as my ancestor St. Louis did. Do you know
those fellows still use poisoned arrows? And then, you know me of old, I
fancy, and you know that when I once make up my mind to a thing, I do it
in earnest."

"Yes; you made up your mind to escape from Vincennes."

"Ay, but you aided me in that, my master; and, apropos, I turn this way
and turn that, without seeing my old friend, M. Vaugrimaud. How is he?"

"M. Vaugrimaud is still your highness's most respectful servant," said
Athos, smiling.

"I have a hundred pistoles here for him, which I bring as a legacy. My
will is made, comte."

"Ah! monseigneur! monseigneur!"

"And you may understand that if Grimaud's name were to appear in my
will--" The duc began to laugh; then addressing Raoul, who, from the
commencement of this conversation, had sunk into a profound reverie,
"Young man," said he, "I know there is to be found here a certain De
Vouvray wine, and I believe--" Raoul left the room precipitately, to
order the wine. In the meantime M. de Beaufort took the hand of Athos.

"What do you mean to do with him?" asked he.

"Nothing at present, monseigneur."

"Ah! yes, I know; since the passion of the king for La Valliere."

"Yes, monseigneur."

"That is all true, then, is it? I think I know her, that little La
Valliere. She is not particularly handsome, if I remember right?"

"No, monseigneur," said Athos.

"Do you know whom she reminds me of?"

"Does she remind your highness of any one?"

"She reminds me of a very agreeable girl, whose mother lived in the
Halles."

"Ah! ah!" said Athos, smiling.

"Oh! the good old times," added M. de Beaufort. "Yes; La Valliere
reminds me of that girl."

"Who had a son, had she not?"

"I believe she had," replied the duc, with careless naivete, and a
complaisant forgetfulness, of which no words could translate the tone
and the vocal expression. "Now, here is poor Raoul, who is your son, I
believe."

"Yes; he is my son, monseigneur."

"And the poor lad has been cut out by the king, and he frets."

"Better than that, monseigneur, he abstains."

"You are going to let the boy rust in idleness; you are wrong. Come,
give him to me."

"My wish is to keep him at home, monseigneur. I have no longer anything
in the world but him, and as long as he likes to remain--"

"Well, well," replied the duc. "I could, nevertheless, have soon put
matters to rights again. I assure you, I think he has in him the stuff
of which marechals of France are made; I have seen more than one
produced from such."

"That is very possible, monseigneur; but it is the king who makes
marechals of France, and Raoul will never accept anything of the king."

Raoul interrupted this conversation by his return. He preceded Grimaud,
whose still steady hands carried the plateau with one glass and a bottle
of the duc's favorite wine. On seeing his old protege, the duc uttered
an exclamation of pleasure.

"Grimaud! Good-evening, Grimaud!" said he; "how goes it?"

The servant bowed profoundly, as much gratified as his noble
interlocutor was.

"Two old friends!" said the duc, shaking honest Grimaud's shoulder after
a vigorous fashion; which was followed by another still more profound
and delighted bow from Grimaud.

"But what is this, comte, only one glass?"

"I should not think of drinking with your highness, unless your highness
permitted me," replied Athos, with noble humility.

"Cordieu! you were right to bring only one glass, we will both drink out
of it, like two brothers in arms. Begin, comte."

"Do me the honor," said Athos, gently putting back the glass.

"You are a charming friend," replied the Duc de Beaufort, who drank, and
passed the goblet to his companion. "But that is not all," continued he,
"I am still thirsty, and I wish to do honor to this handsome young man,
who stands here. I carry good luck with me, vicomte," said he to Raoul;
"wish for something while drinking out of my glass, and the plague
stifle me if what you wish does not come to pass!" He held the goblet to
Raoul, who hastily moistened his lips, and replied with the same
promptitude.

"I have wished for something, monseigneur." His eyes sparkled with a
gloomy fire, and the blood mounted to his cheeks; he terrified Athos, if
only with his smile.

"And what have you wished for?" replied the duke, sinking back into his
fauteuil, while with one hand he returned the bottle to Grimaud, and
with the other gave him a purse.

"Will you promise me, monseigneur, to grant me what I wish for?"

"Pardieu! That is agreed upon?"

"I wished, Monsieur le Duc, to go with you to Gigelli."

Athos became pale, and was unable to conceal his agitation. The duc
looked at his friend, as if desirous to assist him to parry this
unexpected blow.

"That is difficult, my dear vicomte, very difficult," added he, in a
lower tone of voice.

"Pardon me, monseigneur, I have been indiscreet," replied Raoul, in a
firm voice; "but as you yourself invited me to wish--"

"To wish to leave me?" said Athos.

"Oh! monsieur--can you imagine--"

"Well! mordieu!" cried the duc, "the young vicomte is right! What can he
do here? He will rot with grief."

Raoul blushed, and the excitable prince continued: "War is a
distraction; we gain everything by it; we can only lose one thing by
it--life--then so much the worse!"

"That is to say memory," said Raoul, eagerly; "and that is to say, so
much the better!"

He repented of having spoken so warmly when he saw Athos rise and open
the window; which was, doubtless, to conceal his emotion. Raoul sprang
toward the comte, but the latter had already overcome his emotion, and
turned to the lights with a serene and impassible countenance. "Well,
come," said the duc, "let us see! Shall he go, or shall he not? If he
goes, comte, he shall be my aid-de-camp, my son."

"Monseigneur!" cried Raoul, bending his knee.

"Monseigneur!" cried Athos, taking the hand of the duc; "Raoul shall do
just as he likes."

"Oh! no, monsieur, just as you like," interrupted the young man.

"By la Corbleu!" said the prince in his turn, "it is neither the comte
nor the vicomte that shall have his way, it is I. I will take him away.
The marine offers a superb future, my friend."

Raoul smiled again so sadly, that this time Athos felt his heart
penetrated by it, and replied to him by a severe look. Raoul
comprehended it all; he recovered his calmness, and was so guarded that
not another word escaped him. The duc at length rose, on observing the
advanced hour, and said with much animation, "I am in great haste, but
if I am told I have lost time in talking with a friend, I will reply I
have gained a good recruit."

"Pardon me, Monsieur le Duc," interrupted Raoul, "do not tell the king
so, for it is not the king I will serve."

"Eh! My friend, whom then will you serve? The times are past when you
might have said, 'I belong to M. de Beaufort.' No, nowadays, we all
belong to the king, great or small. Therefore, if you serve on board my
vessels, there can be nothing equivocal in it, my dear vicomte; it will
be the king you will serve."

Athos waited with a kind of impatient joy for the reply about to be made
to this embarrassing question by Raoul, the intractable enemy of the
king, his rival. The father hoped that the obstacle would overcome the
desire. He was thankful to M. de Beaufort, whose lightness or generous
reflection had thrown an impediment in the way of the departure of a son
now his only joy. But Raoul, still firm and tranquil: "Monsieur le Duc,"
replied he, "the objection you make I have already considered in my
mind. I will serve on board your vessels, because you do me the honor to
take me with you; but I shall there serve a more powerful master than
the king, I shall serve God!"

"God! how so?" said the duc and Athos together.

"My intention is to make profession, and become a Knight of Malta,"
added Bragelonne, letting fall, one by one, words more icy than the
drops which fall from the bare trees after the tempests of winter.

Under this blow Athos staggered and the prince himself was moved.
Grimaud uttered a heavy groan, and let fall the bottle, which was broken
without anybody paying attention to it. M. de Beaufort looked the young
man in the face, and read plainly, though his eyes were cast down, the
fire of resolution before which everything must give way. As to Athos,
he was too well acquainted with that tender, but inflexible, soul; he
could not hope to make it deviate from the fatal road it had just
chosen. He could only press the hand of the duc held out to him. "Comte,
I shall set off in two days for Toulon," said M. de Beaufort. "Will you
meet me at Paris, in order that I may know your determination?"

"I will have the honor of thanking you there, _mon prince_, for all your
kindnesses," replied the comte.

"And be sure to bring the vicomte with you, whether he follows me or
does not follow me," added the duc: "he has my word, and I only ask
yours."

Having thrown a little balm upon the wound of the paternal heart, he
pulled the ear of Grimaud, whose eyes sparkled more than usual, and
regained his escort in the _parterre_. The horses, rested and refreshed,
set off with spirit through this beautiful night, and soon placed a
considerable distance between their master and the chateau.

Athos and Bragelonne were again face to face. Eleven o'clock was
striking. The father and son preserved a profound silence toward each
other, where an intelligent observer would have expected cries and
tears. But these two men were of such a nature that all emotion plunged
itself where it was lost forever when they had resolved to confine it to
their own hearts. They passed, then, silently and almost breathlessly
the hour which preceded midnight. The clock, by striking, alone pointed
out to them how many minutes had lasted the painful journey made by
their souls in the immensity of the remembrances of the past and of the
fears of the future. Athos rose first, saying, "It is late--till
to-morrow."

Raoul rose, and in his turn embraced his father. The latter held him
clasped to his breast, and said in a tremulous voice, "In two days you
will have left me, then--left me forever, Raoul!"

"Monsieur," replied the young man, "I had formed a determination, that
of piercing my heart with my sword: but you would have thought that
cowardly. I have renounced that determination, and therefore we must
part."

"You leave me by going, Raoul."

"Listen to me again, monsieur, I implore you. If I do not go, I shall
die here of grief and love. I know how long a time I have to live thus.
Send me away quickly, monsieur, or you will see me basely die before
your eyes--in your house--this is stronger than my will--stronger than
my strength--you may plainly see that within one month I have lived
thirty years, and that I approach the end of my life."

"Then," said Athos, coldly, "you go with the intention of getting
killed in Africa? Oh! tell me! do not lie!"

Raoul grew deadly pale, and remained silent for two seconds, which were
to his father two hours of agony. Then, all at once: "Monsieur," said
he, "I have promised to devote myself to God. In exchange for this
sacrifice which I make of my youth and my liberty, I will only ask of
Him one thing, and that is, to preserve me for you, because you are the
only tie which attaches me to this world. God alone can give me the
strength not to forget that I owe you everything, and that nothing ought
to be with me before, you."

Athos embraced his son tenderly, and said:

"You have just replied to me on the word of honor of an honest man; in
two days we shall be with M. de Beaufort at Paris, and you will then do
what will be proper for you to do. You are free. Raoul: adieu."

And he slowly gained his bedroom. Raoul went down into the garden, and
passed the night in the alley of limes.




CHAPTER CII.

PREPARATIONS FOR DEPARTURE.


Athos lost no more time in combating this immutable resolution. He gave
all his attention to preparing, during the two days the duc had granted
him, the proper appointments for Raoul. This labor chiefly concerned
Grimaud, who immediately applied himself to it with the good will and
intelligence we know he possessed. Athos gave this worthy servant orders
to take the route to Paris when the equipments should be ready, and not
to expose himself to keeping the duc waiting, or to delay Raoul, so that
the duc should perceive his absence, he himself, the day after the visit
of M. de Beaufort, set off for Paris with his son.

For the poor young man it was an emotion easily to be understood, thus
to return to Paris among all the people who had known and loved him.
Every face recalled a suffering to him who had suffered so much, to him
who had loved so much, some circumstance of his love. Raoul, on
approaching Paris, felt as if he were dying. Once in Paris, he really
existed no longer. When he reached Guiche's residence, he was informed
that Guiche was with Monsieur. Raoul took the road to the Luxembourg,
and when arrived, without suspecting that he was going to the place
where La Valliere had lived, he heard so much music and respired so many
perfumes, he heard so much joyous laughter, and saw so many dancing
shadows, that, if it had not been for a charitable woman, who perceived
him so dejected and pale beneath a doorway, he would have remained there
a few minutes, and then would have gone away never to return. But, as we
have said, in the first antechambers he had stopped, solely for the sake
of not mixing himself with all those happy existences which he felt were
moving around him in the adjacent salons. And as one of Monsieur's
servants, recognizing him, had asked him if he wished to see Monsieur or
Madame, Raoul had scarcely answered him, but had sunk down upon a bench
near the velvet doorway, looking at a clock, which had stood for nearly
an hour.

The servant had passed on, and another, better acquainted with him, had
come up and interrogated Raoul as to whether he should inform M. Guiche
of his being there. This name even did not rouse the recollections of
poor Raoul. The persistent servant went on to relate that Guiche had
just invented a new game of lottery, and was teaching it to the ladies.
Raoul, opening his large eyes, like the absent man in Theophrastus, had
made no answer, but his sadness had increased by it two shades. With his
head hanging down, his limbs relaxed, his mouth half open for the escape
of his sighs, Raoul remained, thus forgotten, in the antechamber, when
all at once a lady's robe passed, rubbing against the doors of a lateral
salon which opened upon the gallery. A lady, young, pretty, and gay,
scolding an officer of the household, entered by that way, and
expressed herself with much vivacity. The officer replied in calm but
firm sentences; it was rather a little love pet than a quarrel of
courtiers, and was terminated by a kiss on the fingers of the lady.
Suddenly, on perceiving Raoul, the lady became silent, and pushing away
the officer:

"Make your escape, Malicorne," said she; "I did not think there was any
one here. I shall curse you, if they have either heard or seen us!"

Malicorne hastened away. The young lady advanced behind Raoul, and
stretching her joyous face oven him as he lay:

"Monsieur is a gallant man," said she, "and no doubt--"

She here interrupted herself by uttering a cry: "Raoul!" said she,
blushing.

"Mademoiselle de Montalais!" said Raoul, more pale than death.

He rose unsteadily and tried to make his way across the slippery mosaic
of the floor; but she had comprehended that savage and cruel grief; she
felt that in the flight of Raoul there was an accusation, or at least a
suspicion against herself. A woman, ever vigilant, she did not think she
ought to let the opportunity slip of making a justification; but Raoul,
though stopped by her in the middle of the gallery, did not seem
disposed to surrender without a combat. He took it up in a tone so cold
and embarrassed that if they had been thus surprised, the whole court
would have had no doubt about the proceedings of Mademoiselle de
Montalais.

"Ah! monsieur," said she with disdain, "what you are doing is very
unworthy of a gentleman. My heart inclines me to speak to you; you
compromise me by a reception almost uncivil, you are wrong, monsieur;
and you confound your friends with your enemies. Farewell!"

Raoul had sworn never to speak of Louise, never even to look at those
who might have seen Louise; he was going into another world, that he
might never meet with anything Louise had seen, or anything she had
touched. But after the first shock of his pride, after having had a
glimpse of Montalais, the companion of Louise--Montalais, who reminded
him of the turret of Blois and the joys of youth, all his reason faded
away.

"Pardon me, mademoiselle; it enters not, it cannot enter into my
thoughts to be uncivil."

"Do you wish to speak to me?" said she, with the smile of former days.
"Well! come somewhere else; for here we may be surprised."

"Oh!" said he.

She looked at the clock, doubtingly, then having reflected:

"In my apartment," said she, "we shall have an hour to ourselves." And,
taking her course, lighter than a fairy, she ran up to her chamber,
followed by Raoul. Shutting the door, and placing in the hands of her
_cameriste_, the mantle she had held upon her arm.

"You were seeking M. de Guiche, were you not?" said she to Raoul.

"Yes, mademoiselle."

"I will go and ask him to come up here, presently, after I have spoken
to you."

"Do so, mademoiselle."

"Are you angry with me?"

Raoul looked at her for a moment, then, casting down his eyes, "Yes,"
said he.

"You think I was concerned in the plot which brought about your rupture,
do you not?"

"Rupture!" said he, with bitterness. "Oh! mademoiselle, there can be no
rupture where there has been no love."

"An error," replied Montalais; "Louise did love you."

Raoul started.

"Not with love, I know; but she liked you, and you ought to have married
her before you set out for London."

Raoul broke into a sinister laugh, which made Montalais shudder.

"You tell me that very much at your ease, mademoiselle. Do people marry
whom they like? You forget that the king kept for himself as his
mistress her of whom we are speaking."

"Listen," said the young woman, pressing the cold hands of Raoul in her
own, "you were wrong in every way; a man of your age ought never to
leave a woman of hers alone."

"There is no longer any faith in the world, then," said Raoul.

"No, vicomte," said Montalais, quietly. "Nevertheless, let me tell you,
that if instead of loving Louise coldly and philosophically, you had
endeavored to awaken her to love--"

"Enough, I pray you, mademoiselle," said Raoul. "I feel that you are
all, of both sexes, of a different age from me. You can laugh, and you
can banter agreeably. I, mademoiselle, I loved mademoiselle de--" Raoul
could not pronounce her name--"I loved her; well! I put faith in
her--now I am quits by loving her no longer."

"Oh, vicomte!" said Montalais, pointing to his reflection in a mirror.

"I know what you mean, mademoiselle; I am much altered, am I not? Well!
do you know why? Because my face is the mirror of my heart, the inside
has changed as you see the outside has."

"You are consoled, then?" said Montalais, sharply.

"No, I shall never be consoled."

"I don't understand you, M. de Bragelonne."

"I care but little for that. I do not too well understand myself."

"You have not even tried to speak to Louise?"

"Who! I?" exclaimed the young man, with eyes flashing fire; "I!--why do
you not advise me to marry her? Perhaps the king would consent now." And
he rose from his chair full of anger.

"I see," said Montalais, "that you are not cured, and that Louise has
