The time until the arrival of Cortez had passed slowly. The
soldiers, weakened by hunger and thirst, muttered angrily against
the officer who had so rashly brought them into this strait. Few of
them regretted the deed for its own sake, but simply because it had
brought on them peril and misfortune.

Roger had borne his share of the fighting on the walls. He was
defending his life, and although at first he had fought with little
ardor, the pain given by two arrows which pierced his cotton armor
heated his blood; and he afterwards fought as stoutly as the rest.

During the period of inaction he had, more than once, tried to
obtain an interview with Cacama; but the prisoners were jealously
watched, and no one was allowed access to them on any pretext, and
two officers always accompanied the men who took in their daily
rations. They were regarded as hostages, only less important than
Montezuma himself; and as most of them were very rich and powerful
caziques, they might offer bribes which might well shake the
fidelity of any private soldier.

When the news arrived that Cortez, with the whole of the army of
Narvaez, was at hand, the depression that had reigned gave way to
exultation; and the soldiers believed that they would now take the
offensive, and without loss of time put an end to the insurrection.

Marina had accompanied Cortez on his expedition, for she was still
necessary to him as an interpreter, and her influence with the
natives was great. Roger obtained an interview with her, a few
hours after her return. She had evidently been crying passionately.

"My heart is broken, Roger," she said. "I had hoped that the white
men would have done great things for my country. They know so much,
and although I thought there might be trouble at first, for great
changes can never be introduced without trouble, I never dreamed of
anything like this. Cholula was bad enough, but there the people
brought it on themselves; and the Spaniards would have been slain,
had they not first begun to kill. But here it is altogether
different. It was an unprovoked massacre, and after this, who can
hope that the whites and Mexicans can ever be friendly together?

"I love Cortez. He is great and generous, and had he been here this
would have never happened; but many of his people are cruel, and
they are all greedy of wealth; and he, general though he is, has to
give way to them.

"I remember that, in the old days at Tabasco, you told me how
cruelly the Spaniards had treated the people of the islands; but
when I saw them first, I thought that you, being of a different
nation, had spoken too hardly of them. I see, now, that you were
right. I have, all along, done what I could for my people; and
though I am with the invaders, I am sure they recognize this, and
that they feel no ill will against me. But now I fear that they
will curse me, as they will curse them; and that, through all time,
my name will be abhorred in Mexico," and she again burst into
tears.

"I do not think so, Malinche. At Tezcuco it was always said that
you stood between the natives and the whites, and it was owing to
you that they were not more harsh than they were.

"As to this massacre, God forbid that I should say a single word in
defense of it! As a white man and a Christian, I feel it is an act
of horrible atrocity; but it should not make such an impression
upon your people, who make wars solely to obtain victims, whom they
may sacrifice at the altars of their gods; and who, every year,
slay in cold blood fully twenty-five thousand people who have done
them no wrong. By the side of such horrible slaughter as this, the
murder of six hundred, the other day, was but a drop in the ocean
of blood annually shed here."

"Had it been in battle, it would have been nothing," Malinche said.
"Had they offered them up at the altars of the gods, the people
would have understood it, for they do it themselves; but this was a
foul act of treachery. Who, after this, can believe in the promises
of the whites?

"I know the people. You whites despise them, because they have
hitherto allowed themselves to be subdued without resistance; but
now that their first awe of the Spaniards has died away, and they
have nerved themselves to take up arms, you will find that they are
brave. I see nothing but trouble before us. Cortez feels confident
that he can easily repulse any attack, and subdue the city and the
country round; but I do not think so."

"Nor do I, Malinche. No men could have fought more bravely than the
Mexicans, the other day. It is true that we were but in small
numbers, and that we are now many times stronger, and have Cortez
to command us; but on the other hand, the attack was but a hasty
one, and the next time we shall have the whole Mexican force upon
us."

"What will you do, Roger?"

"I must fight for the Spaniards," Roger said gloomily. "They are
not my countrymen, but they are white men as I am, and surrounded
by foes. Besides, I have no option. The Mexicans cannot distinguish
between Spaniards and Englishmen, and I should be seized and
sacrificed, were I to set foot beyond the walls. Were it not for
that I would leave the city, join Amenche, and leave the Spaniards
and Mexicans to fight out their quarrel as they might; but now,
whichever won, the result would be fatal to me. If the Mexicans
were victorious, I, like all other whites, would be sacrificed to
their gods. If the Spaniards won, I should be executed as a
traitor. Therefore, there is nothing for me to do but to remain
with the Spaniards, and share their fate, whatever it may be."

The next morning silence reigned over the city. Not a Mexican was
to be seen anywhere near the palace, within which the Spaniards
were virtually prisoners. Cortez hoped, however, that Cuitlahua
would soon persuade the people to return to their usual habits, and
to open the markets for provisions; but in any case, he felt so
confident of his power to overawe the city, that he sent off a
messenger with dispatches to the coast, saying that he had arrived
safely, and should soon overcome all opposition.

In half an hour, however, the messenger returned at a gallop,
wounded in a score of places. He reported that the city was up in
arms, the drawbridges were raised, and the Mexicans were marching
towards the palace. Scarcely had he arrived, when the sentinels on
the towers shouted that masses of men were approaching, by all the
streets leading to the palace; and immediately afterwards the
terraces and flat roofs of the houses near were darkened by throngs
of natives, shouting and brandishing their weapons.

The trumpet instantly sounded to arms, and so strict was the
discipline that prevailed that, in an incredibly short time, every
soldier was at his post. The position was capable of being defended
against a very numerous enemy, unprovided with artillery; for the
wall round the great one-storied building, though low, was strong;
and the turrets, placed at intervals upon it, enabled the defenders
to command its face, and to pour missiles upon any who might be
bold enough to endeavor to effect a breach, by undermining it with
crowbars and levers. The garrison, too, were sufficient for its
defense; for there were not only some twelve hundred Spaniards, but
the eight thousand Tlascalan allies.

The Aztecs rushed forward, with the shrill whistle used as a battle
cry by the people of Anahuac; and, as they advanced, poured a rain
of missiles of all kinds upon the palace, to which were added those
shot from the terraces and flat roofs.

The Spaniards had pierced the walls with embrasures for their
cannon, and these commanded all the avenues. The gunners waited
until the columns were close at hand, and then their terrible
discharge swept lanes through the crowded masses in the streets.
For a moment the Mexicans paused, paralyzed by the terrible
slaughter; and then, rallying, rushed forward again. Three times
the cannon were discharged into their midst; but though broken and
disordered, they still pressed on until they swept up to the very
foot of the walls, pouring in a hail of arrows.

They were well seconded by those on the housetops who, from their
elevated position, were on a level with the Spaniards; and whose
missiles, arrows, javelins, and stones thrown with great force from
slings, galled the defenders greatly, and wounded great numbers of
them.

In vain did the Aztecs strive to climb the walls. These were of no
great height but, as they showed their heads above the parapet,
they were shot down by the Spanish arquebus men, or struck
backwards by the weapons of the Tlascalans. Failing to scale the
walls, they tried to batter down the parapet with heavy pieces of
timber. But the stonework was too strong, and they then shot
burning arrows into the palace, and hurled blazing torches over the
wall.

The palace itself was of stone, but some of the exterior works
which had been constructed were of wood, and these were soon on
fire. The defenders had no water with which to extinguish the
flames and, at the point where the new works joined the wall, the
fire was so fierce that they were afraid it would spread to the
palace; and, to extinguish it, were forced to adopt the desperate
expedient of overthrowing the wall upon the burning mass. The
breach thus made was guarded by a battery of heavy guns and a party
of arquebusiers, and these repelled every attempt of the Mexicans
to take advantage of the breach which had been thus formed.

The fight continued until night fell, and the Mexicans then drew
off. Cortez and his followers were astonished at the obstinacy with
which they had fought, and the contempt of death they had
displayed. They had obtained such easy victories, with forces but a
fourth of those which Cortez now commanded, that he had formed the
lowest opinion of the fighting powers of the Aztecs. But he now
found that a nation was not to be trampled upon with impunity.

However, he consoled himself with the thought that this was but a
temporary outbreak of fury; and he determined to sally out with all
his force, on the following morning, and to inflict a terrible
chastisement upon his assailants.

As soon as the morning broke, the Spaniards were under arms. Cortez
was speedily undeceived in his hopes that the slaughter of the
previous day would have cowed the Mexicans. The great square and
the streets leading to it were seen to be crowded with foes, who
appeared better organized than on the previous day, being divided
into regiments, each with its banners. These, the Mexican
attendants on Montezuma told them, were the cognizances of the many
cities of the plain, showing that the whole people were joining in
the movement commenced by those of the capital. Towering above the
rest was the royal standard of Mexico.

Among the crowd were numerous priests who, with excited gestures,
called upon them to avenge the insulted gods, and to destroy the
handful of invaders who had brought disgrace upon the nation, had
trampled it under foot, had made their sovereign a captive, and
murdered their nobles in cold blood. It was evident that, fierce as
had been the fighting on the previous day, the renewed assault
would be even more formidable.



Chapter 18: The Rising In Mexico.


The appearance of the vast crowd that surrounded the palace
differed much from that which they had presented on the previous
day, when the Mexicans had fought in their usual garments, or in
their padded cuirasses. Today they had laid aside all their
garments save their loincloths, having found by experience that
their cotton armor was absolutely useless against the missiles of
the Spaniards. The chiefs were now conspicuous, as they moved to
and fro among the dark masses, by their gay dresses and the metal
breastplates worn over the bright feather work. They wore helmets
made to resemble the heads of ferocious wild beasts, crested with
bristly hair or surmounted by bright feather plumes. Some wore only
a red fillet round their head, having tufts of cotton hanging from
it; each tuft denoting some victory in which they had taken part,
and their own rank in the army. Noble and citizen, priest and
soldier, had all united in the common cause.

The assault was about to commence, when the Spaniards' artillery
and musketry poured death into the crowded ranks. The gates were at
once thrown open, and Cortez at the head of his cavalry dashed out,
followed by the infantry and the Tlascalan allies. Confused by the
slaughter made by the firearms, the Aztecs could offer no
resistance to the onslaught. The cavalry trampled them underfoot,
and mowed them down with sword and lance. The Spanish foot and
Tlascalans following close behind carried on the work of
destruction, and it seemed to the Spaniards that the fight was
already over, when the Aztecs fled before them.

The movement of retreat, however, ceased the moment the Mexicans
reached the barricades which they had thrown up across the streets;
and forming behind these they made a gallant stand, while those
upon the housetops poured showers of arrows, darts, and great
stones down upon the advancing Spaniards. In vain the Spanish
artillery were brought up, and their fire swept away the
barricades; there were still others behind, and at each the
desperate fight was renewed.

Coming down from the side streets, the Aztecs fell upon the Spanish
flanks; and clouds of missiles were shot from the boats, which
crowded the canals everywhere intersecting the streets.

Cortez and his cavaliers continued to make desperate charges
through the Aztecs, who, although unable to withstand the weight
and impetus of the horses, closed round them, striving to throw the
riders from their backs and to stab the horses themselves--throwing
away their lives without hesitation, on the chance of getting one
blow at the Spaniards. The moment the horsemen drew back, the
Aztecs followed them; and although their loss was immense, their
ranks were instantly filled up again, while the Spaniards could ill
spare the comparatively small number who fell on their side.

At last, after hours of carnage, the Spaniards, exhausted by their
exertions and having eaten nothing since the night before, fell
back to the palace. Diaz, one of the historians of the events, who
was present at the combat, expressed the astonishment felt by the
Spaniards at the desperation with which the despised Mexicans had
fought.

"The Mexicans," he said; "fought with such ferocity that if we had
had the assistance of ten thousand Hectors, and as many Orlandos,
we should have made no impression on them. There were several of
our troops who had served in the Italian wars; but neither there,
nor in the battles with the Turk, have they ever seen anything like
the desperation shown by these Indians."

As the Spaniards fell back the Aztecs followed them, pouring in
volleys of stones and arrows; and as soon as they had entered the
palace encamped around it, showing that their spirit was wholly
unbroken. Although--as it was contrary to their custom to fight at
night--they did not renew the attack, they shouted insulting
threats as to the Spaniards' fate, when they should fall into their
hands; and were evidently well satisfied with the events of the
day, and looked for victory on the morrow.

Cortez had received a severe wound in the hand during the fight,
and he and his companions felt how grievously they had mistaken the
character of the Aztecs. They had sallied out that morning,
confident in their power to crush out the insurrection. They
returned, feeling that their situation was well-nigh desperate, and
that henceforth they must fight, not for dominion, but for life.

As soon as day broke the fight was renewed, but this time it was
the Aztecs and not the Spaniards who began it. There was no idea of
a fresh sortie. All that the garrison could hope was to defend
their position. So furiously did the natives attack that, for a
time, they forced their way into the entrenchments; but the
Spaniards, whose turn it was to fight with the bravery of despair,
fell upon them with such fury that none of those who had gained an
entry returned.

Cortez now sent to Montezuma, to request him to interpose, as he
had done before, between them and his people. The emperor refused
to interfere. He had viewed the desperate fighting of the last two
days with bitter humiliation. He had seen his brother Cuitlahua
leading on his troops, with the greatest gallantry; while he
himself, thanks to his own conduct, was a helpless prisoner. He
mourned over the terrible losses his people were suffering; and the
fact that his kindness to the Spaniards had brought upon him
nothing but ill treatment and insult at their hands, had earned him
the contempt of his people, and had involved his country in
misfortune and ruin, cut him to the heart.

"What have I to do with Malinzin?" he said coldly. "I desire only
to die."

When still further urged, he added:

"It is useless. They will neither believe me, nor the false words
and promises of Malinzin. You will never leave these walls alive."

On being assured that the Spaniards would willingly depart, and
leave the country, if their assailants would open a way to them, he
at last consented to address the people. Clothing himself in his
richest robes of state, he ascended the central turret of the
palace; surrounded by a guard of Spaniards, and accompanied by
several Aztec nobles. When he was seen, the din of war ceased as if
by magic. A dead silence fell upon the multitude, and they knelt
and prostrated themselves before the sovereign they had so long
held in the deepest reverence.

But when he addressed them, assuring them that he was a guest, and
not a prisoner, of the Spaniards; and ordered them to lay down
their arms, and to allow the Spaniards to march to the coast,
indignation at his cowardice overpowered their feelings of
reverence and respect. They burst into taunts and execrations, and
a moment later a storm of missiles were hurled at the man who had
betrayed them.

The Spanish guards, seeing the effect his presence had produced,
had stood aside, to enable him the better to be seen; and before
they could close around him, and cover him with their shields,
three missiles struck him; one, a stone hurled from a sling,
smiting him on the head with such violence that he fell insensible.
When the Aztecs saw him fall, their brief outburst of indignation
was succeeded by one of sorrow; and with a cry of grief the whole
multitude dispersed, and in a minute or two the crowded square was
wholly deserted.

Montezuma was carried to his chamber. When he recovered
sensibility, he refused absolutely to allow his wounds to be
dressed, and tore off the bandages. Not a word passed his lips. He
sat in an attitude of the deepest dejection. His own people
despised him, and had raised their hands against him. He had drunk
deeply of the cup of humiliation, at the hands of the Spaniards;
but this last drop filled it to overflowing. There was nothing for
him but to die.

The Spanish leaders tried, but in vain, to persuade him to submit
to surgical treatment. He paid no attention to their words, and
they were soon called away by fresh danger from without.

The Aztecs had speedily recovered from their emotion at seeing the
fall of the emperor, and a body of five or six hundred of them,
including many nobles and military leaders of high rank, had taken
possession of the great temple; and now from its summit, a hundred
and fifty feet high, opened a rain of missiles upon the palace. The
Spaniards could not effectually return their fire, for the Aztecs
were sheltered by the sanctuaries on the summit of the pyramids.

It was absolutely necessary, for the safety of the defenders, to
dislodge them from this position; and Cortez ordered his
chamberlain, Don Escobar, with a hundred men, to storm the teocalli
and set fire to the sanctuaries. But the little force were three
times repulsed, and forced to fall back with considerable loss.
Cortez then, though suffering much from the wound in his left hand,
determined himself to lead the assault. As he was incapable of
holding his shield, he had it strapped to his left arm; and with
three hundred picked men, and some thousands of the Tlascalans,
sallied out from the palace, and attacked the Aztecs in the temple
at the foot of the pyramid.

The Spaniards made their way through these without much difficulty,
and then commenced the ascent of the pyramid. This offered great
facilities for defense. There were five terraces connected by
steps, so placed that those mounting the pyramid had to make the
whole circuit, on each terrace, before reaching the steps leading
to the next. It was thus necessary to pass round the pyramid four
times, or nearly two miles, exposed to the missiles of those upon
the summit.

Leaving a strong body of Spaniards and Tlascalans at the bottom, to
prevent the natives ascending and attacking him in the rear, Cortez
led the way up the staircase, followed closely by his principal
officers. In spite of the heavy stones and beams of wood which,
with a storm of arrows, were hurled down upon them, the Spaniards
won their way from terrace to terrace, supported by the fire of
their musketeers below, until at last they reached the great
platform on the summit of the pyramid.

Here a terrible conflict commenced. The Aztecs, brought to bay, and
fighting not only for life, but in the presence of their country's
gods, displayed a valor at least equal to that of the Spaniards.
Numbers were slightly in their favor, but this was far more than
counter-balanced by the superior arms of the Spaniards; and by the
armor, which rendered them almost invulnerable to the comparatively
puny weapons of the Mexicans. And yet, for three hours the fight
continued. At the end of that time, all the Mexicans, save two or
three priests, were killed; while forty-five of the Spaniards had
fallen, and almost all the others were wounded.

While this fight had been raging the combat had ceased, elsewhere;
the combatants on both sides being absorbed in the struggle taking
place at the summit of the temple. They could not, of course, judge
how it was going; though they caught sight of the combatants as
they neared the edges of the platform, which was unprotected by
wall or fence; and many in the course of the struggle fell, or were
hurled, over it.

The moment the struggle was over, the Spaniards rushed with
exulting shouts into the sanctuary of the Mexican god, reeking with
the blood of fresh-killed victims; cast the image from its
pedestal; rolled it across the platform to the head of the steps;
and then, amid shouts that were echoed by their comrades below,
sent it bounding down, while a cry of anguish and dismay rose from
the Mexicans.

The image dethroned, fire was applied to the sanctuary; and the
smoke and flames, rising up, must have told countless thousands,
watching the capital from the housetops of the neighboring cities,
that the white men had triumphed over the gods of Mexico; and that,
as at Cholula so at the capital, these had proved impotent to
protect their votaries from the dread invaders. So dismayed were
the Mexicans, at the misfortune, that they offered no resistance to
the return of the Spaniards from the temple, and retired to their
houses without further fighting.

At night the Spaniards sallied out again, relying upon the habit of
the Mexicans to abstain from fighting at night, and burnt several
hundred houses.

Believing that the spirit of the Mexicans would be broken now,
Cortez, on the following morning, mounted the turret from which
Montezuma had addressed them. Malinche was by his side; and when he
held up his hands, to show that he wished to address them, a
silence fell upon the multitude; and Malinche's voice was heard
plainly by them, as she translated the words of Cortez. He told
them they must now feel that they could not struggle against the
Spaniards. Their gods had been cast down, their dwellings burnt,
their warriors slaughtered. And all this they had brought on
themselves, by their rebellion. Yet if they would lay down their
arms, and return to the obedience of their sovereign, he would stay
his hand. If not, he would make their city a heap of ruins, and
leave not a soul alive to mourn over it.

But Cortez learned, at once, that the spirit he had roused in the
Mexicans was in no way lowered by their reverses. One of the great
chiefs answered him that it was true he had hurled down their gods,
and massacred their countrymen; but they were content to lose a
thousand lives for every one that they took.

"Our streets," he said, "are still thronged with warriors. Our
numbers are scarcely diminished. Yours are lessening every day. You
are dying with hunger and sickness. Your provisions and water are
failing. You must soon fall into our hands. The bridges are broken
down, and you cannot escape. There will be too few of you left to
satisfy the vengeance of the gods."

When he had finished, a shower of arrows showed that hostilities
had recommenced.

The garrison were now completely disheartened. Of what use the
tremendous exertions they had made, and the lives that had been
lost? They were still, as they had been on the first day of their
arrival, hemmed in in their fortress, surrounded by foes thirsting
for their blood. Great numbers were wounded, more or less severely.
Their provisions were well-nigh gone. The enemy were bolder than
ever. They had been promised wealth and honor--they were starving,
and death stared them in the face. They loudly exclaimed that they
had been deceived, and betrayed.

But the men who had served all along with Cortez stood firm. They
had still every confidence in their leader. It was not his fault
that they had been brought to this pass, but by the misconduct of
others, during his absence. At any rate, as they pointed out to
their comrades, the only chance of escape was unity and obedience.

Cortez himself was, as always in a moment of great danger, calm and
collected. The thought of having to leave the city, to abandon all
the treasures they had taken, was even more painful to him than to
the soldiers. It was not the loss of his own share of the booty,
but of that of the emperor, that he regretted; for he felt that
this, together with the downfall of all his plans, and the loss of
the kingdom he had already counted won, would bring upon him the
displeasure of his emperor, would give strength to his enemies at
court, and would probably ensure his being recalled in disgrace.

Nevertheless, he saw that retreat was necessary, for the position
could not be maintained. Every day the defenses became weaker, the
men more exhausted by fighting, and there would soon be no longer a
morsel of bread to serve out to them. A retreat must therefore be
made.

The question was, which route should be chosen? In any case, one of
the narrow dikes connecting the island city with the shore must be
traversed; and on these causeways the Spaniards would fight under
great disadvantage. Finally, he settled upon that leading to
Tlacopan, which was much the shortest, being only two miles in
length.

For some days a large party of men had been at work constructing
movable towers, similar to those used, centuries before, in sieges.
They moved on rollers, and were to be dragged by the Tlascalan
allies. From their summits the soldiers could shoot down upon the
housetops, from which they had been hitherto so annoyed. The towers
were also provided with bridges, which could be let down on to the
roofs, and so enable the soldiers to meet their opponents hand to
hand.

When the structures were completed, the Spaniards again took the
offensive. The gates were opened, and the three towers, dragged by
the Tlascalans, moved out. The Mexicans, astonished at the sight of
these machines, from whose summits a heavy fire of musketry were
kept up, fell back for a time. The towers were moved up close to
the terraces, and the soldiers, after partly clearing them by their
fire, lowered the light bridges and, crossing, engaged in a
hand-to-hand fight with the Mexicans, and drove them from their
positions.

But from the lofty houses of the nobles, the Mexicans still
maintained their resistance. The towers were not high enough to
