He suspected nothing.



CHAPTER XII.


WILLIAM OF ORANGE.

On the third day after Captain Salt departed for Paris certain events
befell at The Hague which demand our attention.

The campaign of 1691 in Flanders was conducted on both sides with the
utmost vigour and the least possible result.  Between May and
September the armies marched and counter-marched, walked up to each
other and withdrew with every expression of defiance.  No important
action was fought, though for some time less than a league divided
their hostility.  William, whose patience was worn out almost sooner
than the shoe-leather of his subjects, left the command in
Marlborough's hands, and retired to his park at Loo, whence, in the
beginning of July, he posted to The Hague to attend a meeting of the
States-General.

On the 17th day of that month, and at ten o'clock in the morning--at
which time the King was taking the air in his famous park on the
outskirts of the town--a couple of old gentlemen were advancing upon
The Hague from the westward, along the old Scheveningen road.
They walked slowly, by reason of their years, but with a certain
solemnity of pace which indicated that, in their own opinion at
least, they were bound upon an errand of importance.  At intervals
they paused to mop their faces; and at every pause they regarded the
landscape with contempt.  One of these old gentlemen was thin and
wiry, with a jaw that protruded like a bulldog's.  His companion, for
whose sake he corrected every now and then his long stride, was a
little hunchback of ferocious demeanour, who looked out on the world
from a pair of terrifying green eyes.  In place of a wig he wore a
bandage round his scalp.

The reader will not need to be told the names of this pair of old
gentlemen.  After his treatment at the hands of the Earl of
Marlborough's soldiers, Captain Barker had been confined to his
pavilion by nothing short of main force, which Dr. Beckerleg had with
difficulty prevailed on Captain Runacles to exert.  The inflammation
of the patient's wound increasing with his irascibility, the Doctor
ended by placing a padlock of his own on the front-door and another
on the garden gate, and promising the little man his liberty on the
first day he was fit to travel.

Captain Barker flung a monastic herbal at the doctor's head;
whereupon the bleeding broke out afresh.  Then he fainted.

Ten weeks afterwards Dr. Beckerleg removed his padlocks, setting free
not only the little Captain, but also Mr. Swiggs, who throughout the
time had kept diligent watch by his master's bedside.

Narcissus walked out to take a look at the garden.  Ten weeks of
neglect had played havoc with the beds.  He contemplated it for some
time, and went down to the Fish and Anchor for a mug of beer.
There he was welcomed by his cronies, who had missed him sorely; or
said so, at any rate.

Captain Barker went to pack his handbag.  When Narcissus returned he
was gone.  Captain Runacles was gone also.

"Any orders?" said Narcissus to Simeon.

"Not as I know by."

Narcissus went back to the Fish and Anchor.


The two friends entered The Hague, brisking up their pace and
stepping gallantly abreast.  Turning to their left, they came,
towards the centre of the town, upon a fair sheet of water, with
avenues of pleasant trees planted along its northern brink, and
behind these trees a public road faced with shops and cabarets, each
shaded by a coloured awning.  It was the breakfast-hour, and beneath
these awnings sat a crowd of soldiers of the guard, citizens and
citizens' wives, eating, chattering, smoking, clinking their glasses
and contemplating from their cool shelter the water that twinkled
between the trees and the throng that moved up and down the
promenade.  The two captains were hungry and thirsty.  They advanced,
and, finding a small table unoccupied, ordered breakfast.

Their appearance, and more especially the bandage around Captain
Barker's head, attracted some attention.  More than one group turned
to stare as the little man began in execrable Dutch to explain his
wants to the drawer.  The fellow, too, was more than ordinarily
dense, and a tempestuous scene was plainly but a matter of a minute
or so, when a tall ensign of the guard rose from a neighbouring
table, and, lifting his hat, addressed the Englishmen in their own
language.  "Pardon, gentlemen, but I cannot help overhearing your
difficulty; and think, with your leave, I may remove it."

Captain Barker scowled for a moment, and seemed about to take deeper
umbrage.  But the tall young man seemed quite unconscious of this,
and smiled down with the serenest good will.

"Do not say no.  I have been in England, and I love all men of your
country."

"Jack," growled Captain Runacles, "this is one of a new generation of
Dutchmen.  We are getting old, my boy."

The young man's manner was so sincere that Captain Barker gave way
with a fair grace--the more readily because there was something in
the amiable face which recalled his lost Tristram.  In less than a
minute he was stating his desires, which were promptly translated
into fluent Dutch.  The drawer ran off on his errand.

"Since you have been so kind, sir," said the little hunchback
politely, "perhaps you can do us another favour."

"What is that?"

"We have come across from Harwich for the purpose of seeking an
audience with his Majesty, King William.  Can you tell us when and
where we are likely to find him?"

"His Majesty is just now at the House in the Wood."

"Where may that be?"

"Not two miles beyond the town.  On fine days, such as the present,
he gives audience every morning, between nine and ten o'clock, in the
open air, walking up and down an alley, which is called for that
reason the Promenade of Audience; and again, if no other business
prevents him, at five o'clock in the afternoon, when the day grows
cool." He pulled out a stout watch and consulted it.  "By six o'clock
I must be back there, for at that time my duty begins.  But if you
will let me accompany you and pass you through the park gates, I will
gladly hasten my return, and start--shall we say?--at half-past
four."

He would take no denial, but rose and left them, waving his hand,
smiling, and turning, after a dozen steps, to call back and assure
them he would be punctual.

"He has the very same eyes," Captain Barker muttered, watching him as
he disappeared between the trees.

"I remarked it, too," assented Captain Runacles, who understood the
allusion at once.  "I'd no notion there was such another pair of eyes
in the world."

"We'd better adopt him, Jerry," the little man went on, with a wry
and hopeless smile; "for it's little chance we have of finding the
other one."  He gulped as he uttered the last three words, and
blinked at the broad sunshine behind the awning.

"The fact is, Jack, the doctor let you out too soon."

"Eh?"

"You're not fit to travel, but ought to be between the blankets at
this moment."

"Jerry, that's false, and you know it."

"Oh, do I?  Then you'd best give over talking nonsense, or by the
Lord I'll take you off and put you to bed this instant!  And, what's
more, I'll call in a Dutch doctor."

Captain Barker could not deny that the rest beneath the awning was
welcome.  The road from Scheveningen had been hot and dusty, and his
illness had left him weaker than even his comrade imagined.  They sat
sipping their beer and gazing at the crowd till the town chimes rang
out and announced half-past four.  At the first note they saw their
young friend advancing from the Buitenhof.

"Here I am, you see.  But I have taken a liberty, I fear, since
leaving you."

"Eh? What have you been doing?" Captain Runacles inquired.

"Why, sir, perceiving that your friend was but lately recovered from
an illness, and remembering that though the distance to the House in
the Wood is but two miles or less, the distance there and back is
almost four, I have brought him a litter.  Perhaps I did wrong?"

He pointed to the litter, which two men in blue blouses were bringing
across the road.

"Not at all, sir.  On the contrary, your thoughtfulness puts me to
shame," answered Captain Runacles, with something like a blush.

Captain Barker also thanked him, and added, "Decidedly, it might be
Tristram's very self"--a remark which the young officer did not
understand in the least.  But he smiled happily.  The mere pleasure
of doing a kindness and finding it appreciated was so strong in this
youth that he almost regretted he had not sacrificed a fortnight's
pay and hired a chariot and six horses.

Captain Barker climbed into the litter, and the party set out at a
leisurely pace, which brought them to the park gates in a little more
than half an hour.  A couple of sentries kept guard here, and within
the lodge a dozen others were playing at dominoes and laughing like
children.

"If you will permit me," said their conductor, as Captain Barker
alighted, "I will conduct you as far as the Promenade of Audience.
Otherwise you will have to go with one of my comrades, and probably
with one who is ignorant of English."

Taking their consent for granted, he marched them past the sentries
and through the iron gates.  A broad avenue of yews confronted them,
with a gravelled carriage-drive that stretched away till lost amid
interlacing boughs.  A couple of gentlemen were advancing down this
avenue in brisk conversation.  They were about to pass our friends
when the elder of the pair--an old gentleman in blue, with a ruddy
complexion and apoplectic neck--glanced up casually, uttered an
exclamation, and came to a halt.

Leaving his companion to stare, he advanced towards Captain Runacles
and saluted him with punctilio.

"This is a great pleasure," he observed in very good English.

"I'm very glad of that, sir," Captain Runacles answered, "though 'pon
my life I don't know why it should be."

"I have been expecting you."

"Indeed?"

"Will you be good enough to withdraw with me behind these yews, in
order that our conversation may not be observed from the lodge
windows?"

"Certainly, if you wish it."

The whole party followed him, much puzzled.  He led them between a
couple of gigantic trees, glanced around him, and asked suddenly:

"The young man, I presume, gave you my message?"

"Now, what in the world--"  began Captain Runacles with a bewildered
stare.  But the little hunchback was quicker.

"What young man, sir?" he cried sharply.  "Do you mean Tristram
Salt?"

"I really don't know his name; but he was accompanied, to be sure, by
a Captain Salt when I met him at Vlaardingen."

Captain Barker groaned.

"But excuse me," pursued the old gentleman in blue, still addressing
Captain Runacles, "I spoke not only of a young man, but of a message.
Did he deliver it?"

"If you mean Tristram Salt, I have not clapped eyes on him since the
1st of May last."

"Then I will deliver it myself.  You do not appear to know me--"

"Not from Adam."

"My name is Cornelius van Adrienssen, and you, Captain Runacles, once
flung a boot at my head."

"Did I, indeed!  It was in a moment of extreme irritation, no doubt."

"We were engaged off the Texel--June the 5th, '71, was the date.
You were on board the _Galloper_, I on the _Zeelandshoop_.
Night parted us--"

"I begin to remember the incident."

"Then I need not proceed.  Let me merely remark that I have kept that
boot."

"Whatever for?"

"What for, sir?" cried the choleric old gentleman, now fairly hopping
with rage.  "What for? To throw it back, sir--that's why."

"My dear Captain van Adrienssen, is not this rather childish?
Twenty years is a long time to harbour resentment."

"You shall fight me, sir."

"Tut, tut!"

"I regret that I have not the boot with me to fling back at you--"

"You have a pair on your feet, sir," suggested the Englishman, whose
temper was rising.

"--But this shall do instead!"  and taking his glove Captain van
Adrienssen dashed it in Captain Runacles' face.

"By the Lord, you shall pay for this!"

"I am ready, sir."

They tugged off their coats and pulled out their swords.

"Sirs, sirs!" cried the young ensign; "remember you are in his
Majesty's park."

But before his sentence was out the two swords were crossed, and the
old gentlemen attacking each other with the unregulated ardour of a
