boudoir which adjoined the cardroom. The marquis followed her.

"Will you not hear me?" he said.

"One would really think, monsieur," she replied, "that I had come here
to meet you, and not to vindicate my own self-respect. If you do not
cease this odious pursuit I shall leave the ballroom."

"Ah!" he cried, recollecting one of the crazy actions of the last Duc de
Lorraine, "let me speak to you so long as I can hold this live coal in
my hand."

He stooped to the hearth and picking up a brand held it tightly.
Mademoiselle de Verneuil flushed, took her arm from that of the count,
and looked at the marquis in amazement. The count softly withdrew,
leaving them alone together. So crazy an action shook Marie's heart, for
there is nothing so persuasive in love as courageous folly.

"You only prove to me," she said, trying to make him throw away the
brand, "that you are willing to make me suffer cruelly. You are extreme
in everything. On the word of a fool and the slander of a woman you
suspected that one who had just saved your life was capable of betraying
you."

"Yes," he said, smiling, "I have been very cruel to you; but
nevertheless, forget it; I shall never forget it. Hear me. I have been
shamefully deceived; but so many circumstances on that fatal day told
against you--"

"And those circumstances were stronger than your love?"

He hesitated; she made a motion of contempt, and rose.

"Oh, Marie. I shall never cease to believe in you now."

"Then throw that fire away. You are mad. Open your hand; I insist upon
it."

He took delight in still resisting the soft efforts of her fingers, but
she succeeded in opening the hand she would fain have kissed.

"What good did that do you?" she said, as she tore her handkerchief and
laid it on the burn, which the marquis covered with his glove.

Madame du Gua had stolen softly into the cardroom, watching the lovers
with furtive eyes, but escaping theirs adroitly; it was, however,
impossible for her to understand their conversation from their actions.

"If all that they said of me was true you must admit that I am avenged
at this moment," said Marie, with a look of malignity which startled the
marquis.

"What feeling brought you here?" he asked.

"Do you suppose, my dear friend, that you can despise a woman like me
with impunity? I came here for your sake and for my own," she continued,
after a pause, laying her hand on the hilt of rubies in her bosom and
showing him the blade of her dagger.

"What does all that mean?" thought Madame du Gua.

"But," she continued, "you still love me; at any rate, you desire me,
and the folly you have just committed," she added, taking his hand,
"proves it to me. I will again be that I desired to be; and I return to
Fougeres happy. Love absolves everything. You love me; I have regained
the respect of the man who represents to me the whole world, and I can
die."

"Then you still love me?" said the marquis.

"Have I said so?" she replied with a scornful look, delighting in the
torture she was making him endure. "I have run many risks to come here.
I have saved Monsieur de Bauvan's life, and he, more grateful than
others, offers me in return his fortune and his name. You have never
even thought of doing that."

The marquis, bewildered by these words, stifled the worst anger he had
ever felt, supposing that the count had played him false. He made no
answer.

"Ah! you reflect," she said, bitterly.

"Mademoiselle," replied the young man, "your doubts justify mine."

"Let us leave this room," said Mademoiselle de Verneuil, catching sight
of a corner of Madame du Gua's gown, and rising. But the wish to reduce
her rival to despair was too strong, and she made no further motion to
go.

"Do you mean to drive me to hell?" cried the marquis, seizing her hand
and pressing it violently.

"Did you not drive me to hell five days ago? are you not leaving me at
this very moment uncertain whether your love is sincere or not?"

"But how do I know whether your revenge may not lead you to obtain my
life to tarnish it, instead of killing me?"

"Ah! you do not love me! you think of yourself and not of me!" she said
angrily, shedding a few tears.

The coquettish creature well knew the power of her eyes when moistened
by tears.

"Well, then," he cried, beside himself, "take my life, but dry those
tears."

"Oh, my love! my love!" she exclaimed in a stifled voice: "those are the
words, the accents, the looks I have longed for, to allow me to prefer
your happiness to mine. But," she added, "I ask one more proof of your
love, which you say is so great. I wish to stay here only so long as may
be needed to show the company that you are mine. I will not even drink
a glass of water in the house of a woman who has twice tried to kill me,
who is now, perhaps, plotting mischief against us," and she showed the
marquis the floating corner of Madame du Gua's drapery. Then she dried
her eyes and put her lips to the ear of the young man, who quivered as
he felt the caress of her warm breath. "See that everything is prepared
for my departure," she said; "you shall take me yourself to Fougeres and
there only will I tell you if I love you. For the second time I trust
you. Will you trust me a second time?"

"Ah, Marie, you have brought me to a point where I know not what I do. I
am intoxicated by your words, your looks, by you--by you, and I am ready
to obey you."

"Well, then, make me for an instant very happy. Let me enjoy the only
triumph I desire. I want to breathe freely, to drink of the life I have
dreamed, to feed my illusions before they are gone forever. Come--come
into the ballroom and dance with me."

They re-entered the room together, and though Mademoiselle de Verneuil
was as completely satisfied in heart and vanity as any woman ever could
be, the unfathomable gentleness of her eyes, the demure smile on her
lips, the rapidity of the motions of a gay dance, kept the secret of her
thoughts as the sea swallows those of the criminal who casts a weighted
body into its depths. But a murmur of admiration ran through the company
as, circling in each other's arms, voluptuously interlaced, with heavy
heads, and dimmed sight, they waltzed with a sort of frenzy, dreaming of
the pleasures they hoped to find in a future union.

A few moments later Mademoiselle de Verneuil and the marquis were in
the latter's travelling-carriage drawn by four horses. Surprised to
see these enemies hand in hand, and evidently understanding each other,
Francine kept silence, not daring to ask her mistress whether her
conduct was that of treachery or love. Thanks to the darkness, the
marquis did not observe Mademoiselle de Verneuil's agitation as
they neared Fougeres. The first flush of dawn showed the towers of
Saint-Leonard in the distance. At that moment Marie was saying to
herself: "I am going to my death."

As they ascended the first hill the lovers had the same thought; they
left the carriage and mounted the rise on foot, in memory of their first
meeting. When Marie took the young man's arm she thanked him by a smile
for respecting her silence; then, as they reached the summit of the
plateau and looked at Fougeres, she threw off her reverie.

"Don't come any farther," she said; "my authority cannot save you from
the Blues to-day."

Montauran showed some surprise. She smiled sadly and pointed to a block
of granite, as if to tell him to sit down, while she herself stood
before him in a melancholy attitude. The rending emotions of her soul no
longer permitted her to play a part. At that moment she would have knelt
on red-hot coals without feeling them any more than the marquis had felt
the fire-brand he had taken in his hand to prove the strength of his
passion. It was not until she had contemplated her lover with a look of
the deepest anguish that she said to him, at last:--

"All that you have suspected of me is true."

The marquis started.

"Ah! I pray you," she said, clasping her hands, "listen to me without
interruption. I am indeed the daughter of the Duc de Verneuil,--but his
natural daughter. My mother, a Demoiselle de Casteran, who became a nun
to escape the reproaches of her family, expiated her fault by fifteen
years of sorrow, and died at Seez, where she was abbess. On her
death-bed she implored, for the first time and only for me, the help of
the man who had betrayed her, for she knew she was leaving me without
friends, without fortune, without a future. The duke accepted the
charge, and took me from the roof of Francine's mother, who had hitherto
taken care of me; perhaps he liked me because I was beautiful; possibly
I reminded him of his youth. He was one of those great lords of the
old regime, who took pride in showing how they could get their crimes
forgiven by committing them with grace. I will say no more, he was my
father. But let me explain to you how my life in Paris injured my soul.
The society of the Duc de Verneuil, to which he introduced me, was
bitten by that scoffing philosophy about which all France was
then enthusiastic because it was wittily professed. The brilliant
conversations which charmed my ear were marked by subtlety of perception
and by witty contempt for all that was true and spiritual. Men laughed
at sentiments, and pictured them all the better because they did
not feel them; their satirical epigrams were as fascinating as the
light-hearted humor with which they could put a whole adventure into
a word; and yet they had sometimes too much wit, and wearied women by
making love an art, and not a matter of feeling. I could not resist the
tide. And yet my soul was too ardent--forgive this pride--not to feel
that their minds had withered their hearts; and the life I led resulted
in a perpetual struggle between my natural feelings and beliefs and the
vicious habits of mind which I there contracted. Several superior men
took pleasure in developing in me that liberty of thought and contempt
for public opinion which do tear from a woman her modesty of soul,
robbed of which she loses her charm. Alas! my subsequent misfortunes
have failed to lessen the faults I learned through opulence. My father,"
she continued, with a sigh, "the Duc de Verneuil, died, after duly
recognizing me as his daughter and making provisions for me by his will,
which considerably reduced the fortune of my brother, his legitimate
son. I found myself one day without a home and without a protector. My
brother contested the will which made me rich. Three years of my late
life had developed my vanity. By satisfying all my fancies my father
had created in my nature a need of luxury, and given me habits of
self-indulgence of which my own mind, young and artless as it then was,
could not perceive either the danger or the tyranny. A friend of my
father, the Marechal Duc de Lenoncourt, then seventy years old, offered
to become my guardian, and I found myself, soon after the termination of
the odious suit, in a brilliant home, where I enjoyed all the advantages
of which my brother's cruelty had deprived me. Every evening the old
marechal came to sit with me and comfort me with kind and consoling
words. His white hair and the many proofs he gave me of paternal
tenderness led me to turn all the feelings of my heart upon him, and
I felt myself his daughter. I accepted his presents, hiding none of my
caprices from him, for I saw how he loved to gratify them. I heard one
fatal evening that all Paris believed me the mistress of the poor old
man. I was told that it was then beyond my power to recover an innocence
thus gratuitously denied me. They said that the man who had abused my
inexperience could not be lover, and would not be my husband. The week
in which I made this horrible discovery the duke left Paris. I was
shamefully ejected from the house where he had placed me, and which did
not belong to him. Up to this point I have told you the truth as though
I stood before God; but now, do not ask a wretched woman to give account
of sufferings which are buried in her heart. The time came when I found
myself married to Danton. A few days later the storm uprooted the mighty
oak around which I had thrown my arms. Again I was plunged into the
worst distress, and I resolved to kill myself. I don't know whether
love of life, or the hope of wearying ill-fortune and of finding at
the bottom of the abyss the happiness which had always escaped me were,
unconsciously to myself, my advisers, or whether I was fascinated by the
arguments of a young man from Vendome, who, for the last two years, has
wound himself about me like a serpent round a tree,--in short, I know
not how it is that I accepted, for a payment of three hundred thousand
francs, the odious mission of making an unknown man fall in love with
me and then betraying him. I met you; I knew you at once by one of
those presentiments which never mislead us; yet I tried to doubt my
recognition, for the more I came to love you, the more the certainty
appalled me. When I saved you from the hands of Hulot, I abjured the
part I had taken; I resolved to betray the slaughterers, and not
their victim. I did wrong to play with men, with their lives, their
principles, with myself, like a thoughtless girl who sees only
sentiments in this life. I believed you loved me; I let myself cling to
the hope that my life might begin anew; but all things have revealed my
past,--even I myself, perhaps, for you must have distrusted a woman so
passionate as you have found me. Alas! is there no excuse for my love
and my deception? My life was like a troubled sleep; I woke and thought
myself a girl; I was in Alencon, where all my memories were pure and
chaste. I had the mad simplicity to think that love would baptize me
into innocence. For a moment I thought myself pure, for I had never
loved. But last night your passion seemed to me true, and a voice
cried to me, 'Do not deceive him.' Monsieur le marquis," she said, in a
guttural voice which haughtily challenged condemnation, "know this; I am
a dishonored creature, unworthy of you. From this hour I accept my fate
as a lost woman. I am weary of playing a part,--the part of a woman to
whom you had brought back the sanctities of her soul. Virtue is a burden
to me. I should despise you if you were weak enough to marry me. The
Comte de Bauvan might commit that folly, but you--you must be worthy of
your future and leave me without regret. A courtesan is too exacting; I
should not love you like the simple, artless girl who felt for a moment
the delightful hope of being your companion, of making you happy, of
doing you honor, of becoming a noble wife. But I gather from that futile
hope the courage to return to a life of vice and infamy, that I may put
an eternal barrier between us. I sacrifice both honor and fortune
to you. The pride I take in that sacrifice will support me in my
wretchedness,--fate may dispose of me as it will. I will never betray
you. I shall return to Paris. There your name will be to me a part of
myself, and the glory you win will console my grief. As for you, you are
a man, and you will forget me. Farewell."

She darted away in the direction of the gorges of Saint-Sulpice, and
disappeared before the marquis could rise to detain her. But she came
back unseen, hid herself in a cavity of the rocks, and examined the
young man with a curiosity mingled with doubt. Presently she saw him
walking like a man overwhelmed, without seeming to know where he went.

"Can he be weak?" she thought, when he had disappeared, and she felt
she was parted from him. "Will he understand me?" She quivered. Then
she turned and went rapidly towards Fougeres, as though she feared the
marquis might follow her into the town, where certain death awaited him.

"Francine, what did he say to you?" she asked, when the faithful girl
rejoined her.

"Ah! Marie, how I pitied him. You great ladies stab a man with your
tongues."

"How did he seem when he came up to you?"

"As if he saw me not at all! Oh, Marie, he loves you!"

"Yes, he loves me, or he does not love me--there is heaven or hell for
me in that," she answered. "Between the two extremes there is no spot
where I can set my foot."

After thus carrying out her resolution, Marie gave way to grief, and her
face, beautified till then by these conflicting sentiments, changed
for the worse so rapidly that in a single day, during which she floated
incessantly between hope and despair, she lost the glow of beauty, and
the freshness which has its source in the absence of passion or the
ardor of joy. Anxious to ascertain the result of her mad enterprise,
Hulot and Corentin came to see her soon after her return. She received
them smiling.

"Well," she said to the commandant, whose care-worn face had a
questioning expression, "the fox is coming within range of your guns;
you will soon have a glorious triumph over him."

"What happened?" asked Corentin, carelessly, giving Mademoiselle de
Verneuil one of those oblique glances with which diplomatists of his
class spy on thought.

"Ah!" she said, "the Gars is more in love than ever; I made him come
with me to the gates of Fougeres."

"Your power seems to have stopped there," remarked Corentin; "the fears
of your _ci-devant_ are greater than the love you inspire."

"You judge him by yourself," she replied, with a contemptuous look.

"Well, then," said he, unmoved, "why did you not bring him here to your
own house?"

"Commandant," she said to Hulot, with a coaxing smile, "if he really
loves me, would you blame me for saving his life and getting him to
leave France?"

The old soldier came quickly up to her, took her hand, and kissed it
with a sort of enthusiasm. Then he looked at her fixedly and said in a
gloomy tone: "You forget my two friends and my sixty-three men."

"Ah, commandant," she cried, with all the naivete of passion, "he was
not accountable for that; he was deceived by a bad woman, Charette's
mistress, who would, I do believe, drink the blood of the Blues."

"Come, Marie," said Corentin, "don't tease the commandant; he does not
understand such jokes."

"Hold your tongue," she answered, "and remember that the day when you
displease me too much will have no morrow for you."

"I see, mademoiselle," said Hulot, without bitterness, "that I must
prepare for a fight."

"You are not strong enough, my dear colonel. I saw more than six
thousand men at Saint-James,--regular troops, artillery, and English
officers. But they cannot do much unless _he_ leads them? I agree with
Fouche, his presence is the head and front of everything."

"Are we to get his head?--that's the point," said Corentin, impatiently.

"I don't know," she answered, carelessly.

"English officers!" cried Hulot, angrily, "that's all that was wanting
to make a regular brigand of him. Ha! ha! I'll give him English, I
will!"

"It seems to me, citizen-diplomat," said Hulot to Corentin, after the
two had taken leave and were at some distance from the house, "that you
allow that girl to send you to the right-about when she pleases."

"It is quite natural for you, commandant," replied Corentin, with a
thoughtful air, "to see nothing but fighting in what she said to us. You
soldiers never seem to know there are various ways of making war. To use
the passions of men and women like wires to be pulled for the benefit
of the State; to keep the running-gear of the great machine we call
government in good order, and fasten to it the desires of human nature,
like baited traps which it is fun to watch,--I call _that_ creating a
world, like God, and putting ourselves at the centre of it!"

"You will please allow me to prefer my calling to yours," said the
soldier, curtly. "You can do as you like with your running-gear; I
recognize no authority but that of the minister of war. I have my
orders; I shall take the field with veterans who don't skulk, and face
an enemy you want to catch behind."

"Oh, you can fight if you want to," replied Corentin. "From what that
girl has dropped, close-mouthed as you think she is, I can tell you that
you'll have to skirmish about, and I myself will give you the pleasure
of an interview with the Gars before long."

"How so?" asked Hulot, moving back a step to get a better view of this
strange individual.

"Mademoiselle de Verneuil is in love with him," replied Corentin, in
a thick voice, "and perhaps he loves her. A marquis, a knight
of Saint-Louis, young, brilliant, perhaps rich,--what a list of
temptations! She would be foolish indeed not to look after her own
interests and try to marry him rather than betray him. The girl is
attempting to fool us. But I saw hesitation in her eyes. They probably
have a rendezvous; perhaps they've met already. Well, to-morrow I shall
have him by the forelock. Yesterday he was nothing more than the enemy
of the Republic, to-day he is mine; and I tell you this, every man who
has been so rash as to come between that girl and me has died upon the
scaffold."

So saying, Corentin dropped into a reverie which hindered him from
observing the disgust on the face of the honest soldier as he discovered
the depths of this intrigue, and the mechanism of the means employed by
Fouche. Hulot resolved on the spot to thwart Corentin in every way that
did not conflict essentially with the success of the government, and to
give the Gars a fair chance of dying honorably, sword in hand, before
he could fall a prey to the executioner, for whom this agent of the
detective police acknowledged himself the purveyor.

"If the First Consul would listen to me," thought Hulot, as he turned
