Scotland for life, I would chuse Dumfries as the place of my residence.
Here we made enquiries about captain Lismahago, of whom hearing no
tidings, we proceeded by the Solway Frith, to Carlisle. You must know,
that the Solway sands, upon which travellers pass at low water, are
exceedingly dangerous, because, as the tide makes, they become quick
in different places, and the flood rushes in so impetuously, that the
passengers are often overtaken by the sea and perish.

In crossing these treacherous Syrtes with a guide, we perceived a
drowned horse, which Humphry Clinker, after due inspection, declared to
be the very identical beast which Mr Lismahago rode when he parted with
us at Feltonbridge in Northumberland. This information, which seemed
to intimate that our friend the lieutenant had shared the fate of his
horse, affected us all, and above all our aunt Tabitha, who shed salt
tears, and obliged Clinker to pull a few hairs out of the dead horse's
tail, to be worn in a ring as a remembrance of his master: but her grief
and ours was not of long duration; for one of the first persons we saw
in Carlisle, was the lieutenant in propria persona, bargaining with
a horse-dealer for another steed, in the yard of the inn where we
alighted.--Mrs Bramble was the first that perceived him, and screamed
as if she had seen a ghost; and, truly, at a proper time and place, he
might very well have passed for an inhabitant of another world; for
he was more meagre and grim than before.--We received him the more
cordially for having supposed he had been drowned; and he was not
deficient in expressions of satisfaction at this meeting. He told us,
he had enquired for us at Dumfries, and been informed by a travelling
merchant from Glasgow, that we had resolved to return by the way of
Coldstream. He said, that in passing the sands without a guide, his
horse had knocked up, and he himself must have perished, if he had not
been providentially relieved by a return post-chaise.--He moreover gave
us to understand, that his scheme of settling in his own country having
miscarried, he was so far on his way to London, with a view to embark
for North-America, where he intended to pass the rest of his days among
his old friends the Miamis, and amuse himself in finishing the education
of the son he had by his beloved Squinkinacoosta.

This project was by no means agreeable to our good aunt, who expatiated
upon the fatigues and dangers that would attend such a long voyage
by sea, and afterwards such a tedious journey by land--She enlarged
particularly on the risque he would run, with respect to the concerns
of his precious soul, among savages who had not yet received the glad
tidings of salvation; and she hinted that his abandoning Great-Britain
might, perhaps, prove fatal to the inclinations of some deserving
person, whom he was qualified to make happy for life. My uncle, who is
really a Don Quixote in generosity, understanding that Lismahago's real
reason for leaving Scotland was the impossibility of subsisting in it
with any decency upon the wretched provision of a subaltern's half-pay,
began to be warmly interested on the side of compassion.--He thought
it very hard, that a gentleman who had served his country with honour,
should be driven by necessity to spend his old age, among the refuse of
mankind, in such a remote part of the world.--He discoursed with me upon
the subject; observing, that he would willingly offer the lieutenant an
asylum at Brambleton-hall, if he did not foresee that his singularities
and humour of contradiction would render him an intolerable housemate,
though his conversation at some times might be both instructive and
entertaining: but, as there seemed to be something particular in
his attention to Mrs Tabitha, he and I agreed in opinion, that this
intercourse should be encouraged and improved, if possible, into a
matrimonial union; in which case there would be a comfortable provision
for both; and they might be settled in a house of their own, so that Mr
Bramble should have no more of their company than he desired.

In pursuance of this design, Lismahago has been invited to pass the
winter at Brambleton-hall, as it will be time enough to execute his
American project in the spring.--He has taken time to consider of this
proposal; mean while, he will keep us company as far as we travel in the
road to Bristol, where he has hopes of getting a passage for America.
I make no doubt but that he will postpone his voyage, and prosecute his
addresses to a happy consummation; and sure, if it produces any
fruit, it must be of a very peculiar flavour. As the weather continues
favourable, I believe, we shall take the Peak of Derbyshire and Buxton
Wells in our way.--At any rate, from the first place where we make any
stay, you shall hear again from

Yours always, J. MELFORD CARLISLE, Sep. 12.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

The peasantry of Scotland are certainly on a poor footing all over the
kingdom; and yet they look better, and are better cloathed than those
of the same rank in Burgundy, and many other places of France and Italy;
nay, I will venture to say they are better fed, notwithstanding
the boasted wine of these foreign countries. The country people of
North-Britain live chiefly on oat-meal, and milk, cheese, butter,
and some garden-stuff, with now and then a pickled-herring, by way of
delicacy; but flesh-meat they seldom or never taste; nor any kind of
strong liquor, except two-penny, at times of uncommon festivity--Their
breakfast is a kind of hasty pudding, of oat-meal or pease-meal, eaten
with milk. They have commonly pottage for dinner, composed of cale or
cole, leeks, barley or big, and butter; and this is reinforced with
bread and cheese, made of skimmed-milk--At night they sup on sowens or
flummery of oat-meal--In a scarcity of oats, they use the meal of barley
and pease, which is both nourishing and palatable. Some of them have
potatoes; and you find parsnips in every peasant's garden--They are
cloathed with a coarse kind of russet of their own making, which is
both decent and warm--They dwell in poor huts, built of loose stones and
turf, without any mortar, having a fireplace or hearth in the middle,
generally made of an old mill-stone, and a hole at top to let out the
smoke.

These people, however, are content, and wonderfully sagacious--All of
them read the Bible, and are even qualified to dispute upon the
articles of their faith; which in those parts I have seen, is entirely
Presbyterian. I am told, that the inhabitants of Aberdeenshire are still
more acute. I once knew a Scotch gentleman at London, who had declared
war against this part of his countrymen; and swore that the impudence
and knavery of the Scots, in that quarter, had brought a reproach upon
the whole nation.

The river Clyde, above Glasgow, is quite pastoral; and the banks of it
are every where adorned with fine villas. From the sea to its source,
we may reckon the seats of many families of the first rank, such as the
duke of Argyle at Roseneath, the earl of Bute in the isle of that name,
the earl of Glencairn at Finlayston, lord Blantyre at Areskine, the
dutchess of Douglas at Bothwell, duke Hamilton at Hamilton, the duke of
Douglas at Douglas, and the earl of Hyndford at Carmichael. Hamilton is
a noble palace, magnificently furnished; and hard by is the village of
that name, one of the neatest little towns I have seen in any country.
The old castle of Douglas being burned to the ground by accident, the
late duke resolved, as head of the first family of Scotland, to have the
largest house in the kingdom, and ordered a plan for this purpose; but
there was only one wing of it finished when he died. It is to be hoped
that his nephew, who is now in possession of his great fortune, will
complete the design of his predecessor--Clydesdale is in general
populous and rich, containing a great number of gentlemen, who
are independent in their fortune; but it produces more cattle than
corn--This is also the case with Tweedale, through part of which
we passed, and Nithsdale, which is generally rough, wild, and
mountainous--These hills are covered with sheep; and this is the small
delicious mutton, so much preferable to that of the London-market. As
their feeding costs so little, the sheep are not killed till five years
old, when their flesh, juices, and flavour are in perfection; but their
fleeces are much damaged by the tar, with which they are smeared to
preserve them from the rot in winter, during which they run wild night
and day, and thousands are lost under huge wreaths of snow--'Tis pity
the farmers cannot contrive some means to shelter this useful animal
from the inclemencies of a rigorous climate, especially from the
perpetual rains, which are more prejudicial than the greatest extremity
of cold weather.

On the little river Nid, is situated the castle of Drumlanrig, one
of the noblest seats in Great-Britain, belonging to the duke of
Queensberry; one of those few noblemen whose goodness of heart does
honour to human-nature--I shall not pretend to enter into a description
of this palace, which is really an instance of the sublime in
magnificence, as well as in situation, and puts one in mind of the
beautiful city of Palmyra, rising like a vision in the midst of
the wilderness. His grace keeps open house, and lives with great
splendour--He did us the honour to receive us with great courtesy, and
detain'd us all night, together with above twenty other guests, with all
their servants and horses to a very considerable number--The dutchess
was equally gracious, and took our ladies under her immediate
protection. The longer I live, I see more reason to believe that
prejudices of education are never wholly eradicated, even when they
are discovered to be erroneous and absurd. Such habits of thinking as
interest the grand passions, cleave to the human heart in such a manner,
that though an effort of reason may force them from their hold for a
moment, this violence no sooner ceases, than they resume their grasp
with an increased elasticity and adhesion.

I am led into this reflection, by what passed at the duke's table after
supper. The conversation turned upon the vulgar notions of spirits and
omens, that prevail among the commonalty of North-Britain, and all the
company agreed, that nothing could be more ridiculous. One gentleman,
however, told a remarkable story of himself, by way of speculation
'Being on a party of hunting in the North (said he), I resolved to visit
an old friend, whom I had not seen for twenty years--So long he had been
retired and sequestered from all his acquaintance, and lived in a moping
melancholy way, much afflicted with lowness of spirits, occasioned by
the death of his wife, whom he had loved with uncommon affection. As he
resided in a remote part of the country, and we were five gentlemen with
as many servants, we carried some provision with us from the next market
town, lest we should find him unprepared for our reception. The roads
being bad, we did not arrive at the house till two o'clock in the
afternoon; and were agreeably surprised to find a very good dinner ready
in the kitchen, and the cloth laid with six covers. My friend himself
appeared in his best apparel at the gate, and received us with open
arms, telling me he had been expecting us these two hours. Astonished at
this declaration, I asked who had given him intelligence of our coming?
and he smiled without making any other reply. However, presuming upon
our former intimacy, I afterwards insisted upon knowing; and he told me,
very gravely, he had seen me in a vision of the second sight--Nay, he
called in the evidence of his steward, who solemnly declared, that his
master had the day before apprised him of my coming, with four other
strangers, and ordered him to provide accordingly; in consequence of
which intimation, he had prepared the dinner which we were now eating;
and laid the covers according to the number foretold.' The incident
we all owned to be remarkable, and I endeavoured to account for it by
natural means. I observed, that as the gentleman was of a visionary
turn, the casual idea, or remembrance of his old friend, might suggest
those circumstances, which accident had for once realized; but that in
all probability he had seen many visions of the same kind, which were
never verified. None of the company directly dissented from my opinion;
but from the objections that were hinted, I could plainly perceive that
the majority were persuaded there was something more extraordinary in
the case.

Another gentleman of the company, addressing himself to me, 'Without all
doubt (said he), a diseased imagination is very apt to produce visions;
but we must find some other method to account for something of this
kind, that happened within these eight days in my neighbourhood--A
gentleman of a good family, who cannot be deemed a visionary in any
sense of the word, was near his own gate, in the twilight, visited by
his grandfather, who has been dead these fifteen years--The spectre was
mounted seemingly on the very horse he used to ride, with an angry and
terrible countenance, and said something, which his grandson, in the
confusion of fear, could not understand. But this was not all--He lifted
up a huge horse whip, and applied it with great violence to his back
and shoulders, on which I saw the impression with my own eyes. The
apparition was afterwards seen by the sexton of the parish, hovering
about the tomb where his body lies interred; as the man declared to
several persons in the village, before he knew what had happened to the
gentleman--Nay, he actually came to me as a justice of the peace, in
order to make oath of these particulars, which, however, I declined
administering. As for the grandson of the defunct, he is a sober,
sensible, worldly minded fellow, too intent upon schemes of interest to
give in to reveries. He would have willingly concealed the affair; but
he bawled out in the first transport of his fear, and, running into
the house, exposed his back and his sconce to the whole family; so that
there was no denying it in the sequel. It is now the common discourse of
the country, that this appearance and behaviour of the old man's spirit,
portends some great calamity to the family, and the good-woman has
actually taken to her bed in this apprehension.'

Though I did not pretend to explain this mystery, I said, I did not at
all doubt, but it would one day appear to be a deception; and, in all
probability, a scheme executed by some enemy of the person who had
sustained the assault; but still the gentleman insisted upon the
clearness of the evidence, and the concurrence of testimony, by which
two creditable witnesses, without any communication one with another,
affirmed the appearance of the same man, with whose person they were
both well acquainted--From Drumlanrig we pursued the course of the Nid
to Dumfries, which stands seven miles above the place where the river
falls into the sea; and is, after Glasgow, the handsomest town I have
seen in Scotland. The inhabitants, indeed, seem to have proposed that
city as their model; not only in beautifying their town and regulating
its police, but, also in prosecuting their schemes of commerce and
manufacture, by which they are grown rich and opulent.

We re-entered England, by the way of Carlisle, where we accidentally
met with our friend Lismahago, whom we had in vain inquired after at
Dumfries and other places--It would seem that the captain, like the
prophets of old, is but little honoured in his own country, which he
has now renounced for ever--He gave me the following particulars of his
visit to his native soil--In his way to the place of his nativity, he
learned that his nephew had married the daughter of a burgeois, who
directed a weaving manufacture, and had gone into partnership with his
father-in-law: chagrined with this information, he had arrived at the
gate in the twilight, where he heard the sound of treddles in the great
hall, which had exasperated him to such a degree, that he had like to
have lost his senses: while he was thus transported with indignation,
his nephew chanced to come forth, when, being no longer master of his
passion, he cried, 'Degenerate rascal! you have made my father's house a
den of thieves;' and at the same time chastised him with his
horse-whip; then, riding round the adjoining village, he had visited
the burying-ground of his ancestors by moon-light; and, having paid
his respects to their manes, travelled all night to another part of
the country--Finding the head of the family in such a disgraceful
situation, all his own friends dead or removed from the places of their
former residence, and the expence of living increased to double of what
it had been, when he first left his native country, he had bid it an
eternal adieu, and was determined to seek for repose among the forests
of America.

I was no longer at a loss to account for the apparition, which had
been described at Drumlanrig; and when I repeated the story to the
lieutenant, he was much pleased to think his resentment had been so much
more effectual than he intended; and he owned, he might at such an hour,
and in such an equipage, very well pass for the ghost of his father,
whom he was said greatly to resemble--Between friends, I fancy Lismahago
will find a retreat without going so far as the wigwams of the Miamis.
My sister Tabby is making continual advances to him, in the way of
affection; and, if I may trust to appearances, the captain is disposed
to take opportunity by the forelock. For my part, I intend to encourage
this correspondence, and shall be glad to see them united--In that case,
we shall find a way to settle them comfortably in our own neighbourhood.
I, and my servants, will get rid of a very troublesome and tyrannic
gouvernante; and I shall have the benefit of Lismahago's conversation,
without being obliged to take more of his company than I desire; for
though an olla is a high-flavoured dish, I could not bear to dine upon
it every day of my life.

I am much pleased with Manchester, which is one of the most agreeable
and flourishing towns in Great-Britain; and I perceive that this is
the place which hath animated the spirit, and suggested the chief
manufactures of Glasgow. We propose to visit Chatsworth, the Peak,
and Buxton, from which last place we shall proceed directly homewards,
though by easy journies. If the season has been as favourable in Wales
as in the North, your harvest is happily finished; and we have nothing
left to think of but our October, of which let Barns be properly
reminded. You will find me much better in flesh than I was at our
parting; and this short separation has given a new edge to those
sentiments of friendship with which I always have been, and ever shall
be,

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE MANCHESTER, Sept. 15.




To Mrs GWILLIM, house-keeper at Brambleton-hall.

MRS GWYLLIM,

It has pleased Providence to bring us safe back to England, and partake
us in many pearls by land and water, in particular the Devil's Harse
a pike, and Hoyden's Hole, which hath got no bottom; and, as we are
drawing huomwards, it may be proper to uprise you, that Brambleton-hall
may be in condition to receive us, after this long gurney to the islands
of Scotland. By the first of next month you may begin to make constant
fires in my brother's chamber and mine; and burn a fagget every day in
the yellow damask room: have the tester and curtains dusted, and
the featherbed and matrosses well haired, because, perhaps, with the
blissing of haven, they may be yoosed on some occasion. Let the ould
hogsheads be well skewred and seasoned for bear, as Mat is resolved to
have his seller choak fool.

If the house was mine, I would turn over a new leaf--I don't see why
the sarvants of Wales shouldn't drink fair water, and eat hot cakes and
barley cale, as they do in Scotland, without troubling the botcher
above once a quarter--I hope you keep accunt of Roger's purseeding in
reverence to the buttermilk. I expect my dew when I come huom, without
baiting an ass, I'll assure you.--As you must have layed a great many
more eggs than would be eaten, I do suppose there is a power of turks,
chickings, and guzzling about the house; and a brave kergo of cheese
ready for market; and that the owl has been sent to Crickhowel, saving
what the maids spun in the family.

Pray let the whole house and furniture have a thorough cleaning from top
to bottom, for the honour of Wales; and let Roger search into, and make
a general clearance of the slit holes, which the maids have in secret;
for I know they are much given to sloth and uncleanness. I hope you have
worked a reformation among them, as I exhorted you in my last, and set
their hearts upon better things than they can find in junkitting and
caterwauling with the fellows of the country.

As for Win Jenkins, she has undergone a perfect metamurphysis, and is
become a new creeter from the ammunition of Humphry Clinker, our new
footman, a pious young man, who has laboured exceedingly, that she may
bring forth fruits of repentance. I make no doubt but he will take the
same pains with that pert hussey Mary Jones, and all of you; and that
he may have power given to penetrate and instill his goodness, even into
your most inward parts, is the fervent prayer of

Your friend in the spirit, TAB. BRAMBLE Septr. 18.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

Lismahago is more paradoxical than ever.--The late gulp he had of his
native air, seems to have blown fresh spirit into all his polemical
faculties. I congratulated him the other day on the present flourishing
state of his country, observing that the Scots were now in a fair way
to wipe off the national reproach of poverty, and expressing my
satisfaction at the happy effects of the union, so conspicuous in
the improvement of their agriculture, commerce, manufactures, and
manners--The lieutenant, screwing up his features into a look of dissent
and disgust, commented on my remarks to this effect--'Those who reproach
a nation for its poverty, when it is not owing to the profligacy or vice
of the people, deserve no answer. The Lacedaemonians were poorer than
the Scots, when they took the lead among all the free states of Greece,
and were esteemed above them all for their valour and their virtue. The
most respectable heroes of ancient Rome, such as Fabricius, Cincinnatus,
and Regulus, were poorer than the poorest freeholder in Scotland; and
there are at this day individuals in North-Britain, one of whom can
produce more gold and silver than the whole republic of Rome could raise
at those times when her public virtue shone with unrivalled lustre; and
poverty was so far from being a reproach, that it added fresh laurels
to her fame, because it indicated a noble contempt of wealth, which was
proof against all the arts of corruption--If poverty be a subject
for reproach, it follows that wealth is the object of esteem and
veneration--In that case, there are Jews and others in Amsterdam and
London, enriched by usury, peculation, and different species of fraud
and extortion, who are more estimable than the most virtuous and
illustrious members of the community. An absurdity which no man in his
senses will offer to maintain.--Riches are certainly no proof of merit:
nay they are often (if not most commonly) acquired by persons of sordid
minds and mean talents: nor do they give any intrinsic worth to the
possessor; but, on the contrary, tend to pervert his understanding, and
render his morals more depraved. But, granting that poverty were really
matter of reproach, it cannot be justly imputed to Scotland. No country
is poor that can supply its inhabitants with the necessaries of life,
and even afford articles for exportation. Scotland is rich in natural
advantages: it produces every species of provision in abundance, vast
herds of cattle and flocks of sheep, with a great number of horses;
prodigious quantities of wool and flax, with plenty of copse wood, and
in some parts large forests of timber. The earth is still more rich
below than above the surface. It yields inexhaustible stores of coal,
free-stone, marble, lead, iron, copper, and silver, with some gold. The
sea abounds with excellent fish, and salt to cure them for exportation;
and there are creeks and harbours round the whole kingdom, for the
convenience and security of navigation. The face of the country displays
a surprising number of cities, towns, villas, and villages, swarming
with people; and there seems to be no want of art, industry, government,
and police: such a kingdom can never be called poor, in any sense of the
word, though there may be many others more powerful and opulent. But the
proper use of those advantages, and the present prosperity of the Scots,
you seem to derive from the union of the two kingdoms!'

I said, I supposed he would not deny that the appearance of the country
was much mended; that the people lived better, had more trade, and a
greater quantity of money circulating since the union, than before.
'I may safely admit these premises (answered the lieutenant), without
subscribing to your inference. The difference you mention, I should
take to be the natural progress of improvement--Since that period, other
nations, such as the Swedes, the Danes, and in particular the French,
have greatly increased in commerce, without any such cause assigned.
Before the union, there was a remarkable spirit of trade among the
Scots, as appeared in the case of their Darien company, in which they
had embarked no less than four hundred thousand pounds sterling; and in
the flourishing state of the maritime towns in Fife, and on the eastern
coast, enriched by their trade with France, which failed in consequence
of the union. The only solid commercial advantage reaped from that
measure, was the privilege of trading to the English plantations; yet,
excepting Glasgow and Dumfries, I don't know any other Scotch towns
concerned in that traffick. In other respects, I conceive the Scots were
losers by the union.--They lost the independency of their state, the
greatest prop of national spirit; they lost their parliament, and their
courts of justice were subjected to the revision and supremacy of an
English tribunal.'

'Softly, captain (cried I), you cannot be said to have lost your own
parliament, while you are represented in that of Great-Britain.' 'True
(said he, with a sarcastic grin), in debates of national competition,
the sixteen peers and forty-five commoners of Scotland, must make a
formidable figure in the scale, against the whole English legislature.'
'Be that as it may (I observed) while I had the honour to sit in the
lower house, the Scotch members had always the majority on their side.'
'I understand you, Sir (said he), they generally side with the majority;
so much the worse for their constituents. But even this evil is not the
worst they have sustained by the union. Their trade has been saddled
with grievous impositions, and every article of living severely taxed,
to pay the interest of enormous debts, contracted by the English, in
support of measures and connections in which the Scots had no interest
nor concern.' I begged he would at least allow, that by the union the
Scots were admitted to all the privileges and immunities of English
subjects; by which means multitudes of them were provided for in the
army and navy, and got fortunes in different parts of England, and its
dominions. 'All these (said he) become English subjects to all intents
and purposes, and are in a great measure lost to their mother-country.
The spirit of rambling and adventure has been always peculiar to the
natives of Scotland. If they had not met with encouragement in England,
they would have served and settled, as formerly, in other countries,
such as Muscovy, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, Germany, France, Piedmont, and
Italy, in all which nations their descendants continue to flourish even
at this day.'

By this time my patience began to fail and I exclaimed, 'For God's
sake, what has England got by this union which, you say, has been so
productive of misfortune to the Scots.' 'Great and manifold are the
advantages which England derives from the union (said Lismahago, in
a solemn tone). First and foremost, the settlement of the protestant
succession, a point which the English ministry drove with such
eagerness, that no stone was left unturned, to cajole and bribe a few
leading men, to cram the union down the throats of the Scottish nation,
who were surprisingly averse to the expedient. They gained by it a
considerable addition of territory, extending their dominion to the sea
on all sides of the island, thereby shutting up all back-doors against
the enterprizes of their enemies. They got an accession of above a
million of useful subjects, constituting a never-failing nursery of
