

Darius, as we have seen, had fled after the disastrous battle of Issus.
His terror was so great that he never stopped in his flight until he had
reached the other side of the river Ti'gris, where he still believed
himself safe.

Instead of going after Darius at once, Alexander first went southward
along the coast; for he thought it would be wiser to take all the cities
near the sea before he went farther inland, so as to make sure that he
had no enemies behind his back.

Marching down through Syr'i-a and Phoe-nic'ia, Alexander took the
cities of Da-mas'cus and Si'don, and came at last to Tyre, a prosperous
commercial city built on an island at a short distance from the shore.

The Tyr'i-ans would not open their gates and surrender, so Alexander
prepared to besiege the city. As he had no fleet, he began to build a
great causeway out to the island.

This was a very difficult piece of work, because the water was deep; and
while his men were building it, they were greatly annoyed by showers of
arrows, stones, and spears from the walls of the city and from the decks
of the Tyrian vessels.

A storm, also, broke the causeway to pieces once, when it was nearly
finished, and the army had to begin the work anew. The obstinate
resistance of Tyre made Alexander so angry, that he celebrated his final
victory by crucifying a large number of the richest citizens.

After offering up a sacrifice to Hercules on the flaming ruins of Tyre,
Alexander went on toward Je-ru'sa-lem. His plan was to punish the Jews,
because they had helped his enemies, and had supplied the Tyrians with
food.

The news of his coming filled the hearts of the Jews with terror, for
they expected to be treated with the same frightful cruelty as the
Tyrians. In their fear they knew not whether to surrender or fight.

Finally Jad-du'a, the high priest, had a vision, in which an angel of
the Lord appeared to him, and told him what to do. In obedience to this
divine command, he made the Le'vites put on their festal garments, and
then, dressed in his priestly robes, he led them down the hill to meet
the advancing conqueror.

When Alexander saw the beautiful procession, headed by such a dignified
old man, he quickly got down from his horse, knelt before Jaddua, and
worshiped the name written on his holy vestments.

His officers, astonished at this unusual humility, finally asked him why
he did such honor to a foreign priest. Then Alexander told them of a
vision he had had before leaving Macedon. In it he had beheld Jaddua,
who bade him come over to Asia without fear, as it was written that the
Persians would be delivered into his hands.

Walking beside the aged Jaddua, Alexander entered the holy city of
Jerusalem and the courts of the temple. Here he offered up a sacrifice
to the Lord, and saw the Books of Daniel and Zech-a-ri'ah, in which his
coming and conquests were all foretold.




XCIX. THE AFRICAN DESERT.


After staying a few days in Jerusalem, Alexander continued on his way to
Egypt, which he quickly conquered also. Here he founded a new city at
the mouth of the Nile, and named it Al-ex-an'dri-a, after himself. It
was so favorably located, that it soon became an important town, and
has continued so even till the present day.

Then, having heard that there was a famous temple in Lib'y-a, dedicated
to Jupiter, Alexander resolved to go there and visit it. The road lay
through an African desert, and the journey was very dangerous indeed.

The soldiers toiled painfully along over the burning sand, in which
their feet sank up to the ankles. The blazing African sun fell straight
down upon their heads, and made them stagger and grow faint with the
heat.

From time to time a hot wind, the simoom, blew over the desert, raising
great clouds of dust, and choking men and horses as it rolled over them
like a torrent, burying them under its shifting waves.

The horses died from thirst and fatigue, for such animals are not fit
for travel in the desert. The only creature which can journey
comfortably over the dreary waste of the Sa-ha'ra is the camel, whose
stomach is made in a peculiar way, so that it can drink a large quantity
of water at a time, and store it up for future use.

Undaunted by fatigue or danger, Alexander pressed onward. Like his
soldiers, he suffered from heat and thirst; and like them, too, he was
deceived by the mirage.

This is an optical effect due to a peculiar condition of the desert
atmosphere. The traveler suddenly sees trees, grass, and running water,
apparently a short distance before him. He hastens eagerly forward to
lie in the shade, and to plunge his hot face and hands in the refreshing
stream; but when he reaches the spot where he saw water and trees, there
is nothing but sand, and he sinks down exhausted and cruelly
disappointed.

After enduring all these hardships, Alexander arrived at last at the
oasis, or green island in the sandy desert, where the Temple of Jupiter
stood. The priests led him into the holy place, and, hoping to flatter
him, called him the son of Jupiter.

After resting for some time in this pleasant spot, Alexander and his men
again braved the dangers of the desert, went back to Alexandria and
Tyre, and from there began the long-delayed pursuit of Darius.

The Greek soldiers had suffered so many hardships since beginning the
war, that they were now ready for anything. They crossed the Eu-phra'tes
over a hastily built bridge; then coming to the Tigris, where neither
bridge nor boats could be found, they boldly swam across the river,
holding their shields over their heads to protect themselves from the
arrows of the Persians who stood on the other bank.

Alexander was always the first to rush forward in battle, and he now led
the way across the river. He was longing to meet the Persians again, and
was very glad to overtake them on the other side of the Tigris.

Here, on the plains of Ar-be'la, the third great battle was fought, and
Alexander won the victory. Darius fled once more before the conqueror,
while Alexander marched straight on to Bab'y-lon, the most wonderful
city in the East.




C. DEATH OF DARIUS.


Alexander soon won the good will of the Babylonians by allowing them to
rebuild the Temple of Bel, which had been destroyed. He also secured the
affections of the captive Jews; for he excused them from doing any work
on this building as soon as he heard that they considered it the Tower
of Babel, and hence objected to aiding in its erection.

The young conqueror spent one month in Babylon, and then went on to
Su'sa. There he found the brazen statue of Athene which Xerxes had
carried off to Persia; and he sent it back to the Athenians, who
received it with much joy.

The Persian queen now became very ill, and, in spite of the utmost care,
she soon died. Throughout her illness, Alexander was most thoughtful and
attentive; and when she died, he gave orders that she should be buried
with all the pomp due to her high rank.

He also comforted the mourning Sisygambis, and sent the news of the
queen's death to Darius, who had fled to the northern part of his
kingdom, where he was hastily gathering together another army. Touched
by Alexander's conduct, Darius now wrote to him, offering peace, and
proposing to share the throne of Persia with him.

The young conqueror's head had been turned by his many victories, and he
was growing more haughty every day: so he proudly refused this proposal,
saying that the world could not have two masters any more than two
suns.

In his pride, Alexander now assumed the dress and state of an Oriental
king, surrounded himself with luxury, and spent most of his time in
feasting and revelry. His courtiers encouraged him in this folly, and he
soon forgot the wise lessons taught by Aristotle.

On several occasions the young king drank so much that he did not know
what he was doing; and once, in a fit of drunken rage, he set fire to
the beautiful palace of Per-sep'o-lis, and burned it to the ground.

As he had refused Darius' offers of peace, he soon considered it
necessary to continue the war: so, laying aside his jeweled robes, he
put on his armor and set out for the north. He was about to overtake the
Persian king, when Darius was mortally wounded by one of his followers
named Bes'sus.

The traitor thought that he would win Alexander's favor by this crime,
and came and boasted of it to him. Alexander was so angry, however, that
he bade his guards seize Bessus, and had him put to death in the most
barbarous way.

When the Macedonian king finally came up with Darius, he found him
bathed in his own blood, and breathing his last. He had only time to
assure him of the safety of his family, and to promise to continue to
protect them, before Darius sank back dead.

By Alexander's orders the body was embalmed, and carried to Sisygambis,
so that it could be properly buried in the beautiful tomb of the Persian
kings. This last act of generosity quite won the aged queen's heart; and
she felt so grateful, that she loved Alexander as long as he lived.




CI. DEFEAT OF PORUS.


Now that Darius was dead, Alexander took the Persian title of "Shah in
Shah" (king of kings), and became ruler of all the empire which had been
subject to the Persian monarch.

He was so proud of his new state and of his vast conquests, that he
entirely forgot that he owed them mostly to his brave generals and
soldiers; and he became so obstinate, that he would no longer listen to
any advice, and only thought of having his own way.

His father's general, Parmenio, who had always given him the wisest
counsel, was no longer in favor, because he tried to restrain the king's
extravagance. Indeed, Alexander's once generous and noble nature was so
changed, that, when his courtiers accused Parmenio of treachery, he
listened to them, and actually put the faithful general to death.

Every day now Alexander indulged in feasts and banquets, always drinking
more and more, although it was affecting his health as well as his
temper. Clytus, the son of his old nurse, tried to check his excesses,
but only succeeded in provoking his wrath.

On one occasion such remonstrances so enraged Alexander, that in his
drunken fury he seized a spear and killed Clytus. When he saw him dead
at his feet, the king realized what a terrible crime he had committed,
and felt deep remorse for a short time.

He reformed, and, instead of giving himself up entirely to pleasure,
spent the next two years in the work of governing Persia, where he
founded several cities called by his name.

As all the central part of Asia now acknowledged his rule, he next went
down into India, where he found King Po'rus, the bravest adversary he
had ever met. This king, whose realm was in the northwestern part of
India, came against Alexander with a very large army. In the ranks were
many elephants, trained to crush the enemy beneath their huge feet, and
bearing on their broad backs wooden turrets filled with brave fighting
men and good archers.

In spite of these elephants, which at first awakened great fear in the
Greek soldiers, the Macedonian phalanx won the victory as usual, and
Porus was made prisoner. He was led into the presence of Alexander, who
haughtily asked him how he expected to be treated. "Like a king!" was
the proud reply.

This answer so pleased Alexander, that he not only set Porus free, but
even allowed him to keep his kingdom, after he had sworn to be the
faithful subject of his conqueror.

Alexander, having thus won the help and affection of Porus, made war
against several other Indian kings, and continued his advance toward the
south. In one of these battles he lost his faithful steed Bucephalus,
which had borne him safely through many a fight.

Alexander felt this loss deeply, and not only had a monument built over
his remains, but also founded a city near by, which was called
Bu-ceph'a-la.




CII. THE RETURN TO BABYLON.


Upon reaching the Hyph'a-sis River, Alexander would have liked to cross
it, and continue his conquests; but his soldiers now refused to go any
farther. They were tired of fighting and danger, and were longing to go
back to Macedon.

Although he was unwilling to do so, Alexander was therefore obliged to
stop in his conquests; but, instead of going home as he had come, he now
built a fleet, and sailed down the In'dus River to the sea.

Now, the Greeks had no maps such as we have; and their knowledge of
geography was very small. When Alexander came to the sea, however, he
thought it must be the same as that into which the Euphrates flowed.

To find out if this was true, he bade his admiral, Ne-ar'chus, sail
along the coast and explore it, while the army went homeward on foot.
Alexander himself staid with the army, and led the soldiers along a new
way, which was very wearisome and dangerous.

The Macedonians had to pass through large wastes of burning sand, where
they suffered a great deal. They were cheered and encouraged, however,
by the example of Alexander, who nobly shared their hardships, and
always went ahead of them on foot, carrying his own armor.

Once, when they were panting with thirst, some of his men found a little
water, which they brought him. Rather than indulge in anything which all
could not share with him, Alexander poured the water out upon the sand,
saying he would refresh himself only when his men could do so too.

After many months of weary travel and great suffering, the army finally
joined the fleet at the mouth of the Euphrates, for Nearchus had in the
mean while sailed all along the northern coast of the Indian Ocean and
up the Persian Gulf.

He wrote an account of this wonderful sea journey, which was of great
importance, as it opened a new and convenient road for Eastern commerce.
The people soon took advantage of it to establish colonies and trading
stations, and to carry on a lively business with the East.




CIII. DEATH OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT.


Alexander now went back to Babylon, where he married Rox-an'a, a Persian
princess, giving her sister's hand to his intimate friend Hephaestion.
This wedding was celebrated with great pomp, for eighty Macedonian
officers took Persian wives on the same day.
