wrath. Your accusers are not one but many, Wolsey; nay, the whole of my
people cry out for justice against you. And they shall have it. But you
shall hear the charges they bring. Firstly, contrary to our prerogative,
and for your own advancement and profit, you have obtained authority
legatine from the Pope; by which authority you have not only spoiled and
taken away their substance from many religious houses, but have usurped
much of our own jurisdiction. You have also made a treaty with the
King of France for the Pope without our consent, and concluded another
friendly treaty with the Duke of Ferrara, under our great seal, and
in our name, without our warrant. And furthermore you have presumed to
couple yourself with our royal self in your letters and instructions, as
if you were on an equality with us."

"Ha! ha! 'The king and I would have you do thus!' 'The king and I give
you our hearty thanks!' Ran it not so, cardinal?" cried Will Sommers.
"You will soon win the cap and bells."

"In exercise of your legatine authority," pursued the king, "you have
given away benefices contrary to our crown and dignity, for the which
you are in danger of forfeiture of your lands and goods."

"A premunire, cardinal," cried Will Sommers. "A premunire!--ha! ha!"

"Then it has been your practice to receive all the ambassadors to our
court first at your own palace," continued Henry, "to hear their charges
and intentions, and to instruct them as you might see fit. You have also
so practised that all our letters sent from beyond sea have first come
to your own hands, by which you have acquainted yourself with their
contents, and compelled us and our council to follow your devices.
You have also written to all our ambassadors abroad in your own name
concerning our affairs, without our authority; and received letters in
return from them by which you have sought to compass your own purposes.
By your ambition and pride you have undone many of our poor subjects;
have suppressed religious houses, and received their possessions; have
seized upon the goods of wealthy spiritual men deceased; constrained all
ordinaries yearly to compound with you; have gotten riches for yourself
and servants by subversion of the laws, and by abuse of your authority
in causing divers pardons of the Pope to be suspended until you, by
promise of a yearly pension, chose to revive them; and also by crafty
and untrue tales have sought to create dissention among our nobles."

"That we can all avouch for," cried Suffolk. "It was never merry in
England while there were cardinals among us."

"Of all men in England your grace should be the last to say so,"
rejoined Wolsey; "for if I had not been cardinal, you would not have had
a head upon your shoulders to utter the taunt."

"No more of this!" cried the king. "You have misdemeaned yourself in
our court by keeping up as great state in our absence as if we had been
there in person, and presumptuously have dared to join and imprint your
badge, the cardinal's hat, under our arms, graven on our coins struck at
York. And lastly, whenever in open Parliament allusion hath been made
to heresies and erroneous sects, you have failed to correct and notice
them, to the danger of the whole body of good and Christian people of
this our realm."

"This last charge ought to win me favour in the eyes of one who
professes the Opinions of Luther," said Wolsey to Anne. "But I deny it,
as I do all the rest."

"I will listen to no defence, Wolsey," replied the king. "I will
make you a terrible example to others how they offend us and our laws
hereafter."

"Do not condemn me unheard!" cried the cardinal, prostrating himself.

"I have heard too much, and I will hear no more!" cried the king
fiercely. "I dismiss you from my presence for ever. If you are innocent,
as you aver, justice will be done you.. If you are guilty, as I believe
you to be, look not for leniency from me, for I will show you none."
And, seating himself, he turned to Anne, and said, in a low tone, "Are
you content, sweetheart?"

"I am," she replied. "I shall not now break my vow. False cardinal," she
added aloud, "your reign is at an end."

"Your own may not be much longer, madam," rejoined Wolsey bitterly. "The
shadow of the axe," he added, pointing to the reflection of a partisan
on the floor, "is at your feet. Ere long it may rise to the head."

And, accompanied by Campeggio, he slowly quitted the presence-chamber.


THUS ENDS THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE CHRONICLE OF WINDSOR CASTLE





BOOK V. MABEL LYNDWOOD




I.

     How the Earl of Surrey and the Fair Geraldine met in King
     James's Bower in the Moat--And how they were surprised by
     the Duke of Richmond.


IN order to preserve unbroken the chain of events with which the last
book of this chronicle concluded, it was deemed expedient to disturb
the unity of time, so far as it related to some of the less important
characters; and it will now be necessary, therefore, to return to the
middle of June, when the Earl of Surrey's term of captivity was drawing
to a close.

As the best means of conquering the anxiety produced by the vision
exhibited to him by Herne, increased as it was by the loss of the relic
he had sustained at the same time, the earl had devoted himself to
incessant study, and for a whole month he remained within his chamber.
The consequence of his unremitting application was that, though he
succeeded in his design and completely regained his tranquillity, his
strength gave way under the effort, and he was confined for some days to
his couch by a low fever.

As soon as he was sufficiently recovered to venture forth, he mounted to
the summit of the Round Tower, in the hope that a walk round its breezy
battlements might conduce to his restoration to health. The day was
bright and beautiful, and a gentle wind was stirring; and as Surrey
felt the breath of heaven upon his cheek, and gazed upon the glorious.
prospect before him, he wondered that his imprisonment had not driven
him mad. Everything around him, indeed, was calculated to make the
sense of captivity painful. The broad and beautiful meads, stretching
out beneath him, seemed to invite a ramble over them; the silver river
courted a plunge into its waves, the woods an hour's retirement into
their shady recesses, The bells of Eton College rang out merrily, but
their sound saddened rather than elated him. The road between Eton and
Windsor, then marked by straggling cottages with gardens between them,
with here and there a dwelling of a better kind, was thronged with herds
of cattle and their drivers, for a fair was held that day in the town of
Windsor, to which they were hastening. Then there were country maidens
and youthful hinds in their holiday apparel, trooping towards the
bridge. Booths were erected, near which, in the Brocas meads, the rustic
sports of wrestling, running, and casting the bar were going forward,
while numbers of boats shot to and fro upon the river, and strains of
music proceeded from a large gilt barge moored to its banks. Nearer, and
in the broad green plain lying beneath the north terrace, were a company
of archers shooting at the butts. But these sights, instead of affording
pleasure to Surrey, only sharpened the anguish of his feelings by the
contrast they offered to his present position.

To distract his thoughts, he quitted the near view, and let his eye run
along the edge of the horizon, until it rested upon a small speck,
which he knew to be the lofty spire of Saint Paul's Cathedral. If, as he
supposed, the Fair Geraldine was in attendance upon Anne Boleyn, at the
palace at Bridewell, she must be under the shadow of this very spire;
and the supposition, whether correct or not, produced such quick and
stifling emotions, that the tears rushed to his eyes.

Ashamed of his weakness, he turned to the other side of the tower, and
bent his gaze upon the woody heights of the great park. These recalled
Herne the Hunter; and burning with resentment at the tricks practised
upon him by the demon, he determined that the first use he would make of
his liberty should be to seek out, and, if possible, effect the capture
of this mysterious being. Some of the strange encounters between Herne
and the king had been related to him by the officer on guard at the
Norman Tower but these only served as stimulants to the adventure. After
a couple of hours thus passed on the keep, he descended refreshed and
invigorated. The next day he was there again, and the day after that;
when, feeling that his restoration was well nigh complete, he requested
permission to pass the following evening in the dry moat of the donjon.
And this was readily accorded him.

Covered with green sod, and shaded by many tall trees growing out of
the side of the artificial mound on which the keep was built, the fosse
offered all the advantages of a garden to the prisoners who were allowed
to take exercise within it. Here, as has been mentioned, King James the
First of Scotland first beheld, from the battlements above, the lovely
Jane Beaufort take her solitary walk, and by his looks and gestures
contrived to make her sensible of the passion with which she inspired
him; and here at last, in an arbour which, for the sake of the old and
delightful legend connected with it, was kept up at the time of this
chronicle, and then bore the name of the royal poet, they had secretly
met, and interchanged their vows of affection.

Familiar with the story, familiar also with the poetic strains to which
the monarch's passion gave birth, Surrey could not help comparing his
own fate with that of the illustrious captive who had visited the spot
before him. Full of such thoughts, he pensively tracked the narrow path
winding between the grassy banks of the fosse--now casting up his eyes
to the keep--now looking towards the arbour, and wishing that he had
been favoured with such visitings as lightened the captivity of the
Scottish king. At last, he sought the bower--a charming little nest of
green leaves and roses, sheltering a bench which seemed only contrived
for lovers--and taking out his tablets, began to trace within them some
stanzas of that exquisite poem which has linked his name for ever with
the Round Tower. Thus occupied, the time stole on insensibly, and he was
not aware that he had over-stayed the limits allowed him, till he was
aroused by the voice of the officer, who came to summon him back to his
prison.

"You will be removed to your old lodging, in the Round Tower, to-morrow
night, my lord," said the officer.

"For what reason?" demanded the earl, as he followed his conductor up
the steep side of the mound. But receiving no reply, he did not renew
the inquiry.

Entering a door in the covered way at the head of the flight of steps
communicating with the Norman Tower, they descended them in silence.
Just as they reached the foot of this long staircase, the earl chanced
to cast back his eyes, and, to his inexpressible astonishment, perceived
on the landing at the head of the steps, and just before the piece of
ordnance commanding the ascent, the figure of Herne the Hunter.

Before he could utter an exclamation, the figure retreated through the
adjoining archway. Telling the officer what he had seen, Surrey would
fain have gone in quest of the fiendish spy; but the other would not
permit him; and affecting to treat the matter as a mere creation of
fancy, he hurried the earl to his chamber in the Curfew Tower.

The next day, Surrey was removed betimes to the Round Tower, and the
cause of the transfer was soon explained by the discharge of ordnance,
the braying of trumpets and the rolling of drums, announcing the arrival
of the king. From the mystery observed towards him, Surrey was led to
the conclusion that the Fair Geraldine accompanied the royal party;
but he in vain sought to satisfy himself of the truth of the surmise by
examining, through the deep embrasure of his window, the cavalcade
that soon afterwards entered the upper quadrangle. Amid the throng of
beautiful dames surrounding Anne Boleyn he could not be certain that he
detected the Fair Geraldine; but he readily distinguished the Duke
of Richmond among the nobles, and the sight awakened a pang of bitter
jealousy in his breast.

The day wore away slowly, for he could not fix his attention upon his
books, neither was he allowed to go forth upon the battlements of the
tower. In the evening, however, the officer informed him he might
take exercise within the dry moat if he was so inclined, and he gladly
availed himself of the permission.

After pacing to and fro along the walk for a short time, he entered the
arbour, and was about to throw himself upon the bench, when he observed
a slip of paper lying upon it. He took it up, and found a few lines
traced upon it in hurried characters. They ran thus:--"The Fair
Geraldine arrived this morning in the castle. If the Earl of Surrey
desires to meet her, he will find her within this arbour at midnight."

This billet was read and re-read by the young earl with feelings of
indescribable transport; but a little reflection damped his ardour,
and made him fear it might be a device to ensnare him. There was no
certainty that the note proceeded in any way from the Fair Geraldine,
nor could he even be sure that she was in the castle. Still, despite
these misgivings, the attraction was too powerful to be resisted, and
he turned over the means of getting out of his chamber, but the scheme
seemed wholly impracticable. The window was at a considerable height
above the ramparts of the keep, and even if he could reach them, and
escape the notice of the sentinels, he should have to make a second
descent into the fosse. And supposing all this accomplished how was
he to return? The impossibility of answering this latter mental
interrogation compelled him to give up all idea of the attempt.

On returning to his prison-chamber, he stationed himself at the
embrasure overlooking the ramparts, and listened to the regular tread of
the sentinel below, half resolved, be the consequences what they might,
to descend. As the appointed time approached, his anxiety became almost
intolerable, and quitting the window, he began to pace hurriedly to and
fro within the chamber, which, as has been previously observed, partook
of the circular form of the keep, and was supported in certain places
by great wooden pillars and cross-beams. But instead of dissipating
his agitation, his rapid movements seemed rather to increase it, and at
last, wrought to a pitch of uncontrollable excitement, he cried aloud--
"If the fiend were to present himself now, and offer to lead me to her,
I would follow him."

Scarcely were the words uttered than a hollow laugh broke from the
farther end of the chamber, and a deep voice exclaimed--"I am ready to
take you to her." "I need not ask who addresses me," said Surrey, after
a pause, and straining his eyes to distinguish the figure of the speaker
in the gloom.

"I will tell you who I am," rejoined the other. "I am he who visited you
once before--who showed you a vision of the Fair Geraldine--and carried
off your vaunted relic--ho! ho!"

"Avoid thee, false fiend!" rejoined Surrey, "thou temptest me now in
vain."

"You have summoned me," returned Herne; "and I will not be dismissed. I
am ready to convey you to your mistress, who awaits you in King James's
bower, and marvels at your tardiness."

"And with what design dost thou offer me this service?" demanded Surrey.

"It will be time enough to put that question when I make any condition,"
replied Herne. "Enough, I am willing to aid you. Will you go?"

"Lead on!" replied Surrey, marching towards him.

Suddenly, Herne drew a lantern from beneath the cloak in which he was
wrapped, and threw its light on a trap-door lying open at his feet.

"Descend!"

Surrey hesitated a moment, and then plunged down the steps. In another
instant the demon followed. Some hidden machinery was then set in
motion, and the trap-door returned to its place. At length, Surrey
arrived at a narrow passage, which appeared to correspond in form with
the bulwarks of the keep. Here Herne passed him, and taking the lead,
hurried along the gallery and descended another flight of steps, which
brought them to a large vault, apparently built in the foundation of the
tower. Before the earl had time to gaze round this chamber, the demon
masked the lantern, and taking his hand, drew him through a narrow
passage, terminated by a small iron door, which flew open at a touch,
and they emerged among the bushes clothing the side of the mound.

"You can now proceed without my aid," said Herne: "but take care not to
expose yourself to the sentinels."

Keeping under the shade of the trees, for the moon was shining brightly,
Surrey hastened towards the arbour, and as he entered it, to his
inexpressible delight found that he had not been deceived, but that the
Fair Geraldine was indeed there.

"How did you contrive this meeting?" she cried, after their first
greetings had passed. "And how did you learn I was in the castle, for
the strictest instructions were given that the tidings should not reach
you."

The only response made by Surrey was to press her lily hand devotedly to
his lips.

"I should not have ventured hither," pursued the Fair Geraldine, "unless
you had sent me the relic as a token. I knew you would never part with
it, and I therefore felt sure there was no deception."

"But how did you get here?" inquired Surrey.

"Your messenger provided a rope-ladder, by which I descended into the
moat," she replied.

Surrey was stupefied.

"You seem astonished at my resolution," she continued; "and, indeed,
I am surprised at it myself; but I could not overcome my desire to see
you, especially as this meeting may be our last. The king, through the
Lady Anne Boleyn, has positively enjoined me to think no more of you
and has given your father, the Duke of Norfolk, to understand that your
marriage without the royal assent will be attended by the loss of all
the favour he now enjoys."

"And think you I will submit to such tyranny?" cried Surrey.

"Alas!" replied the Fair Geraldine in a mournful tone, "I feel we shall
never be united. This conviction, which has lately forced itself upon
my mind, has not made me love you less, though it has in some degree
altered my feelings towards you."

"But I may be able to move the king," cried Surrey. "I have some claim
besides that of kindred on the Lady Anne Boleyn--and she will obtain his
consent."

"Do not trust to her," replied the Fair Geraldine. "You may have
rendered her an important service, but be not too sure of a return.
No, Surrey, I here release you from the troth you plighted to me in the
cloisters."

"I will not be released from it!" cried the earl hastily; "neither will
I release you. I hold the pledge as sacred and as binding as if we had
been affianced together before Heaven."

"For your own sake, do not say so, my dear lord," rejoined the Fair
Geraldine; "I beseech you, do not. That your heart is bound to me now,
I well believe--and that you could become inconstant I will not permit
myself to suppose. But your youth forbids an union between us for many
years; and if during that time you should behold some fairer face than
mine, or should meet some heart you may conceive more loving--though
that can hardly be--I would not have a hasty vow restrain you. Be free,
then--free at least for three years--and if at the end of that time your
affections are still unchanged, I am willing you should bind yourself to
me for ever."

"I cannot act with equal generosity to you," rejoined Surrey in a tone
of deep disappointment. "I would sooner part with life than relinquish
the pledge I have received from you. But I am content that my constancy
should be put to the test you propose. During the long term of my
probation, I will shrink from no trial of faith. Throughout Europe I
will proclaim your beauty in the lists, and will maintain its supremacy
against all comers. But, oh! sweet Geraldine, since we have met in this
spot, hallowed by the loves of James of Scotland and Jane Beaufort, let
us here renew our vows of eternal constancy, and agree to meet again at
the time you have appointed, with hearts as warm and loving as those we
bring together now."

And as he spoke he drew her towards him, and imprinted a passionate kiss
on her lips.

"Let that ratify the pledge," he said.

"Ho! ho! ho!" laughed a deep voice without.

"What was that?" demanded the Fair Geraldine in a tone of alarm.

"You have the relic, have you not?" inquired the earl in a low tone.

"No!" she replied, "your messenger merely showed it to me. But why do
you ask? Ah! I understand. The fiendish laughter that just now sounded
in my ears proceeded from--"

"Herne the Hunter," replied Surrey, in a whisper. "But fear nothing. I
will defend you with my life. Ah! accursed chance! I have no weapon."

"None would avail against him," murmured the Fair Geraldine. "Lead me
forth; I shall die if I stay here."

Supporting her in his arms, Surrey complied, but they had scarcely
gained the entrance of the arbour, when a tall figure stood before them.
It was the Duke of Richmond. A gleam of moonlight penetrating through
the leaves, fell upon the group, and rendered them distinctly visible to
each other.

"Soh!" exclaimed the duke, after regarding the pair in silence for
a moment, "I have not been misinformed. You have contrived a meeting
here."

"Richmond," said Surrey sternly, "we once were dear and loving friends,
and we are still honourable foes. I know that I am safe with you. I
know you will breathe no word about this meeting, either to the Fair
Geraldine's prejudice or mine.

"You judge me rightly, my lord," replied the duke, in a tone of equal
sternness. "I have no thought of betraying you; though, by a word to my
royal father, I could prevent all chance of future rivalry on your part.
I shall, however, demand a strict account from you on liberation."

"Your grace acts as beseems a loyal gentleman," replied Surrey.
"Hereafter I will not fail to account to you for my conduct in any way
you please."

"Oh! let me interpose between you, my lords," cried the Fair Geraldine,
"to prevent the disastrous consequences of this quarrel. I have already
told your grace I cannot love you, and that my heart is devoted to
the Earl of Surrey. Let me appeal to your noble nature--to your
generosity--not to persist in a hopeless suit."

"You have conquered madam," said the duke, after a pause. "I have been
to blame in this matter. But I will make amends for my error. Surrey, I
relinquish her to you."

"My friend!" exclaimed the earl, casting himself into the duke's arms.

"I will now endeavour to heal the wounds I have unwittingly occasioned,"
said the Fair Geraldine. "I am surprised your grace should be insensible
to attractions so far superior to mine as those of the Lady Mary
Howard."

"The Lady Mary is very beautiful, I confess," said the duke; "and if you
had not been in the way, I should assuredly have been her captive."

"I ought not to betray the secret, perhaps," hesitated the Fair
Geraldine, "but gratitude prompts me to do so. The lady is not so blind
to your grace's merits as I have been."

"Indeed!" exclaimed the duke. "If it be so, Surrey, we may yet be
brothers as well as friends."

"And that it is so I can avouch, Richmond," rejoined the earl, "for I am
in my sister's secret as well as the Fair Geraldine. But now that this
explanation has taken place, I must entreat your grace to conduct the
Fair Geraldine back to her lodgings, while I regain, the best way I can,
my chamber in the Round Tower."

"I marvel how you escaped from it," said Richmond; "but I suppose it was
by the connivance of the officer."

"He who set me free--who brought the Fair Geraldine hither--and who, I
