The Hellenes had not long been masters of all Greece, when a Phryg'i-an
called Pe'lops became master of the peninsula, which from him received
the name of Pel-o-pon-ne'sus. He first taught the people to coin money;
and his descendants, the Pe-lop'i-dae, took possession of all the land
around them, with the exception of Argolis, where the Da-na'i-des
continued to reign.

Some of the Ionians and Achaeans, driven away from their homes by the
Pelopidae, went on board their many vessels, and sailed away. They formed
Hel-len'ic colonies in the neighboring islands along the coast of Asia
Minor, and even in the southern part of Italy.

As some parts of Greece were very thinly settled, and as the people
clustered around the towns where their rulers dwelt, there were wide,
desolate tracts of land between them. Here were many wild beasts and
robbers, who lay in wait for travelers on their way from one settlement
to another. The robbers, who hid in the forests or mountains, were
generally feared and disliked, until at last some brave young warriors
made up their minds to fight against them and to kill them all. These
young men were so brave that they well deserved the name of heroes,
which has always been given them; and they met with many adventures
about which the people loved to hear. Long after they had gone, the
inhabitants, remembering their relief when the robbers were killed,
taught their children to honor these brave young men almost as much as
the gods, and they called the time when they lived the Heroic Age.

Not satisfied with freeing their own country from wild men and beasts,
the heroes wandered far away from home in search of further adventures.
These have also been told over and over again to children of all
countries and ages, until every one is expected to know something about
them. Fifty of these heroes, for instance, went on board of a small
vessel called the "Argo," sailed across the well-known waters, and
ventured boldly into unknown seas. They were in search of a Golden
Fleece, which they were told they would find in Col'chis, where it was
said to be guarded by a great dragon.

The leader of these fifty adventurers was Ja'son, an AEolian prince, who
brought them safely to Colchis, whence, as the old stories relate, they
brought back the Golden Fleece. They also brought home the king's
daughter, who married Jason, and ruled his kingdom with him. Of course,
as there was no such thing as a Golden Fleece, the Greeks merely used
this expression to tell about the wealth which they got in the East, and
carried home with them; for the voyage of the "Argo" was in reality the
first distant commercial journey undertaken by the Greeks.




VII. THESEUS VISITS THE LABYRINTH.


On coming back from the quest for the Golden Fleece, the heroes returned
to their own homes, where they continued their efforts to make their
people happy.

The'seus, one of the heroes, returned to Athens, and founded a yearly
festival in honor of the goddess Athene. This festival was called
Pan-ath-e-nae'a, which means "all the worshipers of Athene." It proved a
great success, and was a bond of union among the people, who thus
learned each other's customs and manners, and grew more friendly than if
they had always staid at home. Theseus is one of the best-known among
all the Greek heroes. Besides going with Jason in the "Argo," he rid his
country of many robbers, and sailed to Crete. There he visited Minos,
the king, who, having some time before conquered the Athenians, forced
them to send him every year a shipload of youths and maidens, to feed
to a monster which he kept in the Labyrinth.

To free his country from this tribute, Theseus, of his own free will,
went on board the ship. When he reached Crete, he went first into the
Labyrinth, and killed the monster with his sword. Then he found his way
out of the maze by means of a long thread which the king's daughter had
given him. One end of it he carried with him as he entered, while the
other end was fastened to the door.

His old father, AEgeus, who had allowed him to go only after much
persuasion, had told him to change the black sails of his vessel for
white if he were lucky enough to escape. Theseus promised to do so, but
he entirely forgot it in the joy of his return.

AEgeus, watching for the vessel day after day, saw it coming back at
last; and when the sunlight fell upon the black sails, he felt sure that
his son was dead.

His grief was so great at this loss, that he fell from the rock where he
was standing down into the sea, and was drowned. In memory of him, the
body of water near the rock is still known as the AE-ge'an Sea.

When Theseus reached Athens, and heard of his father's grief and sudden
death, his heart was filled with sorrow and remorse, and he loudly
bewailed the carelessness which had cost his father's life.

Theseus now became King of Athens, and ruled his people very wisely for
many years. He took part in many adventures and battles, lost two wives
and a beloved son, and in his grief and old age became so cross and
harsh that his people ceased to love him.

They finally grew so tired of his cruelty, that they all rose up against
him, drove him out of the city, and forced him to take up his abode on
the Island of Scy'ros. Then, fearing that he might return unexpectedly,
they told the king of the island to watch him night and day, and to
seize the first good opportunity to get rid of him. In obedience to
these orders, the king escorted Theseus wherever he went; and one day,
when they were both walking along the edge of a tall cliff, he suddenly
pushed Theseus over it. Unable to defend or save himself, Theseus fell
on some sharp rocks far below, and was instantly killed.

The Athenians rejoiced greatly when they heard of his death; but they
soon forgot his harshness, remembered only his bravery and all the good
he had done them in his youth, and regretted their ingratitude. Long
after, as you will see, his body was carried to Athens, and buried not
far from the A-crop'o-lis, which was a fortified hill or citadel in the
midst of the city. Here the Athenians built a temple over his remains,
and worshiped him as a god.

While Theseus was thus first fighting for his subjects, and then
quarreling with them, one of his companions, the hero Her'cu-les (or
Her'a-cles) went back to the Peloponnesus, where he had been born. There
his descendants, the Her-a-cli'dae, soon began fighting with the Pelopidae
for the possession of the land.

After much warfare, the Heraclidae were driven away, and banished to
Thessaly, where they were allowed to remain only upon condition that
they would not attempt to renew their quarrel with the Pelopidae for a
hundred years.




VIII. THE TERRIBLE PROPHECY.


While Theseus was reigning over the Athenians, the neighboring throne of
Thebes, in Boeotia, was occupied by King La'ius and Queen Jo-cas'ta.
In those days the people thought they could learn about the future by
consulting the oracles, or priests who dwelt in the temples, and
pretended to give mortals messages from the gods.

Hoping to learn what would become of himself and of his family, Laius
sent rich gifts to the temple at Delphi, asking what would befall him in
the coming years. The messenger soon returned, but, instead of bringing
cheerful news, he tremblingly repeated the oracle's words: "King Laius,
you will have a son who will murder his father, marry his mother, and
bring destruction upon his native city!"

This news filled the king's heart with horror; and when, a few months
later, a son was born to him, he made up his mind to kill him rather
than let him live to commit such fearful crimes. But Laius was too
gentle to harm a babe, and so ordered a servant to carry the child out
of the town and put him to death.

The man obeyed the first part of the king's orders; but when he had come
to a lonely spot on the mountain, he could not make up his mind to kill
the poor little babe. Thinking that the child would soon die if left on
this lonely spot, the servant tied him to a tree, and, going back to the
city, reported that he had gotten rid of him.

No further questions were asked, and all thought that the child was
dead. It was not so, however. His cries had attracted the attention of a
passing shepherd, who carried him home, and, being too poor to keep him,
took him to the King of Corinth. As the king had no children, he gladly
adopted the little boy.

When the queen saw that the child's ankles were swollen by the cord by
which he had been hung to the tree, she tenderly cared for him, and
called him OEd'i-pus, which means "the swollen-footed." This nickname
clung to the boy, who grew up thinking that the King and Queen of
Corinth were his real parents.




IX. THE SPHINX'S RIDDLE.


When OEdipus was grown up, he once went to a festival, where his proud
manners so provoked one of his companions, that he taunted him with
being only a foundling. OEdipus, seeing the frightened faces around
him, now for the first time began to think that perhaps he had not been
told the truth about his parentage. So he consulted an oracle.

Instead of giving him a plain answer,--a thing which the oracles were
seldom known to do,--the voice said, "OEdipus, beware! You are doomed
to kill your father, marry your mother, and bring destruction upon your
native city!"

Horrified at this prophecy, and feeling sure that the King and Queen of
Corinth were his parents, and that the oracle's predictions threatened
misfortunes to them, OEdipus made up his mind to leave home forever.
He did not even dare to return to bid his family good-by, and he started
out alone and on foot to seek his fortunes elsewhere.

As he walked, he thought of his misfortunes, and grew very bitter
against the cruel goddess of fate, whom he had been taught to fear. He
fancied that this goddess could rule things as she pleased, and that it
was she who had said he would commit the dreadful crimes which he was
trying to avoid.

After several days' aimless wandering, OEdipus came at last to some
crossroads. There he met an old man riding in a chariot, and preceded by
a herald, who haughtily bade OEdipus make way for his master.

As OEdipus had been brought up as a prince, he was in the habit of
seeing everybody make way for him. He therefore proudly refused to stir;
and when the herald raised his staff to strike, OEdipus drew his sword
and killed him.

The old man, indignant at this deed of violence, stepped out of his
chariot and attacked OEdipus. Now, the young man did not know that it
was his father Laius whom he thus met for the first time, so he fell
upon and killed him also. The servants too were all slain when they in
turn attacked him; and then OEdipus calmly continued his journey,
little suspecting that the first part of the oracle's prediction had
been fulfilled.

Soon after this fight, OEdipus came to the city of Thebes. The streets
were filled with excited people, all talking at once; and the young
prince, in listening to what they said, soon learned the cause of their
excitement.

[Illustration: After a few moments' deep thought, OEdipus answered.]

It seems that a terrible monster called the Sphinx had taken up its
station on one of the principal roads leading to the town, and would
allow no one to pass who could not answer a riddle which it asked. This
creature had the head of a woman, the body of a lion, and the wings of
an eagle; and, as it ate up all those who could not guess its riddle,
the people were very much frightened.

Many persons had already been slain; for, although the bravest men had
gone out to kill it, they had lost their lives in the attempt, as no one
could harm it unless he guessed the mysterious riddle.

Laius, the king, hoping to learn from the oracle at Delphi the answer to
the riddle, had ridden off in his chariot; but the people grew more
excited still, when a messenger came running into the town, and said
that the king and all his servants had been killed by robbers, and that
their dead bodies had been found in the middle of the road.

OEdipus paid no attention to this news; for he little suspected that
the old man whom he had killed was the king, whom everybody loved, and
for whom they now mourned with noisy grief.

He was, however, deeply interested in the story of the Sphinx; and he
was so sure that he could guess the riddle, that he immediately set out
to find the monster. He walked boldly along the road until stopped by
the Sphinx, which told him to answer this riddle if he wished to live:
"What creature walks upon four feet in the morning, upon two at noon,
and upon three at night?"

After a few moments' deep thought, OEdipus answered that the creature
was _man_. "For," said he, "in the morning of life, or in babyhood, man
creeps on hands and knees; at noon, or in manhood, he walks erect; and
at evening, or in old age, he supports his tottering steps with a
staff."

The Sphinx's riddle was guessed; and the monster, knowing that its power
was now at an end, tried to get away. But OEdipus would not allow it
to do so; and, drawing his sword, he forced it back until it fell over a
precipice, on the sharp stones below, and was dashed to pieces.




X. BLINDNESS AND DEATH OF OEDIPUS.


Boeotia was now rid of the Sphinx; and when the The'bans heard the
joyful news of its death, they welcomed OEdipus with much joy. In
reward for his bravery, they gave him not only the throne, but also the
hand of Jocasta, the widowed queen. It was thus that OEdipus, although
he did not know it, fulfilled the second part of the prophecy, and
married his own mother.

Several years now passed by, during which OEdipus ruled the Thebans so
wisely, that they all loved him dearly, and went to him for advice in
all their troubles. Finally the good times came to an end; and the
people were again terrified, because a plague, or great sickness, broke
out in the city, and many of the inhabitants died.

All kinds of medicines were tried, but without effect; and all the gods
were asked to lend their aid. In despair, OEdipus sent a messenger to
Delphi to ask the oracle how the disease could be stopped. The oracle
for once gave a plain answer, and said that the plague would cease only
when the murderer of Laius had been found and punished.

Investigations were now made for the first time, and it was found that
OEdipus was the one who had slain the king. At the same time, the
servant confessed that he had not killed the royal child; and the
shepherd told how he had found the babe and carried him to Corinth,
where he had been adopted by the king.

When OEdipus heard all this, he was driven almost mad with despair;
for now he knew not only that he had murdered his father and married his
mother, but that it was on his account that the plague had caused the
death of so many people in Thebes.

In her horror and grief at this discovery, Queen Jocasta killed herself.
When OEdipus learned that she was dead, he ran into the room where she
lay, and took one of the buckles which fastened her dress and put out
his eyes with it, saying, that, since they had beheld such a sorrowful
sight, they should never again see the light of day.

To rid the city of his accursed presence, and thus, if possible, save it
from the threatened destruction, OEdipus banished himself, and
wandered away, old, blind, and poor, for he would take none of his
riches with him.

