    Fill twelve, and stop them close; pour also meal
    Well mill'd (full twenty measures) into skins
    Close-seam'd, and mention what thou dost to none.
    Place them together; for at even-tide
    I will convey them hence, soon as the Queen,
    Retiring to her couch, shall seek repose.
    For hence to Sparta will I take my course,
    And sandy Pylus, tidings there to hear
    (If hear I may) of my lov'd Sire's return.
    He ceas'd, then wept his gentle nurse that sound                 470
    Hearing, and in wing'd accents thus replied.
      My child! ah, wherefore hath a thought so rash
    Possess'd thee? whither, only and belov'd,
    Seek'st thou to ramble, travelling, alas!
    To distant climes? Ulysses is no more;
    Dead lies the Hero in some land unknown,
    And thou no sooner shalt depart, than these
    Will plot to slay thee, and divide thy wealth.
    No, stay with us who love thee. Need is none
    That thou should'st on the barren Deep distress                  480
    Encounter, roaming without hope or end.
      Whom, prudent, thus answer'd Telemachus.
    Take courage, nurse! for not without consent
    Of the Immortals I have thus resolv'd.
    But swear, that till eleven days be past,
    Or twelve, or, till enquiry made, she learn
    Herself my going, thou wilt not impart
    Of this my purpose to my mother's ear,
    Lest all her beauties fade by grief impair'd.
      He ended, and the antient matron swore                         490
    Solemnly by the Gods; which done, she fill'd
    With wine the vessels and the skins with meal,
    And he, returning, join'd the throng below.
      Then Pallas, Goddess azure-eyed, her thoughts
    Elsewhere directing, all the city ranged
    In semblance of Telemachus, each man
    Exhorting, at the dusk of eve, to seek
    The gallant ship, and from Noemon, son
    Renown'd of Phronius, ask'd, herself, a bark,
    Which soon as ask'd, he promis'd to supply.                      500
      Now set the sun, and twilight dimm'd the ways,
    When, drawing down his bark into the Deep,
    He gave her all her furniture, oars, arms
    And tackle, such as well-built galleys bear,
    Then moor'd her in the bottom of the bay.
    Meantime, his mariners in haste repair'd
    Down to the shore, for Pallas urged them on.
    And now on other purposes intent,
    The Goddess sought the palace, where with dews
    Of slumber drenching ev'ry suitor's eye,                         510
    She fool'd the drunkard multitude, and dash'd
    The goblets from their idle hands away.
    They through the city reeled, happy to leave
    The dull carousal, when the slumb'rous weight
    Oppressive on their eye-lids once had fall'n.
    Next, Pallas azure-eyed in Mentor's form
    And with the voice of Mentor, summoning
    Telemachus abroad, him thus bespake.
      Telemachus! already at their oars
    Sit all thy fellow-voyagers, and wait                            520
    Thy coming; linger not, but haste away.
      This said, Minerva led him thence, whom he
    With nimble steps follow'd, and on the shore
    Arrived, found all his mariners prepared,
    Whom thus the princely voyager address'd.
      Haste, my companions! bring we down the stores
    Already sorted and set forth; but nought
    My mother knows, or any of her train
    Of this design, one matron sole except.
      He spake, and led them; they, obedient, brought                530
    All down, and, as Ulysses' son enjoin'd,
    Within the gallant bark the charge bestow'd.
      Then, led by Pallas, went the prince on board,
    Where down they sat, the Goddess in the stern,
    And at her side Telemachus. The crew
    Cast loose the hawsers, and embarking, fill'd
    The benches. Blue-eyed Pallas from the West
    Call'd forth propitious breezes; fresh they curled
    The sable Deep, and, sounding, swept the waves.
    He loud-exhorting them, his people bade                          540
    Hand, brisk, the tackle; they, obedient, reared
    The pine-tree mast, which in its socket deep
    They lodg'd, then strain'd the cordage, and with thongs
    Well-twisted, drew the shining sail aloft.
    A land-breeze fill'd the canvas, and the flood
    Roar'd as she went against the steady bark
    That ran with even course her liquid way.
    The rigging, thus, of all the galley set,
    Their beakers crowning high with wine, they hail'd
    The ever-living Gods, but above all                              550
    Minerva, daughter azure-eyed of Jove.
    Thus, all night long the galley, and till dawn
    Had brighten'd into day, cleaved swift the flood.


FOOTNOTES:

[6] The reader is to be reminded that this is not an assembly of the
suitors only, but a general one, which affords Telemachus an opportunity
to apply himself to the feelings of the Ithacans at large.




BOOK III

ARGUMENT

Telemachus arriving at Pylus, enquires of Nestor concerning Ulysses.
Nestor relates to him all that he knows or has heard of the Greecians
since their departure from the siege of Troy, but not being able to give
him any satisfactory account of Ulysses, refers him to Menelaus. At
evening Minerva quits Telemachus, but discovers herself in going. Nestor
sacrifices to the Goddess, and the solemnity ended, Telemachus sets forth
for Sparta in one of Nestor's chariots, and accompanied by Nestor's son,
Pisistratus.


    The sun, emerging from the lucid waves,
    Ascended now the brazen vault with light
    For the inhabitants of earth and heav'n,
    When in their bark at Pylus they arrived,
    City of Neleus. On the shore they found
    The people sacrificing; bulls they slew
    Black without spot, to Neptune azure-hair'd.
    On ranges nine of seats they sat; each range
    Received five hundred, and to each they made
    Allotment equal of nine sable bulls.                              10
    The feast was now begun; these eating sat
    The entrails, those stood off'ring to the God
    The thighs, his portion, when the Ithacans
    Push'd right ashore, and, furling close the sails,
    And making fast their moorings, disembark'd.
    Forth came Telemachus, by Pallas led,
    Whom thus the Goddess azure-eyed address'd.
    Telemachus! there is no longer room
    For bashful fear, since thou hast cross'd the flood
    With purpose to enquire what land conceals                        20
    Thy father, and what fate hath follow'd him.
    Advance at once to the equestrian Chief
    Nestor, within whose bosom lies, perhaps,
    Advice well worthy of thy search; entreat
    Himself, that he will tell thee only truth,
    Who will not lye, for he is passing wise.
      To whom Telemachus discrete replied.
    Ah Mentor! how can I advance, how greet
    A Chief like him, unpractis'd as I am
    In manag'd phrase? Shame bids the youth beware                    30
    How he accosts the man of many years.
      But him the Goddess answer'd azure-eyed,
    Telemachus! Thou wilt, in part, thyself
    Fit speech devise, and heav'n will give the rest;
    For thou wast neither born, nor hast been train'd
    To manhood, under unpropitious Pow'rs.
      So saying, Minerva led him thence, whom he
    With nimble steps attending, soon arrived
    Among the multitude. There Nestor sat,
    And Nestor's sons, while, busily the feast                        40
    Tending, his num'rous followers roasted, some,
    The viands, some, transfix'd them with the spits.
    They seeing guests arrived, together all
    Advanced, and, grasping courteously their hands,
    Invited them to sit; but first, the son
    Of Nestor, young Pisistratus, approach'd,
    Who, fast'ning on the hands of both, beside
    The banquet placed them, where the beach was spread
    With fleeces, and where Thrasymedes sat
    His brother, and the hoary Chief his Sire.                        50
    To each a portion of the inner parts
    He gave, then fill'd a golden cup with wine,
    Which, tasted first, he to the daughter bore
    Of Jove the Thund'rer, and her thus bespake.
      Oh guest! the King of Ocean now adore!
    For ye have chanced on Neptune's festival;
    And, when thou hast, thyself, libation made
    Duly, and pray'r, deliver to thy friend
    The gen'rous juice, that he may also make
    Libation; for he, doubtless, seeks, in prayer                     60
    The Immortals, of whose favour all have need.
    But, since he younger is, and with myself
    Coeval, first I give the cup to thee.
      He ceas'd, and to her hand consign'd the cup,
    Which Pallas gladly from a youth received
    So just and wise, who to herself had first
    The golden cup presented, and in pray'r
    Fervent the Sov'reign of the Seas adored.
      Hear, earth-encircler Neptune! O vouchsafe
    To us thy suppliants the desired effect                           70
    Of this our voyage; glory, first, bestow
    On Nestor and his offspring both, then grant
    To all the Pylians such a gracious boon
    As shall requite their noble off'ring well.
    Grant also to Telemachus and me
    To voyage hence, possess'd of what we sought
    When hither in our sable bark we came.
      So Pallas pray'd, and her own pray'r herself
    Accomplish'd. To Telemachus she gave
    The splendid goblet next, and in his turn                         80
    Like pray'r Ulysses' son also preferr'd.
    And now (the banquet from the spits withdrawn)
    They next distributed sufficient share
    To each, and all were sumptuously regaled.
    At length, (both hunger satisfied and thirst)
    Thus Nestor, the Gerenian Chief, began.
      Now with more seemliness we may enquire,
    After repast, what guests we have received.
    Our guests! who are ye? Whence have ye the waves
    Plough'd hither? Come ye to transact concerns                     90
    Commercial, or at random roam the Deep
    Like pirates, who with mischief charged and woe
    To foreign States, oft hazard life themselves?
      Him answer'd, bolder now, but still discrete,
    Telemachus. For Pallas had his heart
    With manly courage arm'd, that he might ask
    From Nestor tidings of his absent Sire,
    And win, himself, distinction and renown.
      Oh Nestor, Neleus' son, glory of Greece!
    Thou askest whence we are. I tell thee whence.                   100
    From Ithaca, by the umbrageous woods
    Of Neritus o'erhung, by private need,
    Not public, urged, we come. My errand is
    To seek intelligence of the renown'd
    Ulysses; of my noble father, prais'd
    For dauntless courage, whom report proclaims
    Conqueror, with thine aid, of sacred Troy.
    We have already learn'd where other Chiefs
    Who fought at Ilium, died; but Jove conceals
    Even the death of my illustrious Sire                            110
    In dull obscurity; for none hath heard
    Or confident can answer, where he dy'd;
    Whether he on the continent hath fall'n
    By hostile hands, or by the waves o'erwhelm'd
    Of Amphitrite, welters in the Deep.
    For this cause, at thy knees suppliant, I beg
    That thou would'st tell me his disast'rous end,
    If either thou beheld'st that dread event
    Thyself, or from some wanderer of the Greeks
    Hast heard it: for my father at his birth                        120
    Was, sure, predestin'd to no common woes.
    Neither through pity, or o'erstrain'd respect
    Flatter me, but explicit all relate
    Which thou hast witness'd. If my noble Sire
    E'er gratified thee by performance just
    Of word or deed at Ilium, where ye fell
    So num'rous slain in fight, oh, recollect
    Now his fidelity, and tell me true.
      Then Nestor thus Gerenian Hero old.
    Young friend! since thou remind'st me, speaking thus,            130
    Of all the woes which indefatigable
    We sons of the Achaians there sustain'd,
    Both those which wand'ring on the Deep we bore
    Wherever by Achilles led in quest
    Of booty, and the many woes beside
    Which under royal Priam's spacious walls
    We suffer'd, know, that there our bravest fell.
    There warlike Ajax lies, there Peleus' son;
    There, too, Patroclus, like the Gods themselves
    In council, and my son beloved there,                            140
    Brave, virtuous, swift of foot, and bold in fight,
    Antilochus. Nor are these sorrows all;
    What tongue of mortal man could all relate?
    Should'st thou, abiding here, five years employ
    Or six, enquiring of the woes endured
    By the Achaians, ere thou should'st have learn'd
    The whole, thou would'st depart, tir'd of the tale.
    For we, nine years, stratagems of all kinds
    Devised against them, and Saturnian Jove
    Scarce crown'd the difficult attempt at last.                    150
    There, no competitor in wiles well-plann'd
    Ulysses found, so far were all surpass'd
    In shrewd invention by thy noble Sire,
    If thou indeed art his, as sure thou art,
    Whose sight breeds wonder in me, and thy speech
    His speech resembles more than might be deem'd
    Within the scope of years so green as thine.
    There, never in opinion, or in voice
    Illustrious Ulysses and myself
    Divided were, but, one in heart, contrived                       160
    As best we might, the benefit of all.
    But after Priam's lofty city sack'd,
    And the departure of the Greeks on board
    Their barks, and when the Gods had scatter'd them,
    Then Jove imagin'd for the Argive host
    A sorrowful return; for neither just
    Were all, nor prudent, therefore many found
    A fate disast'rous through the vengeful ire
    Of Jove-born Pallas, who between the sons
    Of Atreus sharp contention interposed.                           170
    They both, irregularly, and against
    Just order, summoning by night the Greeks
    To council, of whom many came with wine
    Oppress'd, promulgated the cause for which
    They had convened the people. Then it was
    That Menelaus bade the general host
    Their thoughts bend homeward o'er the sacred Deep,
    Which Agamemnon in no sort approved.
    His counsel was to slay them yet at Troy,
    That so he might assuage the dreadful wrath                      180
    Of Pallas, first, by sacrifice and pray'r.
    Vain hope! he little thought how ill should speed
    That fond attempt, for, once provok'd, the Gods
    Are not with ease conciliated again.
    Thus stood the brothers, altercation hot
    Maintaining, till at length, uprose the Greeks
    With deaf'ning clamours, and with diff'ring minds.
    We slept the night, but teeming with disgust
    Mutual, for Jove great woe prepar'd for all.
    At dawn of day we drew our gallies down                          190
    Into the sea, and, hasty, put on board
    The spoils and female captives. Half the host,
    With Agamemnon, son of Atreus, stay'd
    Supreme commander, and, embarking, half
    Push'd forth. Swift course we made, for Neptune smooth'd
    The waves before us of the monstrous Deep.
    At Tenedos arriv'd, we there perform'd
    Sacrifice to the Gods, ardent to reach
    Our native land, but unpropitious Jove,
    Not yet designing our arrival there,                             200
    Involved us in dissension fierce again.
    For all the crews, followers of the King,
    Thy noble Sire, to gratify our Chief,
    The son of Atreus, chose a diff'rent course,
    And steer'd their oary barks again to Troy.
    But I, assured that evil from the Gods
    Impended, gath'ring all my gallant fleet,
    Fled thence in haste, and warlike Diomede
    Exhorting his attendants, also fled.
    At length, the Hero Menelaus join'd                              210
    Our fleets at Lesbos; there he found us held
    In deep deliberation on the length
    Of way before us, whether we should steer
    Above the craggy Chios to the isle
    Psyria, that island holding on our left,
    Or under Chios by the wind-swept heights
    Of Mimas. Then we ask'd from Jove a sign,
    And by a sign vouchsafed he bade us cut
    The wide sea to Euboea sheer athwart,
    So soonest to escape the threat'ned harm.                        220
    Shrill sang the rising gale, and with swift prows
    Cleaving the fishy flood, we reach'd by night
    Geraestus, where arrived, we burn'd the thighs
    Of num'rous bulls to Neptune, who had safe
    Conducted us through all our perilous course.
    The fleet of Diomede in safety moor'd
    On the fourth day at Argos, but myself
    Held on my course to Pylus, nor the wind
    One moment thwarted us, or died away,
    When Jove had once commanded it to blow.                         230
      Thus, uninform'd, I have arrived, my son!
    Nor of the Greecians, who are saved have heard,
    Or who have perish'd; but what news soe'er
    I have obtain'd, since my return, with truth
    I will relate, nor aught conceal from thee.
      The spear-famed Myrmidons, as rumour speaks,
    By Neoptolemus, illustrious son
    Of brave Achilles led, have safe arrived;
    Safe, Philoctetes, also son renown'd
    Of Paeas; and Idomeneus at Crete                                  240
    Hath landed all his followers who survive
    The bloody war, the waves have swallow'd none.
    Ye have yourselves doubtless, although remote,
    Of Agamemnon heard, how he return'd,
    And how AEgisthus cruelly contrived
    For him a bloody welcome, but himself
    Hath with his own life paid the murth'rous deed.
    Good is it, therefore, if a son survive
    The slain, since Agamemnon's son hath well
    Avenged his father's death, slaying, himself,                    250
    AEgisthus, foul assassin of his Sire.
    Young friend! (for pleas'd thy vig'rous youth I view,
    And just proportion) be thou also bold,
    That thine like his may be a deathless name.
      Then, prudent, him answer'd Telemachus.
    Oh Nestor, Neleus' son, glory of Greece!
    And righteous was that vengeance; _his_ renown
    Achaia's sons shall far and wide diffuse,
    To future times transmitting it in song.
    Ah! would that such ability the Gods                             260
    Would grant to me, that I, as well, the deeds
    Might punish of our suitors, whose excess
    Enormous, and whose bitter taunts I feel
    Continual, object of their subtle hate.
    But not for me such happiness the Gods
    Have twined into my thread; no, not for me
    Or for my father. Patience is our part.
      To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied.
    Young friend! (since thou remind'st me of that theme)
    Fame here reports that num'rous suitors haunt                    270
    Thy palace for thy mother's sake, and there
    Much evil perpetrate in thy despight.
    But say, endur'st thou willing their controul
    Imperious, or because the people, sway'd
    By some response oracular, incline
    Against thee? But who knows? the time may come
    When to his home restored, either alone,
    Or aided by the force of all the Greeks,
    Ulysses may avenge the wrong; at least,
    Should Pallas azure-eyed thee love, as erst                      280
    At Troy, the scene of our unnumber'd woes,
    She lov'd Ulysses (for I have not known
    The Gods assisting so apparently
    A mortal man, as him Minerva there)
    Should Pallas view thee also with like love
    And kind solicitude, some few of those
    Should dream, perchance, of wedlock never more.
      Then answer thus Telemachus return'd.
    That word's accomplishment I cannot hope;
    It promises too much; the thought alone                          290
    O'erwhelms me; an event so fortunate
    Would, unexpected on my part, arrive,
    Although the Gods themselves should purpose it.
      But Pallas him answer'd caerulean-eyed.
    Telemachus! what word was that which leap'd
    The iv'ry guard[7] that should have fenced it in?
    A God, so willing, could with utmost ease
    Save any man, howe'er remote. Myself,
    I had much rather, many woes endured,
    Revisit home, at last, happy and safe,                           300
    Than, sooner coming, die in my own house,
    As Agamemnon perish'd by the arts
    Of base AEgisthus and the subtle Queen.
    Yet not the Gods themselves can save from death
    All-levelling, the man whom most they love,
    When Fate ordains him once to his last sleep.
      To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied.
    Howe'er it interest us, let us leave
    This question, Mentor! He, I am assured,
    Returns no more, but hath already found                          310
    A sad, sad fate by the decree of heav'n.
    But I would now interrogate again
    Nestor, and on a different theme, for him
    In human rights I judge, and laws expert,
    And in all knowledge beyond other men;
    For he hath govern'd, as report proclaims,
    Three generations; therefore in my eyes
    He wears the awful impress of a God.
    Oh Nestor, son of Neleus, tell me true;
    What was the manner of Atrides' death,                           320
    Wide-ruling Agamemnon? Tell me where
    Was Menelaus? By what means contrived
    AEgisthus to inflict the fatal blow,
    Slaying so much a nobler than himself?
    Had not the brother of the Monarch reach'd
    Achaian Argos yet, but, wand'ring still
    In other climes, his long absence gave
    AEgisthus courage for that bloody deed?
    Whom answer'd the Gerenian Chief renown'd.
    My son! I will inform thee true; meantime                        330
    Thy own suspicions border on the fact.
    Had Menelaus, Hero, amber hair'd,
    AEgisthus found living at his return
    From Ilium, never on _his_ bones the Greeks
    Had heap'd a tomb, but dogs and rav'ning fowls
    Had torn him lying in the open field
    Far from the town, nor him had woman wept
    Of all in Greece, for he had foul transgress'd.
    But we, in many an arduous task engaged,
    Lay before Ilium; he, the while, secure                          340
    Within the green retreats of Argos, found
    Occasion apt by flatt'ry to delude
    The spouse of Agamemnon; she, at first,
    (The royal Clytemnestra) firm refused
    The deed dishonourable (for she bore
    A virtuous mind, and at her side a bard
    Attended ever, whom the King, to Troy
    Departing, had appointed to the charge.)
    But when the Gods had purposed to ensnare
    AEgisthus, then dismissing far remote                             350
    The bard into a desart isle, he there
    Abandon'd him to rav'ning fowls a prey,
    And to his own home, willing as himself,
    Led Clytemnestra. Num'rous thighs he burn'd
    On all their hallow'd altars to the Gods,
    And hung with tap'stry, images, and gold
    Their shrines, his great exploit past hope atchiev'd.
    We (Menelaus and myself) had sailed
    From Troy together, but when we approach'd
    Sunium, headland of th' Athenian shore,                          360
    There Phoebus, sudden, with his gentle shafts
    Slew Menelaus' pilot while he steer'd
    The volant bark, Phrontis, Onetor's son,
    A mariner past all expert, whom none
    In steerage match'd, what time the tempest roar'd.
    Here, therefore, Menelaus was detained,
    Giving his friend due burial, and his rites
    Funereal celebrating, though in haste
    Still to proceed. But when, with all his fleet
    The wide sea traversing, he reach'd at length                    370
    Malea's lofty foreland in his course,
    Rough passage, then, and perilous he found.
    Shrill blasts the Thund'rer pour'd into his sails,
    And wild waves sent him mountainous. His ships
    There scatter'd, some to the Cydonian coast
    Of Crete he push'd, near where the Jardan flows.
    Beside the confines of Gortyna stands,
    Amid the gloomy flood, a smooth rock, steep
    Toward the sea, against whose leftward point
    Phaestus by name, the South wind rolls the surge                  380
    Amain, which yet the rock, though small, repells.
    Hither with part he came, and scarce the crews
    Themselves escaped, while the huge billows broke
    Their ships against the rocks; yet five he saved,
    Which winds and waves drove to the AEgyptian shore.
      Thus he, provision gath'ring as he went
    And gold abundant, roam'd to distant lands
    And nations of another tongue. Meantime,
    AEgisthus these enormities at home
    Devising, slew Atrides, and supreme                              390
    Rul'd the subjected land; sev'n years he reign'd
    In opulent Mycenae, but the eighth
    From Athens brought renown'd Orestes home
    For his destruction, who of life bereaved
    AEgisthus base assassin of his Sire.
    Orestes, therefore, the funereal rites
    Performing to his shameless mother's shade
    And to her lustful paramour, a feast
    Gave to the Argives; on which self-same day
    The warlike Menelaus, with his ships                             400
    All treasure-laden to the brink, arrived.
      And thou, young friend! from thy forsaken home
    Rove not long time remote, thy treasures left
    At mercy of those proud, lest they divide
    And waste the whole, rend'ring thy voyage vain.
    But hence to Menelaus is the course
    To which I counsel thee; for he hath come
    Of late from distant lands, whence to escape
    No man could hope, whom tempests first had driv'n
    Devious into so wide a sea, from which                           410
    Themselves the birds of heaven could not arrive
    In a whole year, so vast is the expanse.
    Go, then, with ship and shipmates, or if more
    The land delight thee, steeds thou shalt not want
    Nor chariot, and my sons shall be thy guides
    To noble Lacedemon, the abode
    Of Menelaus; ask from him the truth,
    Who will not lye, for he is passing wise.
      While thus he spake, the sun declined, and night
    Approaching, blue-eyed Pallas interposed.                        420
      O antient King! well hast thou spoken all.
    But now delay not. Cut ye forth the tongues,[8]
    And mingle wine, that (Neptune first invoked
    With due libation, and the other Gods)
    We may repair to rest; for even now
    The sun is sunk, and it becomes us not
    Long to protract a banquet to the Gods
    Devote, but in fit season to depart.
      So spake Jove's daughter; they obedient heard.
    The heralds, then, pour'd water on their hands,                  430
    And the attendant youths, filling the cups,
    Served them from left to right. Next all the tongues
    They cast into the fire, and ev'ry guest
    Arising, pour'd libation to the Gods.
    Libation made, and all with wine sufficed,
    Godlike Telemachus and Pallas both
    Would have return'd, incontinent, on board,
    But Nestor urged them still to be his guests.
      Forbid it, Jove, and all the Pow'rs of heav'n!
    That ye should leave me to repair on board                       440
    Your vessel, as I were some needy wretch
    Cloakless and destitute of fleecy stores
    Wherewith to spread the couch soft for myself,
    Or for my guests. No. I have garments warm
    An ample store, and rugs of richest dye;
    And never shall Ulysses' son belov'd,
    My frend's own son, sleep on a galley's plank
    While I draw vital air; grant also, heav'n,
    That, dying, I may leave behind me sons
    Glad to accommodate whatever guest!                              450
      Him answer'd then Pallas caerulean-eyed.
    Old Chief! thou hast well said, and reason bids
    Telemachus thy kind commands obey.
    Let _him_ attend thee hence, that he may sleep
    Beneath thy roof, but I return on board
    Myself, to instruct my people, and to give
    All needful orders; for among them none
    Is old as I, but they are youths alike,
