
"I was driving to Zotti's by the Greppi palace, when I saw the king come
forth, and the people hooted him. I stood up, and petitioned to kiss his
hand. The people knew me. They did not hoot any more for some time.

"So that you have heard the truth, and you must judge me by it. I cannot
even add that I am sorry, though I strive to wish that I had not been
present. I might wish it really, if I did not feel it to be a cowardly
wish.

"Oh, my Carlo! my lover! my husband! you would not have me go against
my nature? I have seen the king upon the battle-field. He has deigned to
speak to me of Italy and our freedom. I have seen him facing our enemy;
and to see him hooted by the people, and in misfortune and with sad
eyes!--he looked sad and nothing else--and besides, I am sure I know
the king. I mean that I understand him. I am half ashamed to write so
boldly, even to you. I say to myself you should know me, at least; and
if I am guilty of a piece of vanity, you should know that also. Carlo
Alberto is quite unlike other men. He worships success as, much; but
they are not, as he is, so much bettered by adversity. Indeed I do
not believe that he has exact intentions of any sort, or ever had the
intention to betray us, or has done so in reality, that is, meaningly,
of his own will. Count Medole and his party did, as you know, offer
Lombardy to him; and Venice gave herself--brave, noble Venice! Oh! if we
two were there--Venice has England's sea-spirit. But, did we not flatter
the king? And ask yourself, my Carlo, could a king move in such
an enterprise as a common person? Ought we not to be in union with
Sardinia? How can we be if we reject her king? Is it not the only
positive army that, we can look to--I mean regular army? Should we not;
make some excuses for one who is not in our position?

"I feel that I push my questions like waves that fall and cannot get
beyond--they crave so for answers agreeing to them. This should make
me doubt myself, perhaps; but they crowd again, and seem so conclusive
until I have written them down. I am unworthy to struggle with your
intellect; but I say to myself, how unworthy of you I should be if I
did not use my own, such as it is! The poor king; had to conclude an
armistice to save his little kingdom. Perhaps we ought to think of that
sternly. My heart is; filled with pity.

"It cannot but be right that you should know the worst; of me. I call
you my husband, and tremble to be permitted to lean my head on your
bosom for hours, my sweet lover! And yet my cowardice, if I had let the
king go by without a reverential greeting from me, in his adversity,
would have rendered me insufferable to myself. You are hearing me, and
I am compelled to say, that rather than behave so basely I would forfeit
your love, and be widowed till death should offer us for God to join us.
Does your face change to me?

"Dearest, and I say it when the thought of you sets me almost swooning.
I find my hands clasped, and I am muttering I know not what, and I am
blushing. The ground seems to rock; I can barely breathe; my heart is
like a bird caught in the hands of a cruel boy: it will not rest. I fear
everything. I hear a whisper, 'Delay not an instant!' and it is like
a furnace; 'Hasten to him! Speed!' and I seem to totter forward and
drop--I think I have lost you--I am like one dead.

"I remain here to nurse our dear friend Merthyr. For that reason I am
absent from your mother. It is her desire that we should be married.

"Soon, soon, my own soul!

"I seem to be hanging on a tree for you, swayed by such a teazing wind.

"Oh, soon! or I feel that I shall hate any vestige of will that I have
in this head of mine. Not in the heart--it is not there!

"And sometimes I am burning to sing. The voice leaps to my lips; it is
quite like a thing that lives apart--my prisoner.

"It is true, Laura is here with Merthyr.

"Could you come at once?--not here, but to Pallanza? We shall both make
our mother happy. This she wishes, this she lives for, this consoles
her--and oh, this gives me peace! Yes, Merthyr is recovering! I can
leave him without the dread I had; and Laura confesses to the feminine
sentiment, if her funny jealousy of a rival nurse is really simply
feminine. She will be glad of our resolve, I am sure. And then you will
order all my actions; and I shall be certain that they are such as I
would proudly call mine; and I shall be shut away from the world.
Yes; let it be so! Addio. I reserve all sweet names for you. Addio. In
Pallanza:--no not Pallanza--Paradise!

"Hush! and do not smile at me:--it was not my will, I discover, but my
want of will, that distracted me.

"See my last signature of--not Vittoria; for I may sign that again and
still be Emilia Alessandra Ammiani.

                    "SANDRA BELLONI"

The letter was sealed; Luigi bore it away, and a brief letter to
Countess Ammiani, in Pallanza, as well.

Vittoria was relieved of her anxiety concerning Merthyr by the arrival
of Georgiana, who had been compelled to make her way round by Piacenza
and Turin, where she had left Gambier, with Beppo in attendance on him.
Georgiana at once assumed all the duties of head-nurse, and the more
resolutely because of her brother's evident moral weakness in sighing
for the hand of a fickle girl to smooth his pillow. "When he is stronger
you can sit beside him a little," she said to Vittoria, who surrendered
her post without a struggle, and rarely saw him, though Laura told her
that his frequent exclamation was her name, accompanied by a soft look
at his sister--"which would have stirred my heart like poor old Milan
last March," Laura added, with a lift of her shoulders.

Georgiana's icy manner appeared infinitely strange to Vittoria when
she heard from Merthyr that his sister had become engaged to Captain
Gambier.

"Nothing softens these women," said Laura, putting Georgiana in a class.

"I wish you could try the effect of your winning Merthyr," Vittoria
suggested.

"I remember that when I went to my husband, I likewise wanted every
woman of my acquaintance to be married." Laura sighed deeply. "What
is this poor withered body of mine now? It feels like an old volcano,
cindery, with fire somewhere:--a charming bride! My dear, if I live till
my children make me a grandmother, I shall look on the love of men and
women as a toy that I have played with. A new husband? I must be dragged
through the Circles of Dante before I can conceive it, and then I should
loathe the stranger."

News came that the volunteers were crushed. It was time for Vittoria
to start for Pallanza, and she thought of her leave-taking; a final
leave-taking, in one sense, to the friends who had cared too much for
her. Laura delicately drew Georgiana aside in the sick-room, which she
would not quit, and alluded to the necessity for Vittoria's departure
without stating exactly wherefore: but Georgiana was a Welshwoman.
Partly to show her accurate power of guessing, and chiefly that she
might reprove Laura's insulting whisper, which outraged and irritated
her as much as if "Oh! your poor brother!" had been exclaimed, she made
display of Merthyr's manly coldness by saying aloud, "You mean, that
she is going to her marriage." Laura turned her face to Merthyr. He had
striven to rise on his elbow, and had dropped flat in his helplessness.
Big tears were rolling down his cheeks. His articulation failed him,
beyond a reiterated "No, no," pitiful to hear, and he broke into
childish sobs. Georgiana hurried Laura from the room. By-and-by the
doctor was promptly summoned, and it was Georgiana herself, miserably
humbled, who obtained Vittoria's sworn consent to keep the life in
Merthyr by lingering yet awhile.

Meantime Luigi brought a letter from Pallanza in Carlo's handwriting.
This was the burden of it:

"I am here, and you are absent. Hasten!"




CHAPTER XXXVI

A FRESH ENTANGLEMENT

The Lenkenstein ladies returned to Milan proudly in the path of the
army which they had followed along the city walls on the black March
midnight. The ladies of the Austrian aristocracy generally had to be
exiles from Vienna, and were glad to flock together even in an alien
city. Anna and Lena were aware of Vittoria's residence in Milan, through
the interchange of visits between the Countess of Lenkenstein and her
sister Signora Piaveni. They heard also of Vittoria's prospective and
approaching marriage to Count Ammiani. The Duchess of Graatli, who had
forborne a visit to her unhappy friends, lest her Austrian face should
wound their sensitiveness, was in company with the Lenkensteins one day,
when Irma di Karski called on them. Irma had come from Lago
Maggiore, where she had left her patron, as she was pleased to term
Antonio-Pericles. She was full of chatter of that most worthy man's
deplorable experiences of Vittoria's behaviour to him during the war,
and of many things besides. According to her account, Vittoria had
enticed him from place to place with promises that the next day, and the
next day, and the day after, she would be ready to keep her engagement
to go to London, and at last she had given him the slip and left him to
be plucked like a pullet by a horde of volunteer banditti, out of whose
hands Antonio-Pericles-"one of our richest millionaires in Europe,
certainly our richest amateur," said Irma--escaped in fit outward
condition for the garden of Eden.

Count Karl was lying on the sofa, and went into endless invalid's
laughter at the picture presented by Irma of the 'wild man' wanderings
of poor infatuated Pericles, which was exaggerated, though not
intentionally, for Irma repeated the words and gestures of Pericles in
the recital of his tribulations. Being of a somewhat similar physical
organization, she did it very laughably. Irma declared that Pericles was
cured of his infatuation. He had got to Turin, intending to quit Italy
for ever, when--"he met me," said Irma modestly.

"And heard that the war was at an end," Count Karl added.

"And he has taken the superb Villa Ricciardi, on Lago Maggiore, where he
will have a troupe of singers, and perform operas, in which I believe
I may possibly act as prima donna. The truth is, I would do anything to
prevent him from leaving the country."

But Irma had more to say; with "I bear no malice," she commenced it. The
story she had heard was that Count Ammiani, after plighting himself to
a certain signorina, known as Vittoria Campa, had received tidings that
she was one of those persons who bring discredit on Irma's profession.
"Gifted by nature, I can acknowledge," said Irma; "but devoured by
vanity--a perfect slave to the appetite for praise; ready to forfeit
anything for flattery! Poor signor Antonio-Pericles!--he knows her." And
now Count Ammiani, persuaded to reason by his mother, had given her up.
There was nothing more positive, for Irma had seen him in the society of
Countess Violetta d'Isorella.

Anna and Lena glanced at their brother Karl.

"I should not allude to what is not notorious," Irma pursued. "They
are always together. My dear Antonio-Pericles is most amusing in his
expressions of delight at it. For my part, though she served me an evil
turn once,--you will hardly believe, ladies, that in her jealousy of me
she was guilty of the most shameful machinations to get me out of the
way on the night of the first performance of Camilla,--but, for my part,
I bear no malice. The creature is an inveterate rebel, and I dislike her
for that, I do confess."

"The signorina Vittoria Campa is my particular and very dear friend,"
said the duchess.

"She is not the less an inveterate rebel," said Anna.

Count Karl gave a long-drawn sigh. "Alas, that she should have brought
discredit on Fraulein di Karski's profession!"

The duchess hurried straightway to Laura, with whom was Count
Serabiglione, reviewing the present posture of affairs from the
condescending altitudes of one that has foretold it. Laura and Amalia
embraced and went apart. During their absence Vittoria came down to
the count and listened to a familiar illustration of his theory of the
relations which should exist between Italy and Austria, derived from the
friendship of those two women.

"What I wish you to see, signorina, is that such an alliance is
possible; and, if we supply the brains, as we do, is by no means likely
to be degrading. These bears are absolutely on their knees to us for
good fellowship. You have influence, you have amazing wit, you have
unparalleled beauty, and, let me say it with the utmost sadness, you
have now had experience. Why will you not recognize facts? Italian
unity! I have exposed the fatuity--who listens? Italian freedom! I do
not attempt to reason with my daughter. She is pricked by an envenomed
fly of Satan. Yet, behold her and the duchess! It is the very union I
preach; and I am, I declare to you, signorina, in great danger. I feel
it, but I persist. I am in danger" (Count Serabiglione bowed his head
low) "of the transcendent sin of scorn of my species."

The little nobleman swayed deploringly in his chair. "Nothing is so
perilous for a soul's salvation as that. The one sane among madmen! The
one whose reason is left to him among thousands who have forsaken it! I
beg you to realize the idea. The Emperor, as I am given to understand,
is about to make public admission of my services. I shall be all the
more hated. Yet it is a considerable gain. I do not deny that I esteem
it as a promotion for my services. I shall not be the first martyr in
this world, signorina."

Count Serabiglione produced a martyr's smile.

"The profits of my expected posts will be," he was saying, with a
reckoning eye cast upward into his cranium for accuracy, when Laura
returned, and Vittoria ran out to the duchess. Amalia repeated Irma's
tattle. A curious little twitching of the brows at Violetta d'Isorella's
name marked the reception of it.

"She is most lovely," Vittoria said.

"And absolutely reckless."

"She is an old friend of Count Ammiani's."

"And you have an old friend here. But the old friend of a young woman--I
need not say further than that it is different."

The duchess used the privilege of her affection, and urged Vittoria not
to trifle with her lover's impatience.

Admitted to the chamber where Merthyr lay, she was enabled to make
allowance for her irresolution. The face of the wounded man was like a
lake-water taking light from Vittoria's presence.

"This may go on for weeks," she said to Laura.

Three days later, Vittoria received an order from the Government to quit
the city within a prescribed number of hours, and her brain was racked
to discover why Laura appeared so little indignant at the barbarous
act of despotism. Laura undertook to break the bad news to Merthyr. The
parting was as quiet and cheerful as, in the opposite degree, Vittoria
had thought it would be melancholy and regretful. "What a Government!"
Merthyr said, and told her to let him hear of any changes. "All changes
that please my friends please me."

Vittoria kissed his forehead with one grateful murmur of farewell to the
bravest heart she had ever known. The going to her happiness seemed more
like going to something fatal until she reached the Lago Maggiore. There
she saw September beauty, and felt as if the splendour encircling her
were her bridal decoration. But no bridegroom stood to greet her on
the terrace-steps between the potted orange and citron-trees. Countess
Ammiani extended kind hands to her at arms' length.

"You have come," she said. "I hope that it is not too late."

Vittoria was a week without sight of her lover: nor did Countess Ammiani
attempt to explain her words, or speak of other than common daily
things. In body and soul Vittoria had taken a chill. The silent blame
resting on her in this house called up her pride, so that she would not
ask any questions; and when Carlo came, she wanted warmth to melt her.
Their meeting was that of two passionless creatures. Carlo kissed her
loyally, and courteously inquired after her health and the health of
friends in Milan, and then he rallied his mother. Agostino had arrived
with him, and the old man, being in one of his soft moods, unvexed by
his conceits, Vittoria had some comfort from him of a dull kind. She
heard Carlo telling his mother that he must go in the morning. Agostino
replied to her quick look at him, "I stay;" and it seemed like a little
saved from the wreck, for she knew that she could speak to Agostino as
she could not to the countess. When his mother prepared to retire,
Carlo walked over to his bride, and repeated rapidly and brightly his
inquiries after friends in Milan. She, with a pure response to his
natural-unnatural manner, spoke of Merthyr Powys chiefly: to which
he said several times, "Dear fellow!" and added, "I shall always love
Englishmen for his sake."

This gave her one throb. "I could not leave him, Carlo."

"Certainly not, certainly not," said Carlo. "I should have been happy to
wait on him myself. I was busy; I am still. I dare say you have guessed
that I have a new journal in my head: the Pallanza Iris is to be
the name of it;--to be printed in three colours, to advocate three
principles, in three styles. The Legitimists, the Moderates, and the
Republicans are to proclaim themselves in its columns in prose, poetry,
and hotch-potch. Once an editor, always an editor. The authorities
suspect that something of the sort is about to be planted, so I can only
make occasional visits here:--therefore, as you will believe,"--Carlo
let his voice fall--"I have good reason to hate them still. They may
cease to persecute me soon."

He insisted upon lighting his mother to her room. Vittoria and Agostino
sat talking of the Chief and the minor events of the war--of Luciano,
Marco, Giulio, and Ugo Corte--till the conviction fastened on them
that Carlo would not return, when Agostino stood up and said, yawning
wearily, "I'll talk further to you, my child, tomorrow."

She begged that it might be now.

"No; to-morrow," said he.

"Now, now!" she reiterated, and brought down a reproof from his
fore-finger.

"The poetic definition of 'now' is that it is a small boat, my daughter,
in which the female heart is constantly pushing out to sea and sinking.
'To-morrow' is an island in the deeps, where grain grows. When I land
you there, I will talk to you."

She knew that he went to join Carlo after he had quitted her.

Agostino was true to his promise next day. He brought her nearer to what
she had to face, though he did not help her vision much. Carlo had gone
before sunrise.

They sat on the terrace above the lake, screened from the sunlight by
thick myrtle bushes. Agostino smoked his loosely-rolled cigarettes, and
Vittoria sipped chocolate and looked upward to the summit of Motterone,
with many thoughts and images in her mind.

He commenced by giving her a love-message from Carlo. "Hold fast to it
that he means it: conduct is never a straight index where the heart's
involved," said the chuckling old man; "or it is not in times like ours.
You have been in the wrong, and your having a good excuse will not help
you before the deciding fates. Woman that you are! did you not think
that because we were beaten we were going to rest for a very long while,
and that your Carlo of yesterday was going to be your Carlo of to-day?"

Vittoria tacitly confessed to it.

"Ay," he pursued, "when you wrote to him in the Val d'Intelvi, you
supposed you had only to say, 'I am ready,' which was then the case. You
made your summer and left the fruits to hang, and now you are astounded
that seasons pass and fruits drop. You should have come to this place,
if but for a pair of days, and so have fixed one matter in the chapter.
This is how the chapter has run on. I see I talk to a stunned head; you
are thinking that Carlo's love for you can't have changed: and it has
not, but occasion has gone and times have changed. Now listen. The
countess desired the marriage. Carlo could not go to you in Milan with
the sword in his hand. Therefore you had to come to him. He waited for
you, perhaps for his own preposterous lover's sake as much as to make
his mother's heart easy. If she loses him she loses everything, unless
he leaves a wife to her care and the hope that her House will not be
extinct, which is possibly not much more the weakness of old aristocracy
than of human nature.

"Meantime, his brothers in arms had broken up and entered Piedmont,
and he remained waiting for you still. You are thinking that he had
not waited a month. But if four months finished Lombardy, less than one
month is quite sufficient to do the same for us little beings. He met
the Countess d'Isorella here. You have to thank her for seeing him at
all, so don't wrinkle your forehead yet. Luciano Romara is drilling
his men in Piedmont; Angelo Guidascarpi has gone there. Carlo was
considering it his duty to join Luciano, when he met this lady, and she
has apparently succeeded in altering his plans. Luciano and his band
will go to Rome. Carlo fancies that another blow will be struck for
Lombardy. This lady should know; the point is, whether she can be
trusted. She persists in declaring that Carlo's duty is to remain,
and--I cannot tell how, for I am as a child among women--she has
persuaded him of her sincerity. Favour me now with your clearest
understanding, and deliver it from feminine sensations of any
description for just two minutes."

Agostino threw away the end of a cigarette and looked for firmness in
Vittoria's eyes.

"This Countess d'Isorella is opposed to Carlo's marriage at present. She
says that she is betraying the king's secrets, and has no reliance on
a woman. As a woman you will pardon her, for it is the language of your
sex. You are also denounced by Barto Rizzo, a madman--he went mad as
fire, and had to be chained at Varese. In some way or other Countess
d'Isorella got possession of him; she has managed to subdue him. A
sword-cut he received once in Verona has undoubtedly affected his brain,
or caused it to be affected under strong excitement. He is at her villa,
and she says--perhaps with some truth--that Carlo would in several ways
lose his influence by his immediate marriage with you. The reason must
have weight; otherwise he would fulfil his mother's principal request,
and be at the bidding of his own desire. There; I hope I have spoken
plainly."

Agostino puffed a sigh of relief at the conclusion of his task.

Vittoria had been too strenuously engaged in defending the steadiness of
her own eyes to notice the shadow of an assumption of frankness in his.

She said that she understood.

She got away to her room like an insect carrying a load thrice its own
size. All that she could really gather from Agostino's words was, that
she felt herself rocking in a tower, and that Violetta d'Isorella was
beautiful. She had striven hard to listen to him with her wits alone,
and her sensations subsequently revenged themselves in this fashion. The
tower rocked and struck a bell that she discovered to be her betraying
voice uttering cries of pain. She was for hours incapable of meeting
Agostino again. His delicate intuition took the harshness off the
meeting. He led her even to examine her state of mind, and to discern
the fancies from the feelings by which she was agitated. He said
shrewdly and bluntly, "You can master pain, but not doubt. If you show
a sign of unhappiness, remember that I shall know you doubt both what I
have told you, and Carlo as well."

Vittoria fenced: "But is there such a thing as happiness?"

"I should imagine so," said Agostino, touching her cheek, "and
slipperiness likewise. There's patience at any rate; only you must dig
for it. You arrive at nothing, but the eternal digging constitutes the
object gained. I recollect when I was a raw lad, full of ambition, in
love, and without a franc in my pockets, one night in Paris, I found
myself looking up at a street lamp; there was a moth in it. He couldn't
get out, so he had very little to trouble his conscience. I think he was
near happiness: he ought to have been happy. My luck was not so good, or
you wouldn't see me still alive, my dear."

Vittoria sighed for a plainer speaker.




CHAPTER XXXVII

ON LAGO MAGGIORE

Carlo's hours were passed chiefly across the lake, in the Piedmontese
valleys. When at Pallanza he was restless, and he shunned the two or
three minutes of privacy with his betrothed which the rigorous Italian
laws besetting courtship might have allowed him to take. He had
perpetually the look of a man starting from wine. It was evident that he
and Countess d'Isorella continued to hold close communication, for she
came regularly to the villa to meet him. On these occasions Countess
Ammiani accorded her one ceremonious interview, and straightway locked
herself in her room. Violetta's grace of ease and vivacity soared too
high to be subject to any hostile judgement of her character. She seemed
to rely entirely on the force of her beauty, and to care little for
those who did not acknowledge it. She accepted public compliments quite
royally, nor was Agostino backward in offering them. "And you have
a voice, you know," he sometimes said aside to Vittoria; but she had
forgotten how easily she could swallow great praise of her voice; she
had almost forgotten her voice. Her delight was to hang her head above
inverted mountains in the lake, and dream that she was just something
better than the poorest of human creatures. She could not avoid putting
her mind in competition with this brilliant woman's, and feeling
eclipsed; and her weakness became pitiable. But Countess d'Isorella
mentioned once that Pericles was at the Villa Ricciardi, projecting
magnificent operatic entertainments. The reviving of a passion to sing
possessed Vittoria like a thirst for freedom, and instantly confused all
the reflected images within her, as the fury of a sudden wind from the
high Alps scourges the glassy surface of the lake. She begged Countess
Ammiani's permission that she might propose to Pericles to sing in his
private operatic company, in any part, at the shortest notice.

"You wish to leave me?" said the countess, and resolutely conceived it.

Speaking to her son on this subject, she thought it necessary to make
some excuse for a singer's instinct, who really did not live save on the
stage. It amused Carlo; he knew when his mother was really angry with
persons she tried to shield from the anger of others; and her not seeing
the wrong on his side in his behaviour to his betrothed was laughable.
Nevertheless she had divined the case more correctly than he: the
lover was hurt. After what he had endured, he supposed, with all his
forgiveness, that he had an illimitable claim upon his bride's patience.
He told his another to speak to her openly.

"Why not you, my Carlo?" said the countess.

"Because, mother, if I speak to her, I shall end by throwing out my arms
and calling for the priest."

"I would clap hands to that."

"We will see; it may be soon or late, but it can't be now."

"How much am I to tell her, Carlo?"

"Enough to keep her from fretting."

The countess then asked herself how much she knew. Her habit of
receiving her son's word and will as supreme kept her ignorant of
anything beyond the outline of his plans; and being told to speak openly
of them to another, she discovered that her acquiescing imagination
supplied the chief part of her knowledge. She was ashamed also to have
it thought, even by Carlo, that she had not gathered every detail of his
occupation, so that she could not argue against him, and had to submit
to see her dearest wishes lightly swept aside.

"I beg you to tell me what you think of Countess d'Isorella; not the
afterthought," she said to Vittoria.

"She is beautiful, dear Countess Ammiani."

"Call me mother now and then. Yes; she is beautiful. She has a bad
name."

"Envy must have given it, I think."

"Of course she provokes envy. But I say that her name is bad, as envy
could not make it. She is a woman who goes on missions, and carries
a husband into society like a passport. You have only thought of her
beauty?"

"I can see nothing else," said Vittoria, whose torture at the sight of
the beauty was appeased by her disingenuous pleading on its behalf.

"In my time Beauty was a sinner," the countess resumed. "My confessor
has filled my ears with warnings that it is a net to the soul, a weapon
for devils. May the saints of Paradise make bare the beauty of this
woman. She has persuaded Carlo that she is serving the country. You have
let him lie here alone in a fruitless bed, silly girl. He stayed for you
while his comrades called him to Vercelli, where they are assembled.
The man whom he salutes as his Chief gave him word to go there. They
are bound for Rome. Ah me! Rome is a great name, but Lombardy is Carlo's
natal home, and Lombardy bleeds. You were absent--how long you were
absent! If you could know the heaviness of those days of his waiting for
you. And it was I who kept him here! I must have omitted a prayer, for
he would have been at Vercelli now with Luciano and Emilio, and you
might have gone to him; but he met this woman, who has convinced him
that Piedmont will make a Winter march, and that his marriage must be
delayed." The countess raised her face and drooped her hands from the
wrists, exclaiming, "If I have lately omitted one prayer, enlighten me,
blessed heaven! I am blind; I cannot see for my son; I am quite blind. I
do not love the woman; therefore I doubt myself. You, my daughter, tell
me your thought of her, tell me what you think. Young eyes observe;
young heads are sometimes shrewd in guessing."

Vittoria said, after a pause, "I will believe her to be true, if she
supports the king." It was hardly truthful speaking on her part.

"How can Carlo have been persuaded!" the countess sighed.

"By me?" Victoria asked herself, and for a moment she was exulting.

She spoke from that emotion when it had ceased to animate her.

"Carlo was angry with the king. He echoed Agostino, but Agostino does
not sting as he did, and Carlo cannot avoid seeing what the king has
sacrificed. Perhaps the Countess d'Isorella has shown him promises of
fresh aid in the king's handwriting. Suffering has made Carlo Alberto
one with the Republicans, if he had other ambitions once. And Carlo
dedicates his blood to Lombardy: he does rightly. Dear countess--my
mother! I have made him wait for me; I will be patient in waiting for
him. I know that Countess d'Isorella is intimate with the king. There
is a man named Barto Rizzo, who thinks me a guilty traitress, and she
is making use of this man. That must be her reason for prohibiting
the marriage. She cannot be false if she is capable of uniting extreme
revolutionary agents and the king in one plot, I think; I do not know."
Vittoria concluded her perfect expression of confidence with this
atoning doubtfulness.

Countess Ammiani obtained her consent that she would not quit her side.

After Violetta had gone, Carlo, though he shunned secret interviews,
addressed his betrothed as one who was not strange to his occupation
and the trial his heart was undergoing. She could not doubt that she was
beloved, in spite of the colourlessness and tonelessness of a love that
appealed to her intellect. He showed her a letter he had received from
Laura, laughing at its abuse of Countess d'Isorella, and the sarcasms
levelled at himself.

In this letter Laura said that she was engaged in something besides
nursing.

Carlo pointed his finger to the sentence, and remarked, "I must have
your promise--a word from you is enough--that you will not meddle with
any intrigue."

Vittoria gave the promise, half trusting it to bring the lost bloom of
their love to him; but he received it as a plain matter of necessity.
Certain of his love, she wondered painfully that it should continue so
barren of music.

"Why am I to pledge myself that I will be useless?" she asked. "You
mean, my Carlo, that I am to sit still, and watch, and wait."

He answered, "I will tell you this much: I can be struck vitally through
you. In the game I am playing, I am able to defend myself. If you enter
it, distraction begins. Stay with my mother."

"Am I to know nothing?"

"Everything--in good time."

"I might--might I not help you, my Carlo?"

"Yes; and nobly too. And I show you the way."

Agostino and Carlo made an expedition to Turin. Before he went, Carlo
took her in his arms.

"Is it coming?" she said, shutting her eyelids like a child expecting
the report of firearms.

He pressed his lips to the closed eyes. "Not yet; but are you growing
timid?"

His voice seemed to reprove her.

She could have told him that keeping her in the dark among unknown
terrors ruined her courage; but the minutes were too precious, his touch
too sweet. In eyes and hands he had become her lover again. The blissful
minutes rolled away like waves that keep the sunshine out at sea.

Her solitude in the villa was beguiled by the arrival of the score of an
operatic scena, entitled "HAGAR," by Rocco Ricci, which she fancied that
either Carlo or her dear old master had sent, and she devoured it. She
thought it written expressly for her. With HAGAR she communed during
the long hours, and sang herself on to the verge of an imagined desert
beyond the mountain-shadowed lake and the last view of her beloved
Motterone. Hagar's face of tears in the Brerawas known to her; and Hagar
in her 'Addio' gave the living voice to that dumb one. Vittoria revelled
in the delicious vocal misery. She expanded with the sorrow of poor
Hagar, whose tears refreshed her, and parted her from her recent
narrowing self-consciousness. The great green mountain fronted her
like a living presence. Motterone supplied the place of the robust and
venerable patriarch, whom she reproached, and worshipped, but with a
fathomless burdensome sense of cruel injustice, deeper than the tears or
the voice which spoke of it: a feeling of subjected love that was like
a mother's giving suck to a detested child. Countess Ammiani saw the
abrupt alteration of her step and look with a dim surprise. "What do
you conceal from me?" she asked, and supplied the answer by charitably
attributing it to news that the signora Piaveni was coming.

When Laura came, the countess thanked her, saying, "I am a wretched
companion for this boiling head."

Laura soon proved to her that she had been the best, for after very few
hours Vittoria was looking like the Hagar on the canvas.

A woman such as Violetta d'Isorella was of the sort from which Laura
shrank with all her feminine power of loathing; but she spoke of her
with some effort at personal tolerance until she heard of Violetta's
stipulation for the deferring of Carlo's marriage, and contrived to
guess that Carlo was reserved and unfamiliar with his betrothed. Then
she cried out, "Fool that he is! Is it ever possible to come to the end
of the folly of men? She has inflamed his vanity. She met him when you
were holding him waiting, and no doubt she commenced with lamentations
over the country, followed by a sigh, a fixed look, a cheerful air, and
the assurance to him that she knew it--uttered as if through the keyhole
of the royal cabinet--she knew that Sardinia would break the Salasco
armistice in a mouth:--if only, if the king could be sure of support
from the youth of Lombardy."

"Do you suspect the unhappy king?" Vittoria interposed.

"Grasp your colours tight," said Laura, nodding sarcastic approbation of
such fidelity, and smiling slightly. "There has been no mention of the
king. Countess d'Isorella is a spy and a tool of the Jesuits, taking
pay from all parties--Austria as well, I would swear. Their object is
to paralyze the march on Rome, and she has won Carlo for them. I am told
that Barto Rizzo is another of her conquests. Thus she has a madman and
a fool, and what may not be done with a madman and a fool? However, I
have set a watch on her. She must have inflamed Carlo's vanity. He has
it, just as they all have. There's trickery: I would rather behold the
boy charging at the head of a column than putting faith in this base
creature. She must have simulated well," Laura went on talking to
herself.

"What trickery?" said Vittoria.

"He was in love with the woman when he was a lad," Laura replied, and
pertinently to Vittoria's feelings. This threw the moist shade across
her features.

Beppo in Turin and Luigi on the lake were the watch set on Countess
d'Isorella; they were useless except to fortify Laura's suspicions. The
Duchess of Graatli wrote mere gossip from Milan. She mentioned that Anna
of Lenkenstein had visited with her the tomb of her brother Count
Paul at Bologna, and had returned in double mourning; and that Madame
Sedley--"the sister of our poor ruined Pierson"--had obtained grace,
for herself at least, from Anna, by casting herself at Anna's feet,--and
that they were now friends.

Vittoria felt ashamed of Adela.

