"You are early!" the owner of the cabaret said as Hector entered.

"I ought to have been earlier," he replied in a grumbling voice; "but it
was so late before I reached the other side of the forest, that instead
of passing through it I thought it best to wait till daybreak, for
it would be desperately dark under the trees, and sometimes there are
pretty rough fellows to be met with there; so I slept in a shed until
an hour before daybreak and then started, and I lost no time in getting
through it, I can tell you. What can you give me now?"

"The usual thing," the man said, shrugging his shoulders. "Bread and
beer and black sausage."

"It might be worse," Hector said as he seated himself. The food was soon
placed before him. He ate a hearty meal.

"I have a long way to go," he said when he had finished, "and as I am
blessed with a good appetite it will not be long before I am hungry
again. I suppose there is no one in the village that sells bread and
sausage, so if you will let me I will buy a whole one from you and a
couple of loaves."

"I will sell them to you willingly enough; but you will come to another
village three miles on."

"I sha'n't be hungry enough by that time," Hector laughed. "Besides, I
like to choose my own place and time and sit down by the wayside and eat
my meal. One need never go very far without coming upon a stream; and
though I like beer better than water, I can put up with it when there is
nothing stronger to be had."

"Nothing but bread and sausage again, Paolo," Hector said as he joined
his comrade a quarter of a mile beyond the village.

"And good enough too for a hungry man. I have often longed for such a
meal in the days before you took me, in spite of all warning."

"And we have often done no better since, Paolo, when we have been on the
march. Will you start on it now, or wait until we get to a stream?"

"I will hold on for a bit, master. This black bread is so hard that it
needs a lot of washing down."

Making several detours to avoid villages, they walked all day, and
towards evening came upon a main road running west.

"Unless I am mistaken in the line that I have taken, this must be the
road through Eichstadt. I can see some towers ahead, and I have no doubt
that they are those of the town. There is a bridge there across the
Altmuhl. The river makes a loop at this point, and the road cuts across
it to the northwest to Gunzenhausen, where there is another bridge. From
there the road runs to Hall. Thence we can cross the Neckar, either at
Heilbronn or Neckarsulm, and we are then in our own country, and but
a short distance from either Spires or Philippsburg, where we shall
be likely enough to meet Turenne advancing again, or shall at any rate
learn where he is. We will lie up now and not cross the bridge until it
gets dusk."

"I wish we had swords, master."

"Yes, but they would not suit our disguises. But when we get into the
town I will buy two woodmen's axes and a couple of the long knives that
all the peasants here carry. I fancy from what I heard when we were at
Hall with Turenne that the country between Eichstadt and there is for
the most part a great forest, and there are rough hills to pass before
we get to Hall. It will be just as well to have some weapons that we can
use with effect if we should come upon any bands of robbers."

"Quite so, master. A good axe is as good as a sword in a rough sort of
fight; but is there not some way we can travel so as to avoid this great
forest that you speak of?"

"Not without making a great detour, and that through a country where
there will be bodies of Merci's troops quartered everywhere."

"Very well, master. Then I think that the risk will be less with the
robbers, especially as we have not apparently much worth stealing upon
us."

"Not only apparently, but really, Paolo. Fortunately my purse was pretty
well filled when we were taken prisoners; but we spent a good deal at
Ingoldstadt, principally in buying articles we could have done without,
but which we got in order to give an excuse for your going into the
town, and in these disguises and pistols. However, we shall not, I hope,
require much more outlay; and after getting axes and knives we shall
have enough to pay for our food, such as it is, for some time. However,
there is certainly nothing in our pockets to tempt robbers."

"No, master; but if they searched you they would notice your clothes.
They would show at once that you are a person of quality; and although,
as you left your scarf behind you, they might not know that you are an
officer, they would see that there was a mystery about you."

"That is true, and I think that perhaps it would be as well if both of
us were to take off our own clothes when we get beyond the town tonight,
and go on only in those you got for us. When we rejoin our friends we
can get money and replace them."

"I have money with me, master," Paolo said. "I have had no occasion to
spend aught for a long time, and have changed my wages as you paid
them into gold, and have forty pistoles sewn up in the waistbelt of my
breeches. I heard you say that it was always a good thing to carry a
certain amount about with one in case of being taken prisoner or laid up
wounded."

"It was a wise precaution, Paolo; but just at the present moment I would
rather that you did not have it about you. However, I do not suppose we
shall be interfered with. You may as well continue to wear your breeches
under those you have outside, but leave your doublet when I change.
After all, if you were to be searched the pistoles would show that we
are not what we seem, unless we could make up some plausible tale as to
how we came possessed of them."

"Oh, we could manage that easily enough, master! There are other ways of
getting pistoles than by earning them."

Thus chatting they had crossed the bridge and were now entering
Eichstadt. Going to a quiet cabaret they ate a hearty meal, and Hector
afterwards bought the axes and knives, and they left the town just
before the gates were closed. They had walked some miles when a
thunderstorm, which had for some time been threatening, broke over them.

"We must get some shelter if we can," Hector said. "I see a light on
ahead. Let us push on and take refuge before we are wet to the skin."

On reaching the house they saw that it was a wayside inn.

"We are in luck, Paolo," Hector said as he lifted the latch.

The door, however, was fastened, and on his knocking a voice asked, "Who
is there at this time of night?"

"Travellers," Hector replied. "Come, open the door quickly or we shall
be wet to the skin!" and he emphasized his words by kicking at the door.
It was, however, a minute or two before it was opened, and Hector, who
was becoming furious at this delay, had just taken his axe from his
belt and was about to break the door in when it opened, and a man with a
torch in one hand and a sword in the other stood on the threshold.



CHAPTER XVII: A ROBBER'S DEN



"What mean you by knocking thus furiously?" the landlord of the little
inn asked angrily.

"What mean you by keeping your door shut in the face of travellers on
such a night as this?" Hector replied, even more loudly. "Are honest men
to be kept waiting in the rain while you are taking no steps to let them
in?"

"How could I tell that you are honest men?" the landlord retorted.

"Because if we had not been honest men we should long before this have
battered your door down, as indeed I was just going to do when you
opened it."

"Well, come in," the landlord said with an evil smile. "Maybe you would
have done better to have passed on."

He showed them into the taproom, where two or three rough men were
sitting.

"What did these fellows mean by knocking so loudly?" one of them asked
angrily.

"It means," Hector replied, "that travellers have a right to claim
shelter of an inn; and indeed, inn or no inn, no one would refuse
shelter to travellers on such a night as this is going to be." And his
words were emphasized by a crash of thunder overhead.

"You crow pretty loud, young fellow," the man growled.

"I speak loud because I have right on my side. I desire to quarrel with
no man; but one need indeed be a saint to keep one's temper when one is
kept standing outside a door with the rain coming down in great drops,
and threatening in another minute to come in bucketfuls. It is all the
worse when, as you see, one has a sick comrade with one."

The man spoke in a low voice to the three others seated at the table
with him. "May I ask whither you were journeying when thus caught in the
storm?" he asked in a more civil tone than he had hitherto used.

"Certainly you may. We were in haste to get on to Gunzenhausen by
morning, as a friend of ours has work ready for us there. We did not
expect this storm when we left Eichstadt just before the gates closed,
and as the nights are short we thought we would push straight through."

"You are woodmen, I see."

"Ay, woodmen and charcoal burners."

"You are not from this part, at least, judging from your tongue."

"Nor, I fancy, are you," Hector replied.

"No," the other said. "In times like these every one is liable to be
driven from home either because the troops of one army or another have
plundered and destroyed everything, or perhaps because he has been
forced into the ranks."

"That is just our case, and you will understand that in times like
these, as you say, no one cares to answer questions on the part of
strangers. But we have no particular cause of concealment. We have both
been in the army, and, as you see, have left it, and have our reasons
for wishing to travel at night, when there is no chance of falling in
with troops whose officers might ask inconvenient questions. As, thanks
to our host and you, we are nearly wet through, we will thank him to get
ready as quick as may be two flagons of hot beer, and if he has got a
couple of eggs to beat up in each of them, so much the better."

The landlord left the room, and a minute or two later the man who had
spoken to Hector got up and went out.

"These men are up to no good," Hector whispered to Paolo as they sat
down on a bench at a table some little distance from that at which the
other men were seated. "I am sorry now that I asked for the liquor, it
was necessary to order something. I should not be surprised if they drug
it. Do you put yours to your lips, and then groan as if it hurt you too
much to try to swallow, and leave it standing in front of you. I will
pretend to drink mine, and will manage to pour it away on the floor.
Presently do you lean forward on to the table and appear to fall asleep.
As I am in the corner, I will lean back and seem to go off also. Unless
I am greatly mistaken this is a regular thieves' den. Keep one hand on
the butt of a pistol. We will both keep awake for a time, and if nothing
comes of it we will then watch by turns. It is clear that they suspect
that we are not what we seem."

The men at the other table were talking together in low voices, and,
listening intently, Hector could hear a murmur of voices in the room
behind him.

"There were more than two voices there," he whispered presently to
Paolo. The latter nodded, for he too had been listening. Presently the
landlord returned with the two flagons of hot beer, which were set down
on the table before them. The room was lighted only by a torch stuck in
a cresset on the wall, and Hector had purposely seated himself as far
from this as possible. Paolo took up his mug, raised it to his lips, and
then set it down again with a sudden cry.

"I am afraid that you will not be able to take it," Hector said aloud.

"What is the matter with your comrade?" the landlord asked.

"He has a terrible abscess in his jaw, and is unable to speak or to
swallow."

The landlord took the torch from its place and walked over and looked at
Paolo's cheek. "There is no mistake about that," he said. "It is indeed
a terrible swelling, and the cheek looks almost raw."

"He has put liniments on it," Hector said, "but they seem to have done
him harm rather than good. However, he is not so bad as he was, and I
hope that the abscess will break ere long."

The landlord fastened the torch up again, and said in a low tone to the
other men: "There is no doubt about his face being bad." As he turned
away from the table he stood between Hector and the other men, and the
former seized the opportunity of pouring the contents of his mug against
the wall by his knee, knowing that as the floor was of earth it would
soak it up at once. From time to time he lifted the mug to his lips,
until he apparently drained it. Then half closing his eyes he leant up
against the corner. Paolo had already laid his head down on the table,
and after a time both breathed heavily and regularly. Half an hour later
one of the men rose noiselessly and left the room. Two or three minutes
afterwards he returned with the host, the man who had gone out before,
and two others.

"Seven against two," Hector thought to himself. "However, we shall have
the advantage of a surprise." He touched Paolo with his foot to assure
himself that he had not really gone off to sleep, but the responsive
movement showed that he also was on his guard. The man who had first
left the room and one of the others drew their long knives and stepped
quietly forward, while the others, also with bared weapons, prepared
to support them if necessary. Hector waited until the two leaders were
close, then he exclaimed sharply, "Now!" at the same moment throwing
forward his hand with the pistol. Two reports rang out at the same
moment, and the men pitched heavily forward. A yell of surprise and
fury broke from the others, but ere they could step over their fallen
comrades, Hector and his companion stood erect with their second pistols
in their right hands and their axes ready for action in their left.

Hector's second shot took effect on the landlord, Paolo's apparently
missed, for the other four rushed forward. Hector dashed the table
aside, and he and Paolo, poising their heavy axes, rushed forward to
meet their assailants.

"Mind the beams," Hector shouted, as with a sweeping side blow he clove
in the head of one opponent. But the warning came too late. Paolo struck
a downward blow, the axe caught the low beams of the ceiling, and it
flew from his hand. His opponent sprang upon him. Paolo caught the man's
right wrist as he struck at him with his knife, and drew his own from
his girdle. His assailant threw his other arm round him, and, grappling,
they fell on to the ground. Hector could do nothing to assist him, for
the other two men were trying to circle round him, keeping beyond the
swing of his axe but watching for an opportunity to spring upon him.
Keeping his back against the wall he made feints against them. Presently
one of the men passed between him and the two antagonists struggling on
the ground. Suddenly they rolled over and over, coming in contact with
him from behind and almost throwing him over. Before he could recover
from the shock Hector's axe struck him below the ear.

The other man would have turned and made for the door, but Hector knew
that it was important that he should not escape and carry the news to
others of his party, who might be in the forest. He therefore sprang
after him, and before the wretch could open the door struck him between
the shoulders with his long knife. As he did so Paolo sprung up with a
shout.

"Thank God that you are alive, Paolo! I was afraid that he might have
killed you."

"No, no, master. I had him by the wrist too firmly for that, and my
knife did its work almost directly. But with those two fellows hovering
round I should have been at their mercy had I tried to get on my feet.
So I kept on struggling until I saw my opportunity, and then as that
fellow's back was turned I rolled over against him, and so gave you
the chance that you were waiting for. Well, master, it has been a sharp
business."

"It has indeed. Now the first thing is to see if there is anyone else
in the house, and the next to look about for some clothes for you to put
on, for those you wear are covered with blood. Then we must be off, and
put as many miles between us and this place before morning as we can."

A brief search showed that the place was empty, save for the dead in the
taproom. An old doublet belonging to the landlord was found hanging up
in the loft where he slept. Taking off his outer garments, Paolo put
this on.

"It is lucky I kept my breeches on under the others," he said, "for I
certainly could not have gone into a town with these stained things on.
I suppose there is some money hidden somewhere, but we have not time to
look. You may be sure that many a traveller has been murdered here."

"I quite agree with you, but we have certainly no time to spare to hunt
for it. Let us be off at once."

Reloading their pistols and carefully wiping their axes they went out by
a door at the back of the house, for neither cared to re-enter the scene
of the slaughter. Before doing so, however, they took a long draught
from the landlord's beer barrel, to make up for the drink of which
they had deprived themselves. The storm had passed, and the stars were
shining brightly. They met nobody on their way until within two or three
miles of Gunzenhausen; it was found that the haft of Paolo's axe was
deeply stained with blood; and he threw it away on issuing from the
wood, as it did not accord well with his present attire, which was
rather that of a discharged soldier or a worker in cities than of a
countryman. Soon after eight o'clock they approached the town. They were
now greatly fatigued, for they had done two long days' marches without
any sleep between them, and turning off from the road they made their
way to a little clump of trees, and there threw themselves down in the
shade and slept until late in the afternoon.

"I think that after our experience of last night, Paolo," Hector said,
as they walked towards the town, "we had better wait until we can join
some party going to Hall before we leave this place. From what I hear,
the road is a great deal more infested with bands of lawless men than
that along which we have come."

"Then, master, I think we had certainly better wait, for I don't want
anything worse than we had yesterday."

They went to a small inn, had supper, and then lay down on some straw in
an outhouse and slept soundly until morning. Then they breakfasted,
and as there was no one else in the room Paolo was able to eat freely.
Presently the landlord came in, and Hector entered into conversation
with him.

"We want to go on to Hall," he said. "We have friends there, and we are
obliged to leave home because we should be taken for the army."

"Well, I don't think that you will find yourself better off at Hall than
here. They are catching up every ablebodied young fellow and putting him
into the ranks, and as you both look strong and active, except for your
comrade's face, you are both likely to be seized as soon as you enter
Hall, especially if you have no papers to show."

"We are not thinking of entering Hall, landlord. Our friends live a few
miles away, and they will hide us till the army moves away from these
parts."

"That will be before long, thank the saints! There is news that a great
French army marched from Spires three days ago, and there is like to be
a great fight before long; and if the French are beaten Merci will chase
them back to the Rhine, recapture all the towns that they have taken,
and perhaps enter Alsace."

"Which way do they say that the French are marching?"

"They took the road to Weisloch. Some think that they will come through
Wimpfen, and then by Weinsberg here, unless Merci bars the way. Others
again think that they will make their way down through Stuttgart. Five
hundred men march from here tomorrow to Hall, whence they go on to
Heilbronn to strengthen the garrison there. All the waggons in the town
and country round have been fetched in to carry their stores and baggage
and a convoy of ammunition. I should say that you could not do better
than go on with the waggons. No one is likely to ask you any questions,
for it will be thought that you are drivers."

"Thank you very much," Hector said; "that would certainly be a capital
plan. We were afraid of going through the forests alone."

"Yes, and you were right. They are full of marauders. A party of
troopers arrived here from Eichstadt yesterday evening. They stopped to
get a drink at a cabaret in the forest, and on entering found seven men
lying dead, and no one living to say how they got there. That some,
if not all, were robbers was evident from the fact that, on the bodies
being searched, articles evidently plundered from travellers were found
upon all of them. An examination was made of the house, and considerable
quantities of plunder found hidden. Searching in the forest behind,
several mounds of earth, evidently graves, were discovered. The landlord
himself was among the killed, for one of the troopers, who had before
stopped at the house, recognized him. It was supposed that the brigands
were killed by some other party with whom they had quarrelled. Three of
them were shot and two killed by tremendous blows from an axe, and as
neither pistols nor axes were found in the room it is clear that those
within had been killed by some other band."

The next morning, when the column started, Hector and Paolo fell in
among the carts, and rendered good service on the road by helping to
move them when the wheels of the waggons stuck fast at spots where the
road crossed marshy valleys. So bad was the journey that it occupied two
days. Then the waggons were parked outside the walls of Hall, a guard
being placed round them to prevent desertion. The troops slept inside
the town. At daybreak the next morning their march was arrested by an
officer riding out from the town, saying that news had arrived on the
previous evening that the French were marching upon Heilbronn, that
General Merci was concentrating his army there to oppose the passage of
the river, and that the troops were to push on with all speed, leaving
their baggage train at Hall. Hector at once decided that, with the
Bavarian army gathering in front, it would be madness to endeavour to
push on, and that indeed it would be far better to fall back until the
direction of the French march was fully determined, when they could make
a detour and come down upon their flank without having to pass through
