
Deep resentment seized upon her, but she soon succeeded in conquering
it; only the question what she had to give her suitor in return for his
loyal love could not be silenced. Yet was it she who summoned him? Did
he not possess the knowledge of everything that might have deterred
another from wooing her? Had she not showed him more than plainly how
ill he had succeeded in gaining her affection? If, nevertheless, he
insisted upon winning her, he must take her as she was, though the
handsome young man would have had a good right to a heart full of
love. Hers, so long as the gouty traitor lived who had ruined her whole
existence, could never belong entirely to another.

Once she had preferred the handsome, stately dancer to all other men.
Might not this admiration of his person be revived? No--oh, no! And it
was fortunate that it was so, for she no longer desired to love--neither
him nor any one else. On the other hand, she resolved to make his
life as pleasant as lay in her power. When what she granted him had
reconciled her father to her, and she was in Brussels, perhaps she
would find strength to treat Pyramus so that he would never repent his
fidelity.

In the afternoon she longed to escape from the close rooms into the
fresh air, and turned her steps toward Prebrunn, in order to see
once more the little castle which to her was so rich in beautiful and
terrible memories.

On the way she met Frau Lerch. The old woman had kept her keenness
of vision and, though Barbara tried to avoid her, the little ex-maid
stopped her and asked scornfully:

"Here in Ratisbon again, sweetheart? How fresh you look after your
severe illness!--yet you're still on shank's mare, instead of in the
gold coach drawn by white horses."

Barbara abruptly turned her back upon her and went home.

As she was passing the Town Hall Pyramus Kogel left it, and she stopped
as he modestly greeted her.

Very distinguished and manly he looked in his glittering armour,
with the red and yellow sash and the rapier with its large, flashing
basket-hilt at his side; yet she said to herself: "Poor, handsome
fellow! How many would be proud to lean on your arm! Why do you care for
one who can never love you, and to whom you will appear insignificant to
the end?"

Then she kindly clasped the hand which he extended, and permitted him to
accompany her home. On the Haidplatz she asked him whether he had read
the letter which he brought from her father.

He hesitatingly assented. Barbara lowered her eyes, and added softly:

"It is my own dear father to whom you have been kind, and my warmest
gratitude is due to you for it."

The young officer's heart throbbed faster; but as they turned into Red
Cock Street she asked the question:

"You are going from here to Brussels, are you not?"

"To Brussels," he repeated, scarcely able to control his voice.

She raised her large eyes to him, and, after a hard struggle, the words
escaped her lips:

"I learned in Landshut, and it was confirmed by my father's letter, that
you are aware of what I am accused, and that you know--I committed the
sin with which they charge me."

In the very same place where, on an evening never to be forgotten, he
had received the first sharp rebuff from Barbara, she now confessed her
guilt to him--he doubtless noticed it. It must have seemed like a sign
from heaven that it was here she voluntarily approached him, nay, as it
were, offered herself to him. But he loved her, and he would have deemed
it unchivalrous to let her feel now that their relation to one another
had changed. So he only exclaimed with joyous confidence:

"And yet, Barbara, I trustfully place happiness and honour in your
beloved hands. You have long been clear to me, but now for the first
time I believe confidently and firmly that I have found in you the
very wife for me. The bitter trial imposed upon you--I knew it in
Landshut--bowed your unduly obstinate nature, and if you only knew
how well your modest manner becomes you! So I entreat permission to
accompany you home."

Barbara nodded assent, and when he had mounted the steep staircase of
the house before her he stopped in front of the narrow door, and a proud
sense of satisfaction came over him at the thought that the vow which he
had made in this spot was now fulfilled.

Her father had failed to bend this refractory, wonderfully beautiful
iron; he had hoped to try with better fortune, but Fate had anticipated
him, and he was grateful.

Full of blossoming hopes, he now asked, with newly awakened confidence,
whether she would permit him to cross her threshold as a suitor and
become his dear and ardently worshipped wife, and the low "Yes" which he
received in response made him happy.

A few days after he married her, and journeyed with her on horseback to
the Netherlands.

On the way tidings of the battle of Muhlberg reached them. The Emperor
Charles had utterly routed the Protestants. He himself announced his
great victory in the words, "I came, I saw, and God conquered."

When Pyramus told the news to his young wife, she answered quietly, "Who
could resist the mighty monarch!"

In Brussels she learned that the Emperor had taken the Elector of Saxony
captive on the battlefield, but the Landgrave of Hesse had been betrayed
into his power by a stratagem which the Protestants branded as base
treachery, and used to fill all Germany with the bitterest hatred
against him; but here Barbara's wrath flamed forth, and she upbraided
the slanderous heretics. It angered her to have the great sovereign
denied his due reverence in her own home; but secretly she believed in
the breach of faith.




CHAPTER X.

Three years passed.

Barbara occupied with her husband and the two sons she had given him a
pretty little house in the modest quarter of Saint-Gery in Brussels.

Here the capital of wealthy, flourishing Brabant certainly looked very
unlike what she had expected from Gombert's stories; and how little
share she had had hitherto in the splendour which on the drive to
Landshut she had expected to find in Brussels!

Since the musician had described the city, she had seen it distinctly
before her in her vivid imagination. The lower portion, intersected by
the river Senne and numerous canals, belonged to the rich, industrious
citizens, the skilful artisans, and the common people; the upper, which
occupied a hill, contained the great Brabant palace, the residence of
the Emperor Charles. This edifice, which, though its exterior was almost
wholly devoid of ornament, nevertheless presented a majestic aspect on
account of its vast size, adjoined a splendid park, whose leafy groups
of ancient trees merged into the forest of Soignies. Here also stood the
palaces of the great nobles and, on the side of the hill which sloped to
the lower city, the Cathedral of St. Gudule towered proudly aloft.

Much as Barbara had heard in praise of the magnificent market-place in
the lower city, with its marvellous Town Hall, it was always the upper
portion of Brussels she beheld when she thought of the capital. She had
felt that she belonged to this quarter, where all who had any claim to
aristocracy lived; here, near the palace and the beautiful leafy trees,
her future home had been in her imagination.

The result was different, and now the longing for the brilliant Brussels
on the hill was doubly strong. True, there dwelt also those who had the
greatest power of attraction for her.

She was just returning home from the palace park, where stood a pleasant
summer house in which Adrian Dubois lived with his wife and one child.
It was this child especially that drew Barbara to the upper city as
often as possible, and constantly forced her thoughts to linger there
and still to follow the "higher" of the imperial motto, which everywhere
else she was compelled to renounce.

True, a limit was fixed to these visits to the Dubois couple. For one
whole year Frau Traut had successfully concealed the child from the
mother; then Barbara had once met the boy outside the house, and the way
in which he was hurried out of her sight led to the conviction that this
was her child, and Frau Dubois had imprudently betrayed the secret.

From this time Barbara knew that her John had been confided to the care
of the valet and his wife. At last Frau Traut had been unable to resist
her entreaties, and allowed her to see her son and hold him a short time
in her arms.

He was a strong, splendid child, with his mother's thick, curling locks
and large blue eyes. Barbara thought that she had never seen a handsomer
boy; and not only the Dubois, who had yielded their whole hearts to
their nursling, but strangers also admired the magnificent development
of this rare child. The young mother saw in him something grander, more
perfect than the children of other human beings, even than the two boys
whom she had given her husband, although little John usually repulsed
her caresses.

In granting Barbara permission to see her child often, Frau Traut
transgressed an explicit command of the Emperor and, to prevent the evil
consequences which her sympathy might entail, she allowed the mother
to rejoice in the sight of her little son only once a month, and then
always for a short time.

During these interviews she was strictly forbidden to bestow even the
smallest gift upon the boy.

To-day John had voluntarily approached the stranger to whom he owed
his life, but whose passionate caresses at their first meeting had
frightened him, to show her the little wooden horse that Adrian had just
given him. This had made her happy, and on the way home the memory of
her hidden treasure more than once brought a joyous smile to her lips.

At home she first sought her children. Her husband, who had now been
appointed mustering officer, was on one of the journeys required by the
service, which rarely permitted him to remain long in his own house.

Barbara did not miss him; nay, she was happiest during his absence.

After glancing into the nursery, she retired to her quiet chamber, where
her harp stood and the lutes hung which often for hours supplied the
place of her lost voice, and sat down at her spinning wheel.

She turned it thoughtfully, but the thread broke, and her hands fell
into her lap. Her mind had again found the way to the house in the park
and to her John, her own, wonderful, imperial child, and lingered there
until from the next room the cry of an infant was heard and a woman's
voice singing it to sleep. Frau Lamperi, who had made herself a part of
the little household, and beheld in its master the incarnation of every
manly virtue, was lulling the baby to rest. Beside it slept another
child, a boy two years old. Both were hers, yet, though the infant
raised its voice still louder, she remained at the spinning wheel,
dreaming on.

In this way, and while playing on the harp and the lutes, her solitude
was best endured. Her husband's journeys often led him through the whole
Netherlands and the valley of the Rhine as far as Strasbourg and Basle,
and her father had returned to Ratisbon.

She had found no new friends in Brussels, and had not endeavoured to
gain any.

Loneliness, which she had dreaded in the heyday of her early youth, no
longer alarmed her, for quiet reveries and dreams led her back to the
time when life had been beautiful, when she had enjoyed the love of
the greatest of mortals, and art had given her existence an exquisite
consecration.

With the loss of her voice--she was now aware of it--many of the best
things in her life had also ceased to exist. Her singing might perhaps
have lured back her inconstant lover, and had she come to Brussels
possessing the mastery of her voice which was hers during that happy
time in May, her life would have assumed a totally different form.

Gombert, who had induced her to move hither, had urged her with the best
intentions during their drive to Landshut to change her residence. When
he did so, however, Barbara was still connected with the Emperor, and
he was animated by the hope that the trouble in her throat would be
temporary.

It would have been easy to throw wide to a singer of her ability the
doors of the aristocratic houses which were open to him; for, except his
professional comrades, he associated only with the wealthy nobles in the
upper part of the city, who needed him for the brilliant entertainments
which they understood how to arrange so superbly. The Oranges, Egmont,
Aremberg, Brederode, Aerschot, and other heads of the highest nobility
in Brabant would have vied with one another to present her to their
guests, receive her at their country seats, and invite her to join
their riding parties. Where, on the contrary, could he expect to find a
friendly reception for the wife of a poor officer belonging to the lower
nobility, who was said to have forfeited the Emperor's favour, who
could offer nothing to the ear, and to the eye only a peculiar style of
beauty, which she could enhance neither by magnificent attire nor by any
other arts?

Had she been still the Emperor Charles's favourite, or had he bestowed
titles and wealth upon her, more might have been done for her; but as
it was, nothing was left of the favour bestowed by the monarch save
the stain upon her fair name. Deeply as Gombert regretted it, he could
therefore do nothing to make her residence in Brussels more agreeable.
He was not even permitted to open his own house to her, since his wife,
who was neither more jealous nor more scrupulous than most other wives
of artists, positively refused to receive the voiceless singer with the
tarnished reputation.

Worthy Appenzelder associated exclusively with men, and thus of her
Ratisbon friends not one remained except Massi, the violinist, and the
Maltese choir boy, Hannibal Melas.

The little fellow had lost his voice, but had remained in Brussels
and, in fact, through Barbara's intercession; for she had ventured to
recommend the clever, industrious lad to the Bishop of Arras in a letter
which reminded him of his kindness in former days, and the latter had
been gracious, and in a cordial reply thanked her for her friendly
remembrance. Hannibal had remained in the minister's service and, as he
understood several languages and proved trustworthy, was received among
his private secretaries.

The violinist Massi remained faithful and, as he became her husband's
friend also, he was always a welcome guest in her house.

Her father had returned to Ratisbon. After he had acted as godfather to
the oldest boy, Conrad, he could be detained no longer. Homesickness had
obtained too powerful a hold upon him.

True, Barbara and her husband did everything in their power to make life
in their home pleasant; but he needed the tavern, and there either the
carousing was so noisy that it became too much for him, or people often
had very violent political discussions about liberty and faith, which
he only half understood, though they used the Flemish tongue. And the
Danube, the native air, the familiar faces! In short, he could not stay
with his children, though he dearly loved his little godson Conrad; and
it pleased him to see his daughter more yielding and ready to render
service than ever before, and to watch her husband, who, as the saying
went at home, "was ready to let her walk over him."

The husband's intention of making the unbending iron pliant was wholly
changed; the recruiting officer whom his companions and subordinates
knew and feared as one of the sternest of their number, showed himself
to Barbara the most yielding of men. The passionate tenderness with
which he loved her had only increased with time, and the stern soldier's
subjection to her will went so far that, even when he would gladly have
expressed disapproval, he usually omitted to do so, because he dreaded
to lessen the favour which she showed him in place of genuine love, and
which he needed. Besides, she gave him little cause for displeasure; she
did her duty, and strove to render his outward life a pleasant one.

Even after her father had left her she remained a wife who satisfied his
heart. He had learned the coolness of her nature in his first attempts
to woo her in Ratisbon and, as at that time, he whom the service
frequently detained from her for long periods regarded it as a merit.

So he wrote her father letters expressing his gratification, and the
replies which the captain sent to Brussels were in a similar tone.

Barbara had obtained for him his own house, for which he had longed. He
felt comfortable there, and what he lacked in his home he found at the
Red Cock or the Black Bear. An elderly Landshut widow, a relative, acted
as his housekeeper and provided in the best possible manner for his
comfort.

Whoever met the stately mustering officer alone or arm in arm with his
beautiful young wife, whose golden hair had grown out again, must
have believed him a happy man; and so he would have been had not some
singular habits which Barbara possessed made him uneasy. At first the
reveries into which she often sank, and which were so unlike her former
self, had been still worse. He did not know that the improvement had
taken place since she had discovered her John's abode and been permitted
sometimes to see him. Barbara's husband and father supposed that the
child which she had given to the Emperor was dead; both had placed this
interpretation upon her brief statement that it had been taken from her,
and afterward delicacy of feeling prevented any other allusion to this
painful subject.

Besides this proneness to reverie, Barbara's husband was sometimes
disturbed by the carelessness with which she neglected the most
important domestic matters if there was an entertainment or exhibition
which the Emperor Charles attended; and, finally, there was something in
her manner to the children, whom Pyramus loved above all things, which
disturbed, incensed, and wounded him, yet which he felt that neither
threats nor stern interposition could change.

He possessed no defence against the reveries except a warning or a
jesting word. Delight in brilliant spectacles was doubtless natural to
her disposition, and as Pyramus not only loved but esteemed her, it was
repugnant to his feelings to watch her. Yet when, nevertheless, he
once followed her steps, he had found her, according to her expressed
intention, among other women in St. Gudule's Cathedral. Her eyes, which
he watched intently, were constantly turned toward the great personages
whose presence adorned the festival--the Emperor and Queen Mary of
Hungary.

These expeditions were evidently not to meet a lover, yet from that hour
he cherished a conviction, mingled with a bitter sense of resentment,
that she went to the festivals which his Majesty attended in order to
see the man whom she had once loved, and whose image even now she could
not wholly efface from her imagination, perhaps also from her heart.

For her manner to the children, on the contrary, he could find no
plausible explanation. Her love for them was unmistakable. Yet what was
the meaning of the compassionate manner with which she treated them,
talked to them, spoke of them, until it nearly drove him frantic? She
often treated the healthy, merry older boy as if he was ill and needed
comfort, and the pretty infant in the cradle was addressed in the same
way.

If he summoned up his courage and openly reproved her, she always
answered in general terms, such as: "What do you mean? Are we not all
born to suffer?" or, "Shall we envy them because they have entered life
to endure pain and to die?"

Not until Pyramus, with sorrowful emotion, entreated her not to speak of
the children as if they had been given to them for a punishment and not
for a joy, she imposed a certain degree of constraint upon herself and
changed her manner of speech; yet the expression of her eyes revealed
that she felt no really glad, unconstrained joy in her sons.

Though she denied it, she knew how to explain this manner to herself;
for, after her attention had been directed to it, she secretly admitted
that the sight of the two dear children who were wholly hers always
reminded her of the third who had been taken from her, whom she was
permitted to see very rarely, and only in secret, yet who, beside the
others, seemed like a young lion beside modest lambs.

She cherished no desire for a new love, though the lukewarm blending of
gratitude and good will which she bestowed upon her husband did not even
remotely deserve this lofty name.

There was no lack of gallants in Brussels who noticed and were
attracted by her, but whoever knew or had heard of Pyramus Kogel
avoided interfering with his rights; for he was numbered among the best
swordsmen in Brussels, and the air with which the tender-hearted husband
wore his long rapier was decidedly threatening.

Besides, Barbara herself also knew how to protect herself against any
intrusiveness with haughty sharpness.

To-day she was especially glad that Pyramus was absent on an inspecting
tour. She had gratefully enjoyed the meeting with her John. Never had
the light of his blue eyes seemed so sunny, his head with its fair curls
so angelic in its beauty. His voice, too, had enraptured her by its
really bewitching melody. The maternal gift of song would certainly
descend to him, and perhaps it was allotted to the Emperor's son to
amaze his generation by the presence of hero and singer in one person,
like a second King David.

Twilight had already shadowed the paths when she left the Dubois house,
and on her way home she saw the Emperor approaching. She had slipped
behind a statue as quickly as possible, and he could scarcely have
recognised her, for the gloaming had already merged into partial
darkness; but the mere thought of having been so near him quickened the
pulsation of her heart.

The little gentleman at his side with the stiffly erect bearing and
pompous walk was his son Philip, who was now visiting his father in
Brussels, and expected to leave in a few days. How insignificant was the
figure of the heir of so many crowns! How the brother whom she had given
to his imperial father would some day tower above him!

She again imagined all these things in the quiet of her room. The
thought of this child cheered her heart, but it contracted again as she
remembered the series of bitter humiliations which she had experienced
in Brussels. Among the courtiers whom she had known so well in Ratisbon
not one vouchsafed her anything more than a passing greeting; and the
Queen of Hungary, to whom she would gladly have poured out her heart,
had refused her repeated entreaties for an audience.




CHAPTER XI.

After the short walk in the park of his palace, during which Barbara had
met him in the dusk, the Emperor Charles had dined with his son Philip
and the Queen of Hungary. Now he entered his spacious study.

His feet were refusing their support more and more, and the fingers of
his right hand, which the gout was now crippling, found it hard to grasp
his cane.

He sank back in his arm-chair exhausted, closed his eyes, and laid his
hand upon the clever pointed head of the greyhound which lay at his
feet.

The short walk and the fiery wine which he had again enjoyed in
abundance at dinner had increased the pain from which he was now never
free, day or night, and it was some time ere Adrian could succeed in
propping his infirm body comfortably.

At last Charles passed his handkerchief across his perspiring brow, and
called to the majordomo.

Quijada eagerly approached, and the valet was respectfully leaving the
room, but the Emperor's summons stopped him.

"I have something," Charles began, no longer able to maintain complete
control over his voice, which was sometimes interrupted by the shortness
of breath that had recently attacked him, "to say to you also--"

Here he hesitated, pointed to the window which overlooked the park,
then, with a keen glance at the valet's face, continued:

"A ghost wanders about there. I have already seen it several times under
the trees. True, it avoided approaching me. What still remains useful
in this miserable body! But my eyes are sharp yet, and I recognised the
spectre--it is the Ratisbon singer."

"Your Majesty knows," replied Quijada, "what befell her after the birth
of the child, and that she is now living here in Brussels; but I was
strictly forbidden to mention her name in your Majesty's presence."

"That command closed my lips also," said the valet.

"But what the hearing rejected forced itself upon the sight," remarked
Charles, gazing fixedly into vacancy. "Wherever I appear in public I see
this woman, always this woman! It is not only the basilisk's eye that
has constraining power. I can not help perceiving her, yet I have as
little desire to meet her gaze as to encounter vanity, worldly pleasure,
folly, sin."

"Then," cried Quijada angrily, "it will be advisable to transfer her
husband, who is in your Majesty's service, from here to Andalusia or to
the New World."

"As if she would accompany him!" exclaimed the monarch with a scornful
laugh. "No, my friend. This woman did not marry for her own pleasure,
but to cause me sorrow or indignation. She succeeded, too, to a certain
extent; but I do not war with women, least of all with one who is
so unhappy. If we send her husband--who, moreover, is a useful
fellow--across the ocean, she will stay here in Brussels, and we shall
fare like the maid-servants who killed the cocks, and were then waked
by the mistress of the house still earlier than before. Besides, one who
earnestly seeks his true salvation will not remove from his path such
a living memento, such a walking monitor of past sins and follies; and,
finally, this woman is not wholly wrong in deeming herself an
unusual person, cruelly as Heaven has destroyed her best gift. On no
account--you hear me--shall she be wounded or injured for my sake so
long as she reminds me only by her eyes that in happier days we were
closely connected. But to-day the ghost ventured to draw nearer to me
than is seemly, and I recognise the object. It entered the park, not on
my account, but the boy's--and, Adrian, from your house. I demand the
whole truth! Did she find the way to the boy, and was your wife, who is
usually a prudent woman, unwise enough to allow her to feast her eyes
upon him?"

"She is the child's mother," the valet answered gently, "and your
Majesty knows--"

"I know," Charles interrupted the faithful attendant in a sterner tone
than he commonly used to him, "that you were most positively forbidden
to permit any one to approach the boy, least of all the person who gazes
at him with greedy eyes, and from whom might proceed measureless perils.
Your wife, Adrian, who is tenderly attached to the child, will now
suffer the most painfully for the disobedience. It must go away from
here, go at once, and to a distant country--to Spain. If politics and
Heaven permit, I shall soon follow.--You, Luis, will now arrange with
Adrian the best plan for the removal. The work must be accomplished in
the utmost secrecy. The boy shall grow up in the wholesome air of the
country. No one who surrounds him must be permitted even to suspect to
whom he owes his life. This child shall be simple in his habits, devout,
and modest, far from flattery and spoiling, among other lads of plain
families, who know nothing of heresy and court follies. This innocent
child's soul, at least, shall not be corrupted at its root. I
consecrated him to the Saviour, and as a pure sacrifice he must receive
him from his father's hand. I have given him a beautiful charge. In the
monastery his prayers will remove the guilt of him who gave him life.
The pardon for which the mother refused to strive, the son, consecrated
to Jesus Christ our Lord, will struggle to obtain."

With uplifted gaze he interrupted himself. His eyes flashed with a fiery
light, and his voice gained an imperious tone, which showed no trace of
the asthmatic trouble that had just affected it as he added: "But the
secret which even the reckless mother has hitherto known how to guard
must be kept. Not even your wife, Luis, not even our sister, Queen Mary,
must learn what is being accomplished."

Then he added more quietly: "The opportunity to take the boy to Spain
is favourable. Our son, Don Philip, will return in three weeks to
Valladolid. The child can be carried in his train. It will disappear
among the throng, for an actual army forms the tail of the comet. I will
hear your proposal to-morrow. Who is to take charge of him on the way?
Where can a suitable shelter for the boy be found in Spain?"

This announcement fell upon the valet like a thunderbolt, for little
John, who regarded him and his wife as his parents, had become as
dear to the childless couple as if he was their own. To part from the
beautiful, frank, merry boy would darken Frau Traut's whole life. He,
Adrian, had warned her, but she had been unable to resist the entreaties
of the sorely punished mother. Cautiously as Barbara's visits had been
managed, the infirm monarch's eye had maintained its keenness of vision
here also.

Now his wife must pay dearly for her weakness and disobedience. Frau
Traut was threatened, too, with another loss. Massi, the most intimate
friend of their house, also expected to return to Spain in the Infant
Philip's train, to spend the remainder of his days there in peace.
Permission to depart had been granted to him a few hours before.

Little John was fond of this frequent visitor of his foster-parents, who
could whistle so beautifully and knew how to play for him upon a blade
of grass or a comb; but this was not the only reason which made Adrian
think of giving the Emperor's son to the musician's care for the journey
to Spain, where Massi's wife and daughter were awaiting his return at
Leganes, near Madrid. In this healthfully located village lived a pastor
and a sacristan of whom the musician had spoken, and who perhaps later
might take charge of the child's education.

Adrian informed Don Luis and then the monarch of all this, and as
Quijada knew Massi to be a trustworthy man, and described him to his
royal master, Charles entered into negotiations with him.

The result was that a formal compact was concluded between Dubois and
the musician, which granted the violinist considerable emoluments, but
bound him and his family by oath to maintain the most absolute secrecy
concerning the child's origin. Moreover, Massi himself knew nothing
about the boy's parents except that they belonged to the most
aristocratic circles, and he was inclined to believe little John to be
Quijada's son.

The sovereign himself examined the agreement, and at its close made Frau
Traut take a special oath to preserve the most absolute secrecy about
everything concerning the boy to every one, even Barbara.

What Adrian had expected happened. The Emperor's command to take her
darling from her affected his wife most painfully. With eyes reddened by
weeping, and an aching heart, she awaited the day of departure.

On the evening before the journey she was sitting by the child's couch
to enjoy the sight of him as much as possible. Wholly absorbed in gazing
at his infantile grace and patrician beauty, she did not hear the door
open, and started in terror at the sound of footsteps close behind her.

Her husband had ushered the Emperor and Quijada, on whose arm he
was leaning, into the nursery without announcing his entrance. She
involuntarily pressed her finger on her lips to intimate that the child
must not be roused from its slumber; but the gesture was instantly
followed by the profound bow due to the sovereign, and then, with tears
in her eyes, she held the light so that it might fall upon the face of
the lovely child.

A flush tinged the livid features of the invalid, prematurely aged
monarch, and at a wave of his hand the foster-mother left him and his
companion alone with the little one. Charles gazed suspiciously around
the small, neat room.

Not until he had assured himself that he was alone did he look closely
at the son who lay with flushed cheeks on the white pillows of his
little bed in the sound slumber of childhood.

Rarely had he seen a more beautiful boy. How finely chiselled were these
childish features, how thick and wavy the curls that clustered around
his head! The golden lustre which shone from them had also brightened
his mother's hair. And the smile on the cherry lips of the slightly open
mouth. That, too, was familiar to him. The child had inherited it from
Barbara. Memories which had long since paled in his soul, oppressed by
suffering and disappointment, regained their vanished forms and colours,
and for the first time in many months a smile hovered upon his lips.

What an exquisite image of the Creator was this child! and he might call
it his own, and if, as he intended, it grew up an innocent, happy
lad, it would also become a genuine man, with a warm heart and simple,
upright nature, not a moving marble figure, inflated by pompous
self-conceit, incapable of any deep feeling, any untrammelled emotion,
like his son Philip. Then it might happen that from love, from a real
living impulse of the heart, he would fall upon his neck; then----

He stretched both hands towards the little bed and, obeying a mighty
impulse of paternal affection, bent toward the boy to kiss him. But ere
his lips touched the child's he again gazed around him like a thief who
is afraid of being caught. At last he yielded to the longing which urged
him, and kissed little John--his, yes, his own son--first on his high,
open brow, and then on his red lips.

How sweet it was! Yet while he confessed this a painful emotion blended
with the pleasure.

He had again thought of Barbara, of her first kiss and the other joys
of the fairest May-time of his life, and the anxious fear stole upon him
that he might give sin a power over his soul which, after undergoing a
heavy penance, he thought he had broken.

Nothing, nothing at all, he now said to himself, ought to bind him to
the woman whom he had effaced from the book of his life as unworthy,
rebellious, lost to salvation; and, in a totally different mood, he
again gazed at the child. It already wore the semblance of an angel in
the gracious Virgin's train, and it should be dedicated to her and her
divine Son.

Then the boy drew his little arm from under his head.

How strong he was! how superbly the chest of this child not yet four
years old already arched! This bud, when it had bloomed to manhood,
might prove itself, as he himself had done in his youth, the stronger
among the strong. He carefully examined the harmoniously developed
little muscles. What a knight this child promised to become! Surely
it was hardly created for quiet prayer and the inactive peace of the
cloister! He was still free to dispose of the boy. If he should intrust
his physical development to the reliable Quijada, skilled in every
knightly art, and to Count Lanoi, famed as a rider and judge of horses;
confide the training of his mind and soul to the Bishop of Arras, the
learned Frieslander Viglius, or any other clever, strictly religious
man, he might become a second Roland and Bayard--nay, if a crown fell to
his lot, he might rival his great-grandfather, the Emperor Max, and--in
many a line he, too, had done things worthy of imitation--him, his
father. The possession of this child would fill his darkened life with
sunshine, his heart, paralyzed by grief and disappointment, with fresh
pleasure in existence throughout the brief remainder of his earthly
pilgrimage. If he, the father, acknowledged him and aided him to become
a happy, perhaps a great man, this lovely creature might some day be a
brilliant star in the firmament of his age.

Here he paused. The question, "For how long?" forced itself upon him.
He, too, during the short span of youth had been a hero and a victorious
knight. With secure confidence he had undertaken to establish for
himself and his family a sovereignty of the world which should include
the state and the Church. "More, farther," had been his motto, and to
what stupendous successes it had led him! Three years before he had
routed at Muhlberg his most powerful rivals. As prisoners they still
felt his avenging hand.

And now? At this hour?

The hope of the sovereignty of the world lay shattered at his feet. The
wish to obtain the German imperial crown for his heir and successor,
Philip, had proved unattainable. It was destined for his brother,
Ferdinand of Austria, and afterward for the latter's son, Maximilian.
To lead the defeated German Protestants back to the bosom of the Holy
Church appeared more and more untenable. Here in the Netherlands the
heretics, in consequence of the Draconian severity of the regulations
which he himself had issued, had been hung and burned by hundreds, and
hitherto he had gained nothing but the hatred of the nation which he
preferred to all others. His bodily health was destroyed, his mind had
lost its buoyancy, and he was now fifty years old. What lay before him
was a brief pilgrimage--perchance numbering only a few years--here on
earth, and the limitless eternity which would never end. How small
and trivial was the former in comparison with the latter, which had
no termination! And would he desire to rear for the space of time that
separates the grave from the cradle the child for whom he desired
the best blessings, instead of securing for him salvation for the
never-ceasing period of eternal life?

No! This beauty, this strength, should be consecrated to no vain secular
struggle, but to Heaven. The boy when he matured to a correct judgment
would thank him for this decision, which was really no easy one for his
worldly vanity.

Then he reverted to the wish with which he had approached the child's
couch. The son, from gratitude, should take upon himself for his father
and, if he desired, also for his refractory mother, what both had
neglected--the care for their eternal welfare--in prayer and penance.

By consecrating him to Heaven and rearing him for a peaceful existence
in God, far from the vain pleasures of the world and the court he had
done his best for his son and, as if he feared that the sight of his
beautiful, strong boy might shake his resolution, he turned away from
him and called Quijada.

While Charles in a fervent, silent prayer commended John to the favour
of Heaven, the most faithful of his attendants was gazing at the
sovereign's son. Hitherto Heaven had denied him the joy of possessing a
child. How he would have clasped this lovely creature to his heart if it
had been his! What a pleasure it would have been to transmit everything
