stay long."

On her way to the Battery she was thinking of Hyde, and of their
frequent walks together there; and for once she passed the house of
Madame Jacobus without a glance at its long-closed windows. It was
growing dark as she returned, and ere she quite reached it she was
aware of a glow of fire light and candle light from the windows. She
quickened her steps, and saw a servant well known to her standing at
the open door directing two men who were carrying in trunks and
packages. She immediately accosted him.

"Has madame returned at last, Ameer?" she asked joyfully.

"Madame has returned home," he answered. "She is weary--she is not
alone--she will not receive to-night."

"Surely not. I did not think of such a thing. Tell her only that I am
glad, and will call as soon as she can see me."

The man's manner--usually so friendly--was shy and peculiar, and
Cornelia felt saddened and disappointed. "And yet why?" she asked
herself. "Madame has but reached home--I did not wish to intrude upon
her--Ameer need not have thought so--however I am glad she is back
again"--and she walked rapidly home to the thoughts which this
unexpected arrival induced. They were hopeful thoughts,
leaning--however she directed them--towards her absent lover. She felt
sure madame would see clearly to the very bottom of what she could not
understand. She went into her mother's presence full of renewed
expectations, and met her smile with one of unusual brightness.

"Madame Jacobus is at home," said Mrs. Moran, before Cornelia could
speak. "She sent for your father just after you left the house, and I
suppose that he is still there."

"Is she sick?"

"I do not know. I fear so, for the visit is a long one."

It continued so much longer that the two ladies took their tea alone,
nor could they talk of any other subject than madame, and her most
unexpected call for Doctor Moran's services. "It was always the Dutch
Doctor Gansvoort she had before," said Mrs. Moran; "and she was ever
ready to scoff at all others, as pretenders.--I do wonder what keeps
your father so long?"

It was near ten o'clock when Doctor Moran returned, and his face was
sombre and thoughtful--the face of a man who had been listening for
hours to grave matters, and who had not been able to throw off their
physical reflection.

"Have you had tea, John?" asked Mrs. Moran.

"No. Give me a good strong cup, Ava. I am tired with listening and
feeling."

She poured it out quickly, and after he had taken the refreshing drink,
Cornelia asked--

"Is madame very ill?"

"She is wonderfully well. It is her husband."

"Captain Jacobus?"

"Who else? She has brought him home, and I doubt if she has done
wisely."

"What has happened, John? Surely you will tell us!"

"There is nothing to conceal. I have heard the whole story--a very
pitiful story--but yet like enough to end well, Madame told me that the
day after her sister-in-law's burial, James Lauder, a Scotchman who had
often sailed with Captain Jacobus, came down to Charleston to see her.
He had sought her in New York, and been directed by her lawyer to
Charleston. He declared that having had occasion to go to Guy's
Hospital in London to visit a sick comrade, he saw there Captain
Jacobus. He would not admit any doubt of his identity, but said the
Captain had forgotten his name, and everything in connection with his
past life; and was hanging about the premises by favour of the
physicians, holding their horses, and doing various little services for
them."

"Oh how well I can imagine madame's hurry and distress," said Cornelia.

"She hardly knew how to reach London quickly enough. She said thought
would have been too slow for her. But Lauder's tale proved to be true.
Her first action was to take possession of the demented man, and
surround him with every comfort. He appeared quite indifferent to her
care, and she obtained no shadow of recognition from him. She then
brought to his case all the medical skill money could procure, and in
the consultation which followed, the physicians decided to perform the
operation of trepanning."

"But why? Had he been injured, John?"

"Very badly. The hospital books showed that he had been brought there
by two sailors, who said he had been struck in a gale by a falling
mast. The wound healed, but left him mentally a wreck. The physicians
decided that the brain was suffering from pressure, and that trepanning
would relieve, if it did not cure."

"Then why was it not done at first?"

"Whose interest was it to inquire? No money was left with the injured
man. The sailors who took him to the hospital gave false names, and
address, and he received only such treatment as a pauper patient was
likely to receive. But he made friends, and was supported about the
place. Imagine now what a trial was before madame! It was a difficult
matter to perform the operation, for the patient could not be made to
understand its necessity; and he was very hard to manage. Then picture
to yourselves, the terrible strain of nursing which followed; though
madame says it was soon brightened and lightened by her husband's
recognition of her. After that event all weariness was rest, and
suffering ease; and as soon as he was able to travel both were
determined to return at once to their own home. He is yet however a
sick man, and may never quite recover a slight paralysis of the lower
limbs."

"Does he remember how he was hurt?"

"He declares his men mutinied, because instead of returning to New
York, he had taken on a cargo for the East India Company; and that the
blow was given him either by his first, or second mate. He thinks they
sailed his ship out of the Thames, for her papers were all made out,
and she was ready to drop down the river with the next tide. He vows he
will get well and find his ship and the rascals that stole her; and I
should not wonder if he does. He has will enough for anything. Madame
desires to see you, Cornelia. Can you go there with me in the morning?"

"I shall be glad to go. Madame is like no one else."

"She is not like herself at present. I think you may be a little
disappointed in her. She has but one thought, one care, one end and aim
in life--her husband."

The Doctor had judged correctly. Cornelia was disappointed from the
first moment. She was taken to the dim uncanny drawing-room by Ameer,
and left among its ill-omened gods, and odd treasure-trove for nearly
half an hour before madame came to her. The rudely graven faces, so
marvellously instinct with life, made her miserable; she fancied a
thousand mockeries and scorns in them; and no thought of Hyde, or
Arenta, or of the happy hours spent in that ill-boding room, could
charm away its sinister influence.

When madame at length came to her, she appeared like the very genius of
the place. The experiences of the past year had left traces which no
after experience would be able to obliterate. She looked ten years
older. Her wonderful dark eyes, glowing with a soft tender fire alone
remained untouched by the withering hand of anxious love. They were as
vital as ever they had been, and when Cornelia said so, she answered,
"That is because my soul dwells in them, and my soul is always young. I
have had a year, Cornelia, to crumble the body to dust; but my soul
made light of it for love's sake. Did your father tell you how much
Captain Jacobus had suffered?"

"Yes, madame."

But in spite of this assurance, madame went over the whole story in
detail, and Cornelia could not help but remember that Mr. Van Ariens
had said "about her husband she will talk constantly, and to the whole
town." For however far the conversation diverged for a moment, madame
always brought it sharply back to the one subject that interested her.
Even Arenta's peculiarly dangerous position could not detain her
thoughts and interest for many minutes.

"I am sorry for Arenta," she said; "no greater hell can there be, than
to live in constant fear. But she has the gift of a clever tongue, and
every one has not the like talent; and also if a woman with the decency
of her sex may be a scholar, Arenta has learning enough to compass the
fools who might injure her."

"Marat and Robespierre are both against her husband, and she may share
his fate."

"Marat and Robespierre!" she cried. "Both of the creatures have a
devil. I wish them to go to the guillotine together, and I would bury
them together with their faces downwards. Let them pass out of your
memory. Poor Jacobus was in a worse case than Arenta. Till I be
key-cold dead, I shall never forget my first sight of him in that
dreadful place--" and then she described again her overwhelming
emotions when she perceived he was alike apathetic to his pauper
condition, and to her love and presence. There never came a moment
during the whole visit when it was possible to speak of Hyde. Madame
seemed to have quite forgotten her liking for the handsome youth; it
had been swallowed up in her adoring affection for her restored husband.

Cornelia would not force the memory upon her. Some day she might
remember; but for a little while madame had more than enough of fresh
material for her conversation. Every one who had known Captain Jacobus
or herself, called with congratulations for their happy return; and
when Cornelia made a nearly daily visit with her father, madame had
these calls to talk over with her.

One morning, however, the long-looked-for topic was introduced. "I had
a visit from Madame Van Heemskirk yesterday afternoon," she said; "and
the dear old Senator came with her to see Captain Jacobus. While they
talked, madame told me that you had refused that handsome young fellow,
her grandson. What could you mean by such a stupidity, Miss Moran?"

Her voice had just that tone of indifference, mingled with sarcastic
disapproval, that hurt and offended Cornelia. She felt that it was not
worth while to explain herself, for madame had evidently accepted the
offended grandmother's opinion; and the memory of the young Lord was
lively enough to make her sympathize with his supposed wrong.

"I never considered you to be a flirt," she continued, "and I am
astonished. If, now, it had been Arenta, I could have understood it. I
told Madame Van Heemskirk that I had not the least doubt Doctor Moran
dictated the refusal."

"Oh, indeed," answered Cornelia, with a good deal of spirit and some
anger, "you shall not blame my father. He knew nothing whatever of Lord
Hyde's offer, until I had been subjected to such insult and wrong as
drove me to the grave's mouth. Only the mercy of God, and my father's
skill, brought me back to life."

"Yes, I think your father to be wonderfully skilful. He has done
Jacobus a great deal of good, and he now gives him hope of a perfect
recovery. Doctor Moran is a fine physician; Jacobus says so."

Cornelia remained silent. If madame did not feel interest sufficient in
her affairs to ask for the particulars of one so nearly fatal to her,
she determined not to force the subject on her. Then Jacobus rang his
bell, and madame flew to his room to see whether his want had received
proper attention. Cornelia sat still a few moments, her heart swelling,
her eyes filling with the sense of that injustice, harder to bear than
any other form of wrong. She was going away, when madame returned to
her, and something in her eyes went to the heart of the older woman.
She turned her back, with a kind but peremptory word, and taking her
hand, said--

"I have been thoughtless, Cornelia, selfish, I dare say; but I do not
wish to be so. Tell me, my dear, what has happened. Did you quarrel
with George Hyde? And pray what was it about?"

"We never had one word of any kind, but words of affection. He wrote
and asked me if he could come and see my father about our marriage, on
a certain night. I answered his letter with all the love that was in my
heart for him, and told him to come and see my father that very night.
He never came. He never sent me the least explanation. He never wrote
to me, or spoke to me again."

"Oh, but this is a different story! His grandmother told me that you
refused him."

"That is not the truth. Lady Annie Hyde came most unexpectedly that
very day, and I suppose the easiest way to stop all inquiries about
Miss Moran, was to say 'she refused me.'"

"And after Lady Annie's arrival, what happened?"

"I was absolutely deserted. That is the truth. I may as well admit it.
Perhaps you think it impossible for a young man so good-natured to
behave in a manner so cruel and dishonourable; but I assure you it is
the truth."

"My dear, I have lived to see it almost impossible to think worse of
people than they are; and if you can bear to hear more on this subject,
I will tell it to you myself."

"I can always bear the truth. If I have lost my heart, I have not lost
my head; nor will I surrender to useless grief the happiness which I
can yet make for others, and for myself."

"If what you have told me be so--and I believe it is--then I say Lord
George Hyde is an intolerable scoundrel."

"I would rather not hear him spoken of in that way."

"I ask your pardon, but I must give myself a little Christian liberty
of railing. The man is false clean through. He was evidently engaged to
Lady Annie when he first sought your love, and therefore as soon as she
came here, he deserted you. I will tell you plainly that I saw him last
summer very frequently, and he was always with her--always listening
with ears and heart to what she said--always watching her with all his
soul in his eyes--ever on the lookout to see that not a breath of wind
ruffled her soft wraps, or blew too strongly on her little white face."

"That was his way, madame. I have seen him devoting himself to you in
the same manner; yes, and to Madame Griffin, and Miss White, and a
score of other ladies--old and young. You know how good-natured he was.
When did you hear him say a wrong word of any one? even of Rem Van
Ariens who was often intolerably rude."

"Very well! I would rather have a man 'intolerably rude' like my nephew
Rem, than one like Lord Hyde who speaks well of everybody. Upon my
word, I think that is the worst kind of slander!"

"I think not."

"It is; for it takes away the reputation of good men, by making all men
alike. But this, that, or the other, I saw Lord Hyde in devoted
attendance on Lady Annie. Give him up totally. He is in his kingdom
when he has a pretty woman to make a fool of. As for marriage, these
young men who have the world, or the better part of it, they marry
where Cupidity, not Cupid leads them. Give him up entirely."

"I have done so," answered Cornelia. And then she felt a sudden anger
at herself, so much so, that as she walked home, she kept assuring her
heart with an almost passionate insistence, "I have not given him up! I
will not give him up! I believe in him yet."

Madame's advice might be wise, but there are counsels of perfection
that cannot be followed; because they are utterly at variance with that
intuitive knowledge, which the soul has of old; and which it will not
surrender; and whose wisdom it is interiorly sure of. And after this
confidence Cornelia did not go so often to madame's. Something jarred
between them. We know that a single drop taken from a glass of water
