myself I am inclined to think that such speaking out has its good
ends. "The faculty of silence! is it not of all things the most
beautiful?" That is the doctrine preached by a great latter-day
philosopher; for myself, I think that the faculty of speech is
much more beautiful--of speech if it be made but by howlings, and
wailings, and loud clappings of the hand. What is in a man, let it
come out and be known to those around him; if it be bad it will find
correction; if it be good it will spread and be beneficent.

And then one woman made herself audible over the sobs of the crowding
children; she was a gaunt, high-boned woman, but she would have been
comely, if not handsome, had not the famine come upon her. She held a
baby in her arms, and another little toddling thing had been hanging
on her dress till Emmeline had seen it, and plucked it away; and it
was now sitting in her lap quite composed, and sucking a piece of
cake that had been given to it. "An' it's a bad day for us all," said
the woman, beginning in a low voice, which became louder and louder
as she went on; "it's a bad day for us all that takes away from us
the only rale friends that we iver had, and the back of my hand to
them that have come in the way, bringin' sorrow, an' desolation, an'
misery on gentlefolks that have been good to the poor since iver the
poor have been in the land; rale gentlefolks, sich as there ain't no
others to be found nowadays in any of these parts. O'hone, o'hone!
but it's a bad day for us and for the childer; for where shall we
find the dhrop to comfort us or the bit to ate when the sickness
comes on us, as it's likely to come now, when the Fitzgeralds is out
of the counthry. May the Lord bless them, and keep them, and presarve
them, and the Holy Virgin have them in her keepin'!"

"Wh--i--s--h--h," said Aunt Letty, who could not allow such idolatry
to pass by unobserved or unrebuked.

"An' shure the blessin' of a poor woman cannot haram you," continued
the mother; "an' I'll tell you what, neighbours, it'll be a bad day
for him that folk call the heir when he puts his foot in that house."

"'Deed an' that's thrue for you, Bridget Magrath," said another voice
from among the crowd of women.

"A bad day intirely," continued the woman, with the baby; "av the
house stans over his head when he does the like o' that, there'll be
no justice in the heavens."

"But, Mrs. Magrath," said Aunt Letty, trying to interrupt her, "you
must not speak in that way; you are mistaken in supposing that Mr.
Owen--"

"We'll all live to see," said the woman; "for the time's comin' quick
upon us now. But it's a bad law that kills our ould masther over our
heads, an' takes away from us our ould misthress. An' as for him they
calls Mr. Owen--"

But the ladies found it impossible to listen to her any longer, so
with some difficulty they extricated themselves from the crowd by
which they were surrounded, and once more shaking hands with those
who were nearest to them escaped into the park, and made their way
back towards the house.

They had not expected so much demonstration, and were not a little
disconcerted at the scene which had taken place. Aunt Letty had never
been so handled in her life, and hardly knew how to make her bonnet
sit comfortably on her head; and the two girls were speechless till
they were half across the park.

"I am glad we have been," said Emmeline at last, as soon as the
remains of her emotion would allow her to articulate her words.

"It would have been dreadful to have gone away without seeing them,"
said Mary. "Poor creatures, poor dear creatures; we shall never again
have any more people to be fond of us like that!"

"There is no knowing," said Aunt Letty; "the Lord giveth and the Lord
taketh away, and blessed is the name of the Lord. You are both young,
and may come back again; but for me--"

"Dear Aunt Letty, if we come back you shall come too."

"If I only thought that my bones could lie here near my brother's.
But never mind; what signifies it where our bones lie?" And then they
were silent for a while, till Aunt Letty spoke again. "I mean to be
quite happy over in England; I believe I shall be happiest of you all
if I can find any clergyman who is not half perverted to idolatry."

This took place some time before the ladies left Castle
Richmond,--perhaps as much as three weeks; it was even before
Herbert's departure, who started for London the day but one after the
scene here recorded; he had gone to various places to take his last
farewell; to see the Townsends at the parsonage; to call on Father
Barney at Kanturk, and had even shaken hands with the Rev. Mr.
Creagh, at Gortnaclough. But one farewell visit had been put off
for the last. It was now arranged that he was to go over to Desmond
Court and see Clara before he went. There had been some difficulty
in this, for Lady Desmond had at first declared that she could not
feel justified in asking him into her house; but the earl was now at
home, and her ladyship had at last given her consent: he was to see
the countess first, and was afterwards to see Clara--alone. He had
declared that he would not go there unless he were to be allowed an
interview with her in private. The countess, as I have said, at last
consented, trusting that her previous eloquence might be efficacious
in counteracting the ill effects of her daughter's imprudence. On
the day after that interview he was to start for London; "never to
return," as he said to Emmeline, "unless he came to seek his wife."

"But you will come to seek your wife," said Emmeline, stoutly; "I
shall think you faint-hearted if you doubt it."




CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE LAST STAGE.


On the day before his departure for London, Herbert Fitzgerald
once more got on his horse--the horse that was to be no longer his
after that day--and rode off towards Desmond Court. He had already
perceived how foolish he had been in walking thither through the mud
and rain when last he went there, and how much he had lost by his
sad appearance that day, and by his want of personal comfort. So he
dressed himself with some care--dressing not for his love, but for
the countess,--and taking his silver-mounted whip in his gloved
hand, he got up on his well-groomed nag with more spirit than he had
hitherto felt.

Nothing could be better than the manner in which, at this time,
the servants about Castle Richmond conducted themselves. Most of
them--indeed, all but three--had been told that they must go; and in
so telling them, the truth had been explained. It had been "found,"
Aunt Letty said to one of the elder among them, that Mr. Herbert was
not the heir to the property, and therefore the family was obliged
to go away. Mrs. Jones of course accompanied her mistress. Richard
had been told, both by Herbert and by Aunt Letty, that he had better
remain and live on a small patch of land that should be provided
for him. But in answer to this he stated his intention of removing
himself to London. If the London air was fit for "my leddy and Miss
Letty," it would be fit for him. "It's no good any more talking, Mr.
Herbert," said Richard, "I main to go." So there was no more talking,
and he did go.

But all the other servants took their month's warning with tears and
blessings, and strove one beyond another how they might best serve
the ladies of the family to the end. "I'd lose the little fingers
off me to go with you, Miss Emmeline; so I would," said one poor
girl,--all in vain. If they could not keep a retinue of servants in
Ireland, it was clear enough that they could not keep them in London.

The groom who held the horse for Herbert to mount, touched his hat
respectfully as his young master rode off slowly down the avenue, and
then went back to the stables to meditate with awe on the changes
which had happened in his time, and to bethink himself whether or no
he could bring himself to serve in the stables of Owen the usurper.

Herbert did not take the direct road to Desmond Court, but went round
as though he were going to Gortnaclough, and then turning away from
the Gortnaclough road, made his way by a cross lane towards Clady
and the mountains. He hardly knew himself whether he had any object
in this beyond one which he did not express even to himself,--that,
namely, of not being seen on the way leading to Desmond Court. But
this he did do, thereby riding out of the district with which he was
most thoroughly acquainted, and passing by cabins and patches of
now deserted land which were strange to him. It was a poor, bleak,
damp, undrained country, lying beyond the confines of his father's
property, which in good days had never been pleasant to the eye,
but which now in these days--days that were so decidedly bad, was
anything but pleasant. It was one of those tracts of land which had
been divided and subdivided among the cottiers till the fields had
dwindled down to parts of acres, each surrounded by rude low banks,
which of themselves seemed to occupy a quarter of the surface of the
land. The original landmarks, the big earthen banks,--banks so large
that a horse might walk on the top of them,--were still visible
enough, showing to the practised eye what had once been the fields
into which the land had been divided; but these had since been
bisected and crossected, and intersected by family arrangements,
in which brothers had been jealous of brothers, and fathers of
their children, till each little lot contained but a rood or two of
available surface.

This had been miserable enough to look at, even when those roods had
been cropped with potatoes or oats; but now they were not cropped at
all, nor was there preparation being made for cropping them. They had
been let out under the con-acre system, at so much a rood, for the
potato season, at rents amounting sometimes to ten or twelve pounds
the acre; but nobody would take them now. There, in that electoral
division, the whole proceeds of such land would hardly have paid the
poor rates, and therefore the land was left uncultivated.

The winter was over, for it was now April, and had any tillage been
intended, it would have been commenced--even in Ireland. It was the
beginning of April, but the weather was still stormy and cold, and
the east wind, which, as a rule, strikes Ireland with but a light
hand, was blowing sharply. On a sudden a squall of rain came on,--one
of those spring squalls which are so piercingly cold, but which are
sure to pass by rapidly, if the wayfarer will have patience to wait
for them. Herbert, remembering his former discomfiture, resolved that
he would have such patience, and dismounting from his horse at a
cabin on the road-side, entered it himself, and led his horse in
after him. In England no one would think of taking his steed into a
poor man's cottage, and would hardly put his beast into a cottager's
shed without leave asked and granted; but people are more intimate
with each other, and take greater liberties in Ireland. It is
no uncommon thing on a wet hunting-day to see a cabin packed
with horses, and the children moving about among them, almost as
unconcernedly as though the animals were pigs. But then the Irish
horses are so well mannered and good-natured.

The cabin was one abutting as it were on the road, not standing back
upon the land, as is most customary; and it was built in an angle
at a spot where the road made a turn, so that two sides of it stood
close out in the wayside. It was small and wretched to look at,
without any sort of outside shed, or even a scrap of potato-garden
attached to it,--a miserable, low-roofed, damp, ragged tenement, as
wretched as any that might be seen even in the county Cork.

But the nakedness of the exterior was as nothing to the nakedness
of the interior. When Herbert entered, followed by his horse, his
eye glanced round the dark place, and it seemed to be empty of
everything. There was no fire on the hearth, though a fire on the
hearth is the easiest of all luxuries for an Irishman to acquire, and
the last which he is willing to lose. There was not an article of
furniture in the whole place; neither chairs, nor table, nor bed, nor
dresser; there was there neither dish, nor cup, nor plate, nor even
the iron pot in which all the cookery of the Irish cottiers' menage
is usually carried on. Beneath his feet was the damp earthen floor,
and around him were damp, cracked walls, and over his head was the
old lumpy thatch, through which the water was already dropping; but
inside was to be seen none of those articles of daily use which are
usually to be found in the houses even of the poorest.

But, nevertheless, the place was inhabited. Squatting in the middle
of the cabin, seated on her legs crossed under her, with nothing
between her and the wet earth, there crouched a woman with a child
in her arms. At first, so dark was the place, Herbert hardly thought
that the object before him was a human being. She did not move when
he entered, or speak to him, or in any way show sign of surprise
that he should have come there. There was room for him and his horse
without pushing her from her place; and, as it seemed, he might have
stayed there and taken his departure without any sign having been
made by her.

But as his eyes became used to the light he saw her eyes gleaming
brightly through the gloom. They were very large and bright as they
turned round upon him while he moved--large and bright, but with a
dull, unwholesome brightness,--a brightness that had in it none of
the light of life.

And then he looked at her more closely. She had on her some rag of
clothing which barely sufficed to cover her nakedness, and the baby
which she held in her arms was covered in some sort; but he could
see, as he came to stand close over her, that these garments were but
loose rags which were hardly fastened round her body. Her rough short
hair hung down upon her back, clotted with dirt, and the head and
face of the child which she held was covered with dirt and sores. On
no more wretched object, in its desolate solitude, did the eye of man
ever fall.

In those days there was a form of face which came upon the sufferers
when their state of misery was far advanced, and which was a sure
sign that their last stage of misery was nearly run. The mouth would
fall and seem to hang, the lips at the two ends of the mouth would be
dragged down, and the lower parts of the cheeks would fall as though
they had been dragged and pulled. There were no signs of acute agony
when this phasis of countenance was to be seen, none of the horrid
symptoms of gnawing hunger by which one generally supposes that
famine is accompanied. The look is one of apathy, desolation, and
death. When custom had made these signs easily legible, the poor
doomed wretch was known with certainty. "It's no use in life meddling
with him; he's gone," said a lady to me in the far west of the south
of Ireland, while the poor boy, whose doom was thus spoken, stood by
listening. Her delicacy did not equal her energy in doing good,--for
she did much good; but in truth it was difficult to be delicate when
the hands were so full. And then she pointed out to me the signs on
the lad's face, and I found that her reading was correct.

The famine was not old enough at the time of which we are speaking
for Herbert to have learned all this, or he would have known that
there was no hope left in this world for the poor creature whom he
saw before him. The skin of her cheek had fallen, and her mouth was
dragged, and the mark of death was upon her; but the agony of want
was past. She sat there listless, indifferent, hardly capable of
suffering, even for her child, waiting her doom unconsciously.

As he had entered without eliciting a word from her, so might he have
departed without any outward sign of notice; but this would have been
impossible on his part. "I have come in out of the rain for shelter,"
said he, looking down on her.

"Out o' the rain, is it?" said she, still fixing on him her glassy
bright eyes. "Yer honour's welcome thin." But she did not attempt to
move, nor show any of those symptoms of reverence which are habitual
to the Irish when those of a higher rank enter their cabins.

"You seem to be very poorly off here," said Herbert, looking round
the bare walls of the cabin. "Have you no chair, and no bed to lie
on?"

"'Deed no," said she.

"And no fire?" said he, for the damp and chill of the place struck
through to his bones.

"'Deed no," she said again; but she made no wail as to her wants, and
uttered no complaint as to her misery.

"And are you living here by yourself, without furniture or utensils
of any kind?"

"It's jist as yer honour sees it," answered she.

For a while Herbert stood still, looking round him, for the woman was
so motionless and uncommunicative that he hardly knew how to talk
to her. That she was in the lowest depth of distress was evident
enough, and it behoved him to administer to her immediate wants
before he left her; but what could he do for one who seemed to be so
indifferent to herself? He stood for a time looking round him till he
could see through the gloom that there was a bundle of straw lying in
the dark corner beyond the hearth, and that the straw was huddled up,
as though there were something lying under it. Seeing this he left
the bridle of his horse, and stepping across the cabin moved the
straw with the handle of his whip. As he did so he turned his back
from the wall in which the small window-hole had been pierced, so
that a gleam of light fell upon the bundle at his feet, and he could
see that the body of a child was lying there, stripped of every
vestige of clothing.

For a minute or two he said nothing--hardly, indeed, knowing how to
speak, and looking from the corpselike woman back to the lifelike
corpse, and then from the corpse back to the woman, as though he
expected that she would say something unasked. But she did not say a
word, though she so turned her head that her eyes rested on him.

He then knelt down and put his hand upon the body, and found that
it was not yet stone cold. The child apparently had been about four
years old, while that still living in her arms might perhaps be half
that age.

"Was she your own?" asked Herbert, speaking hardly above his breath.

"'Deed, yes!" said the woman. "She was my own, own little Kitty." But
there was no tear in her eye or gurgling sob audible from her throat.

"And when did she die?" he asked.

"'Deed, thin, and I don't jist know--not exactly;" and sinking lower
down upon her haunches, she put up to her forehead the hand with
which she had supported herself on the floor--the hand which was not
occupied with the baby, and pushing back with it the loose hairs from
her face, tried to make an effort at thinking.

"She was alive in the night, wasn't she?" he said.

"I b'lieve thin she was, yer honour. 'Twas broad day, I'm thinking,
when she guv' over moaning. She warn't that way when he went away."

"And who's he?"

"Jist Mike, thin."

"And is Mike your husband?" he asked. She was not very willing to
talk; but it appeared at last that Mike was her husband, and that
having become a cripple through rheumatism, he had not been able to
work on the roads. In this condition he and his should of course have
gone into a poor-house. It was easy enough to give such advice in
such cases when one came across them, and such advice when given
at that time was usually followed; but there were so many who had
no advice, who could get no aid, who knew not which way to turn
themselves! This wretched man had succeeded in finding some one who
would give him his food--food enough to keep himself alive--for such
work as he could do in spite of his rheumatism, and this work to
the last he would not abandon. Even this was better to him than
the poor-house. But then, as long as a man found work out of the
poor-house, his wife and children would not be admitted into it. They
would not be admitted if the fact of the working husband was known.
The rule in itself was salutary, as without it a man could work,
earning such wages as were adjudged to be needful for a family, and
at the same time send his wife and children to be supported on the
rates. But in some cases, such as this, it pressed very cruelly.
Exceptions were of course made in such cases, if they were known: but
then it was so hard to know them!

This man Mike, the husband of that woman, and the father of those
children, alive and dead, had now gone to his work, leaving his home
without one morsel of food within it, and the wife of his bosom
and children of his love without the hope of getting any. And then
looking closely round him, Herbert could see that a small basin or
bowl lay on the floor near her, capable of holding perhaps a pint;
and on lifting it he saw that there still clung to it a few grains
of uncooked Indian corn-flour--the yellow meal, as it was called.
Her husband, she said at last, had brought home with him in his
cap a handful of this flour, stolen from the place where he was
working--perhaps a quarter of a pound, then worth over a farthing,
and she had mixed this with water in a basin; and this was the food
which had sustained her, or rather had not sustained her, since
yesterday morning--her and her two children, the one that was living
and the one that was dead.

Such was her story, told by her in the fewest of words. And then he
asked her as to her hopes for the future. But though she cared, as
it seemed, but little for the past, for the future she cared less.
"'Deed, thin, an' I don't jist know." She would say no more than
that, and would not even raise her voice to ask for alms when he
pitied her in her misery. But with her the agony of death was already
over.

"And the child that you have in your arms," he said, "is it not
cold?" And he stood close over her, and put out his hand and touched
the baby's body. As he did so, she made some motion as though to
arrange the clothing closer round the child's limbs, but Herbert
could see that she was making an effort to hide her own nakedness. It
was the only effort that she made while he stood there beside her.

"Is she not cold?" he said again, when he had turned his face away to
relieve her from her embarrassment.

"Cowld," she muttered, with a vacant face and wondering tone of
voice, as though she did not quite understand him. "I suppose she is
could. Why wouldn't she be could? We're could enough, if that's all."
But still she did not stir from the spot on which she sat; and the
child, though it gave from time to time a low moan that was almost
inaudible, lay still in her arms, with its big eyes staring into
vacancy.

He felt that he was stricken with horror as he remained there in the
cabin with the dying woman and the naked corpse of the poor dead
child. But what was he to do? He could not go and leave them without
succour. The woman had made no plaint of her suffering, and had asked
for nothing; but he felt that it would be impossible to abandon her
without offering her relief; nor was it possible that he should leave
the body of the child in that horribly ghastly state. So he took from
his pocket his silk handkerchief, and, returning to the corner of the
cabin, spread it as a covering over the corpse. At first he did not
like to touch the small naked dwindled remains of humanity from which
life had fled; but gradually he overcame his disgust, and kneeling
down, he straightened the limbs and closed the eyes, and folded the
handkerchief round the slender body. The mother looked on him the
while, shaking her head slowly, as though asking him with all the
voice that was left to her, whether it were not piteous; but of words
she still uttered none.

And then he took from his pocket a silver coin or two, and tendered
them to her. These she did take, muttering some word of thanks, but
they caused in her no emotion of joy. "She was there waiting," she
said, "till Mike should return," and there she would still wait, even
though she should die with the silver in her hand.

"I will send some one to you," he said, as he took his departure;
"some one that shall take the poor child and bury it, and who shall
move you and the other one into the workhouse." She thanked him once
more with some low muttered words, but the promise brought her no
joy. And when the succour came it was all too late, for the mother
and the two children never left the cabin till they left it together,
wrapped in their workhouse shrouds.

Herbert, as he remounted his horse and rode quietly on, forgot for a
while both himself and Clara Desmond. Whatever might be the extent
of his own calamity, how could he think himself unhappy after what
he had seen? how could he repine at aught that the world had done
for him, having now witnessed to how low a state of misery a fellow
human being might be brought? Could he, after that, dare to consider
himself unfortunate?

Before he reached Desmond Court he did make some arrangements for
the poor woman, and directed that a cart might be sent for her, so
that she might be carried to the union workhouse at Kanturk. But his
efforts in her service were of little avail. People then did not
think much of a dying woman, and were in no special hurry to obey
Herbert's behest.

"A woman to be carried to the union, is it? For Mr. Fitzgerald, eh?
What Mr. Fitzgerald says must be done, in course. But sure av' it's
done before dark, won't that be time enough for the likes of her?"

But had they flown to the spot on the wings of love, it would not
have sufficed to prolong her life one day. Her doom had been spoken
before Herbert had entered the cabin.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

FAREWELL.


He was two hours later than he had intended as he rode up the avenue
to Lady Desmond's gate, and his chief thought at the moment was how
he should describe to the countess the scene he had just witnessed.
Why describe it at all? That is what we should all say. He had come
there to talk about other things--about other things which must be
discussed, and which would require all his wits. Let him keep that
poor woman on his mind, but not embarrass himself with any mention of
her for the present. This, no doubt, would have been wise if only it
had been possible; but out of the full heart the mouth speaks.

But Lady Desmond had not witnessed the scene which I have attempted
to describe, and her heart, therefore, was not full of it, and
was not inclined to be so filled. And so, in answer to Herbert's
exclamation, "Oh, Lady Desmond, I have seen such a sight!" she gave
him but little encouragement to describe it, and by her coldness,
reserve, and dignity, soon quelled the expression of his feelings.

The earl was present and shook hands very cordially with Herbert when
he entered the room; and he, being more susceptible as being younger,
and not having yet become habituated to the famine as his mother was,
did express some eager sympathy. He would immediately go down, or
send Fahy with the car, and have her brought up and saved; but his
mother had other work to do and soon put a stop to all this.

"Mr. Fitzgerald," said she, speaking with a smile upon her face, and
with much high-bred dignity of demeanour, "as you and Lady Clara
both wish to see each other before you leave the country, and as
you have known each other so intimately, and considering all the
circumstances, I have not thought it well absolutely to forbid an
interview. But I do doubt its expediency; I do, indeed. And Lord
Desmond, who feels for your late misfortune as we all do, perfectly
agrees with me. He thinks that it would be much wiser for you both
to have parted without the pain of a meeting, seeing how impossible
it is that you should ever be more to each other than you are now."
And then she appealed to her son, who stood by, looking not quite so
wise, nor even quite so decided as his mother's words would seem to
make him.

"Well, yes; upon my word I don't see how it's to be," said the young
earl. "I am deuced sorry for it for one, and I wish I was well off,
so that I could give Clara a pot of money, and then I should not care
so much about your not being the baronet."

"I am sure you must see, Mr. Fitzgerald, and I know that you do see
it because you have very properly said so, that a marriage between
you and Lady Clara is now impossible. For her such an engagement
would be very bad--very bad indeed; but for you it would be utter
ruin. Indeed, it would be ruin for you both. Unencumbered as you will
be, and with the good connection which you will have, and with your
excellent talents, it will be quite within your reach to win for
yourself a high position. But with you, as with other gentlemen who
have to work their way, marriage must come late in life, unless
you marry an heiress. This I think is thoroughly understood by all
people in our position; and I am sure that it is understood by your
excellent mother, for whom I always had and still have the most
unfeigned respect. As this is so undoubtedly the case, and as I
cannot of course consent that Lady Clara should remain hampered by
an engagement which would in all human probability hang over the ten
best years of her life, I thought it wise that you should not see
each other. I have, however, allowed myself to be overruled; and
now I must only trust to your honour, forbearance, and prudence to
protect my child from what might possibly be the ill effects of her
own affectionate feelings. That she is romantic,--enthusiastic to
a fault I should perhaps rather call it--I need not tell you. She
thinks that your misfortune demands from her a sacrifice of herself;
but you, I know, will feel that, even were such a sacrifice available
to you, it would not become you to accept it. Because you have
fallen, you will not wish to drag her down; more especially as you
can rise again--and she could not."

So spoke the countess, with much worldly wisdom, and with
considerable tact in adjusting her words to the object which she had
in view. Herbert, as he stood before her silent during the period of
her oration, did feel that it would be well for him to give up his
love, and go away in utter solitude of heart to those dingy studies
which Mr. Prendergast was preparing for him. His love, or rather
the assurance of Clara's love, had been his great consolation. But
what right had he, with all the advantages of youth, and health, and
friends, and education, to require consolation? And then from moment
to moment he thought of the woman whom he had left in the cabin, and
confessed that he did not dare to call himself unhappy.

He had listened attentively, although he did thus think of other
eloquence besides that of the countess--of the eloquence of that
silent, solitary, dying woman; but when she had done he hardly knew
what to say for himself. She did make him feel that it would be
ungenerous in him to persist in his engagement; but then again,
Clara's letters and his sister's arguments had made him feel that it
was impossible to abandon it. They pleaded of heart-feelings so well
that he could not resist them; and the countess--she pleaded so well
as to world's prudence that he could not resist her.

"I would not willingly do anything to injure Lady Clara," he said.

"That's what we all knew," said the young earl. "You see, what is
a girl to do like her? Love in a cottage is all very well, and all
that; and as for riches, I don't care about them. It would be a
pity if I did, for I shall be about the poorest nobleman in the
three kingdoms, I suppose. But a chap when he marries should have
something; shouldn't he now?"

To tell the truth the earl had been very much divided in his opinions
since he had come home, veering round a point or two this way or a
point or two that, in obedience to the blast of eloquence to which
he might be last subjected. But latterly the idea had grown upon him
that Clara might possibly marry Owen Fitzgerald. There was about
Owen a strange fascination which all felt who had once loved him. To
the world he was rough and haughty, imperious in his commands, and
exacting even in his fellowship; but to the few whom he absolutely
loved, whom he had taken into his heart's core, no man ever was more
tender or more gracious. Clara, though she had resolved to banish
him from her heart, had found it impossible to do so till Herbert's
misfortunes had given him a charm in her eyes which was not all his
own. Clara's mother had loved him--had loved him as she never before
had loved; and now she loved him still, though she had so strongly
determined that her love should be that of a mother, and not that
of a wife. And the young earl, now that Owen's name was again rife
in his ears, remembered all the pleasantness of former days. He had
never again found such a companion as Owen had been. He had met no
other friend to whom he could talk of sport and a man's outward
pleasures when his mind was that way given, and to whom he could also
talk of soft inward things,--the heart's feelings, and aspirations,
and wants. Owen would be as tender with him as a woman, allowing the
young lad's arm round his body, listening to words which the outer
world would have called bosh--and have derided as girlish. So at
least thought the young earl to himself. And all boys long to be
allowed utterance occasionally for these soft tender things;--as
also do all men, unless the devil's share in the world has become
altogether uppermost with them.

And the young lad's heart hankered after his old friend. He had
listened to his sister, and for a while had taken her part; but his
mother had since whispered to him that Owen would now be the better
suitor, the preferable brother-in-law; and that in fact Clara loved
Owen the best, though she felt herself bound by honour to his
kinsman. And then she reminded her son of Clara's former love for
Owen--a love which he himself had witnessed; and he thought of the
day when with so much regret he had told his friend that he was
unsuited to wed with an earl's penniless daughter. Of the subsequent
pleasantness which had come with Herbert's arrival, he had seen
little or nothing. He had been told by letter that Herbert
Fitzgerald, the prosperous heir of Castle Richmond, was to be his
future brother-in-law, and he had been satisfied. But now, if Owen
could return--how pleasant it would be!

"But a chap when he marries should have something; shouldn't he now?"
So spoke the young earl, re-echoing his mother's prudence.

Herbert did not quite like this interference on the boy's part. Was
he to explain to a young lad from Eton what his future intentions
were with reference to his mode of living and period of marriage? "Of
course," he said, addressing himself to the countess, "I shall not
insist on an engagement made under such different circumstances."

"Nor will you allow her to do so through a romantic feeling of
generosity," said the countess.

"You should know your own daughter, Lady Desmond, better than I do,"
he answered; "but I cannot say what I may do at her instance till I
shall have seen her."

"Do you mean to say that you will allow a girl of her age to talk you
into a proceeding which you know to be wrong?"

"I will allow no one," he said, "to talk me into a proceeding which
I know to be wrong; nor will I allow any one to talk me out of a
proceeding which I believe to be right." And then, having uttered
these somewhat grandiloquent words, he shut himself up as though
there were no longer any need for discussing the subject.

"My poor child!" said the countess, in a low tremulous voice, as
though she did not intend him to hear them. "My poor unfortunate
child!" Herbert as he did hear them thought of the woman in the
cabin, and of her misfortunes and of her children. "Come, Patrick,"
continued the countess, "it is perhaps useless for us to say anything
further at present. If you will remain here, Mr. Fitzgerald, for
a minute or two, I will send Lady Clara to wait upon you;" and
then curtsying with great dignity she withdrew, and the young
earl scuffled out after her. "Mamma," he said, as he went, "he is
determined that he will have her."

"My poor child!" answered the countess.

"And if I were in his place I should be determined also. You may as
well give it up. Not but that I like Owen a thousand times the best."

Herbert did wait there for some five minutes, and then the door was
opened very gently, was gently closed again, and Clara Desmond was in
the room. He came towards her respectfully, holding out his hand that
he might take hers; but before he had thought of how she would act
she was in his arms. Hitherto, of all betrothed maidens, she had been
the most retiring. Sometimes he had thought her cold when she had
left the seat by his side to go and nestle closely by his sister. She
had avoided the touch of his hand and the pressure of his arm, and
had gone from him speechless, if not with anger then with dismay,
when he had carried the warmth of his love beyond the touch of his
hand or the pressure of his arm. But now she rushed into his embrace
and hid her face upon his shoulder, as though she were over glad to
return to the heart from which those around her had endeavoured to
banish her. Was he or was he not to speak of his love? That had been
the question which he had asked himself when left alone there for
those five minutes, with the eloquence of the countess ringing in his
ears. Now that question had in truth been answered for him.

"Herbert," she said, "Herbert! I have so sorrowed for you; but I know
that you have borne it like a man."

She was thinking of what he had now half forgotten,--the position
which he had lost, those hopes which had all been shipwrecked, his
title surrendered to another, and his lost estates. She was thinking
of them as the loss affected him; but he, he had reconciled himself
to all that,--unless all that were to separate him from his promised
bride.

"Dearest Clara," he said, with his arm close round her waist, while
neither anger nor dismay appeared to disturb the sweetness of that
position, "the letter which you wrote me has been my chief comfort."
Now if he had any intention of liberating Clara from the bond of her
engagement,--if he really had any feeling that it behoved him not
to involve her in the worldly losses which had come upon him,--he
was taking a very bad way of carrying out his views in that respect.
Instead of confessing the comfort which he had received from that
letter, and holding her close to his breast while he did confess it,
he should have stood away from her--quite as far apart as he had done
from the countess; and he should have argued with her, showing her
how foolish and imprudent her letter had been, explaining that it
behoved her now to repress her feelings, and teaching her that peers'
daughters as well as housemaids should look out for situations which
would suit them, guided by prudence and a view to the wages,--not
follow the dictates of impulse and of the heart. This is what he
should have done, according, I believe, to the views of most men and
women. Instead of that he held her there as close as he could hold
her, and left her to do the most of the speaking. I think he was
right. According to my ideas woman's love should be regarded as
fair prize of war,--as long as the war has been carried on with due
adherence to the recognized law of nations. When it has been fairly
won, let it be firmly held. I have no opinion of that theory of
giving up.

"You knew that I would not abandon you! Did you not know it? say that
you knew it?" said Clara, and then she insisted on having an answer.

"I could hardly dare to think that there was so much happiness left
for me," said Herbert.

"Then you were a traitor to your love, sir; a false traitor." But
deep as was the offence for which she arraigned him, it was clear
to see that the pardon came as quick as the conviction. "And was
Emmeline so untrue to me also as to believe that?"

"Emmeline said--" and then he told her what Emmeline had said.

"Dearest, dearest Emmeline! give her a whole heart-load of love from
me; now mind you do,--and to Mary, too. And remember this, sir; that
I love Emmeline ten times better than I do you; twenty times--,
because she knew me. Oh, if she had mistrusted me--!"

"And do you think that I mistrusted you?"

"Yes, you did; you know you did, sir. You wrote and told me so;--and
now, this very day, you come here to act as though you mistrusted me
still. You know you have, only you have not the courage to go on with
the acting."

And then he began to defend himself, showing how ill it would have
become him to have kept her bound to her engagements had she feared
poverty as most girls in her position would have feared it. But on
