
The Prince next demanded to know the new cause of quarrel between Colonel
Mac-Ivor and Waverley. There was a pause. Both gentlemen found the
presence of the Baron of Bradwardine (for by this time all three had
approached the Chevalier by his command) an insurmountable barrier
against entering upon a subject where the name of his daughter must
unavoidably be mentioned. They turned their eyes on the ground, with
looks in which shame and embarrassment were mingled with displeasure. The
Prince, who had been educated amongst the discontented and mutinous
spirits of the court of St. Germains, where feuds of every kind were the
daily subject of solicitude to the dethroned sovereign, had served his
apprenticeship, as old Frederick of Prussia would have said, to the trade
of royalty. To promote or restore concord among his followers was
indispensable. Accordingly he took his measures.

'Monsieur de Beaujeu!'

'Monseigneur!' said a very handsome French cavalry officer who was in
attendance.

'Ayez la bonte d'aligner ces montagnards la, ainsi que la cavalerie, s'il
vous plait, et de les remettre a la marche. Vous parlez si bien
l'Anglois, cela ne vous donneroit pas beaucoup de peine.'

'Ah! pas du tout, Monseigneur,' replied Mons. le Comte de Beaujeu, his
head bending down to the neck of his little prancing highly-managed
charger. Accordingly he piaffed away, in high spirits and confidence, to
the head of Fergus's regiment, although understanding not a word of
Gaelic and very little English.

'Messieurs les sauvages Ecossois--dat is, gentilmans savages, have the
goodness d'arranger vous.'

The clan, comprehending the order more from the gesture than the words,
and seeing the Prince himself present, hastened to dress their ranks.

'Ah! ver well! dat is fort bien!' said the Count de Beaujeu. 'Gentilmans
sauvages! mais, tres bien. Eh bien! Qu'est ce que vous appelez visage,
Monsieur?' (to a lounging trooper who stood by him). 'Ah, oui! face. Je
vous remercie, Monsieur. Gentilshommes, have de goodness to make de face
to de right par file, dat is, by files. Marsh! Mais, tres bien; encore,
Messieurs; il faut vous mettre a la marche. ... Marchez done, au nom de
Dieu, parceque j'ai oublie le mot Anglois; mais vous etes des braves
gens, et me comprenez tres bien.'

The Count next hastened to put the cavalry in motion. 'Gentilmans
cavalry, you must fall in. Ah! par ma foi, I did not say fall off! I am a
fear de little gross fat gentilman is moche hurt. Ah, mon Dieu! c'est le
Commissaire qui nous a apporte les premieres nouvelles de ce maudit
fracas. Je suis trop fache, Monsieur!'

But poor Macwheeble, who, with a sword stuck across him, and a white
cockade as large as a pancake, now figured in the character of a
commissary, being overturned in the bustle occasioned by the troopers
hastening to get themselves in order in the Prince's presence, before he
could rally his galloway, slunk to the rear amid the unrestrained
laughter of the spectators.

'Eh bien, Messieurs, wheel to de right. Ah! dat is it! Eh, Monsieur de
Bradwardine, ayez la bonte de vous mettre a la tete de votre regiment,
car, par Dieu, je n'en puis plus!'

The Baron of Bradwardine was obliged to go to the assistance of Monsieur
de Beaujeu, after he had fairly expended his few English military
phrases. One purpose of the Chevalier was thus answered. The other he
proposed was, that in the eagerness to hear and comprehend commands
issued through such an indistinct medium in his own presence, the
thoughts of the soldiers in both corps might get a current different from
the angry channel in which they were flowing at the time.

Charles Edward was no sooner left with the Chieftain and Waverley, the
rest of his attendants being at some distance, than he said, 'If I owed
less to your disinterested friendship, I could be most seriously angry
with both of you for this very extraordinary and causeless broil, at a
moment when my father's service so decidedly demands the most perfect
unanimity. But the worst of my situation is, that my very best friends
hold they have liberty to ruin themselves, as well as the cause they are
engaged in, upon the slightest caprice.'

Both the young men protested their resolution to submit every difference
to his arbitration. 'Indeed,' said Edward, 'I hardly know of what I am
accused. I sought Colonel Mac-Ivor merely to mention to him that I had
narrowly escaped assassination at the hand of his immediate dependent, a
dastardly revenge which I knew him to be incapable of authorising. As to
the cause for which he is disposed to fasten a quarrel upon me, I am
ignorant of it, unless it be that he accuses me, most unjustly, of having
engaged the affections of a young lady in prejudice of his pretensions.'

'If there is an error,' said the Chieftain, 'it arises from a
conversation which I held this morning with his Royal Highness himself.'

'With me?' said the Chevalier; 'how can Colonel Mac-Ivor have so far
misunderstood me?'

He then led Fergus aside, and, after five minutes' earnest conversation,
spurred his horse towards Edward. 'Is it possible--nay, ride up, Colonel,
for I desire no secrets--is it possible, Mr. Waverley, that I am mistaken
in supposing that you are an accepted lover of Miss Bradwardine? a fact
of which I was by circumstances, though not by communication from you, so
absolutely convinced that I alleged it to Vich Ian Vohr this morning as a
reason why, without offence to him, you might not continue to be
ambitious of an alliance which, to an unengaged person, even though once
repulsed, holds out too many charms to be lightly laid aside.'

'Your Royal Highness,' said Waverley,'must have founded on circumstances
altogether unknown to me, when you did me the distinguished honour of
supposing me an accepted lover of Miss Bradwardine. I feel the
distinction implied in the supposition, but I have no title to it. For
the rest, my confidence in my own merit is too justly slight to admit of
my hoping for success in any quarter after positive rejection.'

The Chevalier was silent for a moment, looking steadily at them both, and
then said, 'Upon my word, Mr. Waverley, you are a less happy man than I
conceived I had very good reason to believe you. But now, gentlemen,
allow me to be umpire in this matter, not as Prince Regent but as Charles
Stuart, a brother adventurer with you in the same gallant cause. Lay my
pretensions to be obeyed by you entirely out of view, and consider your
own honour, and how far it is well or becoming to give our enemies the
advantage and our friends the scandal of showing that, few as we are, we
are not united. And forgive me if I add, that the names of the ladies who
have been mentioned crave more respect from us all than to be made themes
of discord.'

He took Fergus a little apart and spoke to him very earnestly for two or
three minutes, and then returning to Waverley, said, 'I believe I have
satisfied Colonel Mac-Ivor that his resentment was founded upon a
misconception, to which, indeed, I myself gave rise; and I trust Mr.
Waverley is too generous to harbour any recollection of what is past when
I assure him that such is the case. You must state this matter properly
to your clan, Vich Ian Vohr, to prevent a recurrence of their precipitate
violence.' Fergus bowed. 'And now, gentlemen, let me have the pleasure to
see you shake hands.'

They advanced coldly, and with measured steps, each apparently reluctant
to appear most forward in concession. They did, however, shake hands, and
parted, taking a respectful leave of the Chevalier.

Charles Edward [Footnote: See Note 12.] then rode to the head of the
Mac-Ivors, threw himself from his horse, begged a drink out of old
Ballenkeiroch's cantine, and marched about half a mile along with them,
inquiring into the history and connexions of Sliochd nan Ivor, adroitly
using the few words of Gaelic he possessed, and affecting a great desire
to learn it more thoroughly. He then mounted his horse once more, and
galloped to the Baron's cavalry, which was in front, halted them, and
examined their accoutrements and state of discipline; took notice of the
principal gentlemen, and even of the cadets; inquired after their ladies,
and commended their horses; rode about an hour with the Baron of
Bradwardine, and endured three long stories about Field-Marshal the Duke
of Berwick.

'Ah, Beaujeu, mon cher ami,' said he, as he returned to his usual place
in the line of march, 'que mon metier de prince errant est ennuyant, par
fois. Mais, courage! c'est le grand jeu, apres tout.'




CHAPTER XXX

A SKIRMISH


The reader need hardly be reminded that, after a council of war held at
Derby on the 5th of December, the Highlanders relinquished their
desperate attempt to penetrate farther into England, and, greatly to the
dissatisfaction of their young and daring leader, positively determined
to return northward. They commenced their retreat accordingly, and, by
the extreme celerity of their movements, outstripped the motions of the
Duke of Cumberland, who now pursued them with a very large body of
cavalry.

This retreat was a virtual resignation of their towering hopes. None had
been so sanguine as Fergus Mac-Ivor; none, consequently, was so cruelly
mortified at the change of measures. He argued, or rather remonstrated,
with the utmost vehemence at the council of war; and, when his opinion
was rejected, shed tears of grief and indignation. From that moment his
whole manner was so much altered that he could scarcely have been
recognised for the same soaring and ardent spirit, for whom the whole
earth seemed too narrow but a week before. The retreat had continued for
several days, when Edward, to his surprise, early on the 12th of
December, received a visit from the Chieftain in his quarters, in a
hamlet about half-way between Shap and Penrith.

Having had no intercourse with the Chieftain since their rupture, Edward
waited with some anxiety an explanation of this unexpected visit; nor
could he help being surprised, and somewhat shocked, with the change in
his appearance. His eye had lost much of its fire; his cheek was hollow,
his voice was languid, even his gait seemed less firm and elastic than it
was wont; and his dress, to which he used to be particularly attentive,
was now carelessly flung about him. He invited Edward to walk out with
him by the little river in the vicinity; and smiled in a melancholy
manner when he observed him take down and buckle on his sword.

As soon as they were in a wild sequestered path by the side of the
stream, the Chief broke out--'Our fine adventure is now totally ruined,
Waverley, and I wish to know what you intend to do;--nay, never stare at
me, man. I tell you I received a packet from my sister yesterday, and,
had I got the information it contains sooner, it would have prevented a
quarrel which I am always vexed when I think of. In a letter written
after our dispute, I acquainted her with the cause of it; and she now
replies to me that she never had, nor could have, any purpose of giving
you encouragement; so that it seems I have acted like a madman. Poor
Flora! she writes in high spirits; what a change will the news of this
unhappy retreat make in her state of mind!'





Waverley, who was really much affected by the deep tone of melancholy
with which Fergus spoke, affectionately entreated him to banish from his
remembrance any unkindness which had arisen between them, and they once
more shook hands, but now with sincere cordiality. Fergus again inquired
of Waverley what he intended to do. 'Had you not better leave this
luckless army, and get down before us into Scotland, and embark for the
Continent from some of the eastern ports that are still in our
possession? When you are out of the kingdom, your friends will easily
negotiate your pardon; and, to tell you the truth, I wish you would carry
Rose Bradwardine with you as your wife, and take Flora also under your
joint protection.'--Edward looked surprised.--'She loves you, and I
believe you love her, though, perhaps, you have not found it out, for you
are not celebrated for knowing your own mind very pointedly.' He said
this with a sort of smile.

'How,' answered Edward, 'can you advise me to desert the expedition in
which we are all embarked?'

'Embarked?' said Fergus; 'the vessel is going to pieces, and it is full
time for all who can to get into the long-boat and leave her.'

'Why, what will other gentlemen do?' answered Waverley, 'and why did the
Highland Chiefs consent to this retreat if it is so ruinous?'

'O,' replied Mac-Ivor, 'they think that, as on former occasions, the
heading, hanging, and forfeiting will chiefly fall to the lot of the
Lowland gentry; that they will be left secure in their poverty and their
fastnesses, there, according to their proverb, "to listen to the wind
upon the hill till the waters abate." But they will be disappointed; they
have been too often troublesome to be so repeatedly passed over, and this
time John Bull has been too heartily frightened to recover his
good-humour for some time. The Hanoverian ministers always deserved to be
hanged for rascals; but now, if they get the power in their hands,--as,
sooner or later, they must, since there is neither rising in England nor
assistance from France,--they will deserve the gallows as fools if they
leave a single clan in the Highlands in a situation to be again
troublesome to government. Ay, they will make root-and-branch-work, I
warrant them.'

'And while you recommend flight to me,' said Edward,--'a counsel which I
would rather die than embrace,--what are your own views?'

'O,' answered Fergus, with a melancholy air, 'my fate is settled. Dead or
captive I must be before tomorrow.'

'What do you mean by that, my friend?' said Edward. 'The enemy is still a
day's march in our rear, and if he comes up, we are still strong enough
to keep him in check. Remember Gladsmuir.'

'What I tell you is true notwithstanding, so far as I am individually
concerned.'

'Upon what authority can you found so melancholy a prediction?' asked
Waverley.

'On one which never failed a person of my house. I have seen,' he said,
lowering his voice, 'I have seen the Bodach Glas.'

'Bodach Glas?'

'Yes; have you been so long at Glennaquoich, and never heard of the Grey
Spectre? though indeed there is a certain reluctance among us to mention
him.'

'No, never.'

'Ah! it would have been a tale for poor Flora to have told you. Or, if
that hill were Benmore, and that long blue lake, which you see just
winding towards yon mountainous country, were Loch Tay, or my own Loch an
Ri, the tale would be better suited with scenery. However, let us sit
down on this knoll; even Saddleback and Ulswater will suit what I have to
say better than the English hedgerows, enclosures, and farmhouses. You
must know, then, that when my ancestor, Ian nan Chaistel, wasted
Northumberland, there was associated with him in the expedition a sort of
Southland Chief, or captain of a band of Lowlanders, called Halbert Hall.
In their return through the Cheviots they quarrelled about the division
of the great booty they had acquired, and came from words to blows. The
Lowlanders were cut off to a man, and their chief fell the last, covered
with wounds by the sword of my ancestor. Since that time his spirit has
crossed the Vich Ian Vohr of the day when any great disaster was
impending, but especially before approaching death. My father saw him
twice, once before he was made prisoner at Sheriff-Muir, another time on
the morning of the day on which he died.'

'How can you, my dear Fergus, tell such nonsense with a grave face?'

'I do not ask you to believe it; but I tell you the truth, ascertained
by three hundred years' experience at least, and last night by my own
eyes.'

'The particulars, for heaven's sake!' said Waverley, with eagerness.

'I will, on condition you will not attempt a jest on the subject. Since
this unhappy retreat commenced I have scarce ever been able to sleep for
thinking of my clan, and of this poor Prince, whom they are leading back
like a dog in a string, whether he will or no, and of the downfall of my
family. Last night I felt so feverish that I left my quarters and walked
out, in hopes the keen frosty air would brace my nerves--I cannot tell
how much I dislike going on, for I know you will hardly believe me.
However--I crossed a small footbridge, and kept walking backwards and
forwards, when I observed with surprise by the clear moonlight a tall
figure in a grey plaid, such as shepherds wear in the south of Scotland,
which, move at what pace I would, kept regularly about four yards before
me.'

'You saw a Cumberland peasant in his ordinary dress, probably.'

'No; I thought so at first, and was astonished at the man's audacity in
daring to dog me. I called to him, but received no answer. I felt an
anxious throbbing at my heart, and to ascertain what I dreaded, I stood
still and turned myself on the same spot successively to the four points
of the compass. By Heaven, Edward, turn where I would, the figure was
instantly before my eyes, at precisely the same distance! I was then
convinced it was the Bodach Glas. My hair bristled and my knees shook. I
manned myself, however, and determined to return to my quarters. My
ghastly visitant glided before me (for I cannot say he walked) until he
reached the footbridge; there he stopped and turned full round. I must
either wade the river or pass him as close as I am to you. A desperate
courage, founded on the belief that my death was near, made me resolve to
make my way in despite of him. I made the sign of the cross, drew my
sword, and uttered, "In the name of God, Evil Spirit, give place!" "Vich
Ian Vohr," it said, in a voice that made my very blood curdle, "beware of
to-morrow!" It seemed at that moment not half a yard from my sword's
point; but the words were no sooner spoken than it was gone, and nothing
appeared further to obstruct my passage. I got home and threw myself on
my bed, where I spent a few hours heavily enough; and this morning, as no
enemy was reported to be near us, I took my horse and rode forward to
make up matters with you. I would not willingly fall until I am in
charity with a wronged friend.'

Edward had little doubt that this phantom was the operation of an
exhausted frame and depressed spirits, working on the belief common to
all Highlanders in such superstitions. He did not the less pity Fergus,
for whom, in his present distress, he felt all his former regard revive.
With the view of diverting his mind from these gloomy images, he offered,
with the Baron's permission, which he knew he could readily obtain, to
remain in his quarters till Fergus's corps should come up, and then to
march with them as usual. The Chief seemed much pleased, yet hesitated to
accept the offer.

'We are, you know, in the rear, the post of danger in a retreat.'

'And therefore the post of honour.'

'Well,' replied the Chieftain, 'let Alick have your horse in readiness,
in case we should be overmatched, and I shall be delighted to have your
company once more.'

The rear-guard were late in making their appearance, having been delayed
by various accidents and by the badness of the roads. At length they
entered the hamlet. When Waverley joined the clan Mac-Ivor, arm-in-arm
with their Chieftain, all the resentment they had entertained against him
seemed blown off at once. Evan Dhu received him with a grin of
congratulation; and even Callum, who was running about as active as ever,
pale indeed, and with a great patch on his head, appeared delighted to
see him.

'That gallows-bird's skull,' said Fergus, 'must be harder than marble;
the lock of the pistol was actually broken.'

'How could you strike so young a lad so hard?' said Waverley, with some
interest.

'Why, if I did not strike hard sometimes, the rascals would forget
themselves.'

They were now in full march, every caution being taken to prevent
surprise. Fergus's people, and a fine clan regiment from Badenoch,
commanded by Cluny Mac-Pherson, had the rear. They had passed a large
open moor, and were entering into the enclosures which surround a small
village called Clifton. The winter sun had set, and Edward began to rally
Fergus upon the false predictions of the Grey Spirit. 'The ides of March
are not past,' said Mac-Ivor, with a smile; when, suddenly casting his
eyes back on the moor, a large body of cavalry was indistinctly seen to
hover upon its brown and dark surface. To line the enclosures facing the
open ground and the road by which the enemy must move from it upon the
village was the work of a short time. While these manoeuvres were
accomplishing, night sunk down, dark and gloomy, though the moon was at
full. Sometimes, however, she gleamed forth a dubious light upon the
scene of action.

The Highlanders did not long remain undisturbed in the defensive position
they had adopted. Favoured by the night, one large body of dismounted
dragoons attempted to force the enclosures, while another, equally
strong, strove to penetrate by the highroad. Both were received by such a
heavy fire as disconcerted their ranks and effectually checked their
progress. Unsatisfied with the advantage thus gained, Fergus, to whose
ardent spirit the approach of danger seemed to restore all its
elasticity, drawing his sword and calling out 'Claymore!' encouraged his
men, by voice and example, to break through the hedge which divided them
and rush down upon the enemy. Mingling with the dismounted dragoons, they
forced them, at the sword-point, to fly to the open moor, where a
considerable number were cut to pieces. But the moon, which suddenly
shone out, showed to the English the small number of assailants,
disordered by their own success. Two squadrons of horse moving to the
support of their companions, the Highlanders endeavoured to recover the
enclosures. But several of them, amongst others their brave Chieftain,
were cut off and surrounded before they could effect their purpose.
Waverley, looking eagerly for Fergus, from whom, as well as from the
retreating body of his followers, he had been separated in the darkness
and tumult, saw him, with Evan Dhu and Callum, defending themselves
desperately against a dozen of horsemen, who were hewing at them with
their long broadswords. The moon was again at that moment totally
overclouded, and Edward, in the obscurity, could neither bring aid to his
friends nor discover which way lay his own road to rejoin the rear-guard.
After once or twice narrowly escaping being slain or made prisoner by
parties of the cavalry whom he encountered in the darkness, he at length
reached an enclosure, and, clambering over it, concluded himself in
safety and on the way to the Highland forces, whose pipes he heard at
some distance. For Fergus hardly a hope remained, unless that he might be
made prisoner. Revolving his fate with sorrow and anxiety, the
superstition of the Bodach Glas recurred to Edward's recollection, and he
said to himself, with internal surprise 'What, can the devil speak
truth?' [Footnote: See Note 13.]




CHAPTER XXXI

CHAPTER OF ACCIDENTS


Edward was in a most unpleasant and dangerous situation. He soon lost the
sound of the bagpipes; and, what was yet more unpleasant, when, after
searching long in vain and scrambling through many enclosures, he at
length approached the highroad, he learned, from the unwelcome noise of
kettledrums and trumpets, that the English cavalry now occupied it, and
consequently were between him and the Highlanders. Precluded, therefore,
from advancing in a straight direction, he resolved to avoid the English
military and endeavour to join his friends by making a circuit to the
left, for which a beaten path, deviating from the main road in that
direction, seemed to afford facilities. The path was muddy and the night
dark and cold; but even these inconveniences were hardly felt amidst the
apprehensions which falling into the hands of the King's forces
reasonably excited in his bosom.

After walking about three miles, he at length reached a hamlet. Conscious
that the common people were in general unfavourable to the cause he had
espoused, yet desirous, if possible, to procure a horse and guide to
Penrith, where he hoped to find the rear, if not the main body, of the
Chevalier's army, he approached the alehouse of the place. There was a
great noise within; he paused to listen. A round English oath or two, and
the burden of a campaign song, convinced him the hamlet also was occupied
by the Duke of Cumberland's soldiers. Endeavouring to retire from it as
softly as possible, and blessing the obscurity which hitherto he had
murmured against, Waverley groped his way the best he could along a small
paling, which seemed the boundary of some cottage garden. As he reached
the gate of this little enclosure, his outstretched hand was grasped by
that of a female, whose voice at the same time uttered, 'Edward, is't
thou, man?'

'Here is some unlucky mistake,' thought Edward, struggling, but gently,
to disengage himself.

'Naen o' thy foun, now, man, or the red cwoats will hear thee; they hae
been houlerying and poulerying every ane that past alehouse door this
noight to make them drive their waggons and sick loike. Come into
feyther's, or they'll do ho a mischief.'

'A good hint,' thought Waverley, following the girl through the little
garden into a brick-paved kitchen, where she set herself to kindle a
match at an expiring fire, and with the match to light a candle. She had
no sooner looked on Edward than she dropped the light, with a shrill
scream of 'O feyther, feyther!'

The father, thus invoked, speedily appeared--a sturdy old farmer, in a
pair of leather breeches, and boots pulled on without stockings, having
just started from his bed; the rest of his dress was only a Westmoreland
statesman's robe-de-chambre--that is, his shirt. His figure was displayed
to advantage by a candle which he bore in his left hand; in his right he
brandished a poker.

'What hast ho here, wench?'

'O!' cried the poor girl, almost going off in hysterics, 'I thought it
was Ned Williams, and it is one of the plaid-men.'

'And what was thee ganging to do wi' Ned Williams at this time o'
noight?' To this, which was, perhaps, one of the numerous class of
questions more easily asked than answered, the rosy-cheeked damsel made
no reply, but continued sobbing and wringing her hands.

'And thee, lad, dost ho know that the dragoons be a town? dost ho know
that, mon? ad, they'll sliver thee loike a turnip, mon.'

'I know my life is in great danger,' said Waverley, 'but if you can
assist me, I will reward you handsomely. I am no Scotchman, but an
unfortunate English gentleman.'

'Be ho Scot or no,' said the honest farmer, 'I wish thou hadst kept the
other side of the hallan. But since thou art here, Jacob Jopson will
betray no man's bluid; and the plaids were gay canny, and did not do so
much mischief when they were here yesterday.' Accordingly, he set
seriously about sheltering and refreshing our hero for the night. The
fire was speedily rekindled, but with precaution against its light being
seen from without. The jolly yeoman cut a rasher of bacon, which Cicely
soon broiled, and her father added a swingeing tankard of his best ale.
It was settled that Edward should remain there till the troops marched in
the morning, then hire or buy a horse from the farmer, and, with the best
directions that could be obtained, endeavour to overtake his friends. A
clean, though coarse, bed received him after the fatigues of this unhappy
day.

With the morning arrived the news that the Highlanders had evacuated
Penrith, and marched off towards Carlisle; that the Duke of Cumberland
was in possession of Penrith, and that detachments of his army covered
the roads in every direction. To attempt to get through undiscovered
would be an act of the most frantic temerity. Ned Williams (the right
Edward) was now called to council by Cicely and her father. Ned, who
perhaps did not care that his handsome namesake should remain too long in
the same house with his sweetheart, for fear of fresh mistakes, proposed
that Waverley, exchanging his uniform and plaid for the dress of the
country, should go with him to his father's farm near Ullswater, and
remain in that undisturbed retirement until the military movements in the
country should have ceased to render his departure hazardous. A price was
also agreed upon, at which the stranger might board with Farmer Williams
if he thought proper, till he could depart with safety. It was of
moderate amount; the distress of his situation, among this honest and
simple-hearted race, being considered as no reason for increasing their
demand.

The necessary articles of dress were accordingly procured, and, by
following by-paths known to the young farmer, they hoped to escape any
unpleasant rencontre. A recompense for their hospitality was refused
peremptorily by old Jopson and his cherry-cheeked daughter; a kiss paid
the one and a hearty shake of the hand the other. Both seemed anxious for
their guest's safety, and took leave of him with kind wishes.

In the course of their route Edward, with his guide, traversed those
fields which the night before had been the scene of action. A brief gleam
of December's sun shone sadly on the broad heath, which, towards the spot
where the great north-west road entered the enclosures of Lord Lonsdale's
property, exhibited dead bodies of men and horses, and the usual
companions of war, a number of carrion-crows, hawks, and ravens.

'And this, then, was thy last field,' said Waverley to himself, his eye
filling at the recollection of the many splendid points of Fergus's
character, and of their former intimacy, all his passions and
imperfections forgotten--'here fell the last Vich Ian Vohr, on a nameless
heath; and in an obscure night-skirmish was quenched that ardent spirit,
who thought it little to cut a way for his master to the British throne!
Ambition, policy, bravery, all far beyond their sphere, here learned the
fate of mortals. The sole support, too, of a sister whose spirit, as
proud and unbending, was even more exalted than thine own; here ended all
thy hopes for Flora, and the long and valued line which it was thy boast
to raise yet more highly by thy adventurous valour!'

As these ideas pressed on Waverley's mind, he resolved to go upon the
open heath and search if, among the slain, he could discover the body of
his friend, with the pious intention of procuring for him the last rites
of sepulture. The timorous young man who accompanied him remonstrated
upon the danger of the attempt, but Edward was determined. The followers
of the camp had already stripped the dead of all they could carry away;
but the country people, unused to scenes of blood, had not yet approached
the field of action, though some stood fearfully gazing at a distance.
About sixty or seventy dragoons lay slain within the first enclosure,
upon the highroad, and on the open moor. Of the Highlanders, not above a
dozen had fallen, chiefly those who, venturing too far on the moor, could
not regain the strong ground. He could not find the body of Fergus among
the slain. On a little knoll, separated from the others, lay the
carcasses of three English dragoons, two horses, and the page Callum Beg,
whose hard skull a trooper's broadsword had, at length, effectually
cloven. It was possible his clan had carried off the body of Fergus; but
it was also possible he had escaped, especially as Evan Dhu, who would
never leave his Chief, was not found among the dead; or he might be
prisoner, and the less formidable denunciation inferred from the
appearance of the Bodach Glas might have proved the true one. The
approach of a party sent for the purpose of compelling the country people
to bury the dead, and who had already assembled several peasants for that
purpose, now obliged Edward to rejoin his guide, who awaited him in great
anxiety and fear under shade of the plantations.

After leaving this field of death, the rest of their journey was happily
accomplished. At the house of Farmer Williams, Edward passed for a young
kinsman, educated for the church, who was come to reside there till the
civil tumults permitted him to pass through the country. This silenced
suspicion among the kind and simple yeomanry of Cumberland, and accounted
sufficiently for the grave manners and retired habits of the new guest.
The precaution became more necessary than Waverley had anticipated, as a
variety of incidents prolonged his stay at Fasthwaite, as the farm was
called.

A tremendous fall of snow rendered his departure impossible for more than
ten days. When the roads began to become a little practicable, they
successively received news of the retreat of the Chevalier into Scotland;
then, that he had abandoned the frontiers, retiring upon Glasgow; and
that the Duke of Cumberland had formed the siege of Carlisle. His army,
therefore, cut off all possibility of Waverley's escaping into Scotland
in that direction. On the eastern border Marshal Wade, with a large
force, was advancing upon Edinburgh; and all along the frontier, parties
of militia, volunteers, and partizans were in arms to suppress
insurrection, and apprehend such stragglers from the Highland army as had
been left in England. The surrender of Carlisle, and the severity with
which the rebel garrison were threatened, soon formed an additional
reason against venturing upon a solitary and hopeless journey through a
hostile country and a large army, to carry the assistance of a single
sword to a cause which seemed altogether desperate. In this lonely and
secluded situation, without the advantage of company or conversation with
men of cultivated minds, the arguments of Colonel Talbot often recurred
to the mind of our hero. A still more anxious recollection haunted his
slumbers--it was the dying look and gesture of Colonel Gardiner. Most
devoutly did he hope, as the rarely occurring post brought news of
skirmishes with various success, that it might never again be his lot to
draw his sword in civil conflict. Then his mind turned to the supposed
death of Fergus, to the desolate situation of Flora, and, with yet more
tender recollection, to that of Rose Bradwardine, who was destitute of
the devoted enthusiasm of loyalty, which to her friend hallowed and
exalted misfortune. These reveries he was permitted to enjoy, undisturbed
by queries or interruption; and it was in many a winter walk by the
shores of Ullswater that he acquired a more complete mastery of a spirit
tamed by adversity than his former experience had given him; and that he
felt himself entitled to say firmly, though perhaps with a sigh, that the
romance of his life was ended, and that its real history had now
commenced. He was soon called upon to justify his pretensions by reason
and philosophy.




CHAPTER XXXII

A JOURNEY TO LONDON


The family at Fasthwaite were soon attached to Edward. He had, indeed, that
gentleness and urbanity which almost universally attracts corresponding
kindness; and to their simple ideas his learning gave him consequence,
and his sorrows interest. The last he ascribed, evasively, to the loss of
a brother in the skirmish near Clifton; and in that primitive state of
society, where the ties of affection were highly deemed of, his continued
depression excited sympathy, but not surprise.

In the end of January his more lively powers were called out by the happy
union of Edward Williams, the son of his host, with Cicely Jopson. Our
hero would not cloud with sorrow the festivity attending the wedding of
two persons to whom he was so highly obliged. He therefore exerted
himself, danced, sung, played at the various games of the day, and was
the blithest of the company. The next morning, however, he had more
serious matters to think of.

The clergyman who had married the young couple was so much pleased with
the supposed student of divinity, that he came next day from Penrith on
purpose to pay him a visit. This might have been a puzzling chapter had
he entered into any examination of our hero's supposed theological
studies; but fortunately he loved better to hear and communicate the news
of the day. He brought with him two or three old newspapers, in one of
which Edward found a piece of intelligence that soon rendered him deaf to
every word which the Reverend Mr. Twigtythe was saying upon the news from
the north, and the prospect of the Duke's speedily overtaking and
crushing the rebels. This was an article in these, or nearly these
words:--

'Died at his house, in Hill Street, Berkeley Square, upon the 10th inst.,
Richard Waverley, Esq., second son of Sir Giles Waverley of
Waverley-Honour, etc. etc. He died of a lingering disorder, augmented by
the unpleasant predicament of suspicion in which he stood, having been
obliged to find bail to a high amount to meet an impending accusation of
high-treason. An accusation of the same grave crime hangs over his elder
brother, Sir Everard Waverley, the representative of that ancient family;
and we understand the day of his trial will be fixed early in the next
month, unless Edward Waverley, son of the deceased Richard, and heir to
the Baronet, shall surrender himself to justice. In that case we are
assured it is his Majesty's gracious purpose to drop further proceedings
upon the charge against Sir Everard. This unfortunate young gentleman is
ascertained to have been in arms in the Pretender's service, and to have
marched along with the Highland troops into England. But he has not been
heard of since the skirmish at Clifton, on the 18th December last.'

Such was this distracting paragraph. 'Good God!' exclaimed Waverley, 'am
I then a parricide? Impossible! My father, who never showed the affection
of a father while he lived, cannot have been so much affected by my
supposed death as to hasten his own; no, I will not believe it, it were
distraction to entertain for a moment such a horrible idea. But it were,
if possible, worse than parricide to suffer any danger to hang over my
noble and generous uncle, who has ever been more to me than a father, if
such evil can be averted by any sacrifice on my part!'

While these reflections passed like the stings of scorpions through
Waverley's sensorium, the worthy divine was startled in a long
disquisition on the battle of Falkirk by the ghastliness which they
communicated to his looks, and asked him if he was ill? Fortunately the
bride, all smirk and blush, had just entered the room. Mrs. Williams was
none of the brightest of women, but she was good-natured, and readily
concluding that Edward had been shocked by disagreeable news in the
papers, interfered so judiciously, that, without exciting suspicion, she
drew off Mr. Twigtythe's attention, and engaged it until he soon after
took his leave. Waverley then explained to his friends that he was under
the necessity of going to London with as little delay as possible.

One cause of delay, however, did occur, to which Waverley had been very
little accustomed. His purse, though well stocked when he first went to
Tully-Veolan, had not been reinforced since that period; and although his
life since had not been of a nature to exhaust it hastily, for he had
lived chiefly with his friends or with the army, yet he found that, after
settling with his kind landlord, he should be too poor to encounter the
expense of travelling post. The best course, therefore, seemed to be to
get into the great north road about Boroughbridge, and there take a place
in the northern diligence, a huge old-fashioned tub, drawn by three
horses, which completed the journey from Edinburgh to London (God
willing, as the advertisement expressed it) in three weeks. Our hero,
therefore, took an affectionate farewell of his Cumberland friends, whose
kindness he promised never to forget, and tacitly hoped one day to
acknowledge by substantial proofs of gratitude. After some petty
difficulties and vexatious delays, and after putting his dress into a
shape better befitting his rank, though perfectly plain and simple, he
accomplished crossing the country, and found himself in the desired
vehicle vis-a-vis to Mrs. Nosebag, the lady of Lieutenant Nosebag,
adjutant and riding-master of the--dragoons, a jolly woman of about
fifty, wearing a blue habit, faced with scarlet, and grasping a
silver-mounted horse-whip.

This lady was one of those active members of society who take upon them
faire le frais de la conversation. She had just returned from the north,
and informed Edward how nearly her regiment had cut the petticoat people
into ribands at Falkirk, 'only somehow there was one of those nasty,
awkward marshes, that they are never without in Scotland, I think, and so
our poor dear little regiment suffered something, as my Nosebag says, in
that unsatisfactory affair. You, sir, have served in the dragoons?'
Waverley was taken so much at unawares that he acquiesced.

'O, I knew it at once; I saw you were military from your air, and I was
sure you could be none of the foot-wobblers, as my Nosebag calls them.
What regiment, pray?' Here was a delightful question. Waverley, however,
justly concluded that this good lady had the whole army-list by heart;
and, to avoid detection by adhering to truth, answered, 'Gardiner's
dragoons, ma'am; but I have retired some time.'

'O aye, those as won the race at the battle of Preston, as my Nosebag
says. Pray, sir, were you there?'

'I was so unfortunate, madam,' he replied, 'as to witness that
engagement.'

'And that was a misfortune that few of Gardiner's stood to witness, I
believe, sir--ha! ha! ha! I beg your pardon; but a soldier's wife loves a
joke.'

'Devil confound you,' thought Waverley: 'what infernal luck has penned me
up with this inquisitive hag!'

Fortunately the good lady did not stick long to one subject. 'We are
coming to Ferrybridge now,' she said, 'where there was a party of OURS
left to support the beadles, and constables, and justices, and these sort
of creatures that are examining papers and stopping rebels, and all
that.' They were hardly in the inn before she dragged Waverley to the
window, exclaiming, 'Yonder comes Corporal Bridoon, of our poor dear
troop; he's coming with the constable man. Bridoon's one of my lambs, as
Nosebag calls 'ern. Come, Mr.--a--a--pray, what's your name, sir?'

'Butler, ma'am,' said Waverley, resolved rather to make free with the
name of a former fellow-officer than run the risk of detection by
inventing one not to be found in the regiment.

