surprised her.  But who could be more to Scotland than Wallace had
been?  All that was in the power of patriot or of king to do for his
country, he had done; and what then was Bruce in her estimation?  One
who, basking in pleasures while his country suffered, allowed a brave
subject to breast, to overthrow every danger, before he put himself
forward? and now he appeared to assume a throne, which, though his
right by birth, he had most justly forfeited, by neglecting the duties
indispensable in the heir of so great and oppressed a kingdom!  These
would have been her thoughts of him; but Wallace called this Bruce his
friend! and the few words she had heard him speak, being full of
gratitude to her deliverer, that engaged her esteem.

The answer, however, which she made to the reply of Wallace was
spontaneous, and it struck upon the heart of Bruce.  "How long," said
she, "have you promised Scotland that it should see that day!"

"Long, to my grief, Lady Helen," rejoined Bruce; "I would say to my
shame--had I ever intentionally erred toward my country; but ignorance
of her state, and of the depth of Edward's treachery, was my crime.  I
only required to be shown the right path to pursue it, and Sir William
Wallace came to point the way.  My soul, lady, is not unworthy the
destiny to which he calls me."  Had there been light, she would have
seen the flush of conscious virtue that overspread his fine countenance
while he spoke; but the words were sufficient to impress her with that
respect he deserved, and which her answer showed.

"My father taught me to consider the Bruce the rightful heirs of
Scotland; and now that I see the day which he so often wished to hail,
I cannot but regard it as the termination of Scotland's woes.  Oh! had
it been before! perhaps--"  Here she paused, for tears stopped her
utterance.

"You think," rejoined Bruce, "that much bloodshed might have been
spared!  But, dear lady, poison not the comfort of your life by that
belief.  No man exists who could have effected so much for Scotland in
so short a time, and with so little loss, as our Wallace has done.
Who, like him, makes mercy the companion of war, and compels even his
enemies to emulate the clemency he shows?  Fewer have been slain on the
Scottish side during the whole of his struggle with Edward, than were
lost by Baliol on the fatal day of Dunbar.  Then, no quarter was given;
and too many of the wounded were left to perish on the field.  But with
Wallace, life was granted to all who asked; the wounded enemy and the
friend were alike succored by him.  This conduct provoked the jealousy
of the Southron generals, not to be surpassed in generosity, and thus
comparatively few have been lost.  But if in that number some of our
noblest chiefs, we must be resigned to yield to God what is his own;
may, we must be grateful, daughter of the gallant Mar, for the manner
in which they were taken.  They fell in the arms of true glory, like
parents defending their offspring; while others--my grandfather and
father--perished with broken hearts, in unavailing lamentations that
they could not share the fate of those who died for Scotland."

"But you, dear Bruce," returned Wallace, "will live for her; will teach
those whose hearts have bled in her cause, to find a balm for every
wound in her prosperity."

Helen smiled through her tears at those words.  They spoke the heavenly
consolation which had descended on her mourning spirit.  "If Scotland
be to rest under the happy reign of Robert Bruce, then envy cannot
again assail Sir William Wallace, and my father has not shed his blood
in vain.  His beautified spirit, with those of my uncles Bothwell and
Ruthven, will rejoice in such a peace, and I shall enjoy it to
felicity, in so sacred a participation."  Surprised at her associating
the name of Lord Ruthven with those who had fallen, Wallace interrupted
her with the assurance of her uncle's safety.  The Scottish chiefs
easily understood that De Valence had given her the opposite
intelligence, to impress her with an idea that she was friendless, and
so precipitate her into the determination of becoming his wife.  But
she did not repeat to her brave auditors all the arguments he had used
to shake her impregnable heart--impregnable, because a principle kept
guard there, which neither flattery nor ambition could dispossess.  He
had told her that the very day in which she would give him her hand,
King Edward would send him viceroy into Scotland, where she should
reign with all the power and magnificence of a queen.  He was handsome,
accomplished, and adored her; but Helen could not love him whom she
could not esteem, for she knew he was libertine, base and cruel.  That
he loved her affected her not; she could only be sensible to an
affection placed on worthy foundations; and he who trampled on all
virtues in his own actions, could not desire them when seen in her; he
therefore must love her for the fairness of her form alone; and to
place any value on such affection was to grasp the wind.

Personal flatteries having made no impression on Helen, ambitious
projects were attempted with equal failure.  Had De Valence been lord
of the eastern and western empires, could he have made her the envy and
admiration of a congregated world, all would have been in vain; she had
seen and known the virtues of Sir William Wallace; and from that hour,
all that was excellent in man, and all that was desirable on earth,
seemed to her to be in him summed up.  "On the barren heath," said she
to herself, "in some desert island, with only thee and thy virtues, how
happy could be Helen Mar! how great!  For, to share thy heart--thy
noble, glorious heart--would be a bliss, a seal of honor from Heaven,
with which no terrestrial elevation could compare!"  Then would she
sigh; capable of appreciating and loving above all earthly things the
matchless virtues of Sir William Wallace.  On the very evening of the
night in question in which he had so unexpectedly appeared to release
her, her thoughts had been engaged in this train: "Yes," cried she to
herself, "even in loving thy perfections there is such enjoyment, that
I would rather be as I am--what others might call the hopeless Helen,
than the loving and beloved of any other man on earth.  In thee I love
virtue; and the imperishable sentiment will bless me in the world to
come."  With these thoughts she had fallen asleep; she dreamed that she
called on her father, on Wallace to save her, and on opening her eyes,
she had found him indeed near.

Every word which this almost adored friend now said to comfort her with
regard to her own immediate losses, to assure her of the peace of
Scotland, should Heaven bless the return of Bruce, took root in her
soul, and sprung up into resignation and happiness.  She listened to
the plans of Wallace and of Bruce to effect their great enterprise, and
the hours of the night passed to her not only in repose, but in
enjoyment.  Wallace, though pleased with the interest she took in even
the minutest details of their design, became fearful of overtasking her
weakened frame; he whispered Bruce to gradually drop the conversation;
and, as it died away, slumber again stole over her eyelids.

The dawn had spread far over the sky while she yet slept.  Wallace sat
contemplating her, and the now sleeping Bruce, who had also
imperceptibly sunk to rest.  Various and anxious were his meditations.
He had hardly seen seven-and-twenty years, yet so had he been tried in
the vicissitudes of life, that he felt as if he had lived a century;
and instead of looking on the lovely Helen as on one whose charms might
claim a lover's lovely Helen as on one whose charms might claim a
lover's wishes in his breast, he regarded her with sentiments more like
parental tenderness.  That, indeed, seemed the affection which now
reigned in his bosom.  He felt as a father toward Scotland.  For every
son and daughter of that harassed country, he was ready to lay down his
life.  Edwin he cherished in his heart as he would have done the
dearest of his own offspring.  It was as a parent to whom a beloved and
prodigal son had returned, that he looked on Bruce.  But Helen, of all
Scotland's daughters, she was the most precious in his eyes; set love
aside, and no object without the touch of that all-pervading passion
could he regard with more endearing tenderness than he did Helen Mar.

The shades of night vanished before the bright uprise of the king of
day, and with them her slumbers.  She stirred; she awoke.  The lark was
then soaring with shrill cadence over her head; its notes pierced the
ear of Bruce, and he started on his feet.

"You have allowed me to sleep, Wallace?"

"And why not?" replied he.  "Here it was safe for all to have slept.
Yet had there been danger, I was at my post to have called you."  He
gently smiled as he spoke.

"Whence, my friend," cried Bruce, with a respondent beam on his
countenance, "did you draw the ethereal essence that animates your
frame?  You toil for us--watch for us, and yet you never seem fatigued,
never discomposed!  How is this?  What does it mean?"

"That the soul is immortal," answered Wallace; "that it has a godlike
power given to it by the Giver of all good, even while on earth, to
subdue the wants of this mortal frame.  The circumstances in which
Heaven has cast me, have disciplined my circumstances in which Heaven
has cast me, have disciplined my body to obey my mind in all things;
and, therefore, when the motives for exertion are strong within me, it
is long, very long, before I feel hunger, thirst, or drowsiness.
Indeed, while thus occupied, I have often thought it possible for the
activity of the soul so to wear the body, that some day she might find
it suddenly fall away from about her spiritual substance, and leave her
unencumbered, without having felt the touch of death.  And yet, that
Elisha-like change," continued Wallace, following up on his own
thought, "could not be till Heaven sees the appointed time.  'Man does
not live by bread alone;' neither by sleep, nor any species of
refreshment.  His Spirit alone, who created all things, can give us a
rest, while we keep the strictest vigils; His power can sustain the
wasting frame, even in a barren wilderness."

"True," replied Helen, looking timidly up: "but, because Heaven is so
gracious as sometimes to work miracles in our favor, surely we are not
authorized to neglect the natural means of obtaining the same end?"

"Certainly not," returned Wallace; "it is not for man to tempt God at
any time.  Sufficient for us it is to abide by His all-wise
dispensations.  When we are in circumstances that allow the usual means
of life, it is demanded of us to use them.  But when we are brought
into situations where watching, fasting, and uncommon toils are not to
be avoided, then it is an essential part of our obedience to perform
our duties to the end, without any regard to the wants which may impede
our way.  It is in such an hour, when the soul of man, resolved to
obey, looks down on human nature and looks up to God, that he receives
both the manna and the ever-living waters of heaven.  By this faith and
perseverance, the uplifted hands of Moses prevailed over Amalek in
Rephidim; and by the same did the lengthened race of the sun light
Joshua to a double victory in Gibeon."

The morning vapors having dispersed from the opposite plain, and Helen
being refreshed by her long repose, Wallace seated her on horseback,
and they recommenced their journey.  The helmets of both chiefs were
now open.  Grimsby looked at one and the other; the countenances of
both assured him that he should find a protector in either.  He drew
toward Helen; she noticed his manner, and observing to Wallace that she
believed the soldier wished to speak with her, checked her horse.  At
this action, Grimsby presumed to ride up, and bowing respectfully,
said, that before he followed her to Paris, it would be right for the
Count de Valois to know whom he had taken into his train; "one, madam,
who has been degraded by King Edward; degraded," added he, "but not
debased; that last disgrace depends on myself; and I should shrink from
your protection rather than court it, were I indeed vile."

"You have too well proved your integrity, Grimsby," replied Helen, "to
doubt it now; but what has the Count de Valois to do with your being
under my protection?  It is not to him we go, but to the French king."

"And is not that knight with the diadem," inquired Grimsby, "the Count
de Valois?  The servants at Chateau Galliard told me he was so."

Surprised at this, Helen said the knight should answer for himself; and
quickening the step of her horse, followed by Grimsby, rejoined his
side.

When she informed Wallace of what had passed, he called the soldier to
approach.  "Grimsby," said he, "you have claims upon me which should
insure you my protection were I even insensible to the honorable
principles you have just declared to Lady Helen.  But, I repeat, I am
already your friend.  You have only to speak, and all in my power to
serve you shall be done."

"Then, sir," returned he, "as mine is rather a melancholy story, and
parts of it have already drawn tears from Lady Helen, if you will honor
me with your attention apart from her, I would relate how I fell into
disgrace with my sovereign."

Wallace fell a little back with Grimsby; and while Bruce and Helen rode
briskly forward, he, at a slower pace, prepared to listen to the
recapitulation of scenes in which he was only too deeply interested.
The soldier began by narrating the fatal events at Ellerslie, which had
compelled him to leave the army in Scotland.  He related that after
quitting the priory of St. Fillan, he reached Guienne, and there served
under the Earl of Lincoln, until the marriage of Edward with King
Philip's sister gave the English monarch quiet possession of that
province.  Grimsby then marched with the rest of the troops to join
their sovereign in Flanders.  There he was recognized, and brought to
judgment by one of Heselrigge's captains; one who had been a particular
favorite with the tyrant from their similarity of disposition, and to
whom he had told the mutiny and desertion (as he called it) of Grimsby.
But on the presentation of the Earl of Lincoln, his punishment was
mitigated from death to the infliction of a certain number of lashes.
This sentence, which the honest officer regarded as worse than the loss
of life, was executed.  On stripping him at the halberts, Lady Helen's
gift, the diamond clasp, was found hanging round his neck; this was
seized as a proof of some new crime; his general now gave him up; and
so inconsistent were his judges, that while they allowed this treason
(for so they stigmatized his manly resentment of Heselrigge's cruelty)
to prejudice them in this second charge, they would not believe what
was so probable, that this very jewel had been given to him by a friend
of Sir William Wallace in reward for his behavior on that occasion.  He
appealed to Edward, but he appealed in vain; and on the following day
he was adjudged to be broken on the wheel for the supposed robbery.

Every heart was callous to his sufferings, but that of the wife of his
jailer; who, fancying him like a brother of hers, who had been killed
ten years before in Italy, at the dead of the night she opened his
prison doors.  He fled into Normandy; and, without a home, outlawed,
branded as a traitor and a thief, he was wandering half-desperate one
stormy night on the banks of the Marne, when a cry of distress
attracted his attention.  It issued from the suit of De Valence, on his
way to Guienne.  Scared at the tempest, the female attendants of Lady
Helen had abandoned themselves to shrieks of despair; but she,
insensible to anything but grief, lay in perfect stillness in the
litter that conveyed her.  As Grimsby approached the travelers, De
Valence demanded his assistance to conduct them to a place of shelter.
Chateau Galliard was the nearest residence fit to receive the earl and
his train.  Thither the soldier led them, and heard from the servants
that the lady in the vehicle was their lord's wife, and a lunatic.
Grimsby remained in the chateau, because he had nowhere else to go; and
by accidental speeches from the lady's attendants soon found that she
was not married to the earl; and was not only perfectly sane, but often
most cruelly treated.  Her name he had never learned until the last
evening, when, carrying some wine into the banqueting-room, he heard De
Valence mention it to the other stranger knight.  He then retired full
of horror, resolving to essay her rescue himself; but the unexpected
sight of the two knights in the hall determined him to reveal the case
to them.  "This," added Grimsby, "is my story; and whoever you are,
noble lord, if you think me not unworthy your protection, grant it, and
you shall find me faithful unto death."

"I owe you that, and more," replied the chief; "I am that Wallace on
whose account you fled your country; and if you be willing to share the
fortunes of one who may live and die in camps, I pledge you that my
best destiny shall be yours."  Could Grimsby in his joyful surprise
have thrown himself at the feet of Wallace, he would have done so; but
taking hold of the end of his scarf, he pressed it enthusiastically to
his lips, and exclaimed:

"Bravest of the brave, this is beyond my prayers; to meet here the
triumphant lord of Scotland!  I fell innocently into disgrace; ah! how
am I now exalted unto honor!  My country would have deprived me of
life; I am therefore dead to it, and live only to gratitude and you!"

"Then," replied Wallace, "as the first proof of the confidence I repose
in you, know that the young chief who is riding forward with Lady Helen
is Robert Bruce, the Prince of Scotland.  Our next enterprise is to
place him upon the throne of his ancestors.  Meanwhile, till we license
you to do otherwise, keep our names a secret, and call us by those we
may hereafter think fit to assume."

Grimsby, once more reinstated in the station he deserved--that of trust
and respect--no longer hung his head in abject despondency; but looking
erect as one born again from disgrace, he became the active, cheerful,
and faithful servant of Wallace.

During Wallace's conversation with the soldier, Helen was listening
with delight to the encomiums which Bruce passed upon his friend and
champion.  As his eloquent tongue described the merits of Wallace, and
expressed an ardent gratitude for his having so gloriously supplied his
place to Scotland, Helen turned her eyes upon the prince.  Before she
had scarcely remarked that he was more than young and handsome; but
now, while she contemplated the noble confidence which breathed in
every feature, she said to herself: "This man is worthy to be the
friend of Wallace!  His soul is a mirror to reflect all the brightness
of Wallace's; ay, like as with the sun's rays, to kindle with heaven's
fire all on whom it turns."

Bruce remarked the unusual animation of her eyes as she looked at him.

"You feel all I say of Wallace," said he.  And it was not a charge at
which she need blush.

It was addressed to that perception of exalted worth which regards
neither sex nor age.  Helen did not misapprehend him.  The amiable
frankness of his manner seemed to open to him her heart.  Wallace she
adored almost as a god; Bruce she could love as a brother.  It requires
not time nor proof to make virtuous hearts coalesce; there is a
language without sounds, a recognition, independent of the visual
organ, which acknowledges the kindred of congenial souls almost in the
moment they meet.  "The virtuous mind knoweth its brother in the dark!"
This was said by the man whose soul sympathized in every noble purpose
with that of Wallace; while Helen, impelled by the same principle, and
blushing with an emotion untainted by any sensation of shame, replied:

"I am too grateful to Heaven for having allowed me to witness the
goodness, to share the esteem of such a being--a man whose like I have
never seen."

"He is one of the few, Lady Helen," replied Bruce, "who is worthy of so
august a title; and he brightly shows the image in which he was made;
so humble, so dignified, so great, so lowly; so super-eminent in all
accomplishments of mind and body; wise, brave, and invincible; yet
forbearing, gentle, and unassuming; formed to be beloved, yet without a
touch of vanity; loving all who approach him, without the least alloy
of passion.  Ah! Lady Helen, he is a model after which I will fashion
my life; for he has written the character of the Son of God in his
heart, and it shall be my study to transcribe the blessed copy into
mine!"

Tears of gratitude glittered in the eye, and on the smile of Helen.  To
answer Bruce she found to be impossible, but that her smile and look
were appreciated by him, his own told her; and stretching out his hand
to her, as she put hers into his, he said:

"We are united in his heart, my sweet friend!"

At this moment Wallace joined them. He saw the action, and the
animation on each countenance, and looked at Bruce with a glance of
inquiry; but Bruce perceived nothing of a lover's jealousy in the look;
it carried the wish of a friend to share what had impressed them with
such happy traits.

"We have been talking of you," returned the prince, "and if to be
beloved is a source of joy, you must be peculiarly blessed.  The
affections of Lady Helen and myself have met, and made your heart the
altar on which we have pledged our fraternal love."

Wallace regarded each with a look of tenderness.  "It is my joy to love
you both like a brother, but Lady Helen must consider me as even more
than that to her.  I am her father's representative, I am the voice of
grateful Scotland, thanking her for the preservation her generous
exertions yielded!  And to you, my prince, I am your friend, your
subject--all that is devoted and true."

Thus enjoying the dear communion of hearts, the interchange of mind,
and mingling soul with soul, did these three friends journey toward the
gates of Paris.  Every hour seemed an age of blessedness to Helen, so
gratefully did she enjoy each passing moment of a happiness that seemed
to speak of Paradise.  Nature never before appeared so beautiful in her
eyes, the sky was more serene, the birds sung with sweeter notes, the
landscape shone in brighter charms; the fragrances of the flowers
bathed her senses in the softest balm; and the very air as it breathed
around her, seemed fraught with life and joy.  But Wallace animated the
scene; and while she fancied that she inhaled his breath in every
respiration, she moved as if on enchanted ground.  Oh! she could have
lingered there forever! and hardly did she know what it was to draw any
but sighs of bliss till she saw the towers of Paris embattling the
horizon.  They reminded her that she was now going to be occasionally
divided from him; that when entered within those walls, it would no
longer be decorous for her to pass days and nights in listening to his
voice, in losing all of woman's love in the beautified affection of an
angel.

This passion of the soul (if such it may be called), which has its rise
in virtue and its aim the same, would be most unjustly degraded were it
classed with what the herd generally entitle love.  The love which men
stigmatize, deride, and yet encourage, is a fancy, an infatuation,
awakened by personal attraction, by--the lover knows not what,
sometimes by gratified vanity, sometimes by idleness, and often by the
most debasing propensities of human nature.  Earthly it is, and unto
earth it shall return!  But love, true heaven-born love, that pure
affection which unites congenial spirits here, and with which the
Creator will hereafter connect in one blessed fraternity the whole
kindred of mankind, has but one cause--the universal unchangeableness
and immortality, a something so excellent that the simple wish to
partake its essence in the union of affection, to facilitate and to
share its attainment of true and lasting happiness, invigorates our
virtue and inspires our souls.  These are the aims and joys of real
love.  It has nothing selfish; in every desire it soars above this
earth; and anticipates, as the ultimatum of its joy, the moment when it
shall meet its partner before the throne of God.  Such was the
sentiment of Helen toward Wallace.  So unlike what she had seen in
others of the universal passion, she would hardly have acknowledged to
herself that what she felt was love, had not the anticipation of even
an hour's separation from him, whispered the secret to her heart.


CHAPTER LXV.

Paris.


When they were arrived within a short distance from Paris, Wallace
wrote a few lines to King Philip, informing him who were the companions
of his journey, and that he would rest near the Abbey of St. Genevieve
until he should receive his majesty's greetings to Bruce; also the
queen's granted protection for the daughter of the Earl of Mar.
Grimsby was the bearer of this letter.  He soon returned with an escort
of honor, accompanied by Prince Louis himself.  At sight of Wallace he
flew into his arms, and after embracing him again and again with all
the unchecked ardor of youthful gratitude, he presented to him a packet
from the king.

It expressed the satisfaction of Philip at the near prospect of his
seeing the man whom he had so long admired, and whose valor had wrought
him such service as the preservation of his son.  He then added that he
had other matters to thank him for when they should meet, and subjects
to discuss which would be much elucidated by the presence of Bruce.
"According to your request," continued he, "the name of neither shall
be made public at my court.  My own family only know who are to be my
illustrious guests.  The queen is impatient to bid them welcome, and no
less eager to greet the Lady Helen Mar with her friendship and
protection."

A beautiful palfrey, superbly caparisoned, and tossing its fair neck
amid the pride of its gorgeous chamfraine, was led forward by a page.
Two ladies, also, bearing rich apparel for Helen, appeared in the
train.  When their errand was made known to Wallace, he communicated it
to Helen.  Her delicacy indeed wished to lay aside her page's apparel
before she was presented to the queen; but she had been so happy while
she wore it!

"Days have passed with me in these garments," said she to herself,
"which may never occur again!"

The laddies were conducted to her.  They delivered a gracious message
from their royal mistress, and opened the caskets.  Helen sighed; she
could urge nothing in opposition to their embassy, and reluctantly
assented to the change they were to make in her appearance.  She stood
mute while they disarrayed her of her humble guise, and clothed her in
the robes of France.  During their attendance, in the adulatory strains
of the court, they broke out in encomiums on the graces of her person;
but to all this she turned an inattentive ear--her mind was absorbed in
what she had enjoyed, in the splendid penance she might now undergo.

One of the women was throwing the page's clothes carelessly into a bag,
when Helen perceiving her, with ill-concealed eagerness, cried:

"Take care of that suit, it is more precious to me than gold or jewels."

"Indeed!" answered the attendant, more respectfully folding it; "it
does not seem of very rich silk."

"Probably not," returned Helen, "but it is valuable to me, and wherever
I lodge, I will thank you to put it into my apartment."

A mirror was now presented that she might see herself.  She started at
the load of jewels with which they had adorned her, and while tears
filled her eyes, she mildly said:

"I am a mourner, and these ornaments must not be worn by me."

The ladies obeyed her wish to have them taken off, and with thoughts
divided between her father and her father's friend, she was conducted
toward the palfrey.  Wallace approached her, and Bruce flew forward,
with his usual haste, to assist her; but it was no longer the beautiful
little page that met his view, the confidential and frank glance of a
youthful brother--it was a lovely woman arrayed in all the charms of
female apparel, trembling and blushing, as she again appeared as a
woman before the eyes of the man she loved.  Wallace sighed as he
touched her hand, for there was something in her air which seemed to
say, "I am not what I was a few minutes ago."  It was the aspect of the
world's austerity, the decorum of rank and situation--but not of the
heart--that had never been absent from the conduct of Helen; had she
been in the wilds of Africa, with no other companion than Wallace,
still would those chaste reserves which lived in her soul have been
there the guardian of her actions, for modesty was as much the
attribute of her person, as magnanimity the character of her mind.

Her more distant air at this time was the effect of reflections while
in the abbey where he had lodged her.  She saw that the frank
intercourse between them was to be interrupted by the forms of a court,
and her manner insensibly assumed the demeanor she was so soon to wear.
Bruce looked at her with delighted wonder.  He had before admired her
as beautiful, he now gazed on her as transcendently so.  He checked
himself in his swift step--he paused to look on her and Wallace, and
contemplating them with sentiments of unmingled admiration, this
exclamation unconsciously escaped him:

"How lovely!"

He could not but wish to see two such perfectly amiable and perfectly
beautiful beings united as closely by the bonds of the altar as he
believed they were in heart, and he longed for the hour when he might
endow them with those proofs of his fraternal love which should class
them with the first of Scottish princes.

"But how," thought he, "can I ever sufficiently reward thee, Wallace,
for what thou hast done for me and mine?  Thy services are beyond all
price; thy soul is above even empires.  Then how can I show thee all
that is in my heart for thee?"

While he thus apostrophized his friend, Wallace and Helen advanced
toward him.  Bruce held out his hand to her with a cordial smile.

"Lady Helen, we are still to be the same!  Robes of no kind must ever
separate the affections born in our pilgrimage!"

She put her hand into his with a glow of delight.

"While Sir William Wallace allows me to call him brother," answered
she, "that will ever be a sanction to our friendship; but courts are
formal places, and I now go to one."

"And I will soon remove you to another," replied he, "where"--he
hesitated--looked at Wallace and then resumed: "where every wish of my
sister Helen's heart shall be gratified, or I be no king."

Helen blushed deeply and hastened toward the palfrey.  Wallace placed
her on the embroidered saddle, and Prince Louis preceding the
cavalcade, it moved on.

As Bruce vaulted into his seat he said something to his friend of the
perfectly feminine beauty of Helen.

"But her soul is fairer!" returned Wallace.

The Prince of Scotland, with a gay but tender smile, softly whispered:

"Fair, doubly fair to you!"

Wallace drew a deep sigh.

"I never knew but one woman who resembled her, and she did indeed excel
all of created mold.  From infancy to manhood I read every thought of
her angelic heart; I became the purer by the study, and I loved my
model with an idolatrous adoration.  There was my error!  But those
sympathies, those hours are past.  My heart will never throb as it has
throbbed; never rejoice as it has rejoiced; for she who lived but for
me, who doubled all my joys, is gone!  Oh, my prince, though blessed
with friendship, there are times when I feel that I am solitary!"

Bruce looked at him with some surprise.

"Solitary, Wallace! can you ever be solitary, and near Helen of Mar?"

"Perhaps more so then than at any other time; for her beauties, her
excellences, remind me of what were once mine, and recall every regret.
Oh, Bruce! thou canst not comprehend my loss!  To mingle thought with
thought, and soul with soul, for years; and then, after blending our
very beings, and feeling as if indeed made one, to be separated--and by
a stroke of violence!  This was a trial of the spirit which, but for
Heaven's mercy, would have crushed me.  I live, but still my heart will
mourn, mourn her I have lost--and mourn that my rebellious nature will
not be more resigned to the judgments of its God."

"And is love so constant, so tenacious?" exclaimed Bruce; "is it to
consume your youth, Wallace?  Is it to wed such a heart as yours to the
tomb?  Ah! am I not to hope that the throne of my children may be
upheld by a race of thine?"

Wallace shook his head, but with a placid firmness replied:

"Your throne and your children's, if they follow your example, will be
upheld by Heaven; but should they pervert themselves, a host of mortal
supports would not be sufficient to stay their downfall."

In discourse like this, the youthful Prince of Scotland caught a
clearer view of the inmost thoughts of his friend than he had been able
to discern before; for war, or Bruce's own interests, having
particularly engaged them in all their former conversations, Wallace
had never been induced to glance at the private circumstances of his
history.  While Bruce sighed in tender pity for the captivated heart of
Helen, he the more deeply revered, more intensely loved, his suffering
and heroic friend.

A few hours brought the royal escort to the Louvre; and through a train
of nobles, Helen was led by Prince Louis into the regal saloon.  The
Scottish chiefs followed.  The queen and the Count D'Evereux received
Bruce and Helen, while De Valois conducted Wallace to the king, who had
retired for the purpose of this conference to his closet.

At sight of the armor which he had sent to the preserver of his son,
Philip instantly recognized the Scottish hero, and rising from his
seat, hastened forward and clasped him in his arms.  "Wonder not,
august chief," exclaimed he, "at the weakness exhibited in these eyes!
It is the tribute of nature to a virtue which loads even kings with
benefits.  You have saved my son's life; you have preserved from taint
the honor of my sister!"  Philip then proceeded to inform his auditor
that he had heard from a confessor of Queen Margaret's, just arrived
from England, all that had lately happened at Edward's court; and of
Wallace's letter, to clear the innocence of that injured princess.
"She is perfectly reinstated in the king's confidence," added Philip,
"but I can never pardon the infamy with which he would have overwhelmed
her; nay, it has already dishonored her, for the blasting effects of
slander no time nor labor can erase.  I yield to the prayers of my too
gentle sister, not to openly resent this wrong, but in private he shall
feel a brother's indignation.  I do not declare war against him, but
ask what you will, bravest of men, and were it to place the crown of
Scotland on your head, demand it of me, and by my concealed agency it
shall be effected."

The reply of Wallace was simple.  He claimed no merit in the justice he
had done the Queen of England; neither in his rescue of Prince Louis,
but as a proof of King Philip's friendship, he gladly embraced his
offered services with regard to Scotland.

"Not," added he, "to send troops into that country against England.
Scotland is now free of its Southron invaders; all I require is that
you will use your royal influence with Edward to allow it to remain so.
Pledge your faith, most gracious monarch, with my master the royally
descended Bruce, who is now in your palace.  He will soon assume the
crown that is his right; and with such an ally as France to hold the
ambition of Edward in check, we may certainly hope that the bloody
feuds between Scotland and England may at last be laid to rest."

Wallace explained to Philip the dispositions of the Scots, the nature
of Bruce's claims, and the transcendent virtues of his youthful
character.  The monarch took fire at the speaker's enthusiasm, and,
giving him his hand, exclaimed:

"Wallace, I know not what manner of man you are!  You seem born to
dictate to kings, while you put aside as things of no moment the crowns
offered to yourself.  You are young and, marveling, I would say without
ambition, did I not know that your deeds and your virtues have set you
above all earthly titles.  But to convince me that you do not disdain
the gratitude we pay, at least accept a name in my country; and know,
that the armor you wear, the coronet around your helmet, invest you
with the rank of a prince of France, and the title of Count of Gascony."

To have refused this mark of the monarch's esteem would have been an
act of churlish pride foreign from the character of Wallace.  He
graciously accepted the offered distinction, and bowing his head,
allowed the king to throw the brilliant collar of Gascony over his neck.

This act was performed by Philip with all the emotions of disinterested
esteem.  But when he had proposed it to his brother D'Evereux, as the
only way he could devise of rewarding Wallace for the preservation of
his son, and the honor of their sister, he was obliged to urge in
support of his wish, the desire he had to take the first opportunity of
being revenged on Edward by the reseizure of Guienne.  To have Sir
William Wallace lord of Gascony would then be of the greatest advantage
as no doubt could be entertained of his arms soon restoring the sister
province to the French monarchy.  In such a case, Philip promised to
bestow Guienne on his brother D'Evereux.

To attach this new count to France was now all the wish of Philip, and
he closed the conference with every expression of friendship which man
could deliver to man.  Wallace lost not the opportunity of pleading for
the abdicated King of Scots; and Philip, eager as well to evince his
resentment to Edward as to oblige Wallace, promised to send immediate
orders to Normandy that De Valence should leave Chateau Galliard, and
Baliol be attended with his former state.

The king then led his guest into the royal saloon, where they found the
queen seated between Bruce and Helen.  At sight of the Scottish chief
her majesty rose.  Philip led him up to her; and Wallace, bending his
knee, put the fair hand extended to his lips.

"Welcome," said she, "bravest of knights; receive a mother's thanks."
Tears of gratitude stood in her eyes.  She clasped the hand of her son
and his together, and added, "Louis, wherever our Count of Gascony
advises you to pledge this hand, give it."

"Then it will follow mine!" cried the king, putting his into that of
Bruce; "You are Wallace's acknowledged sovereign, young prince, and you
shall ever find brothers in me and my son!  Sweet lady," added he,
turning to the glowing Helen, "thanks to your charms for having drawn
this friend of mankind to bless our shores!"

The court knew Wallace merely as Count of Gascony; and, to preserve an
equal concealment, Bruce assumed the name of the young De Longueville,
whom Prince Louis had, in fact, allowed to leave him on the road to
Paris to retire to Chartres, there to pass a year of mourning within
its penitential monastery.  Only two persons ever came to the Louvre
who could recognize Bruce to be other than he seemed, and they were,
John Cummin, the elder twin brother of the present Regent of Scotland,
and James Lord Douglas.  The former had remained in France, out of
dislike to his brother's proceedings, and as Bruce knew him in Guienne,
and believed him to be a blunt, well-meaning young man, he saw no
danger in trusting him.  The brave son of William Douglas was
altogether of a nobler mettle, and both Wallace and his prince rejoiced
at the prospect of receiving him to their friendship.

Philip opened the affair to the two lords; and having declared his
designs in favor of Bruce, conducted them into t he queen's room, and
pointing where he stood, "There," cried he, "is the King of Scotland."

Douglas and Cummin would have bent their knees to their young monarch,
but Bruce hastily caught their hands, and prevented them:

"My friends," said he, "regard me as your fellow-soldier only, till you
see me on the throne of my fathers.  Till then, that is our prince,"
added he, looking on Wallace; "he is my leader, my counselor, my
example!  And, if you love me, he must be yours."

Douglas and Cummin turned toward Wallace at these words.  Royalty did
indeed sit on his brow, but with a tempered majesty which spoke only in
love and honor.  From the resplendent countenance of Bruce it smiled
and threatened, for the blaze of his impassioned nature was not yet
subdued.  The queen looked from one to the other.  The divinely
composed air of Wallace seemed to her the celestial port of some
heaven-descended being, lent awhile to earth to guide the steps of the
Prince of Scotland.  She had read, in Homer's song, of the deity of
wisdom assuming the form of Mentor to protect the son of Ulysses, and
had it not been for the youth of the Scottish chief, she would have
said, here is the realization of the tale.

Helen had eyes for none but Wallace.  Nobles, princes, kings, were all
involved in one uninteresting mass to her when he was present.  Yet she
smiled on Douglas when she heard him express his gratitude to the
champion of Scotland for the services he had done a country for which
his own father had died.  Cummin, when he paid his respects to Wallace,
told him that he did so with double pleasure, since he had two
unquestionable evidences of his unequaled merit--the confidence of his
father, the Lord Badenoch, and the hatred of his brother, the present
usurper of that title.

The king soon after led his guests to the council-room, where a secret
cabinet was to be held, to settle the future bonds between the two
kingdoms; and Helen, looking long after the departing figure of
Wallace, with a pensive step followed the queen to her apartment.




Chapter LXVI.

The Louvre.


These preliminaries of lasting friendship being arranged, and sworn to
by Philip, Wallace dispatched a messenger to Scotland, to Lord Ruthven,
at Huntingtower, informing him of the present happy dispositions with
regard to Scotland.  He made particular inquiries respecting the state
of the public mind; and declared his intention not to introduce Bruce
amongst the cabals of his chieftains until he knew exactly how they
were all disposed.  Some weeks passed before a reply to this letter
arrived.  During the time, the health of Helen, which had been much
impaired by the sufferings inflicted on her by De Valence, gradually
recovered, and her beauty became as much the admiration of the French
nobles as her meek dignity was of their respect.  A new scene of
royalty presented itself in this gay court to Wallace, for all was
pageant and chivalric gallantry; but it had no other effect on him than
that of exciting those benevolent affections which rejoiced in the
innocent gayeties of his fellow-beings.  His gravity was not that of a
cynic.  Though hilarity never awakened his mind to buoyant mirth, yet
he loved to see it in others, and smiled when others laughed.

With a natural superiority, which looked over these court pastimes to
objects of greater moment, Bruce merely endured them; but it was with
an urbanity congenial with his friend's, and while the princes of
France were treading the giddy mazes of the dance, or tilting at each
other in the mimic war of the tournament, the Prince of Scotland, who
excelled in all these exercises, left the field of gallantry
undisputed, and moved an uninterested spectator in the splendid scene,
talking with Wallace or with Helen on events which yet lay in fate, and
whose theater would be the field of his native land.  So accustomed had
the friends now been to share their thoughts with Lady Helen, that they
imparted to her their plans, and listened with pleasure to her timid
yet judicious remarks.  Her soul was inspired with the same zeal for
Scotland which animated their own breasts; like Bruce's it was ardent;
but, like Wallace's, it was tempered with a moderation which, giving
her foresight, freed her opinion from the hazard of rashness.  What he
possessed by the suggestions of genius, or had acquired by experience,
she learned from love.  It taught her to be careful for the safety of
Wallace; and while she saw that his life must often be put in peril for
Scotland, her watchful spirit, with an eagle's ken, perceived and gave
warning where his exposure might incur danger without adequate
advantage.

The winds of this season of the year being violent and often adverse.
Wallace's messenger did not arrive at his destined port in Scotland
till the middle of November, and the January of 1299 had commenced
before his returning bark entered the mouth of the Seine.

Wallace was alone, with Grimsby, opening the door, announced Sir Edwin
Ruthven.  In a moment the friends were locked in each other's arms.
Edwin, straining Wallace to his heart, reproached him in affectionate
terms for having left him behind; but while he spoke, joy shone through
the tears which hung on his eyelids, and with the smiles of fraternal
love, again and again he kissed his friend's hand, and pressed it to
his bosom.  Wallace answered his glad emotions with similar
demonstrations of affection, and when the agitations of their meeting
were subdued, he learned from Edwin that he had left the messenger at
some distance on the road, so impatient was he to embrace his friend
again, and to congratulate his dear cousin on her escape.

Edwin answered the anxious inquiries of Wallace respecting his country,
by informing him that Badenoch, having arrogated to himself the supreme
power in Scotland, had determined to take every advantage of the last
victory gained over King Edward.  In this resolution he was supported
by the Lords Athol, Buchan, and Soulis, who were returned, full of
indignation from the Court of Durham.  Edward removed to London; and
Badenoch, soon hearing that he was preparing other armies for the
subjugation of Scotland, sent embassadors to the Vatican to solicit the
Pope's interference.  Flattered by this appeal, Boniface wrote a letter
to Edward, exhorting him to refrain from Further oppressing a country
over which he had no lawful power.  Edward's answer was full of
artifice and falsehood, every good principle, and declaring his
determination to consolidate Great Britain into one kingdom, or to make
the northern part one universal grave.**  Wallace sighed as he listened.

**Both these curious letters are extant in Hollingshed.

"Ah! my dear Edwin," said he, "how just is the observation, that the
almost total neglect of truth and justice, which the generality of
statesmen discover in their transactions with each other, is an
unaccountable to reason as it is dishonorable and ruinous!  It is one
source of the misery of the human race--a misery in which millions are
involved, without any compensation; for it seldom happens that this
dishonesty contributes ultimately even to the interests of the princes
who thus basely sacrifice their integrity to their ambition.  But
proceed, my friend."

"The speedy consequence of this correspondence," Edwin continued, "was
a renewal of hostilities against Scotland.  Badenoch took Sir Simon
Fraser as his colleague in military duty, and a stout resistance for a
little while was made on the borders; but Berwick soon became the prey
of Lord Percy, and the brave Lord Dundaff was killed defending the
citadel.  Many other places fell, and battles were fought, in which the
English were everywhere victorious; for," added Edwin, "none of your
generals would draw a sword under the command of Badenoch; and, alarmed
at these disasters, the Bishop of Dunkeld is gone to Rome, to entreat
the Pope to order your return.  The Southrons are advancing into
Scotland in every direction.  They have landed again on the eastern
coast; they have possessed themselves of all the border counties; and
without your Heaven-anointed arm to avert the blow, our country must be
irretrievably lost."

Edwin had brought letters from Ruthven and the young Earl of Bothwell,
which none particularly narrated these ruinous events, to enforce every
argument to Wallace for his return.  They gave it as their opinion,
however, that he must revisit Scotland under an assumed name.  Did he
come openly, the jealousy of the Scottish lords would be reawakened,
and the worst of them might put a finishing stroke to their country by
taking him off by assassination or poison.  Ruthven and Bothwell,
therefore, entreated that, as it was his wisdom as well as his valor
their country required, he would hasten to Scotland, and condescend to
serve her unrecognized till Bruce should be established on the throne.

While Edwin was conducted to the apartments of Lady Helen, Wallace took
these letters to his prince.  On Bruce being informed of the
circumstances in which his country lay, and of the wishes of its most
virtuous chiefs for his accession to the crown, he assented to the
prudence of their advice with regard to Wallace.  "But," added he, "our
fortunes must be in every respect, as far as we can mold them, the
same.  While you are to serve Scotland under a cloud, so will I.  At
the moment Bruce is proclaimed King of Scotland, Wallace shall be
declared its bravest friend.  We will go together--as brothers, if you
will!" continued he.  "I am already considered by the French nobility
as Thomas de Longueville; you may personate the Red Reaver; Scotland
does not yet know that he was slain; and the reputation of his valor
and a certain nobleness in his wild warfare having placed him, in the
estimation of our shores, rather in the light of one of their own
island sea-kings than in that of his real character--a gallant, though
fierce pirate--the aid of his name would bring no evil odor to our
joint appearance.  But were you to wear the title you bear here, a
quarrel might ensue between Philip and Edward, which I perceive the
former is not willing should occur openly.  Edward must deem it a
breach of their amity did his brother-in-law permit a French prince to
appear in arms against him in Scotland; but the Reaver being considered
in England as outlawed by France, no surprise can be excited that he
and his brother should fight against Philip's ally.  We will, then,
assume their characters; and I shall have the satisfaction of serving
for Scotland before I claim her as my own.  When we again drive Edward
over the boarders, on that day we will throw off our visors, and Sir
William Wallace shall place the crown on my head."

Wallace could not but approve the dignity of mind which these
sentiments displayed.  In the same situation they would have been his
own; and he sought not, from any motive of policy, to dissuade Bruce
from a delicacy of conduct which drew him closer to his heart.
Sympathy of tastes is a pleasant attraction; but congeniality of
principles is the cement of souls.  This Wallace felt in his new-born
friendship with Bruce; and though his regard for him had none of that
fostering tenderness with which he loved to contemplate the blooming
virtues of the youthful Edwin, yet it breathed every endearment arising
from a perfect equality in heart and mind.  It was the true fraternal
tie; and while he talked with him on the fulfillment of their
enterprise, he inwardly thanked Heaven for blessing him so abundantly.
He had found a son in Edwin; a brother, and a tender sister in the
noble Bruce and lovely Helen.

Bruce received Edwin with a welcome which convinced the before anxious
youth that he met a friend, rather than a rival, in the heart of
Wallace.  And every preliminary being settled by the three friends
respecting their immediate return to Scotland, they repaired to Philip,
to inform him of Lord Ruthven's dispatches and their consequent
resolutions.

The king liked all they said, excepting their request to be permitted
to take an early leave of his court.  He urged them to wait the return
of a second embassador he had sent to England.  Immediately on
Wallace's arrival, Philip had dispatched a request to the English king,
that he would grant the Scots the peace which was their right.  Not
receiving any answer, he sent another messenger with a more categorical
demand.  The persevered hostilities of Edward against Scotland
explained the delay; but the king yet hoped for a favorable reply, and
made such entreaties to Bruce and his friend to remain in Paris till it
should arrive, that they at last granted a reluctant consent.

At the end of a week, the embassador returned with a conciliatory
letter to Philip; but, affirming Edward's right to Scotland, declared
his determination never to lay down his arms till he had again brought
the whole realm under his scepter.

Wallace and his royal friend now saw no reason for lingering in France;
and having visited the young De Longueville at Chartres, they apprised
him of their intention to still further borrow his name.  "We will not
disgrace it," cried Bruce; "I promised to return it to you, a theme for
your country's minstrels."  When the friends rose to depart, the brave
and youthful penitent grasped their hands: "You go, valiant Scots, to
cover with a double glory, in the field of honor, a name which my
unhappy brother Guy dyed deep in his own country's blood!  The tears I
weep before this cross for his and my transgressions have obtained me
mercy; and your design is an earnest to me from Him who hung on this
sacred tree, that my brother also is forgiven."

At an early hour next day, Wallace and Bruce took leave of the French
king.  The queen kissed Helen affectionately, and whispered, while she
tied a jeweled collar round her neck, that when she returned, she hoped
to add to it the coronet of Gascony.  Helen's only reply was a sigh,
and her eyes turned unconsciously on Wallace.  He was clad in a plain
suit of black armor, with a red plume in his helmet--the ensign of the
Reaver, whose name he had assumed.  All of his former habit that he now
wore about him, was the sword which he had taken from Edward.  At the
moment Helen looked toward Wallace, Prince Louis was placing a
cross-hilted dagger in his girdle.  "My deliverer," said he, "wear this
for the sake of the descendant of St. Louis.  It accompanied that holy
king through all his wars in Palestine.  It twice saved him from the
assassin's steel; and I pray Heaven it may prove as faithful to you."**

**The author was shown the dagger of Wallace by a friend.  It was of
very strong but simple workmanship, and could be used as a knife as
well as a weapon.

Soon after this, Douglas and Cummin entered, to pay their parting
respects to the king; and that over, Wallace taking Helen by the hand,
led her forth, followed by Bruce and his friends.

At Havre, they embarked for the Frith of Tay; and a favorable gate
driving them through the straits of Calais, they launched out into the
wide ocean.




Chapter LXVII.

Scotland.


The eighth morning from the day in which the Red Reaver's ship was
relaunched from the Norman harbor, Wallace, now the representative of
that once formidable pirate, bearing the white flag of good faith,
entered between the castled shores of the Frith of Tay, and cast anchor
under the towers of Dundee.

When Bruce leaped upon the beach, he turned to Wallace and said with
exultation, though in a low voice, "Scotland now receives her king!
This earth shall cover me, or support my throne!"

"It shall support your throne, and bless it too," replied Wallace; "you
are come in the power of justice, and that is the power of God.  I know
Him in whom I bid you confide; for He has been my shield and sword, and
never yet have I turned my back upon my enemies.  Trust, my dear
prince, where I have trusted; and while virtue is your incense, you
need not doubt the issue of your prayers."

Had Wallace seen the face of Bruce at that moment, but the visor
concealed it, he would have beheld an answer in his eloquent eyes which
required not words to explain.  He grasped the hand of Wallace with
fervor, and briefly replied, "Your trust shall be my trust!"

The chiefs did not stay longer at Dundee than was requisite to furnish
them with horses to convey them to Perth, where Ruthven still bore
