are you here for at all, but to invent a lie when I want one?'

'True, most noble,' and the worthy sat meekly down to his paper.... but
did not proceed rapidly.

'I don't see anything that would suit the emergency, unless I stated,
with your august leave, that Cyril, and not you, celebrated the
gladiatorial exhibition; which might hardly appear credible?'

Orestes burst out laughing, in spite of himself. The sleek Chaldee
smiled and purred in return. The victory was won; and Orestes, somewhat
more master of himself, began to turn his vulpine cunning to the one
absorbing question of the saving of his worthless neck.

'No, that would be too good. Write, that we had discovered a plot on
Cyril's part to incorporate the whole of the African churches (mind and
specify Carthage and Hippo) under his own jurisdiction, and to throw off
allegiance to the Patriarch of Constantinople, in case of Heraclian's
success.'

The secretary purred delighted approval, and scribbled away now with
right good heart.

'Heraclian's success, your Excellency.'

'We of course desired, by every means in our power, to gratify the
people of Alexandria, and, as was our duty, to excite by every lawful
method their loyalty toward the throne of the Caesars (never mind who
sat on it) at so critical a moment.'

'So critical a moment....'

'But as faithful Catholics, and abhorring even in the extremest need,
the sin of Uzzah, we dreaded to touch with the unsanctified hands
of laymen the consecrated ark of the Church, even though for its
preservation....'

'Its preservation, your Excellency....'

'We, therefore, as civil magistrates, felt bound to confine ourselves
to those means which were already allowed by law and custom to our
jurisdiction; and accordingly made use of those largesses, spectacles,
and public execution of rebels, which have unhappily appeared to his
holiness the patriarch (too ready, perhaps, to find a cause of complaint
against faithful adherents of the Byzantine See) to partake of the
nature of those gladiatorial exhibitions, which are equally abhorrent
to the spirit of the Catholic Church, and to the charity of the sainted
emperors by whose pious edicts they have been long since abolished.'

'Your Excellency is indeed great.... but--pardon your slave's remark--my
simplicity is of opinion that it may be asked why you did not inform the
Augusta Pulcheria of Cyril's conspiracy?'

'Say that we sent a messenger off three months ago, but that.... Make
something happen to him, stupid, and save me the trouble.'

'Shall I kill him by Arabs in the neighbourhood of Palmyra, your
Excellency?'

'Let me see.... No. They may make inquiries there. Drown him at sea.
Nobody can ask questions of the sharks.'

'Foundered between Tyre and Crete, from which sad calamity only one man
escaped on a raft, and being picked tip, after three weeks' exposure to
the fury of the elements, by a returning wheat-ship--By the bye, most
noble, what am I to say about those wheat-ships not having even sailed?'

'Head of Augustus! I forgot them utterly. Say that--say that the plague
was making such ravages in the harbour quarter that we feared carrying
the infection to the seat of the empire; and let them sail to-morrow.'

The secretary's face lengthened.

'My fidelity is compelled to remark, even at the risk of your just
indignation, that half of them have been unloaded again for your
munificent largesses of the last two days.'

Orestes swore a great oath.

'Oh, that the mob had but one throat, that I might give them an emetic!
Well, we must buy more corn, that's all.'

The secretary's face grew longer still.

'The Jews, most August--'

'What of them?' yelled the hapless Prefect. 'Have they been
forestalling?'

'My assiduity has discovered this afternoon that they have been buying
up and exporting all the provisions which they could obtain.'

'Scoundrels! Then they must have known of Heraclian's failure!'

'Your sagacity has, I fear, divined the truth. They have been betting
largely against his success for the last week, both in Canopus and
Pelusium.'

'For the last week! Then Miriam betrayed me knowingly!' And Orestes
broke forth again into a paroxysm of fury.

'Here--call the tribune of the guard! A hundred gold pieces to the man
who brings me the witch alive!'

'She will never be taken alive.'

'Dead, then--in any way! Go, you Chaldee hound! what are you hesitating
about?'

'Most noble lord,' said the secretary, prostrating himself upon the
floor, and kissing his master's feet in an agony of fear....

'Remember, that if you touch one Jew you touch all! Remember the bonds!
remember the--the--your own most august reputation, in short.'

'Get up, brute, and don't grovel there, but tell me what you mean, like
a human being. If old Miriam is once dead, her bonds die with her, don't
they?'

'Alas, my lord, you do not know the customs of that accursed folk. They
have a damnable practice of treating every member of their nation as a
brother, and helping each freely and faithfully without reward; whereby
they are enabled to plunder all the rest of the world, and thrive
themselves, from the least to the greatest. Don't fancy that your bonds
are in Miriam's hands. They have been transferred months ago. Your
real creditors may be in Carthage, or Rome, or Byzantium, and they will
attack you from thence; while all that you would find if you seized the
old witch's property, would be papers, useless to you, belonging to
Jews all over the empire, who would rise as one man in defence of their
money. I assure you, it is a net without a bound. If you touch one you
touch all.... And besides, my diligence, expecting some such command,
has already taken the liberty of making inquiries as to Miriam's place
of abode; but it appears, I am sorry to say, utterly unknown to any of
your Excellency's servants.'

'You lie!' said Orestes.... 'I would much sooner believe that you have
been warning the hag to keep out of the way.'

Orestes had spoken, for that once in his life, the exact truth.

The secretary, who had his own private dealings with Miriam, felt every
particular atom of his skin shudder at those words; and had he had hair
on his head, it would certainly have betrayed him by standing visibly on
end. But as he was, luckily for him, close shaven, his turban remained
in its proper place, as he meekly replied-- 'Alas! a faithful servant can
feel no keener woe than the causeless suspicion of that sun before whose
rays he daily prostrates his--'

'Confound your periphrases! Do you know where she is?'

'No!' cried the wretched secretary, driven to the lie direct at last;
and confirmed the negation with such a string of oaths, that Orestes
stopped his volubility with a kick, borrowed of him, under threat of
torture, a thousand gold pieces as largess to the soldiery, and ended
by concentrating the stationaries round his own palace, for the double
purpose of protecting himself in case of a riot, and of increasing the
chances of the said riot, by leaving the distant quarters of the city
without police.

'If Cyril would but make a fool of himself, now that he is in the
full-blown pride of victory--the rascal!--about that Ammonius, or about
Hypatia, or anything else, and give me a real handle against him! After
all, truth works better than lying now and then. Oh, that I could poison
him! But one can't bribe those ecclesiastics; and as for the dagger, one
could not hire a man to be torn in pieces by monks. No; I must just sit
still, and see what Fortune's dice may turn up. Well, your pedants like
Aristides or Epaminondas--thank Heaven, the race of them has died
out long ago!--might call this no very creditable piece of provincial
legislation; but after all, it is about as good as any now going, or
likely to be going till the world's end; and one can't be expected to
strike out a new path. I shall stick to the wisdom of my predecessors,
and--oh, that Cyril may make a fool of himself to-night!'

And Cyril did make a fool of himself that night, for the first and last
time in his life; and suffers for it, as wise men are wont to do when
they err, to this very day and hour: but how much Orestes gained by his
foe's false move cannot be decided till the end of this story; perhaps
not even then.



CHAPTER XXIV: LOST LAMBS


And Philammon?

For a long while he stood in the street outside the theatre, too much
maddened to determine on any course of action; and, ere he had recovered
his self-possession, the crowd began to pour from every outlet, and
filling the street, swept him away in its stream.

Then, as he heard his sister's name, in every tone of pity, contempt,
and horror, mingle with their angry exclamations, he awoke from his
dream, and, bursting through the mob, made straight for Pelagia's house.

It was fast closed; and his repeated knocks at the gate brought only,
after long waiting, a surly negro face to a little wicket.

He asked eagerly and instinctively for Pelagia; of course she had not
yet returned. For Wulf he was not within. And then he took his station
close to the gateway, while his heart beat loud with hope and dread.

At last the Goths appeared, forcing their way through the mob in a close
column. There were no litters with them. Where, then, were Pelagia and
her girls? Where, too, was the hated figure of the Amal? and Wulf, and
Smid? The men came on, led by Goderic and Agilmund, with folded arms,
knitted brows, downcast eyes: a stern disgust, not unmingled with shame,
on every countenance, told Philammon afresh of his sister's infamy.

Goderic passed him close, and Philammon summoned up courage to ask for
Wulf.... Pelagia he had not courage to name.

'Out, Greek hound! we have seen enough of your accursed race to-day!
What? are you trying to follow us in?' And the young man's sword flashed
from its sheath so swiftly, that Philammon had but just time enough
to spring back into the street, and wait there, in an agony of
disappointment and anxiety, as the gates slid together again, and the
house was as silent as before.

For a miserable hour he waited, while the mob thickened instead of
flowing away, and the scattered groups of chatterers began to form
themselves into masses, and parade the streets with shouts of 'Down with
the heathen!' 'Down with the idolaters!' 'Vengeance on all blaspheming
harlots!'

At last the steady tramp of legionaries, and in the midst of the
glittering lines of armed men--oh, joy!--a string of litters!

He sprang forward, and called Pelagia's name again and again. Once he
fancied he heard an answer: but the soldiers thrust him back.

'She is safe here, young fool, and has seen and been seen quite enough
to-day already. Back!'

'Let me speak to her!'

'That is her business. Ours is now to see her home safe.'

'Let me go in with you, I beseech!'

'If you want to go in, knock for yourself when we are gone. If you have
any business in the house, they will open to you, I suppose. Out, you
interfering puppy!'

And a blow of the spear-butt in his chest sent him rolling back into
the middle of the street, while the soldiers, having delivered up their
charge, returned with the same stolid indifference. In vain Philammon,
returning, knocked at the gate. Curses and threats from the negro were
all the answer which he received; and at last, wearied into desperation,
he wandered away, up one street and down another, struggling in vain to
form some plan of action for himself, until the sun was set.

Wearily he went homewards at last. Once the thought of Miriam crossed
his mind. It was a disgusting alternative to ask help of her, the very
author of his sister's shame: but yet she at least could obtain for him
a sight of Pelagia; she had promised as much. But then--the condition
which she had appended to her help! To see his sister, and yet to leave
her as she was!--Horrible contradiction! But could he not employ Miriam
for his own ends?--outwit her?--deceive her?--for it came to that. The
temptation was intense: but it lasted only a moment. Could he defile so
pure a cause by falsehood? And hurrying past the Jewess's door, hardly
daring to look at it, lest the temptation should return, he darted
upstairs to his own little chamber, hastily flung open the door, and
stopped short in astonishment.

A woman, covered from head to foot in a large dark veil, stood in the
centre of the chamber.

'Who are you? This is no place for you!' cried he, after a minute's
pause. She replied only by a shudder and a sob.... He caught sight,
beneath the folds of the veil, of a too well-known saffron shawl, and
springing upon her like the lion on the lamb, clasped to his bosom his
sister.

The veil fell from her beautiful forehead. She gazed into his eyes
one moment with a look of terrified inquiry, and saw nothing there but
love.... And clinging heart to heart, brother and sister mingled holy
kisses, and strained nearer and nearer still, as if to satisfy their
last lingering doubts of each other's kin.

Many a minute passed in silent joy.... Philammon dare not speak; he dare
not ask her what brought her thither--dare not wake her to recollect
the frightful present by questions of the past, of his long forgotten
parents, their home, her history.... And, after all, was it not enough
for him that he held her at last?--her, there by her own will--the lost
lamb returned to him?--and their tears mingled as their cheeks were
pressed together.

At last she spoke.

'I ought to have known you,--I believe I did know you from the first
day! When they mentioned your likeness to me, my heart leapt up
within me; and a voice whispered.... but I would not hear it! I was
ashamed--ashamed to acknowledge my brother, for whom I had sought and
longed for years.... ashamed to think that I had a brother.... Ah, God!
and ought I not to be ashamed?'

And she broke from him again, and threw herself on the floor.

'Trample upon me; curse me!--anything but part me from him!'

Philammon had not the heart to answer her; but he made an involuntary
gesture of sorrowful dissent.

'No! Call me what I am!--what he called me just now!--but do not take me
away! Strike me, as he struck me!--anything but parting!'

'Struck you? The curse of God be on him!'

'Ah, do not curse him!--not him! It was not a blow, indeed!--only a
push--a touch--and it was my fault--all mine. I angered him--I upbraided
him;--I was mad.... Oh, why did he deceive me? Why did he let me
dance?--command me to dance?'

'Command you?'

'He said that we must not break our words. He would not hear me, when I
told him that we could deny having promised. I said that promises made
over the wine need never be kept. Who ever heard of keeping them? And
Orestes was drunk, too. But he said that I might teach a Goth to be what
I liked, except a liar.... Was not that a strange speech?.... And Wulf
bade him be strong, and blest him for it.'

'He was right,' sobbed Philammon.

'Then I thought he would love me for obeying him, though I loathed
it!--Oh, God, how I loathed it!.... But how could I fancy that he did
not like my doing it? Who ever heard of any one doing of their own will
what they did not like?'

Philammon sobbed again, as the poor civilised savage artlessly opened to
him all her moral darkness. What could he say?.... he knew what to say.
The disease was so utterly patent, that any of Cyril's school-children
could have supplied the remedy. But how to speak it?--how to tell her,
before all things, as he longed to do, that there was no hope of her
marrying the Amal, and, therefore, no peace for her till she left him.

'Then you did hate the--the--' said he, at last, catching at some gleam
of light.

'Hate it? Do I not belong, body and soul, to him?--him only?.... And
yet.... Oh, I must tell you all! When I and the girls began to
practise, all the old feelings came back--the love of being admired, and
applauded, and cheered; and dancing is so delicious!--so delicious to
feel that you are doing anything beautiful perfectly, and better than
every one else!.... And he saw that I liked it, and despised me for
it.... And, deceitful!--he little guessed how much of the pains which
I took were taken to please him, to do my best before him, to win
admiration, only that I might take it home and throw it all at his
beloved feet, and make the world say once more, "She has all Alexandria
to worship her, and yet she cares for that one Goth more than for--" But
he deceived me, true man that he is! He wished to enjoy my smiles to
the last moment, and then to cast me off, when I had once given him an
excuse.... Too cowardly to upbraid me, he let me ruin myself, to save
him the trouble of ruining me. Oh, men, men! all alike! They love us for
their own sakes, and we love them for love's sake. We live by love, we
die for love, and yet we never find it, but only selfishness dressed
up in love's mask.... And then we take up with that, poor, fond,
self-blinded creatures that we are!--and in spite of the poisoned hearts
around us, persuade ourselves that our latest asp's egg, at least, will
hatch into a dove, and that though all men are faithless, our own tyrant
can never change, for he is more than man!'

'But he has deceived you! You have found out your mistake. Leave him,
then, as he deserves!'

Pelagia looked up, with something of a tender smile. 'Poor darling!
Little do you know of love!'

Philammon, utterly bewildered by this newest and strangest phase of
human passion, could only gasp out--

'But do you not love me, too, my sister?'

'Do I not love you? But not as I love him! Oh, hush, hush!--, you cannot
understand yet!' And Pelagia hid her face in her hands, while convulsive
shudderings ran through every limb....

'I must do it! I must! I will dare every thing, stoop to everything for
love's sake! Go to her!--to the wise woman!--to Hypatia! She loves you!
I know that she loves you! She will hear you, though she will not me!'

'Hypatia? Do you know that she was sitting there unmoved at--in the
theatre?'

'She was forced! Orestes compelled her! Miriam told me so. And I saw it
in her face. As I passed beneath her, I looked up; and she was as pale
as ivory, trembling in every limb. There was a dark hollow round her
eyes--she had been weeping, I saw. And I sneered in my mad self-conceit,
and said, "She looks as if she was going to be crucified, not married!".
But now, now!--Oh, go to her! Tell her that I will give her all I
have--jewels, money, dresses, house! Tell her that I--I--entreat
her pardon, that I will crawl to her feet myself and ask it, if she
requires!--Only let her teach me--teach me to be wise and good,
and honoured, and respected, as she is! Ask her to tell a poor
broken-hearted woman her secret. She can make old Wulf, and him, and
Orestes even, and the magistrates, respect her.... Ask her to teach me
how to be like her, and to make him respect me again, and I will give
her all--all!'

Philammon hesitated. Something within warned him, as the Daemon used
to warn Socrates, that his errand would be bootless. He thought of the
theatre, and of that firm, compressed lip; and forgot the hollow eye of
misery which accompanied it, in his wrath against his lately-worshipped
idol.

'Oh, go! go! I tell you it was against her will. She felt for me--I saw
it--Oh, God! when I did not feel for myself! And I hated her, because
she seemed to despise me in my fool's triumph! She cannot despise me
now in my misery.... Go! Go! or you will drive me to the agony of going
myself.'

There was but one thing to be done.

'You will wait, then, here? You will not leave me again?'

'Yes. But you must be quick! If he finds out that I am away, he may
fancy.... Ah, heaven! let him kill me, but never let him be jealous of
me! Go now! this moment! Take this as an earnest--the cestus which I
wore there. Horrid thing! I hate the sight of it! But I brought it with
me on purpose, or I would have thrown it into the canal. There; say it
is an earnest--only an earnest--of what I will give her!'

In ten minutes more Philammon was in Hypatia's hall. The household
seemed full of terror and disturbance; the hall was full of soldiers. At
last Hypatia's favourite maid passed, and knew him. Her mistress could
not speak with any one. Where was Theon, then? He, too, had shut himself
up. Never mind. Philammon must, would speak with him. And he pleaded
so passionately and so sweetly, that the soft-hearted damsel, unable to
resist so handsome a suppliant, undertook his errand, and led him up
to the library, where Theon, pale as death, was pacing to and fro,
apparently half beside himself with terror.

Philammon's breathless message fell at first upon unheeding ears.

'A new pupil, sir! Is this a time for pupils; when my house, my
daughter's life, is not safe? Wretch that I am! And have I led her into
the snare? I, with my vain ambition and covetousness! Oh, my child! my
child! my one treasure! Oh, the double curse which will light upon me,
if--'

'She asks for but one interview.'

'With my daughter, sir? Pelagia! Will you insult me? Do you suppose,
even if her own pity should so far tempt her to degrade herself, that I
could allow her so to contaminate her purity?'

'Your terror, sir, excuses your rudeness.'

'Rudeness, sir? the rudeness lies in your intruding on us at such a
moment!'

'Then this, perhaps, may, in your eyes at least, excuse me in my turn.'
And Philammon held out the cestus. 'You are a better judge of its value
than I. But I am commissioned to say, that it is only an earnest of what
she will give willingly and at once, even to the half of her wealth, for
the honour of becoming your daughter's pupil.' And he laid the jewelled
girdle on the table.

The old man halted in his walk. The emeralds and pearls shone like the
galaxy. He looked at them; and walked on again more slowly.... What
might be their value? What might it not be? At least, they would pay all
his debts.... And after hovering to and fro for another minute before
the bait, he turned to Philammon.

'If you would promise to mention the thing to no one--'

'I will promise.'

'And in case my daughter, as I have a right to expect, shall refuse--'

'Let her keep the jewels. Their owner has learnt, thank God, to despise
and hate them! Let her keep the jewels--and my curse! For God do so to
me, and more also, if I ever see her face again!'

The old man had not heard the latter part of Philammon's speech. He had
seized his bait as greedily as a crocodile, and hurried off with it into
Hypatia's chamber, while Philammon stood expectant; possessed with a new
and fearful doubt. 'Degrade herself!' 'Contaminate her purity!' If
that notion were to be the fruit of all her philosophy? If selfishness,
pride, Pharisaism, were all its outcome? Why--had they not been its
outcome already? When had he seen her helping, even pitying, the poor,
the outcast? When had he heard from her one word of real sympathy for
the sorrowing; for the sinful?.... He was still lost in thought when
Theon re-entered, bringing a letter.

'_From Hypatia to her well-beloved pupil_.

'I pity you--how should I not? And more. I thank you for this your
request, for it shows me that my unwilling presence at the hideous
pageant of to-day has not alienated from me a soul of which I had
cherished the noblest hopes, for which I had sketched out the
loftiest destiny. But how shall I say it? Ask yourself whether a
change--apparently impossible--must not take place in her for whom you
plead, before she and I can meet. I am not so inhuman as to blame you
for having asked me; I do not even blame her for being what she is. She
does but follow her nature; who can be angry with her, if destiny have
informed so fair an animal with a too gross and earthly spirit? Why weep
over her? Dust she is, and unto dust she will return: while you, to
whom a more divine spark was allotted at your birth, must rise, and
unrepining, leave below you one only connected with you by the unreal
and fleeting bonds of fleshly kin.'

Philammon crushed the letter together in his hand, and strode from
the house without a word. The philosopher had no gospel, then, for the
harlot! No word for the sinner, the degraded! Destiny forsooth! She was
to follow her destiny, and be base, miserable, self-condemned. She was
to crush the voice of conscience and reason, as often as it awoke within
her, and compel herself to believe that she was bound to be that which
she knew herself bound not to be. She was to shut her eyes to that
present palpable misery which was preaching to her, with the voice of
God Himself, that the wages of sin are death. Dust she was, and unto
dust she will return! Oh, glorious hope for her, for him, who felt as
if an eternity of bliss would be worthless, if it parted him from his
new-found treasure! Dust she was, and unto dust she must return!

Hapless Hypatia! If she must needs misapply, after the fashion of her
school, a text or two here and there from the Hebrew Scriptures, what
suicidal fantasy set her on quoting that one? For now, upon Philammon's
memory flashed up in letters of light, old words forgotten for
months--and ere he was aware, he found himself repeating aloud and
passionately, 'I believe in the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of
the body, and the life everlasting,'.... and then clear and fair
arose before him the vision of the God-man, as He lay at meat in the
Pharisee's house; and of her who washed His feet with tears, and wiped
them with the hairs of her head.... And from the depths of his agonised
heart arose the prayer, 'Blessed Magdalene, intercede for her?'

So high he could rise, but not beyond. For the notion of that God-man
was receding fast to more and more awful abysmal heights, in the
minds of a generation who were forgetting His love in His power, and
practically losing sight of His humanity in their eager doctrinal
assertion of His Divinity. And Philammon's heart re-echoed the spirit
of his age, when he felt that for an apostate like himself it were
presumptuous to entreat for any light or help from the fountain-head
itself. He who had denied his Lord, he who had voluntarily cut himself
off from the communion of the Catholic Church--how could he restore
himself? How could he appease the wrath of Him who died on the cross,
save by years of bitter supplication and self-punishment?....

'Fool! Vain and ambitious fool that I have been! For this I threw away
the faith of my childhood! For this I listened to words at which I
shuddered; crushed down my own doubts and disgusts; tried to persuade
myself that I could reconcile them with Christianity--that I could make
a lie fit into the truth! For this I puffed myself up in the vain hope
of becoming not as other men are--superior, forsooth, to my kind! It was
not enough for me to be a man made in the image of God: but I must needs
become a god myself, knowing good and evil.--And here is the end! I call
upon my fine philosophy to help me once, in one real practical human
struggle, and it folds its arms and sits serene and silent, smiling upon
my misery! Oh! fool, fool, thou art filled with the fruit of thy own
devices! Back to the old faith! Home again, then wanderer! And yet how
home? Are not the gates shut against me? Perhaps against her too....
What if she, like me, were a baptized Christian?'

Terrible and all but hopeless that thought flashed across him, as in the
first revulsion of his conscience he plunged utterly and implicitly
back again into the faith of his childhood, and all the dark and cruel
theories popular in his day rose up before him in all their terrors. In
the innocent simplicity of the Laura he had never felt their force; but
he felt them now. If Pelagia were a baptized woman, what was before her
but unceasing penance? Before her, as before him, a life of cold
and hunger, groans and tears, loneliness and hideous soul-sickening
uncertainty. Life was a dungeon for them both henceforth. Be it so!
There was nothing else to believe in. No other rock of hope in earth
or heaven. That at least promised a possibility of forgiveness, of
amendment, of virtue, of reward--ay, of everlasting bliss and glory; and
even if she missed of that, better for her the cell in the desert than
a life of self-contented impurity! If that latter were her destiny, as
Hypatia said, she should at least die fighting against it, defying it,
cursing it! Better virtue with hell, than sin with heaven! And Hypatia
had not even promised her a heaven. The resurrection of the flesh was
too carnal a notion for her refined and lofty creed. And so, his four
months' dream swept away in a moment, he hurried back to his chamber,
with one fixed thought before him--the desert; a cell for Pelagia;
another for himself. There they would repent, and pray, and mourn out
life side by side, if perhaps God would have mercy upon their souls.
Yet--perhaps, she might not have been baptized after all. And then
she was safe. Like other converts from Paganism, she might become a
catechumen, and go on to baptism, where the mystic water would wash
away in a moment all the past, and she would begin life afresh, in the
spotless robes of innocence. Yet he had been baptized, he knew from
Arsenius, before he left Athens; and she was older than he. It was
all but impossible yet he would hope; and breathless with anxiety
and excitement, he ran up the narrow stairs and found Miriam standing
outside, her hand upon the bolt, apparently inclined to dispute his
passage.

'Is she still within?'

'What if she be?'

'Let me pass into my own room.'

'Yours? Who has been paying the rent for you, these four months past?
You! What can you say to her? What can you do for her? Young pedant, you
must be in love yourself before you can help poor creatures who are in
love!'

But Philammon pushed past her so fiercely, that the old woman was
forced to give way, and with a sinister smile she followed him into the
chamber.

Pelagia sprang towards her brother.

'Will she?--will she see me?'

'Let us talk no more of her, my beloved,' said Philammon, laying his
hands gently on her trembling shoulders, and looking earnestly into
her eyes.... 'Better that we two should work out our deliverance for
ourselves, without the help of strangers. You can trust me?'

'You? And can you help me? Will you teach me?'

'Yes, but not here.... We must escape--Nay, hear me, one moment! dearest
sister, hear me! Are you so happy here that you can conceive of no
better place? And--and, oh, God! that it may not be true after all!--but
is there not a hell hereafter?'

Pelagia covered her face with her hands--'The old monk warned me of it!'

'Oh, take his warning....' And Philammon was bursting forth with
some such words about the lake of fire and brimstone as he had been
accustomed to hear from Pambo and Arsenius, when Pelagia interrupted
