
The Lady of Lochleven stood astonished at his sudden escape--"Am I
surrounded," she said, "by traitors? Upon him, villains!--pursue, stab,
cut him down."

"He cannot leave the island, madam," said Dryfesdale, interfering; "I
have the key of the boat-chain."

But two or three voices of those who pursued from curiosity, or command
of their mistress, exclaimed from below, that he had cast himself into
the lake.

"Brave Douglas still!" exclaimed the Queen--"Oh, true and noble heart,
that prefers death to imprisonment!"

"Fire upon him!" said the Lady of Lochleven; "if there be here a true
servant of his father, let him shoot the runagate dead, and let the lake
cover our shame!"

The report of a gun or two was heard, but they were probably shot rather
to obey the Lady, than with any purpose of hitting the mark; and Randal
immediately entering, said that Master George had been taken up by a
boat from the castle, which lay at a little distance.

"Man a barge, and pursue them!" said the Lady.

"It were quite vain," said Randal; "by this time they are half way to
shore, and a cloud has come over the moon."

"And has the traitor then escaped?" said the Lady, pressing her hands
against her forehead with a gesture of despair; "the honour of our
house is for ever gone, and all will be deemed accomplices in this base
treachery."

"Lady of Lochleven," said Mary, advancing towards her, "you have this
night cut off my fairest hopes--You have turned my expected freedom
into bondage, and dashed away the cup of joy in the very instant I was
advancing it to my lips--and yet I feel for your sorrow the pity that
you deny to mine--Gladly would I comfort you if I might; but as I may
not, I would at least part from you in charity."

"Away, proud woman!" said the Lady; "who ever knew so well as thou
to deal the deepest wounds under the pretence of kindness and
courtesy?--Who, since the great traitor, could ever so betray with a
kiss?"

"Lady Douglas of Lochleven," said the Queen, "in this moment thou canst
not offend me--no, not even by thy coarse and unwomanly language, held
to me in the presence of menials and armed retainers. I have this night
owed so much to one member of the house of Lochleven, as to cancel
whatever its mistress can do or say in the wildness of her passion."

"We are bounden to you, Princess," said Lady Lochleven, putting a strong
constraint on herself, and passing from her tone of violence to that
of bitter irony; "our poor house hath been but seldom graced with royal
smiles, and will hardly, with my choice, exchange their rough honesty
for such court-honour as Mary of Scotland has now to bestow."

"They," replied Mary, "who knew so well how to _take_, may think
themselves excused from the obligation implied in receiving. And that
I have now little to offer, is the fault of the Douglasses and their
allies."

"Fear nothing, madam," replied the Lady of Lochleven, in the same bitter
tone, "you retain an exchequer which neither your own prodigality can
drain, nor your offended country deprive you of. While you have fair
words and delusive smiles at command, you need no other bribes to lure
youth to folly."

The Queen cast not an ungratified glance on a large mirror, which,
hanging on one side of the apartment, and illuminated by the
torch-light, reflected her beautiful face and person. "Our hostess grows
complaisant," she said, "my Fleming; we had not thought that grief and
captivity had left us so well stored with that sort of wealth which
ladies prize most dearly."

"Your Grace will drive this severe woman frantic," said Fleming, in
a low tone. "On my knees I implore you to remember she is already
dreadfully offended, and that we are in her power."

"I will not spare her, Fleming," answered the Queen; "it is against my
nature. She returned my honest sympathy with insult and abuse, and I
will gall her in return,--if her words are too blunt for answer, let her
use her poniard if she dare!"

"The Lady Lochleven," said the Lady Fleming aloud, "would surely do well
now to withdraw, and to leave her Grace to repose."

"Ay," replied the Lady, "or to leave her Grace, and her Grace's minions,
to think what silly fly they may next wrap their meshes about. My eldest
son is a widower--were he not more worthy the flattering hopes with
which you have seduced his brother?--True, the yoke of marriage has been
already thrice fitted on--but the church of Rome calls it a sacrament,
and its votaries may deem it one in which they cannot too often
participate."

"And the votaries of the church of Geneva," replied Mary, colouring with
indignation, "as they deem marriage _no_ sacrament, are said at times
to dispense with the holy ceremony."--Then, as if afraid of the
consequences of this home allusion to the errors of Lady Lochleven's
early life, the Queen added, "Come, my Fleming, we grace her too much
by this altercation; we will to our sleeping apartment. If she would
disturb us again to-night, she must cause the door to be forced." So
saying, she retired to her bed-room, followed by her two women.

Lady Lochleven, stunned as it were by this last sarcasm, and not the
less deeply incensed that she had drawn it upon herself, remained like
a statue on the spot which she had occupied when she received an
affront so flagrant. Dryfesdale and Randal endeavoured to rouse her to
recollection by questions.

"What is your honourable Ladyship's pleasure in the premises?"

"Shall we not double the sentinels, and place one upon the boats and
another in the garden?" said Randal.

"Would you that despatches were sent to Sir William at Edinburgh, to
acquaint him with what has happened?" demanded Dryfesdale; "and ought
not the place of Kinross to be alarmed, lest there be force upon the
shores of the lake?"

"Do all as thou wilt," said the Lady, collecting herself, and about
to depart. "Thou hast the name of a good soldier, Dryfesdale, take all
precautions.--Sacred Heaven! that I should be thus openly insulted!"

"Would it be your pleasure," said Dryfesdale, hesitating, "that this
person--this Lady--be more severely restrained?"

"No, vassal!" answered the Lady, indignantly, "my revenge stoops not to
so low a gratification. But I will have more worthy vengeance, or the
tomb of my ancestors shall cover my shame!"

"And you shall have it, madam," replied Dryfesdale--"ere two suns go
down, you shall term yourself amply revenged."

The Lady made no answer--perhaps did not hear his words, as she
presently left the apartment. By the command of Dryfesdale, the rest of
the attendants were dismissed, some to do the duty of guard, others to
their repose. The steward himself remained after they had all departed;
and Roland Graeme, who was alone in the apartment, was surprised to see
the old soldier advance towards him with an air of greater cordiality
than he had ever before assumed to him, but which sat ill on his
scowling features.

"Youth," he said, "I have done thee some wrong--it is thine own fault,
for thy behaviour hath seemed as light to me as the feather thou wearest
in thy hat; and surely thy fantastic apparel, and idle humour of mirth
and folly, have made me construe thee something harshly. But I saw this
night from my casement, (as I looked out to see how thou hadst disposed
of thyself in the garden,) I saw, I say, the true efforts which thou
didst make to detain the companion of the perfidy of him who is no
longer worthy to be called by his father's name, but must be cut off
from his house like a rotten branch. I was just about to come to thy
assistance when the pistol went off; and the warder (a false knave, whom
I suspect to be bribed for the nonce) saw himself forced to give the
alarm, which, perchance, till then he had wilfully withheld. To atone,
therefore, for my injustice towards you, I would willingly render you a
courtesy, if you would accept of it from my hands."

"May I first crave to know what it is?" replied the page.

"Simply to carry the news of this discovery to Holyrood, where thou
mayest do thyself much grace, as well with the Earl of Morton and the
Regent himself, as with Sir William Douglas, seeing thou hast seen the
matter from end to end, and borne faithful part therein. The making
thine own fortune will be thus lodged in thine own hand, when I trust
thou wilt estrange thyself from foolish vanities, and learn to walk in
this world as one who thinks upon the next."

"Sir Steward," said Roland Graeme, "I thank you for your courtesy, but I
may not do your errand. I pass that I am the Queen's sworn servant, and
may not be of counsel against her. But, setting this apart, methinks it
were a bad road to Sir William of Lochleven's favour, to be the first to
tell him of his son's defection--neither would the Regent be over well
pleased to hear the infidelity of his vassal, nor Morton to learn the
falsehood of his kinsman."

"Um!" said the steward, making that inarticulate sound which expresses
surprise mingled with displeasure. "Nay, then, even fly where ye list;
for, giddy-pated as ye may be, you know how to bear you in the world."

"I will show you my esteem is less selfish than ye think for," said
the page; "for I hold truth and mirth to be better than gravity and
cunning--ay, and in the end to be a match for them.--You never loved me
less, Sir Steward, than you do at this moment. I know you will give me
no real confidence, and I am resolved to accept no false protestations
as current coin. Resume your old course--suspect me as much and watch
me as closely as you will, I bid you defiance--you have met with your
match."

"By Heaven, young man," said the steward, with a look of bitter
malignity, "if thou darest to attempt any treachery towards the House of
Lochleven, thy head shall blacken in the sun from the warder's turret!"

"He cannot commit treachery who refuses trust," said the page; "and for
my head, it stands as securely on my shoulders, as on any turret that
ever mason built."

"Farewell, thou prating and speckled pie," said Dryfesdale, "that art
so vain of thine idle tongue and variegated coat! Beware trap and
lime-twig."

"And fare thee well, thou hoarse old raven," answered the page;
"thy solemn flight, sable hue, and deep croak, are no charms against
bird-bolt or hail-shot, and that thou mayst find--it is open war betwixt
us, each for the cause of our mistress, and God show the right!"

"Amen, and defend his own people!" said the steward. "I will let my
mistress know what addition thou hast made to this mess of traitors.
Good night, Monsieur Featherpate."

"Good-night, Seignior Sowersby," replied the page; and, when the old man
departed, he betook himself to rest.




Chapter the Thirty-First.


  Poison'd--ill fare!--dead, forsook, cast off!--
                                  KING JOHN.

However weary Roland Graeme might be of the Castle of Lochleven--however
much he might wish that the plan for Mary's escape had been perfected,
I question if he ever awoke with more pleasing feelings than on the
morning after George Douglas's plan for accomplishing her deliverance
had been frustrated. In the first place, he had the clearest conviction
that he had misunderstood the innuendo of the Abbot, and that the
affections of Douglas were fixed, not on Catherine Seyton, but on the
Queen; and in the second place, from the sort of explanation which had
taken place betwixt the steward and him, he felt himself at liberty,
without any breach of honour towards the family of Lochleven, to
contribute his best aid to any scheme which should in future be formed
for the Queen's escape; and, independently of the good-will which he
himself had to the enterprise, he knew he could find no surer road to
the favour of Catherine Seyton. He now sought but an opportunity to
inform her that he had dedicated himself to this task, and fortune was
propitious in affording him one which was unusually favourable.

At the ordinary hour of breakfast, it was introduced by the steward with
his usual forms, who, as soon as it was placed on the board in the inner
apartment, said to Roland Graeme, with a glance of sarcastic import, "I
leave you, my young sir, to do the office of sewer--it has been too long
rendered to the Lady Mary by one belonging to the house of Douglas."

"Were it the prime and principal who ever bore the name," said Roland,
"the office were an honour to him."

The steward departed without replying to this bravade, otherwise than
by a dark look of scorn. Graeme, thus left alone, busied himself as one
engaged in a labour of love, to imitate, as well as he could, the
grace and courtesy with which George of Douglas was wont to render his
ceremonial service at meals to the Queen of Scotland. There was more
than youthful vanity--there was a generous devotion in the feeling with
which he took up the task, as a brave soldier assumes the place of a
comrade who has fallen in the front of battle. "I am now," he said,
"their only champion: and, come weal, come wo, I will be, to the best
of my skill and power, as faithful, as trustworthy, as brave, as any
Douglas of them all could have been."

At this moment Catherine Seyton entered alone, contrary to her custom;
and not less contrary to her custom, she entered with her kerchief
at her eyes. Roland Graeme approached her with beating heart and with
down-cast eyes, and asked her, in a low and hesitating voice, whether
the Queen were well?

"Can you suppose it?" said Catherine. "Think you her heart and body are
framed of steel and iron, to endure the cruel disappointment of yester
even, and the infamous taunts of yonder puritanic hag?--Would to God
that I were a man, to aid her more effectually!"

"If those who carry pistols, and batons, and poniards," said the page,
"are not men, they are at least Amazons; and that is as formidable."

"You are welcome to the flash of your wit, sir," replied the damsel; "I
am neither in spirits to enjoy, nor to reply to it."

"Well, then," said the page, "list to me in all serious truth. And,
first, let me say, that the gear last night had been smoother, had you
taken me into your counsels."

"And so we meant; but who could have guessed that Master Page should
choose to pass all night in the garden, like some moon-stricken knight
in a Spanish romance--instead of being in his bed-room, when Douglas
came to hold communication with him on our project."

"And why," said the page, "defer to so late a moment so important a
confidence?"

"Because your communications with Henderson, and--with pardon--the
natural impetuosity and fickleness of your disposition, made us dread to
entrust you with a secret of such consequence, till the last moment."

"And why at the last moment?" said the page, offended at this frank
avowal; "why at that, or any other moment, since I had the misfortune to
incur so much suspicion?"

"Nay--now you are angry again," said Catherine; "and to serve you aright
I should break off this talk; but I will be magnanimous, and answer your
question. Know, then, our reason for trusting you was twofold. In the
first place, we could scarce avoid it, since you slept in the room
through which we had to pass. In the second place----"

"Nay," said the page, "you may dispense with a second reason, when the
first makes your confidence in me a case of necessity."

"Good now, hold thy peace," said Catherine. "In the second place, as
I said before, there is one foolish person among us, who believes that
Roland Graeme's heart is warm, though his head is giddy--that his blood
is pure, though it boils too hastily--and that his faith and honour
are true as the load-star, though his tongue sometimes is far less than
discreet."

This avowal Catherine repeated in a low tone, with her eye fixed on the
floor, as if she shunned the glance of Roland while she suffered it
to escape her lips--"And this single friend," exclaimed the youth in
rapture; "this only one who would do justice to the poor Roland Graeme,
and whose own generous heart taught her to distinguish between follies
of the brain and faults of the heart--Will you not tell me, dearest
Catherine, to whom I owe my most grateful, my most heartfelt thanks?"

"Nay," said Catherine, with her eyes still fixed on the ground, "if your
own heart tell you not----"

"Dearest Catherine!" said the page, seizing upon her hand, and kneeling
on one knee.

"If your own heart, I say, tell you not," said Catherine, gently
disengaging her hand, "it is very ungrateful; for since the maternal
kindness of the Lady Fleming----"

The page started on his feet. "By Heaven, Catherine, your tongue wears
as many disguises as your person! But you only mock me, cruel girl.
You know the Lady Fleming has no more regard for any one, than hath the
forlorn princess who is wrought into yonder piece of old figured court
tapestry."

"It may be so," said Catherine Seyton, "but you should not speak so
loud."

"Pshaw!" answered the page, but at the same time lowering his voice,
"she cares for no one but herself and the Queen. And you know, besides,
there is no one of you whose opinion I value, if I have not your own.
No--not that of Queen Mary herself."

"The more shame for you, if it be so," said Catherine, with great
composure.

"Nay, but, fair Catherine," said the page, "why will you thus damp my
ardour, when I am devoting myself, body and soul, to the cause of your
mistress?"

"It is because in doing so," said Catherine, "you debase a cause so
noble, by naming along with it any lower or more selfish motive. Believe
me," she said, with kindling eyes, and while the blood mantled on her
cheek, "they think vilely and falsely of women--I mean of those who
deserve the name--who deem that they love the gratification of their
vanity, or the mean purpose of engrossing a lover's admiration and
affection, better than they love the virtue and honour of the man they
may be brought to prefer. He that serves his religion, his prince, and
his country, with ardour and devotion, need not plead his cause with the
commonplace rant of romantic passion--the woman whom he honours with his
love becomes his debtor, and her corresponding affection is engaged to
repay his glorious toil."

"You hold a glorious prize for such toil," said the youth, bending his
eyes on her with enthusiasm.

"Only a heart which knows how to value it," said Catherine. "He that
should free this injured Princess from these dungeons, and set her at
liberty among her loyal and warlike nobles, whose hearts are burning
to welcome her--where is the maiden in Scotland whom the love of such a
hero would not honour, were she sprung from the blood royal of the land,
and he the offspring of the poorest cottager that ever held a plough?"

"I am determined," said Roland, "to take the adventure. Tell me first,
however, fair Catherine, and speak it as if you were confessing to the
priest--this poor Queen, I know she is unhappy--but, Catherine, do you
hold her innocent? She is accused of murder."

"Do I hold the lamb guilty, because it is assailed by the wolf?"
answered Catherine; "do I hold yonder sun polluted, because an
earth-damp sullies his beams?"

The page sighed and looked down. "Would my conviction were as deep
as thine! But one thing is clear, that in this captivity she hath
wrong--She rendered herself up, on a capitulation, and the terms have
been refused her--I will embrace her quarrel to the death!"

"Will you--will you, indeed?" said Catherine, taking his hand in her
turn. "Oh, be but firm in mind, as thou art bold in deed and quick in
resolution; keep but thy plighted faith, and after ages shall honour
thee as the saviour of Scotland!"

"But when I have toiled successfully to win that Leah, Honour, thou wilt
not, my Catherine," said the page, "condemn me to a new term of service
for that Rachel, Love?"

"Of that," said Catherine, again extricating her hand from his grasp,
"we shall have full time to speak; but Honour is the elder sister, and
must be won the first."

"I may not win her," answered the page; "but I will venture fairly for
her, and man can do no more. And know, fair Catherine,--for you shall
see the very secret thought of my heart,--that not Honour only--not
only that other and fairer sister, whom you frown on me for so much as
mentioning--but the stern commands of duty also, compel me to aid the
Queen's deliverance."

"Indeed!" said Catherine; "you were wont to have doubts on that matter."

"Ay, but her life was not then threatened," replied Roland.

"And is it now more endangered than heretofore?" asked Catherine Seyton,
in anxious terror.

"Be not alarmed," said the page; "but you heard the terms on which your
royal mistress parted with the Lady of Lochleven?"

"Too well--but too well," said Catherine; "alas! that she cannot rule
her princely resentment, and refrain from encounters like these!"

"That hath passed betwixt them," said Roland, "for which woman never
forgives woman. I saw the Lady's brow turn pale, and then black, when,
before all the menzie, and in her moment of power, the Queen humbled her
to the dust by taxing her with her shame. And I heard the oath of deadly
resentment and revenge which she muttered in the ear of one, who by his
answer will, I judge, be but too ready an executioner of her will."

"You terrify me," said Catherine.

"Do not so take it--call up the masculine part of your spirit--we will
counteract and defeat her plans, be they dangerous as they may. Why do
you look upon me thus, and weep?"

"Alas!" said Catherine, "because you stand there before me a living and
breathing man, in all the adventurous glow and enterprise of youth, yet
still possessing the frolic spirits of childhood--there you stand, full
alike of generous enterprise and childish recklessness; and if to-day,
or to-morrow, or some such brief space, you lie a mangled and lifeless
corpse upon the floor of these hateful dungeons, who but Catherine
Seyton will be the cause of your brave and gay career being broken short
as you start from the goal? Alas! she whom you have chosen to twine your
wreath, may too probably have to work your shroud!"

"And be it so, Catherine," said the page, in the full glow of youthful
enthusiasm; "and _do_ thou work my shroud! and if thou grace it with
such tears as fall now at the thought, it will honour my remains more
than an earl's mantle would my living body. But shame on this faintness
of heart! the time craves a firmer mood--Be a woman, Catherine, or
rather be a man--thou canst be a man if thou wilt."

Catherine dried her tears, and endeavoured to smile.

"You must not ask me," she said, "about that which so much disturbs
your mind; you shall know all in time--nay, you should know all now, but
that--Hush! here comes the Queen."

Mary entered from her apartment, paler than usual, and apparently
exhausted by a sleepless night, and by the painful thoughts which had
ill supplied the place of repose; yet the languor of her looks was
so far from impairing her beauty, that it only substituted the frail
delicacy of the lovely woman for the majestic grace of the Queen.
Contrary to her wont, her toilette had been very hastily despatched,
and her hair, which was usually dressed by Lady Fleming with great care,
escaping from beneath the headtire, which had been hastily adjusted,
fell in long and luxuriant tresses of Nature's own curling, over a neck
and bosom which were somewhat less carefully veiled than usual.

As she stepped over the threshold of her apartment, Catherine, hastily
drying her tears, ran to meet her royal mistress, and having first
kneeled at her feet, and kissed her hand, instantly rose, and placing
herself on the other side of the Queen, seemed anxious to divide with
the Lady Fleming the honour of supporting and assisting her. The page,
on his part, advanced and put in order the chair of state, which she
usually occupied, and having placed the cushion and footstool for her
accommodation, stepped back, and stood ready for service in the place
usually occupied by his predecessor, the young Seneschal. Mary's
eye rested an instant on him, and could not but remark the change of
persons. Hers was not the female heart which could refuse compassion, at
least, to a gallant youth who had suffered in her cause, although he
had been guided in his enterprise by a too presumptuous passion; and the
words "Poor Douglas!" escaped from her lips, perhaps unconsciously, as
she leant herself back in her chair, and put the kerchief to her eyes.

"Yes, gracious madam," said Catherine, assuming a cheerful manner,
in order to cheer her sovereign, "our gallant Knight is indeed
banished--the adventure was not reserved for him; but he has left behind
him a youthful Esquire, as much devoted to your Grace's service, and
who, by me, makes you tender of his hand and sword."

"If they may in aught avail your Grace," said Roland Graeme, bowing
profoundly.

"Alas!" said the Queen, "what needs this, Catherine?--why prepare new
victims to be involved in, and overwhelmed by, my cruel fortune?--were
we not better cease to struggle, and ourselves sink in the tide without
farther resistance, than thus drag into destruction with us every
generous heart which makes an effort in our favour?--I have had but too
much of plot and intrigue around me, since I was stretched an orphan
child in my very cradle, while contending nobles strove which should
rule in the name of the unconscious innocent. Surely time it were that
all this busy and most dangerous coil should end. Let me call my prison
a convent, and my seclusion a voluntary sequestration of myself from the
world and its ways."

"Speak not thus, madam, before your faithful servants," said Catherine,
"to discourage their zeal at once, and to break their hearts. Daughter
of Kings, be not in this hour so unkingly--Come, Roland, and let us, the
youngest of her followers, show ourselves worthy of her cause--let us
kneel before her footstool, and implore her to be her own magnanimous
self." And leading Roland Graeme to the Queen's seat, they both kneeled
down before her. Mary raised herself in her chair, and sat erect, while,
extending one hand to be kissed by the page, she arranged with the
other the clustering locks which shaded the bold yet lovely brow of the
high-spirited Catherine.

"Alas! _ma mignone_," she said, for so in fondness she often called her
young attendant, "that you should thus desperately mix with my unhappy
fate the fortune of your young lives!--Are they not a lovely couple,
my Fleming? and is it not heart-rending to think that I must be their
ruin?"

"Not so," said Roland Graeme, "it is we, gracious Sovereign, who will be
your deliverers."

"_Ex oribus parvulorum!_" said the Queen, looking upward; "if it is by
the mouth of these children that Heaven calls me to resume the stately
thoughts which become my birth and my rights, thou wilt grant them thy
protection, and to me the power of rewarding their zeal!"--Then turning
to Fleming, she instantly added,--"Thou knowest, my friend, whether
to make those who have served me happy, was not ever Mary's favourite
pastime. When I have been rebuked by the stern preachers of the
Calvinistic heresy--when I have seen the fierce countenances of my
nobles averted from me, has it not been because I mixed in the harmless
pleasures of the young and gay, and rather for the sake of their
happiness than my own, have mingled in the masque, the song, or the
dance, with the youth of my household? Well, I repent not of it--though
Knox termed it sin, and Morton degradation--I was happy, because I
saw happiness around me; and woe betide the wretched jealousy that can
extract guilt out of the overflowings of an unguarded gaiety!--Fleming,
if we are restored to our throne, shall we not have one blithesome day
at a blithesome bridal, of which we must now name neither the bride
nor the bridegroom? but that bridegroom shall have the barony of
Blairgowrie, a fair gift even for a Queen to give, and that bride's
chaplet shall be twined with the fairest pearls that ever were found
in the depths of Lochlomond; and thou thyself, Mary Fleming, the best
dresser of tires that ever busked the tresses of a Queen, and who would
scorn to touch those of any woman of lower rank,--thou thyself shalt,
for my love, twine them into the bride's tresses.--Look, my Fleming,
suppose them such clustered locks as those of our Catherine, they would
not put shame upon thy skill."

So saying, she passed her hand fondly over the head of her youthful
favourite, while her more aged attendant replied despondently, "Alas!
madam, your thoughts stray far from home."

"They do, my Fleming," said the Queen; "but is it well or kind in you to
call them back?--God knows, they have kept the perch this night but too
closely--Come, I will recall the gay vision, were it but to punish them.
Yes, at that blithesome bridal, Mary herself shall forget the weight
of sorrows, and the toil of state, and herself once more lead a
measure.--At whose wedding was it that we last danced, my Fleming?
I think care has troubled my memory--yet something of it I should
remember--canst thou not aid me?--I know thou canst."

"Alas! madam," replied the lady----

"What!" said Mary, "wilt thou not help us so far? this is a peevish
adherence to thine own graver opinion, which holds our talk as folly.
But thou art court-bred, and wilt well understand me when I say,
the Queen _commands_ Lady Fleming to tell her where she led the last
_branle_."

With a face deadly pale, and a mien as if she were about to sink into
the earth, the court-bred dame, no longer daring to refuse obedience,
faltered out--"Gracious Lady--if my memory err not--it was at a masque
in Holyrood--at the marriage of Sebastian."

The unhappy Queen, who had hitherto listened with a melancholy smile,
provoked by the reluctance with which the Lady Fleming brought out her
story, at this ill-fated word interrupted her with a shriek so wild
and loud that the vaulted apartment rang, and both Roland and Catherine
sprang to their feet in the utmost terror and alarm. Meantime, Mary
seemed, by the train of horrible ideas thus suddenly excited, surprised
not only beyond self-command, but for the moment beyond the verge of
reason.

"Traitress!" she said to the Lady Fleming, "thou wouldst slay thy
sovereign--Call my French guards--_a moi! a moi! mes Francais!_--I
am beset with traitors in mine own palace--they have murdered my
husband--Rescue! rescue for the Queen of Scotland!" She started up from
her chair--her features, late so exquisitely lovely in their paleness,
now inflamed with the fury of frenzy, and resembling those of a Bellona.
"We will take the field ourself," she said; "warn the city--warn Lothian
and Fife--saddle our Spanish barb, and bid French Paris see our petronel
be charged!--Better to die at the head of our brave Scotsmen, like our
grandfather at Flodden, than of a broken heart, like our ill-starred
father!"

"Be patient--be composed, dearest Sovereign," said Catherine: and then
addressing Lady Fleming angrily, she added, "How could you say aught
that reminded her of her husband?"

The word reached the ear of the unhappy Princess, who caught it up,
speaking with great rapidity. "Husband!--what husband?--Not his most
Christian Majesty--he is ill at ease--he cannot mount on horseback.--Not
him of the Lennox--but it was the Duke of Orkney thou wouldst say."

"For God's love, madam, be patient!" said the Lady Fleming.

But the Queen's excited imagination could by no entreaty be diverted
from its course. "Bid him come hither to our aid," she said, "and
bring with him his lambs, as he calls them--Bowton, Hay of Talla, Black
Ormiston, and his kinsman Hob--Fie! how swart they are, and how they
smell of sulphur! What! closeted with Morton? Nay, if the Douglas and
the Hepburn hatch the complot together, the bird, when it breaks the
shell, will scare Scotland. Will it not, my Fleming?"

"She grows wilder and wilder," said Fleming; "we have too many hearers
for these strange words."

"Roland," said Catherine, "in the name of God, begone! You cannot aid us
here--Leave us to deal with her alone--Away--away!"

She thrust him to the door of the anteroom; yet even when he had entered
that apartment, and shut the door, he could still hear the Queen talk in
a loud and determined tone, as if giving forth orders, until at length
the voice died away in a feeble and continued lamentation.

At this crisis Catherine entered the anteroom. "Be not too anxious," she
said, "the crisis is now over; but keep the door fast--let no one enter
until she is more composed."

"In the name of God, what does this mean?" said the page; "or what was
there in the Lady Fleming's words to excite so wild a transport?"

"Oh, the Lady Fleming, the Lady Fleming," said Catherine, repeating the
words impatiently; "the Lady Fleming is a fool--she loves her mistress,
yet knows so little how to express her love, that were the Queen to ask
her for very poison, she would deem it a point of duty not to resist
her commands. I could have torn her starched head-tire from her formal
head--The Queen should have as soon had the heart out of my body, as the
word Sebastian out of my lips--That that piece of weaved tapestry should
be a woman, and yet not have wit enough to tell a lie!"

"And what was this story of Sebastian?" said the page. "By Heaven,
Catherine, you are all riddles alike!"

