what passed around him. The latter was, on the other hand, absorbed
in the politics of the hour. She was connected with many noble
families, and knew that a member of these might fall at any moment
under Nero's displeasure. To have a friend, then, high in the
favour of Nero was a matter of great importance; and she therefore
impressed upon all her intimates that when they found Beric at
her house they should scrupulously avoid all discussion of public
affairs.



CHAPTER XVII: BETROTHAL


Nero had, within a short time of Beric's establishment in the
palace, spoken to him of his apprehension of the increasing power
of the party who, having reverted to the opinions of the Stoic
philosophers, were ever denouncing the luxury and extravagance
of modern ways, and endeavouring, both by example and precept, to
reintroduce the simplicity and severity of former times.

"All this," Nero said angrily, "is of course but a cloak under which
to attack me. Piso and Plautus, Seneca and Lucan, do but assume
this severity of manners. They have plotted and intrigued against
me. I shall never be safe while they live."

"Caesar," Beric said gravely, "I am but a soldier, but born a free
Briton and a chief. I cannot sell my service, but must give it
loyally and heartily. You honour me with your favour and confidence;
I believe that I am worthy of it. I do not serve you for money.
Already I have begged you not to heap presents upon me. Wealth
would be useless to me did I desire it. Not only have you offered
to bestow estates upon me, but I have learned already that there are
many others who, seeing that I am favoured by you, would purchase
my friendship or my advocacy by large sums. I should despise myself
if I cared for money. You would, I know honour me not only with
your trust that I can be relied upon to do my duty as your guard,
but by treating me as one in your confidence in other matters. At
the risk, then, of exciting your displeasure and forfeiting your
favour, I must again pray you not to burden me with state matters.
Of these I know nothing, and wish to know nothing. Save that
of Seneca, I scarce know the names of the others of whom you have
spoken. I am wholly ignorant of the intrigues of court life, and I
seek to know nothing of them, and am therefore in no position to
give any opinion on these matters; and did I speak from only partial
knowledge I should do these men great wrong.

"In the next place, Caesar, I am not one who has a double face, and
if you ask my opinion of a matter in which I thought that others
had ill advised you, I should frankly say that I thought you
were wrong; and the truth is never palatable to the great. I try,
therefore, to shut my ears to everything that is going on around me,
for did I take note of rumours my loyalty to you might be shaken."

"Perhaps you are right," Nero said, after a long pause. "But tell
me, once and for all, what you do think on general matters. It is
good to have the opinion of one whom I know to be honest."

"On one subject only are my convictions strong, Caesar. I think that
the terrible persecution of the Christians is in itself horrible,
and contrary to all the traditions of Rome. These are harmless
people. They make no disturbances; they do injury to no one; they
are guilty of no act that would justify in any way the tortures
inflicted upon them. I am not a Christian, I know nothing of
their doctrines; but I am unable to understand how one naturally
clement and kind hearted as you are can give way to the clamour of
the populace against these people. As to those of whom you speak,
and others, I have no opinions; but were I Caesar, strong in the
support of the Praetorian guards, and in the affection of the people
at large, I would simply despise plotters. The people may vaguely
admire the doctrines of the Stoics, but they themselves love
pleasure and amusements and spectacles, and live upon your bounty
and generosity. There can then be nothing to fear from open force.
Should there be conspirators who would attempt to compass their
ends by assassination, you have your guards to protect you. You
have myself and my little band of countrymen ready to watch over
you unceasingly."

"No care and caution will avail against the knife of the assassin,"
Nero said gloomily. "It is only by striking down conspirators and
assassins that one can guard one's self against their weapons.
Julius Caesar was killed when surrounded by men whom he deemed his
friends."

Beric could not deny the truth of Nero's words. "That is true,
Caesar, and therefore I do not presume to criticise or even to have
an opinion upon acts of state policy. These are matters utterly
beyond me. I know nothing of the history of the families of Rome.
I know not who may, with or without reason, deem that they have
cause of complaint against you, or who may be hostile to you either
from private grievances or personal ambitions, and knowing nothing
I wish to know nothing. I desire, as I said when you first spoke to
me, to be regarded as a watchdog, to be attached to you by personal
kindness, and to guard you night and day against conspirators and
assassins. I beseech you not to expect more from me, or to deem it
possible that a Briton can be qualified to give any opinion whatever
as to a matter so alien to him as the intrigues and conspiracies
of an imperial city. Did I agree with you, you would soon doubt my
honesty; did I differ from you, I should incur your displeasure."

Nero looked up at the frank countenance of the young Briton.

"Enough," he said smiling, "you shall be my watchdog and nothing
more."

As time went on Nero's confidence in his British guard steadily
increased. He had his spies, and knew how entirely Beric kept himself
aloof from intimate acquaintanceship with any save the family of
Norbanus, and learned, too, that he had refused many large bribes
from suitors. For a time, although he knew it not, Beric was
constantly watched. His footsteps were followed when he went abroad,
his conversations with others in the baths, which formed the great
centres of meeting, and stood to the Romans in the place of modern
clubs, were listened to and noted. It was observed that he seldom
went to convivial gatherings, and that at any place when the
conversation turned on public affairs he speedily withdrew; that
he avoided all display of wealth, dressed as quietly as it was
possible for one in the court circle to do, and bore himself as
simply as when he had been training in the ludus of Scopus. There
he still went very frequently, practising constantly in arms with
his former companions, preferring this to the more formal exercises
of the gymnasium. Thus, after a time, Nero became confirmed in his
opinion of Beric's straightforward honesty, and felt that there
was no fear of his being tampered with by his enemies.

One result of this increased confidence was that Beric's hours
of leisure became much restricted, for Nero came to require his
attendance whenever he appeared in public. With Beric and Boduoc
among the group of courtiers that followed him, the emperor felt
assured there was no occasion to fear the knife of the assassin;
and it was only when he was at the baths, where only his most chosen
friends were admitted, or during the long carousals that followed
the suppers, that Beric was at liberty, and in the latter case
Boduoc was always near at hand in case of need.

Nero's precautions were redoubled after the detection of the
conspiracy of Piso. That this plot was a real one, and not a mere
invention of Nero to justify his designs upon those he hated and
feared, is undoubted. The hour for the attempt at assassination had
been fixed, the chief actor was prepared and the knife sharpened.
But the executions that followed embraced many who had no knowledge
whatever of the plot. Seneca was among the victims against whom
there was no shadow of proof.

After the discovery of this plot Beric found his position more
and more irksome in spite of the favour Nero showed him. Do what
he would he could not close his ears to what was public talk in
Rome. The fabulous extravagances of Nero, the public and unbounded
profligacy of himself and his court, the open defiance of decency,
the stupendous waste of public money on the new and most sumptuous
palace into which he had now removed, were matters that scandalized
even the population of Rome. Senators, patricians, grave councillors,
noble matrons were alike willingly or unwillingly obliged to join
in the saturnalia that prevailed. The provinces were ruined to
minister to the luxury of Rome. The wealth of the noblest families
was sequestrated to the state. All law, order, and decency were
set at defiance.

To the Britons, simple in their tastes and habits, this profusion
of luxury, this universal profligacy seemed absolutely monstrous.
When they met together and talked of their former life in their
rude huts, it seemed that the vengeance of the gods must surely
fall upon a people who seemed to have lost all sense of virtue,
all respect for things human and divine. To Beric the only bearable
portions of his existence were the mornings he spent in reading,
and in the study of Greek with Chiton, and in the house of Norbanus.
Of Lesbia he saw little. She spent her life in a whirl of dissipation
and gaiety, accompanying members of her family to all the fetes in
defiance of the wishes of Norbanus, whose authority in this matter
she absolutely set at naught.

"The emperor's invitations override the authority of one who makes
himself absurd by his presumption of philosophy. I live as do
other Roman ladies of good family. Divorce me if you like; I have
the fortune I brought you, and should prefer vastly to go my own
way."

This step Norbanus would have taken but for the sake of Aemilia. By
his orders the latter never went abroad with her mother or attended
any of the public entertainments, but lived in the quiet society
of the personal friends of Norbanus. Lesbia had yielded the point,
for she did not care to be accompanied by a daughter of marriageable
age, as by dint of cosmetics and paint she posed as still a young
woman. Aemilia had long since recovered her spirits, and was again
the merry girl Beric had known at Massilia.

One day when Beric called he saw that Norbanus, who was seldom put
out by any passing circumstance, was disturbed in mind.

"I am troubled indeed," he said, in answer to Beric's inquiry.
"Lesbia has been proposing to me the marriage of Rufinus Sulla, a
connection of hers, and, as you know, one of Nero's intimates, with
Aemilia."

Beric uttered an exclamation of anger.

"He is one of the worst of profligates," he exclaimed. "I would slay
him with my own hand rather than that Aemilia should be sacrificed
to him."

"And I would slay her first," Norbanus said calmly; "but, as Lesbia
threatened when I indignantly refused the proposal, Rufinus has
but to ask Nero's approval, and before his orders my authority as
a father goes for nothing. I see but one way. It has seemed to me
for a long time, Beric, that you yourself felt more warmly towards
Aemilia than a mere friend. Putting aside our obligations to you
for having risked your life in defence of Ennia, there is no one
to whom I would more willingly give her. Have I been mistaken in
your thoughts of her?"

"By no means," Beric said. "I love your daughter Aemilia, but I
have never spoken of it to you for two reasons. In the first place
I shall not be for some years of the age at which we Britons marry,
and in the second I am but a captive. At present I stand high in
the favour of Nero, but that favour may fail me at any day, and
my life at the palace is becoming unbearable; but besides, it is
impossible that this orgy of crime and debauchery can continue. The
vengeance of heaven cannot be much longer delayed. The legions in
the provinces are utterly discontented and well nigh mutinous, and
even if Rome continues to support Nero the time cannot be far off
when the legions proclaim either Galba, or Vespasian, or some other
general, as emperor, and then the downfall of Nero must come. How
then could I ask you for the hand of Aemilia, a maiden of noble
family, when the future is all so dark and troubled and my own lot
so uncertain?

"I cannot raise my sword against Caesar, for, however foul his
crimes, he has treated me well. Had it not been for that I would
have made for Praeneste, when the gladiators rose there the other
day, and for the same reason I can do nothing to prepare the way
for a rising here. I know the ludus of Scopus would join to a man.
There is great discontent among the other schools, for the people
have become so accustomed to bloodshed that they seem steeled to
all pity, and invariably give the signal for the despatch of the
conquered. As to your offer, Norbanus, I thank you with all my
heart; but were it not for this danger that threatens from Rufinus,
I would say that at the present time I dare not link her lot to
mine. The danger is too great, the future too dark. It seems to
me that the city and all in it are seized with madness, and above
all, at the present time, I would not for worlds take her to the
palace of Nero. But if Aemilia will consent to a betrothal to me,
putting off the period of marriage until the times are changed,
I will, with delight, accept the offer of her hand, if she too is
willing, for in Briton, as in Gaul, our maidens have a voice in
their own disposal."

Norbanus smiled. "Methinks, Beric, you need not fear on that score.
Since the day when you fought the lion in the arena you have been
her hero and the lord of her heart. Even I, although but short
sighted as to matters unconnected with my work, could mark that,
and I believe it is because her mother sees and fears it that she
has determined to marry her to Rufinus. I will call her down to
find out whether she is ready to obey my wishes."

In a minute or two Aemilia came down from the women's apartments
above.

"My child," Norbanus said, "I have offered you in marriage to
Beric. He has accepted, saving only that you must come to him not
in obedience to my orders but of your own free will, since it is
the custom of his country that both parties should be equally free
of choice. What do you say, my child?"

Aemilia had flushed with a sudden glow of colour as her father
began, and stood with downcast eyes until he had finished.

"One moment before you decide, Aemilia," Beric said. "You know how
I am situated, and that at any moment I may be involved in peril
or death; that life with me can scarcely be one of ease or luxury,
and that even at the best you may be an exile for ever from Rome."

She looked up now. "I love you, Beric," she said. "I would rather
live in a cottage with you for my lord and master than in a palace
with any other. I would die with you were there need. Your wishes
shall always be my law."

"That is not the way in Britain," Beric said, as he drew her to
him and kissed her. "The husband is not the lord of his wife, they
are friends and equals, and such will we be. There is honour and
respect on both sides."

"It will be but your betrothal at present," Norbanus said. "Neither
Beric nor I would like to see you in the palace of Caesar; but the
sponsalia shall take place today, and then he can claim you when
he will. Come again this evening, Beric. I will have the conditions
drawn up, and some friends shall be here to witness the form of
betrothal. This haste, child, is in order to give Beric power to
protect you. Were you free, Rufinus might obtain an order from Nero
for me to give you to him, but once the conditions are signed they
cannot be broken save by your mutual consent; and moreover, Beric
can use his influence with the emperor on behalf of his betrothed
wife, while so long as you remain under my authority he could
scarcely interfere did Nero give his promise to Rufinus."

"Will my mother be here?"

"She will not, nor do I desire her presence," Norbanus said decidedly.
"She has defied my authority and has gone her own path, and it is
only for your sake that I have not divorced her. She comes and she
goes as she chooses, but her home is with her family, not here. She
has no right by law to a voice in your marriage. You are under my
authority and mine alone. It is but right that a good mother should
have an influence and a voice as to her daughter's marriage; but
a woman who frequents the saturnalia of Nero has forfeited her
mother's rights. It will be time enough for her to hear of it when
it is too late for her to cause trouble. Now do you two go into
the garden together, for I have arrangements to make."

At six o'clock Beric returned to the house. In the atrium were
gathered a number of guests; some were members of the family of
Norbanus, others were his colleagues in office--all were men of
standing and family. Beric was already known to most of them, having
met them at suppers at the house. When all were assembled Norbanus
left the room, and presently returned leading Aemilia by the hand.

"My friends," he said, "you already know why you are assembled here,
namely to be witnesses to the betrothal of my daughter to Beric the
Briton. Vitrio, the notary, will read the conditions under which
they are betrothed."

The document was a formal one, and stated that Norbanus gave up
his potestas or authority over his daughter Aemilia to Beric, and
that he bound himself to complete the further ceremony of marriage
either by the religious or civil form as Beric might select whenever
the latter should demand it, and that further he agreed to give
her on her marriage the sum of three thousand denarii, and to leave
the whole of his property to her at his death; while Beric on his
part bound himself to complete the ceremonies of marriage whenever
called upon by Norbanus to do so, and to pay him at the present
time one thousand denarii on the consideration of his signing the
present agreement, and on his delivering up to him his authority
over his daughter.

"You have heard this document read, Norbanus," the notary said,
when he had concluded the reading. "Do you assent to it? And are
you ready to affix your signature to the contract?"

"I am ready," Norbanus said.

"And you, Beric?"

"I am also ready," Beric replied.

"Then do you both write your signatures here."

Both signed, and four of the guests affixed their signatures as
witnesses. Norbanus then placed Aemilia's hand in Beric's. "You are
now betrothed man and wife," he said. "I transfer to you, Beric,
my authority over my daughter; henceforth she is your property to
claim as you will."

A minute later there was a sudden movement at the door, and Lesbia
entered in haste. "News has just been brought to me of your intention,
Norbanus, and I am here to say that I will not permit this betrothal."

"You have no voice or authority in the matter," Norbanus said
calmly. "Legal right to interfere you never had. Your moral right
you have forfeited. The conditions have been signed. Aemilia is
betrothed to Beric."

Lesbia broke out into passionate reproaches and threats, but Norbanus
advanced a step or two towards her, and said with quiet dignity,
"I have borne with you for her sake, Lesbia. Now that she belongs
to Beric and not to me, I need not restrain my just indignation
longer. I return your property to your hands."

Lesbia stepped back as if struck. The words were the well known
formula by which a Roman divorced his wife. She had not dreamed
that Norbanus would summon up resolution to put this disgrace upon
her, and to bring upon himself the hostility of her family. Her
pride quickly came to her aid.

"Thanks for the release," she said sarcastically; "far too much
of my life has already been wasted on a dotard, and my family will
see that the restitution of my property is full and complete: but
beware, Norbanus, I am not to be outraged with impunity, and you
will learn to your cost that a woman of my family knows how to
revenge herself."

Then turning she passed out of the door, entered her lectica and
was carried away.

"I must apologize to you, my friends," Norbanus said calmly, "for
having brought you to be present at an unpleasant family scene, but
I had not expected it, and know not through whom Lesbia obtained
the news of what was doing here. I suppose one of the slaves carried
it to her. But these things trouble not a philosopher; for myself
I marvel at my long patience, and feel rejoiced that at last I
shall be free to live my own life."

"You have done well, Norbanus," one of his colleagues said, "though
I know not what Nero will say when he hears of it, for severity
among husbands is not popular at present in Rome."

"I can open my veins as Seneca did," Norbanus said calmly; "neither
death nor exile have any terrors for me. Rome has gone mad, and
life for a reasoning being is worthless here."

"I shall represent the matter to Nero," Beric said, "and as it is
seldom that I ask aught of him, I doubt not he will listen to me.
When he is not personally concerned, Nero desires to act justly,
and moreover, I think that he can weigh the advantages of the
friendship of a faithful guard against that of his boon companions.
I will speak to him the first thing in the morning. He frequently
comes into the library and reads for an hour. At any rate there is
no chance of Lesbia being beforehand with me. It is too late for
her to see Rufinus and get him to approach Nero tonight."

"Let us talk of other matters," Norbanus said, "all these things
are but transitory." He then began to talk on his favourite topic--the
religions of the world, while Beric drew Aemilia, who had
been weeping since the scene between her parents, into the tablinum.

"It is unlucky to weep on the day of your betrothal, Aemilia."

"Who could help it, Beric? Besides, as it is not for my own troubles
the omen will have no avail. But it is all so strange and so rapid.
This morning I was in trouble, alarmed at what my mother told me
of her intentions, fearful that my father, who has so long yielded
to her, would permit her to have her own way in this also. Then
came the great joy when he told me that he would give me to you--that
you, who of all men I thought most of, was henceforth to
be my lord. Then, just when my happiness was complete, and I was
formally bound to you, came my mother. Ennia and I always loved our
father most, he was ever thoughtful and kind to us, while even as
children our mother did not care for us. As we grew up she cared still
less, thinking only of her own pleasures and friends, and leaving
us almost wholly in charge of the slaves; but it was not until
Ennia was seized as a Christian that I knew how little she loved
us. Then she raved and stormed, lamented and wept, not because of
the fate of Ennia, not because of the terrible death that awaited
her, but because of the disgrace it brought upon herself. Even after
she was brought here she scarce came in to see her, and loudly said
that it would be best for her to die. Lately, as you know, I have
seen little of her; she spends all her time abroad, has defied my
father's authority; and brought grief and trouble upon him. Still,
to a daughter it is terrible that her mother should be divorced."

"Let us not think of it now, Aemilia. Your father has acted, as he
always does, rightly and well. I know much more of what is going
on than you do, and I can tell you that Lesbia, who was so jealous
of the honour of her name when Ennia was concerned, is bringing
far greater dishonour upon her name by her own actions. And now let
us talk of ourselves. The act you have just done, dear, may bring
all sorts of sacrifices upon you. At any moment I may be a fugitive,
and, as you know, the families of those who incur Nero's wrath
share in their disgrace; and if I am forced to fly, you too may be
obliged to become a fugitive."

She looked up brightly. "I shall not mind any hardships I suffer
for your sake, Beric. Rome is hateful to me since Ennia stood in
the arena. I would rather share a hut with you among the savage
mountains of the north than a palace here."

"I trust that trouble is still far distant, but I shall, as soon as
I can, find a retreat where, in case I fall under Nero's displeasure,
you can lie hid until I can send for you."

"I have such a retreat, Beric. Since Ennia's death I have seen a
good deal of the Christians. Lycoris, you know, was captured at the
same time as Ennia, and was put to death by fire; but her daughter,
married to a freedman who had purchased her liberty from my father,
managed to escape with her husband when the place was surrounded.
I have met her several times since. She and her husband are living
hidden in the catacombs, where she tells me many of their sect have
taken refuge from the persecutions.

"The last time I saw her she said to me, 'No one's life is safe
in this terrible city, and none, however high in station, can say
that they may not require refuge. Should you need an asylum, Aemilia,
go to the house of a freedman, one Mincius, living in the third
house on the right of a street known as the Narrow one, close behind
the amphitheatre at the foot of the Palatine Hill, and knock thrice
at the door. When they open, say, 'In the name of Christ,' then
they will take you in. Tell them that you desire to see me, and
that you are the sister of Ennia, the daughter of Norbanus, and
they will lead you to us. There is an entrance to the catacombs
under the house. As the sister of Ennia you will be warmly received
by all there, even although you yourself may not belong to us. The
galleries and passages are of a vast extent and known only to us.
There is no fear of pursuit there.'"

"That is good news, Aemilia; it is sad that, but an hour betrothed,
we are forced to think of refuges, but it will be happiness to me
to know that if danger threatens, you have a place of retreat. You
see this ring; Nero himself gave it me; mark it well, so that you
may know it again. It is a figure of Mercury carved on an amethyst.
When you receive it, by night or day, tarry not a moment, but wrap
yourself in a sombre mantle like that of a slave, and hie you to
this refuge you speak of; but first see your father, tell him where
you are going and why, so that he may fly too, if he choose."

"He will not do that," Aemilia said, "and how can I leave him?"

"You must leave him because you belong to me, Aemilia, and because
you are acting on my orders. The danger to you is far greater than
to him. You are my wife, he only my father in law, and they would
strike at me first through you. Besides, there are other reasons.
Your father is a Roman of the old type, and like Seneca and Plautus,
and others of the same school, will deem it no loss when the time
comes to quit life. However, you will tell him of the danger, and
