down the Kattegat and without a declaration of war or any warning had
bombarded Copenhagen and had taken away the Danish fleet, lest it be of
value to Napoleon. The Congress of Vienna went one step further. It took
Norway (which since the union of Calmar of the year 1397 had been united
with Denmark) away from Denmark and gave it to Charles XIV of Sweden as
a reward for his betrayal of Napoleon, who had set him up in the king
business. This Swedish king, curiously enough, was a former French
general by the name of Bernadotte, who had come to Sweden as one of
Napolean's{sic} adjutants, and had been invited to the throne of
that good country when the last of the rulers of the house of
Hollstein-Gottorp had died without leaving either son or daughter. From
1815 until 1844 he ruled his adopted country (the language of which he
never learned) width great ability. He was a clever man and enjoyed the
respect of both his Swedish and his Norwegian subjects, but he did
not succeed in joining two countries which nature and history had put
asunder. The dual Scandinavian state was never a success and in 1905,
Norway, in a most peaceful and orderly manner, set up as an independent
kingdom and the Swedes bade her "good speed" and very wisely let her go
her own way.

The Italians, who since the days of the Renaissance had been at the
mercy of a long series of invaders, also had put great hopes in General
Bonaparte. The Emperor Napoleon, however, had grievously disappointed
them. Instead of the United Italy which the people wanted, they had been
divided into a number of little principalities, duchies, republics and
the Papal State, which (next to Naples) was the worst governed and
most miserable region of the entire peninsula. The Congress of
Vienna abolished a few of the Napoleonic republics and in their place
resurrected several old principalities which were given to deserving
members, both male and female, of the Habsburg family.

The poor Spaniards, who had started the great nationalistic revolt
against Napoleon, and who had sacrificed the best blood of the country
for their king, were punished severely when the Congress allowed His
Majesty to return to his domains. This vicious creature, known as
Ferdinand VII, had spent the last four years of his life as a prisoner
of Napoleon. He had improved his days by knitting garments for the
statues of his favourite patron saints. He celebrated his return by
re-introducing the Inquisition and the torture-chamber, both of which
had been abolished by the Revolution. He was a disgusting person,
despised as much by his subjects as by his four wives, but the Holy
Alliance maintained him upon his legitimate throne and all efforts
of the decent Spaniards to get rid of this curse and make Spain a
constitutional kingdom ended in bloodshed and executions.

Portugal had been without a king since the year 1807 when the royal
family had fled to the colonies in Brazil. The country had been used as
a base of supply for the armies of Wellington during the Peninsula war,
which lasted from 1808 until 1814. After 1815 Portugal continued to be
a sort of British province until the house of Braganza returned to the
throne, leaving one of its members behind in Rio de Janeiro as Emperor
of Brazil, the only American Empire which lasted for more than a few
years, and which came to an end in 1889 when the country became a
republic.

In the east, nothing was done to improve the terrible conditions of both
the Slavs and the Greeks who were still subjects of the Sultan. In
the year 1804 Black George, a Servian swineherd, (the founder of the
Karageorgevich dynasty) had started a revolt against the Turks, but he
had been defeated by his enemies and had been murdered by one of his
supposed friends, the rival Servian leader, called Milosh Obrenovich,
(who became the founder of the Obrenovich dynasty) and the Turks had
continued to be the undisputed masters of the Balkans.

The Greeks, who since the loss of their independence, two thousand years
before, had been subjects of the Macedonians, the Romans, the Venetians
and the Turks, had hoped that their countryman, Capo d'Istria, a native
of Corfu and together with Czartoryski, the most intimate personal
friends of Alexander, would do something for them. But the Congress of
Vienna was not interested in Greeks, but was very much interested in
keeping all "legitimate" monarchs, Christian, Moslem and otherwise, upon
their respective thrones. Therefore nothing was done.

The last, but perhaps the greatest blunder of the Congress was the
treatment of Germany. The Reformation and the Thirty Years War had not
only destroyed the prosperity of the country, but had turned it into a
hopeless political rubbish heap, consisting of a couple of kingdoms,
a few grand-duchies, a large number of duchies and hundreds of
margravates, principalities, baronies, electorates, free cities and free
villages, ruled by the strangest assortment of potentates that was ever
seen off the comic opera stage. Frederick the Great had changed this
when he created a strong Prussia, but this state had not survived him by
many years.

Napoleon had blue-penciled the demand for independence of most of these
little countries, and only fifty-two out of a total of more than three
hundred had survived the year 1806. During the years of the great
struggle for independence, many a young soldier had dreamed of a new
Fatherland that should be strong and united. But there can be no union
without a strong leadership, and who was to be this leader?

There were five kingdoms in the German speaking lands. The rulers of
two of these, Austria and Prussia, were kings by the Grace of God. The
rulers of three others, Bavaria, Saxony and Wurtemberg, were kings by
the Grace of Napoleon, and as they had been the faithful henchmen of the
Emperor, their patriotic credit with the other Germans was therefore not
very good.

The Congress had established a new German Confederation, a league of
thirty-eight sovereign states, under the chairmanship of the King of
Austria, who was now known as the Emperor of Austria. It was the sort of
make-shift arrangement which satisfied no one. It is true that a German
Diet, which met in the old coronation city of Frankfort, had been
created to discuss matters of "common policy and importance." But in
this Diet, thirty-eight delegates represented thirty-eight different
interests and as no decision could be taken without a unanimous vote
(a parliamentary rule which had in previous centuries ruined the mighty
kingdom of Poland), the famous German Confederation became very soon
the laughing stock of Europe and the politics of the old Empire began to
resemble those of our Central American neighbours in the forties and the
fifties of the last century.

It was terribly humiliating to the people who had sacrificed everything
for a national ideal. But the Congress was not interested in the private
feelings of "subjects," and the debate was closed.

Did anybody object? Most assuredly. As soon as the first feeling of
hatred against Napoleon had quieted down--as soon as the enthusiasm
of the great war had subsided--as soon as the people came to a full
realisation of the crime that had been committed in the name of "peace
and stability" they began to murmur. They even made threats of open
revolt. But what could they do? They were powerless. They were at the
mercy of the most pitiless and efficient police system the world had
ever seen.

The members of the Congress of Vienna honestly and sincerely believed
that "the Revolutionary Principle had led to the criminal usurpation
of the throne by the former emperor Napoleon." They felt that they were
called upon to eradicate the adherents of the so-called "French ideas"
just as Philip II had only followed the voice of his conscience when he
burned Protestants or hanged Moors. In the beginning of the sixteenth
century a man who did not believe in the divine right of the Pope to
rule his subjects as he saw fit was a "heretic" and it was the duty
of all loyal citizens to kill him. In the beginning of the nineteenth
century, on the continent of Europe, a man who did not believe in the
divine right of his king to rule him as he or his Prime Minister saw
fit, was a "heretic," and it was the duty of all loyal citizens to
denounce him to the nearest policeman and see that he got punished.

But the rulers of the year 1815 had learned efficiency in the school of
Napoleon and they performed their task much better than it had been done
in the year 1517. The period between the year 1815 and the year 1860 was
the great era of the political spy. Spies were everywhere. They lived in
palaces and they were to be found in the lowest gin-shops. They peeped
through the key-holes of the ministerial cabinet and they listened to
the conversations of the people who were taking the air on the benches
of the Municipal Park. They guarded the frontier so that no one might
leave without a duly viseed passport and they inspected all packages,
that no books with dangerous "French ideas" should enter the realm of
their Royal masters. They sat among the students in the lecture hall and
woe to the Professor who uttered a word against the existing order of
things. They followed the little boys and girls on their way to church
lest they play hookey.

In many of these tasks they were assisted by the clergy. The church had
suffered greatly during the days of the revolution. The church property
had been confiscated. Several priests had been killed and the generation
that had learned its cathechism from Voltaire and Rousseau and the
other French philosophers had danced around the Altar of Reason when the
Committee of Public Safety had abolished the worship of God in October
of the year 1793. The priests had followed the "emigres" into their long
exile. Now they returned in the wake of the allied armies and they set
to work with a vengeance.

Even the Jesuits came back in 1814 and resumed their former labours of
educating the young. Their order had been a little too successful in its
fight against the enemies of the church. It had established "provinces"
in every part of the world, to teach the natives the blessings of
Christianity, but soon it had developed into a regular trading company
which was for ever interfering with the civil authorities. During
the reign of the Marquis de Pombal, the great reforming minister of
Portugal, they had been driven out of the Portuguese lands and in the
year 1773 at the request of most of the Catholic powers of Europe, the
order had been suppressed by Pope Clement XIV. Now they were back on
the job, and preached the principles of "obedience" and "love for the
legitimate dynasty" to children whose parents had hired shopwindows that
they might laugh at Marie Antoinette driving to the scaffold which was
to end her misery.

But in the Protestant countries like Prussia, things were not a whit
better. The great patriotic leaders of the year 1812, the poets and the
writers who had preached a holy war upon the usurper, were now branded
as dangerous "demagogues." Their houses were searched. Their letters
were read. They were obliged to report to the police at regular
intervals and give an account of themselves. The Prussian drill master
was let loose in all his fury upon the younger generation. When a party
of students celebrated the tercentenary of the Reformation with noisy
but harmless festivities on the old Wartburg, the Prussian bureaucrats
had visions of an imminent revolution. When a theological student,
more honest than intelligent, killed a Russian government spy who
was operating in Germany, the universities were placed under
police-supervision and professors were jailed or dismissed without any
form of trial.

Russia, of course, was even more absurd in these anti-revolutionary
activities. Alexander had recovered from his attack of piety. He was
gradually drifting toward melancholia. He well knew his own limited
abilities and understood how at Vienna he had been the victim both of
Metternich and the Krudener woman. More and more he turned his back
upon the west and became a truly Russian ruler whose interests lay in
Constantinople, the old holy city that had been the first teacher of the
Slavs. The older he grew, the harder he worked and the less he was able
to accomplish. And while he sat in his study, his ministers turned the
whole of Russia into a land of military barracks.

It is not a pretty picture. Perhaps I might have shortened this
description of the Great Reaction. But it is just as well that you
should have a thorough knowledge of this era. It was not the first time
that an attempt had been made to set the clock of history back. The
result was the usual one.




NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE

THE LOVE OF NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE, HOWEVER WAS TOO STRONG TO BE
DESTROYED IN THIS WAY. THE SOUTH AMERICANS WERE THE FIRST TO REBEL
AGAINST THE REACTIONARY MEASURES OF THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA, GREECE AND
BELGIUM AND SPAIN AND A LARGE NUMBER OF OTHER COUNTRIES OF THE EUROPEAN
CONTINENT FOLLOWED SUIT AND THE NINETEENTH CENTURY WAS FILLED WITH THE
RUMOUR OF MANY WARS OF INDEPENDENCE


IT will serve no good purpose to say "if only the Congress of Vienna had
done such and such a thing instead of taking such and such a course, the
history of Europe in the nineteenth century would have been different."
The Congress of Vienna was a gathering of men who had just passed
through a great revolution and through twenty years of terrible and
almost continuous warfare. They came together for the purpose of giving
Europe that "peace and stability" which they thought that the people
needed and wanted. They were what we call reactionaries. They sincerely
believed in the inability of the mass of the people to rule themselves.
They re-arranged the map of Europe in such a way as seemed to promise
the greatest possibility of a lasting success. They failed, but not
through any premeditated wickedness on their part. They were, for the
greater part, men of the old school who remembered the happier days of
their quiet youth and ardently wished a return of that blessed period.
They failed to recognise the strong hold which many of the revolutionary
principles had gained upon the people of the European continent. That
was a misfortune but hardly a sin. But one of the things which the
French Revolution had taught not only Europe but America as well, was
the right of people to their own "nationality."

Napoleon, who respected nothing and nobody, was utterly ruthless in
his dealing with national and patriotic aspirations. But the early
revolutionary generals had proclaimed the new doctrine that "nationality
was not a matter of political frontiers or round skulls and broad noses,
but a matter of the heart and soul." While they were teaching the French
children the greatness of the French nation, they encouraged Spaniards
and Hollanders and Italians to do the same thing. Soon these people, who
all shared Rousseau's belief in the superior virtues of Original Man,
began to dig into their past and found, buried beneath the ruins of
the feudal system, the bones of the mighty races of which they supposed
themselves the feeble descendants.

The first half of the nineteenth century was the era of the great
historical discoveries. Everywhere historians were busy publishing
mediaeval charters and early mediaeval chronicles and in every country
the result was a new pride in the old fatherland. A great deal of this
sentiment was based upon the wrong interpretation of historical
facts. But in practical politics, it does not matter what is true, but
everything depends upon what the people believe to be true. And in most
countries both the kings and their subjects firmly believed in the glory
and fame of their ancestors.

The Congress of Vienna was not inclined to be sentimental. Their
Excellencies divided the map of Europe according to the best interests
of half a dozen dynasties and put "national aspirations" upon the Index,
or list of forbidden books, together with all other dangerous "French
doctrines."

But history is no respecter of Congresses. For some reason or other (it
may be an historical law, which thus far has escaped the attention
of the scholars) "nations" seemed to be necessary for the orderly
development of human society and the attempt to stem this tide was
quite as unsuccessful as the Metternichian effort to prevent people from
thinking.

Curiously enough the first trouble began in a very distant part of the
world, in South America. The Spanish colonies of that continent had been
enjoying a period of relative independence during the many years of the
great Napoleonic wars. They had even remained faithful to their king
when he was taken prisoner by the French Emperor and they had refused to
recognise Joseph Bonaparte, who had in the year 1808 been made King of
Spain by order of his brother.

Indeed, the only part of America to get very much upset by the
Revolution was the island of Haiti, the Espagnola of Columbus' first
trip. Here in the year 1791 the French Convention, in a sudden outburst
of love and human brotherhood, had bestowed upon their black brethren
all the privileges hitherto enjoyed by their white masters. Just as
suddenly they had repented of this step, but the attempt to undo the
original promise led to many years of terrible warfare between General
Leclerc, the brother-in-law of Napoleon, and Toussaint l'Ouverture, the
negro chieftain. In the year 1801, Toussaint was asked to visit Leclerc
and discuss terms of peace. He received the solemn promise that he would
not be molested. He trusted his white adversaries, was put on board a
ship and shortly afterwards died in a French prison. But the negroes
gained their independence all the same and founded a Republic.
Incidentally they were of great help to the first great South American
patriot in his efforts to deliver his native country from the Spanish
yoke.

Simon Bolivar, a native of Caracas in Venezuela, born in the year 1783,
had been educated in Spain, had visited Paris where he had seen the
Revolutionary government at work, had lived for a while in the United
States and had returned to his native land where the widespread
discontent against Spain, the mother country, was beginning to take a
definite form. In the year 1811, Venezuela declared its independence and
Bolivar became one of the revolutionary generals. Within two months, the
rebels were defeated and Bolivar fled.

For the next five years he was the leader of an apparently lost cause.
He sacrificed all his wealth and he would not have been able to begin
his final and successful expedition without the support of the President
of Haiti. Thereafter the revolt spread all over South America and soon
it appeared that Spain was not able to suppress the rebellion unaided.
She asked for the support of the Holy Alliance.

This step greatly worried England. The British shippers had succeeded
the Dutch as the Common Carriers of the world and they expected to reap
heavy profits from a declaration of independence on the part of all
South America. They had hopes that the United States of America would
interfere but the Senate had no such plans and in the House, too, there
were many voices which declared that Spain ought to be given a free
hand.

Just then, there was a change of ministers in England. The Whigs went
out and the Tories came in. George Canning became secretary of State. He
dropped a hint that England would gladly back up the American government
with all the might of her fleet, if said government would declare
its disapproval of the plans of the Holy Alliance in regard to the
rebellious colonies of the southern continent. President Monroe
thereupon, on the 2nd of December of the year 1823, addressed Congress
and stated that: "America would consider any attempt on the part of
the allied powers to extend their system to any portion of this western
hemisphere as dangerous to our peace and safety," and gave warning that
"the American government would consider such action on the part of the
Holy Alliance as a manifestation of an unfriendly disposition toward the
United States." Four weeks later, the text of the "Monroe Doctrine" was
printed in the English newspapers and the members of the Holy Alliance
were forced to make their choice.

Metternich hesitated. Personally he would have been willing to risk the
displeasure of the United States (which had allowed both its army and
navy to fall into neglect since the end of the Anglo-American war of
the year 1812.) But Canning's threatening attitude and trouble on the
continent forced him to be careful. The expedition never took place and
South America and Mexico gained their independence.

As for the troubles on the continent of Europe, they were coming fast
and furious. The Holy Alliance had sent French troops to Spain to act as
guardians of the peace in the year 1820. Austrian troops had been used
for a similar purpose in Italy when the "Carbonari" (the secret society
of the Charcoal Burners) were making propaganda for a united Italy and
had caused a rebellion against the unspeakable Ferdinand of Naples.

Bad news also came from Russia where the death of Alexander had been the
sign for a revolutionary outbreak in St. Petersburg, a short but bloody
upheaval, the so-called Dekaberist revolt (because it took place in
December,) which ended with the hanging of a large number of good
patriots who had been disgusted by the reaction of Alexander's last
years and had tried to give Russia a constitutional form of government.

But worse was to follow. Metternich had tried to assure himself of the
continued support of the European courts by a series of conferences
at Aix-la-Chapelle at Troppau at Laibach and finally at Verona. The
delegates from the different powers duly travelled to these agreeable
watering places where the Austrian prime minister used to spend his
summers. They always promised to do their best to suppress revolt but
they were none too certain of their success. The spirit of the people
was beginning to be ugly and especially in France the position of the
king was by no means satisfactory.

The real trouble however began in the Balkans, the gateway to western
Europe through which the invaders of that continent had passed since the
beginning of time. The first outbreak was in Moldavia, the ancient Roman
province of Dacia which had been cut off from the Empire in the third
century. Since then, it had been a lost land, a sort of Atlantis, where
the people had continued to speak the old Roman tongue and still called
themselves Romans and their country Roumania. Here in the year 1821,
a young Greek, Prince Alexander Ypsilanti, began a revolt against the
Turks. He told his followers that they could count upon the support
of Russia. But Metternich's fast couriers were soon on their way to St
Petersburg and the Tsar, entirely persuaded by the Austrian arguments in
favor of "peace and stability," refused to help. Ypsilanti was forced to
flee to Austria where he spent the next seven years in prison.

In the same year, 1821, trouble began in Greece. Since 1815 a secret
society of Greek patriots had been preparing the way for a revolt.
Suddenly they hoisted the flag of independence in the Morea (the ancient
Peloponnesus) and drove the Turkish garrisons away. The Turks answered
in the usual fashion. They took the Greek Patriarch of Constantinople,
who was regarded as their Pope both by the Greeks and by many Russians,
and they hanged him on Easter Sunday of the year 1821, together with a
number of his bishops. The Greeks came back with a massacre of all
the Mohammedans in Tripolitsa, the capital of the Morea and the Turks
retaliated by an attack upon the island of Chios, where they murdered
25,000 Christians and sold 45,000 others as slaves into Asia and Egypt.

Then the Greeks appealed to the European courts, but Metternich told
them in so many words that they could "stew in their own grease," (I
am not trying to make a pun, but I am quoting His Serene Highness who
informed the Tsar that this "fire of revolt ought to burn itself out
beyond the pale of civilisation" and the frontiers were closed to those
volunteers who wished to go to the rescue of the patriotic Hellenes.
Their cause seemed lost. At the request of Turkey, an Egyptian army was
landed in the Morea and soon the Turkish flag was again flying from
the Acropolis, the ancient stronghold of Athens. The Egyptian army
then pacified the country "a la Turque," and Metternich followed the
proceedings with quiet interest, awaiting the day when this "attempt
against the peace of Europe" should be a thing of the past.

Once more it was England which upset his plans. The greatest glory of
England does not lie in her vast colonial possessions, in her wealth
or her navy, but in the quiet heroism and independence of her average
citizen. The Englishman obeys the law because he knows that respect
for the rights of others marks the difference between a dog-kennel and
civilised society. But he does not recognize the right of others to
interfere with his freedom of thought. If his country does something
which he believes to be wrong, he gets up and says so and the government
which he attacks will respect him and will give him full protection
against the mob which to-day, as in the time of Socrates, often loves to
destroy those who surpass it in courage or intelligence. There never has
been a good cause, however unpopular or however distant, which has not
counted a number of Englishmen among its staunchest adherents. The mass
of the English people are not different from those in other lands. They
stick to the business at hand and have no time for unpractical "sporting
ventures." But they rather admire their eccentric neighbour who drops
everything to go and fight for some obscure people in Asia or Africa and
when he has been killed they give him a fine public funeral and hold him
up to their children as an example of valor and chivalry.

Even the police spies of the Holy Alliance were powerless against this
national characteristic. In the year 1824, Lord Byron, a rich young
Englishman who wrote the poetry over which all Europe wept, hoisted the
sails of his yacht and started south to help the Greeks. Three months
later the news spread through Europe that their hero lay dead in
Missolonghi, the last of the Greek strongholds. His lonely death caught
the imagination of the people. In all countries, societies were formed
to help the Greeks. Lafayette, the grand old man of the American
revolution, pleaded their cause in France. The king of Bavaria sent
hundreds of his officers. Money and supplies poured in upon the starving
men of Missolonghi.
