emotion which were frequent in one whose feelings were never deep and
lasting, but easily aroused and warmly spoken, he declared himself
really to listen to and adopt all means which Richard's art could
suggest for the better maintenance of their common weal and interests.

And then, with that wondrous, if somewhat too restless and over-refining
energy which belonged to him, Richard rapidly detailed the scheme of his
profound and dissimulating policy. His keen and intuitive insight into
human nature had shown him the stern necessity which, against their very
will, must unite Warwick with Margaret of Anjou. His conversation with
Montagu had left no doubt of that peril on his penetrating mind. He
foresaw that this union might be made durable and sacred by the marriage
of Anne and Prince Edward; and to defeat this alliance was his first
object, partly through Clarence, partly through Margaret herself. A
gentlewoman in the Duchess of Clarence's train had been arrested on the
point of embarking to join her mistress. Richard had already seen and
conferred with this lady, whose ambition, duplicity, and talent for
intrigue were known to him. Having secured her by promises of the most
lavish dignities and rewards, he proposed that she should be permitted
to join the duchess with secret messages to Isabel and the duke, warning
them both that Warwick and Margaret would forget their past feud in
present sympathy, and that the rebellion against King Edward, instead
of placing them on the throne, would humble them to be subordinates and
aliens to the real profiters, the Lancastrians. [Comines, 3, c. 5; Hall;
Hollinshed] He foresaw what effect these warnings would have upon the
vain duke and the ambitious Isabel, whose character was known to him
from childhood. He startled the king by insisting upon sending, at the
same time, a trusty diplomatist to Margaret of Anjou, proffering to give
the princess Elizabeth (betrothed to Lord Montagu's son) to the young
Prince Edward. ["Original Letters from Harleian Manuscripts." Edited by
Sir H. Ellis (second series).] Thus, if the king, who had, as yet, no
son, were to die, Margaret's son, in right of his wife, as well as in
that of his own descent, would peaceably ascend the throne. "Need I
say that I mean not this in sad and serious earnest?" observed Richard,
interrupting the astonished king. "I mean it but to amuse the Anjouite,
and to deafen her ears to any overtures from Warwick. If she listen,
we gain time; that time will inevitably renew irreconcilable quarrel
between herself and the earl. His hot temper and desire of revenge
will not brook delay. He will land, unsupported by Margaret and
her partisans, and without any fixed principle of action which can
strengthen force by opinion."

"You are right, Richard," said Edward, whose faithless cunning
comprehended the more sagacious policy it could not originate. "All be
it as you will."

"And in the mean while," added Richard, "watch well, but anger not,
Montagu and the archbishop. It were dangerous to seem to distrust them
till proof be clear; it were dull to believe them true. I go at once to
fulfil my task."




CHAPTER VII. WARWICK AND HIS FAMILY IN EXILE.

We now summon the reader on a longer if less classic journey than from
Thebes to Athens, and waft him on a rapid wing from Shene to Amboise. We
must suppose that the two emissaries of Gloucester have already arrived
at their several destinations,--the lady has reached Isabel, the envoy
Margaret.

In one of the apartments appropriated to the earl in the royal palace,
within the embrasure of a vast Gothic casement, sat Anne of Warwick; the
small wicket in the window was open, and gave a view of a wide and fair
garden, interspersed with thick bosquets and regular alleys, over which
the rich skies of the summer evening, a little before sunset, cast
alternate light and shadow. Towards this prospect the sweet face of the
Lady Anne was turned musingly. The riveted eye, the bended neck, the
arms reclining on the knee, the slender fingers interlaced,--gave to her
whole person the character of revery and repose.

In the same chamber were two other ladies; the one was pacing the floor
with slow but uneven steps, with lips moving from time to time, as if in
self-commune, with the brow contracted slightly: her form and face took
also the character of revery, but not of repose.

The third female (the gentle and lovely mother of the other two) was
seated, towards the centre of the room, before a small table, on which
rested one of those religious manuscripts, full of the moralities and
the marvels of cloister sanctity, which made so large a portion of the
literature of the monkish ages. But her eye rested not on the Gothic
letter and the rich blazon of the holy book. With all a mother's fear
and all a mother's fondness, it glanced from Isabel to Anne, from Anne
to Isabel, till at length in one of those soft voices, so rarely heard,
which makes even a stranger love the speaker, the fair countess said,--

"Come hither, my child Isabel; give me thy hand, and whisper me what
hath chafed thee."

"My mother," replied the duchess, "it would become me ill to have a
secret not known to thee, and yet, methinks, it would become me less to
say aught to provoke thine anger!"

"Anger, Isabel! Who ever knew anger for those they love?"

"Pardon me, my sweet mother," said Isabel, relaxing her haughty brow,
and she approached and kissed her mother's cheek.

The countess drew her gently to a seat by her side.

"And now tell me all,--unless, indeed, thy Clarence hath, in some
lover's hasty mood, vexed thy affection; for of the household secrets
even a mother should not question the true wife."

Isabel paused, and glanced significantly at Anne.

"Nay, see!" said the countess, smiling, though sadly, "she, too, hath
thoughts that she will not tell to me; but they seem not such as should
alarm my fears, as thine do. For the moment ere I spoke to thee, thy
brow frowned, and her lip smiled. She hears us not,--speak on."

"Is it then true, my mother, that Margaret of Anjou is hastening hither?
And can it be possible that King Louis can persuade my lord and father
to meet, save in the field of battle, the arch-enemy of our House?"

"Ask the earl thyself, Isabel; Lord Warwick hath no concealment from his
children. Whatever he doth is ever wisest, best, and knightliest,--so,
at least, may his children always deem!"

Isabel's colour changed and her eye flashed. But ere she could answer,
the arras was raised, and Lord Warwick entered. But no longer did the
hero's mien and manner evince that cordial and tender cheerfulness
which, in all the storms of his changeful life, he had hitherto
displayed when coming from power and danger, from council or from camp,
to man's earthly paradise,--a virtuous home.

Gloomy and absorbed, his very dress--which, at that day, the
Anglo-Norman deemed it a sin against self-dignity to neglect--betraying,
by its disorder, that thorough change of the whole mind, that terrible
internal revolution, which is made but in strong natures by the tyranny
of a great care or a great passion, the earl scarcely seemed to heed his
countess, who rose hastily, but stopped in the timid fear and reverence
of love at the sight of his stern aspect; he threw himself abruptly on a
seat, passed his hand over his face, and sighed heavily.

That sigh dispelled the fear of the wife, and made her alive only to
her privilege of the soother. She drew near, and placing herself on
the green rushes at his feet, took his hand and kissed it, but did not
speak.

The earl's eyes fell on the lovely face looking up to him through tears,
his brow softened, he drew his hand gently from hers, placed it on her
head, and said in a low voice,--"God and Our Lady bless thee, sweet
wife!"

Then, looking round, he saw Isabel watching him intently; and, rising
at once, he threw his arm round her waist, pressed her to his bosom, and
said, "My daughter, for thee and thine day and night have I striven and
planned in vain. I cannot reward thy husband as I would; I cannot give
thee, as I had hoped, a throne!"

"What title so dear to Isabel," said the countess, "as that of Lord
Warwick's daughter?"

Isabel remained cold and silent, and returned not the earl's embrace.

Warwick was, happily, too absorbed in his own feelings to notice those
of his child. Moving away, he continued, as he paced the room (his habit
in emotion, which Isabel, who had many minute external traits in common
with her father, had unconsciously caught from him),--

"Till this morning I hoped still that my name and services, that
Clarence's popular bearing and his birth of Plantagenet, would suffice
to summon the English people round our standard; that the false Edward
would be driven, on our landing, to fly the realm; and that, without
change to the dynasty of York, Clarence, as next male heir, would ascend
the throne. True, I saw all the obstacles, all the difficulties,--I was
warned of them before I left England; but still I hoped. Lord Oxford
has arrived, he has just left me. We have gone over the chart of the way
before us, weighed the worth of every name, for and against; and, alas!
I cannot but allow that all attempt to place the younger brother on
the throne of the elder would but lead to bootless slaughter and
irretrievable defeat."

"Wherefore think you so, my lord?" asked Isabel, in evident excitement.
"Your own retainers are sixty thousand,--an army larger than Edward, and
all his lords of yesterday, can bring into the field."

"My child," answered the earl, with that profound knowledge of his
countrymen which he had rather acquired from his English heart than from
any subtlety of intellect, "armies may gain a victory, but they do not
achieve a throne,--unless, at least, they enforce a slavery; and it
is not for me and for Clarence to be the violent conquerors of our
countrymen, but the regenerators of a free realm, corrupted by a false
man's rule."

"And what then," exclaimed Isabel,--"what do you propose, my father?
Can it be possible that you can unite yourself with the abhorred
Lancastrians, with the savage Anjouite, who beheaded my grandsire,
Salisbury? Well do I remember your own words,--'May God and Saint George
forget me, when I forget those gray and gory hairs!'"

Here Isabel was interrupted by a faint cry from Anne, who, unobserved
by the rest, and hitherto concealed from her father's eye by the deep
embrasure of the window, had risen some moments before, and listened,
with breathless attention, to the conversation between Warwick and the
duchess.

"It is not true, it is not true!" exclaimed Anne, passionately.
"Margaret disowns the inhuman deed."

"Thou art right, Anne," said Warwick; "though I guess not how thou didst
learn the error of a report so popularly believed that till of late I
never questioned its truth. King Louis assures me solemnly that that
foul act was done by the butcher Clifford, against Margaret's knowledge,
and, when known, to her grief and anger."

"And you, who call Edward false, can believe Louis true?"

"Cease, Isabel, cease!" said the countess. "Is it thus my child can
address my lord and husband? Forgive her, beloved Richard."

"Such heat in Clarence's wife misbeseems her not," answered Warwick.
"And I can comprehend and pardon in my haughty Isabel a resentment
which her reason must at last subdue; for think not, Isabel, that it is
without dread struggle and fierce agony that I can contemplate peace and
league with mine ancient foe; but here two duties speak to me in voices
not to be denied: my honour and my hearth, as noble and as man, demand
redress, and the weal and glory of my country demand a ruler who does
not degrade a warrior, nor assail a virgin, nor corrupt a people by lewd
pleasures, nor exhaust a land by grinding imposts; and that honour shall
be vindicated, and that country shall be righted, no matter at what
sacrifice of private grief and pride."

The words and the tone of the earl for a moment awed even Isabel; but
after a pause, she said suddenly, "And for this, then, Clarence hath
joined your quarrel and shared your exile?--for this,--that he may place
the eternal barrier of the Lancastrian line between himself and the
English throne?"

"I would fain hope," answered the earl, calmly, "that Clarence will view
our hard position more charitably than thou. If he gain not all that
I could desire, should success crown our arms, he will, at least, gain
much; for often and ever did thy husband, Isabel, urge me to stern
measures against Edward, when I soothed him and restrained. Mort Dieu!
how often did he complain of slight and insult from Elizabeth and her
minions, of open affront from Edward, of parsimony to his wants as
prince,--of a life, in short, humbled and made bitter by all the
indignity and the gall which scornful power can inflict on dependent
pride. If he gain not the throne, he will gain, at least, the succession
in thy right to the baronies of Beauchamp, the mighty duchy, and the
vast heritage of York, the vice-royalty of Ireland. Never prince of the
blood had wealth and honours equal to those that shall await thy lord.
For the rest, I drew him not into my quarrel; long before would he have
drawn me into his; nor doth it become thee, Isabel, as child and as
sister, to repent, if the husband of my daughter felt as brave men feel,
without calculation of gain and profit, the insult offered to his lady's
House. But if here I overgauge his chivalry and love to me and mine,
or discontent his ambition and his hopes, Mort Dieu! we hold him not
a captive. Edward will hail his overtures of peace; let him make terms
with his brother, and return."

"I will report to him what you say, my lord," said Isabel, with cold
brevity and, bending her haughty head in formal reverence, she advanced
to the door. Anne sprang forward and caught her hand.

"Oh, Isabel!" she whispered, "in our father's sad and gloomy hour can
you leave him thus?" and the sweet lady burst into tears.

"Anne," retorted Isabel, bitterly, "thy heart is Lancastrian; and what,
peradventure, grieves my father hath but joy for thee."

Anne drew back, pale and trembling, and her sister swept from the room.

The earl, though he had not overheard the whispered sentences which
passed between his daughters, had watched them closely, and his lip
quivered with emotion as Isabel closed the door.

"Come hither, my Anne," he said tenderly; "thou who hast thy mother's
face, never hast a harsh thought for thy father."

As Anne threw herself on Warwick's breast, he continued, "And how camest
thou to learn that Margaret disowns a deed that, if done by her command,
would render my union with her cause a sacrilegious impiety to the
dead?"

Anne coloured, and nestled her head still closer to her father's bosom.
Her mother regarded her confusion and her silence with an anxious eye.

The wing of the palace in which the earl's apartments were situated
was appropriated to himself and household, flanked to the left by an
abutting pile containing state-chambers, never used by the austere and
thrifty Louis, save on great occasions of pomp or revel; and, as we have
before observed, looking on a garden, which was generally solitary and
deserted. From this garden, while Anne yet strove for words to answer
her father, and the countess yet watched her embarrassment, suddenly
came the soft strain of a Provencal lute; while a low voice, rich, and
modulated at once by a deep feeling and an exquisite art that would have
given effect to even simpler words, breathed--

    THE LAY OF THE HEIR OF LANCASTER

    "His birthright but a father's name,
       A grandsire's hero-sword,
     He dwelt within the stranger's land,
       The friendless, homeless lord!"

    "Yet one dear hope, too dear to tell,
       Consoled the exiled man;
     The angels have their home in heaven
       And gentle thoughts in Anne."

At that name the voice of the singer trembled, and paused a moment;
the earl, who at first had scarcely listened to what he deemed but the
ill-seasoned gallantry of one of the royal minstrels, started in proud
surprise, and Anne herself, tightening her clasp round her father's
neck, burst into passionate sobs. The eye of the countess met that of
her lord; but she put her finger to her lips in sign to him to listen.
The song was resumed--

    "Recall the single sunny time,
       In childhood's April weather,
     When he and thou, the boy and girl,
       Roved hand in band together."

    "When round thy young companion knelt
       The princes of the isle;
     And priest and people prayed their God,
       On England's heir to smile."

The earl uttered a half-stifled exclamation, but the minstrel heard not
the interruption, and continued,--

    "Methinks the sun hath never smiled
       Upon the exiled man,
     Like that bright morning when the boy
       Told all his soul to Anne."

    "No; while his birthright but a name,
       A grandsire's hero--sword,
     He would not woo the lofty maid
       To love the banished lord."

    "But when, with clarion, fife, and drum,
       He claims and wins his own;
     When o'er the deluge drifts his ark,
       To rest upon a throne."

    "Then, wilt thou deign to hear the hope
       That blessed the exiled man,
     When pining for his father's crown
       To deck the brows of Anne?"

The song ceased, and there was silence within the chamber, broken but by
Anne's low yet passionate weeping. The earl gently strove to disengage
her arms from his neck; but she, mistaking his intention, sank on her
knees, and covering her face with her hands, exclaimed,--

"Pardon! pardon! pardon him, if not me!"

"What have I to pardon? What hast thou concealed from me? Can I think
that thou hast met, in secret, one who--"

"In secret! Never, never, Father! This is the third time only that I
have heard his voice since we have been at Amboise, save when--save
when--"

"Go on."

"Save when King Louis presented him to me in the revel under the name
of the Count de F----, and he asked me if I could forgive his mother for
Lord Clifford's crime."

"It is, then, as the rhyme proclaimed; and it is Edward of Lancaster who
loves and woos the daughter of Lord Warwick!"

Something in her father's voice made Anne remove her hands from her
face, and look up to him with a thrill of timid joy. Upon his brow,
indeed, frowned no anger, upon his lip smiled no scorn. At that moment
all his haughty grief at the curse of circumstance which drove him to
his hereditary foe had vanished. Though Montagu had obtained from
Oxford some glimpse of the desire which the more sagacious and temperate
Lancastrians already entertained for that alliance, and though Louis
had already hinted its expediency to the earl, yet, till now, Warwick
himself had naturally conceived that the prince shared the enmity of his
mother, and that such a union, however politic, was impossible; but
now indeed there burst upon him the full triumph of revenge and pride.
Edward of York dared to woo Anne to dishonour, Edward of Lancaster dared
not even woo her as his wife till his crown was won! To place upon the
throne the very daughter the ungrateful monarch had insulted; to make
her he would have humbled not only the instrument of his fall, but the
successor of his purple; to unite in one glorious strife the wrongs
of the man and the pride of the father,--these were the thoughts that
sparkled in the eye of the king-maker, and flushed with a fierce rapture
the dark cheek, already hollowed by passion and care. He raised his
daughter from the floor, and placed her in her mother's arms, but still
spoke not.

"This, then, was thy secret, Anne," whispered the countess; "and I half
foreguessed it, when, last night, I knelt beside thy couch to pray, and
overheard thee murmur in thy dreams."

"Sweet mother, thou forgivest me; but my father--ah, he speaks not. One
word! Father, Father, not even his love could console me if I angered
thee!"

The earl, who had remained rooted to the spot, his eyes shining
thoughtfully under his dark brows, and his hand slightly raised, as
if piercing into the future, and mapping out its airy realm, turned
quickly,--

"I go to the heir of Lancaster; if this boy be bold and true, worthy of
England and of thee, we will change the sad ditty of that scrannel lute
into such a storm of trumpets as beseems the triumph of a conqueror and
the marriage of a prince!"




CHAPTER VIII. HOW THE HEIR OF LANCASTER MEETS THE KING-MAKER.

In truth, the young prince, in obedience to a secret message from the
artful Louis, had repaired to the court of Amboise under the name of the
Count de F----. The French king had long before made himself acquainted
with Prince Edward's romantic attachment to the earl's daughter, through
the agent employed by Edward to transmit his portrait to Anne at
Rouen; and from him, probably, came to Oxford the suggestion which that
nobleman had hazarded to Montagu; and now that it became his policy
seriously and earnestly to espouse the cause of his kinswoman Margaret,
he saw all the advantage to his cold statecraft which could be drawn
from a boyish love. Louis had a well-founded fear of the warlike spirit
and military talents of Edward IV.; and this fear had induced him
hitherto to refrain from openly espousing the cause of the Lancastrians,
though it did not prevent his abetting such seditions and intrigues as
could confine the attention of the martial Plantagenet to the perils of
his own realm. But now that the breach between Warwick and the king had
taken place; now that the earl could no longer curb the desire of
the Yorkist monarch to advance his hereditary claims to the fairest
provinces of France,--nay, peradventure, to France itself,--while the
defection of Lord Warwick gave to the Lancastrians the first fair hope
of success in urging their own pretensions to the English throne,
he bent all the powers of his intellect and his will towards the
restoration of a natural ally and the downfall of a dangerous foe.
But he knew that Margaret and her Lancastrian favourers could not
of themselves suffice to achieve a revolution,--that they could only
succeed under cover of the popularity and the power of Warwick, while
he perceived all the art it would require to make Margaret forego her
vindictive nature and long resentment, and to supple the pride of the
great earl into recognizing as a sovereign the woman who had branded him
as a traitor.

Long before Lord Oxford's arrival, Louis, with all that address which
belonged to him, had gradually prepared the earl to familiarize himself
to the only alternative before him, save that, indeed, of powerless
sense of wrong and obscure and lasting exile. The French king looked
with more uneasiness to the scruples of Margaret; and to remove these,
he trusted less to his own skill than to her love for her only son.

His youth passed principally in Anjou--that court of minstrels--young
Edward's gallant and ardent temper had become deeply imbued with the
southern poetry and romance. Perhaps the very feud between his House and
Lord Warwick's, though both claimed their common descent from John of
Gaunt, had tended, by the contradictions in the human heart, to endear
to him the recollection of the gentle Anne. He obeyed with joy the
summons of Louis, repaired to the court, was presented to Anne as the
Count de F----, found himself recognized at the first glance (for his
portrait still lay upon her heart, as his remembrance in its core), and,
twice before the song we have recited, had ventured, agreeably to the
sweet customs of Anjou, to address the lady of his love under the shade
of the starlit summer copses. But on this last occasion, he had departed
from his former discretion; hitherto he had selected an hour of deeper
night, and ventured but beneath the lattice of the maiden's chamber when
the rest of the palace was hushed in sleep. And the fearless declaration
of his rank and love now hazarded was prompted by one who contrived to
turn to grave uses the wildest whim of the minstrel, the most romantic
enthusiasm of youth.

Louis had just learned from Oxford the result of his interview with
Warwick. And about the same time the French king had received a letter
from Margaret, announcing her departure from the castle of Verdun for
Tours, where she prayed him to meet her forthwith, and stating that she
had received from England tidings that might change all her schemes, and
more than ever forbid the possibility of a reconciliation with the Earl
of Warwick.

The king perceived the necessity of calling into immediate effect the
aid on which he had relied, in the presence and passion of the young
prince. He sought him at once; he found him in a remote part of the
gardens, and overheard him breathing to himself the lay he had just
composed.

"Pasque Dieu!" said the king, laying his hand on the young man's
shoulder, "if thou wilt but repeat that song where and when I bid thee,
I promise that before the month ends Lord Warwick shall pledge thee his
daughter's hand; and before the year is closed thou shalt sit beside
Lord Warwick's daughter in the halls of Westminster."

And the royal troubadour took the counsel of the king.

The song had ceased; the minstrel emerged from the bosquets, and stood
upon the sward, as, from the postern of the palace, walked with a slow
step, a form from which it became him not, as prince or as lover, in
peace or in war, to shrink. The first stars had now risen; the light,
though serene, was pale and dim. The two men--the one advancing, the
other motionless--gazed on each other in grave silence. As Count
de F----, amidst the young nobles in the king's train, the earl had
scarcely noticed the heir of England. He viewed him now with a different
eye: in secret complacency, for, with a soldier's weakness, the
soldier-baron valued men too much for their outward seeming, he surveyed
a figure already masculine and stalwart, though still in the graceful
symmetry of fair eighteen.

"A youth of a goodly presence," muttered the earl, "with the dignity
that commands in peace, and the sinews that can strive against hardship
and death in war."

He approached, and said calmly: "Sir minstrel, he who woos either fame
or beauty may love the lute, but should wield the sword. At least, so
methinks had the Fifth Henry said to him who boasts for his heritage the
sword of Agincourt."

"O noble earl!" exclaimed the prince, touched by words far gentler than
he had dared to hope, despite his bold and steadfast mien, and giving
way to frank and graceful emotion, "O noble earl! since thou knowest me;
since my secret is told; since, in that secret, I have proclaimed a hope
as dear to me as a crown and dearer far than life, can I hope that thy
rebuke but veils thy favour, and that, under Lord Warwick's eye, the
grandson of Henry V. shall approve himself worthy of the blood that
kindles in his veins?"

"Fair sir and prince," returned the earl, whose hardy and generous
nature the emotion and fire of Edward warmed and charmed, "there are,
alas! deep memories of blood and wrong--the sad deeds and wrathful words
of party feud and civil war--between thy royal mother and myself; and
though we may unite now against a common foe, much I fear that the Lady
Margaret would brook ill a closer friendship, a nearer tie, than the
exigency of the hour between Richard Nevile and her son."

"No, Sir Earl, let me hope you misthink her. Hot and impetuous, but not
mean and treacherous, the moment that she accepts the service of
thine arm she must forget that thou hast been her foe; and if I, as my
father's heir, return to England, it is in the trust that a new era will
commence. Free from the passionate enmities of either faction, Yorkist
and Lancastrian are but Englishmen to me. Justice to all who serve us,
pardon for all who have opposed."

The prince paused, and, even in the dim light, his kingly aspect gave
effect to his kingly words. "And if this resolve be such as you approve;
if you, great earl, be that which even your foes proclaim, a man whose
power depends less on lands and vassals--broad though the one, and
numerous though the other--than on well-known love for England, her
glory and her peace, it rests with you to bury forever in one grave the
feuds of Lancaster and York! What Yorkist who hath fought at Towton or
St. Albans under Lord Warwick's standard, will lift sword against the
husband of Lord Warwick's daughter? What Lancastrian will not forgive a
Yorkist, when Lord Warwick, the kinsman of Duke Richard, becomes father
to the Lancastrian heir, and bulwark to the Lancastrian throne? O
Warwick, if not for my sake, nor for the sake of full redress against
the ingrate whom thou repentest to have placed on my father's throne, at
least for the sake of England, for the healing of her bleeding wounds,
for the union of her divided people, hear the grandson of Henry V., who
sues to thee for thy daughter's hand!"

The royal wooer bent his knee as he spoke. The mighty subject saw and
prevented the impulse of the prince who had forgotten himself in the
lover; the hand which he caught he lifted to his lips, and the next
moment, in manly and soldierlike embrace, the prince's young arm was
thrown over the broad shoulder of the king-maker.




CHAPTER IX. THE INTERVIEW OF EARL WARWICK AND QUEEN MARGARET.

Louis hastened to meet Margaret at Tours; thither came also her father
Rene, her brother John of Calabria, Yolante her sister, and the Count of
Vaudemonte. The meeting between the queen and Rene was so touching as to
have drawn tears to the hard eyes of Louis XI.; but, that emotion over,
Margaret evinced how little affliction had humbled her high spirit, or
softened her angry passions: she interrupted Louis in every argument for
reconciliation with Warwick. "Not with honour to myself and to my son,"
she exclaimed, "can I pardon that cruel earl, the main cause of King
Henry's downfall! in vain patch up a hollow peace between us,--a peace
of form and parchment! My spirit never can be contented with him, ne
pardon!"

For several days she maintained a language which betrayed the chief
cause of her own impolitic passions, that had lost her crown. Showing
to Louis the letter despatched to her, proffering the hand of the Lady
Elizabeth to her son, she asked if that were not a more profitable
party [See, for this curious passage of secret history, Sir H. Ellis's
"Original Letters from the Harleian Manuscripts," second series,
vol. i., letter 42.], and if it were necessary that she should
forgive,--whether it were not more queenly to treat with Edward than
with a twofold rebel?

In fact, the queen would perhaps have fallen into Gloucester's artful
snare, despite all the arguments and even the half-menaces [Louis
would have thrown over Margaret's cause if Warwick had demanded it; he
instructed MM. de Concressault and du Plessis to assure the earl that
he would aid him to the utmost to reconquer England either for the Queen
Margaret or for any one else he chose (on pour qui il voudra): for that
he loved the earl better than Margaret or her son.--BRANTE, t. ix. 276.]
of the more penetrating Louis, but for a counteracting influence which
Richard had not reckoned upon. Prince Edward, who had lingered behind
Louis, arrived from Amboise, and his persuasions did more than all the
representations of the crafty king. The queen loved her son with that
intenseness which characterizes the one soft affection of violent
natures. Never had she yet opposed his most childish whim, and now he
spoke with the eloquence of one who put his heart and his life's life
into his words. At last, reluctantly, she consented to an interview with
Warwick. The earl, accompanied by Oxford, arrived at Tours, and the two
nobles were led into the presence of Margaret by King Louis.

The reader will picture to himself a room darkened by thick curtains
drawn across the casement, for the proud woman wished not the earl
to detect on her face either the ravages of years or the emotions
of offended pride. In a throne chair, placed on the dais, sat the
motionless queen, her hands clasping, convulsively, the arms of the
fauteuil, her features pale and rigid; and behind the chair leaned the
graceful figure of her son. The person of the Lancastrian prince was
little less remarkable than that of his hostile namesake, but its
character was distinctly different. ["According to some of the French
chroniclers, the Prince of Wales, who was one of the handsomest and
most accomplished princes in Europe, was very desirous of becoming the
husband of Anne Nevile," etc.--Miss STRICKLAND: Life of Margaret of
Anjou.] Spare, like Henry V., almost to the manly defect of leanness,
his proportions were slight to those which gave such portly majesty to
the vast-chested Edward, but they evinced the promise of almost equal
strength,--the muscles hardened to iron by early exercise in arms,
the sap of youth never wasted by riot and debauch. His short purple
manteline, trimmed with ermine, was embroidered with his grandfather's
favourite device, "the silver swan;" he wore on his breast the badge of
St. George; and the single ostrich plume, which made his cognizance as
Prince of Wales, waved over a fair and ample forehead, on which were
even then traced the lines of musing thought and high design; his
chestnut hair curled close to his noble head; his eye shone dark
and brilliant beneath the deep-set brow, which gives to the human
countenance such expression of energy and intellect,--all about him,
in aspect and mien, seemed to betoken a mind riper than his years,
a masculine simplicity of taste and bearing, the earnest and grave
temperament mostly allied in youth to pure and elevated desires, to an
honourable and chivalric soul.

Below the dais stood some of the tried and gallant gentlemen who had
braved exile, and tasted penury in their devotion to the House of
Lancaster, and who had now flocked once more round their queen, in the
hope of better days. There were the Dukes of Exeter and Somerset, their
very garments soiled and threadbare,--many a day had those great lords
hungered for the beggar's crust! [Philip de Comines says he himself
had seen the Dukes of Exeter and Somerset in the Low Countries in as
wretched a plight as common beggars.] There stood Sir John Fortescue,
the patriarch authority of our laws, who had composed his famous
treatise for the benefit of the young prince, overfond of exercise with
lance and brand, and the recreation of knightly song. There were Jasper
of Pembroke, and Sir Henry Rous, and the Earl of Devon, and the Knight
of Lytton, whose House had followed, from sire to son, the fortunes of
the Lancastrian Rose; [Sir Robert de Lytton (whose grandfather had been
Comptroller to the Household of Henry IV., and Agister of the Forests
allotted to Queen Joan), was one of the most powerful knights of the
time; and afterwards, according to Perkin Warbeck, one of the ministers
most trusted by Henry VII. He was lord of Lytton, in Derbyshire (where
his ancestors had been settled since the Conquest), of Knebworth in
Herts (the ancient seat and manor of Plantagenet de Brotherton, Earl
of Norfolk and Earl Marshal), of Myndelesden and Langley, of Standyarn,
Dene, and Brekesborne, in Northamptonshire, and became in the reign of
Henry VII. Privy Councillor, Uuder-Treasurer, and Keeper of the great
Wardrobe.] and, contrasting the sober garments of the exiles, shone the
jewels and cloth-of-gold that decked the persons of the more prosperous
foreigners, Ferri, Count of Vaudemonte, Margaret's brother, the Duke
of Calabria, and the powerful form of Sir Pierre de Breze, who had
accompanied Margaret in her last disastrous campaigns, with all the
devotion of a chevalier for the lofty lady adored in secret. [See,
for the chivalrous devotion of this knight (Seneschal of Normandy) to
Margaret, Miss Strickland's Life of that queen.]

When the door opened, and gave to the eyes of those proud exiles the
form of their puissant enemy, they with difficulty suppressed the murmur
of their resentment, and their looks turned with sympathy and grief to
the hueless face of their queen.

The earl himself was troubled; his step was less firm, his crest less
haughty, his eye less serenely steadfast.

But beside him, in a dress more homely than that of the poorest exile
there, and in garb and in aspect, as he lives forever in the portraiture
of Victor Hugo and our own yet greater Scott, moved Louis, popularly
called "The Fell."

"Madame and cousin," said the king, "we present to you the man for whose
haute courage and dread fame we have such love and respect, that we
value him as much as any king, and would do as much for him as for man
living [Ellis: Original Letters, vol. i., letter 42, second series]; and
with my lord of Warwick, see also this noble earl of Oxford, who, though
he may have sided awhile with the enemies of your Highness, comes now to
pray your pardon, and to lay at your feet his sword."

Lord Oxford (who had ever unwillingly acquiesced in the Yorkist
dynasty), more prompt than Warwick, here threw himself on his knees
before Margaret, and his tears fell on her hand, as he murmured
"Pardon."

"Rise, Sir John de Vere," said the queen, glancing with a flashing eye
from Oxford to Lord Warwick. "Your pardon is right easy to purchase, for
well I know that you yielded but to the time,--you did not turn the time
against us; you and yours have suffered much for King Henry's cause.
Rise, Sir Earl."

"And," said a voice, so deep and so solemn, that it hushed the very
breath of those who heard it,--"and has Margaret a pardon also for the
man who did more than all others to dethrone King Henry, and can do more
than all to restore his crown?"

"Ha!" cried' Margaret, rising in her passion, and casting from her the
hand her son had placed upon her shoulder, "ha! Ownest thou thy wrongs,
proud lord? Comest thou at last to kneel at Queen Margaret's feet?
Look round and behold her court,--some half-score brave and unhappy
gentlemen, driven from their hearths and homes, their heritage the prey
of knaves and varlets, their sovereign in a prison, their sovereign's
wife, their sovereign's son, persecuted and hunted from the soil! And
comest thou now to the forlorn majesty of sorrow to boast, 'Such deeds
were mine?'"

"Mother and lady," began the prince

"Madden me not, my son. Forgiveness is for the prosperous, not for
adversity and woe."

"Hear me," said the earl,--who, having once bowed his pride to the
interview, had steeled himself against the passion which, in his
heart, he somewhat despised as a mere woman's burst of inconsiderate
fury,--"for I have this right to be heard,--that not one of these
knights, your lealest and noblest friends, can say of me that I ever
stooped to gloss mine acts, or palliate bold deeds with wily words. Dear
to me as comrade in arms, sacred to me as a father's head, was Richard
of York, mine uncle by marriage with Lord Salisbury's sister. I speak
not now of his claims by descent (for those even King Henry could not
deny), but I maintain them, even in your Grace's presence, to be such as
vindicate, from disloyalty and treason, me and the many true and gallant
men who upheld them through danger, by field and scaffold. Error, it
might be,--but the error of men who believed themselves the defenders
of a just cause. Nor did I, Queen Margaret, lend myself wholly to my
kinsman's quarrel, nor share one scheme that went to the dethronement of
King Henry, until--pardon, if I speak bluntly; it is my wont, and would
be more so now, but for thy fair face and woman's form, which awe me
more than if confronting the frown of Coeur de Lion, or the First Great
Edward--pardon me, I say, if I speak bluntly, and aver that I was not
King Henry's foe until false counsellors had planned my destruction, in
body and goods, land and life. In the midst of peace, at Coventry, my
father and myself scarcely escaped the knife of the murderer. [See Hall
(236), who says that Margaret had laid a snare for Salisbury and Warwick
at Warwick, and "if they had not suddenly departed, their life's thread
had been broken."] In the streets of London the very menials and
hangmen employed in the service of your Highness beset me unarmed [Hall,
Fabyan]; a little time after and my name was attainted by an illegal
Parliament. [Parl. Rolls, 370; W. Wyr. 478.] And not till after these
things did Richard Duke of York ride to the hall of Westminster, and
lay his hand upon the throne; nor till after these things did I and
my father Salisbury say to each other, 'The time has come when neither
peace nor honour can be found for us under King Henry's reign.' Blame
me if you will, Queen Margaret; reject me if you need not my sword; but
that which I did in the gone days was such as no nobleman so outraged
and despaired [Warwick's phrase. See Sir H. Ellis's "Original Letters,"
vol. i., second series.] would have forborne to do,--remembering that
England is not the heritage of the king alone, but that safety and
honour, and freedom and justice, are the rights of his Norman gentlemen
and his Saxon people. And rights are a mockery and a laughter if they do
not justify resistance, whensoever, and by whomsoever, they are invaded
and assailed."

It had been with a violent effort that Margaret had refrained
from interrupting this address, which had, however, produced no
inconsiderable effect upon the knightly listeners around the dais.
And now, as the earl ceased, her indignation was arrested by dismay on
seeing the young prince suddenly leave his post and advance to the side
of Warwick.

"Right well hast thou spoken, noble earl and cousin,--right well, though
right plainly. And I," added the prince, "saving the presence of my
queen and mother,--I, the representative of my sovereign father, in his
name will pledge thee a king's oblivion and pardon for the past, if
thou on thy side acquit my princely mother of all privity to the snares
against thy life and honour of which thou hast spoken, and give thy
knightly word to be henceforth leal to Lancaster. Perish all memories of
the past that can make walls between the souls of brave men."

Till this moment, his arms folded in his gown, his thin, fox-like face
bent to the ground, Louis had listened, silent and undisturbed. He now
deemed it the moment to second the appeal of the prince. Passing his
hand hypocritically over his tearless eyes, the king turned to Margaret
and said,--

"Joyful hour! happy union! May Madame La Vierge and Monseigneur Saint
Martin sanctify and hallow the bond by which alone my beloved kinswoman
can regain her rights and roiaulme. Amen."

Unheeding this pious ejaculation, her bosom heaving, her eyes wandering
from the earl to Edward, Margaret at last gave vent to her passion.

"And is it come to this, Prince Edward of Wales, that thy mother's
wrongs are not thine? Standest thou side by side with my mortal foe,
who, instead of repenting treason, dares but to complain of injury? Am
I fallen so low that my voice to pardon or disdain is counted but as a
sough of idle air! God of my fathers, hear me! Willingly from my heart
I tear the last thought and care for the pomps of earth. Hateful to me
a crown for which the wearer must cringe to enemy and rebel! Away, Earl
Warwick! Monstrous and unnatural seems it to the wife of captive Henry
to see thee by the side of Henry's son!"

Every eye turned in fear to the aspect of the earl, every ear listened
for the answer which might be expected from his well-known heat and
pride,--an answer to destroy forever the last hope of the Lancastrian
line. But whether it was the very consciousness of his power to raise
or to crush that fiery speaker, or those feelings natural to brave men,
half of chivalry, half contempt, which kept down the natural anger by
thoughts of the sex and sorrows of the Anjouite, or that the wonted
irascibility of his temper had melted into one steady and profound
passion of revenge against Edward of York, which absorbed all lesser and
more trivial causes of resentment,--the earl's face, though pale as the
dead, was unmoved and calm, and, with a grave and melancholy smile, he
answered,--

"More do I respect thee, O queen, for the hot words which show a truth
rarely heard from royal lips than hadst thou deigned to dissimulate the
forgiveness and kindly charity which sharp remembrance permits thee not
to feel! No, princely Margaret, not yet can there be frank amity between
thee and me! Nor do I boast the affection yon gallant gentlemen have
displayed. Frankly, as thou hast spoken, do I say, that the wrongs I
have suffered from another alone move me to allegiance to thyself! Let
others serve thee for love of Henry; reject not my service, given but
for revenge on Edward,--as much, henceforth, am I his foe as formerly
his friend and maker! [Sir H. Ellis: Original Letters, vol. i., second
series.] And if, hereafter, on the throne, thou shouldst remember and
resent the former wars, at least thou hast owed me no gratitude, and
thou canst not grieve my heart and seethe my brain, as the man whom I
once loved better than a son! Thus, from thy presence I depart, chafing
not at thy scornful wrath; mindful, young prince, but of thy just and
gentle heart, and sure, in the calm of my own soul (on which this much,
at least, of our destiny is reflected as on a glass), that when, high
lady, thy colder sense returns to thee, thou wilt see that the league
between us must be made!--that thine ire as woman must fade before thy
duties as a another, thy affection as a wife, and thy paramount and
solemn obligations to the people thou hast ruled as queen! In the
dead of night thou shalt hear the voice of Henry in his prison asking
Margaret to set him free; the vision of thy son shall rise before thee
in his bloom and promise, to demand why his mother deprives him of a
crown; and crowds of pale peasants, grinded beneath tyrannous exaction,
and despairing fathers mourning for dishonoured children, shall ask the
Christian queen if God will sanction the unreasoning wrath which rejects
the only instrument that can redress her people."

This said, the earl bowed his head and turned; but, at the first sign of
his departure, there was a general movement among the noble bystanders.
Impressed by the dignity of his bearing, by the greatness of his power,
and by the unquestionable truth that in rejecting him Margaret cast
away the heritage of her son, the exiles, with a common impulse, threw
themselves at the queen's feet, and exclaimed, almost in the same
words,--

"Grace! noble queen!--Grace for the great Lord Warwick!"

"My sister," whispered John of Calabria, "thou art thy son's ruin if the
earl depart!"

"Pasque Dieu! Vex not my kinswoman,--if she prefer a convent to a
throne, cross not the holy choice!" said the wily Louis, with a mocking
irony on his pinched lips.

The prince alone spoke not, but stood proudly on the same spot, gazing
on the earl, as he slowly moved to the door.

"Oh, Edward! Edward, my son!" exclaimed the unhappy Margaret, "if for
thy sake--for thine--I must make the past a blank, speak thou for me!"

"I have spoken," said the prince, gently, "and thou didst chide me,
noble mother; yet I spoke, methinks, as Henry V. had done, if of a
mighty enemy he had had the power to make a noble friend."

A short, convulsive sob was heard from the throne chair; and as suddenly
as it burst, it ceased. Queen Margaret rose, not a trace of that
stormy emotion upon the grand and marble beauty of her face. Her voice,
unnaturally calm, arrested the steps of the departing earl.

"Lord Warwick, defend this boy, restore his rights, release his sainted
father, and for years of anguish and of exile, Margaret of Anjou
forgives the champion of her son!"

In an instant Prince Edward was again by the earl's side; a moment more,
and the earl's proud knee bent in homage to the queen, joyful tears were
in the eyes of her friends and kindred, a triumphant smile on the lips
of Louis, and Margaret's face, terrible in its stony and locked repose,
was raised above, as if asking the All-Merciful pardon--for the pardon
which the human sinner had bestowed! [Ellis: Original Letters from the
Harleian Manuscripts, letter 42.]




CHAPTER X. LOVE AND MARRIAGE--DOUBTS OF CONSCIENCE--DOMESTIC
JEALOUSY--AND HOUSEHOLD TREASON.

The events that followed this tempestuous interview were such as the
position of the parties necessarily compelled. The craft of Louis, the
energy and love of Prince Edward, the representations of all her
kindred and friends, conquered, though not without repeated struggles,
Margaret's repugnance to a nearer union between Warwick and her son. The
earl did not deign to appear personally in this matter. He left it, as
became him, to Louis and the prince, and finally received from them the
proposals, which ratified the league, and consummated the schemes of his
revenge.

Upon the Very Cross [Miss Strickland observes upon this interview: "It
does not appear that Warwick mentioned the execution of his father, the
Earl of Salisbury, which is almost a confirmation of the statements of
those historians who deny that he was beheaded by Margaret."] in St.
Mary's Church of Angers, Lord Warwick swore without change to hold the
party of King Henry. Before the same sacred symbol, King Louis and his
brother, Duke of Guienne, robed in canvas, swore to sustain to their
utmost the Earl of Warwick in behalf of King Henry; and Margaret
recorded her oath "to treat the earl as true and faithful, and never for
deeds past to make him any reproach."

Then were signed the articles of marriage between Prince Edward and the
Lady Anne,--the latter to remain with Margaret, but the marriage not to
