
Nature has pointed out her ordinary sphere by the circumstances of her
physical existence. She cannot wander far. If here and there the gods
send their missives through women as through men, let them speak
without remonstrance. In no age have men been able wholly to hinder
them. A Deborah must always be a spiritual mother in Israel. A Corinna
may be excluded from the Olympic games, yet all men will hear her
song, and a Pindar sit at her feet. It is Man's fault that there ever
were Aspasias and Ninons. These exquisite forms were intended for the
shrines of virtue.

Neither need men fear to lose their domestic deities. Woman is born
for love, and it is impossible to turn her from seeking it. Men should
deserve her love as an inheritance, rather than seize and guard it
like a prey. Were they noble, they would strive rather not to be loved
too much, and to turn her from idolatry to the true, the only Love.
Then, children of one Father, they could not err nor misconceive one
another.

Society is now so complex, that it is no longer possible to educate
Woman merely as Woman; the tasks which come to her hand are so
various, and so large a proportion of women are thrown entirely upon
their own resources. I admit that this is not their state of perfect
development; but it seems as if Heaven, having so long issued its
edict in poetry and religion without securing intelligent obedience,
now commanded the world in prose to take a high and rational view. The
lesson reads to me thus:--

Sex, like rank, wealth, beauty, or talent, is but an accident of
birth. As you would not educate a soul to be an aristocrat, so do not
to be a woman. A general regard to her usual sphere is dictated in the
economy of nature. You need never enforce these provisions rigorously.
Achilles had long plied the distaff as a princess; yet, at first sight
of a sword, he seized it. So with Woman; one hour of love would teach
her more of her proper relations than all your formulas and
conventions. Express your views, men, of what you _seek_ in
women; thus best do you give them laws. Learn, women, what you should
_demand_ of men; thus only can they become themselves. Turn both
from the contemplation of what is merely phenomenal in your existence,
to your permanent life as souls. Man, do not prescribe how the Divine
shall display itself in Woman. Woman, do not expect to see all of God
in Man. Fellow-pilgrims and helpmeets are ye, Apollo and Diana, twins
of one heavenly birth, both beneficent, and both armed. Man, fear not
to yield to Woman's hand both the quiver and the lyre; for if her urn
be filled with light, she will use both to the glory of God. There is
but one doctrine for ye both, and that is the doctrine of the SOUL.






PART III.

EXTRACTS FROM JOURNALS AND LETTERS.






[The following extract from Margaret's Journal will be read with a
degree of melancholy interest when connected with the eventful end of
her eventful life. It was written many years before her journey to
Europe, and rings in our ears now almost with the tones of
prophecy.--Ed.]


I like to listen to the soliloquies of a bright child. In this
microcosm the philosophical observer may trace the natural progression
of the mind of mankind. I often silently observe L---, with this view.
He is generally imitative and dramatic; the day-school, the singing-school
or the evening party, are acted out with admirable variety in the humors
of the scene, end great discrimination of character in its broader
features. What is chiefly remarkable is his unconsciousness of his
mental processes, and how thoughts it would be impossible for him
to recall spring up in his mind like flowers and weeds in the soil.
But to-night he was truly in a state of lyrical inspiration, his eyes
flashing, his face glowing, and his whole composition chanted out in
an almost metrical form. He began by mourning the death of a certain
Harriet whom he had let go to foreign parts, and who had died at sea.
He described her as having "blue, sparkling eyes, and a sweet smile,"
and lamented that he could never kiss her cold lips again. This part,
which he continued for some time, was in prolonged cadences, and a
low, mournful tone, with a frequently recurring burden of "O, my
Harriet, shall I never see thee more!"

     *       *       *       *       *

EXTRACT FROM JOURNAL.

     *       *       *       *       *

It is so true that a woman may be in love with a woman, and a man with
a man. It is pleasant to be sure of it, because it is undoubtedly the
same love that we shall feel when we are angels, when we ascend to the
only fit place for the Mignons, where

  "Sie fragen nicht nach Mann und Welb."


It is regulated by the same law as that of love between persons of
different sexes, only it is purely intellectual and spiritual,
unprefaced by any mixture of lower instincts, undisturbed by any need
of consulting temporal interests; its law is the desire of the spirit
to realize a whole, which makes it seek in another being that which it
finds not in itself.

Thus the beautiful seek the strong; the mute seek the eloquent; the
butterfly settles on the dark flower. Why did Socrates so love
Alcibiades? Why did Korner so love Schneider? How natural is the love
of Wallenstein for Max, that of Madame de Stael for de Recamier, mine
for -----! I loved ---- for a time with as much passion as I was then
strong enough to feel. Her face was always gleaming before me; her
voice was echoing in my ear; all poetic thoughts clustered round the
dear image. This love was for me a key which unlocked many a treasure
which I still possess; it was the carbuncle (emblematic gem!) which
cast light into many of the darkest corners of human nature. She loved
me, too, though not so much, because her nature was "less high, less
grave, less large, less deep;" but she loved more tenderly, less
passionately. She loved me, for I well remember her suffering when she
first could feel my faults, and knew one part of the exquisite veil
rent away--how she wished to stay apart and weep the whole day.

These thoughts were suggested by a large engraving representing Madame
Recamier in her boudoir. I have so often thought over the intimacy
between her and Madame de Stael.

Madame Recamier is half-reclining on a sofa; she is clad in white
drapery, which clings very gracefully to her round, but
elegantly-slender form; her beautiful neck and arms are bare; her hair
knotted up so as to show the contour of her truly-feminine head to
great advantage. A book lies carelessly on her lap; one hand yet holds
it at the place where she left off reading; her lovely face is turned
towards us; she appears to muse on what she has been reading. When we
see a woman in a picture with a book, she seems to be doing precisely
that for which she was born; the book gives such an expression of
purity to the female figure. A large window, partially veiled by a
white curtain, gives a view of a city at some little distance. On one
side stand the harp and piano; there are just books enough for a
lady's boudoir. There is no picture, except one of De Recamier
herself, as Corinne. This is absurd; but the absurdity is interesting,
as recalling the connection. You imagine her to have been reading one
of De Stael's books, and to be now pondering what those brilliant
words of her gifted friend can mean.

Everything in the room is in keeping. Nothing appears to have been put
there because other people have it; but there is nothing which shows a
taste more noble and refined than you would expect from the fair
Frenchwoman. All is elegant, modern, in harmony with the delicate
habits and superficial culture which you would look for in its
occupant.

     *       *       *       *       *

TO HER MOTHER.

_Sept_. 5, 1887.

* * * * * If I stay in Providence, and more money is wanting than can
otherwise be furnished, I will take a private class, which is ready for
me, and by which, even if I reduced my terms to suit the place, I can
earn the four hundred dollars that ---- will need. If I do not stay, I
will let her have my portion of our income, with her own, or even capital
which I have a right to take up, and come into this or some other
economical place, and live at the cheapest rate. It will not be even a
sacrifice to me to do so, for I am weary of society, and long for the
opportunity for solitary concentration of thought. I know what I say;
if I live, you may rely upon me.

God be with you, my dear mother! I am sure he will prosper the doings
of so excellent a woman if you will only keep your mind calm and be
firm. Trust your daughter too. I feel increasing trust in mine own
good mind. We will take good care of the children and of one another.
Never fear to trouble me with your perplexities. I can never be so
situated that I do not earnestly wish to know them. Besides, things do
not trouble me as they did, for I feel within myself the power to aid,
to serve.

Most affectionately,

Your daughter, M.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART OF LETTER TO M.

_Providence_, Oct. 7, 1838.

* * * For yourself, dear ------, you have attained an important age.
No plan is desirable for you which is to be pursued with precision.
The world, the events of every day, which no one can predict, are to
be your teachers, and you must, in some degree, give yourself up, and
submit to be led captive, if you would learn from them. Principle must
be at the helm, but thought must shift its direction with the winds
and waves.

Happy as you are thus far in worthy friends, you are not in much
danger of rash intimacies or great errors. I think, upon the whole,
quite highly of your judgment about people and conduct; for, though
your first feelings are often extravagant, they are soon balanced.

I do not know other faults in you beside that want of retirement of
mind which I have before spoken of. If M------ and A------ want too
much seclusion, and are too severe in their views of life and man, I
think you are too little so. There is nothing so fatal to the finer
faculties as too ready or too extended a publicity. There is some
danger lest there be no real religion in the heart which craves too
much of daily sympathy. Through your mind the stream of life has
coursed with such rapidity that it has often swept away the seed or
loosened the roots of the young plants before they had ripened any
fruit.

I should think writing would be very good for you. A journal of your
life, and analyses of your thoughts, would teach you how to
generalize, and give firmness to your conclusions. Do not write down
merely that things are beautiful, or the reverse; but _what_ they
are, and _why_ they are beautiful or otherwise; and show these
papers, at least at present, to nobody. Be your own judge and your own
helper. Do not go too soon to any one with your difficulties, but try
to clear them up for yourself.

I think the course of reading you have fallen upon, of late, will be
better for you than such books as you formerly read, addressed rather
to the taste and imagination than the judgment. The love of beauty has
rather an undue development in your mind. See now what it is, and what
it has been. Leave for a time the Ideal, and return to the Real.

I should think two or three hours a day would be quite enough, at
present, for you to give to books. Now learn buying and selling,
keeping the house, directing the servants; all that will bring you
worlds of wisdom if you keep it subordinate to the one grand aim of
perfecting the whole being. And let your self-respect forbid you to do
imperfectly anything that you do at all.

I always feel ashamed when I write with this air of wisdom; but you
will see, by my hints, what I mean. Your mind wants depth and
precision; your character condensation. Keep your high aim steadily in
view; life will open the path to reach it. I think ----, even if she
be in excess, is an excellent friend for you; her character seems to
have what yours wants, whether she has or has not found the right way.

     *       *       *       *       *

TO HER BROTHER, A. B. F.

_Providence, Feb_. 19, 1888

MY DEAR A.:

     *       *       *      *       *

I wish you could see the journals of two dear little girls, eleven
years old, in my school. They love one another like Bessie Bell and
Mary Gray in the ballad. They are just of a size, both lively as
birds, affectionate, gentle, ambitious in good works and knowledge.
They encourage one another constantly to do right; they are rivals,
but never jealous of one another. One has the quicker intellect, the
other is the prettier. I have never had occasion to find fault with
either, and the forwardness of their minds has induced me to take both
into my reading-class, where they are associated with girls many years
their elders. Particular pains do they take with their journals. These
are written daily, in a beautiful, fair, round hand, well-composed,
showing attention, and memory well-trained, with many pleasing sallies
of playfulness, and some very interesting thoughts.

     *       *       *       *       *

TO THE SAME.

_Jamaica Plain, Dec_. 20, 1840.

* * * * About your school I do not think I could give you much advice
which would be of value, unless I could know your position more in
detail. The most important rule is, in all relations with our
fellow-creatures, never forget that, if they are imperfect persons,
they are immortal souls, and treat them as you would wish to be
treated by the light of that thought.

As to the application of means, abstain from punishment as much as
possible, and use encouragement as far as you can _without
flattery_. But be even more careful as to strict truth in this
regard, towards children, than to persons of your own age; for, to the
child, the parent or teacher is the representative of _justice;_
and as that of life is severe, an education which, in any degree,
excites vanity, is the very worst preparation for that general and
crowded school.

I doubt not you will teach grammar well, as I saw you aimed at
principles in your practice.

In geography, try to make pictures of the scenes, that they may be
present to their imaginations, and the nobler faculties be brought
into action, as well as memory.

In history, try to study and paint the characters of _great men_;
they best interpret the leadings of events amid the nations.

I am pleased with your way of speaking of both people and pupils; your
view seems from the right point. Yet beware of over great pleasure in
being popular, or even beloved. As far as an amiable disposition and
powers of entertainment make you so, it is a happiness; but if there
is one grain of plausibility, it is poison.

But I will not play Mentor too much, lest I make you averse to write
to your very affectionate sister,

M.

     *       *       *       *       *

TO HER BROTHER, R.

I entirely agree in what you say of _tuition_ and
_intuition;_ the two must act and react upon one another, to make
a man, to form a mind. Drudgery is as necessary, to call out the
treasures of the mind, as harrowing and planting those of the earth.
And besides, the growths of literature and art are as much nature as
the trees in Concord woods; but nature idealized and perfected.

     *       *       *       *       *

TO THE SAME.

1841.

I take great pleasure in that feeling of the living presence of beauty
in nature which your letters show. But you, who have now lived long
enough to see some of my prophecies fulfilled, will not deny, though
you may not yet believe the truth of my words when I say you go to an
extreme in your denunciations of cities and the social institutions.
_These_ are a growth also, and, as well as the diseases which
come upon them, under the control of the one spirit as much as the
great tree on which the insects prey, and in whose bark the busy bird
has made many a wound.

When we get the proper perspective of these things we shall find man,
however artificial, still a part of nature. Meanwhile, let us trust;
and while it is the soul's duty ever to bear witness to the best it
knows, let us not be hasty to conclude that in what suits us not there
can be no good. Let us be sure there _must_ be eventual good,
could we but see far enough to discern it. In maintaining perfect
truth to ourselves and choosing that mode of being which suits us, we
had best leave others alone as much as may be. You prefer the country,
and I doubt not it is on the whole a better condition of life to live
there; but at the country party you have mentioned you saw that no
circumstances will keep people from being frivolous. One may be
gossipping, and vulgar, and idle in the country,--earnest, noble and
wise, in the city. Nature cannot be kept from us while there is a sky
above, with so much as one star to remind us of prayer in the silent
night.

As I walked home this evening at sunset, over the Mill-Dam, towards
the city, I saw very distinctly that the city also is a bed in God's
garden. More of this some other time.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO A YOUNG FRIEND.

_Concord, May _2, 1887.

MY DEAR: I am passing happy here, except that I am not well,--so
unwell that I fear I must go home and ask my good mother to let me
rest and vegetate beneath her sunny kindness for a while. The
excitement of conversation prevents my sleeping. The drive here with
Mr. E------ was delightful. Dear Nature and Time, so often
calumniated, will take excellent care of us if we will let them. The
wisdom lies in schooling the heart not to expect too much. I did that
good thing when I came here, and I am rich. On Sunday I drove to
Watertown with the author of "Nature." The trees were still bare, but
the little birds care not for that; they revel, and carol, and wildly
tell their hopes, while the gentle, "voluble" south wind plays with
the dry leaves, and the pine-trees sigh with their soul-like sounds
for June. It was beauteous; and care and routine fled away, and I was
as if they had never been, except that I vaguely whispered to myself
that all had been well with me.

     *       *       *       *       *

The baby here is beautiful. He looks like his father, and smiles so
sweetly on all hearty, good people. I play with him a good deal, and
he comes so _natural,_ after Dante and other poets.

Ever faithfully your friend.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE SAME.

1887.

MY BELOVED CHILD: I was very glad to get your note. Do not think you
must only write to your friends when you can tell them you are happy;
they will not misunderstand you in the dark hour, nor think you
_forsaken_, if cast down. Though your letter of Wednesday was
very sweet to me, yet I knew it could not last as it was then. These
hours of heavenly, heroic strength leave us, but they come again:
their memory is with us amid after-trials, and gives us a foretaste of
that era when the steadfast soul shall be the only reality.

My dearest, you must suffer, but you will always be growing stronger,
and with every trial nobly met, you will feel a growing assurance that
nobleness is not a mere _sentiment_ with you. I sympathize deeply
in your anxiety about your mother; yet I cannot but remember the
bootless fear and agitation about my mother, and how strangely our
destinies were guided. Take refuge in prayer when you are most
troubled; the door of the sanctuary will never be shut against you. I
send you a paper which is very sacred to me. Bless Heaven that your
heart is awakened to sacred duties before any kind of gentle
ministering has become impossible, before any relation has been
broken.  [Footnote: It has always been my desire to find appropriate
time and place to correct an erroneous impression which has gained
currency in regard to my father, and which does injustice to his
memory. That impression is that he was exceedingly stern and exacting
