"Know you anything of this pass?" exhibiting the paper that Dunwoodie
had retained when Wharton was taken.

"Nothing--upon my honor, nothing," cried the father, shrinking from the
paper as from contagion.

"On your oath?"

"Nothing."

"Have you other testimony? This does not avail you, Captain Wharton. You
have been taken in a situation where your life is forfeited; the labor
of proving your innocence rests with yourself. Take time to reflect,
and be cool."

There was a frightful calmness in the manner of this judge that appalled
the prisoner. In the sympathy of Colonel Singleton, he could easily lose
sight of his danger; but the obdurate and collected air of the others
was ominous of his fate. He continued silent, casting imploring glances
towards his friend. Dunwoodie understood the appeal, and offered himself
as a witness. He was sworn, and desired to relate what he knew. His
statement did not materially alter the case, and Dunwoodie felt that it
could not. To him personally but little was known, and that little
rather militated against the safety of Henry than otherwise. His account
was listened to in silence, and the significant shake of the head that
was made by the silent member spoke too plainly what effect it
had produced.

"Still you think that the prisoner had no other object than what he has
avowed?" said the president, when he had ended.

"None other, I will pledge my life," cried the major, with fervor.

"Will you swear it?" asked the immovable judge.

"How can I? God alone can tell the heart; but I have known this
gentleman from a boy; deceit never formed part of his character. He is
above it."

"You say that he escaped, and was retaken in open arms?" said the
president.

"He was; nay, he received a wound in the combat. You see he yet moves
his arm with difficulty. Would he, think you, sir, have trusted himself
where he could fall again into our hands, unless conscious of
innocence?"

"Would Andre have deserted a field of battle, Major Dunwoodie, had he
encountered such an event, near Tarrytown?" asked his deliberate
examiner. "Is it not natural to youth to seek glory?"

"Do you call this glory?" exclaimed the major: "an ignominious death and
a tarnished name."

"Major Dunwoodie," returned the other, still with inveterate gravity,
"you have acted nobly; your duty has been arduous and severe, but it has
been faithfully and honorably discharged; ours must not be less so."

During the examination, the most intense interest prevailed among the
hearers. With that kind of feeling which could not separate the
principle from the cause, most of the auditors thought that if Dunwoodie
failed to move the hearts of Henry's judges, no other possessed the
power. Caesar thrust his misshapen form forward and his features, so
expressive of the concern he felt, and so different from the vacant
curiosity pictured in the countenance of the other blacks, caught the
attention of the silent judge. For the first time he spoke:--

"Let that black be brought forward."

It was too late to retreat, and Caesar found himself confronted with a
row of rebel officers, before he knew what was uppermost in his
thoughts. The others yielded the examination to the one who suggested
it, and using all due deliberation, he proceeded accordingly.

"You know the prisoner?"

"I t'ink he ought," returned the black, in a manner as sententious as
that of his examiner.

"Did he give you the wig when he threw it aside?"

"I don't want 'em," grumbled Caesar; "got a berry good hair heself."

"Were you employed in carrying any letters or messages of any kind while
Captain Wharton was in your master's house?"

"I do what a tell me," returned the black.

"But what did they tell you to do?"

"Sometime a one ting--sometime anoder."

"Enough," said Colonel Singleton, with dignity. "You have the noble
acknowledgment of a gentleman, what more can you obtain from this
slave?--Captain Wharton, you perceive the unfortunate impression against
you. Have you other testimony to adduce?"

To Henry there now remained but little hope; his confidence in his
security was fast ebbing, but with an indefinite expectation of
assistance from the loveliness of his sister, he fixed an earnest gaze
on the pallid features of Frances. She arose, and with a tottering step
moved towards the judges; the paleness of her cheek continued but for a
moment, and gave place to a flush of fire, and with a light but firm
tread, she stood before them. Raising her hand to her polished
forehead, Frances threw aside her exuberant locks, and displayed a
picture of beauty and innocence to their view that might have moved even
sterner natures. The president shrouded his eyes for a moment, as if the
wild eye and speaking countenance recalled the image of another. The
movement was transient, and recovering himself, with an earnestness that
betrayed his secret wishes,--

"To you, then, your brother previously communicated his intention of
paying your family a secret visit?"

"No!--no!" said Frances, pressing her hand on her brain, as if to
collect her thoughts; "he told me nothing--we knew not of the visit
until he arrived; but can it be necessary to explain to gallant men,
that a child would incur hazard to meet his only parent, and that in
times like these, and in a situation like ours?"

"But was this the first time? Did he never even talk of doing so
before?" inquired the colonel, leaning towards her with
paternal interest.

"Certainly--certainly," cried Frances, catching the expression of his
own benevolent countenance. "This is but the fourth of his visits."

"I knew it!" exclaimed the veteran, rubbing his hands with delight. "An
adventurous, warm-hearted son--I warrant me, gentlemen, a fiery soldier
in the field! In what disguises did he come?"

"In none, for none were then necessary; the royal troops covered the
country, and gave him safe passage."

"And was this the first of his visits out of the uniform of his
regiment?" asked the colonel, in a suppressed voice, avoiding the
penetrating looks of his companions.

"Oh! the very first," exclaimed the eager girl. "His first offense, I do
assure you, if offense it be."

"But you wrote him--you urged the visit; surely, young lady, you wished
to see your brother?" added the impatient colonel.

"That we wished it, and prayed for it,--oh, how fervently we prayed for
it!--is true; but to have held communion with the royal army would have
endangered our father, and we dared not."

"Did he leave the house until taken, or had he intercourse with any out
of your own dwelling?"

"With none--no one, excepting our neighbor, the peddler Birch."

"With whom!" exclaimed the colonel, turning pale, and shrinking as from
the sting of an adder.

Dunwoodie groaned aloud, and striking his head with his hand, cried in
piercing tones, "He is lost!" and rushed from the apartment.

"But Harvey Birch," repeated Frances, gazing wildly at the door through
which her lover had disappeared.

"Harvey Birch!" echoed all the judges. The two immovable members of the
court exchanged looks, and threw an inquisitive glance at the prisoner.

"To you, gentlemen, it can be no new intelligence to hear that Harvey
Birch is suspected of favoring the royal cause," said Henry, again
advancing before the judges; "for he has already been condemned by your
tribunals to the fate that I now see awaits myself. I will therefore
explain, that it was by his assistance I procured the disguise, and
passed your pickets; but to my dying moments, and with my dying breath,
I will avow, that my intentions were as pure as the innocent being
before you."

"Captain Wharton," said the president, solemnly, "the enemies of
American liberty have made mighty and subtle efforts to overthrow our
power. A more dangerous man, for his means and education, is not ranked
among our foes than this peddler of Westchester. He is a spy--artful,
delusive, and penetrating, beyond the abilities of any of his class. Sir
Henry could not do better than to associate him with the officer in his
next attempt. He would have saved Andre. Indeed, young man, this is a
connection that may prove fatal to you!"

The honest indignation that beamed on the countenance of the aged
warrior was met by a look of perfect conviction on the part of
his comrades.

"I have ruined him!" cried Frances, clasping her hands in terror. "Do
you desert us? then he is lost, indeed!"

"Forbear! lovely innocent, forbear!" said the colonel, with strong
emotion; "you injure none, but distress us all."

"Is it then such a crime to possess natural affection?" said Frances
wildly. "Would Washington--the noble, upright, impartial Washington,
judge so harshly? Delay, till Washington can hear his tale."

"It is impossible," said the president, covering his eyes, as if to hide
her beauty from his view.

"Impossible! oh! but for a week suspend your judgment. On my knees I
entreat you, as you will expect mercy yourself, when no human power can
avail you, give him but a day."

"It is impossible," repeated the colonel, in a voice that was nearly
choked. "Our orders are peremptory, and too long delay has been
given already."

He turned from the kneeling suppliant, but could not, or would not,
extricate that hand that she grasped with frenzied fervor.

"Remand your prisoner," said one of the judges to the officer who had
the charge of Henry. "Colonel Singleton, shall we withdraw?"

"Singleton! Singleton!" echoed Frances. "Then you are a father, and know
how to pity a father's woes; you cannot, will not, wound a heart that is
now nearly crushed. Hear me, Colonel Singleton; as God will listen to
your dying prayers, hear me, and spare my brother!"

"Remove her," said the colonel, gently endeavoring to extricate his
hand; but none appeared disposed to obey. Frances eagerly strove to read
the expression of his averted face, and resisted all his efforts
to retire.

"Colonel Singleton! how lately was your own son in suffering and in
danger! Under the roof of my father he was cherished-under my father's
roof he found shelter and protection. Oh! suppose that son the pride of
your age, the solace and protection of your infant children, and then
pronounce my brother guilty, if you dare!"

"What right has Heath to make an executioner of me!" exclaimed the
veteran fiercely, rising with a face flushed like fire, and every vein
and artery swollen with suppressed emotion. "But I forget myself; come,
gentlemen, let us mount, our painful duty must be done."

"Mount not! go not!" shrieked Frances. "Can you tear a son from his
parent--a brother from his sister, so coldly? Is this the cause I have
so ardently loved? Are these the men that I have been taught to
reverence? But you relent, you do hear me, you will pity and forgive."

"Lead on, gentlemen," said the colonel, motioning towards the door, and
erecting himself into an air of military grandeur, in the vain hope of
quieting his feelings.

"Lead not on, but hear me," cried Frances, grasping his hand
convulsively. "Colonel Singleton, you are a father!--pity--mercy--mercy
for the son! mercy for the daughter! Yes--you had a daughter. On this
bosom she poured out her last breath; these hands closed her eyes; these
very hands, that are now clasped in prayer, did those offices for her
that you condemn my poor, poor brother, to require."

One mighty emotion the veteran struggled with, and quelled; but with a
groan that shook his whole frame. He even looked around in conscious
pride at his victory; but a second burst of feeling conquered. His head,
white with the frost of seventy winters, sank upon the shoulder of the
frantic suppliant. The sword that had been his companion in so many
fields of blood dropped from his nerveless hand, and as he cried, "May
God bless you for the deed!" he wept aloud.

Long and violent was the indulgence that Colonel Singleton yielded to
his feelings. On recovering, he gave the senseless Frances into the
arms of her aunt, and, turning with an air of fortitude to his comrades,
he said,--

"Still, gentlemen, we have our duty as officers to discharge; our
feelings as men may be indulged hereafter. What is your pleasure with
the prisoner?"

One of the judges placed in his hand a written sentence, that he had
prepared while the colonel was engaged with Frances, and declared it to
be the opinion of himself and his companion.

It briefly stated that Henry Wharton had been detected in passing the
lines of the American army as a spy, and in disguise. That thereby,
according to the laws of war, he was liable to suffer death, and that
this court adjudged him to the penalty; recommending him to be executed
by hanging, before nine o'clock on the following morning.

It was not usual to inflict capital punishments, even on the enemy,
without referring the case to the commander in chief, for his
approbation; or, in his absence, to the officer commanding for the time
being. But, as Washington held his headquarters at New Windsor, on the
western bank of the Hudson, there was sufficient time to receive
his answer.

"This is short notice," said the veteran, holding the pen in his hand,
in a suspense that had no object; "not a day to fit one so young
for heaven?"

"The royal officers gave Hale [Footnote: An American officer of this
name was detected within the British lines, in disguise, in search of
military information. He was tried and executed, as stated in the text,
as soon as the preparations could be made. It is said that he was
reproached under the gallows with dishonoring the rank he held by his
fate. 'What a death for an officer to die!' said one of his captors.
'Gentlemen, any death is honorable when a man dies in a cause like that
of America,' was his answer. Andre was executed amid the tears of his
enemies; Hale died unpitied and with reproaches in his ears; and yet one
was the victim of ambition, and the other of devotion to his country.
Posterity will do justice between them.] but an hour," returned his
comrade; "we have granted the usual time. But Washington has the power
to extend it, or to pardon."

"Then to Washington will I go," cried the colonel, returning the paper
with his signature; "and if the services of an old man like me, or that
brave boy of mine, entitle me to his ear, I will yet save the youth."

So saying, he departed, full of his generous intentions in favor of
Henry Wharton.

The sentence of the court was communicated, with proper tenderness, to
the prisoner; and after giving a few necessary instructions to the
officer in command, and dispatching a courier to headquarters with their
report, the remaining judges mounted, and rode to their own quarters,
with the same unmoved exterior, but with the consciousness of the same
dispassionate integrity, that they had maintained throughout the trial.




CHAPTER XXVII


     Have you no countermand for Claudio yet,
     But he must die to-morrow?
                                    _--Measure for Measure._

A few hours were passed by the prisoner, after his sentence was
received, in the bosom of his family. Mr. Wharton wept in hopeless
despondency over the untimely fate of his son; and Frances, after
recovering from her insensibility, experienced an anguish of feeling to
which the bitterness of death itself would have been comparatively
light. Miss Peyton alone retained a vestige of hope, or presence of mind
to suggest what might be proper to be done under their circumstances.
The comparative composure of the good aunt arose in no degree from any
want of interest in the welfare of her nephew, but it was founded in a
kind of instinctive dependence on the character of Washington. He was a
native of the same colony with herself; and although his early military
services, and her frequent visits to the family of her sister, and
subsequent establishment at its head, had prevented their ever meeting,
still she was familiar with his domestic virtues, and well knew that the
rigid inflexibility for which his public acts were distinguished formed
no part of his reputation in private life. He was known in Virginia as a
consistent but just and lenient master; and she felt a kind of pride in
associating in her mind her countryman with the man who led the armies,
and in a great measure controlled the destinies, of America. She knew
that Henry was innocent of the crime for which he was condemned to
suffer, and, with that kind of simple faith that is ever to be found in
the most ingenuous characters, could not conceive of those constructions
and interpretations of law that inflicted punishment without the actual
existence of crime. But even her confiding hopes were doomed to meet
with a speedy termination. Towards noon, a regiment of militia, that
were quartered on the banks of the river, moved to the ground in front
of the house that held our heroine and her family, and deliberately
pitched their tents, with the avowed intention of remaining until the
following morning, to give solemnity and effect to the execution of a
British spy.

Dunwoodie had performed all that was required of him by his orders, and
was at liberty to retrace his steps to his expectant squadron, which was
impatiently waiting his return to be led against a detachment of the
enemy that was known to be slowly moving up the banks of the river, in
order to cover a party of foragers in its rear. He was accompanied by a
small party of Lawton's troop, under the expectation that their
testimony might be required to convict the prisoner; and Mason, the
lieutenant, was in command. But the confession of Captain Wharton had
removed the necessity of examining any witnesses on behalf of the
people. [Footnote: In America justice is administered in the name of
"the good people," etc., etc., the sovereignty residing with them.] The
major, from an unwillingness to encounter the distress of Henry's
friends, and a dread of trusting himself within its influence, had
spent the time we have mentioned in walking by himself, in keen anxiety,
at a short distance from the dwelling. Like Miss Peyton, he had some
reliance on the mercy of Washington, although moments of terrific doubt
and despondency were continually crossing his mind. To him the rules of
service were familiar, and he was more accustomed to consider his
general in the capacity of a ruler, than as exhibiting the
characteristics of the individual. A dreadful instance had too recently
occurred, which fully proved that Washington was above the weakness of
sparing another in mercy to himself. While pacing, with hurried steps,
through the orchard, laboring under these constantly recurring doubts,
enlivened by transient rays of hope, Mason approached, accoutered
completely for the saddle.

"Thinking you might have forgotten the news brought this morning from
below, sir, I have taken the liberty to order the detachment under
arms," said the lieutenant, very coolly, cutting down with his sheathed
saber the mullein tops that grew within his reach.

"What news?" cried the major, starting.

"Only that John Bull is out in Westchester, with a train of wagons,
which, if he fills, will compel us to retire through these cursed hills,
in search of provender. These greedy Englishmen are so shut up on York
Island, that when they do venture out, they seldom leave straw enough to
furnish the bed of a Yankee heiress."

"Where did the express leave them, did you say? The intelligence has
entirely escaped my memory."

"On the heights above Sing Sing," returned the lieutenant, with no
little amazement. "The road below looks like a hay market, and all the
swine are sighing forth their lamentations, as the corn passes them
towards King's Bridge. George Singleton's orderly, who brought up the
tidings, says that our horses were holding consultation if they should
not go down without their riders, and eat another meal, for it is
questionable with them whether they can get a full stomach again. If
they are suffered to get back with their plunder, we shall not be able
to find a piece of pork at Christmas fat enough to fry itself."

"Peace, with all this nonsense of Singleton's orderly, Mr. Mason," cried
Dunwoodie, impatiently; "let him learn to wait the orders of his
superiors."

"I beg pardon in his name, Major Dunwoodie," said the subaltern; "but,
like myself, he was in error. We both thought it was the order of
General Heath, to attack and molest the enemy whenever he ventured out
of his nest."

"Recollect yourself, Lieutenant Mason," said the major, "or I may have
to teach you that your orders pass through me."

"I know it, Major Dunwoodie--I know it; and I am sorry that your memory
is so bad as to forget that I never have yet hesitated to obey them."

"Forgive me, Mason," cried Dunwoodie, taking both his hands. "I do know
you for a brave and obedient soldier; forget my humor. But this
business--had you ever a friend?"

"Nay, nay," interrupted the lieutenant, "forgive me and my honest zeal.
I knew of the orders, and was fearful that censure might fall on my
officer. But remain, and let a man breathe a syllable against the corps,
and every sword will start from the scabbard of itself; besides, they
are still moving up, and it is a long road from Croton to King's Bridge.
Happen what may, I see plainly that we shall be on their heels before
they are housed again."

"Oh! that the courier was returned from headquarters!" exclaimed
Dunwoodie. "This suspense is insupportable."

"You have your wish," cried Mason. "Here he is at the moment, and riding
like the bearer of good news. God send it may be so; for I can't say
that I particularly like myself to see a brave young fellow dancing
upon nothing."

Dunwoodie heard but very little of this feeling declaration; for, ere
half of it was uttered, he had leaped the fence and stood before the
messenger.

"What news?" cried the major, the moment that the soldier stopped his
horse.

"Good!" exclaimed the man; and feeling no hesitation to intrust an
officer so well known as Major Dunwoodie, he placed the paper in his
hands, as he added, "but you can read it, sir, for yourself."

Dunwoodie paused not to read; but flew, with the elastic spring of joy,
to the chamber of the prisoner. The sentinel knew him, and he was
suffered to pass without question.

"Oh! Peyton," cried Frances, as he entered the apartment, "you look like
a messenger from heaven! Bring you tidings of mercy?"

"Here, Frances--here, Henry--here, dear cousin Jeanette," cried the
youth, as with trembling hands he broke the seal; "here is the letter
itself, directed to the captain of the guard. But listen--"

All did listen with intense anxiety; and the pang of blasted hope was
added to their misery, as they saw the glow of delight which had beamed
on the countenance of the major give place to a look of horror. The
paper contained the sentence of the court, and underneath was written
these simple words,--

"Approved--GEO. WASHINGTON."

"He's lost, he's lost!" cried Frances, sinking into the arms of her
aunt.

"My son! my son!" sobbed the father, "there is mercy in heaven, if there
is none on earth. May Washington never want that mercy he thus denies to
my innocent child!"

"Washington!" echoed Dunwoodie, gazing around him in vacant horror.
"Yes, 'tis the act of Washington himself; these are his characters; his
very name is here, to sanction the dreadful deed."

"Cruel, cruel Washington!" cried Miss Peyton. "How has familiarity with
blood changed his nature!"

"Blame him not," said Dunwoodie; "it is the general, and not the man;
my life on it, he feels the blow he is compelled to inflict."

"I have been deceived in him," cried Frances. "He is not the savior of
his country; but a cold and merciless tyrant. Oh! Peyton, Peyton! how
have you misled me in his character!"

"Peace, dear Frances; peace, for God's sake; use not such language. He
is but the guardian of the law."

"You speak the truth, Major Dunwoodie," said Henry, recovering from the
shock of having his last ray of hope extinguished, and advancing from
his seat by the side of his father. "I, who am to suffer, blame him not.
Every indulgence has been granted me that I can ask. On the verge of the
grave I cannot continue unjust. At such a moment, with so recent an
instance of danger to your cause from treason, I wonder not at
Washington's unbending justice. Nothing now remains but to prepare for
that fate which so speedily awaits me. To you, Major Dunwoodie, I make
my first request."

"Name it," said the major, giving utterance with difficulty.

Henry turned, and pointing to the group of weeping mourners near him, he
continued,--

"Be a son to this aged man; help his weakness, and defend him from any
usage to which the stigma thrown upon me may subject him. He has not
many friends amongst the rulers of this country; let your powerful name
be found among them."

"It shall."

"And this helpless innocent," continued Henry, pointing to where Sarah
sat, unconscious of what was passing, "I had hoped for an opportunity to
revenge her wrongs;" a flush of excitement passed over his features;
"but such thoughts are evil--I feel them to be wrong. Under your care,
Peyton, she will find sympathy and refuge."

"She shall," whispered Dunwoodie.

"This good aunt has claims upon you already; of her I will not speak;
but here," taking the hand of Frances, and dwelling upon her countenance
with an expression of fraternal affection, "here is the choicest gift of
all. Take her to your bosom, and cherish her as you would cultivate
innocence and virtue."

The major could not repress the eagerness with which he extended his
hand to receive the precious boon; but Frances, shrinking from his
touch, hid her face in the bosom of her aunt.

"No, no, no!" she murmured. "None can ever be anything to me who aid in
my brother's destruction."

Henry continued gazing at her in tender pity for several moments, before
he again resumed a discourse that all felt was most peculiarly his own.

"I have been mistaken, then. I did think, Peyton, that your worth, your
noble devotion to a cause that you have been taught to revere, that your
kindness to our father when in imprisonment, your friendship for me,--in
short, that your character was understood and valued by my sister."

"It is--it is," whispered Frances, burying her face still deeper in the
bosom of her aunt.

"I believe, dear Henry," said Dunwoodie, "this is a subject that had
better not be dwelt upon now."

"You forget," returned the prisoner, with a faint smile, "how much I
have to do, and how little time is left to do it in."

"I apprehend," continued the major, with a face of fire, "that Miss
Wharton has imbibed some opinions of me that would make a compliance
with your request irksome to her--opinions that it is now too late
to alter."

"No, no, no," cried Frances, quickly, "you are exonerated, Peyton--with
her dying breath she removed my doubts."

"Generous Isabella!" murmured Dunwoodie; "but, still, Henry, spare your
sister now; nay, spare even me."
