saved, they would start off down the river to hunt in the Ohio country
and begin again the same round of alternating toil and debauchery. In
the history of the country there is hardly a more depressing chapter
than that which records the easy descent of the red man, once his taste
for "fire water" was developed, to bestiality and impotence.

The coming on of the Revolution produced no immediate effects in the
West. The meaning of the occurrences round Boston was but slowly grasped
by the frontier folk. There was little indeed that the Westerners could
do to help the cause of the eastern patriots, and most of them, if left
alone, would have been only distant spectators of the conflict. But
orders given to the British agents and commanders called for the
ravaging of the trans-Alleghany country; and as a consequence the West
became an important theater of hostilities.

The British agents had no troops with which to undertake military
operations on a considerable scale, but they had one great resource--the
Indians--and this they used with a reckless disregard of all
considerations of humanity. In the summer of 1776 the Cherokees were
furnished with fifty horse-loads of ammunition and were turned loose
upon the back country of Georgia and the Carolinas. Other tribes were
prompted to depredations farther north. White, half-breed, and Indian
agents went through the forests inciting the natives to deeds of horror;
prices were fixed on scalps--and it is significant of the temper of
these agents that a woman's scalp was paid for as readily as a man's.

In every corner of the wilderness the bloody scenes of Pontiac's war
were now reenacted. Bands of savages lurked about the settlements, ready
to attack at any unguarded moment; and wherever the thin blue smoke of a
settler's cabin rose, prowlers lay in wait. A woman might not safely
go a hundred yards to milk a cow, or a man lead a horse to water.
The farmer carried a gun strapped to his side as he ploughed, and he
scarcely dared venture into the woods for the winter's supply of fuel
and game. Hardly a day passed on which a riderless horse did not come
galloping into some lonely clearing, telling of afresh tragedy on the
trail.

The rousing of the Indians against the frontiersmen was an odious
act. The people of the back country were in not the slightest degree
responsible for the revolt against British authority in the East. They
were non-combatants, and no amount of success in sweeping them from
their homes could affect the larger outcome. The crowning villainy of
this shameful policy was the turning of the redskins loose to prey upon
helpless women and children.

The responsibility for this inhumanity must be borne in some degree
by the government of George III. "God and nature," wrote the Earl
of Suffolk piously, "hath put into our hands the scalping-knife and
tomahawk, to torture them into unconditional submission." But the fault
lay chiefly with the British officers at the western posts--most of
all, with Lieutenant-Governor Hamilton at Detroit. Probably no British
representative in America was on better terms with the natives. He drank
with them, sang war-songs with them, and received them with open arms
when they came in from the forests with the scalps of white men dangling
at their belts. A great council on the banks of the Detroit in June,
1778, was duly opened with prayer, after which Hamilton harangued the
assembled Chippewas, Hurons, Mohawks, and Potawatomi on their "duties"
in the war and congratulated them on the increasing numbers of their
prisoners and scalps, and then urged them to redoubled activity by
holding out the prospect of the complete expulsion of white men from the
great interior hunting-grounds.

Scarcely were the deputations attending this council well on their way
homewards when a courier arrived from the Illinois country bringing
startling news. The story was that a band of three hundred rebels led by
one George Rogers Clark had fallen upon the Kaskaskia settlements, had
thrown the commandant into irons, and had exacted from the populace an
oath of allegiance to the Continental Congress. It was reported, too,
that Cahokia had been taken, and that, even as the messenger was leaving
Kaskaskia, "Gibault, a French priest, had his horse ready saddled to go
to Vincennes to receive the submission of the inhabitants in the name of
the rebels."

George Rogers Clark was a Virginian, born in the foothills of Albemarle
County three years before Braddock's defeat. His family was not of the
landed gentry, but he received some education, and then, like Washington
and many other adventuresome young men of the day, became a surveyor.
At the age of twenty-two he was a member of Governor Dunmore's staff.
During a surveying expedition he visited Kentucky, which so pleased him
that in 1774 he decided to make that part of the back country his home.
He was even then a man of powerful frame, with broad brow, keen blue
eyes, and a dash of red in his hair from a Scottish ancestress--a man,
too, of ardent patriotism, strong common sense, and exceptional
powers of initiative and leadership. Small wonder that in the rapidly
developing commonwealth beyond the mountains he quickly became a
dominating spirit.

With a view to organizing a civil government and impressing upon the
Virginia authorities the need of defending the western settlements, the
men of Kentucky held a convention at Harrodsburg in the spring of 1775
and elected two delegates to present their petition to the Virginia
Assembly. Clark was one of them. The journey to Williamsburg was long
and arduous, and the delegates arrived only to find that the Legislature
had adjourned. The visit, none the less, gave Clark an opportunity
to explain to the new Governor--"a certain Patrick Henry, of
Hanover County," as the royalist Dunmore contemptuously styled his
successor--the situation in the back country and to obtain five hundred
pounds of powder. He also induced the authorities to take steps which
led to the definite organization of Kentucky as a county of Virginia.

In the bloody days that followed, most of the pioneers saw nothing to be
done except to keep close guard and beat off the Indians when they came.
A year or two of that sort of desperate uncertainty gave Clark an idea.
Why not meet the trouble at its source by capturing the British posts
and suppressing the commandants whose orders were mainly responsible
for the atrocities? There was just one obstacle: Kentucky could spare
neither men nor money for the undertaking.

In the spring of 1777 two young hunters, disguised as traders, were
dispatched to the Illinois country and to the neighborhood of Vincennes,
to spy out the land. They brought back word that the posts were not
heavily manned, and that the French-speaking population took little
interest in the war and was far from reconciled to British rule. The
prospect seemed favorable. Without making his purpose known to anyone,
Clark forthwith joined a band of disheartened settlers and made his way
with them over the Wilderness Trail to Virginia. By this time a plan on
the part of the rebels for the defense of the Kentucky settlements had
grown into a scheme for the conquest of the whole Northwest.

Clark's proposal came opportunely. Burgoyne's surrender had given the
colonial cause a rosy hue, and already the question of the occupation
of the Northwest had come up for discussion in Congress. Governor Henry
thought well of the plan. He called Thomas Jefferson, George Mason, and
George Wythe into conference, and on January 2, 1778, Clark was given
two sets of orders--one, for publication, commissioning him to raise
seven companies of fifty men each "in any county of the Commonwealth"
for militia duty in Kentucky, the other, secret, authorizing him to
use this force in an expedition for the capture of the "British post at
Kaskasky." To meet the costs, only twelve hundred pounds in depreciated
continental currency could be raised. But the Governor and his friends
promised to try to secure three hundred acres of land for each soldier,
in case the project should succeed. The strictest secrecy was preserved,
and, even if the Legislature had been in session, the project would
probably not have been divulged to it.

Men and supplies were gathered at Fort Pitt and Wheeling and were
carried down the Ohio to "the Falls," opposite the site of Louisville.
The real object of the expedition was concealed until this point was
reached. On learning of the project, the men were surprised, and some
refused to go farther. But in a few weeks one hundred and seventy-five
men, organized in four companies, were in readiness. The start was made
on the 24th of June. Just as the little flotilla of clumsy flatboats was
caught by the rapid current, the landscape was darkened by an eclipse of
the sun. The superstitious said that this was surely an evil omen. But
Clark was no believer in omens, and he ordered the bateaux to proceed.
He had lately received news of the French alliance, and was surer than
ever that the habitants would make common cause with his forces and give
him complete success.

To appear on the Mississippi was to run the risk of betraying the
object of the expedition to the defenders of the posts. Hence the wily
commander decided to make the last stages of his advance by an overland
route. At the deserted site of Fort Massac, nine miles below the mouth
of the Tennessee, the little army left the Ohio and struck off northwest
on a march of one hundred and twenty miles, as the crow flies, across
the tangled forests and rich prairies of southern Illinois.

Six days brought the invaders to the Kaskaskia River, three miles above
the principal settlement. Stealing silently along the bank of the stream
on the night of the 4th of July, they crossed in boats which they seized
at a farmhouse and arrived at the palisades wholly unobserved. Half of
the force was stationed in the form of a cordon, so that no one might
escape. The remainder followed Clark through an unguarded gateway into
the village.

According to a story long current, the officials of the post were that
night giving a ball, and all of the elite, not of Kaskaskia alone but of
the neighboring settlements as well, were joyously dancing in one of
the larger rooms of the fort. Leaving his men some paces distant, Clark
stepped to the entrance of the hall, and for some time leaned unobserved
against the door-post, grimly watching the gayety. Suddenly the air was
rent by a warwhoop which brought the dancers to a stop. An Indian brave,
lounging in the firelight, had caught a glimpse of the tall, gaunt, buff
and blue figure in the doorway and had recognized it. Women shrieked;
men cursed; the musicians left their posts; all was disorder. Advancing,
Clark struck a theatrical pose and in a voice of command told the
merrymakers to go on with their dancing, but to take note that they now
danced, not as subjects of King George but as Virginians. Finding that
they were in no mood for further diversion, he sent them to their homes;
and all night they shivered with fear, daring not so much as to light a
candle lest they should be set upon and murdered in their beds.

This account is wholly unsupported by contemporary testimony, and it
probably sprang from the imagination of some good frontier story-teller.
It contains at least this much truth, that the settlement, after being
thrown into panic, was quickly and easily taken. Curiously enough, the
commandant was a Frenchman, Rocheblave, who had thriftily entered the
British service. True to the trust reposed in him, he protested and
threatened, but to no avail. The garrison, now much diminished, was
helpless, and the populace--British, French, and Indian alike--was not
disposed to court disaster by offering armed resistance. Hence, on the
morning after the capture the oath of fidelity was administered, and the
American flag was hoisted for the first time within view of the Father
of Waters. After dispatching word to General Carleton that he had been
compelled to surrender the post to "the self-styled Colonel, Mr. Clark,"
Rocheblave was sent as a captive to Williamsburg, where he soon broke
parole and escaped. His slaves were sold for five hundred pounds, and
the money was distributed among the troops. Cahokia was occupied without
resistance, and the French priest, Father Pierre Gibault, whose parish
extended from Lake Superior to the Ohio, volunteered to go to Vincennes
and win its inhabitants to the American cause.

Like Kaskaskia and Cahokia, the Wabash settlement had been put in charge
of a commandant of French descent. The village, however, was at the
moment without a garrison, and its chief stronghold, Fort Sackville,
was untenanted. Gibault argued forcefully for acceptance of American
sovereignty, and within two days the entire population filed into the
little church and took the oath of allegiance. The astonished Indians
were given to understand that their former "Great Father," the King of
France, had returned to life, and that they must comply promptly with
his wishes or incur his everlasting wrath for having given aid to the
despised British.

Thus without the firing of a shot or the shedding of a drop of blood,
the vast Illinois and Wabash country was won for the future United
States. Clark's plan was such that its success was assured by its very
audacity. It never occurred to the British authorities that their far
western forts were in danger, and they were wholly unprepared to fly
to the defense of such distant posts. British sovereignty on the
Mississippi was never recovered; and in the autumn of 1778 Virginia took
steps to organize her new conquest by setting up the county of Illinois,
which included all her territories lying "on the western side of the
Ohio."



Chapter IV. The Conquest Completed

Lieutenant-Governor Hamilton had many faults, but sloth was not one of
them; and when he heard what had happened he promptly decided to regain
the posts and take the upstart Kentucky conqueror captive. Emissaries
were sent to the Wabash country to stir up the Indians, and for weeks
the Detroit settlement resounded with preparations for the expedition.
Boats were built or repaired, guns were cleaned, ammunition was
collected in boxes, provisions were put up in kegs or bags, baubles for
the Indians were made or purchased. Cattle and wheels, together with
a six-pounder, were sent ahead to be in readiness for use at various
stages of the journey.

Further weeks were consumed in awaiting reenforcements which never came;
and in early October, when the wild geese were scudding southward before
the first snow flurries of the coming winter, the commandant started
for the reconquest with a motley force of thirty-six British regulars,
forty-five local volunteers, seventy-nine local militia, and sixty
Indians. Reenforcements were gathered on the road, so that when
Vincennes was reached the little army numbered about five hundred. From
Detroit the party dropped easily down the river to Lake Erie, where
it narrowly escaped destruction in a blinding snowstorm. By good
management, however, it was brought safely to the Maumee, up whose
sluggish waters the bateaux were laboriously poled. A portage of nine
miles gave access to the Wabash. Here the water was very shallow, and
only by building occasional dikes to produce a current did the party
find it possible to complete the journey. As conferences with the
Indians further delayed them, it was not until a few days before
Christmas that the invaders reached their goal.

The capture of Vincennes proved easy enough. The surrender, none
the less, was made in good military style. There were two iron
three-pounders in the wretched little fort, and one of these was loaded
to the muzzle and placed in the open gate. As Hamilton and his men
advanced, so runs a not very well authenticated story, Lieutenant
Helm stood by the gun with a lighted taper and called sternly upon
the invaders to halt. The British leader demanded the surrender of the
garrison. Helm parleyed and asked for terms. Hamilton finally conceded
the honors of war, and Helm magnanimously accepted. Hamilton thereupon
drew up his forces in a double line, the British on one side and
the Indians on the other; and the garrison--one officer and one
soldier--solemnly marched out between them! After the "conquerors" had
regained their equanimity, the cross of St. George was once more run
up on the fort. A body of French militia returned to British allegiance
with quite as much facility as it had shown in accepting American
sovereignty under the eloquence of Father Gibault; and the French
inhabitants, gathered again in the church, with perfectly straight faces
acknowledged that they had "sinned against God and man" by taking sides
with the rebels, and promised to be loyal thereafter to George III.

Had the British forces immediately pushed on, this same scene might have
been repeated at Kaskaskia and Cahokia. Clark's position there was far
from strong. Upon the expiration of their term of enlistment most of
his men had gone back to Kentucky or Virginia, and their places had been
taken mainly by creoles, whose steadfastness was doubtful. Furthermore,
the Indians were restless, and it was only by much vigilance and bravado
that they were kept in a respectful mood. All this was well known to
Hamilton, who now proposed to follow up the recapture of the Mississippi
posts by the obliteration of all traces of American authority west of
the Alleghanies.

The difficulties and dangers of a midwinter campaign in the flooded
Illinois country were not to be lightly regarded, and weeks of
contending with icy blasts and drenching rains lent a seat by an open
fire unusual attractiveness. Hence the completion of the campaign was
postponed until spring--a decision which proved the salvation of the
American cause in the West. As means of subsistence were slender, most
of the Detroit militia were sent home, and the Indians were allowed to
scatter to their distant wigwams. The force kept at the post numbered
only about eighty or ninety whites, with a few Indians.

Clark now had at Kaskaskia a band of slightly over a hundred men. He
understood Hamilton's army to number five or six hundred. The outlook
was dubious, until Francois Vigo, a friendly Spanish trader of St.
Louis, escaping captivity at Vincennes, came to Kaskaskia with the
information that Hamilton had sent away most of his troops; and this
welcome news gave the doughty Kentuckian a brilliant idea. He would
defend his post by attacking the invaders while they were yet at
Vincennes, and before they were ready to resume operations. "The case is
desperate," he wrote to Governor Henry, "but, sir, we must either quit
the country or attack Mr. Hamilton." He had probably never heard of
Scipio Africanus but, like that indomitable Roman, he proposed to carry
the war straight into the enemy's country. "There were undoubtedly
appalling difficulties," says Mr. Roosevelt, "in the way of a midwinter
march and attack; and the fact that Clark attempted and performed the
feat which Hamilton dared not try, marks just the difference between a
man of genius and a good, brave, ordinary commander."

Preparations were pushed with all speed. A large, flat-bottomed boat,
the Willing, was fitted out with four guns and was sent down the
Mississippi with forty men to ascend the Ohio and the Wabash to a place
of rendezvous not far from the coveted post. By early February the
depleted companies were recruited to their full strength; and after the
enterprise had been solemnly blessed by Father Gibault, Clark and
his forces, numbering one hundred and thirty men, pushed out upon the
desolate, windswept prairie.

The distance to be covered was about two hundred and thirty miles. Under
favorable circumstances, the trip could have been made in five or six
days and with little hardship. The rainy season, however, was now at
its height, and the country was one vast quagmire, overrun by swollen
streams which could be crossed only at great risk. Ten days of wearisome
marching brought the expedition to the forks of the Little Wabash. The
entire region between the two channels was under water, and for a little
time it looked as if the whole enterprise would have to be given up.
There were no boats; provisions were running low; game was scarce; and
fires could not be built for cooking.

But Clark could not be turned back by such difficulties. He plunged
ahead of his men, struck tip songs and cheers to keep them in spirit,
played the buffoon, went wherever danger was greatest, and by an almost
unmatched display of bravery, tact, and firmness, won the redoubled
admiration of his suffering followers and held them together. Murmurs
arose among the creoles, but the Americans showed no signs of faltering.
For more than a week the party floundered through the freezing water,
picked its way from one outcropping bit of earth to another, and seldom
found opportunity to eat or sleep. Rifles and powder-horns had to be
borne by the hour above the soldiers' heads to keep them dry.

Finally, on the 23d of February, a supreme effort carried the troops
across the Horseshoe Plain, breast-deep in water, and out upon high
ground two miles from Vincennes. By this time many of the men were so
weakened that they could drag themselves along only with assistance. But
buffalo meat and corn were confiscated from the canoes of some passing
squaws, and soon the troops were refreshed and in good spirits. The
battle with the enemy ahead seemed as nothing when compared with the
struggle with the elements which they had successfully waged. No exploit
of the kind in American history surpasses this, unless it be Benedict
Arnold's winter march through the wilderness of Maine in 1775 to attack
Quebec.

Two or three creole hunters were now taken captive, and from them Clark
learned that no one in Vincennes knew of his approach. They reported,
however, that, although the habitants were tired of the "Hair-Buyer's"
presence and would gladly return to American allegiance, some two
hundred Indians had just arrived at the fort. The Willing had not been
heard from. But an immediate attack seemed the proper course; and the
young colonel planned and carried it out with the curious mixture of
bravery and braggadocio of which he was a past master.

First he drew up a lordly letter, addressed to the inhabitants of the
town, and dispatched it by one of his creole prisoners. "Gentlemen," it
ran, "being now within two miles of your village with my army...and not
being willing to surprise you, I take this step to request such of you
as are true citizens, and willing to enjoy the liberty I bring you,
to remain still in your houses. And those, if any there be, that are
friends to the King, will instantly repair to the fort and join the
Hair-Buyer General and fight like men." Having thus given due warning,
he led his "army" forward, marching and counter-marching his meager
forces among the trees and hills to give an appearance of great numbers,
while he and his captains helped keep up the illusion by galloping
wildly here and there on horses they had confiscated, as if ordering a
vast array. At nightfall the men advanced upon the stockade and opened
fire from two directions.

Not until a sergeant reeled from his chair with a bullet in his breast
did the garrison realize that it was really under attack. The habitants
had kept their secret well. There was a beating of drums and a hurrying
to arms, and throughout the night a hot fusillade was kept up. By firing
from behind houses and trees, and from rifle pits that were dug before
the attack began, the Americans virtually escaped loss; while Hamilton's
gunners were picked off as fast as they appeared at the portholes of the
fort. Clark's ammunition ran low, but the habitants furnished a fresh
supply and at the same time a hot breakfast for the men. In a few hours
the cannon were silenced, and parleys were opened. Hamilton insisted
that he and his garrison were "not disposed to be awed into an action
unworthy of British subjects," but they were plainly frightened, and
Clark finally sent the commandant back to the fort from a conference in
the old French church with the concession of one hour's time in which
to decide what he would do. To help him make up his mind, the American
leader caused half a dozen Indians who had just returned from the
forests with white men's scalps dangling at their belts to be tomahawked
and thrown into the river within plain view of the garrison.

Surrender promptly followed. Hamilton and twenty-five of his men were
sent off as captives to Virginia, where the commandant languished in
prison until, in 1780, he was paroled at the suggestion of Washington.
On taking, an oath of neutrality, the remaining British sympathizers
were set at liberty. For a second time the American flag floated over
Indiana soil, not again to be lowered.

Immediately after the capitulation of Hamilton, a scouting-party
captured a relief expedition which was on its way from Detroit and
placed in Clark's hands ten thousand pounds' worth of supplies for
distribution as prize-money among his deserving men. The commander's cup
of satisfaction was filled to the brim when the Willing appeared with a
long-awaited messenger from Governor Henry who brought to the soldiers
the thanks of the Legislature of Virginia for the capture of Kaskaskia
and also the promise of more substantial reward.

The whole of the Illinois and Indiana country was now in American hands.
Tenure, however, was precarious so long as Detroit remained a British
stronghold, and Clark now broadened his plans to embrace the capture of
that strategic place. Leaving Vincennes in charge of a garrison of forty
men, he returned to Kaskaskia with the Willing and set about organizing
a new expedition. Kentucky pledged three hundred men, and Virginia
promised to help. But when, in midsummer, the commander returned to
Vincennes to consolidate and organize his force, he found the numbers to
be quite insufficient. From Kentucky there came only thirty men.

Disappointment followed disappointment; he was ordered to build a fort
at the mouth of the Ohio--a project of which he had himself approved;
and when at last he had under his command a force that might have been
adequate for the Detroit expedition, he was obliged to use it in meeting
a fresh incursion of savages which had been stirred up by the new
British commandant on the Lakes. But Thomas Jefferson, who in 1779
succeeded Henry as Governor of Virginia, was deeply interested in the
Detroit project, and at his suggestion Washington gave Clark an order on
the commandant of Fort Pitt for guns, supplies, and such troops as
could be spared. On January 22, 1781, Jefferson appointed Clark
"brigadier-general of the forces to be embodied on an expedition
westward of the Ohio." Again Clark was doomed to disappointment.
One obstacle after another interposed. Yet as late as May, 1781, the
expectant conqueror wrote to Washington that he had "not yet lost sight
of Detroit." Suitable opportunity for the expedition never came, and
when peace was declared the northern stronghold was still in British
hands.

Clark's later days were clouded. Although Virginia gave him six thousand
acres of land in southern Indiana and presented him with a sword, peace
left him without employment, and he was never able to adjust himself to
the changed situation. For many years he lived alone in a little
cabin on the banks of the Ohio, spending his time hunting, fishing, and
brooding over the failure of Congress to reward him in more substantial
manner for his services. He was land-poor, lonely, and embittered. In
1818 he died a paralyzed and helpless cripple. His resting place is
in Cave Hill Cemetery, Louisville; the finest statue of him stands in
Monument Circle, Indianapolis--"an athletic figure, scarcely past
youth, tall and sinewy, with a drawn sword, in an attitude of energetic
encouragement, as if getting his army through the drowned lands of the
Wabash." *


