to success in the legal profession. Cleveland's career as a lawyer was
marked by those steady, solid gains in reputation which result from care
and thoroughness rather than from brilliancy, and in these respects
it finds many parallels among lawyers of the trustee type. What is
exceptional and peculiar in Cleveland's career is the way in which
political situations formed about him without any contrivance on his
part, and as it were projected him from office to office until he
arrived in the White House.

At the outset nothing could have seemed more unlikely than such a
career. Cleveland's ambitions were bound up in his profession and his
politics were opposed to those of the powers holding local control. But
the one circumstance did not shut him out of political vocation and
the other became a positive advantage. He entered public life in 1863
through an unsought appointment as assistant district attorney for Erie
County. The incumbent of the office was in poor health and needed an
assistant on whom he could rely to do the work. Hence Cleveland was
called into service. His actual occupancy of the position prompted his
party to nominate him to the office; and although he was defeated, he
received a vote so much above the normal voting strength of his party
that, in 1869, he was picked for the nomination to the office of sheriff
to strengthen a party ticket made up in the interest of a congressional
candidate. The expectation was that while the district might be carried
for the Democratic candidate for Congress, Cleveland would probably fail
of election. The nomination was virtually forced upon him against
his wishes. But he was elected by a small plurality. This success,
reenforced by his able conduct of the office, singled him out as the
party's hope for success in the Buffalo municipal election; and after
his term as sheriff he was nominated for mayor, again without any effort
on his part. Although ordinarily the Democratic party was in a hopeless
minority, Cleveland was elected. It was in this campaign that he
enunciated the principle that public office is a public trust, which was
his rule of action throughout his career. Both as sheriff and as mayor
he acted upon it with a vigor that brought him into collision with
predatory politicians, and the energy and address with which he defended
public interests made him widely known as the reform mayor of Buffalo.
His record and reputation naturally attracted the attention of the state
managers of the Democratic party, who were casting about for a candidate
strong enough to overthrow the established Republican control, and
Cleveland was just as distinctly drafted for the nomination to the
governorship in 1882 as he had been for his previous offices.

In his career as governor Cleveland displayed the same stanch
characteristics as before, and he was fearless and aggressive in
maintaining his principles. The most striking characteristic of his veto
messages is the utter absence of partisan or personal designs. Some
of the bills he vetoed purported to benefit labor interests, and
politicians are usually fearful of any appearance of opposition to such
interests: His veto of the bill establishing a five cent fare for the
New York elevated railways was an action of a kind to make him a target
for calumny and misrepresentation. Examination of the record reveals no
instance in which Cleveland flinched from doing his duty or faltered in
the full performance of it. He acted throughout in his avowed capacity
of a public trustee, and he conducted the office of governor with the
same laborious fidelity which he had displayed as sheriff and as mayor.
And now, as before, he antagonized elements of his own party who
sought only the opportunities of office and cared little for its
responsibilities. He did not unite suavity of manner with vigor of
action, and at times he allowed himself to reflect upon the motives of
opponents and to use language that was personally offensive. He told the
Legislature in one veto message that "of all the defective and shabby
legislation which has been presented to me, this is the worst and most
inexcusable." He once sent a scolding message to the State Senate, in
which he said that "the money of the State is apparently expended with
no regard to economy," and that "barefaced jobbery has been permitted."
The Senate having refused to confirm a certain appointee, he declared
that the opposition had "its rise in an overwhelming greed for the
patronage which may attach to the place," and that the practical
effect of such opposition was to perpetuate "the practice of unblushing
peculation." What he said was quite true and it was the kind of truth
that hurt. The brusqueness of his official style and the censoriousness
of his language infused even more personal bitterness into the
opposition which developed within his own party than in that felt in the
ranks of the opposing party. At the same time, these traits delighted
a growing body of reformers hostile to both the regular parties. These
"Mugwumps," as they were called, were as a class so addicted to personal
invective that it was said of them with as much truth as wit that they
brought malice into politics without even the excuse of partisanship.
But it was probably the enthusiastic support of this class which turned
the scale in New York in the presidential election of 1884.

In the national conventions of that year, there was an unusually small
amount of factional strife. In the Republican convention, President
Arthur was a candidate, but party sentiment was so strong for Blaine
that he led Arthur on the first ballot and was nominated on the fourth
by a large majority. In the Democratic convention, Cleveland was
nominated on the second ballot. Meanwhile, his opponents had organized a
new party from which more was expected than it actually accomplished.
It assumed the title Anti-Monopoly and chose the notorious demagogue,
General Benjamin F. Butler, as its candidate for President.

During this campaign, the satirical cartoon attained a power and an
effectiveness difficult to realize now that it has become an ordinary
feature of journalism, equally available for any school of opinion. But
it so happened that the rise of Cleveland in politics coincided with the
artistic career of Joseph Keppler, who came to this country from Vienna
and who for some years supported himself chiefly as an actor in
Western theatrical companies. He had studied drawing in Vienna and
had contributed cartoons to periodicals in that city. After some
unsuccessful ventures in illustrated journalism, he started a pictorial
weekly in New York in 1875. It was originally printed in German, but in
less than a year it was issued also in English. It was not until
1879 that it sprang into general notice through Keppler's success in
reproducing lithographed designs in color. Meanwhile, the artist was
feeling his way from the old style caricature, crowded with figures with
overhead loops of explanatory text, to designs possessing an artistic
unity expressive of an idea plain enough to tell its own story. He had
matured both his mechanical resources and his artistic method by the
time the campaign of 1884 came on, and he had founded a school which
could apply the style to American politics with aptness superior to
his own. It was Bernhard Gillam, who, working in the new Keppler style,
produced a series of cartoons whose tremendous impressiveness was
universally recognized. Blaine was depicted as the tattooed man and was
exhibited in that character in all sorts of telling situations. While
on the stump during the campaign, Blaine had sometimes literally to wade
through campaign documents assailing his personal integrity, and phrases
culled from them were chanted in public processions. One of the features
of a great parade of business men of New York was a periodical chorus
of "Burn this letter," suiting the action to the word and thus making a
striking pyrotechnic display.* But the cartoons reached people who
would never have been touched by campaign documents or by campaign
processions.


     *  The allusion was to the Mulligan letters, which had been made
public by Mr. Blaine himself when it had been charged that they
contained evidence of corrupt business dealings. The disclosure had been
made four years before and ample opportunity had existed for instituting
proceedings if the case warranted it, but nothing was done except to
nurse the scandal for campaign use.


Notwithstanding the exceptional violence and novel ingenuity of the
attacks made upon him, Blaine met them with such ability and address
that everywhere he augmented the ordinary strength of his party, and his
eventual defeat was generally attributed to an untoward event among his
own adherents at the close of the campaign. At a political reception
in the interest of Blaine among New York clergymen, the Reverend Dr.
Burchard spoke of the Democratic party as "the party of rum, Romanism,
and rebellion." Unfortunately Blaine did not hear him distinctly enough
to repudiate this slur upon the religious belief of millions of American
citizens, and alienation of sentiment caused by the tactless and
intolerant remark could easily account for Blaine's defeat by a small
margin. He was only 1149 votes behind Cleveland in New York in a poll of
over 1,125,000 votes, and only 23,005 votes behind in a national poll of
over 9,700,000 votes for the leading candidates. Of course Cleveland
in his turn was a target of calumny, and in his case the end of the
campaign did not bring the customary relief. He was pursued to the end
of his public career by active, ingenious, resourceful, personal spite
and steady malignity of political opposition from interests whose enmity
he had incurred while Governor of New York.

The situation which confronted Cleveland when he became President was
so complicated and embarrassing that perhaps even the most sagacious and
resourceful statesman could not have coped with it successfully, though
it is the characteristic of genius to accomplish the impossible. But
Cleveland was no genius; he was not even a man of marked talent. He was
stanch, plodding, laborious, and dutiful; but he was lacking in ability
to penetrate to the heart of obscure political problems and to deal
with primary causes rather than with effects. The great successes of his
administration were gained in particular problems whose significance had
already been clearly defined. In this field, Cleveland's resolute and
energetic performance of duty had splendid results.

At the time of Cleveland's inauguration as President, the Senate claimed
an extent of authority which, if allowed to go unchallenged, would
have turned the Presidency into an office much like that of the doge
of Venice, one of ceremonial dignity without real power. "The
Federalist"--that matchless collection of constitutional essays written
by Hamilton, Madison, and Jay--laid down the doctrine that "against the
enterprising ambition" of the legislative department "the people ought
to indulge all their jealousy and exhaust all their precautions."
But some of the precautions taken in framing the Constitution proved
ineffectual from the start. The right conferred upon the President to
recommend to the consideration of Congress "such measures as he shall
judge necessary and expedient," was emptied of practical importance by
the success of Congress in interpreting it as meaning no more than that
the President may request Congress to take a subject into consideration.
In practice, Congress considers only such measures as are recommended by
its own committees. The framers of the Constitution took special pains
to fortify the President's position by the veto power, which is treated
at length in the Constitution. By a special clause, the veto power was
extended to "every order, resolution or vote... except on a question of
adjournment"--a clause which apparently should enable the President
to strike off the "riders" continually put upon appropriation bills to
coerce executive action; but no President has ventured to exercise
this authority. Although the Senate was joined to the President as an
advisory council in appointments to office, it was explained in "The
Federalist" that "there will be no exertion of choice on the part of
Senators." Nevertheless, the Senate has claimed and exercised the right
to dictate appointments. While thus successfully encroaching upon the
authority of the President, the Senate had also been signally successful
in encroaching upon the authority of the House. The framers of the
Constitution anticipated for the House a masterful career like that of
the House of Commons, and they feared that the Senate could not
protect itself in the discharge of its own functions; so, although the
traditional principle that all revenue bills should originate in the
House was taken over into the Constitution, it was modified by the
proviso that "the Senate may propose or concur with amendments as on
other bills." This right to propose amendments has been improved by the
Senate until the prerogative of the House has been reduced to an empty
form. Any money bill may be made over by amendment in the Senate,
and when contests have followed, the Senate has been so successful in
imposing its will upon the House that the House has acquired the habit
of submission. Not long before the election of Cleveland, as has been
pointed out, this habitual deference of the House had enabled the Senate
to originate a voluminous tariff act in the form of an amendment to the
Internal Revenue Bill voted by the House.

In addition to these extensions of power through superior address in
management, the ascendancy of the Senate was fortified by positive law.
In 1867, when President Johnson fell out with the Republican leaders in
Congress, a Tenure of Office Act was passed over his veto, which
took away from the President the power of making removals except by
permission of the Senate. In 1869, when Johnson's term had expired, a
bill for the unconditional repeal of this law passed the House with
only sixteen votes in the negative, but the Senate was able to force a
compromise act which perpetuated its authority over removals.* President
Grant complained of this act as "being inconsistent with a faithful and
efficient administration of the government," but with all his great
fame and popularity he was unable to induce the Senate to relinquish the
power it had gained.


     *  The Act of April 5, 1869, required the President, within thirty
days after the opening of the sessions, to nominate persons for all
vacant offices, whether temporarily filled or not, and in place of all
officers who may have been suspended during the recess of the Senate.


This law was now invoked by Republicans as a means of counteracting
the result of the election. Such was the feeling of the times that
partisanship could easily masquerade as patriotism. Republicans still
believed that as saviors of the Union they had a prescriptive right to
the government. During the campaign, Eugene Field, the famous Western
poet, had given a typical expression of this sentiment in some scornful
verses concluding with this defiant notice:

These quondam rebels come today In penitential form, And hypocritically
say The country needs "Reform!" Out on reformers such as these; By
Freedom's sacred powers, We'll run the country as we please; We saved
it, and it's ours.

Although the Democratic party had won the Presidency and the House, the
Republicans still retained control of the Senate, and they were expected
as a matter of course to use their powers for party advantage. Some
memorable struggles, rich in constitutional precedents, issued from
these conditions.



CHAPTER IV. A CONSTITUTIONAL CRISIS

As soon as Cleveland was seated in the presidential chair, he had to
deal with a tremendous onslaught of office seekers. In ordinary business
affairs, a man responsible for general policy and management would
never be expected to fritter away his time and strength in receiving
applicants for employment. The fact that such servitude is imposed
upon the President of the United States shows that American political
arrangements are still rather barbaric, for such usages are more
suitable to some kinglet seated under a tree to receive the petitions of
his tribesmen than they are to a republican magistrate charged with the
welfare of millions of people distributed over a vast continent. Office
seekers apparently regard themselves as a privileged class with a right
of personal access to the President, and any appearances of aloofness or
reserve on his part gives sharp offense. The exceptional force of
such claims of privilege in the United States may be attributed to the
participation which members of Congress have acquired in the appointing
power. The system thus created imposes upon the President the duties
of an employment agent, and at the same time engages Congressmen in
continual occupation as office brokers. The President cannot deny
himself to Congressmen, since he is dependent upon their favor for
opportunity to get legislative consideration for his measures.

It was inevitable that numerous changes in office should take place
when the Democratic party came into power, after being excluded for
twenty-four years. It may be admitted that, in a sound constitutional
system, a change of management in the public business would not vacate
all offices any more than in private business, but would affect only
such leading positions as are responsible for policy and discipline.
Such a sensible system, however, had existed only in the early days of
the republic and at the time of Cleveland's accession to office federal
offices were generally used as party barracks. The situation which
confronted President Cleveland he thus described in later years:

"In numerous instances the post-offices were made headquarters for local
party committees and organizations and the centers of partisan scheming.
Party literature favorable to the postmaster's party, that never passed
regularly through the mails, was distributed through the post-offices as
an item of party service; and matter of a political character, passing
through the mails in the usual course and addressed to patrons belonging
to the opposite party, was withheld; disgusting and irritating placards
were prominently displayed in many post-offices, and the attention of
Democratic inquirers for mail matter was tauntingly directed to them
by the postmaster; and in various other ways postmasters and similar
officials annoyed and vexed those holding opposite political opinions,
who, in common with all having business at public offices, were entitled
to considerate and obliging treatment. In some quarters, official
incumbents neglected public duty to do political work and especially in
Southern States, they frequently were not only inordinately active in
questionable political work, but sought to do party service by secret
and sinister manipulation of colored votes, and by other practices
inviting avoidable and dangerous collisions between the white and
colored population."*


     * Cleveland, "Presidential Problems," pp. 42-43.


The Administration began its career in March, 1885. The Senate did not
convene until December. Meanwhile, removals and appointments went on
in the public service, the total for ten months being six hundred and
forty-three which was thirty-seven less than the number of removals made
by President Grant in seven weeks, in 1869.

In obedience to the statute of 1869, President Cleveland sent in all the
recess appointments within thirty days after the opening of the
session. They were referred to various committees according to the long
established custom of the Senate, but the Senate moved so slowly
that three months after the opening of the session, only seventeen
nominations had been considered, fifteen of which the Senate confirmed.

Meanwhile, the Senate had raised an issue which the President met with
a force and a directness probably unexpected. Among the recess
appointments was one to the office of District Attorney for the Southern
District of Alabama, in place of an officer who had been suspended in
July 1885, but whose term of office expired by limitation on December
20, 1885. Therefore, at the time the Senate took up the case, the Tenure
of Office Act did not apply to it, and the only question actually
open was whether the acting officer should be confirmed or rejected.
Nevertheless, the disposition to assert control over executive action
was so strong that the Senate drifted into a constitutional struggle
over a case that did not then involve the question of the President's
discretionary power of removal from office, which was really the point
at issue.

On December 26, 1885, the Judiciary Committee notified the
Attorney-General to transmit "all papers and information in the
possession of the Department" regarding both the nomination and "the
suspension and proposed removal from office" of the former incumbent. On
January 11, 1886, the Attorney-General sent to the Committee the papers
bearing upon the nomination, but withheld those touching the removal
on the ground that he had "received no direction from the President in
relation to their transmission." The matter was debated by the Senate
in executive session and on January 25, 1886, a resolution was
adopted which was authoritative in its tone and which directed the
Attorney-General to transmit copies of all documents and papers in
relation to the conduct of the office of District Attorney for the
Southern District of Alabama since January 1, 1885. Within three days,
Attorney-General Garland responded that he had already transmitted all
papers relating to the nomination; but with regard to the demand for
papers exclusively relating to the suspension of the former incumbent he
was directed by the President to say "that it is not considered that the
public interests will be promoted by a compliance."

The response of the Attorney-General was referred to the Judiciary
Committee which, on the 18th of February, made an elaborate report
exhibiting the issue as one which involved the right of Congress to
obtain information. It urged that "the important question, then, is
whether it is within the constitutional competence of either House of
Congress to have access to the official papers and documents in the
various public offices of the United States, created by laws enacted by
themselves." The report, which was signed only by the Republican
members of the Committee, was an adroit partisan performance, invoking
traditional constitutional principles in behalf of congressional
privilege. A distinct and emphatic assertion of the prerogative of the
Senate was made, however, in resolutions recommended to the Senate for
adoption. Those resolutions censured the Attorney-General and declared
it to be the duty of the Senate "to refuse its advice and consent
to proposed removals of officers" when papers relating to them "are
withheld by the Executive or any head of a department."

On the 2nd of March, a minority report was submitted, making the point
of which the cogency was obvious, that inasmuch as the term of the
official concerning whose suspension the Senate undertook to inquire had
already expired by legal limitation, the only object in pressing for the
papers in his case must be to review an act of the President which
was no longer within the jurisdiction of the Senate, even if the
constitutionality of the Tenure of Office Act should be granted.
The report also showed that of the precedents cited in behalf of the
majority's contention, the applicability could be maintained only of
those which were supplied by cases arising since 1867, before which time
the right of the President to remove officers at his own discretion was
fully conceded.

The controversy had so far followed the ordinary lines of partisan
contention in Congress, which public opinion was accustomed to regard
with contemptuous indifference as mere sparring for points in the
electioneering game. President Cleveland now intervened in a way which
riveted the attention of the nation upon the issue. Ever since the
memorable struggle which began when the Senate censured President
Jackson and did not end until that censure was expunged, the Senate
had been chary of a direct encounter with the President. Although the
response of the Attorney-General stated that he was acting under the
direction of the President, the pending resolutions avoided any mention
of the President but expressed "condemnation of the refusal of the
Attorney-General under whatever influence, to send to the Senate" the
required papers. The logical implication was that, when the orders
of the President and the Senate conflicted, it was the duty of the
Attorney-General to obey the Senate. This raised an issue which
President Cleveland met by sending to the Senate his message of March
1, 1886, which has taken a high rank among American constitutional
documents. It is strong in its logic, dignified in its tone, terse,
direct, and forceful in its diction.

Cleveland's message opened with the statement that "ever since the
beginning of the present session of the Senate, the different heads of
the departments attached to the executive branch of the government have
been plied with various requests and documents from committees of the
Senate, from members of such committees, and at last from the Senate
itself, requiring the transmission of reasons for the suspension of
certain officials during the recess of that body, or for papers touching
the conduct of such officials." The President then observed that "though
these suspensions are my executive acts, based upon considerations
addressed to me alone and for which I am wholly responsible, I have had
no invitation from the Senate to state the position which I have felt
constrained to assume." Further on, he clinched this admission of full
responsibility by declaring that "the letter of the Attorney-General in
response to the resolution of the Senate... was written at my suggestion
and by my direction."

This statement made clear in the sight of the nation that the true issue
was between the President and the Senate. The strength of the Senate's
position lay in its claim to the right of access to the records
of public offices "created by laws enacted by themselves." The
counterstroke of the President was one of the most effective passages
of his message in its effect upon public opinion. "I do not suppose,"
he said, "that the public offices of the United States are regulated or
controlled in their relations to either House of Congress by the fact
that they were 'created by laws enacted by themselves.' It must be that
these instrumentalities were enacted for the benefit of the people and
to answer the general purposes of government under the Constitution and
the laws, and that they are unencumbered by any lien in favor of either
branch of Congress growing out of their construction, and unembarrassed
by any obligation to the Senate as the price of their creation."

The President asserted that, as a matter of fact, no official papers
on file in the departments had been withheld. "While it is by no means
conceded that the Senate has the right, in any case, to review the
act of the Executive in removing or suspending a public officer upon
official documents or otherwise, it is considered that documents and
papers of that nature should, because they are official, be freely
transmitted to the Senate upon its demand, trusting the use of the same,
for proper and legitimate purposes, to the good faith of that body; and
though no such paper or document has been especially demanded in any
of the numerous requests and demands made upon the departments, yet as
often as they were found in the public offices they have been furnished
in answer to such applications." The point made by the President, with
sharp emphasis, was that there was nothing in his action which could be
construed as a refusal of access to official records; what he did refuse
to acknowledge was the right of the Senate to inquire into his motives
and to exact from him a disclosure of the facts, circumstances, and
sources of information that prompted his action. The materials upon
which his judgment was formed were of a varied character. "They consist
of letters and representations addressed to the Executive or intended
for his inspection; they are voluntarily written and presented by
private citizens who are not in the least instigated thereto by any
official invitation or at all subject to official control. While some
of them are entitled to Executive consideration, many of them are so
irrelevant or in the light of other facts so worthless, that they have
not been given the least weight in determining the question to which
they are supposed to relate." If such matter were to be considered
public records and subject to the inspection of the Senate, the
President would thereby incur "the risk of being charged with making a
suspension from office upon evidence which was not even considered."

Issue as to the status of such documents was joined by the President
in the sharpest possible way by the declaration: "I consider them in no
proper sense as upon the files of the department but as deposited there
for my convenience, remaining still completely under my control. I
suppose if I desired to take them into my custody I might do so
with entire propriety, and if I saw fit to destroy them no one could
complain."

Moreover, there were cases in which action was prompted by oral
communications which did not go on record in any form. As to this,
Cleveland observed, "It will not be denied, I suppose, that the
President may suspend a public officer in the entire absence of any
papers or documents to aid his official judgment and discretion; and
I am quite prepared to avow that the cases are not few in which
