thin stalactites of varying powers of reverberation, and these play
delightful tunes or at least tones.

One of the great objects of a trip to Manitou is to gain a sight of the
world-renowned, but singularly named, Garden of the Gods. The most
direct road to reach it from the village is by way of Manitou Avenue and
Buena Vista Drive, the latter being a well-traveled road, which enters
the avenue on the left, about a mile from the town, as one advances
towards Colorado City. The entrance to the Garden is past Balanced Rock,
an immense boulder which stands directly to the left of the road, poised
on such a slender base that it suggests an irregular pyramid standing on
its apex. To the right, as one passes this curious formation, is a steep
wall of stratified stone, draped with clinging vines, and overgrown with
evergreens. Pausing a moment on the brow of the elevation which is
reached here, one can look down into the valley below in which the
Garden lies. To the west are the mountains; to the east the plains. The
road which winds through the valley is a pleasant way. One's eyes and
mind are kept busy beholding and recording the interesting views which
here abound.

No one knows why this valley was named "The Garden of the Gods." There
is nothing especially garden-like in its appearance; but, doubtless
through "apt alliteration's artful aid," the name has become greatly
popular, and it would be foolish to quarrel with it, or make any attempt
to change it. There are, however, ample suggestions that Titanic forces
have been at work here, and it requires but little imagination to
ascribe these innumerable quaint sculpturings, these magnificent
architectural rock works, these grand and imposing temples, not made
with hands, to the agencies of the gods. Here are to be found carved in
the stone by those cunning instruments of the hands of Nature--the wind,
the rain, the sunbeam and the frost--curious, often grotesque, figures
irresistibly suggestive of forms of life. Here stands a statue of
Liberty, leaning on her shield, with the conventional Phrygian cap on
her head; there is a gigantic frog carved in sandstone; yonder is a
pilgrim, staff in hand. Groups of figures in curious attitudes are to be
seen on every hand.

Stone figures of the lion, the seal and the elephant are all found;
indeed, a lively imagination is not needed to discover in this Garden of
the Gods an endless variety of imitative forms of human beings, of birds
and beasts and reptiles. These figures possess a curious interest and
attract wondering attention; but the notable and majestic objects here
are the "Great Gateway" and the "Cathedral Spires." Two lofty tables of
carnelian colored sandstone, set directly opposite each other, about
fifty feet apart, and rising to a height of 330 feet, form the portals
of the far-famed Gateway. They rise from perfectly level ground, and
present a strangely impressive spectacle.

The "Cathedral Spires" are of a similar character to the Gateway, but
their crests are sharply splintered into spire-like pinnacles. The forms
assumed by the rocks here are remarkable indeed, but their color is
still more remarkable. No sandstones of the East glow with such a
splendor of carnelian hue. The striking contrast formed by these crimson
crags outlined against he deep blue sky, and gilded by the high, white
light of the unclouded sun of Colorado, cannot be described.

One of the most visited prairie-dog towns is close to the Garden of the
Gods. It is interesting to the tourist, and is generally visited on the
return from the Garden to Manitou. The town is situated on the road
which passes through the great Gateway to Colorado City, and may be seen
on a little plateau to the left. There are a great number of little
hills of sand and gravel thrown up by the dogs around their burrows.
Every fine day they can be seen at work around their dwellings, or
sitting on their haunches sunning themselves, and chattering gaily with
some neighbor. The burrow has an easy incline for about two feet, then
descends perpendicularly for five or six, and after that branches off
obliquely; it is often as large as a foot in diameter. It has been
claimed that the prairie-dog, the owl and the rattlesnake live
harmoniously together.

Concerning this, Mr. William G. Smith, the well-known naturalist, says:
"Impossible. The burrowing owl will generally be seen where dogs
congregate, and wherever the ground is undermined his snakeship is apt
to be found; but rest assured there is some lively 'scattering' to get
out of his way if he draws his slimy carcass into their burrows. The
dogs have no desire to contest his right to it, and give him all the
room he wants." The dogs at home are neat little fellows, and allow no
litter to accumulate around their doors. They go to bed early, and never
go around disturbing their neighbors before daylight.

Adjoining the Garden is a region of ridges. One ridge leads up to
another, and that to a third, and so on. This broken country, covered
with pine and cedar, and clothed with bunch grass and grama, makes a
capital tramping-ground, especially in winter, when rabbits, mountain
grouse and sage-hens are numerous enough to make it worth while to
shoulder a gun.

The way to reach the ridges is to take the road to the Garden of the
Gods, and follow it till the Quarry Road is reached. Pursuing the latter
up a gorge, and then turning to the left on a branch road, which zigzags
up the sides of the gorge, one soon finds oneself on the top of a ridge.
The rule in ridge-climbing is never to cross a gully, but always to keep
on top. All the ridges in this vicinity converge to the main ridge,
which overlooks Queen's Canon. This ridge bends to the northwest, and in
two or three miles joins a still higher one, which, strange to say, will
be found to overlook the Ute Pass, a thousand feet above the Fontaine
qui-Bouille, which flows in the bottom of the canon below--Eyrie, the
site of a private residence--a most interesting glen, but not open to
the public. The character of the monoliths in this canon is more
remarkable even than those of the Garden of the Gods.

The Major Domo is a column of red sandstone, rising to a height of 300
feet, with a curious swell near the summit, which far exceeds in
diameter the base of the shaft. It looks as though it might fall at any
moment in obedience to the laws of gravity, and it is not exceeded in
this regard by the Leaning Tower of Pisa. There is another glen of a
similar character, about two miles to the northwest, which is known as
Blair Athol. It is a beautiful spot, but, lacking water, has never been
used as a dwelling place. It abounds in wildly picturesque scenery, and
possesses rock formations of strange shapes and brilliant colors. There
are groves of magnificent pines; and the view of the distant plains
stretching to the eastern horizon is unobstructed, and of great
interest.

We have already spoken of the discovery of Pike's Peak. At the summit of
this mountain, 14,147 feet above the sea level, there is a little signal
service station, which can be reached by railway. When the mountain was
first discovered several efforts were made to reach the summit, but
without success. Major Pike himself recorded his opinion that it would
be impossible for any human being to ascend to the summit. In these days
of engineering progress there is, however, no such word as "impossible."
Several enthusiasts talked as far back as twenty years ago of the
possibility of a railroad to the very summit of the once inaccessible
peak, and fifteen years ago a survey was made, with a view to building a
railroad up the mountain, by a series of curves and nooks.

It was believed possible by the engineers that a railroad of standard
gauge and equipment could be operated without special appliances, and so
strongly was this view held that work was commenced on the project.
Eight miles of grading was completed, but the project was then abandoned
in consequence of adverse reports received from experts, sent out for
the purpose. Their statement was that no grade would be able to stand
the force of the washouts, though, strange to say, all the grading that
was accomplished stands to-day, as firm as ever. Three or four years
later another project, destined to be more successful, came into
existence. In 1889, grading commenced, and finally the work was
completed, and the summit of Pike's Peak can now be reached by railroad.

The road itself is one of the most remarkable ones in the United States,
and, indeed, in the world. The road-bed is fifteen feet wide, and there
is not a single foot of trestle work in the entire construction. There
are three short bridges of iron, and the precautions in the way of cross
sections of masonry are very elaborate. The average ascent per mile is
1,320 feet, and the total ascent is nearly 8,000 feet. In the center of
the track, between the heavy steel rails, are two cog rails, of great
strength. These are provided to insure absolute safety for travelers,
one being for general use and the other as a kind of reserve.

Special locomotives are used on the line. These were constructed by the
Baldwin Company, of Philadelphia, and include the latest patents in
engine building. When standing on a level track they appear to be at a
slant of about 8 per cent. When on a mountain road, like that of Pike's
Peak, they are approximately level. There are three wheels on each side
of the engine, but these are not driving wheels, being merely used to
help sustain the weight. The driving wheels operate on the cog rails in
the center of the track. The cars also slope, or slant, like the engine.
No couplings are used, so that one great element of danger, is avoided.
The engine and the cars have each independent cog brakes of almost
unlimited power. When traveling three or four miles an hour, the little
train, with the locomotive pushing instead of pulling it, can be stopped
instantly. When the speed reaches eight or nine miles an hour, stoppage
can be effected in less than one revolution of a wheel.

Not only is the ride up Pike's Peak a wonderful sensation and a constant
reminder of the triumphs of engineering, but it is also a source of
continual delight to the lover of the beautiful and awful in nature.
About half way up the mountain is a most delightful little hillside
retreat, aptly named "The Half-Way House." It is a very comfortable
establishment within rustic walls. The pines and firs which surround it
add a great charm to the outlook, and the cool mountain breeze is
charged with very pleasing odors. Tourists frequently spend a night here
and consider the sensation one of the most unique of a long trip.

A tourist describing a ride up Pike's Peak by this singular railroad,
says:

"We are now far above timber line. On all sides can be seen strange
flowers, of lovely forms and varied hues. Plants which attain
considerable proportions on the plains are here reduced to their lowest
forms. It is not an unusual thing to find a sunflower stalk in the
prairies rising from a height of eight to ten feet; here they grow like
dandelions in the grass, yet retaining all their characteristics of form
and color. Beyond this mountain meadow are great fields of disintegrated
granite, broken cubes of pink rock, so vast in extent that they might
well be the ruins of all the ancient cities in the world. Far below
flash the waters of Lake Morain, and beyond, to the southward, lie the
Seven Lakes. Another turn of the track to the northward, and the shining
rails stretch almost straight up what appears to be an inaccessible wall
of almost peerless granite. But no physical obstruction is formidable
enough to stop the progress of this marvelous railway; and passing the
yawning abyss of the 'Crater,' the line proceeds direct to the summit.
The grade here is one of 25 per cent., and timid passengers will not
escape a thrill of fear as they gaze over the brink of this precipice,
although the danger is absolutely nothing. At last the summit is
reached, and, disembarking, the tourists can seek refreshments in the
hotel, which will cater to their wants, and then spend the time before
the train returns in enjoying the view, and in rambling over the seventy
acres of broken granite which form the summit.

"The view from the Peak, once beheld, can never be forgotten. The first
sensation is that of complete isolation. The silence is profound. The
clouds are below us, and noiselessly break in foaming billows against
the faces of the beetling cliffs. Occasionally the silence is broken by
the deep roll of thunder from the depths beneath, as though the voice of
the Creator were uttering a stern edict of destruction. The storm rises,
the mists envelop us, there is a rush of wind, a rattle of hail, and we
seek refuge in the hotel.

"Pause a moment before entering, and hold up your hands. You can feel
the sharp tingle of the electric current as it escapes from your
finger-tips. The storm is soon over, and you can see the sunbeams
gilding the upper surfaces of the white clouds that sway and swing below
you half way down the mountain sides, and completely hide from view the
world beneath. The scenery shifts, like a drawn curtain the clouds part;
and as from the heights of another sphere we look forth upon the majesty
of the mountains and the plains, an ocean of inextricably entangled
peaks sweeps into view. Forests dark and vast seem like vague shadows on
distant mountain sides. A city is dwarfed into the compass of a single
block; water courses are mere threads of silver, laid in graceful curves
upon the green velvet mantle of the endless plains. The red granite
rocks beneath our feet are starred with tiny flowers, so minute that
they are almost microscopic, yet tinted with the most delicate and
tender colors.

"The majesty of greatness and the mystery of minuteness are here brought
face to face. What wonders of creation exist between these two extremes!
The thoughtful mind is awed by the contemplation of this scene, and when
the reflection comes that these vast spaces are but grains of sand upon
an infinite shore of creation, and that there are worlds of beauty as
far and varied between the tiny flowers and the ultimate researches of
the microscope as those which exist, on an ascending scale, between the
flowers and the great globe itself, the mind is overwhelmed with wonder
and admiration. It is in vain that one strives to describe the scene.
Only those who have beheld it can realize its grandeur and
magnificence."

Lovers of horseback riding regard the vicinity of Pike's Peak and
Manitou almost in the light of a paradise. A ride of a few miles in any
direction leads to some specially attractive or historic spot. Crystal
Park is one of the popular resorts of this kind. It is enclosed by high
mountains on all sides, with an entrance which partakes of the nature of
a natural gateway. In summer time this park is a profusion of bloom,
with wild flowers and vines seldom seen in any other part of the world
in such splendor. There are several elevated spots from which the
surrounding country can be seen for miles. Above the park is Cameron's
Cone. This is a mountain of much interest, although it can only be
reached and climbed by hardy, athletic individuals. All around there are
a profusion of canons. The Red Rock Canon was at one time a popular
resort. It took its name from the profusion of red sandstone on all
sides. This natural wealth finally destroyed the beauty of the canon,
which is now a mass of stone quarries. Bear Creek Canon has less of the
practical and more of the picturesque about it. A very charming brook
runs down the center, and there are two or three small but very
delightful falls.

The Ridge Road is a species of boulevard recently constructed for the
use of visitors to Manitou. At places the grade is so abrupt that timid
ladies do not care to drive down it. Otherwise it is a very pleasing
thoroughfare, with fresh surprises and delights awaiting the tourist
every time he passes along it. The view in every direction is most
charming and extensive. Pike's Peak can be seen to great advantage, and
in the forty miles of the road many different features of this mountain
can be observed. The road also leads to William's Canon.

Cheyenne Mountain, although dwarfed somewhat by Pike's Peak, is
deserving of notice. It is very massive in its form, and its sides are
almost covered by canons, brooklets and waterfalls. Two vast gorges,
know as the North and South Canons, are especially asked for by
visitors. The walls of these gorges are of rich granite, and stand
perpendicular on each side a thousand feet high. The effect is very
wonderful in a variety of ways. In the South Canon are the celebrated
Seven Falls, which were immortalized by Mrs. Helen Hunt Jackson, the
well-known poetess, whose remains were interred on Cheyenne Mountain by
her own request. The Seven Lakes must also be seen by all visitors to
the Manitou region, and there are so many more special features to be
examined and treasures to be discovered that, no matter how long one
stays in the neighborhood, a pang of regret is felt when the visit is
brought to a termination.

There are other spots in America where more awful scenes can be
encountered. There are few, however where the combinations are so
delightful or the general views so attractive and varying.





CHAPTER XVIII


INTO THE BOWELS OF THE EARTH.

The Grand Canon of the Colorado--Niagara Outdone--The Course of the
Colorado River--A Survey Party Through the Canon--Experiences of a
Terrible Night--Wonderful Contrasts of Color in the Massive Rocks--A
Natural Wall a Thousand Feet High--Hieroglyphics which have Never been
Deciphered--Relics of a Superior Race--Conjecture as to the Origin of
the Ancient Bearded White Men.


We have already spoken of Niagara as one of the wonders of the world,
and one of the most sought-after beauty spots of America. We will now
devote a few pages to a description of a far more remarkable natural
wonder and to a phenomenon which, were it situated nearer the center of
population, would have long since outclassed even Niagara as a tourist's
Mecca.

Reference is made to the Grand Canon of the Colorado.

Few people have the slightest conception of the magnitude or awfulness
of this canon. It is clearly one of the wonders of the world, and its
vastness is such that to explore it from end to end is a work of the
greatest possible difficulty.

Even in area, the canon is extraordinary. It is large enough to contain
more than one Old World country. It is long enough to stretch across
some of the largest States in the Union. Some of the smaller New England
States would be absolutely swallowed up in the yawning abyss could they,
by any means, be removed to it bodily. An express train running at a
high rate of speed, without a single stop and on a first-class road-bed,
could hardly get from one end of the canon to the other in less than
five hours, and an ordinary train with the usual percentage of stoppage
would about make the distance between morning and evening.

Reduced to the record of cold figures, the Grand Canon is made up of a
series of chasms measuring about 220 miles in length, as much as 12
miles in width, and frequently as much as 7,000 feet in depth.

This marvelous feature of American scenery is very fully described in
"Our Own Country," published by the National Publishing Company. In
describing the canon, that profusely illustrated work says that the
figures quoted "do not readily strike a responsive chord in the human
mind, for the simple reason that they involve something utterly
different from anything that more than 99 per cent. of the inhabitants
of the world have ever seen. The man who gazes upon Niagara for the
first time, is astounded at the depth of the gorge as well as at the
force of the water; and he who has seen Niagara can appreciate somewhat
the marvels of the Grand Canon, when he bears in mind that the great
wonder of the Western World is for miles at a stretch more than fifty
times as deep as the falls and the gorge, generally admitted to be the
most awful scenic grandeur within reach of the ordinary traveler. Nor is
this all. Visitors to Paris who have enjoyed a bird's-eye view of the
gay city from the summit of Eifel Tower, have felt terribly impressed
with its immense altitude, and have been astounded at the effect on the
appearance of living and inanimate objects so far below them. How many
of the Americans who have been thus impressed by French enterprise, have
realized that in their own country there is a natural gorge, at points
