nothing to fear from his successor, they made the most of their freedom in
the intervening time and secured a reputation for frankness by their
fearlessness. They were not satisfied merely to be relieved of further
terror, but desired to show their courage by wanton insolence.

[Sidenote:--3--] Pertinax was a Ligurian from Alba Pompeia; his father was
not of noble birth and he himself had just enough literary training for
ordinary needs. Under these conditions he had become an associate of
Claudius Pompeianus, through whose influence he had become a commander in
the cavalry, and had reached such a height that he now came to be emperor
over his former friend. And I at that time, during the reign of Pertinax,
saw Pompeianus for the first and last occasion. He was wont to live mostly
in the country on account of Commodus [and very seldom came down to the
city], making his age and a disease of the eyes his excuse [and he had
never before, when I was present, entered the senate]. Moreover, after
Pertinax he was always ill. [During his reign he saw and was well
[Footnote: Reading [Greek: erroto] (Dindorf).] and advised.] Pertinax
honored him mightily in every way and in the senate made him take the seat
beside him. [The same privilege he accorded also to Acilius Glabrio. This
man, too, at that period both heard and saw. It was to these, then, that
he granted such surpassing honor.] Toward us also he behaved in a very
sociable way. He was easy of access, listened readily to any one's
request, and cordially answered as he thought right. Again, he gave us
banquets marked by moderation. Whenever he failed to invite us, he would
send to various persons various foods, even the least costly. For this the
wealthy and vainglorious made great sport of him, but the rest of us, who
valued excellence above debauchery, approved his course.

[Public opinion regarding Pertinax was so different from
that in the case of Commodus that those who heard what had happened,
suspecting that this story had been spread by Commodus to test them, in
several instances (governors of provinces being particularly involved)
imprisoned the men who brought the news. It was not that they did not wish
it to be true, but they were more afraid of seeming to have helped destroy
Commodus than of not attaching themselves to Pertinax. For under the
latter one who even committed an error of this kind might still breathe
freely, but under the former not even a faultless person could feel safe.]

[Sidenote:--4--] While he was still in Britain, after that great revolt
which he quelled, and was being accorded praise on all sides, a horse
named Pertinax won a race at Rome. It belonged to the Greens and was
picked as a winner by Commodus. So, when its partisans raised a great
shout, proclaiming "It is Pertinax," the others, their opponents, in
disgust at Commodus likewise prayed (speaking with reference to the man,
not the horse): "Would that it might be so!" Later, when this same horse
by reason of age had given up racing and was in the country, it was sent
for by Commodus, who brought it into the hippodrome, gilded its hoofs, and
adorned its back with a gilded skin. And people suddenly seeing it cried
out again: "It is Pertinax!" The very expression was itself ominous, since
it occurred at the last horse-race that year, and immediately after it the
sovereignty passed to Pertinax. A similar import was attached to the club,
for Commodus when about to fight on the final day had given it to
Pertinax.

[Sidenote:--5--] It was in this way that Pertinax came into power. He
obtained all the proper titles and a new one for wishing to be democratic.
That is, he was named Princeps Senatus, according to ancient custom. He at
once reduced to order everything that was previously irregular and lacking
in discipline. He showed in his capacity of emperor kindliness and
uprightness, unimpeachable management, and a most careful consideration
for the public welfare. Pertinax did everything, in fact, that a good
emperor should do, and he removed the stigma of disgrace from the memories
of those who had been unjustly put to death; moreover, he took oath that
he would never sanction such a penalty. Immediately some recalled their
relatives and some their friends with tears and joy at once; formerly not
even these exhibitions of emotion were allowed. After this they exhumed
the bodies, some of which were found entire and some in fragments,
according as decay and time had caused each of them to fare, and they gave
them decent treatment and deposited them in their ancestral tombs.

At this time the treasury was suffering from such lack of funds that only
twenty-five myriad denarii could be found. Pertinax therefore had
difficulty in raising money from the images and the arms, the horses and
the trappings, and the favorites of Commodus, but gave to the Pretorians
all that he had promised and to the people one hundred denarii apiece. All
the articles that Commodus had gathered by way of luxury and for armed
combats and for chariot driving were exposed in the auction-room, the
principal object sought being their sale, though there was a further
intention to show what were the late emperor's deeds and practices and to
ascertain who would purchase such articles.

[Sidenote:--6--] Laetus consistently spoke well of Pertinax and abused
Commodus [relating all the latter's evil deeds].

He [Footnote: Pertinax is meant.] summoned some barbarians that had
received a large sum of gold coin from Commodus in return for preservation
of peace (the party was already on the road) and demanded its return,
saying: "Tell your people that Pertinax is ruler." The foreigners knew his
name very well as a result of the reverses they had suffered when he made
a campaign against them with Marcus.--Let me tell you another similar act
of his intended to cast reflections upon Commodus. He found that some
filthy clowns and buffoons, disgusting in appearance, with still more
disgusting names and habits, had been made extremely wealthy by Commodus
on account of their wantonness and licentiousness; accordingly, he made
public their titles and the amounts they had acquired. The former caused
laughter and the latter wrath and grief, for there were some of them that
possessed just the sums for which the emperor had slain numbers of
senators. However, Laetus did not remain permanently loyal to Pertinax, or
perhaps we might even say not for a moment. Since he did not get what he
wanted, he proceeded to incite the soldiers against him (as will be
related).

[Sidenote:--7--] Pertinax appointed as prefect of the city his
father-in-law, Flavius Sulpicianus, a man who in any case deserved the
position. Yet he was unwilling to make his wife Augusta or his son Caesar,
though we voted him permission. He rejected emphatically each proposition,
whether because he had not yet firmly rooted his own power, or because he
did not choose to let his unchaste consort sully the name of Augusta. As
for his son, who was still a child, he did not care to have him spoiled by
the dignity [Footnote: Reading [Greek: ogkho] (Reimar) for the MS. [Greek:
horkho].] and the hope implied in the name before he should be educated.
Indeed, he would not even bring him up in the palace, but on the very
first day of his sovereignty he put aside everything that had belonged to
him previously and divided it between his children--he had also a
daughter--and gave orders that they should live at their grandfather's
house; there he visited them occasionally in the capacity of father and
not of emperor.

[Sidenote:--8--] Now, since the soldiers were no longer allowed to plunder
nor the Caesarians to indulge their licentiousness, they hated him
bitterly. The Caesarians attempted no revolt, because they were unarmed,
but the Pretorian soldiers and Laetus formed a plot against him. In the
first place they selected Falco the consul for emperor, because he was
prominent for both wealth and family, and purposed to bring him to the
camp while Pertinax was at the coast investigating the corn supply. The
latter, learning of the plan, returned in haste to the City, and coming
before the senate said: "You should not be ignorant, Conscript Fathers,
that though I found but twenty-five myriad denarii, I have distributed as
much to the soldiers as did Marcus and Lucius, to whom were left
sixty-seven thousand five hundred myriads. It is the surprising Caesarians
who have been responsible for this deficiency of funds." Pertinax told a
lie when he said that he had bestowed upon the soldiers an equal amount
with Lucius and Marcus; for the one had given them about five thousand and
the other about three thousand denarii apiece. The soldiers and the
Caesarians, who were present in the senate in great numbers, became
mightily indignant and muttered dangerously. But as we were about to
condemn Falco [and were already declaring him an enemy] Pertinax rose and
cried out: "Heaven forbid that any senator, while I am ruler, be put to
death even for a just cause!" [And in this way Falco's life was saved, and
thenceforth he lived in the country, preserving a cautious and respectful
demeanor.]

[Sidenote:--9--] But Laetus, using Falco as a starting point, destroyed
many of the soldiers on the pretence that the emperor ordered it. The
rest, when they became aware of it, were afraid that they should perish,
too, and raised a tumult. Two hundred bolder than their mates invaded the
palace with drawn swords. Pertinax had no warning of their approach until
they had got upstairs. Then his wife rushed in and informed him what had
happened. On learning this he behaved in a way which one may call noble or
senseless or however one pleases. For, whereas he might probably have
killed his assailants (since he had the night-guard and the cavalry by to
protect him and there were also many other people in the palace at the
time), or might at any rate have concealed himself and made his escape to
some place or other, and might have closed the doors of the palace and the
other intervening doors, he, nevertheless, adopted neither alternative.
Instead, hoping to awe them by his presence and thus gain a hearing and
persuade them to their duty, he confronted the approaching band, which was
already indoors. No one of their fellow soldiers had barred the way, and
the porters and other Caesarians so far from making any door fast had
opened absolutely all the entrances. The soldiers, seeing him, at first
were [Sidenote:--10--] abashed, save one, and rested their eyes on the
floor and began thrusting their swords back into their scabbards. But the
one exception leaped forward, exclaiming: "This sword the soldiers have
sent you," and forthwith made a dash at him, striking him a blow. Then his
comrades did not restrain themselves and felled their emperor together
with Eclectus. The latter alone had not deserted him and defended him as
far as he was able, even to the extent of wounding several. Wherefore I,
who still earlier believed that he had shown himself a man of worth, now
thoroughly admired him. The soldiers cut off the head of Pertinax and
stuck it on a spear, glorying in the deed. Thus did Pertinax, who
undertook to restore everything in a brief interval, meet his end. He did
not comprehend, though a well trained man of affairs, that it is
impossible with safety to reform everything at once, but that the
constitution of a government requires, if anything does, both time and
wisdom. He had lived sixty-seven years lacking four months and three days.
He had reigned eighty-seven days.

[Sidenote:--11--] When the fate of Pertinax was reported, some ran to
their homes and some to those of the soldiers, and paid heed to their own
safety. It happened that Sulpicianus had been despatched by Pertinax to
the camp to set in order matters there, and he consequently stayed there
and took action looking to the appointment of an emperor. But there was a
certain Didius Julianus [of senatorial rank but eccentric character], an
insatiate money-getter and reckless spender, always anxious for a change
in the government, who on account of the last named proclivity had been
driven out by Commodus to his own city, Mediolanum. He, accordingly, on
hearing of the death of Pertinax, hastily made his way to the camp, and
standing near the gates of the fort made offers to the soldiers in regard
to the Roman throne. Then ensued a most disgraceful affair and one
unworthy of Rome. For just as is done in some market and auction-room,
both the city and her whole empire were bid off. The sellers were the
people who had killed their emperor, and the would-be buyers were
Sulpicianus and Julianus, who vied to outbid each other, one from within,
the other from without. By their increases they speedily reached the sum
of five thousand denarii per man. Some of the guard kept reporting and
saying to Julianus: "Sulpicianus is willing to give so much; now what will
you add?" And again to Sulpicianus: "Julianus offers so much; how much
more do you make it?" Sulpicianus would have won the day, since he was
inside and was prefect of the city and was the first to say five thousand,
had not Julianus raised his bid, and no longer by small degrees but by
twelve hundred and fifty denarii at once, which he offered with a great
shout, indicating the amount likewise on his fingers. Captivated by the
difference and at the same time through fear that Sulpicianus might avenge
Pertinax (an idea that Julianus put into their heads) they received the
highest bidder inside and designated him emperor.

[Sidenote:--12--] So toward evening the new ruler turned his steps with
speed toward the Forum and senate-house. He was escorted by a vast number
of Pretorians with numerous standards as if prepared for action, his
object being to scare both us and the populace and thereby secure our
allegiance. The soldiers called him "Commodus," and exalted him in various
other ways. As the news was brought to us each individually, and we
ascertained the truth, we were possessed with fear of Julianus and the
soldiers, especially all of us who had [Lacuna] any favors for Pertinax.
[Footnote: A slight gap in the MS., where we should perhaps read: "all of
us who had done any favors for Pertinax or anything to displease Julianus"
(Boissevain).] [Lacuna] I was one of them, for I had been honored by
Pertinax in various ways, owing to him my appointment as praetor, and when
acting as advocate for others at trials I had frequently proved Julianus
in the wrong on many points. Nevertheless, we put in an appearance, and
partly for this very reason, since it did not seem to us to be safe to
hide at home, for fear that act in itself might arouse suspicion. So when
bath [Footnote: Reading [Greek: leloumenoi] (Reiske) for the MS. [Greek:
dedoulomenoi].] and dinner were both over, we pushed our way through the
soldiers, entered the senate-house, and heard the potentate deliver a
characteristic speech, in the course of which he said: "I see that you
need a ruler, and I myself am better fitted than any one else to direct
you. And I should mention all the advantages I can offer, if you did not
know them perfectly and had not already had experience with me.
Consequently, I felt no need of being attended by many soldiers, but have
come to you alone, that you may ratify what has been given me by them." "I
am here alone" is what he said, when he had surrounded the entire exterior
of the senate-house with heavily armed men and had a number of soldiers in
the senate-house itself. Moreover, he mentioned our being aware what kind
of person he was, and made us both hate and fear him.

[Sidenote:--13--] In this way he got his imperial power confirmed also by
decrees of the senate and returned to the palace. Finding the dinner that
had been prepared for Pertinax he made great fun of it, and sending out to
every place from which by any means whatever something expensive could be
procured at that time of day he satisfied his hunger (the corpse was still
lying in the building) and then proceeded to amuse himself by dicing.
Among his companions was Pylades the dancer. The next day we went up to
visit him, feigning in looks and behavior much that we did not feel, so as
not to let our grief be detected. The populace, however, openly frowned
upon the affair, spoke its mind as much at it pleased, and was ready to do
what it could. Finally, when he came to the senate-house and was about to
sacrifice to Janus before the entrance, all bawled out as if by
preconcerted arrangement, terming him empire-plunderer and parricide. He
affected not to be angry and promised them some money, whereupon they grew
indignant at the implication that they could be bribed and all cried out
together: "We don't want it, we won't take it!" The surrounding buildings
echoed back the shout in a way to make one shudder. When Julianus had
heard their response, he could endure it no longer, but ordered that those
who stood nearest should be slain. That excited the populace a great deal
more, and it did not cease expressing its longing for Pertinax or its
abuse of Julianus, its invocations of the gods or its curses upon the
soldiers. Though many were wounded and killed in many parts of the city,
they continued to resist and finally seized weapons and made a rush into
the hippodrome. There they spent the night and the ensuing day without
food or drink, calling upon the remainder of the soldiery (especially
Pescennius Niger and his followers in Syria) with prayers for assistance.
Later, feeling the effects of their outcries and fasting and loss of
sleep, they separated and kept quiet, awaiting the hoped for deliverance
from abroad.

  "I do not assist the populace: for it has not called upon me."

[Sidenote:--14--] Julianus after seizing the power in this way managed
affairs in a servile fashion, paying court to the senate as well as to men
of any influence. Sometimes he made offers, again he bestowed gifts, and
he laughed and sported with anybody and everybody. He was constantly going
to the theatre and kept getting up banquets: in fine, he left nothing
undone to win our favor. However, he was not trusted; his servility was so
abject that it made him an object of suspicion. Everything out of the
common, even if it seems to be a kindness to somebody, is regarded by men
of sense as a trap.

The senate had at one time voted him a golden statue and he refused to
accept it, saying: "Give me a bronze one so that it may last; for I
perceive that the gold and silver statues of the emperors that ruled
before me have been torn down, whereas the bronze ones remain." In this he
was not right: since 'tis excellence that safeguards the memory of
potentates. And the bronze statue that was bestowed upon him was torn down
after he was overthrown.

This was what went on in Rome. Now I shall speak about what happened
outside and the various revolutions. There were three men at this time who
were commanding each three legions of citizens and many foreigners
besides, and they all asserted their claims,--Severus, Niger, and Albinus.
The last-named governed Britain, Severus Pannonia, and Niger Syria. These
were the three persons darkly indicated by the three stars that suddenly
came to view surrounding the sun, when Julianus in our presence was
offering the Sacrifices of Entrance in front of the senate-house. These
heavenly bodies were so very brilliant that the soldiers kept continually
looking at them and pointing them out to one another, declaring moreover
that some dreadful fate would befall the usurper. As for us, however much
we hoped and prayed that it might so prove, yet the fear of the moment
would not permit us to gaze at them, save by occasional glances. Such are
the facts that I know about the matter.

[Sidenote:--15--] Of the three leaders that I have mentioned Severus [was]
the shrewdest [in being able to foresee the future with accuracy, to
manage present affairs successfully, to ascertain everything concealed as
well as if it had been laid bare and to work out every complicated
situation with the greatest ease.] He understood in advance that after
deposing Julianus the three would fall to blows with one another and offer
combat for the possession of the empire, and therefore determined to win
over the rival who was nearest him. So he sent a letter by one of his
trusted managers to Albinus, creating him Caesar. Of Niger, who was proud
of having been invoked by the people, he had no hopes. Albinus on the
supposition that he was going to share the empire with Severus remained
where he was: Severus made all strategic points in Europe, save Byzantium,
his own and hastened toward Rome. He did not venture outside a protecting
circle of weapons, having selected his six hundred most valiant men in
whose midst he passed his time day and night; these did not once put off
their breastplates until they reached Rome.

[This Fulvius [Footnote: The name, so far as can be discerned in the MS.,
may be Fulvius or Flavius or Fabius. The position and import of the
fragment are alike doubtful.] (?) too, who when governor of Africa had
been tried and condemned by Pertinax for rascality, avarice, and
licentiousness, was later elevated to the highest position by the same
man, now become emperor, as a favor to Severus.]
