distance a number of little black specks, like horsemen in rapid
motion. Henry Chatillon, with Shaw and myself, galloped toward them
to reconnoiter, when to our amusement we saw the supposed Arapahoes
resolved into the black tops of some pine trees which grew along a
ravine. The summits of these pines, just visible above the verge of
the prairie, and seeming to move as we ourselves were advancing, looked
exactly like a line of horsemen.

We encamped among ravines and hollows, through which a little brook
was foaming angrily. Before sunrise in the morning the snow-covered
mountains were beautifully tinged with a delicate rose color. A noble
spectacle awaited us as we moved forward. Six or eight miles on our
right, Pike's Peak and his giant brethren rose out of the level prairie,
as if springing from the bed of the ocean. From their summits down to
the plain below they were involved in a mantle of clouds, in restless
motion, as if urged by strong winds. For one instant some snowy peak,
towering in awful solitude, would be disclosed to view. As the
clouds broke along the mountain, we could see the dreary forests, the
tremendous precipices, the white patches of snow, the gulfs and chasms
as black as night, all revealed for an instant, and then disappearing
from the view. One could not but recall the stanza of "Childe Harold":

     Morn dawns, and with it stern Albania's hills,
     Dark Suli's rocks, and Pindus' inland peak,
     Robed half in mist, bedewed with snowy rills,
     Array'd in many a dun and purple streak,
     Arise; and, as the clouds along them break,
     Disclose the dwelling of the mountaineer:
     Here roams the wolf, the eagle whets his beak,
     Birds, beasts of prey, and wilder men appear,
     And gathering storms around convulse the closing year.

Every line save one of this description was more than verified here.
There were no "dwellings of the mountaineer" among these heights. Fierce
savages, restlessly wandering through summer and winter, alone invade
them. "Their hand is against every man, and every man's hand against
them."

On the day after, we had left the mountains at some distance. A black
cloud descended upon them, and a tremendous explosion of thunder
followed, reverberating among the precipices. In a few moments
everything grew black and the rain poured down like a cataract. We got
under an old cotton-wood tree which stood by the side of a stream, and
waited there till the rage of the torrent had passed.

The clouds opened at the point where they first had gathered, and the
whole sublime congregation of mountains was bathed at once in warm
sunshine. They seemed more like some luxurious vision of Eastern romance
than like a reality of that wilderness; all were melted together into
a soft delicious blue, as voluptuous as the sky of Naples or the
transparent sea that washes the sunny cliffs of Capri. On the left the
whole sky was still of an inky blackness; but two concentric rainbows
stood in brilliant relief against it, while far in front the ragged
cloud still streamed before the wind, and the retreating thunder
muttered angrily.

Through that afternoon and the next morning we were passing down the
banks of the stream called La Fontaine qui Bouille, from the boiling
spring whose waters flow into it. When we stopped at noon, we were
within six or eight miles of the Pueblo. Setting out again, we found by
the fresh tracks that a horseman had just been out to reconnoiter us; he
had circled half round the camp, and then galloped back full speed for
the Pueblo. What made him so shy of us we could not conceive. After an
hour's ride we reached the edge of a hill, from which a welcome sight
greeted us. The Arkansas ran along the valley below, among woods and
groves, and closely nestled in the midst of wide cornfields and green
meadows where cattle were grazing rose the low mud walls of the Pueblo.



CHAPTER XXI

THE PUEBLO AND BENT'S FORT


We approached the gate of the Pueblo. It was a wretched species of fort
of most primitive construction, being nothing more than a large
square inclosure, surrounded by a wall of mud, miserably cracked and
dilapidated. The slender pickets that surmounted it were half broken
down, and the gate dangled on its wooden hinges so loosely, that to
open or shut it seemed likely to fling it down altogether. Two or three
squalid Mexicans, with their broad hats, and their vile faces overgrown
with hair, were lounging about the bank of the river in front of it.
They disappeared as they saw us approach; and as we rode up to the gate
a light active little figure came out to meet us. It was our old friend
Richard. He had come from Fort Laramie on a trading expedition to Taos;
but finding, when he reached the Pueblo, that the war would prevent his
going farther, he was quietly waiting till the conquest of the country
should allow him to proceed. He seemed to consider himself bound to do
the honors of the place. Shaking us warmly by the hands, he led the way
into the area.

Here we saw his large Santa Fe wagons standing together. A few squaws
and Spanish women, and a few Mexicans, as mean and miserable as the
place itself, were lazily sauntering about. Richard conducted us to the
state apartment of the Pueblo, a small mud room, very neatly
finished, considering the material, and garnished with a crucifix, a
looking-glass, a picture of the Virgin, and a rusty horse pistol. There
were no chairs, but instead of them a number of chests and boxes
ranged about the room. There was another room beyond, less sumptuously
decorated, and here three or four Spanish girls, one of them very
pretty, were baking cakes at a mud fireplace in the corner. They brought
out a poncho, which they spread upon the floor by way of table-cloth.
A supper, which seemed to us luxurious, was soon laid out upon it, and
folded buffalo robes were placed around it to receive the guests. Two
or three Americans, besides ourselves, were present. We sat down Turkish
fashion, and began to inquire the news. Richard told us that, about
three weeks before, General Kearny's army had left Bent's Fort to march
against Santa Fe; that when last heard from they were approaching the
mountainous defiles that led to the city. One of the Americans produced
a dingy newspaper, containing an account of the battles of Palo Alto and
Resaca de la Palma. While we were discussing these matters, the doorway
was darkened by a tall, shambling fellow, who stood with his hands in
his pockets taking a leisurely survey of the premises before he entered.
He wore brown homespun pantaloons, much too short for his legs, and
a pistol and bowie knife stuck in his belt. His head and one eye
were enveloped in a huge bandage of white linen. Having completed his
observations, he came slouching in and sat down on a chest. Eight or ten
more of the same stamp followed, and very coolly arranging themselves
about the room, began to stare at the company. Shaw and I looked at each
other. We were forcibly reminded of the Oregon emigrants, though these
unwelcome visitors had a certain glitter of the eye, and a compression
of the lips, which distinguished them from our old acquaintances of the
prairie. They began to catechise us at once, inquiring whence we had
come, what we meant to do next, and what were our future prospects in
life.

The man with the bandaged head had met with an untoward accident a few
days before. He was going down to the river to bring water, and was
pushing through the young willows which covered the low ground, when he
came unawares upon a grizzly bear, which, having just eaten a buffalo
bull, had lain down to sleep off the meal. The bear rose on his hind
legs, and gave the intruder such a blow with his paw that he laid his
forehead entirely bare, clawed off the front of his scalp, and narrowly
missed one of his eyes. Fortunately he was not in a very pugnacious
mood, being surfeited with his late meal. The man's companions, who were
close behind, raised a shout and the bear walked away, crushing down the
willows in his leisurely retreat.

These men belonged to a party of Mormons, who, out of a well-grounded
fear of the other emigrants, had postponed leaving the settlements until
all the rest were gone. On account of this delay they did not reach Fort
Laramie until it was too late to continue their journey to California.
Hearing that there was good land at the head of the Arkansas, they
crossed over under the guidance of Richard, and were now preparing to
spend the winter at a spot about half a mile from the Pueblo.

When we took leave of Richard, it was near sunset. Passing out of the
gate, we could look down the little valley of the Arkansas; a beautiful
scene, and doubly so to our eyes, so long accustomed to deserts and
mountains. Tall woods lined the river, with green meadows on either
hand; and high bluffs, quietly basking in the sunlight, flanked the
narrow valley. A Mexican on horseback was driving a herd of cattle
toward the gate, and our little white tent, which the men had pitched
under a large tree in the meadow, made a very pleasing feature in the
scene. When we reached it, we found that Richard had sent a Mexican to
bring us an abundant supply of green corn and vegetables, and invite
us to help ourselves to whatever we wished from the fields around the
Pueblo.

The inhabitants were in daily apprehensions of an inroad from more
formidable consumers than ourselves. Every year at the time when the
corn begins to ripen, the Arapahoes, to the number of several thousands,
come and encamp around the Pueblo. The handful of white men, who are
entirely at the mercy of this swarm of barbarians, choose to make a
merit of necessity; they come forward very cordially, shake them by the
hand, and intimate that the harvest is entirely at their disposal. The
Arapahoes take them at their word, help themselves most liberally, and
usually turn their horses into the cornfields afterward. They have the
foresight, however, to leave enough of the crops untouched to serve as
an inducement for planting the fields again for their benefit in the
next spring.

The human race in this part of the world is separated into three
divisions, arranged in the order of their merits; white men, Indians,
and Mexicans; to the latter of whom the honorable title of "whites" is
by no means conceded.

In spite of the warm sunset of that evening the next morning was a
dreary and cheerless one. It rained steadily, clouds resting upon the
very treetops. We crossed the river to visit the Mormon settlement. As
we passed through the water, several trappers on horseback entered it
from the other side. Their buckskin frocks were soaked through by the
rain, and clung fast to their limbs with a most clammy and uncomfortable
look. The water was trickling down their faces, and dropping from the
ends of their rifles, and from the traps which each carried at the
pommel of his saddle. Horses and all, they had a most disconsolate and
woebegone appearance, which we could not help laughing at, forgetting
how often we ourselves had been in a similar plight.

After half an hour's riding we saw the white wagons of the Mormons drawn
up among the trees. Axes were sounding, trees were falling, and log-huts
going up along the edge of the woods and upon the adjoining meadow.
As we came up the Mormons left their work and seated themselves on
the timber around us, when they began earnestly to discuss points
of theology, complain of the ill-usage they had received from the
"Gentiles," and sound a lamentation over the loss of their great temple
at Nauvoo. After remaining with them an hour we rode back to our camp,
happy that the settlements had been delivered from the presence of such
blind and desperate fanatics.

On the morning after this we left the Pueblo for Bent's Fort. The
conduct of Raymond had lately been less satisfactory than before, and
we had discharged him as soon as we arrived at the former place; so that
the party, ourselves included, was now reduced to four. There was some
uncertainty as to our future course. The trail between Bent's Fort and
the settlements, a distance computed at six hundred miles, was at this
time in a dangerous state; for since the passage of General Kearny's
army, great numbers of hostile Indians, chiefly Pawnees and Comanches,
had gathered about some parts of it. A little after this time they
became so numerous and audacious, that scarcely a single party, however
large, passed between the fort and the frontier without some token of
their hostility. The newspapers of the time sufficiently display this
state of things. Many men were killed, and great numbers of horses and
mules carried off. Not long since I met with the gentleman, who, during
the autumn, came from Santa Fe to Bent's Fort, when he found a party
of seventy men, who thought themselves too weak to go down to the
settlements alone, and were waiting there for a re-enforcement. Though
this excessive timidity fully proves the ignorance and credulity of
the men, it may also evince the state of alarm which prevailed in the
country. When we were there in the month of August, the danger had not
become so great. There was nothing very attractive in the neighborhood.
We supposed, moreover, that we might wait there half the winter without
finding any party to go down with us; for Mr. Sublette and the others
whom we had relied upon had, as Richard told us, already left Bent's
Fort. Thus far on our journey Fortune had kindly befriended us. We
resolved therefore to take advantage of her gracious mood and trusting
for a continuance of her favors, to set out with Henry and Delorier, and
run the gauntlet of the Indians in the best way we could.

Bent's Fort stands on the river, about seventy-five miles below the
Pueblo. At noon of the third day we arrived within three or four miles
of it, pitched our tent under a tree, hung our looking-glasses against
its trunk and having made our primitive toilet, rode toward the fort.
We soon came in sight of it, for it is visible from a considerable
distance, standing with its high clay walls in the midst of the
scorching plains. It seemed as if a swarm of locusts had invaded the
country. The grass for miles around was cropped close by the horses of
General Kearny's soldiery. When we came to the fort, we found that not
only had the horses eaten up the grass, but their owners had made
away with the stores of the little trading post; so that we had great
difficulty in procuring the few articles which we required for our
homeward journey. The army was gone, the life and bustle passed away,
and the fort was a scene of dull and lazy tranquillity. A few invalid
officers and soldiers sauntered about the area, which was oppressively
hot; for the glaring sun was reflected down upon it from the high white
walls around. The proprietors were absent, and we were received by Mr.
Holt, who had been left in charge of the fort. He invited us to dinner,
where, to our admiration, we found a table laid with a white cloth, with
castors in the center and chairs placed around it. This unwonted repast
concluded, we rode back to our camp.

Here, as we lay smoking round the fire after supper, we saw through the
dusk three men approaching from the direction of the fort. They rode up
and seated themselves near us on the ground. The foremost was a tall,
well-formed man, with a face and manner such as inspire confidence at
once. He wore a broad hat of felt, slouching and tattered, and the rest
of his attire consisted of a frock and leggings of buckskin, rubbed with
the yellow clay found among the mountains. At the heel of one of his
moccasins was buckled a huge iron spur, with a rowel five or six inches
in diameter. His horse, who stood quietly looking over his head, had a
rude Mexican saddle, covered with a shaggy bearskin, and furnished with
a pair of wooden stirrups of most preposterous size. The next man was a
sprightly, active little fellow, about five feet and a quarter high, but
very strong and compact. His face was swarthy as a Mexican's and covered
with a close, curly black beard. An old greasy calico handkerchief was
tied round his head, and his close buckskin dress was blackened and
polished by grease and hard service. The last who came up was a large
strong man, dressed in the coarse homespun of the frontiers, who dragged
his long limbs over the ground as if he were too lazy for the effort. He
had a sleepy gray eye, a retreating chin, an open mouth and a
protruding upper lip, which gave him an air of exquisite indolence
and helplessness. He was armed with an old United States yager, which
redoubtable weapon, though he could never hit his mark with it, he was
accustomed to cherish as the very sovereign of firearms.

The first two men belonged to a party who had just come from California
with a large band of horses, which they had disposed of at Bent's
Fort. Munroe, the taller of the two, was from Iowa. He was an excellent
fellow, open, warm-hearted and intelligent. Jim Gurney, the short man,
was a Boston sailor, who had come in a trading vessel to California, and
taken the fancy to return across the continent. The journey had already
made him an expert "mountain man," and he presented the extraordinary
phenomenon of a sailor who understood how to manage a horse. The third
of our visitors named Ellis, was a Missourian, who had come out with a
party of Oregon emigrants, but having got as far as Bridge's Fort, he
had fallen home-sick, or as Jim averred, love-sick--and Ellis was just
the man to be balked in a love adventure. He thought proper to join the
California men and return homeward in their company.

They now requested that they might unite with our party, and make the
journey to the settlements in company with us. We readily assented, for
we liked the appearance of the first two men, and were very glad to
gain so efficient a re-enforcement. We told them to meet us on the next
evening at a spot on the river side, about six miles below the fort.
Having smoked a pipe together, our new allies left us, and we lay down
to sleep.



CHAPTER XXII

TETE ROUGE, THE VOLUNTEER


The next morning, having directed Delorier to repair with his cart
to the place of meeting, we came again to the fort to make some
arrangements for the journey. After completing these we sat down under a
sort of perch, to smoke with some Cheyenne Indians whom we found there.
In a few minutes we saw an extraordinary little figure approach us in a
military dress. He had a small, round countenance, garnished about
the eyes with the kind of wrinkles commonly known as crow's feet and
surrounded by an abundant crop of red curls, with a little cap resting
on the top of them. Altogether, he had the look of a man more conversant
with mint juleps and oyster suppers than with the hardships of prairie
service. He came up to us and entreated that we would take him home to
the settlements, saying that unless he went with us he should have to
stay all winter at the fort. We liked our petitioner's appearance so
little that we excused ourselves from complying with his request. At
this he begged us so hard to take pity on him, looked so disconsolate,
and told so lamentable a story that at last we consented, though not
without many misgivings.

The rugged Anglo-Saxon of our new recruit's real name proved utterly
unmanageable on the lips of our French attendants, and Henry Chatillon,
after various abortive attempts to pronounce it, one day coolly
christened him Tete Rouge, in honor of his red curls. He had at
different times been clerk of a Mississippi steamboat, and agent in
a trading establishment at Nauvoo, besides filling various other
capacities, in all of which he had seen much more of "life" than was
good for him. In the spring, thinking that a summer's campaign would
be an agreeable recreation, he had joined a company of St. Louis
volunteers.

"There were three of us," said Tete Rouge, "me and Bill Stevens and John
Hopkins. We thought we would just go out with the army, and when we had
conquered the country, we would get discharged and take our pay, you
know, and go down to Mexico. They say there is plenty of fun going on
there. Then we could go back to New Orleans by way of Vera Cruz."

But Tete Rouge, like many a stouter volunteer, had reckoned without
his host. Fighting Mexicans was a less amusing occupation than he had
supposed, and his pleasure trip was disagreeably interrupted by brain
fever, which attacked him when about halfway to Bent's Fort. He jolted
along through the rest of the journey in a baggage wagon. When they came
to the fort he was taken out and left there, together with the rest of
the sick. Bent's Fort does not supply the best accommodations for an
invalid. Tete Rouge's sick chamber was a little mud room, where he and a
companion attacked by the same disease were laid together, with nothing
but a buffalo robe between them and the ground. The assistant surgeon's
deputy visited them once a day and brought them each a huge dose of
calomel, the only medicine, according to his surviving victim, which he
was acquainted with.

Tete Rouge woke one morning, and turning to his companion, saw his eyes
fixed upon the beams above with the glassy stare of a dead man. At this
the unfortunate volunteer lost his senses outright. In spite of the
doctor, however, he eventually recovered; though between the brain fever
and the calomel, his mind, originally none of the strongest, was so much
shaken that it had not quite recovered its balance when we came to the
fort. In spite of the poor fellow's tragic story, there was something
so ludicrous in his appearance, and the whimsical contrast between his
military dress and his most unmilitary demeanor, that we could not help
smiling at them. We asked him if he had a gun. He said they had taken
it from him during his illness, and he had not seen it since; "but
perhaps," he observed, looking at me with a beseeching air, "you will
lend me one of your big pistols if we should meet with any Indians." I
next inquired if he had a horse; he declared he had a magnificent one,
and at Shaw's request a Mexican led him in for inspection. He exhibited
the outline of a good horse, but his eyes were sunk in the sockets, and
every one of his ribs could be counted. There were certain marks too
about his shoulders, which could be accounted for by the circumstance,
that during Tete Rouge's illness, his companions had seized upon the
insulted charger, and harnessed him to a cannon along with the draft
horses. To Tete Rouge's astonishment we recommended him by all means to
exchange the horse, if he could, for a mule. Fortunately the people at
the fort were so anxious to get rid of him that they were willing to
make some sacrifice to effect the object, and he succeeded in getting a
tolerable mule in exchange for the broken-down steed.

A man soon appeared at the gate, leading in the mule by a cord which he
placed in the hands of Tete Rouge, who, being somewhat afraid of his new
acquisition, tried various flatteries and blandishments to induce her
to come forward. The mule, knowing that she was expected to advance,
stopped short in consequence, and stood fast as a rock, looking straight
forward with immovable composure. Being stimulated by a blow from behind
she consented to move, and walked nearly to the other side of the fort
before she stopped again. Hearing the by-standers laugh, Tete Rouge
plucked up spirit and tugged hard at the rope. The mule jerked backward,
spun herself round, and made a dash for the gate. Tete Rouge, who clung
manfully to the rope, went whisking through the air for a few rods, when
he let go and stood with his mouth open, staring after the mule, who
galloped away over the prairie. She was soon caught and brought back
by a Mexican, who mounted a horse and went in pursuit of her with his
lasso.

Having thus displayed his capacity for prairie travel, Tete Rouge
proceeded to supply himself with provisions for the journey, and with
this view he applied to a quartermaster's assistant who was in the fort.
This official had a face as sour as vinegar, being in a state of chronic
indignation because he had been left behind the army. He was as anxious
as the rest to get rid of Tete Rouge. So, producing a rusty key, he
opened a low door which led to a half-subterranean apartment, into which
the two disappeared together. After some time they came out again, Tete
Rouge greatly embarrassed by a multiplicity of paper parcels containing
the different articles of his forty days' rations. They were consigned
