Rienzi has left the camp, and betaken himself with few attendants to
Florence, where he has friends, who will provide him with arms and money
to enter Rome."

"Ah then! now I guess," said Adrian, with a half smile, "for whom I was
mistaken!"

Montreal blushed slightly. "Fairly conjectured!" said he.

"Meanwhile, at Rome," continued the Provencal--"at Rome, your worthy
House, and that of the Orsini, being elected to the supreme power,
quarrelled among themselves, and could not keep the authority they had
won. Francesco Baroncelli, (This Baroncelli, who has been introduced to
the reader in a former portion of this work, is called by Matteo Villani
"a man of vile birth and little learning--he had been a Notary of the
Capitol." In the midst of the armed dissensions between the Barons,
which followed the expulsion of Rienzi, Baroncelli contrived to make
himself Master of the Capitol, and of what was considered an auxiliary
of no common importance--viz. the Great Bell, by whose alarum Rienzi
had so often summoned to arms the Roman people. Baroncelli was crowned
Tribune, clothed in a robe of gold brocade, and invested with the
crozier-sceptre of Rienzi. At first, his cruelty against the great took
the appearance of protection to the humble; but the excesses of his sons
(not exaggerated in the text), and his own brutal but bold ferocity,
soon made him execrated by the people, to whom he owed his elevation. He
had the folly to declare against the Pope; and this it really was that
mainly induced Innocent to restore, and oppose to their New Demagogue,
the former and more illustrious Tribune. Baroncelli, like Rienzi, was
excommunicated; and in his instance, also, the curse of the Church
was the immediate cause of his downfall. In attempting flight he was
massacred by the mob, December, 1353. Some, however, have maintained
that he was slain in combat with Rienzi; and others, by a confusion
of dates, have made him succeed to Rienzi on the death of the
latter.--Matteo Villani, lib. iii. cap. 78. Osservaz. Stor. di Zefirino
Re. MS. Vat. Rip. dal Bzovio, ann. 1353. N. 2.) a new demagogue, a
humble imitator of Rienzi, rose upon the ruins of the peace broken by
the nobles, obtained the title of Tribune, and carried about the very
insignia used by his predecessor. But less wise than Rienzi, he took
the antipapal party. And the Legate was thus enabled to play the papal
demagogue against the usurper. Baroncelli was a weak man, his sons
committed every excess in mimicry of the highborn tyrants of Padua and
Milan. Virgins violated and matrons dishonoured, somewhat contrasted the
solemn and majestic decorum of Rienzi's rule;--in fine, Baroncelli fell
massacred by the people. And now, if you ask what rules Rome, I answer,
'It is the hope of Rienzi.'"

"A strange man, and various fortunes. What will be the end of both!"

"Swift murder to the first, and eternal fame to the last," answered
Montreal, calmly. "Rienzi will be restored; that brave phoenix will wing
its way through storm and cloud to its own funereal pyre: I foresee, I
compassionate, I admire.--And then," added Montreal, "I look beyond!"

"But wherefore feel you so certain that, if restored, Rienzi must fall?"

"Is it not clear to every eye, save his, whom ambition blinds? How can
mortal genius, however great, rule that most depraved people by popular
means? The Barons--(you know their indomitable ferocity)--wedded to
abuse, and loathing every semblance to law; the Barons, humbled for
a moment, will watch their occasion, and rise. The people will again
desert. Or else, grown wise in one respect by experience, the new
Senator will see that popular favour has a loud voice, but a recreant
arm. He will, like the Barons, surround himself by foreign swords. A
detachment from the Grand Company will be his courtiers; they will be
his masters! To pay them the people must be taxed. Then the idol is
execrated. No Italian hand can govern these hardy demons of the north;
they will mutiny and fall away. A new demagogue will lead on the people,
and Rienzi will be the victim. Mark my prophecy!"

"And then the 'beyond' to which you look?"

"Utter prostration of Rome, for new and long ages; God makes not two
Rienzis; or," said Montreal, proudly, "the infusion of a new life into
the worn-out and diseased frame,--the foundation of a new dynasty.
Verily, when I look around me, I believe that the Ruler of nations
designs the restoration of the South by the irruptions of the North; and
that out of the old Franc and Germanic race will be built up the thrones
of the future world!"

As Montreal thus spoke, leaning on his great war-sword, with his fair
and heroic features--so different, in their frank, bold, fearless
expression, from the dark and wily intellect that characterises
the lineaments of the South--eloquent at once with enthusiasm and
thought--he might have seemed no unfitting representative of the genius
of that northern chivalry of which he spake. And Adrian half fancied
that he saw before him one of the old Gothic scourges of the Western
World.

Their conversation was here interrupted by the sound of a trumpet, and
presently an officer entering, announced the arrival of ambassadors from
Florence.

"Again you must pardon me, noble Adrian," said Montreal, "and let me
claim you as my guest at least for tonight. Here you may rest secure,
and on parting, my men shall attend you to the frontiers of whatsoever
territory you design to visit."

Adrian, not sorry to see more of a man so celebrated, accepted the
invitation.

Left alone, he leaned his head upon his hand, and soon became lost in
his reflections.



Chapter 8.III. Faithful and Ill-fated Love.--The Aspirations Survive the
Affections.

Since that fearful hour in which Adrian Colonna had gazed upon the
lifeless form of his adored Irene, the young Roman had undergone the
usual vicissitudes of a wandering and adventurous life in those exciting
times. His country seemed no longer dear to him. His very rank precluded
him from the post he once aspired to take in restoring the liberties of
Rome; and he felt that if ever such a revolution could be consummated,
it was reserved for one in whose birth and habits the people could
feel sympathy and kindred, and who could lift his hand in their behalf
without becoming the apostate of his order and the judge of his own
House. He had travelled through various courts, and served with renown
in various fields. Beloved and honoured wheresoever he fixed a temporary
home, no change of scene had removed his melancholy--no new ties had
chased away the memory of the Lost. In that era of passionate and
poetical romance, which Petrarch represented rather than created, Love
had already begun to assume a more tender and sacred character than it
had hitherto known, it had gradually imbibed the divine spirit which
it derives from Christianity, and which associates its sorrows on
earth with the visions and hopes of heaven. To him who relies upon
immortality, fidelity to the dead is easy; because death cannot
extinguish hope, and the soul of the mourner is already half in the
world to come. It is an age that desponds of a future life--representing
death as an eternal separation--in which, if men grieve awhile for the
dead, they hasten to reconcile themselves to the living. For true is the
old aphorism, that love exists not without hope. And all that romantic
worship which the Hermit of Vaucluse felt, or feigned, for Laura, found
its temple in the desolate heart of Adrian Colonna. He was emphatically
the Lover of his time! Often as, in his pilgrimage from land to land,
he passed the walls of some quiet and lonely convent, he seriously
meditated the solemn vows, and internally resolved that the cloister
should receive his maturer age. The absence of years had, however,
in some degree restored the dimmed and shattered affection for his
fatherland, and he desired once more to visit the city in which he had
first beheld Irene. "Perhaps," he thought, "time may have wrought some
unlooked-for change; and I may yet assist to restore my country."

But with this lingering patriotism no ambition was mingled. In that
heated stage of action, in which the desire of power seemed to stir
through every breast, and Italy had become the El Dorado of wealth, or
the Utopia of empire, to thousands of valiant arms and plotting minds,
there was at least one breast that felt the true philosophy of the
Hermit. Adrian's nature, though gallant and masculine, was singularly
imbued with that elegance of temperament which recoils from rude
contact, and to which a lettered and cultivated indolence is the
supremest luxury. His education, his experience, and his intellect, had
placed him far in advance of his age, and he looked with a high contempt
on the coarse villanies and base tricks by which Italian ambition
sought its road to power. The rise and fall of Rienzi, who, whatever his
failings, was at least the purest and most honourable of the self-raised
princes of the age, had conspired to make him despond of the success of
noble, as he recoiled from that of selfish aspirations. And the dreamy
melancholy which resulted from his ill-starred love, yet more tended
to wean him from the stale and hackneyed pursuits of the world. His
character was full of beauty and of poetry--not the less so in that it
found not a vent for its emotions in the actual occupation of the poet!
Pent within, those emotions diffused themselves over all his thoughts
and coloured his whole soul. Sometimes, in the blessed abstraction of
his visions, he pictured to himself the lot he might have chosen had
Irene lived, and fate united them--far from the turbulent and vulgar
roar of Rome--but amidst some yet unpolluted solitude of the bright
Italian soil. Before his eye there rose the lovely landscape--the palace
by the borders of the waveless lake--the vineyards in the valley--the
dark forests waving from the hill--and that home, the resort and refuge
of all the minstrelsy and love of Italy, brightened by the "Lampeggiar
dell' angelico riso," that makes a paradise in the face we love. Often,
seduced by such dreams to complete oblivion of his loss, the young
wanderer started from the ideal bliss, to behold around him the solitary
waste of way--or the moonlit tents of war--or, worse than all, the
crowds and revels of a foreign court.

Whether or not such fancies now, for a moment, allured his meditations,
conjured up, perhaps, by the name of Irene's brother, which never
sounded in his ears but to awaken ten thousand associations, the Colonna
remained thoughtful and absorbed, until he was disturbed by his own
squire, who, accompanied by Montreal's servitors, ushered in
his solitary but ample repast. Flasks of the richest Florentine
wines--viands prepared with all the art which, alas, Italy has now
lost!--goblets and salvers of gold and silver, prodigally wrought with
barbaric gems--attested the princely luxury which reigned in the camp
of the Grand Company. But Adrian saw in all only the spoliation of his
degraded country, and felt the splendour almost as an insult. His lonely
meal soon concluded, he became impatient of the monotony of his tent;
and, tempted by the cool air of the descending eve, sauntered carelessly
forth. He bent his steps by the side of the brooklet that curved,
snakelike and sparkling, by Montreal's tent; and finding a spot somewhat
solitary and apart from the warlike tenements around, flung himself by
the margin of the stream.

The last rays of the sun quivered on the wave that danced musically over
its stony bed; and amidst a little copse on the opposite bank broke the
brief and momentary song of such of the bolder habitants of that purple
air as the din of the camp had not scared from their green retreat. The
clouds lay motionless to the west, in that sky so darkly and intensely
blue, never seen but over the landscapes that a Claude or a Rosa loved
to paint; and dim and delicious rose-hues gathered over the grey peaks
of the distant Apennines. From afar floated the hum of the camp, broken
by the neigh of returning steeds; the blast of an occasional bugle; and,
at regular intervals, by the armed tramp of the neighbouring sentry.
And opposite to the left of the copse--upon a rising ground, matted
with reeds, moss, and waving shrubs--were the ruins of some old Etruscan
building, whose name had perished, whose very uses were unknown.

The scene was so calm and lovely, as Adrian gazed upon it, that it was
scarcely possible to imagine it at that very hour the haunt of fierce
and banded robbers, among most of whom the very soul of man was
embruted, and to all of whom murder or rapine made the habitual
occupation of life.

Still buried in his reveries, and carelessly dropping stones into the
noisy rivulet, Adrian was aroused by the sound of steps.

"A fair spot to listen to the lute and the ballads of Provence," said
the voice of Montreal, as the Knight of St. John threw himself on the
turf beside the young Colonna.

"You retain, then, your ancient love of your national melodies," said
Adrian.

"Ay, I have not yet survived all my youth," answered Montreal, with a
slight sigh. "But somehow or other, the strains that once pleased
my fancy now go too directly to my heart. So, though I still welcome
jongleur and minstrel, I bid them sing their newest conceits. I cannot
wish ever again to hear the poetry I heard when I was young!"

"Pardon me," said Adrian, with great interest, "but fain would I have
dared, though a secret apprehension prevented me hitherto,--fain would
I have dared to question you of that lovely lady, with whom, seven
years ago, we gazed at moonlight upon the odorous orange-groves and rosy
waters of Terracina."

Montreal turned away his face; he laid his hand on Adrian's arm, and
murmured, in a deep and hoarse tone, "I am alone now!"

Adrian pressed his hand in silence. He felt no light shock at thus
learning the death of one so gentle, so lovely, and so ill-fated.

"The vows of my knighthood," continued Montreal, "which precluded
Adeline the rights of wedlock--the shame of her house--the angry
grief of her mother--the wild vicissitudes of my life, so exposed to
peril--the loss of her son--all preyed silently on her frame. She did
not die (die is too harsh a word!), but she drooped away, and glided
into heaven. Even as on a summer's morn some soft dream fleets across
us, growing less and less distinct, until it fades, as it were, into
light, and we awaken--so faded Adeline's parting spirit, till the
daylight of God broke upon it."

Montreal paused a moment, and then resumed: "These thoughts make the
boldest of us weak sometimes, and we Provencals are foolish in these
matters!--God wot, she was very dear to me!"

The Knight bent down and crossed himself devoutly, his lips muttered a
prayer. Strange as it may seem to our more enlightened age, so martial
a garb did morality then wear, that this man, at whose word towns had
blazed and torrents of blood had flowed, neither adjudged himself, nor
was adjudged by the majority of his contemporaries, a criminal. His
order, half monastic, half warlike, was emblematic of himself.
He trampled upon man, yet humbled himself to God; nor had all his
acquaintance with the refining scepticism of Italy shaken the sturdy and
simple faith of the bold Provencal. So far from recognising any want
of harmony between his calling and his creed, he held that man no true
chevalier who was not as devout to the Cross as relentless with the
sword.

"And you have no child save the one you lost?" asked Adrian, when he
observed the wonted composure of Montreal once more returning.

"None!" said Montreal, as his brow again darkened. "No love-begotten
heir of mine will succeed to the fortunes I trust yet to build. Never
on earth shall I see upon the face of her child the likeness of Adeline!
Yet, at Avignon, I saw a boy I would have claimed; for methought she
must have looked her soul into his eyes, they were so like hers! Well,
well! The Provence tree hath other branches; and some unborn nephew must
be--what? The stars have not yet decided! But ambition is now the only
thing in the world left me to love."

"So differently operates the same misfortune upon different characters,"
thought the Colonna. "To me, crowns became valueless when I could no
longer dream of placing them on Irene's brow!"

The similarity of their fates, however, attracted Adrian strongly
towards his host; and the two Knights conversed together with more
friendship and unreserve than they had hitherto done. At length Montreal
said, "By the way, I have not inquired your destination."

"I am bound to Rome," said Adrian; "and the intelligence I have learned
from you incites me thitherward yet more eagerly. If Rienzi return, I
may mediate successfully, perchance, between the Tribune-Senator and the
nobles; and if I find my cousin, young Stefanello, now the head of
our house, more tractable than his sires, I shall not despair of
conciliating the less powerful Barons. Rome wants repose; and whoever
governs, if he govern but with justice, ought to be supported both by
prince and plebeian!"

Montreal listened with great attention, and then muttered to himself,
"No, it cannot be!" He mused a little while, shading his brow with his
hand, before he said aloud, "To Rome you are bound. Well, we shall meet
soon amidst its ruins. Know, by the way, that my object here is already
won: these Florentine merchants have acceded to my terms; they have
purchased a two years' peace; tomorrow the camp breaks up, and the
Grand Company march to Lombardy. There, if my schemes prosper, and
the Venetians pay my price, I league the rascals (under Landau, my
Lieutenant) with the Sea-City, in defiance of the Visconti, and shall
pass my autumn in peace amidst the pomps of Rome."

"Sir Walter de Montreal," said Adrian, "your frankness perhaps makes
me presumptuous; but when I hear you talk, like a huxtering trader, of
selling alike your friendship and your forbearance, I ask myself, 'Is
this the great Knight of St. John; and have men spoken of him fairly,
when they assert the sole stain on his laurels to be his avarice?"

Montreal bit his lip; nevertheless, he answered calmly, "My frankness
has brought its own penance, Lord Adrian. However, I cannot wholly leave
so honoured a guest under an impression which I feel to be plausible,
but not just. No, brave Colonna; report wrongs me. I value Gold,
for Gold is the Architect of Power! It fills the camp--it storms the
city--it buys the marketplace--it raises the palace--it founds the
throne. I value Gold,--it is the means necessary to my end!"

"And that end--"

"Is--no matter what," said the Knight coldly. "Let us to our tents, the
dews fall heavily, and the malaria floats over these houseless wastes."

The pair rose;--yet, fascinated by the beauty of the hour, they lingered
for a moment by the brook. The earliest stars shone over its crisping
wavelets, and a delicious breeze murmured gently amidst the glossy
herbage.

"Thus gazing," said Montreal, softly, "we reverse the old Medusan fable
the poets tell us of, and look and muse ourselves out of stone. A little
while, and it was the sunlight that gilded the wave--it now shines as
brightly and glides as gaily beneath the stars; even so rolls the stream
of time: one luminary succeeds the other equally welcomed--equally
illumining--equally evanescent!--You see, the poetry of Provence still
lives beneath my mail!"

Adrian early sought his couch; but his own thoughts and the sounds of
loud mirth that broke from Montreal's tent, where the chief feasted the
captains of his band, a revel from which he had the delicacy to excuse
the Roman noble, kept the Colonna long awake; and he had scarcely fallen
into an unquiet slumber, when yet more discordant sounds again invaded
his repose. At the earliest dawn the wide armament was astir--the
creaking of cordage--the tramp of men--loud orders and louder oaths--the
slow rolling of baggage-wains--and the clank of the armourers, announced
the removal of the camp, and the approaching departure of the Grand
Company.

Ere Adrian was yet attired, Montreal entered his tent.

"I have appointed," he said, "five score lances under a trusty leader,
to accompany you, noble Adrian, to the borders of Romagna; they wait
your leisure. In another hour I depart; the on-guard are already in
motion."

Adrian would fain have declined the proffered escort; but he saw that
it would only offend the pride of the chief, who soon retired. Hastily
Adrian endued his arms--the air of the fresh morning, and the glad
sun rising gorgeously from the hills, revived his wearied spirit. He
repaired to Montreal's tent, and found him alone, with the implements of
writing before him, and a triumphant smile upon his countenance.

"Fortune showers new favours on me!" he said, gaily. "Yesterday the
Florentines spared me the trouble of a siege: and today (even since I
last saw you--a few minutes since) puts your new Senator of Rome into my
power."

"How! Have your bands then arrested Rienzi?"

"Not so--better still! The Tribune changed his plan, and repaired to
Perugia, where my brothers now abide--sought them--they have supplied
him with money and soldiers enough to brave the perils of the way, and
to defy the swords of the Barons. So writes my good brother Arimbaldo, a
man of letters, whom the Tribune thinks rightly he has decoyed with old
tales of Roman greatness, and mighty promises of grateful advancement.
You find me hastily expressing my content at the arrangement. My
brothers themselves will accompany the Senator-Tribune to the walls of
the Capitol."

"Still, I see not how this places Rienzi in your power."

"No! His soldiers are my creatures--his comrades my brothers--his
creditor myself! Let him rule Rome then--the time soon comes when the
Vice-Regent must yield to--"

"The Chief of the Grand Company," interrupted Adrian, with a shudder,
which the bold Montreal was too engrossed with the unconcealed
excitement of his own thoughts to notice. "No, Knight of Provence,
basely have we succumbed to domestic tyrants: but never, I trust, will
Romans be so vile as to wear the yoke of a foreign usurper."

Montreal looked hard at Adrian, and smiled sternly.

"You mistake me," said he; "and it will be time enough for you to play
the Brutus when I assume the Caesar. Meanwhile we are but host and
guest. Let us change the theme."

Nevertheless this, their latter conference, threw a chill over both
during the short time the Knights remained together, and they parted
with a formality which was ill-suited to their friendly intercourse of
the night before. Montreal felt he had in cautiously revealed himself,
but caution was no part of his character, whenever he found himself
at the head of an army, and at the full tide of fortune; and at that
moment, so confident was he of the success of his wildest schemes, that
he recked little whom he offended, or whom alarmed.

Slowly, with his strange and ferocious escort, Adrian renewed his way.
Winding up a steep ascent that led from the plain,--when he reached
the summit, the curve in the road shewed him the whole army on its
march;--the gonfalons waving--the armour flashing in the sun, line after
line, like a river of steel, and the whole plain bristling with the
array of that moving war;--while the solemn tread of the armed thousands
fell subdued and stifled at times by martial and exulting music. As they
swept on, Adrian descried at length the stately and towering form of
Montreal upon a black charger, distinguished even at that distance from
the rest, not more by his gorgeous armour than his lofty stature. So
swept he on in the pride of his array--in the flush of his hopes--the
head of a mighty armament--the terror of Italy--the hero that was--the
monarch that might be!




BOOK IX. THE RETURN.

     "Allora la sua venuta fu a Roma sentita; Romani si
     apparecchiavano a riceverlo con letizia...furo fatti archi
     trionfali," &c. &c.--"Vita di Cola di Rienzi", lib. ii. c.
     17.

     "Then the fame of his coming was felt at Rome; the Romans
     made ready to receive him with gladness...triumphal arches
     were erected," &c., &c.--"Life of Cola di Rienzi".



Chapter 9.I. The Triumphal Entrance.

All Rome was astir!--from St. Angelo to the Capitol, windows, balconies,
roofs, were crowded with animated thousands. Only here and there, in the
sullen quarters of the Colonna, the Orsini, and the Savelli, reigned a
death-like solitude and a dreary gloom. In those fortifications, rather
than streets, not even the accustomed tread of the barbarian sentinel
was heard. The gates closed--the casements barred--the grim silence
around--attested the absence of the Barons. They had left the city so
soon as they had learned the certain approach of Rienzi. In the villages
and castles of the Campagna, surrounded by their mercenaries, they
awaited the hour when the people, weary of their idol, should welcome
back even those ferocious Iconoclasts.

With these exceptions, all Rome was astir! Triumphal arches of drapery,
wrought with gold and silver, raised at every principal vista, were
inscribed with mottoes of welcome and rejoicing. At frequent intervals
stood youths and maidens, with baskets of flowers and laurels. High
above the assembled multitudes--from the proud tower of Hadrian--from
the turrets of the Capitol--from the spires of the sacred buildings
dedicated to Apostle and to Saint--floated banners as for a victory.
Rome once more opened her arms to receive her Tribune!

Mingled with the crowd--disguised by his large mantle--hidden by the
pressure of the throng--his person, indeed, forgotten by most--and, in
the confusion of the moment, heeded by none--stood Adrian Colonna! He
had not been able to conquer his interest for the brother of Irene.
Solitary amidst his fellow-citizens, he stood--the only one of the proud
race of Colonna who witnessed the triumph of the darling of the people.

"They say he has grown large in his prison," said one of the bystanders;
"he was lean enough when he came by daybreak out of the Church of St.
Angelo!"

"Ay," said another, a little man with a shrewd, restless eye, "they say
truly; I saw him take leave of the Legate."

Every eye was turned to the last speaker; he became at once a personage
of importance. "Yes," continued the little man with an elated and
pompous air, "as soon, d'ye see, as he had prevailed on Messere
Brettone, and Messere Arimbaldo, the brothers of Fra Moreale, to
accompany him from Perugia to Monte Fiascone, he went at once to the
Legate d'Albornoz, who was standing in the open air conversing with his
captains. A crowd followed. I was one of them; and the Tribune nodded
at me--ay, that did he!--and so, with his scarlet cloak, and his scarlet
cap, he faced the proud Cardinal with a pride greater than his own.
'Monsignore,' said he, 'though you accord me neither money nor arms, to
meet the dangers of the road and brave the ambush of the Barons, I
am prepared to depart. Senator of Rome, his Holiness hath made me:
according to custom, I pray you, Monsignore, forthwith to confirm the
rank.' I would you could have seen how the proud Spaniard stared, and
blushed, and frowned; but he bit his lip, and said little."

"And confirmed Rienzi Senator?"

"Yes; and blessed him, and bade him depart."

"Senator!" said a stalwart but grey-haired giant with folded arms; "I
like not a title that has been borne by a patrician. I fear me, in the
new title he will forget the old."

"Fie, Cecco del Vecchio, you were always a grumbler!" said a merchant
of cloth, whose commodity the ceremonial had put in great request.
"Fie!--for my part, I think Senator a less new-fangled title than
Tribune. I hope there will be feasting enow, at last. Rome has been long
dull. A bad time for trade, I warrant me!"

The artisan grinned scornfully. He was one of those who distinguished
between the middle class and the working, and he loathed a merchant as
much as he did a noble. "The day wears," said the little man; "he must
be here anon. The Senator's lady, and all his train, have gone forth to
meet him these two hours."

Scarce were these words uttered, when the crowd to the right swayed
restlessly; and presently a horseman rode rapidly through the street.
"Way there! Keep back! Way--make way for the Most Illustrious the
Senator of Rome!"

The crowd became hushed--then murmuring--then hushed again. From balcony
and casement stretched the neck of every gazer. The tramp of steeds was
heard at a distance--the sound of clarion and trumpet;--then, gleaming
through the distant curve of the streets, was seen the wave of the
gonfalons--then, the glitter of spears--and then from the whole
multitude, as from one voice, arose the shout,--"He comes! he comes!"

Adrian shrunk yet more backward amongst the throng; and, leaning against
the wall of one of the houses, contemplated the approaching pageant.

First came, six abreast, the procession of Roman horsemen who had gone
forth to meet the Senator, bearing boughs of olive in their hands; each
hundred preceded by banners, inscribed with the words, "Liberty and
Peace restored." As these passed the group by Adrian, each more popular
citizen of the cavalcade was recognised, and received with loud shouts.
By the garb and equipment of the horsemen, Adrian saw that they belonged
chiefly to the traders of Rome; a race who, he well knew, unless
strangely altered, valued liberty only as a commercial speculation. "A
vain support these," thought the Colonna;--"what next?" on, then, came
in glittering armour the German mercenaries, hired by the gold of the
Brothers of Provence, in number two hundred and fifty, and previously
in the pay of Malatesta of Rimini;--tall, stern, sedate,
disciplined,--eyeing the crowd with a look, half of barbarian wonder,
half of insolent disdain. No shout of gratulation welcomed these sturdy
strangers; it was evident that their aspect cast a chill over the
assembly.

"Shame!" growled Cecco del Vecchio, audibly. "Has the people's friend
need of the swords which guard an Orsini or a Malatesta?--shame!"

No voice this time silenced the huge malcontent.

"His only real defence against the Barons," thought Adrian, "if he pay
them well! But their number is not sufficient!"

Next came two hundred fantassins, or foot-soldiers, of Tuscany, with the
corselets and arms of the heavy-armed soldiery--a gallant company, and
whose cheerful looks and familiar bearing appeared to sympathise
with the crowd. And in truth they did so,--for they were Tuscans,
and therefore lovers of freedom. In them, too, the Romans seemed to
recognise natural and legitimate allies,--and there was a general cry of
"Vivano i bravi Toscani!"

"Poor defence!" thought the more sagacious Colonna; "the Barons can awe,
and the mob corrupt them."

Next came a file of trumpeters and standard-bearers;--and now the sound
of the music was drowned by shouts, which seemed to rise simultaneously
as from every quarter of the city;--"Rienzi! Rienzi!--Welcome,
welcome!--Liberty and Rienzi! Rienzi and the Good Estate!" Flowers
dropped on his path, kerchiefs and banners waved from every
house;--tears might be seen coursing, unheeded, down bearded
cheeks;--youth and age were kneeling together, with uplifted hands,
invoking blessings on the head of the Restored. On he came the
Senator-Tribune--"the Phoenix to his pyre!"

Robed in scarlet, that literally blazed with gold, his proud head bared
in the sun, and bending to the saddle bow, Rienzi passed slowly through
the throng. Not in the flush of that hour were visible, on his glorious
countenance, the signs of disease and care: the very enlargement of his
proportions gave a greater majesty to his mien. Hope sparkled in his
eye--triumph and empire sat upon his brow. The crowd could not contain
themselves; they pressed forward, each upon each, anxious to catch the
glance of his eye, to touch the hem of his robe. He himself was deeply
affected by their joy. He halted; with faltering and broken words,
he attempted to address them. "I am repaid," he said,--"repaid for
all;--may I live to make you happy!"

The crowd parted again--the Senator moved on--again the crowd closed
in. Behind the Tribune, to their excited imagination, seemed to move the
very goddess of ancient Rome.

Upon a steed, caparisoned with cloth of gold;--in snow-white robes,
studded with gems that flashed back the day,--came the beautiful and
regal Nina. The memory of her pride, her ostentation, all forgotten in
that moment, she was scarce less welcome, scarce less idolized, than her
lord. And her smile all radiant with joy--her lip quivering with proud
and elate emotion,--never had she seemed at once so born alike for love
and for command;--a Zenobia passing through the pomp of Rome,--not a
captive, but a queen.

But not upon that stately form riveted the gaze of Adrian--pale,
breathless, trembling, he clung to the walls against which he leaned.
Was it a dream? Had the dead revived? Or was it his own--his living
Irene--whose soft and melancholy loveliness shone sadly by the side of
Nina--a star beside the moon? The pageant faded from his eyes--all grew
dim and dark. For a moment he was insensible. When he recovered, the
crowd was hurrying along, confused and blent with the mighty stream
that followed the procession. Through the moving multitude he caught the
graceful form of Irene, again snatched by the closing standards of the
procession from his view. His blood rushed back from his heart through
every vein. He was as a man who for years had been in a fearful trance,
and who is suddenly awakened to the light of heaven.

One of that mighty throng remained motionless with Adrian. It was Cecco
del Vecchio.

"He did not see me," muttered the smith to himself; "old friends are
forgotten now! Well, well, Cecco del Vecchio hates tyrants still--no
matter what their name, nor how smoothly they are disguised. He did not
see ME! Umph!"



Chapter 9.II. The Masquerade.

The acuter reader has already learned, without the absolute intervention
of the author as narrator, the incidents occurring to Rienzi in the
interval between his acquittal at Avignon and his return to Rome. As the
impression made by Nina upon the softer and better nature of Albornoz
died away, he naturally began to consider his guest--as the profound
politicians of that day ever considered men--a piece upon the great
Chess-Board, to be moved, advanced, or sacrificed, as best suited
the scheme in view. His purpose accomplished, in the recovery of the
patrimonial territory, the submission of John di Vico, and the fall
and death of the Demagogue Baroncelli, the Cardinal deemed it far from
advisable to restore to Rome, and with so high a dignity, the able and
ambitious Rienzi. Before the daring Roman, even his own great spirit
quailed; and he was wholly unable to conceive or to calculate the policy
that might be adopted by the new Senator, when once more Lord of
Rome. Without affecting to detain, he therefore declined to assist in
restoring him. And Rienzi thus saw himself within an easy march of Rome,
without one soldier to protect him against the Barons by the way.
But Heaven had decreed that no single man, however gifted, or however
powerful, should long counteract or master the destinies of Rienzi: and
perhaps in no more glittering scene of his life did he ever evince so
dexterous and subtle an intellect as he now did in extricating himself
from the wiles of the Cardinal. Repairing to Perugia, he had, as we have
seen, procured, through the brothers of Montreal, men and money for his
return. But the Knight of St. John was greatly mistaken, if he imagined
that Rienzi was not thoroughly aware of the perilous and treacherous
tenure of the support he had received. His keen eye read at a glance the
aims and the characters of the brothers of Montreal--he knew that while
affecting to serve him, they designed to control--that, made the debtor
of the grasping and aspiring Montreal, and surrounded by the troops
conducted by Montreal's brethren, he was in the midst of a net which, if
not broken, would soon involve fortune and life itself in its fatal and
deadly meshes. But, confident in the resources and promptitude of his
own genius, he yet sanguinely trusted to make those his puppets, who
dreamed that he was their own; and, with empire for the stake, he cared
not how crafty the antagonists he was compelled to engage.

Meanwhile, uniting to all his rasher and all his nobler qualities, a
profound dissimulation, he appeared to trust implicitly to his Provencal
companions; and his first act on entering the Capitol, after the
triumphal procession, was to reward with the highest dignities in his
gift, Messere Arimbaldo and Messere Brettone de Montreal!

High feasting was there that night in the halls of the Capitol; but
dearer to Rienzi than all the pomp of the day, were the smiles of Nina.
Her proud and admiring eyes, swimming with delicious tears, fixed upon
his countenance, she but felt that they were re-united, and that the
