This wonderful volcanic upheaval is all the more remarkable, from the
inland situation of the plain on which it occurred, it being no less
than 120 miles distant from the nearest ocean, while there is no other
volcano nearer to it than 80 miles. The activity of the ovens has now
ceased, and portions of the upheaved plain on which they are situated
have again been brought under cultivation, and the volcano is in a state
of quiescence.

The crater of Popocatapetl, which towers to a height of 17,000 feet, is
a vast circular basin, whose nearly vertical walls are in some parts
of a pale rose tint, in others quite black. The bottom contains several
small fuming cones, whence arise vapors of changeable color, being
successively red, yellow and white. All round them are large deposits of
sulphur, which are worked for mercantile purposes.

Orizaba has a little less lofty snow-clad peak. This mountain was in
brisk volcanic activity from 1545 to 1560, but has since then relapsed
into a prolonged repose. It was climbed, in 1856, by Baron Muller, to
whose mind the crater appeared like the entrance to a lower world of
horrible darkness. He was struck with astonishment on contemplating the
tremendous forces required to elevate and rend such enormous masses--to
melt them, and then pile them up like towers, until by cooling they
became consolidated into their present forms. The internal walls of the
crater are in many places coated with sulphur, and at the bottom are
several small volcanic craters. At the time of his visit the summit
was wholly covered with snow, but the Indians affirmed that hot vapors
occasionally ascend from fissures in the rocks. Since then others have
reached its summit, among them Angelo Heilprin, the first to gaze into
the crater of Mont Pelee after its eruption.


ERUPTIONS IN NICARAGUA


On the 14th of November, 1867, there commenced an eruption from a
mountain about eight leagues to the eastward of the city of Leon,
in Nicaragua. This mountain does not appear to have been previously
recognized as an active volcano, but it is situated in a very volcanic
country. The outburst had probably some connection with the earthquake
at St. Thomas, which took place on the 18th of November following. The
mountain continued in a state of activity for about sixteen days. There
was thrown out an immense quantity of black sand, which was carried as
far as to the coast of the Pacific, fifty miles distant. Glowing stones
were projected from the crater to an estimated height of three thousand
feet.

Central America is more prolific of volcanoes than Mexico, and the
State of Guatemala in particular. One authority credits this State with
fifteen or sixteen and another with more than thirty volcanic cones.
Of these at least five are decidedly active. Tajumalco, which was in
eruption at the time of the great earthquake of 1863, yields great
quantities of sulphur, as also does Quesaltenango. The most famous is
the Volcan de Agua (Water Volcano), so called from its overwhelming the
old city of Guatemala with a torrent of water in 1541.

Nicaragua is also rich in volcanoes, being traversed its entire length
by a remarkable chain of isolated volcanic cones, several of which are
to some extent active. We have already told the story of the tremendous
eruption of Coseguina in 1835, one of the most violent of modern times.
The latest important eruption here was that of Ometepec, a volcanic
mount on an island of the same name in Lake Nicaragua. This broke a long
period of repose on June 19, 1883, with a severe eruption, in which
the lava, pouring from a new crater, in seven days overflowed the whole
island and drove off its population. Incessant rumblings and earthquake
shocks accompanied the eruption, and mud, ashes, stones and lava covered
the mountain slopes, which had been cultivated for many centuries.
These were the most recent strong displays of volcanic energy in Central
America, though former great outflows of lava are indicated by great
fields of barren rock, which extend for miles.



CHAPTER XXVII.

The Terrible Eruption of Krakatoa.


The most destructive volcanic explosion of recent times, one perhaps
unequalled in violence in all times, was that of the small mountain
island of Krakatoa, in the East Indian Archipelago, in 1883. This made
its effects felt round the entire globe, and excited such wide attention
that we feel called upon to give it a chapter of its own.

The island of Krakatoa lies in the Straits of Sunda, between Java and
Sumatra. In size it is insignificant, and had been silent so long that
its volcanic character was almost lost sight of. Of its early history we
know nothing. At some remote time in the past it may have appeared as a
large cone, of some twenty-five miles in circumference at base and not
less than 10,000 feet high. Then, still in unknown times, its cone was
blown away by internal forces, leaving only a shattered and irregular
crater ring. This crater was two or three miles in diameter, while the
highest part of its walls rose only a few hundred feet above the sea.
Later volcanic work built up a number of small cones within the crater,
and still later a new cone, called Rakata, rose on the edge of the old
one to a height of 2,623 feet.

The first known event in the history of the island volcano was an
eruption in the year 1680. After that it lay in repose, forming a group
of islands, one much larger than the others. Some of the smaller islands
indicated the rim of the old crater, much of which was buried under the
sea. Its state of quiescence continued for two centuries, a tropical
vegetation richly mantled the island, and to all appearance it had sunk
permanently to rest.

Indications of a coming change appeared in 1880, in the form of
earthquakes, which shook all the region around. These continued at
intervals for more that two years. Then, on May 20, 1883, there were
heard at Batavia, a hundred miles away, "booming sounds like the firing
of artillery." Next day the captain of a vessel passing through the
Straits saw that Krakatoa was in eruption, sending up clouds of smoke
and showers of dust and pumice. The smoke was estimated to reach a
height of seven miles, while the volcanic dust drifted to localities 300
miles away.


AWFUL PREMONITIONS


The mountain continued to play for about fourteen weeks with varying
activity, several parties meanwhile visiting it and making observations.
Such an eruption, in ordinary cases, would have ultimately died away,
with no marked change other than perhaps the ejection of a stream of
lava. But such was not now the case. The sequel was at once unexpected
and terrible. As the island was uninhabited, no one actually saw what
took place, those nearest to the scene of the eruption having enough
to do to save their own lives, while the dense clouds of vapor and dust
baffled observation.

The phase of greatest violence set in on Sunday, August 26th. Soon after
midday sailors on passing ships saw that the island had vanished behind
a dense cloud of black vapor, the height of which was estimated at not
less than seventeen miles. At intervals frightful detonations resounded,
and after a time a rain of pumice began to fall at places ten miles
distant. For miles round fierce flashes of lightning rent the vapor,
and at a distance of fully forty miles ghostly corposants gleamed on the
rigging of a vessel.

These phenomena grew more and more alarming until August 27th, when four
explosions of fearful intensity shook earth and sea and air, the third
being "far the most violent and productive of the most widespread
results." It was, in fact, perhaps the most tremendous volcanic
outburst, in its intensity, known in human history. It seemed to
overcome the obstruction to the energy of the internal forces, for the
eruption now declined, and in a day or two practically died away, though
one or two comparatively insignificant outbursts took place later.


FAR-REACHING DESTRUCTION


The eruption spread ruin and death over many surrounding leagues. At
Krakotoa itself, when men once more reached its shores, everything was
found to be changed. About two-thirds of the main island were blown
completely away. The marginal cone was cut nearly in half vertically,
the new cliff falling precipitously toward the centre of the crater.
Where land had been before now sea existed, in some places more than
one hundred feet deep. But the part of the island that remained had been
somewhat increased in size by ejected materials.

Of the other islands and islets some had disappeared; some were
partially destroyed; some were enlarged by fallen debris, while many
changes had taken place in the depth of the neighboring sea-bed. Two
new islands, Steers and Calmeyer, were formed. The ejected pumice, so
cavernous in structure as to float upon the water, at places formed
great floating islands which covered the sea for miles, and sometimes
rose from four to seven feet above it, proving a serious obstacle
to navigation. On vessels near by dust fell to the depth of eighteen
inches. The enormous clouds of volcanic dust which had been flung high
into the air darkened the sky for a great area around. At Batavia, about
a hundred miles from the volcano, it produced an effect not unlike that
of a London fog. This began about seven in the morning of August 27th.
Soon after ten the light had become lurid and yellow, and lamps were
required in the houses; then came a downfall of rain, mingled with dust,
and by about half-past eleven the town was in complete darkness. It
soon after began to lighten, and the rain to diminish, and about three
o'clock it had ceased.

At Buitenzorg, twenty miles further away, the conditions were similar,
but lasted for a shorter time. In places much farther away the upper sky
presented a strangely murky aspect, and the sun assumed a green color.
Phenomena of this kind were traced over a broad area of the globe, even
as far as the Hawaiian Islands, while over a yet wider area the sky
after sunset was lit up by after-glows of extraordinary beauty. The
height to which the dust was projected has been calculated from various
data, with the result that 121,500 feet, or nearly 25 miles, is thought
to be a probable maximum estimate, though it may be that occasional
fragments of larger size were shot up to a still greater height.


A GRAPHIC DESCRIPTION OF THE ERUPTION


Another effect, of a distressing character, followed the eruption. A
succession of enormous waves, emanating from Krakatoa, traversed the
sea, and swept the coast bordering the Straits of Sunda with such force
as to destroy many villages on the low-lying shores in Java, Sumatra and
other islands. Some buildings at a height of fifty feet above sea-level
were washed away, and in some places the water rose higher, in one place
reaching the height of 115 feet. At Telok Betong, in Sumatra, a ship was
carried inland a distance of nearly two miles, and left stranded at a
height of thirty feet above the sea.

The eruption of Krakatoa seems to have been due to some deep-lying
causes of extraordinary violence, this appearing not only in the
terrible explosion which tore the island to fragments and sent its
remnants as floating dust many miles high into the air, but also from an
internal convulsion that affected many of the volcanoes of Java, which
almost simultaneously broke into violent eruption. We extract from
Dr. Robert Bonney's "Our Earth and its Story" a description of these
closely-related events.

"The disturbances originated on the island of Krakatoa, with eruptions
of red hot stones and ashes, and by noon next day Semeru, the largest of
the Javanese volcanoes, was reported to be belching forth flames at
an alarming rate. The eruption soon spread to Gunung Guntur and other
mountains, until more than a third of the forty-five craters of Java
were either in activity or seriously threatening it.

"Just before dusk a great cloud hung over Gunung Guntur, and the crater
of the volcano began to emit enormous streams of white sulphurous
mud and lava, which were rapidly succeeded by explosions, followed by
tremendous showers of cinders and enormous fragments of rock, which were
hurled high into the air and scattered in all directions, carrying death
and destruction with them. The overhanging clouds were, moreover, so
charged with electricity that water-spouts added to the horror of the
scene. The eruption continued all Saturday night, and next day a dense
cloud, shot with lurid red, gathered over the Kedang range, intimating
that an eruption had broken out there.

"This proved to be the case, for soon after streams of lava poured down
the mountain sides into the valleys, sweeping everything before them.
About two o'clock on Monday morning--we are drawing on the account of
an eye-witness--the great cloud suddenly broke into small sections and
vanished. When light came it was seen that an enormous tract of land,
extending from Point Capucin on the south, and Negery Passoerang on the
north and west, to the lowest point, covering about fifty square miles,
had been temporarily submerged by the 'tidal wave.' Here were situated
the villages of Negery and Negery Babawang. Few of the inhabitants of
these places escaped death. This section of the island was less
densely populated than the other portions, and the loss of life was
comparatively small, although it must have aggregated several thousands.
The waters of Welcome Bay in the Sunda Straits, Pepper Bay on the east,
and the Indian Ocean on the south, had rushed in and formed a sea of
turbulent waves.


DETONATIONS HEARD FOR MANY MILES AWAY


"On Monday night the volcano of Papandayang was in an active state of
paroxysmal eruption, accompanied by detonations which are said to have
been heard for many miles away. In Sumatra three distinct columns of
flame were seen to rise from a mountain to a vast height, and its whole
surface was soon covered with fiery lava streams, which spread to
great distances on all sides. Stones fell for miles around, and black
fragmentary matter carried into the air caused total darkness. A
whirlwind accompanied the eruption, by which house-roofs, trees, men,
and horses were swept into the air. The quantity of matter ejected was
such as to cover the ground and the roofs of the houses at Denamo to
the depth of several inches. Suddenly the scene changed. At first it was
reported that Papandayang had been split into seven distinct peaks. This
proved untrue; but in the open seams formed could be seen great balls of
molten matter. From the fissures poured forth clouds of steam and black
lava, which, flowing in steady streams, ran slowly down the mountain
sides, forming beds 200 or 300 feet in extent. At the entrance to
Batavia was a large group of houses extending along the shore, and
occupied by Chinamen. This portion of the city was entirely destroyed,
and not many of the Chinese who lived on the swampy plains managed to
save their lives. They stuck to their homes till the waves came and
washed them away, fearing torrents of flame and lava more than torrents
of water.

"Of the 3,500 Europeans and Americans in Batavia--which for several
hours was in darkness, owing to the fall of ashes--800 perished at
Anjer. The European and American quarter was first overwhelmed by rocks,
mud and lava from the crater, and then the waters came up and swallowed
the ruins, leaving nothing to mark the site, and causing the loss of
about 200 lives of the inhabitants and those who sought refuge there."

The loss of life above mentioned was but a small fraction of the total
loss. All along the coasts of the adjoining large islands towns and
villages were swept away and their inhabitants drowned, till the total
loss was, as nearly as could be estimated, 36,000 souls. Krakatoa thus
surpassed Mont Pelee in its tale of destruction. These two, indeed, have
been the most destructive to life of known volcanic explosions, since
the volcano usually falls far short of the earthquake in its murderous
results.

The distant effects of this explosion were as remarkable as the near
ones. The concussion of the air reached to an unprecedented distance
and the clouds of floating dust encircled the earth, producing striking
phenomena of which an account is given at the end of this chapter.

The rapidity with which the effects of the Krakatoa eruption made
themselves evident in all parts of the earth is perhaps the most
remarkable outcome of this extraordinary event. The floating pumice
reached the harbor of St. Paul on the 22nd of March, 1884, after having
made a voyage of some two hundred and sixty days at a rate of
six-tenths of a mile an hour. Immense quantities of pumice of a similar
description, and believed to have been derived from the same source,
reached Tamatave in Madagascar five months later, and no doubt much of
it long continued to float round the world.


SERIES OF ATMOSPHERIC WAVES


Another result of the eruption was the series of atmospheric waves,
caused by the disturbance in the atmosphere, which affected the
barometer over the entire world. The velocity with which these waves
traveled has been variously estimated at from 912.09 feet to 1066.29
feet per second. This speed is, of course, very much inferior to that at
which sound travels through the air. Yet, in three distinct cases, the
noise of the Krakatoa explosions was plainly heard at a distance of at
least 2,200 miles, and in one instance--that recorded from Rodriguez--of
nearly 3,000. The sound travelled to Ceylon, Burmah, Manila, New Guinea
and Western Australia, places, however, within a radius of about 2,000
miles; out Diego Garcia lies outside that area, and Rodriguez a thousand
miles beyond it. Six days subsequent to the explosion, after the
atmospheric waves had traveled four times round the globe, the barometer
was still affected by them.

Another result, similar in kind, was the extraordinary dissemination of
the great ocean wave, which in a like manner seems to have encircled the
earth, since high waves, without evident cause, appeared not only in
the Pacific, but at many places on the Atlantic coast within a few days
after the event. They were observed alike in England and at New York.
The writer happened to be at Atlantic City, on the New Jersey coast,
at this time. It was a period of calm, the winds being at rest, but,
unheralded, there came in an ocean wave of such height as to sweep away
the ocean-front boardwalk and do much other damage. He ascribed this
strange wave at the time to the Krakatoa explosion, and is of the same
opinion still.

In addition to the account given of this extraordinary volcanic event,
it seems desirable to give Sir Robert S. Ball's description of it in his
recent work, "The Earth's Beginnings." While repeating to some
extent what we have already said, it is worthy, from its freshness of
description and general readability, of a place here.


SIR ROBERT S. BALL'S DESCRIPTION


"Until the year 1883 few had ever heard of Krakatoa. It was unknown
to fame, as are hundreds of other gems of glorious vegetation set
in tropical waters. It was not inhabited, but the natives from the
surrounding shores of Sumatra and Java used occasionally to draw their
canoes up on its beach, while they roamed through the jungle in search
of the wild fruits that there abounded. It was known to the mariner who
navigated the Straits of Sunda, for it was marked on his charts as one
of the perils of the intricate navigation in those waters. It was no
doubt recorded that the locality had been once, or more than once,
the seat of an active volcano. In fact, the island seemed to owe its
existence to some frightful eruption of by-gone days; but for a couple
of centuries there had been no fresh outbreak. It almost seemed as if
Krakatoa might be regarded as a volcano that had become extinct. In this
respect it would only be like many other similar objects all over the
globe, or like the countless extinct volcanoes all over the moon.

"As the summer of 1883 advanced the vigor of Krakatoa, which had sprung
into notoriety at the beginning of the year, steadily increased and the
noises became more and more vehement; these were presently audible on
shores ten miles distant, and then twenty miles distant; and still those
noises waxed louder and louder, until the great thunders of the volcano,
now so rapidly developing, astonished the inhabitants that dwelt over an
area at least as large as Great Britain. And there were other symptoms
of the approaching catastrophe. With each successive convulsion a
quantity of fine dust was projected aloft into the clouds. The wind
could not carry this dust away as rapidly as it was hurled upward by
Krakatoa, and accordingly the atmosphere became heavily charged with
suspended particles.

"A pall of darkness thus hung over the adjoining seas and islands. Such
was the thickness and density of these atmospheric volumes of Krakatoa
dust that, for a hundred miles around, the darkness of midnight
prevailed at midday. Then the awful tragedy of Krakatoa took place.
Many thousands of the unfortunate inhabitants of the adjacent shores of
Sumatra and Java were destined never to behold the sun again. They were
presently swept away to destruction in an invasion of the shore by the
tremendous waves with which the seas surrounding Krakatoa were agitated.

"As the days of August passed by the spasms of Krakatoa waxed more and
more vehement. By the middle of that month the panic was widespread, for
the supreme catastrophe was at hand. On the night of Sunday, August 26,
1883, the blackness of the dust-clouds, now much thicker than ever in
the Straits of Sunda and adjacent parts of Sumatra and Java, was only
occasionally illumined by lurid flashes from the volcano.

"At the town of Batavia, a hundred miles distant, there was no quiet
that night. The houses trembled with subterranean violence, and the
windows rattled as if heavy artillery were being discharged in the
streets. And still these efforts seemed to be only rehearsing for the
supreme display. By ten o'clock on the morning of Monday, August 27,
1883, the rehearsals were over, and the performance began. An overture,
consisting of two or three introductory explosions, was succeeded by
a frightful convulsion which tore away a large part of the island of
Krakatoa and scattered it to the winds of heaven. In that final outburst
all records of previous explosions on this earth were completely broken.


AN EXTRAORDINARY NOISE


"This supreme effort it was which produced the mightiest noise that, so
far as we can ascertain, has ever been heard on this globe. It must have
been indeed a loud noise which could travel from Krakatoa to Batavia and
preserve its vehemence over so great a distance; but we should form a
very inadequate conception of the energy of the eruption of Krakatoa if
we thought that its sounds were heard by those merely a hundred miles
off. This would be little indeed compared with what is recorded on
testimony which it is impossible to doubt.

"Westward from Krakatoa stretches the wide expanse of the Indian Ocean.
On the opposite side from the Straits of Sunda lies the island of
Rodriguez, the distance from Krakatoa being almost three thousand miles.
It has been proved by evidence which cannot be doubted that the
thunders of the great volcano attracted the attention of an intelligent
coast-guard on Rodriguez, who carefully noted the character of the
sounds and the time of their occurrence. He had heard them just four
hours after the actual explosion, for this is the time the sound
occupied on its journey.


A CONSTANT WIND


"This mighty incident at Krakatoa has taught us other lessons on the
constitution of our atmosphere. We previously knew little, or I might
say almost nothing, as to the conditions prevailing above the height
of ten miles overhead. It was Krakatoa which first gave us a little
information which was greatly wanted. How could we learn what winds were
blowing at a height four times as great as the loftiest mountain on the
earth, and twice as great as the loftiest altitude to which a balloon
has ever soared? No doubt a straw will show which way the wind blows,
but there are no straws up there. There was nothing to render the winds
perceptible until Krakatoa came to our aid. Krakatoa drove into those
winds prodigious quantities of dust. Hundreds of cubic miles of air were
thus deprived of that invisibility which they had hitherto maintained.

"With eyes full of astonishment men watched those vast volumes of
Krakatoa dust on a tremendous journey. Of course, every one knows the
so-called trade-winds on our earth's surface, which blow steadily in
fixed directions, and which are of such service to the mariner. But
there is yet another constant wind. It was first disclosed by Krakatoa.
Before the occurrence of that eruption, no one had the slightest
suspicion that far up aloft, twenty miles over our heads, a mighty
tempest is incessantly hurrying, with a speed much greater than that of
the awful hurricane which once laid so large a part of Calcutta on the
ground and slew so many of its inhabitants. Fortunately for humanity,
