now loud, and the two Frenchmen attacked Rupert furiously, one on
each side. With no weapon but a stick, Rupert felt such a conflict
to be hopeless, and with a spring as sudden as that with which he
had mounted he leapt to the ground, as the general on one side and
the dragoon on the other cut at him at the same moment.

The spring took him close to the horse of the latter, and before
the amazed soldier could again strike, Rupert had vaulted on to the
horse, behind him. Then using his immense strength--a strength
brought to perfection by his exercise at Loches, and his work in
lifting sacks as a miller's man--he seized with both hands the
French soldier by the belt, lifted him from the seat, and threw him
backwards over his head, the man flying through the air some yards
before he fell on the ground with a heavy crash. Driving his heels
into the horse, he rode him straight at the French general, as the
latter--who had dashed forward as Rupert unseated the trooper--came
at him. Rupert received a severe cut on the left shoulder, but the
impetus of the heavier horse and rider rolled the French officer
and his horse on to the ground. Rupert shifted his seat into the
saddle, leapt the fallen horse, and stooping down seized the
officer by his waist belt, lifted him from the ground as if he had
been a child, threw him across the horse in front of him, and
galloped forward towards the allied lines, amid a perfect roar of
cheering, just as a British cavalry regiment rode out from between
the infantry to check a body of French dragoons who were galloping
up at full speed from their side.

With a thundering cheer the British regiment reined up as Rupert
rode up to them, the French dragoons having halted when they saw
that the struggle was over.

"Why, as I live," shouted Colonel Forbes, "it's the little cornet!"

"The little cornet! The little cornet!" shouted the soldiers, and
waved their swords and cheered again and again, in wild enthusiasm;
as Colonel Forbes, Lauriston, Dillon, and the other officers,
pressed forward to greet their long-lost comrade.

Before, however, a word of explanation could be uttered, an officer
rode up.

"The Duke of Marlborough wishes to see you," he said, in French.

"Will you take charge of this little officer, colonel?" Rupert
said, placing the French general, who was half suffocated by
pressure, rage, and humiliation, on his feet again.

"Now, sir," he said to the officer, "I am with you."

The latter led the way to the spot where the duke was sitting on
horseback surrounded by his staff, on rising ground a hundred yards
behind the infantry regiment.

"My Lord Duke," Rupert said, as he rode up, "I beg to report myself
for duty."

"Rupert Holliday!" exclaimed the duke, astonished. "My dear boy,
where do you come from, and where have you been? I thought I was
looking at the deeds of some modern Paladin, but now it is all
accounted for.

"I wrote myself to Marshal Villeroi to ask tidings of you, and to
know why you were not among the officers exchanged; and I was told
that you had escaped from Lille, and had never been heard of
since."

"He never heard of me, sir, but his Majesty of France could have
given you further news. But the story is too long for telling you
now."

"You must be anxious about your friends, Rupert. I heard from
Colonel Holliday just before I left England, begging me to cause
further inquiries to be made for you. He mentioned that your lady
mother was in good health, but greatly grieving at your
disappearance. Neither of them believed you to be dead, and were
confident you would reappear.

"And now, who is the French officer you brought in?"

"I don't know, sir," Rupert said, laughing. "There was no time for
any formal introduction, and I made his acquaintance without asking
his name."

An officer was at once sent off to Colonel Forbes to inquire the
name of the prisoner.

"There is one of your assailants making off!" the duke said; and
Rupert saw that the trooper had regained his feet and was limping
slowly away.

"He fell light," Rupert said; "he was no weight to speak of."

"The other officer is killed, I think," the duke said, looking with
a telescope.

"I fancy so," Rupert said, drily. "I hit him rather hard. He was
the Duc de Carolan, and as he had given much annoyance to a friend
of mine, not to mention a serious act of disservice to myself, I
must own that if I had to kill a Frenchman in order to escape, I
could not have picked out one with whom I had so long an account to
settle."

The officer now rode back, and reported that the prisoner was
General Mouffler.

"A good cavalry officer," the duke said. "It is a useful capture.

"And now, Rupert, you will want to be with your friends. If we
encamp here tonight, come in to me after it is dark and tell me
what you have been doing. If not, come to me the first evening we
halt."

Rupert now rode back to his regiment, where he was again received
with the greatest delight. The men had now dismounted, and Rupert,
after a few cordial words with his brother officers, went off to
find Hugh.

He found the faithful fellow leaning against a tree, fairly crying
with emotion and delight, and Rupert himself could not but shed
tears of pleasure at his reunion with his attached friend. After a
talk with Hugh, Rupert again returned to the officers, who were
just sitting down to a dinner on the grass.

After the meal was over Rupert was called upon to relate his
adventures. Some parts of his narrative were clear enough, but
others were singularly confused and indistinct. The first parts
were all satisfactory. Rupert's capture was accounted for. He said
that in the person of the commanding officer he met an old friend
of Colonel Holliday, who took him to Paris, and presented him at
Versailles.

Then the narrative became indistinct. He fell into disgrace. His
friend was sent back to the army, and he was sent to Lille.

"But why was this, Rupert," Captain Dillon--for he was now a
captain--asked. "Did you call his Majesty out? Or did you kiss
Madame de Maintenon? Or run away with a maid of honour?"

A dozen laughing suggestions were made, and then Rupert said
gravely:

"There was an unfounded imputation that I was interfering with the
plans which his Majesty had formed for the marriage of a lady and
gentleman of the court."

Rupert spoke so gravely that his brother officers saw that any
joking here would be ill timed; but sly winks were exchanged as
Rupert, changing the subject, went on to recount his captivity at
Lille.

The story of his escape was listened to eagerly, and then Rupert
made a long pause, and coloured lightly.

"Several things of no importance then happened," he said, "and as I
was going through the streets of Blois--"

"The streets of where?" Colonel Forbes asked, in astonishment. "You
escape from Lille, just on the frontier, what on earth were you
doing down at Blois, a hundred miles south of Paris?"

Rupert paused again.

"I really cannot explain it, colonel. I shall make a point of
telling the duke, and if he considers that I acted wrongly, I must
bear his displeasure; but the matter is of no real importance, and
does not greatly concern my adventures. Forgive me, if I do not
feel justified in telling it. All the rest is plain sailing."

Again the narrative went on, and the surprise at hearing that
Rupert had been confined at Loches, well known as a prison for
dangerous political offenders, was only exceeded by that occasioned
by the incidents of his escape therefrom. Rupert carried on his
story to the point of the escape from the French, which they had
just witnessed.

There was a chorus of congratulations at his having gone safely
through such great dangers; and Dillon remarked:

"It appears to me that you have been wasting your time and your
gifts most amazingly. Here have you been absent just two years, and
with the exception of a paltry marauder you do not seem to have
slain a single Frenchman, till you broke that officer's skull
today.

"I think, my friends, that the least we can do is to pass a formal
vote of censure upon our comrade for such a grievous waste of his
natural advantages. The only thing in his favour is, that he seems
to have been giving up his whole attention to growing, and he has
got so prodigiously broad and big that now he has again joined us
he will be able to make up for the otherwise sinful loss of time."

A chorus of laughter greeted Dillon's proposal, and the merry group
then broke up, and each went off to his duty.

Rupert's first effort was to obtain such clothes as would enable
him to appear in his place in the ranks without exciting laughter.
Hugh told him that all his clothes and effects were in store at
Liege, but indeed it was questionable whether any would be of use
to him. He was not taller indeed than he was two years before, but
he was broader, by some inches, than before. From the quartermaster
he obtained a pair of jack boots which had belonged to a trooper
who had been killed in a skirmish two days before, and from the
armourer he got a sword, cuirass, and pistols. As to riding
breeches there was no trouble, for several of the officers had
garments which would fit him, but for a regimental coat he could
obtain nothing which was in any way large enough. Hugh was
therefore dispatched to Halle to purchase a riding coat of the best
fashion and largest size that he could find, and a hat as much as
possible in conformity with those generally worn.

An hour or two later Lord Fairholm and Sir John Loveday rode over.
The news of the singular fight on the ground between the armies,
and of the reappearance of the famous "little cornet of the 5th
dragoons" having spread apace through the army.

Joyous and hearty were the greetings, and after a while, the party
being joined by Dillon, Rupert gave his three friends a full
account of his adventures, omitting some of the particulars which
he had not deemed it expedient to speak of in public.

"I understand now," Lord Fairholm said, "the change in your face
which struck me."

"Is my face changed?" Rupert said. "It does not seem to me that I
have changed in face a bit since I joined, six years ago."

"It is not in features, but in expression. You look good tempered
now, Rupert, even merry when you smile, but no man could make a
mistake with you now. There is, when you are not speaking, a sort
of intent look upon your face, intent and determined--the
expression which seems to tell of great danger expected and faced.
No man could have gone through that two months in the dungeon of
Loches and come out unchanged. All the other dangers you have gone
through--and you always seem to be getting into danger of some
kind--were comparatively sharp and sudden, and a sudden peril,
however great, may not leave a permanent mark; but the two months
in that horrible den, from which no other man but yourself would
deem escape possible, could not but change you.

"When you left us, although you were twenty, you were in most
things still a boy; there is nothing boyish about you now. It is
the same material, but it has gone through the fire. You were good
iron, very tough and strong, but you could be bent. Now, Rupert,
you have been tried in the furnace and have come out steel."

"You are very good to say so," Rupert said, smiling, "but I don't
feel all that change which you speak of. I hope that I am just as
much up to a bit of fun as ever I was. At present I strike you
perhaps as being more quiet; but you see I have hardly spoken to a
soul for eighteen months, and have got out of the way rather. All
that I do feel is, that I have gained greatly in strength, as that
unfortunate French trooper found to his cost today.

"But there, the trumpets are sounding; it's too late for a battle
today, so I suppose we have got a march before us."



Chapter 22: Oudenarde.

The trumpet call which summoned Rupert and his friends to horse
was, as he suspected, an indication that there was a general
movement of the troops in front.

Vendome had declined to attack the allies in the position they had
taken up, but had moved by his right to Braine le Leude, a village
close to the ground on which, more than a hundred years later,
Waterloo was fought, and whence he threatened alike Louvain and
Brussels. Marlborough moved his army on a parallel line to
Anderleet. No sooner had he arrived there, than he found that
Vendome was still moving towards his right--a proof that Louvain
was really the object of the attack. Again the allied troops were
set in motion, and all night, through torrents of rain, they
tramped wearily along, until at daybreak they were in position at
Parc, covering the fortress of Louvain. Vendome, finding himself
anticipated, fell back to Braine le Leude without firing a shot.

But though Marlborough had so far foiled the enemy, it was clear
that he was not in a condition to take the offensive before the
arrival of Prince Eugene, who would, he trusted, be able to come to
his assistance; and for weeks the armies watched each other without
movement.

On the 4th of July, Vendome suddenly marched from Braine le Leude,
intending to capture the fortress of Oudenarde. Small bodies of
troops were sent off at the same time to Ghent and Bruges, whose
inhabitants rose and admitted the French. Marlborough, seeing the
danger which threatened the very important fortress of Oudenarde,
sent orders to Lord Chandos who commanded at Ath, to collect all
the small garrisons in the neighbourhood, and to throw himself into
Oudenarde. This was done before Vendome could reach the place,
which was thus secured against a coup de main. Vendome invested the
fortress, brought up his siege train from Tournay, and moved
towards Lessines with his main army, to cover the siege.

The loss of Ghent and Bruges, the annoyances he suffered from party
attacks at home, and the failure of the allies to furnish the
promised contingents, so agitated Marlborough that he was seized
with an attack of fever.

Fortunately, on the 7th of July Prince Eugene arrived. Finding that
his army could not be up in time, he had left them, and,
accompanied only by his personal staff, had ridden on to join
Marlborough.

The arrival of this able general and congenial spirit did much to
restore Marlborough; and after a council with the prince, he
determined to throw his army upon Vendome's line of communications,
and thus force him to fight with his face to Paris.

At two in the morning of the 9th of July, the allies broke up their
camp, and advanced in four great columns towards Lessines and the
French frontier. By noon the heads of the columns had reached
Herfelingen, fourteen miles from their starting point, and bridges
were thrown across the Dender, and the next morning the army
crossed, and then stood between the French and their own frontier.

Vendome, greatly disconcerted at finding that his plans had all
been destroyed, ordered his army to fall back to Gavre on the
Scheldt, intending to cross below Oudenarde.

Marlborough at once determined to press forward, so as to force on
a battle, having the advantage of coming upon the enemy when
engaged in a movement of retreat. Accordingly, at daybreak on the
11th, Colonel Cadogan, with the advanced guard, consisting of the
whole of the cavalry and twelve battalions of infantry, pushed
forward, and marched with all speed to the Scheldt, which they
reached by seven o'clock. Having thrown bridges across it, he
marched to meet the enemy, his troops in battle array; the infantry
opposite Eynes, the cavalry extending to the left towards
Schaerken. Advancing strongly down the river in this order, Cadogan
soon met the French advanced guard under Biron, which was moving up
from Gavre. In the fighting the French had the advantage, retaining
possession of Eynes, and there awaiting the advance of the English.

Meanwhile Marlborough and Eugene, with the main body of the army,
had reached the river, and were engaged in getting the troops
across the narrow bridges, but as yet but a small portion of the
forces had crossed. Seeing this, Vendome determined to crush the
British advanced guard with the whole weight of his army, and so
halted his troops and formed order of battle.

The country in which the battle of Oudenarde was about to be fought
is undulating, and cut up by several streams, with hedgerows,
fields, and enclosures, altogether admirably adapted for an army
fighting a defensive battle. The village of Eynes lies about a mile
below Oudenarde and a quarter of a mile from the Scheldt. Through
it flows a stream formed by the junction of the two rivulets. At a
distance of about a mile from the Scheldt, and almost parallel with
that river, runs the Norken, a considerable stream, which falls
into the Scheldt below Gavre. Behind this river the ground rises
into a high plateau, in which, at the commencement of the fight,
the greater portion of the French army were posted.

The appearance of Colonel Cadogan with his advanced guard
completely astonished the French generals. The allies were known to
have been fifteen miles away on the preceding evening, and that a
great army should march that distance, cross a great river, and be
in readiness to fight a great battle, was contrary to all their
calculations of probabilities.

The Duke of Burgundy wished to continue the march to Ghent. Marshal
Vendome pointed out that it was too late, and that although a
country so intersected with hedges was unfavourable ground for the
army which possessed the larger masses of men, yet that a battle
must be fought. This irresolution and dissension on the part of the
French generals wasted time, and allowed the allies to push large
bodies of troops across the river unmolested. As fast as they got
over Marlborough formed them up near Bevere, a village a few
hundred yards north of Oudenarde. Marlborough then prepared to take
the offensive, and ordered Colonel Cadogan to retake Eynes.

Four English battalions, under Colonel Sabine, crossed the stream
and attacked the French forces in the village, consisting of seven
battalions under Pfiffer, while the cavalry crossed the rivulets
higher up, and came down on the flank of the village. The result
was three French battalions were surrounded and made prisoners, and
the other four routed and dispersed.

The French generals now saw that there was no longer a possibility
of avoiding a general action. Vendome would have stood on the
defensive, which, as he had the Norken with its steep and difficult
ground in his front, was evidently the proper tactics to have
pursued. He was, however, overruled by the Duke of Burgundy and the
other generals, and the French accordingly descended from the
plateau, crossed the Norken, and advanced to the attack. The armies
were of nearly equal strength, the French having slightly the
advantage. The allies had 112 battalions and 180 squadrons, in all
80,000 men; the French, 121 battalions and 198 squadrons, in all
85,000 men.

The French again lost time, and fell into confusion as they
advanced, owing to Marshal Vendome's orders being countermanded by
the Duke of Burgundy, who had nominally the chief command, and who
was jealous of Vendome's reputation. Marlborough divined the cause
of the hesitation, and perceiving that the main attack would be
made on his left, which was posted in front of the Castle of
Bevere, half a mile from the village of the same name; ordered
twelve battalions of infantry under Cadogan to move from his right
at Eynes to reinforce his left.

He then lined all the hedges with infantry, and stationing twenty
British battalions under Argyle with four guns in reserve, awaited
the attack. But few guns were employed on either side during the
battle, for artillery in those days moved but slowly, and the rapid
movements of both armies had left the guns far behind.

The French in their advance at once drew in four battalions, posted
at Groenvelde, in advance of Eynes, and then bearing to their
right, pressed forward with such vigour that they drove back the
