                    God save the people!"

Still the Government was not covinced; the Corn Laws were enforced,
the price of bread showed no signs of falling, and the situation grew
daily more desperate and more threatening.

593. The Irish Famine, 1845-1846.

At last the Irish famine opened the Prime Minister's eyes (S592).
When in Elizabeth's reign Sir Walter Raleigh brought over the cheap
but precarious potato from America and planted it in Ireland, his
motive was one of pure good will.  He could not foresee that it would
in time become in that country an almost universal food, that through
its very abundance the population would rapidly increase, and that
then, by the sudden failure of the crop, terrible destitution would
ensue.  Such was the case in the summer of 1845.  It is said by
eyewitnesses that in a single night the entire potato crop was smitten
with disease, and the healthy plants were transformed into a mass of
putrefying vegetation.  Thus at one fell stroke the food of nearly a
whole nation was cut off.[1]

[1] O'Connor's "The Parnell Movement."

In the years that followed, the famine became appalling.  The starving
peasants left their miserable huts and streamed into the towns for
relief, only to die of hunger in the streets.

Parliament responded nobly to the piteous calls for help, and voted in
all no less than 10,000,000 pounds to relieve the distress.[2]
Subscriptions were also taken up in London and the chief towns, by
which large sums were obtained, and America contributed shiploads of
provisions and a good deal of money; but the misery was so great that
even these measures failed to accomplish what was hoped.  When the
famine was over, it was found that Ireland had lost about two million
(or one fourth) of her population.[3] This was the combined effect of
starvation, of the various diseases that followed in its path, and of
emigration.[4]

[2] Molesworth's "History of England from 1830."
[3] The actual number of deaths from starvation, or fever caused by
insufficient food, was estimated at from two hundred thousand to three
hundred thousand.  See the Encyclopaedia Britannica under "Ireland."
[4] McCarthy's "History of Our Own Times," Vol. I.

594. Repeal of the Corn Laws, 1846-1849; Free Trade established, 1869.

In the face of such appalling facts, and of the bad harvests and
distress in England, Sir Robert Peel (S592) could hold out no longer,
and by a gradual process, extending from 1846 to 1849, the obnoxious
Corn Laws were repealed, with the exception of a trifling duty, which
was finally removed in 1869.

The beginning once made, free trade in nearly everything, except wine,
spirits, and tobacco, followed.  They were, and still are, subject to
a heavy duty, perhaps because the government believes, as Napoleon
did, that the vices have broad backs and can comfortably carry the
heaviest taxes.  A few years later (1849) the old Navigation Laws
(S459) were totally repealed.  This completed the English free-trade
measures.  But, by a singular contrast, while nearly all goods and
products now enter England free, yet Australia, Canada, New Zealand,
and the Union of South Africa--in a word, all the great self-governing
English colonies--continue to impose duties on imports from the mother
country (S625).

595. The World's Fair (1851); Repeal of the Window and the Newspaper
     Tax; the Atlantic Cable, 1866.

The great industrial exhibition known as the "World's Fair" was opened
in Hyde Park, London (1851).  The original plan of it was conceived by
Prince Albert.  It proved to be not only a complete success in itself,
but it led to many similar fairs on the part of different nations.
For the first time in history the products and inventions of all the
countries of the globe were brought together under one roof, in a
gigantic structure of glass and iron called the "Crystal Palace,"
which is still in use for exhibition purposes at Sydenham, a suburb of
London.

The same year (1851) the barbarous tax on light and air, known as the
"Window Tax,"[1] was repealed and the House Tax (which is still in
force) was substituted for it.  From that date the Englishman, whether
in London or out, might enjoy his sunshine, when he could get it,
without having to pay for every beam,--a luxury which only the rich
could afford.

[1] This tax, which took the place of the ancient Hearth Tax
(1663-1689), was first imposed in 1695.

A little later (1855) a stamp tax on newspapers, which had been
devised in Queen Anne's time in the avowed hope of crushing them out,
was repealed.  The result was that henceforth cheap papers could be
published, and the workingman, as he sat by his fireside, could inform
himself of what the world was doing and thinking,--two things of which
he had before known almost nothing, and cared, perhaps, even less.

To get this news of the world's life more speedily, England had
established the first line of Atlantic steamers (S565); next, the
first Atlantic cable, connecting England with America, was laid
(1858).  It soon gave out, but was permanently relaid not long
afterwards, in 1866.  Since then a large part of the globe has been
joined in like manner,[1] and the great cities of every civilized land
are practically one in their knowledge of all important events.  So
many improvements have also been made in the use of electricity, not
only for the transmission of intelligence, but as an illuminator, and
more recently still as a motive power, that it now seems probable that
"the age of steam" will be superseded by the higher "age of
electricity."

[1] There are now over 250,000 miles of submarine electric cables in
operation in the world.

596. The Opium War (1839); the War in the Crimea (1854).

For nearly twenty years after Victoria's accession no wars occurred in
her reign worthy of mention, with the exception of that with China
(1839).  At that time the Chinese Emperor, either from a desire to put
a stop to the consumption of opium in his dominions, or because he
wished to encourage the home production of the drug, prohibited its
importation.  As the English in India were largely engaged in the
production of opium for the Chinese market,--the people of that
country smoking it instead of tobacco,--the British government
insisted that the Emperor should not interfere with so lucrative a
trade.  War ensued.

The Chinese, being unable to contend against English gunboats, were
soon forced to withdraw their prohibition of the foreign opium
traffic.  The English government, with the planters of India, reaped a
golden reward of many millions for their deliberate violation of the
rights of a heathen and half-civilized people.  The war opened five
important ports to the British trade, and subsequent wars opened a
number more on the rivers in the interior.  This action, with the
later aggressions of other European powers, roused an intensely bitter
feeling among large numbers of the Chinese.  Their hatred of
foreigners finally led to a desperate but unsuccessful attempt (1900)
to drive all Europeans and Americans, including missionaries, out of
the country.

Eventually, the pressure of the great powers of Europe and the
diplomatic influence of the United States induced China to grant the
"Open Door" to the demands of foreign trade.  Later, England and China
made an agreement (1911) which bids fair to stop the exportation of
opium to that country.

Next, Turkey declared war against Russia (1853).  The latter Power had
insisted on protecting all Christians in the Turkish dominions against
the oppression of the Sultan.  England and France considered the
Czar's championship of the Christians as a mere pretext for occupying
Turkish territory.  To prevent this aggression they formed an alliance
with the Sultan, which resulted in the Russo-Turkish war, and ended in
the taking of Sebastopol by the allied forces.  Russia was obliged to
retract her demands, and peace was declared (1856).

597. The Great Rebellion in India, 1857.

The following year, 1857, was memorable for the outbreak of rebellion
in India.  The real cause of the revolt was probably a long-smothered
feeling of resentment on the part of the Sepoy, or native, troops
against English rule,--a feeling that dates back to the extortion and
misgovernment of Warren Hastings (S555).  The immediate cause of the
uprising was the introduction of an improved rifle using a greased
cartridge, which had to be bitten off before being rammed down.

To the Hindu the fat of cattle or swine is an abomination, and his
religion forbids his tasting it.  An attempt on the part of the
British Government to enforce the use of the new cartridge brought on
a general mutiny among three hundred thousand Sepoys.  During the
revolt the native troops perpetrated the most horrible atrocitise on
the English women and children who fell into their hands.  When the
insurrection was finally quelled under Havelock and Campbell, the
English soldiers retaliated by binding numbers of prisoners to the
mouths of cannon and blowing them to shreds.  At the close of the
rebellion, the government of India was wholly transferred to the
Crown, and later the Queen received the title of "Empress of India"
(1876).

598. Death of Prince Albert; the American Civil War, 1861.

Not long after the Sepoy rebellion was quelled, Prince Albert (S589)
died suddenly (1861).  In him the nation lost an earnest promoter of
social, educational, and industrial reforms, and the United States a
true and judicious friend, who, at a most critical period in the Civil
War, used his influence to maintain peace between the two countries.

After his death the Queen held no court for many years, and so
complete was her seclusion that Sir Charles Dilke, a well-known
Radical, suggested in Parliament (1868) that her Majesty be invited to
abdicate or choose a regent.  The suggestion was indignantly rejected;
but it revealed the feeling, which quite generally existed, that "the
real Queen died with her husband," and that only her shadow remained.

In the spring of the year 1861, in which Prince Albert died, the
American Civil War broke out between the Northern and Southern
States.  Lord Palmerston, the Liberal Prime Minister, preferred to be
considered the minister of the nation rather than the head of a
political party.  At the beginning of the war he was in favor of the
North.  As the conflict threatened to be bitter the Queen issued a
proclamation declaring her "determination to maintain a strict and
impartial neutrality in the contest between the said contending
parties." The rights of belligerents--in other words, all the rights
of war according to the law of nations--were granted to the South
equally with the North; and her Majesty's subjects were warned against
aiding either side in the conflict.

The progress of the war caused terrible distress in Lancashire, owing
to the cutting off of supplies of cotton for the mills through the
blockade of the ports of the Confederate States.  The starving
weavers, however, gave their moral support to the North, and continued
steadfast to the cause of the Union even in the sorest period of their
suffering.  The great majority of the manufacturers and business
classes generally, and the nobility, with a few exceptions,
sympathized with the efforts of the South to establish an independent
Confederacy.  Most of the distinguished political and social leaders,
in Parliament and out, with nearly all the influential journals, were
on the same side, and were openly hostile to the Union.[1]

[1] Lord John Russell (Foreign Secretary), Lord Brougham, Sir John
Bowring, Carlyle, Ruskin, and the London Times and Punch espouses the
cause of the South more or less openly; while others, like
Mr. Gladstone, declared their full belief in the ultimate success of
the Confederacy.  On the other hand, Prince Albert, the Duke of
Argyll, John Bright, John Stuart Mill, Professor Newman, Lord
Palmerston, at least for a time, and the London Daily News defended
the cause of the North.  After the death of President Lincoln, Punch
manfully acknowledged (see issue of May 6, 1865) that it had been
altogether wrong in its estimation of him and his measures; and
Mr. Gladstone, in an essay on "Kin beyond Sea" in his "Gleanings of
Past Years," paid a noble tribute to the course pursued by America
since the close of the war.

Late in Autumn (1861) Captain Wilkes, of the United States Navy,
boarded the British mail steamer Trent, and seized two Confederate
commissioners (Mason and Slidell) who were on their way to England.
When intelligence of the act was conveyed to President Lincoln, he
expressed his unqualified disapproval of it, saying: "This is the very
thing the British captains used to do.  They claimed the right of
searching American ships, and taking men out of them.  That was the
cause of the War of 1812.  Now, we cannot abandon our own principles;
we shall have to give up these men, and apologize for what we have
done."

The British Government made a formal demand that the commissioners
should be given up.  Through the influence of Prince Albert, and with
the approval of the Queen, this demand was couched in most
conciliatory language.  Slidell and Mason were handed over to Great
Britain, and an apology was made by Secretary Seward.

During the progress of the Civil War a number of fast-sailing vessels
were fitted out in England, and employed in running the blockade of
the Southern ports, to supply them with arms, ammunition, and
manufactured goods of various kinds.  Later, several gunboats were
built in British shipyards by agents of the Confederate government,
for the purpose of attacking the commerce of the United States.  The
most famous of these vessels was the Alabama, built expressly for the
Confederate service by the Lairds, of Birkenhead, armed with British
cannon, and manned chiefly by British sailors.

Charles Francis Adams, the American Minister at London, notified Lord
Palmerston, the Prime Minister, of her true character.  But Palmerston
permitted the Alabama to leave port (1862), satisfied with the pretext
that she was going on a trial trip.[1] She set sail on her career of
destruction, and soon drove nearly every American merchant vessel from
the seas.  Two years later (1864) she was defeated and sunk by the
United States gunboat Kearsarge.  After the war the Government of the
United States demanded damages from Great Britain for losses caused by
the Alabama and other English-built privateers.

[1] The Queen's advocate gave his opinion that the Alabama should be
detained, but it reached the Foreign Secretary (Lord Russell) just
after she had put out to sea.

A treaty was agreed to by the two nations; and by its provisions an
international court was held at Geneva, Switzerland (1872), to deal
with the demands made by the United States on Great Britain.  The
court awarded $15,500,000 in gold as compensation to the United
States, which was duly paid.  One very important result of this
decision was that it established a precedent for settling by
arbitration on equitable and amicable terms whatever questions might
arise in future between the two nations.[1]

[1] This treaty imposed duties on neutral governments of a far more
stringent sort than Great Britain had hitherto been willing to
concede.  It resulted, furthermore, in the passage of an act of
Parliament, punishing with severe penalties such illegal shipbuilding
as that of the Alabama.  See Sheldon Amos's "Fifty Years of the
English Constitution, 1830-1880."

599. Municipal Reform (1835); Woman Suffrage; the Jews.

Excellent as was the Reform Bill of 1832 (S582), it did not go far
enough.  There was also great need of municipal reform, since in many
cities the taxpayers had no voice in the management of local affairs,
and the city officers sometimes spent the income of large charitable
funds in feasting and merrimaking while the poor got little or
nothing.

A law was passed (1835) giving taxpayers in cities (except London)
control of municipal elections.  By a subsequent amendment, the ballot
in such cases was extended to women,[2] and for the first time perhaps
in modern history partial woman suffrage was formally granted by
supreme legislative act.  A number of years later the political
restrictions imposed on the Jews were removed.

[2] Woman suffrage in municipal elections was granted to single women
and widows (householders) in 1869.  In 1870 an act was passed enabling
them to vote at schoolboard elections, and also to become members of
such boards.  By act of 1894 women were made eligible to sit and vote
in district and parish councils (or local-government elections).

There was a considerable number of Jews in London and in other large
cities who were men of wealth and influence.  They were entitled to
vote and hold municipal office, but they were debarred from election
to Parliament by a law which required them to make oath "on the faith
of a Christian."  The law was now so modified (1859) that a very
prominent Jew, Baron Rothschild, took his seat in Parliament.  Finally
the Oaths Act (1888) abolished all religious tests in Parliament.

600. Second and Third Reform Acts, 1867, 1884; County and Parish
     Councils (1884, 1894).

In 1867 the pressure of public opinion moved Mr. Disraeli (later Lord
Beaconsfield), a member of Lord Derby's Conservative Cabinet (S479),
to bring in a second Reform Bill (S582), which became law.  This bill
provided "household suffrage." It gave the right to vote to all male
householders in the English parliamentary boroughs (that is, towns
having the right to elect one or more members to Parliament), who paid
a tax for the support of the poor, and to all lodgers paying a rental
of 10 pounds yearly; it also increased the number of voters among
small property holders in counties.[1]

[1] See Summary of Constitutional History in the Appendix, p.xxvi,
S31.  Lord Derby held the office, but Mr. Disraeli was really Prime
Minister.

There still remained, however, a large class in the country districts
for whom nothing had been done.  The men employed by the farmers to
till the soil were wretchedly poor and deplorably ignorant.  Joseph
Arch, a Warwickshire farm laborer, who had been educated by hunger and
toil, succeeded in establishing a national union among men of his
class (1872).  In 1884 Mr. Gladstone, the Liberal Prime Minister,
secured the ballot for agricultural laborers by the passage of the
third Reform Act, which gave all residents of counties throughout the
United Kingdom the right to vote on the same liberal conditions as the
residents of the towns.

It is estimated that this last law added about two and a half millions
of voters; this gave one voter to every six persons of the total
population, whereas, before the passing of the first Reform Bill in
1832, thre was not over one in fifty.  When the new or so-called
"People's Parliament" convened (1886), Joseph Arch and several other
candidates took their seats in the House of Commons as representatives
of classes of the population who, up to that date, had no voice in the
legislation of the country.

The next step may bring universal "manhood suffrage." The County
Council and Parish Council acts (1888, 1894) greatly extended the
power of the people in all matters of local government, so that now
every village in England controls its own affairs.

601. Compulsory Church Rates abolished; Disestablishment in Ireland
     (1869).

While these great reforms were taking place with respect to elections,
others of great importance were also being effected.  From its origin
in 1549 the established Protestant Church of England (S362) had
compelled persons of all religious beliefs to pay rates or taxes for
the maintenance of the Established Cuhrch in the parish where they
resided.  Methodists, Baptists, and other Dissenters (SS472, 496, 507)
objected to this law as unjust, since, in addition to the expense of
supporting their own form of worship, they were obliged to contribute
toward maintaining one with which they had no sympathy.  So great had
the opposition become to paying these "church rates," that in over
fifteen hundred parishes in England (1859) the authorities could not
collect them.  After long debate Mr. Gladstone carried through a bill
(1868) which abolished this mode of taxation and made the payment of
these rates purely voluntary.[1]

[1] Church rates were levied on all occupiers of land or houses within
the parish.  The Church of England is now supported by a tax on
landowners, by its endowments, and by voluntary gifts.

A similar act of justice was soon after granted to Ireland (1869).[2]
At the time of the union of the two countries in 1800 (S562), the
maintenance of the Protestant Episcopal Church continued to remain
obligatory upon the Irish people, although only a small part of them
were of that faith.  Mr. Gladstone, now Liberal Prime Minister,
succeeded in getting Parliament to enact a law which disestablished
this branch of the National Church and left all religious
denominations in Ireland to the voluntary support of those who
belonged to them.  Henceforth the English Protestants residing in that
country could no longer claim the privilege of worshiping God at the
expense of his Roman Catholic neighbor.

[2] The Disestablishment Bill was passed in 1869 and took effect in
1871.

602. The Elementary Education Act, 1870.

In 1870 Mr. Forester, a member of Mr. Gladstone's Liberal Cabinet
(SS534, 601), succeeded in passing a measure of the highest
importance, entitled The Elementary Education Act.  This act did not
undertake to establish a new system of instruction, but to aid and
improve that which was then in use.  In the course of time, however,
it effected such changes for the better in the common schools that it
practically re-created most of them.

It will be remembered that before the Reformation the Catholic
monasteries took the leading part in educating the children of the
country (SS45, 60).  The destruction of the monasteries by Henry VIII
(S352) put a stop to their work; but after Henry's death, his son,
Edward VI, established many Protestant schools (SS364, 365), while
tohers were founded by men who had grown suddenly rich through getting
possession of monastic lands.  These new schools did good work, and
are still doing it; but they seldom reached the children of the poor.
Later on, many wealthy persons founded Charity Schools to help the
class who could not afford to pay anything for their tuition.  The
pupils who lived in these institutions (of which a number still exist)
were generally obliged to wear a dress which, by its peculiarity of
cut and color, always reminded them that they were "objects of public
or private benevolence." Furthermore, while the boys in these
institutions were often encouraged to go on and enter Grammar Schools,
the girls were informed that a very little learning would be all that
they would ever need in the humble station in life to which Providence
had seen fit to call them.

Meanwhile, the Church of England, and other religious denominations,
both Catholic and Protestant, established many common schools (1781-
1811) for the benefit of the poor.  The cost of carrying them on was
usually met by private contributions.  All of these schools gave some
form of denominational religious instruction.  As the population
increased many more schools were required.  At length Parliament began
(1833) to grant money to help the different religious societies in
maintaining their systems of instruction.  When able, the parents of
the children were also called on to pay a small sum weekly.  In 1870
the Liberal Government took hold of the education question with great
vigor.  It provided that in all cases where the existing Church of
England or other denominational schools were not able to accomodate
the children of a given district, School Boards should be established
to open new schools, which, if necessary, should be maintained
entirely at the public expense.  In these "Board Schools," as they
were called, no denominational religious instruction whatever could be
given.

This very important act "placed a school within the reach of every
child," but, except in very poor districts, these schools were not
made free schools; in fact, free schools, in the American sense,
cannot be said to exist in Great Britain.  Later on (1880) compulsory
attendance was required, and subsequent acts of Parliament (1902,
1904) transferred the management of these schools from the School
Boards to the Town and County Councils.[1]  Again, these new measures
make it practicable for a boy or girl, who has done well in the
primary course, to secure assistance which will open opportunities for
obtaining a higher education.  Thus, as a recent writer declares,
"There is now a path leading from the workman's home even to the
University."[2]

[1] But many men and women who belong to the Dissenting Denominations
complain that the Educational Acts of 1870-1904 compel them to pay
taxes for the support of a great number of public elementary schools
which are under the control of the English Church, and furthermore,
that teachers who are members of Dissenting societies, such as the
Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists, etc., can seldom, if ever, get
appointments in the class of schools mentioned.  Quite a number of
these Dissenters who call themselves "Passive Resisters" have refused
to pay the school tax and have had their property seized or have been
sent to jail year after year.
[2] A.L. Lowell's "The Government of England," II, 323.

Meanwhile (1871) the universities and colleges, with most of the
offices and professorships connected with them, were thrown open to
all persons without regard to religious belief; whereas, formerly, no
one could graduate from Oxford or Cambridge without subscribing to the
doctrines of the Church of England.

603. The First Irish Land Act, 1870.

In 1870, the same year that the Government undertook to provide for
the education of the masses (S602), Mr. Gladstone, who was still Prime
Minister and head of the Liberal Party (S601), brought in a bill for
the relief of small Irish farmers, those who had to support themselves
and their families from the little they could get from a few hired
acres.  Since the union (S562) much of the general policy of England
toward Ireland had been described as "a quick alternation of kicks and
kindness." Mr. Gladstone did not hesitate to say that he believed the
misery of the island sprang mainly from its misgovernment.  He thought
that the small farmer needed immediate help and that it was the duty
of the Liberal Party to grant it.

The circumstances under which the land was held in Ireland were
peculiar.  A very large part of it was owned by Englishmen whose
ancestors obtained it through the wholesale confiscations of James I,
Cromwell, and later rulers (SS423, 453).  Very few of these English
landlords cared to reside in the country or to do anything for its
improvement.  Their agents or overseers generally forced the farm
tenants to pay the largest amount of rent that could be wrung from
them, and they could dispossess a tenant of his land whenever they saw
fit, without giving a reason for the act.  If, by his labor, the
tenant made the land more fertile, he seldom reaped any additional
profit from his industry, for the rent was usually increased, and
swallowed up all that he raised.  Such a system of extortion was
destructive to those who tilled the soil, and if it brought in more
money for the landlord, it produced nothing but misery and discontent
for his tenant.

Mr. Gladstone's new law endeavored to remedy these evils by the
following provisions:

1. In case a landlord ejected a rent-paying tenant, he was to pay him
   damages, and allow him a fair sum for whatever improvement he had
   made.
2. It secured a ready means of arbitration between landlord and
   tenant, and if a tenant failed to pay an exorbitant rate he could
   not be hastily or unjustly driven from his farm.
3. It made it possible for the tenant to borrow a certain sum from the
   government for the purpose of purchasing the land in case the owner
   was willing to sell.

604. Distress in Ireland; the Land League (1879).

The friends of the new Irish land law hoped it would be found
satisfactory; but the potato crop again failed in Ireland (1876-1879),
and the country seemed threatened with another great famine (S593).
Thousands who could not get the means to pay even a moderate rent were
now forced to leave their cabins and seek shelter in the bogs, with
the prospect of dying there of starvation.

The wrected condition of the people led an number of influential
Irishmen to for a Land League (1879).  This organization sought to
abolish the entire landlord system in Ireland and to secure
legislation which should eventually give the Irish peasantry
possession of the soil they cultivated.

In time the League grew to have a membership of several hundred
thousand persons, extending over the greater part of Ireland.  Finding
it difficult to get parliamentary help for their grievances, the
League resolved to try a different kind of tactics.  Its members
refused to work for, buy from, sell to, or have any intercourse with
landlords, or their agents, who extorted exhorbitant rent, ejected
tenants unable to pay, or took possession of land from which tenants
had been unjustly driven.  This process of social excommunication was
first tried on an English agent, or overseer, named Boycott, and soon
became famous under the name of "boycotting."

As the struggle went on, many of the suffering poor became desperate.
Farm buildings belonging to landlords and their agents were burned,
many of their cattle were horribly mutilated, and a number of the
agents shot.  At the same time the cry rose of "No Rent, Death to the
Landlords!" Hundreds of Irish tenants now refused to pay anything for
the use of the land they cultivated, and attacked those who did.

Eventually the lawlessness of the country compelled the Government to
take severe measures.  It suppressed the Land League (1881), which was
believed to be responsible for the refusal to pay rent, and for the
accompanying outrages; but it could not extinguish the feeling which
gave rise to that organization, and the angry discontent soon burst
forth more violently than ever.

605. The Second Irish Land Act (1881); Fenian and Communist Outrages.

Mr. Gladstone (S603) now succeeded in carrying through a second Irish
Land Law (1881) (S603), which he hoped might be more effective in
relieving the Irish peasants than the first had been.  This measure
was familiarly known as the "Three F's,"--meaning Fair rent, Fixity of
tenure, and Free sale.  By the provisions of this act the tenant could
appeal to a board of land commissioners appointed to fix the rate of
his rent in case the demands made by the landlord seemed to him
excessive.

Next, he could continue to hold his farm, provided he paid the rate
determined on, for a period of fifteen years, during which time the
rent could not be raised nor the tenant evicted except for violation
of agreement or persistent neglect or waste of the land.  Finally, he
could sell his tenancy whenever he saw fit to the highest bidder.
This law was later amended and extended in the interest of the peasant
farmer (1887).

The year following the passage of this second Land Act, Lord Frederick
Cavendish, chief secretary of Ireland, and Mr. Burke, a prominent
government official, were murdered in Phoenix Park, Dublin (1882).
Later, members of the Fenian society, and of other secret
organizations sympathizing with the small Irish farmers, perpetrated
dynamite outrages in London and other parts of England for the purpose
of intimidating the Government.  These acts were denounced by the
leaders of the Irish National Party.  They declared that "the cause of
Ireland was not to be served by the knife of the assassin or by the
infernal machine."

Notwithstanding the vindictive feeling caused by these rash deeds,
despite also the passage of the Coercion Bill (1887), the majority of
the more intelligent and thoughtful of the Irish people had faith in
the progress of events.  They believed that the time would come when
their country would obtain the enjoyment of all the political rights
which England so fully possesses.  It will be seen (S620) that about
ten years later they did gain a very important extension of the right
of local self-government.[1]

[1] See Summary of Constitutional History in the Appendix, p.xxvii,
S33.

606. The Darwinian Theory of Evolution, 1859; the Persistence of
     Force.

In the progress of science the Victorian period surpassed all previous
records in England except that made by Sir Isaac Newton's discovery of
the law of gravitation (S481).  That great thinker demonstrated in
1684 that all forms of matter, great or small, near or distant, are
governed by one universal force of attraction.  In like manner the
researches and investigations of the nineteenth century led to the
conviction that all forms of life upon the earth obey a universal law
of development.  By this law the higher are evolved from the lower
through a succession of gradual but progressive changes.

This conception originated long before the beginning of the Victorian
era, but it lacked the support of carefully examined facts, and most
sensible men regarded it as nothing more than a plausible conjecture.
The thinker who did more than any other to supply the facts, and to
put the theory, so far as it relates to natural history, on a solid
and lasting foundation, was the distinguished English naturalist,
Charles Darwin.[1]

[1] Alfred Russel Wallace, also noted as a naturalist, worked out the
thoery of evolution by "natural selection" about the same time, though
not so fully, with respect to details, as Darwin; as each of these
investigators arrived at his conclusions independently of the other,
the theory was thus doubly confirmed.

On his return (1837) from a voyage of scientific discovery round the
world, Darwin began to examine and classify the facts which he had
collected, and continued to collect, relating to certain forms of
animal life.  After twenty-two years of uninterrupted labor he
published a work in 1859, entitled "The Origin of Species," in which
he aimed to show that life generally owes its course of development ot
the struggle for existence and to "the survival of the fittest."

Darwin's work may truthfully be said to have wrought a revolution in
the study of nature as great as that accomplished by Newton in the
seventeenth century.  Though it excited heated and prolonged
discussion, the Darwinian theory gradually made its way, and is now
generall received, though sometimes in a modified form, by practically
every eminent man of science throughout the world.

After Mr. Darwin began his researches, but before he completed them,
Sir William Grove, an eminent electrician, commenced a series of
experiments which resulted in his publishing his remarkable book[2] on
the connection of the physical forces of nature.  He showed that heat,
light, and electricity are mutually convertible; that they must be
regarded as modes of motion; and, finally, that all force is
persistent and indestructible, thus proving, as Professor Tyndall
says, that "to nature, nothing can be added; from nature, nothing can
be taken away." Together, the work of Darwin and Grove, with kindred
discoveries, resulted in the theory of evolution, or development.
Later on, Herbert Spencer and other students of evolution endeavored
to make it the basis of a system of philosophy embracing the whole
field of nature and life.

[2] "The Correlation of the Physical Forces" (1846).

The Victorian period was also noted for many other great names in
science, philosophy, literature, and art.  The number was so great
that it would manifestly be impracticable to devote any adequate space
to them here.[1]

[1] It will be sufficient to mention the novelists, Dickens,
Thackeray, Bronte, and "George Eliot"; the historians, Stubbs, Hallam,
Arnold, Grote, Macaulay, Alison, Buckle, Froude, Freeman, and
Gardiner; the essayists, Carlyle, Landor, and De Quincey; the poets,
Browning and Tennyson; the philosophical writers, Hamilton, Mill, and
Spencer; with Lyell, Faraday, Carpenter, Tyndall, Huxley, Darwin,
Wallace, and Lord Kelvin in science; John Ruskin, the eminent art
critic; and, in addition, the chief artists of the period, Millais,
Rossetti, Burne-Jones, Watts, and Hunt.

607. The Queen's Two Jubilees; Review of Sixty Years of English
     History (1837-1897).

Queen Victoria celebrated the fiftieth year of her reign (1887); ten
years later (1897) the nation spontaneously rose to do honor to her
"Diamond Jubilee." The splendid military pageant which marked that
event in London was far more than a brilliant show, for it
demonstrated the enthusiastic loyalty of the English people and of the
English colonies.

The real meaning of the occasion is best sought in a review of the
record of those threescore years.  They were, in large degree, a
period of progress; perhaps, in fact, no similar period in European
history has been so "crowded with benefit to humanity."

When Victoria came to the throne in her nineteenth year (1837) she
found the kingdom seething with discontent, and the province of Canada
approaching rebellion.  In business circles reckless speculation and
the bursting of "Bubble Companies" had been followed by "tight money"
and "hard times." Among the poor matters were far worse.  Wages were
low, work was scarce, bread was dear.  In the cities half-fed
multitudes lived in cellars; in the country the same class occupied
wretched cottages hardly better than cellars.[2]

[2] See Cobbett's "Rural Rides, 1821-1832."

The "New Poor Law" (S403),[3] which went into effect in 1834, or
shortly before the Queen's accession, eventually accomplished much
good; but for a time it forced many laborers into the workhouse.  The
result aggravated the suffering and discontent, and the predominant
feeling of the day may be seen reflected in the pages of Dickens,
Carlyle, and Kingsley.[1]

[3] The "New Poor Law": Between 1691 and 1834 the administration of
relief for the poor was in the hands of justices of the peace, who
gave aid indiscriminately to those who begged for it.  In 1795 wages
for ordinary laborers were so low that the justices resolved to grant
an allowance to every poor family in accordance with its numbers.  The
result of this mistaken kindness was speedily seen; employers cut down
wages to the starvation point, knowing that the magistrates would give
help out of the poor fund.  The consequence was that the tax rate for
relief of the poor rose to a degree that became unbearable.
The "New Law" of 1834 effected a sweeping reform: (1) it forbade
outdoor relief to the able-bodied poor, and thus, in the end,
compelled the employer to give better wages (but outdoor relief is now
frequently granted); (2) it restricted aid to that given in
workhouses, where the recipient, if in good health, was obliged to
labor in return for what he received; (3) it greatly reduced the
expense of supporting the poor by uniting parishes in workhouse
"unions"; (4) it modified the old rigid Law of Settlement, thereby
making it possible for those seeking employment to take their labor to
the best market.
[1] See Dickens's "Oliver Twist" (1838), Carlyle's "Chartism" (1839),
and Kingsley's "Yeast" and "Alton Locke" (1849).
