opportunity, so that we can recapture the ship without an alarm being
given to the other vessels, which are no doubt sailing in company with
us. And now, if you have nothing to say, I will go off to sleep again,
for there is time for another hour or two. I feel as if I had not quite
finished my night's rest, and the days pass so slowly here that it is
as well for us to sleep when we feel the least inclination.

"By the way, Matteo, put something into that peephole we made. It is
possible that they might see the light through it, and come to examine
what it is. It is better to run no risk."

That day the captives were far more restless than they had been since
they were taken prisoners. At first there had been a feeling of
depression, too great to admit even of conversation with each other.
The defeat of their fleet, the danger that threatened Venice, and the
prospect of imprisonment in the gloomy dungeons of Genoa, combined to
depress them on the first day of their imprisonment. On the second,
their success in getting out the bolts had cheered them, and they had
something to look forward to and talk about; but still, few of them
thought that there was any real prospect of their obtaining their
freedom. Now, however, that success seemed to lie ready to hand; now
that they could, that very evening, remove the sacks, effect a junction
with their crew, arm themselves with the weapons lying in sight, and
rush up and overpower the Genoese; it seemed hard to remain longer in
confinement. Several of them urged Francis to make the attempt that
night, but he refused.

"You reckon only on the foe you see," he said. "The danger lies not
from them, but from the foes we cannot see. We must wait for an
opportunity."

"But no opportunity may occur," one of them urged.

"That is quite possible," Francis agreed; "but should no special
opportunity occur, we shall be none the worse for having waited, for it
will always be as open to us to make the attempt as it is tonight. It
might succeed--possibly we could overpower the guard on deck before
they could give the alarm--but the risk is too great to be run, until
we are certain that no other way is open to us. In the daylight the
hatch is open; but even could we free our comrades, and unite for a
rush, unobserved--which we could hardly hope to do--we should find the
whole of the Genoese on deck, and could not possibly overpower them
before they had time to give the alarm to other vessels. At night, when
we can unite, we cannot gain the deck, for the hatch is not only
closed, but would almost certainly be fastened, so that men should not
get down to pilfer among the stores."

"But if we cannot attack in the daytime, Messer Hammond, without giving
the alarm; and cannot attack at all at night, what are we to do?"

"That is the next point to be seen to," Francis replied. "We must cut,
either from this hold or from the other, a way up to the deck above. It
may take us some days to do this, but that matters little. We have
plenty of time for the work before reaching Genoa. The difficulty is
not in the work itself, but in doing it unobserved."

"That is difficult, indeed," Matteo said, "seeing that the Genoese
sailors are quartered in the forecastle above the forehold, while the
officers will be in the cabins in the poop over us."

"That is so, Matteo, and for that reason, it is clear that it is we,
not the sailors, who must cut through the planks above. There are no
divisions in the forecastle, and it will be, therefore, absolutely
impossible to cut through into it, without being perceived long before
a hole is made of a sufficient size to enable us to get out. Here we
may succeed better, for fortunately we know the exact plan of the
cabins above us, and can choose a spot where we should not be likely to
be noticed."

"That is so," Matteo agreed, "and as they will not have as many
officers as we had--that is, including the volunteers--some of the
cabins will not be occupied. Perhaps, by listening to the footsteps
above, we might find out which are vacant."

"I thought of that, Matteo, but I doubt whether it would be well to
rely upon that. Many on board ship wear soft shoes, which make but
little noise, and it would be fatal to us were we to make a mistake.
After thinking it over, I have decided that we had best try to cut a
way up into the captain's cabin."

"But that is sure to be occupied, Messer Hammond," Parucchi said.

"Yes, it will be certainly be occupied; but it affords a good
opportunity of success. As you know, Parucchi, Carlo Bottini had been a
long time at Constantinople and the Eastern ports, and had a somewhat
luxurious taste. Do you not remember that, against the stern windows,
he had caused to be erected a low wide seat running across the cabin?
This he called a divan, and spent no small proportion of his time
lolling upon it. If I am right, its height was from ten inches to a
foot above the deck, and it was fully four feet wide. It would
therefore be quite possible to cut through the two planks at the back,
without its being observed by anyone in the cabin."

There was a chorus of assent.

"Of course we must work most cautiously," Francis went on. "The wood
must be cut out with clean cuts with the daggers. There must be no
sawing or scraping. The beams are two feet apart, and we must cut
through two planks close to them. In that way there will be no nails to
remove. Of course, we shall not cut quite through until the time
arrives for us to make the attempt, but just leave enough to hold the
planks together. Half an hour's work will get through that, for if we
were to cut through it at once, not only would there be risk of the
hole being discovered by anyone sweeping the cabin, but we should be
obliged to remain absolutely silent, or we should be heard
immediately."

"We can begin at once, can we not?" Matteo asked. "Anything is better
than sitting quietly here."

"Certainly, Matteo, if you wish. Two can work at once, one on each
line. Choose the two sharpest edged of the daggers, and be sure to cut
clean, and not to make a scraping noise or to try to break out pieces
of wood. The work must be done in absolute quiet. Indeed, however
careful you are, it is possible that some slight sound may be heard
above, but, if noticed, it will probably be taken for the rats."

Matteo and another of the young men at once fell to work; but it was
not until the evening of the following day that cuts were made as deep
as was considered prudent. The depth of wood remaining was tested by
thrusting the point of a dagger through, and it was decided that little
more than a quarter of an inch remained.

Upon the following day the ship anchored, and remained for two days in
some port. Provisions were brought on board and carried down into the
hold, and the prisoners had no doubt that they were in harbour on the
coast of either Sicily, or the south of Italy. They had not set sail
many hours, when the motion of the ship told them that the wind was
getting up, and by night the vessel was rolling heavily, the noise made
by the dashing of the water against her planks being so great, that
those below could scarcely hear each other speak. Their spirits had
risen with the increase of the motion, for the opportunity for which
they had been waiting was now at hand. In a gale the vessels would keep
well apart from each other, to prevent the danger of a collision, and
any outcry would be drowned by the noise of the wind and water.

Each night Francis had paid a visit to the sailors forward, to enjoin
patience until he should give them the order for making the attempt.
They had long since cut through the planks, which were only retained in
their place by the pressure of the sacks behind them. He had bade them
be in readiness on the first occasion on which rough weather might set
in, and knew that they would now be expecting the signal.

As soon, then, as it became dark, and the hatch over the middle hold
was closed; the planks were removed, and Francis and his party set to
work shifting the sacks, in the corner where the sailors had cut the
planks. Each sack was taken up, and placed against the pile further on,
without the slightest noise, until at last all were removed that stood
in the way of the planks being taken down. These were carried out into
the hold.

Francis entered the gap. The sailors had already been informed that the
occasion had come, and that they were to remain perfectly quiet until
bidden to move.

"All is prepared," he said as he entered. "Rinaldo, do you see that the
men come out one by one. As each comes out a weapon will be placed in
his hands, and he will be then led to the starboard side of the hold,
which is free from encumbrance, and will there stand until he receives
orders to move further. Remember that not the slightest noise must be
made, for if any stumbled and fell, and the noise were heard above, it
might be thought that some of the stores had shifted from their places,
and men would be sent below to secure them. The alarm would be given,
and a light or other signal shown the other ships, before we could
overpower all resistance. After the men are all ranged up as I have
directed, they will have to remain there for some little time, while we
complete our arrangements."

As soon as the sailors were all armed, and ready for action, Francis
entered the after hold, where Matteo and another had been engaged in
cutting the planks quite through. They had just completed the task when
he reached them, and had quietly removed the two pieces of plank.
Francis had already given his orders to his companions, and each knew
the order in which they were to ascend.

A dim light streamed down from the hole. Two of his comrades lifted
Francis so that his head was above the level of the hole, and he was
enabled to see into the cabin. So far as he could tell, it was
untenanted, but it was possible that the commander might be on the
divan above him. This was not, however, likely, as in the gale that was
now blowing he would probably be on deck, directing the working of the
ship.

Francis now gave the signal, and the others raised him still further,
until he was able to get his weight upon the deck above, and he then
crawled along underneath the divan, and lay there quiet until Parucchi
and Matteo had both reached the deck. Then he gave the word, and all
three rolled out and leaped to their feet, with their daggers in their
hands, in readiness to fall upon the captain should he be on the divan.

As they had hoped and expected, the cabin was untenanted. The other
volunteers now joined them, the last giving the word to Rinaldo, who
soon passed up, followed by the crew, until the cabin was as full as it
could contain. There were now assembled some fifty men, closely packed
together.

"That is ample," Francis said, "as they will be unarmed and unprepared.
We can issue out singly until the alarm is given, and then those that
remain must rush out in a body. Simply knock them down with the hilts
of your swords. There is no occasion to shed blood, unless in the case
of armed resistance; but remember they will have their knives in their
girdles, and do not let anyone take you by surprise."

Opening the door, Francis walked along a passage, and then through an
outer door into the waist of the ship. The wind was blowing fiercely,
but the gale was not so violent as it had appeared to them when
confined below. The night was dark, but after a week's confinement
below, his eyes were able easily to make out almost every object on
deck. There were but few sailors in the waist. The officers would be on
the poop, and such of the crew as were not required on duty in the
forecastle. Man after man joined him, until some thirty were gathered
near the bulwarks. An officer on the poop caught sight of them by the
light of the lantern, which was suspended there as a signal to the
other vessels.

"What are all you men doing down there?" he challenged. "There is no
occasion for you to keep on deck until you are summoned."

"Do you move forward with the men here, Parucchi. Knock down the
fellows on deck, and rush into the forecastle and overpower them there,
before they can get up their arms. I will summon the rest in a body,
and we will overpower the officers."

He ran back to the cabin door, and bade the men follow him. As they
poured out there was a scuffle on the deck forward, and the officer
shouted out again:

"What is going on there? What does all this mean?"

Francis sprang up the ladder to the poop, followed by his men, and
before the officer standing there understood the meaning of this sudden
rush of men, or had time to draw his sword, he was knocked down. The
captain and three other officers, who were standing by the helm, drew
their swords and rushed forward, thinking there was a mutiny among
their crew; but Francis shouted out:

"Throw down your weapons, all of you. We have retaken the ship, and
resistance is useless, and will only cost you your lives."

The officers stood stupefied with astonishment; and then, seeing that
fully twenty armed men were opposed to them, they threw down their
swords. Francis ordered four of the sailors to conduct them to the
captain's cabin, and remain in guard over them; then with the rest he
hurried forward to assist Parucchi's party.

But the work was already done. The Genoese, taken completely by
surprise, had at once surrendered, as the armed party rushed in the
forecastle, and the ship was already theirs. As soon as the prisoners
were secured, the after hatch was thrown off, and those whose turn to
crawl up through the hole had not yet arrived came up on deck.

"Rinaldo," Francis said, as soon as the crew had fallen into their
places, "send a man aloft, and let him suddenly knock out the light in
the lantern."

"But we can lower it down, captain, from the deck."

"Of course we can, Rinaldo, but I don't want it lowered down, I want it
put suddenly out."

Rinaldo at once sent a man up, and a minute later the light suddenly
disappeared.

"If we were seen to lower it down," Francis said to Matteo, "the
suspicions of those who noticed it would be at once aroused, for the
only motive for doing so would be concealment; whereas now, if it is
missed, it will be supposed that the wind has blown it out. Now we have
only to lower our sails, and we can drop unobserved out of the fleet."

"There are sixteen lights, I have just been counting them," Matteo
said.

"These are probably the fourteen galleys captured with us, and two
galleys as guards, in case, on their way, they should fall in with any
of our ships.

"Parucchi, will you at once muster the men, and see that all are armed
and in readiness for fighting?

"Matteo, do you and some of your friends assist the lieutenant."

In a few minutes, Parucchi reported that the men were all ready for
action.

"Rinaldo, brail up the sails, so that we may drop into the rear of the
squadron. Watch the lights of the vessels behind, and steer so that
they shall pass us as widely as possible."

This was the order the men were expecting to receive, but they were
surprised when, just as the last light was abreast of them, Francis
gave the order for the brails to be loosed again.

"Signor Parucchi, do you tell off fifty men. I am going to lay the ship
alongside that vessel, and recapture her. They will not see us until we
are close on board, and will suppose it is an accident when we run
alongside. No doubt they, like the Pluto, have only a complement of
fifty men, and we shall overpower them before they are prepared to
offer any resistance.

"No doubt they have prisoners below. Immediately we have recaptured
her, I shall return on board with the rest, leaving you with your fifty
men in charge of her. As soon as you have secured the Genoese, free any
prisoners there may be in the hold. I shall keep close to you, and you
can hear me, and tell me how many there are."

The Pluto was now edged away, till she was close to the other ship. The
crew, exulting in having turned the tables on the Genoese, and at the
prospect of recovering another of the lost galleys, clustered in the
waist, grasping their arms. The ship was not perceived until she was
within her own length of the other. Then there was a sudden hail:

"Where are you coming to? Keep away, or you will be into us. Why don't
you show your light?"

Francis shouted back some indistinct answer. Rinaldo pushed down the
helm, and a minute later the Pluto ran alongside the other vessel. Half
a dozen hands, told off for the work, sprang into her rigging, and
lashed the vessels together; while Francis, followed by the crew,
climbed the bulwarks and sprang on to the deck of the enemy.

Scarce a blow was struck. The Genoese, astonished at this sudden
apparition of armed men on their deck, and being entirely unarmed and
unprepared, either ran down below or shouted they surrendered, and in
two minutes the Venetians were masters of the vessel.

"Back to the Pluto," Francis shouted. "The vessels will tear their
sides out!"

Almost as suddenly as they had invaded the decks of the galley, the
Venetians regained their own vessel, leaving the lieutenant with his
fifty men on board the prize. The lashings were cut, the Pluto's helm
put up, and she sheered away from her prize. Her bulwarks were broken
and splintered where she had ground against the other vessel in the
sea, and Rinaldo soon reported that some of the seams had opened, and
the water was coming in.

"Set the carpenter and some of the hands to work, to caulk the seams as
well as they can from the inside, and set a gang to work at the pumps
at once. It is unfortunate that it is blowing so hard. If the wind had
gone down instead of rising, we would have recaptured the whole fleet,
one by one."

The Pluto was kept within a short distance of the captured vessel, and
Parucchi presently shouted out that he had freed two hundred prisoners.

"Arm them at once!" Francis shouted back. "Extinguish your light, and
board the vessel whose light you see on your starboard bow. I will take
the one to port. When you have captured her, lower the sails of both
vessels. I will do the same. You will keep a little head sail set, so
as to keep them before the wind; but do not show more than you can
help. I wish the rest of the fleet to outrun us, as soon as possible."

The Pluto sheered off from the prize, and directed her course towards
the vessel nearest to her, which she captured as easily as she had done
the preceding. But this time, not only were her bulwarks stove in, but
the chain plates were carried away; and the mainmast, no longer
supported by its shrouds, fell over the side with a crash.

This vessel had but a hundred prisoners on board. They were wild with
astonishment and delight, when they found that their vessel had been
recaptured. Francis told them to keep by him through the night, as
possibly he might need their assistance.

For some hours the gale increased. The Pluto lay head to it, her mast
serving as a floating anchor. As soon as the lights of the Genoese
squadron disappeared in the distance, Francis hoisted a lantern on his
mainmast, as a signal to the other vessels to keep near him.

As soon as day broke, the galley they had last recaptured was seen,
half a mile away, while the two others could be made out some six miles
to leeward. The gale died out soon after daybreak, and Francis at once
set his crew to work to get the mast on board, and to ship it by its
stump.

It was a difficult undertaking, for the vessel was rolling heavily. It
was first got alongside, two ropes were passed over it, and it was
parbuckled on board. Shears were made of two spars, and the end was
placed against the stump, which projected six feet above the deck. By
the aid of the shears, it was hoisted erect and lashed to the stump,
wedges were driven in to tighten the lashings, and it was then firmly
stayed; and by the afternoon it was in readiness for sail to be hoisted
again.

By this time Parucchi, with the vessel he had captured, was alongside.
The Lion of Saint Mark was hoisted to the mainmast of the Pluto, and
three similar banners were run up by the other vessels, the crews
shouting and cheering with wild enthusiasm.



Chapter 17: An Ungrateful Republic.


"It is glorious, Francis," Matteo said, "to think that we should have
recaptured four of our ships!"

"It is very good, as far as it goes," Francis replied, "but it might
have been a great deal better. If it hadn't been for the storm, we
might have picked them all up one by one. Each vessel we took, the
stronger we became, and I had calculated upon our capturing the greater
number. But in such a sea, I don't think we could possibly capture more
than we did."

"I should think not," Matteo said. "I had never dreamt of doing more
than recovering the Pluto, and when you first talked about that, it
seemed almost like madness. I don't think one of us had the slightest
belief in the possibility of the thing, when you first proposed it."

"I thought it was to be managed somehow," Francis said. "It would have
been a shame, indeed, if a hundred and fifty men were to be kept
prisoners for a fortnight, or three weeks, by a third of their number."

"Well, certainly no one would have thought of making the attempt, if
you had not proposed it, Francis. I believe, even if you were to
propose our sailing north, and capturing Genoa, there is not a man on
board but would follow you willingly, with the firm conviction that you
would succeed."

"In that case, Matteo," Francis said, laughing, "it is very lucky for
you that I am not at all out of my mind. Signal now to Parucchi to
lower his boats, and come on board with our men. We may fall in yet
with another Genoese squadron, and may as well have our full complement
on board, especially as Parucchi has found two hundred men already on
board the vessel we captured."

Parucchi and his men soon transferred themselves to the Pluto, and the
four vessels hoisted their sails, and made for the south. They had
learned, from their captives, that the squadron had already passed
through the Straits of Messina, and that it was at Messina they had
stopped and taken in provision two days before. Indeed, when, late in
the afternoon, the sky cleared and the sun shone out, they saw the
mountains of Calabria on their left.

Learning, from the captives, that no Genoese vessels had been seen in
the straits as they passed through, Francis did not hesitate to order
the course to be shaped for the straits, instead of sailing round
Sicily, as he would have done had there been any chance of falling in
