the traffic of Arabia Felix as far as Mecca, as I wrote to their
Highnesses by Antonio de Torres in my reply respecting the repartition of
the sea and land with the Portuguese; and afterwards it would equal that
of Calicut, as I told them and put in writing at the monastery of
Mejorada.

The news of the gold that I said I would give is, that on the day of the
Nativity, while I was much tormented, being harassed by wicked Christians
and by Indians, and when I was on the point of giving up everything and,
if possible, escaping from life, our Lord miraculously comforted me and
said, "Fear not violence, I will provide for all things; the seven years
of the term of the gold have not elapsed, and in that and in everything
else I will afford thee a remedy." On that day I learned that there were
eighty leagues of land with mines at every point thereof. The opinion now
is that it is all one. Some have collected a hundred and twenty
castellanos in one day, and others ninety, and even the number of two
hundred and fifty has been reached. From fifty to seventy, and in many
more cases from fifteen to fifty, is considered a good day's work, and
many carry it on. The usual quantity is from six to twelve, and any one
obtaining less than this is not satisfied. It seems too that these mines
are like others, and do not yield equally every day. The mines are new,
and so are the workers: it is the opinion of everybody that even if all
Castile were to go there, every individual, however inexpert he might be,
would not obtain less than one or two castellanos daily, and now it is
only commencing. It is true that they keep Indians, but the business is
in the hands of the Christians. Behold what discernment Bobadilla had,
when he gave up everything for nothing, and four millions of tenths,
without any reason or even being requested, and without first notifying
it to their Highnesses. And this is not the only loss.

I know that my errors have not been committed with the intention of doing
evil, and I believe that their Highnesses regard the matter just as I
state it; and I know and see that they deal mercifully even with those
who maliciously act to their disservice. I believe and consider it very
certain that their clemency will be both greater and more abundant
towards me, for I fell therein through ignorance and the force of
circumstances, as they will know fully hereafter; and I indeed am their
creature, and they will look upon my services, and will acknowledge day
by day that they are much profited. They will place everything in the
balance, even as Holy Scripture tells us good and evil will be at the day
of judgment. If, however, they command that another person do judge me,
which I cannot believe, and that it be by inquisition in the Indies, I
very humbly beseech them to send thither two conscientious and honorable
persons at my expense, who I believe will easily, now that gold is
discovered, find five marks in four hours. In either case it is needful
for them to provide for this matter.

The Commander on his arrival at Santo Domingo took up his abode in my
house, and just as he found it so he appropriated everything to himself.
Well and good; perhaps he was in want of it. A pirate never acted thus
towards a merchant. About my papers I have a greater grievance, for he
has so completely deprived me of them that I have never been able to
obtain a single one from him; and those that would have been most useful
in my exculpation are precisely those which he has kept most concealed.
Behold the just and honest inquisitor! Whatever he may have done, they
tell me that there has been an end to justice, except in an arbitrary
form. God our Lord is present with his strength and wisdom, as of old,
and always punishes in the end, especially ingratitude and injuries.

FOOTNOTES:

[371-1] An echo of the words of Jesus to Peter when he began to sink, "O
thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?" _Matthew_, XIV. 31.

[371-2] _Revelation_, XXI. 1. "And I saw a new heaven and a new earth;
for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away."

[371-3] "For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth." _Isaiah_,
LXV. 17.

[372-1] 1485-1491 inc. and 1492-1500 inc.

[372-2] _Sy yo robara las Yndias o tierra que jaz fase ellas_, etc. In
the translation _jaz fase_ is taken to stand for _yace hacia_. This
supposition makes sense and is probably correct. The reading of the other
text is "_que san face ellas_." Navarrete says that neither one is
intelligible.

[372-3] The death of Prince John, October 4, 1497.

[373-1] The name given to that part of the mainland of South America
which Columbus discovered on his third voyage.

[373-2] _I.e._ so great was their abundance.

[373-3] On this revolt, see Bourne, _Spain in America_, p. 49 _et seqq._,
and in greater detail, Irving, _Columbus_, ed. 1868, II. 109 _et seqq._

[373-4] Hojeda sailed in May 1499. Las Casa's account of his voyage is
translated by Markham in his _Letters of Amerigo Vespucci_, Hakluyt
Society (London, 1894), p. 78 _et seqq._ See also Irving, _Columbus_,
III. 23-42[TN-9] He was accompanied on this voyage by Amerigo Vespucci.

[373-5] Vicente Yanez Pinzon set sail from Palos, November 18, 1499. For
his voyage, see Irving, _Columbus_, III. 49-58.

[374-1] The Alcalde was Roldan, the leader of the revolt. He was alcalde
mayor of the city of Isabela and of the whole island, _i.e._, the chief
justice. Las Casas, _Historia de las Indias_, II. 124.

[374-2] On the career in Espanola of Adrian de Muxica and his execution,
see Irving, _Columbus_, II. 283 _et seqq._

[374-3] Ferdinand de Guevara. See Irving, _Columbus_, II. 283 _et seqq._

[374-4] _I.e._, maravedis, equivalent to about $4000.

[375-1] Bobadilla, the successor of Columbus as governor, who sent him
back in chains.

[375-2] A mark was eight ounces or two-thirds of a Troy pound. Here it is
probably the silver mark as a measure of value, which was about $3.25. If
the word is used as a measure of weight of gold, it would be about $150.

[375-3] Bobadilla arrived at Santo Domingo August 23, 1500.

[375-4] Bartholomew Columbus.

[377-1] Juan Aguado arrived from Spain in October, 1495. Las Casas,
_Historia de las Indias_, II. 109 _et seqq._, gives a full account of his
mission. See also Irving, _Columbus_, ed. 1868, II. 77 _et seqq._

[378-1] Cf. _Daniel_, chs. III. and VI.

[378-2] The castellano was one-sixth of an ounce, or in value about $3.

[378-3] See Bourne, _Spain in America_, p. 50, for Columbus's bitter
characterization of the Spaniards in Espanola in 1498, and p. 46 for the
royal authorization in June, 1497, to transport criminals to the island.
The terrible consequences of this policy led the Spanish government later
to adopt the strictest regulations controlling emigration to the New
World. _Cf._ _Spain in America_, ch. XVI.

[378-4] Bobadilla was a knight commander of the military order of
Calatrava.

[379-1] Diego Columbus had been appointed a page to Prince John in 1492.
Navarrete, _Viages_, II. 17. At this time, 1500, both Diego and Ferdinand
were pages in the Queen's household. _Historie_, ed. 1867, p. 276.

[380-1] The younger brother of the Admiral.

[381-1] _Un otro mundo._ See note, p. 352 above.

[381-2] _Caballeros de conquistas y del uso, y no de letras._ This should
be: "Knights of Conquests and by profession and not of letters." _I.e._,
by nobles that have actually been conquerors and had conquered territory
awarded to them and who are knights by practice or profession and not
gentlemen of letters.

[381-3] What this means is not altogether clear. Apparently Columbus
means that men of letters or lawyers in Greece and Rome, great conquering
nations, would know what standards to apply in his case, and that there
were some such men of breadth in Spain.




LETTER OF COLUMBUS ON THE FOURTH VOYAGE




INTRODUCTION


The letter on Columbus's last voyage when he explored the coast of
Central America and of the Isthmus of Panama was written when he was
shipwrecked on the island of Jamaica, 1503. It is his last important
writing and one of great significance in understanding his geographical
conceptions.

The Spanish text of this letter is not older than the sixteenth century
and perhaps not older than the seventeenth. The Spanish text was first
published by Navarrete in his _Coleccion de los Viages y
Descubrimientos_, 1825. An Italian translation, however, was published in
1505 and is commonly known as the _Lettera Rarissima_. Mr. John Boyd
Thacher has reproduced this early Italian translation in facsimile in his
_Christopher Columbus_, accompanied by a translation into English. Cesare
de Lollis prepared a critical edition of the Spanish text for the
_Raccolta Colombiana_, which was carefully collated with and in some
instances corrected by this contemporary translation. Most of his changes
in punctuation and textual emendations have been adopted in the present
edition, and attention is called to them in the notes.

The translation is that of R.H. Major as published in the revised edition
of his _Select Letters of Columbus_. It has been carefully revised by the
present editor, and some important changes have been made. As hitherto
published in English a good many passages in this letter have been so
confused and obscure and some so absolutely unintelligible, that the late
Justin Winsor characterized this last of the important writings of
Columbus as "a sorrowful index of his wandering reason."[388-1] Almost
every one of these passages has yielded up the secret of its meaning
either through a more exact translation or in the light of the textual
emendations suggested by de Lollis or proposed by the present editor.
Among such revisions and textual emendations attention may be called to
those discussed on pp. 392, 396, 397. As here published this letter of
Columbus is as coherent and intelligible as his other writings.

The editor wishes here to acknowledge his obligations to Professor Henry
R. Lang of Yale University, whom he has consulted in regard to perplexing
passages or possible emendations, and from whom he has received valuable
assistance.

The other important accounts of this voyage, or of the part of it covered
by this letter, are the brief report by Diego de Porras, of which a
translation is given in Thacher's _Columbus_, and those by Ferdinand
Columbus in the _Historie_ and Peter Martyr in his _De Rebus Oceanicis_.
On this voyage Las Casas's source was the account of Ferdinand Columbus.
Lollis presents some striking evidence to show that the accounts of
Ferdinand Columbus and Peter Martyr were based upon the same original, a
lost narrative of the Admiral. It will be remembered, however, that
Ferdinand accompanied his father on this voyage, and although only a boy
of thirteen his narrative contains several passages of vivid personal
recollection. The editor has carefully compared Ferdinand's narrative
with the account in this letter and noted the important differences.

E.G.B.

FOOTNOTES:

[388-1] _Christopher Columbus_, p 459; _cf._ also the passages quoted on
p. 460.




THE FOURTH VOYAGE OF COLUMBUS

_A Letter written by Don Christobal Colon, Viceroy and Admiral of the
     Indies, to the most Christian and mighty King and Queen of Spain,
     our Sovereigns, in which are described the events of his voyage, and
     the countries, provinces, cities, rivers and other marvellous
     matters therein discovered, as well as the places where gold and
     other substances of great richness and value are to be found_


_Most Serene, and very high and mighty Princes, the King and Queen our
Sovereigns_:--

My passage from Cadiz to the Canary occupied four days, and thence to the
Indies sixteen days. From which I wrote, that my intention was to
expedite my voyage as much as possible while I had good vessels, good
crews and stores, and that Jamaica was the place to which I was bound. I
wrote this in Dominica:[389-1]--

Up to the period of my reaching these shores I experienced most excellent
weather, but the night of my arrival came on with a dreadful tempest, and
the same bad weather has continued ever since. On reaching the island of
Espanola[389-2] I despatched a packet of letters, by which I begged as a
favor that a ship should be supplied me at my own cost in lieu of one of
those that I had brought with me, which had become unseaworthy, and could
no longer carry sail. The letters were taken, and your Highnesses will
know if a reply has been given to them. For my part I was forbidden to go
on shore;[390-1] the hearts of my people failed them lest I should take
them further, and they said that if any danger were to befall them, they
should receive no succor, but, on the contrary, in all probability have
some great affront offered them. Moreover every man had it in his power
to tell me that the new Governor would have the superintendence of the
countries that I might acquire.[390-2]

The tempest was terrible throughout the night, all the ships were
separated, and each one driven to the last extremity, without hope of
anything but death; each of them also looked upon the loss of the rest as
a matter of certainty. What man was ever born, not even excepting Job,
who would not have been ready to die of despair at finding himself as I
then was, in anxious fear for my own safety, and that of my son, my
brother[390-3] and my friends, and yet refused permission either to land
or to put into harbor on the shores which by God's mercy I had gained for
Spain sweating blood?

But to return to the ships: although the tempest had so completely
separated them from me as to leave me single, yet the Lord restored them
to me in His own good time. The ship which we had the greatest fear for,
had put out to sea to escape [being blown] toward the island. The
_Gallega_[390-4] lost her boat and a great part of her provisions, which
latter loss indeed all the ships suffered. The vessel in which I was,
though dreadfully buffeted, was saved by our Lord's mercy from any injury
whatever; my brother went in the ship that was unsound, and he under God
was the cause of its being saved. With this tempest I struggled on till
I reached Jamaica, and there the sea became calm, but there was a strong
current which carried me as far as the Queen's Garden[391-1] without
seeing land. Hence as opportunity afforded I pushed on for the mainland,
in spite of the wind and a fearful contrary current, against which I
contended for sixty days, and after all only made seventy leagues. All
this time I was unable to get into harbor, nor was there any cessation of
the tempest, which was one continuation of rain, thunder and lightning;
indeed it seemed as if it were the end of the world. I at length reached
the Cape of Gracias a Dios, and after that the Lord granted me fair wind
and tide; this was on the twelfth of September.[391-2] Eighty-eight days
did this fearful tempest continue, during which I was at sea, and saw
neither sun nor stars; my ships lay exposed, with sails torn, and
anchors, rigging, cables, boats and a great quantity of provisions lost;
my people were very weak and humbled in spirit, many of them promising to
lead a religious life, and all making vows and promising to perform
pilgrimages, while some of them would frequently go to their messmates to
make confession.[392-1] Other tempests have been experienced, but never
of so long a duration or so fearful as this: many whom we looked upon as
brave men, on several occasions showed considerable trepidation; but the
distress of my son who was with me grieved me to the soul, and the more
when I considered his tender age, for he was but thirteen years old, and
he enduring so much toil for so long a time. Our Lord, however, gave him
strength even to enable him to encourage the rest, and he worked as if he
had been eighty years at sea, and all this was a consolation to me. I
myself had fallen sick, and was many times at the point of death, but
from a little cabin that I had caused to be constructed on deck, I
directed our course. My brother was in the ship that was in the worst
condition and the most exposed to danger; and my grief on this account
was the greater that I brought him with me against his will.

Such is my fate, that the twenty years of service[393-1] through which I
have passed with so much toil and danger, have profited me nothing, and
at this very day I do not possess a roof in Spain that I can call my own;
if I wish to eat or sleep, I have nowhere to go but to the inn or tavern,
and most times lack wherewith to pay the bill. Another anxiety wrung my
very heartstrings, which was the thought of my son Diego, whom I had left
an orphan in Spain, and dispossessed of my honor and property, although I
had looked upon it as a certainty, that your Majesties, as just and
grateful Princes, would restore it to him in all respects with
increase.[393-2]

I reached the land of Cariay,[393-3] where I stopped to repair my vessels
and take in provisions, as well as to afford relaxation to the men, who
had become very weak. I myself (who, as I said before, had been several
times at the point of death) gained information respecting the gold mines
of which I was in search, in the province of Ciamba;[393-4] and two
Indians conducted me to Carambaru,[393-5] where the people (who go
naked) wear golden mirrors round their necks, which they will neither
sell, give, nor part with for any consideration. They named to me many
places on the sea-coast where there were both gold and mines. The last
that they mentioned was Veragua,[394-1] which was five-and-twenty leagues
distant from the place where we then were. I started with the intention
of visiting all of them, but when I had reached the middle of my journey
I learned that there were other mines at so short a distance that they
might be reached in two days. I determined on sending to see them. It was
on the eve of St. Simon and St. Jude,[394-2] which was the day fixed for
our departure; but that night there arose so violent a storm, that we
were forced to go wherever it drove us, and the Indian who was to conduct
us to the mines was with us all the time. As I had found every thing true
that had been told me in the different places which I had visited, I felt
satisfied it would be the same with respect to Ciguare,[394-3] which
according to their account, is nine days journey across the country
westward: they tell me there is a great quantity of gold there, and that
the inhabitants wear coral ornaments on their heads, and very large coral
bracelets and anklets, with which article also they adorn and inlay their
seats, boxes, and tables. They also said that the women there wore
necklaces hanging down to their shoulders. All the people agree in the
report I now repeat, and their account is so favorable that I should be
content with the tithe of the advantages that their description holds
out. They are all likewise acquainted with the pepper-plant;[395-1]
according to the account of these people, the inhabitants of Ciguare are
accustomed to hold fairs and markets for carrying on their commerce, and
they showed me also the mode and form in which they transact their
various exchanges; others assert that their ships carry cannon, and that
the men go clothed and use bows and arrows, swords and cuirasses, and
that on shore they have horses which they use in battle, and that they
wear rich clothes and have good things.[395-2] They also say that the sea
surrounds Ciguare, and that at ten days' journey from thence is the river
Ganges; these lands appear to hold the same relation to Veragua, as
Tortosa to Fontarabia, or Pisa to Venice.[395-3] When I left Carambaru
and reached the places in its neighborhood, which I have mentioned above
as being spoken of by the Indians, I found the customs of the people
correspond with the accounts that had been given of them, except as
regarded the golden mirrors: any man who had one of them would willingly
part with it for three hawks'-bells,[395-4] although they were equivalent
in weight to ten or fifteen ducats. These people resemble the natives of
Espanola in all their habits. They have various modes of collecting the
gold, none of which will bear comparison with the plans adopted by the
Christians.

All that I have here stated is from hearsay. This, however, I know, that
in the year ninety-four I sailed twenty-four degrees to the westward in
nine hours,[396-1] and there can be no mistake upon the subject, because
there was an eclipse; the sun was in Libra and the moon in Aries.[396-2]
What I had learned by the mouth of these people I already knew in detail
from books. Ptolemy thought that he had satisfactorily corrected[396-3]
Marinus, and yet this latter appears to have come very near to the truth.
Ptolemy placed Catigara[396-4] at a distance of twelve lines to the west
of his meridian, which he fixes at two degrees and a third beyond Cape
St. Vincent, in Portugal. Marinus comprised the earth and its limits in
fifteen lines.[396-5] Marinus on Ethiopia gives a description covering
more than twenty-four degrees beyond the equinoctial line, and now that
the Portuguese have sailed there they find it correct.[397-1] Ptolemy
says also that the most southern land is the first boundary, and that it
does not go lower down than fifteen degrees and a third.[397-2] The world
is but small; out of seven divisions of it the dry part occupies six,
and the seventh is entirely covered by water.[398-1] Experience has shown
it, and I have written it with quotations from the Holy Scripture, in
other letters, where I have treated of the situation of the terrestrial
paradise, as approved by the Holy Church;[398-2] and I say that the world
is not so large as vulgar opinion makes it, and that one degree of the
equinoctial line measures fifty-six miles and two-thirds; and this may be
proved to a nicety.[398-3]

But I leave this subject, which it is not my intention now to treat upon,
but simply to give a narrative of my laborious and painful voyage,
although of all my voyages it is the most honorable and advantageous. I
have said that on the eve of St. Simon and St. Jude I ran before the wind
wherever it took me, without power to resist it; at length I found
shelter for ten days from the roughness of the sea and the tempest
overhead, and resolved not to attempt to go back to the mines, which I
regarded as already in our possession.[398-4] When I started in pursuance
of my voyage it was under a heavy rain, and reaching the harbor of
Bastimentos I put in, though much against my will.[399-1] The storm and
a rapid current kept me in for fourteen days, when I again set sail, but
not with favorable weather. After I had made fifteen leagues with great
exertions, the wind and the current drove me back[399-2] again with great
fury, but in again making for the port which I had quitted, I found on
the way another port, which I named Retrete, where I put in for shelter
with as much risk as regret, the ships being in sad condition, and my
crews and myself exceedingly fatigued.[399-3] I remained there fifteen
days, kept in by stress of weather, and when I fancied my troubles were
at an end, I found them only begun. It was then that I changed my
resolution with respect to proceeding to the mines, and proposed doing
something in the interim, until the weather should prove more favorable
for my voyage.[399-4] I had already made four leagues when the storm
recommenced, and wearied me to such a degree that I absolutely knew not
what to do; my wound reopened, and for nine days my life was despaired
of; never was the sea seen so high, so terrific, and so covered with
foam; not only did the wind oppose our proceeding onward, but it also
rendered it highly dangerous to run in for any headland, and kept me in
that sea which seemed to me as a sea of blood, seething like a cauldron
on a mighty fire. Never did the sky look more fearful; during one day and
one night it burned like a furnace, and every instant I looked to see if
my masts and my sails were not destroyed; these flashes came with such
alarming fury that we all thought the ships must have been consumed. All
this time the waters from heaven never ceased, not to say that it rained,
for it was like a repetition of the deluge. The men were at this time so
crushed in spirit that they longed for death as a deliverance from so
many martyrdoms. Twice already had the ships suffered loss in boats,
anchors, and rigging, and were now lying bare without sails.

When it pleased our Lord, I returned to Puerto Gordo,[400-1] where I
recruited my condition as well as I could. I then once more turned
towards Veragua; for my voyage, although I was [ready] for it, the wind
and current were still contrary.[400-2] I arrived at nearly the same spot
as before, and there again the wind and currents still opposed my
progress; and once again I was compelled to put into port, not daring to
await the opposition of Saturn[400-3] with Mars so tossed on an exposed
coast; for it almost always brings on a tempest or severe weather. This
was on Christmas-day, about the hour of mass.

Thus, after all these fatigues, I had once more to return to the spot
from whence I started; and when the new year had set in, I returned again
to my task: but although I had fine weather for my voyage, the ships were
no longer in a sailing condition, and my people were either dying or very
sick. On the day of the Epiphany,[400-4] I reached Veragua in a state of
exhaustion; there, by our Lord's goodness, I found a river and a safe
harbor, although at the entrance there were only ten spans of water. I
succeeded in making an entry, but with great difficulty; and on the
following day the storm recommenced, and had I been still on the outside
at that time, I should have been unable to enter on account of the reef.
It rained without ceasing until the fourteenth of February, so that I
could find no opportunity of penetrating into the interior, nor of
recruiting my condition in any respect whatever; and on the twenty-fourth
of January, when I considered myself in perfect safety, the river
suddenly rose with great violence to a considerable height, breaking my
cables and the breastfasts,[401-1] and nearly carrying away my ships
altogether, which certainly appeared to me to be in greater danger than
ever. Our Lord, however, brought a remedy as He has always done. I do not
know if any one else ever suffered greater trials.

On the sixth of February, while it was still raining, I sent seventy men
on shore to go into the interior, and at five leagues' distance they
found several mines. The Indians who went with them conducted them to a
very lofty mountain, and thence showing them the country all around, as
far as the eye could reach, told them there was gold in every part, and
that, towards the west, the mines extended twenty days' journey; they
also recounted the names of the towns and villages where there was more
or less of it. I afterwards learned that the Quibian,[402-1] who had
lent these Indians, had ordered them to show the distant mines, and which
belonged to an enemy of his; but that in his own territory one man might,
if he would, collect in ten days as much as a child could carry.[402-2] I
bring with me some Indians, his servants, who are witnesses of this fact.
The boats went up to the spot where the dwellings of these people are
situated; and, after four hours, my brother returned with the guides, all
of them bringing back gold which they had collected at that place. The
gold must be abundant, and of good quality, for none of these men had
ever seen mines before; very many of them had never seen pure gold, and
most of them were seamen and lads. Having building materials in
abundance, I established a settlement, and made many presents to the
Quibian, which is the name they gave to the lord of the country. I
plainly saw that harmony would not last long, for the natives are of a
very rough disposition, and the Spaniards very encroaching; and,
moreover, I had taken possession of land belonging to the Quibian. When
he saw what we did, and found the traffic increasing, he resolved upon
burning the houses, and putting us all to death; but his project did not
succeed, for we took him prisoner, together with his wives, his children,
and his servants. His captivity, it is true, lasted but a short time, for
he eluded the custody of a trustworthy man, into whose charge he had been
given, with a guard of men; and his sons escaped from a ship, in which
they had been placed under the special charge of the master.

In the month of January the mouth of the river was entirely closed
up,[403-1] and in April the vessels were so eaten by the shipworm,[403-2]
that they could scarcely be kept above water. At this time the river
forced a channel for itself, by which I managed, with great difficulty,
to extricate three of them after I had unloaded them. The boats were then
sent back into the river for water and salt, but the sea became so high
and furious, that it afforded them no chance of exit; upon which the
Indians collected themselves together in great numbers, and made an
attack upon the boats, and at length massacred the men.[403-3] My
brother, and all the rest of our people, were in a ship which remained
inside; I was alone, outside, upon that dangerous coast, suffering from a
severe fever and worn with fatigue. All hope of escape was gone. I toiled
up to the highest part of the ship, and, with a voice of fear crying, and
very urgently, I called upon your Highnesses' war-captains in every
direction for help, but there was no reply. At length, groaning with
exhaustion, I fell asleep, and heard a compassionate voice address me
thus: "O fool, and slow to believe and to serve thy God, the God of all!
what did He do more for Moses, or for David his servant, than He has done
for thee? From thine infancy He has kept thee under His constant and
watchful care. When He saw thee arrived at an age which suited His
designs respecting thee, He brought wonderful renown to thy name
throughout all the land. He gave thee for thine own the Indies, which
form so rich a portion of the world, and thou hast divided them as it
pleased thee, for He gave thee power to do so. He gave thee also the keys
of those barriers of the ocean sea which were closed with such mighty
chains;[404-1] and thou wast obeyed through many lands, and gained an
honorable fame throughout Christendom. What did he more for the people of
Israel, when he brought them out of Egypt?[404-2] or for David, whom from
a shepherd He made to be king in Judea? Turn to Him, and acknowledge
thine error--His mercy is infinite. Thine old age shall not prevent thee
from accomplishing any great undertaking. He holds under His sway many
very great possessions. Abraham had exceeded a hundred years of age when
he begat Isaac; nor was Sarah young. Thou criest out for uncertain help:
answer, who has afflicted thee so much and so often, God or the world?
The privileges promised by God, He never fails in bestowing; nor does He
ever declare, after a service has been rendered Him, that such was not
agreeable with His intention, or that He had regarded the matter in
another light; nor does he inflict suffering, in order to give effect to
the manifestation of His power. His word goes according to the letter;
and He performs all his promises with interest. This is [his] custom.
Thus I have told thee what thy Creator has done for thee, and what He
does for all men. Just now He gave me a specimen of the reward of so many
toils and dangers incurred by thee in the service of others."[404-2]

I heard all this, as it were, in a trance; but I had no answer to give in
definite words, and could but weep for my errors. He who spoke to me,
whoever it was, concluded by saying,--"Fear not, but trust; all these
tribulations are recorded on marble, and not without cause." I arose as
soon as I could; and at the end of nine days there came fine weather, but
not sufficiently so to allow of drawing the vessels out of the river. I
collected the men who were on land, and, in fact, all of them that I
could, because there were not enough to admit of one party remaining on
shore while another stayed on board to work the vessels. I myself should
have remained with my men to defend the settlement, had your Highnesses
known of it; but the fear that ships might never reach the spot where we
were, as well as the thought, that when provision is to be made for
bringing help, everything will be provided,[405-1] made me decide upon
leaving. I departed, in the name of the Holy Trinity, on Easter
night,[405-2] with the ships rotten, worm-eaten and full of holes. One of
them I left at Belen, with a supply of necessaries; I did the same at
Belpuerto. I then had only two left, and they in the same state as the
others. I was without boats or provisions, and in this condition I had to
cross seven thousand miles of sea; or, as an alternative, to die on the
passage with my son, my brother, and so many of my people. Let those who
are accustomed to finding fault and censuring ask, while they sit in
security at home, "Why did you not do so and so under such
circumstances?" I wish they now had this voyage to make. I verily believe
that another journey of another kind awaits them, or our faith is
nothing.

On the thirteenth of May I reached the province of Mago [Mango],[405-3]
which borders on Cathay, and thence I started for the island of
Espanola. I sailed two days with a good wind, after which it became
contrary. The route that I followed called forth all my care to avoid the
numerous islands, that I might not be stranded on the shoals that lie in
their neighborhood. The sea was very tempestuous, and I was driven
backward under bare poles. I anchored at an island, where I lost, at one
stroke, three anchors; and, at midnight, when the weather was such that
the world appeared to be coming to an end, the cables of the other ship
broke, and it came down upon my vessel with such force that it was a
wonder we were not dashed to pieces; the single anchor that remained to
me was, next to the Lord, our only preservation. After six days, when the
weather became calm, I resumed my journey, having already lost all my
tackle; my ships were pierced by borers more than a honey-comb and the
crew entirely paralyzed with fear and in despair. I reached the island a
little beyond the point at which I first arrived at it, and there I
turned in to recover myself after the storm;[406-1] but I afterwards put
into a much safer port in the same island. After eight days I put to sea
again, and reached Jamaica by the end of June;[406-2] but always beating
against contrary winds, and with the ships in the worst possible
condition. With three pumps, and the use of pots and kettles, we could
scarcely clear the water that came into the ship, there being no remedy
but this for the mischief done by the ship-worm. I steered in such a
manner as to come as near as possible to Espanola, from which we were
twenty-eight leagues distant, but I afterwards wished I had not done so,
for the other ship which was half under water was obliged to run in for a
port. I determined on keeping the sea in spite of the weather, and my
vessel was on the very point of sinking when our Lord miraculously
brought us upon land. Who will believe what I now write? I assert that in
this letter I have not related one hundredth part of the wonderful events
that occurred in this voyage; those who were with the Admiral can bear
witness to it. If your Highnesses would be graciously pleased to send to
my help a ship of above sixty-four tons, with two hundred quintals of
