
'I cannot tell, husband,' she said, smiling; 'if I have won your praise
and safety, it is enough for me.'



CHAPTER XXXII

THE END OF GUATEMOC


Now for a while we dwelt in quiet at the City of Pines, and by slow
degrees and with much suffering I recovered from the wounds that the
cruel hand of de Garcia had inflicted upon me. But we knew that this
peace could not last, and the people of the Otomie knew it also, for had
they not scourged the envoys of Malinche out of the gates of their city?
Many of them were now sorry that this had been done, but it was done,
and they must reap as they had sown.

So they made ready for war, and Otomie was the president of their
councils, in which I shared. At length came news that a force of fifty
Spaniards with five thousand Tlascalan allies were advancing on the city
to destroy us. Then I took command of the tribesmen of the Otomie--there
were ten thousand or more of them, all well-armed after their own
fashion--and advanced out of the city till I was two-thirds of the way
down the gorge which leads to it. But I did not bring all my army down
this gorge, since there was no room for them to fight there, and I had
another plan. I sent some seven thousand men round the mountains, of
which the secret paths were well known to them, bidding them climb to
the crest of the precipices that bordered either side of the gorge,
and there, at certain places where the cliff is sheer and more than one
thousand feet in height, to make a great provision of stones.

The rest of my army, excepting five hundred whom I kept with me, I
armed with bows and throwing spears, and stationed them in ambush in
convenient places where the sides of the cliff were broken, and in such
fashion that rocks from above could not be rolled on them. Then I sent
trusty men as spies to warn me of the approach of the Spaniards, and
others whose mission it was to offer themselves to them as guides.

Now I thought my plan good, and everything looked well, and yet it
missed failure but by a very little. For Maxtla, our enemy and the
friend of the Spaniards, was in my camp--indeed, I had brought him with
me that I might watch him--and he had not been idle.

For when the Spaniards were half a day's march from the mouth of the
defile, one of those men whom I had told off to watch their advance,
came to me and made it known that Maxtla had bribed him to go to the
leader of the Spaniards and disclose to him the plan of the ambuscade.
This man had taken the bribe and started on his errand of treachery,
but his heart failed him and, returning, he told me all. Then I caused
Maxtla to be seized, and before nightfall he had paid the price of his
wickedness.

On the morning after his death the Spanish array entered the pass.
Half-way down it I met them with my five hundred men and engaged them,
but suffered them to drive us back with some loss. As they followed they
grew bolder and we fled faster, till at length we flew down the defile
followed by the Spanish horse. Now, some three furlongs from its mouth
that leads to the City of Pines, this pass turns and narrows, and here
the cliffs are so sheer and high that a twilight reigns at the foot of
them.

Down the narrow way we ran in seeming rout, and after us came the
Spaniards shouting on their saints and flushed with victory. But
scarcely had we turned the corner when they sang another song, for those
who were watching a thousand feet above us gave the signal, and down
from on high came a rain of stones and boulders that darkened the air
and crashed among them, crushing many of them. On they struggled, seeing
a wider way in front where the cliffs sloped, and perhaps half of them
won through. But here the archers were waiting, and now, in the place of
stones, arrows were hailed upon them, till at length, utterly bewildered
and unable to strike a blow in their own defence, they turned to fly
towards the open country. This finished the fight, for now we assailed
their flank, and once more the rocks thundered on them from above, and
the end of it was that those who remained of the Spaniards and their
Indian allies were driven in utter rout back to the plain beyond the
Pass of Pines.

After this battle the Spaniards troubled us no more for many years
except by threats, and my name grew great among the people of the
Otomie.

One Spaniard I rescued from death and afterwards I gave him his liberty.
From him I inquired of the doings of de Garcia or Sarceda, and learned
that he was still in the service of Cortes, but that Marina had been
true to her word, and had brought disgrace upon him because he had
threatened to put Otomie to the torture. Moreover Cortes was angry with
him because of our escape, the burden of which Marina had laid upon his
shoulders, hinting that he had taken a bribe to suffer us to pass the
gate.


Of the fourteen years of my life which followed the defeat of the
Spaniards I can speak briefly, for compared to the time that had gone
before they were years of quiet. In them children were born to me and
Otomie, three sons, and these children were my great joy, for I loved
them dearly and they loved me. Indeed, except for the strain of their
mother's blood, they were English boys and not Indian, for I christened
them all, and taught them our English tongue and faith, and their mien
and eyes were more English than Indian, though their skins were dark.
But I had no luck with these dear children of mine, any more than I have
had with that which Lily bore me. Two of them died--one from a fever
that all my skill would not avail to cure, and another by a fall from a
lofty cedar tree, which he climbed searching for a kite's nest. Thus
of the three of them--since I do not speak now of that infant, my
firstborn, who perished in the siege--there remained to me only the
eldest and best beloved of whom I must tell hereafter.

For the rest, jointly with Otomie I was named cacique of the City
of Pines at a great council that was held after I had destroyed the
Spaniards and their allies, and as such we had wide though not absolute
power. By the exercise of this power, in the end I succeeded in
abolishing the horrible rites of human sacrifice, though, because of
this, a large number of the outlying tribes fell away from our rule, and
the enmity of the priests was excited against me. The last sacrifice,
except one only, the most terrible of them all, of which I will tell
afterwards, that was ever celebrated on the teocalli in front of the
palace, took place after the defeat of the Spaniards in the pass.

When I had dwelt three years in the City of Pines and two sons had
been born to me there, secret messengers arrived that were sent by
the friends of Guatemoc, who had survived the torture and was still a
prisoner in the hands of Cortes. From these messengers we learned that
Cortes was about to start upon an expedition to the Gulf of Honduras,
across the country that is now known as Yucatan, taking Guatemoc and
other Aztec nobles with him for he feared to leave them behind. We heard
also that there was much murmuring among the conquered tribes of Anahuac
because of the cruelties and extortions of the Spaniards, and many
thought that the hour had come when a rising against them might be
carried to a successful issue.

This was the prayer of those who sent the envoys, that I should raise a
force of Otomies and travel with it across the country to Yucatan, and
there with others who would be gathered, wait a favourable opportunity
to throw myself upon the Spaniards when they were entangled in the
forests and swamps, putting them to the sword and releasing Guatemoc.
Such was the first purpose of the plot, though it had many others of
which it is useless to speak, seeing that they came to nothing.

When the message had been delivered I shook my head sadly, for I could
see no hope in such a scheme, but the chief of the messengers rose and
led me aside, saying that he had a word for my ear.

'Guatemoc sends these words,' he said; 'I hear that you, my brother, are
free and safe with my cousin Otomie in the mountains of the Otomie. I,
alas! linger in the prisons of the Teules like a crippled eagle in a
cage. My brother, if it is in your power to help me, do so I conjure
you by the memory of our ancient friendship, and of all that we have
suffered together. Then a time may still come when I shall rule again in
Anahuac, and you shall sit at my side.'

I heard and my heart was stirred, for then, as to this hour, I loved
Guatemoc as a brother.

'Go back,' I said, 'and find means to tell Guatemoc that if I can save
him I will, though I have small hopes that way. Still, let him look for
me in the forests of Yucatan.'

Now when Otomie heard of this promise of mine she was vexed, for she
said that it was foolish and would only end in my losing my life. Still,
having given it she held with me that it must be carried out, and the
end of it was that I raised five hundred men, and with them set out upon
my long and toilsome march, which I timed so as to meet Cortes in the
passes of Yucatan. At the last moment Otomie wished to accompany me, but
I forbade it, pointing out that she could leave neither her children nor
her people, and we parted with bitter grief for the first time.

Of all the hardships that I underwent I will not write. For two and
a half months we struggled on across mountains and rivers and through
swamps and forests, till at last we reached a mighty deserted city,
that is called Palenque by the Indians of those parts, which has been
uninhabited for many generations. This city is the most marvellous place
that I have seen in all my travels, though much of it is hidden in
bush, for wherever the traveller wanders there he finds vast palaces of
marble, carven within and without, and sculptured teocallis and the huge
images of grinning gods. Often have I wondered what nation was strong
enough to build such a capital, and who were the kings that dwelt in it.
But these are secrets belonging to the past, and they cannot be answered
till some learned man has found the key to the stone symbols and
writings with which the walls of the buildings are covered over.

In this city I hid with my men, though it was no easy task to persuade
them to take up their habitation among so many ghosts of the departed,
not to speak of the noisome fevers and the wild beasts and snakes that
haunted it, for I had information that the Spaniards would pass through
the swamp that lies between the ruins and the river, and there I hoped
to ambush them. But on the eighth day of my hiding I learned from spies
that Cortes had crossed the great river higher up, and was cutting his
way through the forest, for of swamps he had passed more than enough. So
I hurried also to the river intending to cross it. But all that day and
all that night it rained as it can rain nowhere else in the world that
I have seen, till at last we waded on our road knee deep in water, and
when we came to the ford of the river it was to find a wide roaring
flood, that no man could pass in anything less frail than a Yarmouth
herring boat. So there on the bank we must stay in misery, suffering
many ills from fever, lack of food, and plenitude of water, till at
length the stream ran down.

Three days and nights we waited there, and on the fourth morning I made
shift to cross, losing four men by drowning in the passage. Once over, I
hid my force in the bush and reeds, and crept forward with six men only,
to see if I could discover anything of the whereabouts of the Spaniards.
Within an hour I struck the trail that they had cut through the forest,
and followed it cautiously. Presently we came to a spot where the forest
was thin, and here Cortes had camped, for there was heat left in the
ashes of his fires, and among them lay the body of an Indian who had
died from sickness. Not fifty yards from this camp stood a huge ceiba,
a tree that has a habit of growth not unlike that of our English oak,
though it is soft wooded and white barked, and will increase more in
bulk in twenty years than any oak may in a hundred. Indeed I never yet
saw an oak tree so large as this ceiba of which I write, either in girth
or in its spread of top, unless it be the Kirby oak or the tree that
is called the 'King of Scoto' which grows at Broome, that is the next
parish to this of Ditchingham in Norfolk. On this ceiba tree many
zaphilotes or vultures were perched, and as we crept towards it I saw
what it was they came to seek, for from the lowest branches of the ceiba
three corpses swung in the breeze. 'Here are the Spaniard's footprints,'
I said. 'Let us look at them,' and we passed beneath the shadow of the
tree.

As I came, a zaphilote alighted on the head of the body that hung
nearest to me, and its weight, or the wafting of the fowl's wing, caused
the dead man to turn round so that he came face to face with me. I
looked, started back, then looked again and sank to the earth groaning.
For here was he whom I had come to seek and save, my friend, my brother,
Guatemoc the last emperor of Anahuac. Here he hung in the dim and
desolate forest, dead by the death of a thief, while the vulture
shrieked upon his head. I sat bewildered and horror-stricken, and as
I sat I remembered the proud sign of Aztec royalty, a bird of prey
clasping an adder in its claw. There before me was the last of the
stock, and behold! a bird of prey gripped his hair in its talons, a
fitting emblem indeed of the fall of Anahuac and the kings of Anahuac.

I sprang to my feet with an oath, and lifting the bow I held I sent
an arrow through the vulture and it fell to the earth fluttering and
screaming. Then I bade those with me to cut down the corpses of Guatemoc
and of the prince of Tacuba and another noble who hung with him, and
hollow a deep grave beneath the tree. There I laid them, and there I
left them to sleep for ever in its melancholy shadow, and thus for the
last time I saw Guatemoc my brother, whom I came from far to save and
found made ready for burial by the Spaniard.

Then I turned my face homewards, for now Anahuac had no king to rescue,
but it chanced that before I went I caught a Tlascalan who could speak
Spanish, and who had deserted from the army of Cortes because of the
hardships that he suffered in their toilsome march. This man was present
at the murder of Guatemoc and his companions, and heard the Emperor's
last words. It seems that some knave had betrayed to Cortes that an
attempt would be made to rescue the prince, and that thereon Cortes
commanded that he should be hung. It seems also that Guatemoc met his
death as he had met the misfortunes of his life, proudly and without
fear. These were his last words: 'I did ill, Malinche, when I held my
hand from taking my own life before I surrendered myself to you. Then my
heart told me that all your promises were false, and it has not lied to
me. I welcome my death, for I have lived to know shame and defeat and
torture, and to see my people the slaves of the Teule, but still I say
that God will reward you for this deed.'

Then they murdered him in the midst of a great silence.


And so farewell to Guatemoc, the most brave, the best and the noblest
Indian that ever breathed, and may the shadow of his tormentings and
shameful end lie deep upon the fame of Cortes for so long as the names
of both of them are remembered among men!


For two more months I journeyed homeward and at length I reached the
City of Pines, well though wearied, and having lost only forty men by
various misadventures of travel, to find Otomie in good health, and
overjoyed to know me safe whom she thought never to see again. But when
I told her what was the end of her cousin Guatemoc she grieved bitterly,
both for his sake and because the last hope of the Aztec was gone, and
she would not be comforted for many days.



CHAPTER XXXIII

ISABELLA DE SIGUENZA IS AVENGED


For many years after the death of Guatemoc I lived with Otomie at peace
in the City of Pines. Our country was poor and rugged, and though we
defied the Spaniards and paid them no tribute, now that Cortes had gone
back to Spain, they had no heart to attempt our conquest. Save some few
tribes that lived in difficult places like ourselves, all Anahuac was
in their power, and there was little to gain except hard blows in the
bringing of a remnant of the people of the Otomie beneath their yoke, so
they let us be till a more convenient season. I say of a remnant of the
Otomie, for as time went on many clans submitted to the Spaniards, till
at length we ruled over the City of Pines alone and some leagues of
territory about it. Indeed it was only love for Otomie and respect for
the shadow of her ancient race and name, together with some reverence
for me as one of the unconquerable white men, and for my skill as a
general, that kept our following together.

And now it may be asked was I happy in those years? I had much to make
me happy--no man could have been blessed with a wife more beautiful and
loving, nor one who had exampled her affection by more signal deeds of
sacrifice. This woman of her own free will had lain by my side on the
stone of slaughter; overriding the instincts of her sex she had not
shrunk from dipping her hands in blood to secure my safety, her wit had
rescued me in many a trouble, her love had consoled me in many a sorrow:
surely therefore if gratitude can conquer the heart of man, mine should
have been at her feet for ever and a day, and so indeed it was, and in a
sense is still. But can gratitude, can love itself, or any passion that
rules our souls, make a man forget the house where he was born? Could
I, an Indian chief struggling with a fallen people against an inevitable
destiny, forget my youth and all its hopes and fears, could I forget the
valley of the Waveney and that Flower who dwelt therein, and forsworn
though I might be, could I forget the oath that I once had sworn? Chance
had been against me, circumstances overpowered me, and I think that
there are few who, could they read this story, would not find in it
excuse for all that I had done. Certainly there are very few who,
standing where I stood, surrounded as I was by doubts, difficulties, and
dangers, would not have acted as I did.

And yet memory would rise up against me, and time upon time I would lie
awake at night, even by the side of Otomie, and remember and repent,
if a man may repent of that over which he has no control. For I was a
stranger in a strange land, and though my home was there and my children
were about me, the longing for my other home was yet with me, and I
could not put away the memory of that Lily whom I had lost. Her ring was
still upon my hand, but nothing else of her remained to me. I did not
know if she were married or single, living or dead. The gulf between us
widened with the widening years, but still the thought of her went
with me like my shadow; it shone across the stormy love of Otomie, I
remembered it even in my children's kiss. And worst of all I despised
myself for these regrets. Nay, if the worst can have a worse, there was
one here, for though she never spoke of it, I feared that Otomie had
read my mind.


Heart to heart, Though far apart,


so ran the writing upon Lily's betrothal ring, and so it was with me.
Far apart we were indeed, so far that no bridge that I might imagine
could join that distance, and yet I could not say that we had ceased
from being 'heart to heart.' Her heart might throb no more, but mine
beat still toward it. Across the land, across the sea, across the gulf
of death--if she were dead--still in secret must I desire the love that
I had forsworn.

And so the years rolled on, bringing little of change with them, till
I grew sure that here in this far place I should live and die. But that
was not to be my fate.


If any should read this, the story of my early life, he will remember
that the tale of the death of a certain Isabella de Siguenza is pieced
into its motley. He will remember how this Isabella, in the last moments
of her life, called down a curse upon that holy father who added outrage
and insult to her torment, praying that he might also die by the hands
of fanatics and in a worse fashion. If my memory does not play me false,
I have said that this indeed came to pass, and very strangely. For after
the conquest of Anahuac by Cortes, among others this same fiery priest
came from Spain to turn the Indians to the love of God by torment and by
sword. Indeed, of all of those who entered on this mission of peace, he
was the most zealous. The Indian pabas wrought cruelties enough when,
tearing out the victim's heart, they offered it like incense to Huitzel
or to Quetzal, but they at least dismissed his soul to the Mansions of
the Sun. With the Christian priests the thumb-screw and the stake took
the place of the stone of sacrifice, but the soul which they delivered
from its earthly bondage they consigned to the House of Hell.

Of these priests a certain Father Pedro was the boldest and the most
cruel. To and fro he passed, marking his path with the corpses of
idolaters, until he earned the name of the 'Christian Devil.' At length
he ventured too far in his holy fervour, and was seized by a clan of the
Otomie that had broken from our rule upon this very question of human
sacrifice, but which was not yet subjugated by the Spaniards. One day,
it was when we had ruled for some fourteen years in the City of Pines,
it came to my knowledge that the pabas of this clan had captured a
Christian priest, and designed to offer him to the god Tezcat.

Attended by a small guard only, I passed rapidly across the mountains,
purposing to visit the cacique of this clan with whom, although he had
cast off his allegiance to us, I still kept up a show of friendship,
and if I could, to persuade him to release the priest. But swiftly as I
travelled the vengeance of the pabas had been more swift, and I arrived
at the village only to find the 'Christian Devil' in the act of being
led to sacrifice before the image of a hideous idol that was set upon a
stake and surrounded with piles of skulls. Naked to the waist, his hands
bound behind him, his grizzled locks hanging about his breast, his keen
eyes fixed upon the faces of his heathen foes in menace rather than in
supplication, his thin lips muttering prayers, Father Pedro passed on to
the place of his doom, now and again shaking his head fiercely to free
himself from the torment of the insects which buzzed about it.

I looked upon him and wondered. I looked again and knew. Suddenly there
rose before my mind a vision of that gloomy vault in Seville, of a
woman, young and lovely, draped in cerements, and of a thin-faced
black-robed friar who smote her upon the lips with his ivory crucifix
and cursed her for a blaspheming heretic. There before me was the man.
Isabella de Siguenza had prayed that a fate like to her own fate should
befall him, and it was upon him now. Nor indeed, remembering all that
had been, was I minded to avert it, even if it had been in my power to
do so. I stood by and let the victim pass, but as he passed I spoke to
him in Spanish, saying:

'Remember that which it may well be you have forgotten, holy father,
remember now the dying prayer of Isabella de Siguenza whom many years
ago you did to death in Seville.'

The man heard me; he turned livid beneath his bronzed skin and staggered
until I thought that he would have fallen. He stared upon me, with
terror in his eye, to see as he believed a common sight enough, that of
an Indian chief rejoicing at the death of one of his oppressors.

'What devil are you,' he said hoarsely, 'sent from hell to torment me at
the last?'

'Remember the dying prayer of Isabella de Siguenza, whom you struck and
cursed,' I answered mocking. 'Seek not to know whence I am, but remember
this only, now and for ever.'

For a moment he stood still, heedless of the urgings of his tormentors.
Then his courage came to him again, and he cried with a great voice:
'Get thee behind me, Satan, what have I to fear from thee? I remember
that dead sinner well--may her soul have peace--and her curse has fallen
upon me. I rejoice that it should be so, for on the further side of
yonder stone the gates of heaven open to my sight. Get thee behind me,
Satan, what have I to fear from thee?'

Crying thus he staggered forward saying, 'O God, into Thy hand I commend
my spirit!' May his soul have peace also, for if he was cruel, at least
he was brave, and did not shrink beneath those torments which he had
inflicted on many others.


Now this was a little matter, but its results were large. Had I saved
Father Pedro from the hands of the pabas of the Otomie, it is likely
enough that I should not to-day be writing this history here in the
valley of the Waveney. I do not know if I could have saved him, I only
know that I did not try, and that because of his death great sorrows
came upon me. Whether I was right or wrong, who can say? Those who judge
my story may think that in this as in other matters I was wrong; had
they seen Isabella de Siguenza die within her living tomb, certainly
they would hold that I was right. But for good or ill, matters came
about as I have written.

And it came about also, that the new viceroy sent from Spain was stirred
to anger at the murder of the friar by the rebellious and heathen people
of the Otomie, and set himself to take vengeance on the tribe that
wrought the deed.

Soon tidings reached me that a great force of Tlascalan and other
Indians were being collected to put an end to us, root and branch, and
that with them marched more than a hundred Spaniards, the expedition
being under the command of none other than the Captain Bernal Diaz, that
same soldier whom I had spared in the slaughter of the noche triste, and
whose sword to this day hung at my side.

Now we must needs prepare our defence, for our only hope lay in
boldness. Once before the Spaniards had attacked us with thousands of
their allies, and of their number but few had lived to look again on the
camp of Cortes. What had been done could be done a second time--so said
Otomie in the pride of her unconquerable heart. But alas! in fourteen
years things had changed much with us. Fourteen years ago we held sway
over a great district of mountains, whose rude clans would send up their
warriors in hundreds at our call. Now these clans had broken from our
yoke, which was acknowledged by the people of the City of Pines alone
and those of some adjacent villages. When the Spaniards came down on me
the first time, I was able to muster an army of ten thousand soldiers to
oppose them, now with much toil I could collect no more than between two
and three thousand men, and of these some slipped away as the hour of
danger drew nigh.

Still I must put a bold face on my necessities, and make what play I
might with such forces as lay at my command, although in my heart I
feared much for the issue. But of my fears I said nothing to Otomie, and
if she felt any she, on her part, buried them in her breast. In truth I
do believe her faith in me was so great, that she thought my single wit
enough to over-match all the armies of the Spaniards.

Now at length the enemy drew near, and I set my battle as I had done
fourteen years before, advancing down the pass by which alone they
could approach us with a small portion of my force, and stationing the
remainder in two equal companies upon either brow of the beetling cliffs
that overhung the road, having command to overwhelm the Spaniards with
rocks, hurled upon them from above, so soon as I should give the signal
by flying before them down the pass. Other measures I took also, for
seeing that do what I would it well might happen that we should be
driven back upon the city, I caused its walls and gates to be set in
order, and garrisoned them. As a last resource too, I stored the lofty
summit of the teocalli, which now that sacrifices were no longer offered
there was used as an arsenal for the material of war, with water and
