    This niche of fame,--'tis all the Fates bestow--
    Awaits thee still. For me, all life's desire--
    'Twere vain--hath fled; but gladly would I go,
And bear the welcome news to Pallas' shade below."

XXIV. Meanwhile to weary mortals fresh and fair
    Upsprings the Dawn, and reawakes the land
    To toil and labour. Reared with pious care
    By Tarchon and the good AEneas, stand
    The funeral pyres along the winding strand.
    Here brings each warrior, as in days gone by,
    His comrade's corpse, and holds the lighted brand.
    The dusk flames burn beneath them, and on high
The clouds of smoke roll up, and shroud the lofty sky.

XXV. Three times the Trojans, sheathed in shining mail,
    Pace round the piles; three times they ride around
    The funeral fire, and raise the warrior's wail.
    Tears bathe their arms, and tears bedew the ground,
    And, mixt with clamour, comes the clarion's sound.
    Spoils of dead Latins on the flames are thrown,
    Bits, bridles, glowing wheels and helmets crown'd
    With glittering plumes, and, last, the gifts well-known,
The luckless spear and shield, the weapons of their own.

XXVI. Oxen in numbers round the pyres are slain
    To Death's dread power, and herds of bristly swine;
    And cattle, snatched from all the neighbouring plain,
    And sheep they slaughter for the flames divine.
    Far down the sea-coast, where the bale-fires shine,
    They guard and gaze upon the pyres, where lie
    Their burning comrades, nor their watch resign,
    Nor leave the spot, till dewy night on high
Rolls round the circling heavens, and starlight gilds the sky.

XXVII. Nor less the sorrowing Latins build elsewhere
    Their countless piles. These burying they bemoan;
    Those to the town or neighbouring fields they bear.
    The rest, untold, unhonoured and unknown,
    A mass of carnage, on the flames are thrown.
    Thick blaze the fires, and light the plains around,
    And on the third dawn, when the mists have flown,
    The bones and dust, still smouldering on the ground,
Mourning, they rake in heaps, and cover with a mound.

XXVIII. But loudest in Laurentum rose the noise
    Of woe and wailing for their friends who died.
    Here, mothers, wives, sad sisters, orphaned boys
    Curse the dire war, and Turnus and his bride.
    "Let him, let Turnus fight it out," they cried;
    "Who claims chief honours and Italia's throne,
    And caused the quarrel, let his sword decide";
    And spiteful Drances: "Ay, 'tis he alone
Whom Latium's foes demand; the challenge is his own."

XXIX. And voices, too, with various reasons, plead
    For Turnus, sheltered by the queen's great name,
    And spoils that speak for many a glorious deed.
    Lo, in the midst, the tumult still aflame,
    With doleful news from Diomede, back came
    The envoys. All was useless,--gifts, and prayer,
    And proffered gold; his answer was the same:
    Let Latins look for other arms elsewhere,
Or beg the Trojan king in clemency to spare.

XXX. Grief bowed Latinus, and his heart sank low.
    The wrath of Heaven, the recent funerals,
    The graves before them--all AEneas show
    The god's true choice. A council straight he calls,
    And Latium's chiefs convenes within his walls.
    All meet; along the crowded ways the peers
    Stream at the summons. In his palace-halls
    Amidst them sits Latinus, first in years,
And first in sceptred state, but filled with anxious fears.

XXXI. Forthwith the envoys he invites, each man
    To tell his message, and the terms expound,
    Then, silence made, thus Venulus began:
    "Friends, we have seen great Diomede, and found
    The Argive camp, and, safe from peril, crowned
    Our journey's end, and pressed the mighty hand
    That razed old Troy. On Iapygian ground
    By Garganus the conqueror hath planned
Argyripa's new town, named from his native land.

XXXII. "There, audience gained and liberty to speak,
    The gifts we tender, and our names declare
    And country, who our foemen, what we seek,
    And why to Arpi and his court we fare.
    He hears, and gently thus bespeaks us fair:
    'O happy nations, once by Saturn blest,
    Time-old Ausonians, what sad misfare,
    What evil fortune mars your ancient rest
And tempts to wage strange wars, and dare the doubtful test?

XXXIII. "'All we, whoever with the steel profaned
    Troy's fields (I leave the wasting siege alone,
    The dead, who lie in Simois), all have drained
    Evils past utterance, o'er the wide world blown,
    And, suffering, learned our trespass to atone,
    A hapless band! E'en Priam's self might weep
    For woes like ours, as Pallas well hath known,
    Whose baleful star once wrecked us on the deep,
And grim Euboea's rocks, Caphareus' vengeful steep.

XXXIV. "'Freed from that war, to distant shores we stray.
    To Proteus' Pillars, far remote from men
    An exile, Menelaus wends his way;
    Ulysses shudders at the Cyclops' den;
    Why speak of Pyrrhus, by Orestes slain?
    Or poor Idomeneus, expelled his state?
    Of Locrians, cast upon the Libyan plain?
    Of Agamemnon, greatest of the great,
Mycenae's valiant lord, slain by his faithless mate,

XXXV. "'E'en on his threshold, when the adulterer lay
    In wait for Asia's conqueror? Me, too,
    Hath envious Heaven in exile doomed to stay,
    Nor home, nor wife, nor Calydon to view.
    Nay, ghastly prodigies my flight pursue.
    Transformed to birds, my comrades wing the skies,--
    Ah! cruel punishment for friends so true!--
    Or skim the streams; from all the shores arise
Their piteous shrieks, the cliffs re-echo with their cries.

XXXVI. "'Such woes had I to look for, from the day
    I dared a goddess, and my javelin tore
    The hand of Venus. To such fights, I pray,
    Persuade me not. Troy fall'n, I fight no more
    With Trojans, nor those evil days of yore
    Now care to dwell on. To AEneas go,
    And take these gifts. Once, hand to hand, we bore
    The shock of battle; to my cost I know
How to his shield he towers, the whirlwind of his throw.

XXXVII. "'Had Ida's land two others borne as great,
    To Argos Dardanus had found his way,
    And Greece were mourning now a different fate.
    The stubborn siege, the conquerors kept at bay,
    For ten whole years, the triumph's long delay
    Were his and Hector's doing, each in might
    Renowned, and each the foremost in the fray,
    AEneas first in piety. Go, plight
What peace ye may, but shun to meet him in the fight.'

XXXVIII. "Thou hast, great king, the answer of the king,
    And this, his sentence on the war." So they,
    And diverse murmurs in the crowd upspring;
    As when big rocks a rushing torrent stay,
    The prisoned waters, chafing with delay,
    Boil, and the banks in many a foaming crest
    Fling back with echoes the tumultuous spray.
    Now from his throne, their murmurs laid to rest,
The King, first offering prayer, his listening folk addressed:

XXXIX. "I would, ye peers, and better it had been
    An earlier hour had called us to debate,
    Than thus in haste a council to convene,
    And meet, while foemen battle at the gate.
    A war ill-omened, with disastrous fate,
    We wage with men unconquered in the field,
    A race of gods, whose force nor toils abate,
    Nor wounds can tire; who, driven back, still wield
The sword and shake the spear, and, beaten, scorn to yield.

XL. "What hope ye had in Diomede, give o'er;
    Each for himself must be his hope and stay.
    This hope how slender, and our straits how sore,
    Ye see; the general ruin and decay
    Is open, palpable and clear as day.
    Yet blame I none; what valour could, was done.
    Our country's strength, our souls were in the fray.
    Hear then in brief, and ponder every one,
What wavering thoughts have shaped, our present fate to shun.

XLI. "Far-stretching westward, past Sicania's bound,
    By Tiber's stream, an ancient tract is mine.
    Auruncans and Rutulians till the ground;
    Their ploughshares cleave the stubborn slopes, their kine
    Graze on the rocks. This tract, these hills of pine
    Let Latins yield the Trojans for their own,
    And both, as friends, in equal league combine
    And share the realm. Here let them settle down,
If so they love the land, and build the wished-for town.

XLII. "But if new frontiers, and another folk,
    They fain would look for, and can leave our shore,
    Then twice ten ships of tough Italian oak
    Build we, nor only let us build a score
    Can they but man them (by the stream good store
    Of timber is at hand); let them decide
    The form, the number, and the size. What more
    Is wanting, we will grudge not to provide,
Gold, labour, brass, and docks, and naval gear beside.

XLIII. "Nay more, to strike the proffered league, 'twere good
    That chosen envoys to their camp should fare,
    A hundred Latins of the noblest blood,
    The peaceful olive in their hands to bear,
    With gifts, the choicest that the realm can spare,
    Talents of gold and ivory, just in weight,
    The royal mantle, and the curule chair,
    The marks of rule. With freedom now debate,
Consult the common weal, and help the sickly state."

XLIV. Up rose then Drances, with indignant mien,
    Whom, spiteful still, the fame of Turnus stung
    With carping envy, and malignant spleen;
    Lavish of wealth, and fluent with his tongue,
    No mean adviser in debate, and strong
    In faction, but in battle cold and tame.
    From royal seed his mother's race was sprung,
    His sire's unknown. He thus with words of blame
Piles up the general wrath, and fans resentment's flame.

XLV. "Good king, the matter--it is plain, for each
    Knows well our needs, but hesitates to say.
    Let _him_ cease blustering, and allow free speech,
    Him, for whose pride and sullen temper, yea,
    I say it, let him threaten as he may--
    Quenched is the light of many a chief, that lies
    In earth's cold lap, and mourning and dismay
    Have filled the town, while, sure of flight, he tries
To storm the Trojan camp, and idly flouts the skies.

XLVI. "One gift, O best of monarchs, add, to crown
    Thy bounty to the Dardans,--one, beside
    These many, nor let bluster bear thee down.
    A worthy husband for thy child provide,
    And peace shall with the lasting pact abide.
    Else, if such terror doth our souls enslave,
    Him now, in hope to turn away his pride,
    Him let us pray his proper right to waive,
And, pitying, deign to yield what king and country crave.

XLVII. "O Turnus, cause of all our ills to-day,
    Why make the land these miseries endure?
    The war is desperate; for peace we pray,
    And that one pledge, inviolably sure,
    Naught else but which can make the peace secure.
    Thy foeman, I--nor be the fact concealed,
    For so thou deem'st--entreat thee and adjure.
    Blood flows enough on many a wasted field.
Relent, and spare thine own, and, beaten, learn to yield.

XLVIII. "Or, if fame tempt, and in thy bosom glow
    Such fire, and so thou hankerest to gain
    A kingdom's dower, take heart and face the foe.
    Must we, poor souls, that Turnus may obtain
    A royal bride, like carrion strew the plain,
    Unwept, unburied? If thine arm hath might,
    If but a spark of native worth remain,
    Go forth this hour; in arms assert thy right,
And meet him, face to face, who calls thee to the fight."

XLIX. Fierce blazed the wrath of Turnus, and he wrung
    Speech from his breast, deep groaning in his gall.
    "Glib art thou, Drances, voluble of tongue,
    When hands are needed, and the trumpets call.
    The council summoned, thou art first of all.
    Not this the hour thy vapouring to outpour,
    Though big thy talk, and brave the words, that fall
    From craven lips, while ramparts stand before,
To guard thee safe from foes, nor trenches swim with gore.

L.  "Rave on, and thunder in thy wonted strain,
    And brand me coward, thou whose hands can slay
    Such Trojan hosts, whose trophies grace the plain.
    What worth can do, and manhood can essay,
    We twain may venture. Sooth, not far away
    Need foes be sought; around the walls they throng.
    March we to meet them! Dotard, why delay?
    Still dwells thy War-God in a windy tongue,
And flying feet, and knees all feeble and unstrung?

LI. "I beaten? Who, foul spawn of earth, shall call
    Me beaten? who, that saw swoln Tiber flow
    Red with the blood of Trojans, ay, and all
    Evander's house and progeny laid low,
    And fierce Arcadians vanquished at a blow?
    Not such dead Pandarus and Bitias found
    This right hand, nor those thousands hurled below
    In one short day, when battlement and mound
Hemmed me in hostile walls, and foemen swarmed around.

LII. "No hope from war?--Go, fool, to Dardan ears
    These bodings whisper, to thy new ally.
    Go, swell the panic, spread the coward's fears.
    Puff up the foemen's prowess to the sky,--
    Twice-conquered churls,--and Latin arms decry.
    See now, forsooth, the Myrmidons afraid
    Of Phrygian arms, Tydides fain to fly,
    Achilles trembling, Aufidus in dread
Shrunk from the Hadrian deep, and cowering in his bed.

LIII. "Or mark the trickster's cunning when he feigns
    To fear my vengeance, whom his taunts revile!
    Nay, Drances, be at ease; this hand disdains
    To take the forfeit of a soul so vile.
    Keep it, fit inmate of that breast of guile,
    And now, good Sire, if, beaten, we despair,
    If never Fate on Latin arms shall smile,
    And naught our ruined fortunes can repair,
Stretch we our craven hands, and beg the foe to spare.

LIV. "Yet oh! if aught of ancient worth remain,
    Him deem I noblest, and his end renowned,
    Brave soul! who sooner than behold such stain,
    Fell once for all, and, dying, bit the ground.
    But, if fit men and martial means abound,
    And towns and tribes, to muster at our call,
    Hath Italy; if Trojans, too, have found
    Fame dearly bought with many a brave man's fall
(For they have, too, their deaths; the storm hath swept o'er all),

LV. "Why fail we on the threshold, faint with fears,
    And sick knees tremble ere the trumpets bray?
    Time--healing Time--and long, laborious years
    Oft raise the humble; Fortune in her play
    Lifts those to-morrow, whom she lowers to-day.
    What though no aid AEtolian Arpi lends,
    Ours is Messapus, ours Tolumnius, yea,
    And all whom Latium or Laurentum sends,
Nor scanty fame, nor slow Italia's hosts attends.

LVI. "Ours, too, is brave Camilla, noble maid,
    The pride of Volscians, and she leads a band
    Of horsemen fierce, in brazen arms arrayed.
    If me the foe to single fight demand,
    And so ye will, and I alone withstand
    The common good, come danger as it may,
    Not so hath victory fled this hated hand,
    Not yet so weak is Turnus, as to stay
With such a prize unsnatched, and falter from the fray.

LVII. "Though greater than the great Achilles he,
    Though, like Achilles, Vulcan's arms he wear,
    Fain will I meet him. Lo, to you, to thee,
    Latinus, father of the bride so fair,
    I, Turnus, I, in prowess past compare,
    Devote this life. AEneas calls but me,
    So let him, rather than that Drances bear
    The smart, if death the wrathful gods decree,
Or, if 'tis glory's field, usurp the victor's fee."

LVIII. While thus, with wrangling and contentious doubt,
    They urged debate, AEneas his array
    Moved from the camp. Behold, a trusty scout
    Back, through Latinus' palace, speeds his way,
    And fills the town with tumult and dismay.
    The Trojans--see!--the Trojans,--down they swarm
    From Tiber. See the meadows far away
    Alive with foes! Rage, turmoil and alarm
In turns distract the town. "Arm," cry the young men, "arm!"

LIX. The old men weep and mutter. Clamours rend
    The startled skies, and discord reigns supreme,
    E'en as when birds on lofty woods descend
    In flocks, or in Padusa's fishful stream
    The swans sing hoarsely, and the wild-fowl scream
    Along the babbling waters. Turnus straight
    The moment snatched. "Ah! townsmen, sooth, ye deem
    This hour an hour to chatter and debate;
Sit on, and praise sweet peace, while foemen storm the gate."

LX. He spake, and from the council dashed with speed.
    "Go, Volusus," he cries, "and arm amain
    The Volscians; hither the Rutulians lead.
    Messapus, go, with horsemen in thy train,
    And Coras, with thy brother scour the plain.
    Let these all entrance at the gate forestall,
    And man the turrets; let the rest remain
    In arms, and wait my bidding." One and all,
The townsmen throng the streets, and hurry to the wall.

LXI. Then, sore distrest, the aged king proclaims
    The council closed, and for a happier tide
    Puts off debate; and oft himself he blames,
    Who welcomed not AEneas to his side,
    Nor graced his city with a Dardan's bride.
    But hark! to battle peals the clarion's call.
    These by the gate dig trenches, those provide
    Sharp stakes and stones. Along the girdling wall
Pale boys and matrons stand: the last hour cries for all.

LXII. To Pallas' rock-built temple rides the queen,
    Bearing her gifts. The matrons march in line,
    And by her side is fair Lavinia seen,
    The war's sad authoress, with down-dropt eyne.
    They, entering in, with incense fume the shrine,
    And from the threshold pour the mournful strain:
    "O strong in arms, Tritonian maid divine!
    Break thou the Phrygian robber's spear in twain,
And 'neath the gates strike down and stretch him on the plain."

LXIII. Now in hot haste fierce Turnus dons the mail,
    Eager for battle. On his breast he laced
    The corselet, rough with many a brazen scale.
    Around his legs the golden greaves he placed,
    His brow yet bare, and at his side he braced,
    The trusty sword. All golden is the glow
    Of burnished arms, as down the height in haste
    He flies exulting to the field below.
High leaps his heart, and hope anticipates the foe.

LXIV. So, free at length, his tether snapt in twain,
    Swift from his stall, in eager joy, the steed
    Bounds forth and, master of the open plain,
    Now seeks the mares that in the pastures feed,
    Now towards the well-known river scours the mead,
    Wont there to cool his glowing sides, and neighs
    With head erect and glories in his speed,
    While o'er his collar and his shoulders plays
The waving mane, flung loose in many a wandering maze.

LXV. Him meets Camilla, with her Volscian train,
    And by the gate dismounting then and there
    (Down likewise leap her followers to the plain),
    "Turnus," she cries, "if confidence can e'er
    Befit the brave, I venture and I swear
    Singly to face yon Trojans in the fray,
    And stem the Tuscan cavalry. My care
    Shall be the war's first hazards to essay;
Thou guard the walls afoot, and by the ramparts stay."

LXVI. Then he, with eyes fixt on the wondrous maid,
    "O glory of Italia, virgin bright!
    What praise can match thee? how shall thanks be paid?
    But now, since naught can daunt thee nor affright,
    Share thou my labour, and divide the fight.
    Yonder AEneas, so the news hath flown,
    So spies report, hath sent his horsemen light
    To scour the fields, while o'er the mountains' crown
Himself through devious ways is marching to the town.

LXVII. "Deep in a hollow, where the wood's dark shade
    Two cross-ways hides, an ambush I prepare,
    And armed men shall the double pass blockade.
    Thou take the shock of battle, and o'erbear
    The Tuscan horse. Messapus shall be there,
    Tiburtus' band, and Latins in array
    To aid, and thine shall be the leader's care."
    He spake, and cheered Messapus to the fray,
And Latium's federate chiefs, and spurred upon his way.

LXVIII. There lies a winding valley, fit for snares
    And stratagems, shut in on either hand
    By wooded slopes. A narrow pathway fares
    Along the gorge, and on the hill-tops, planned
    For safety, flat but hidden spreads the land.
    Rightward or leftward there is room to bear
    The shock of arms, or on the ridge to stand,
    And roll down rocks upon the foe. 'Twas there
Young Turnus, screened by woods, lies crouching in his lair.

LXIX. Meanwhile Latonia in the realms of air
    Fleet Opis, sister of her sacred train,
    Addressed in sorrowing accents, "Maiden fair,
    See how Camilla to the fatal plain
    Goes forth, in quest of battle. See, in vain
    Our arms she wears, the quiver and the bow.
    Dearest is she of all that own my reign,
    Nor new-born is Diana's love, I trow;
No fit of fondness this, or fancy known but now

LXX. "When tyrant Metabus his people's hate
    Drove from Privernum, for his deeds of shame.
    His babe he bore, the partner of his fate,
    Through war and battle, and, her mother's name
    Casmilla changed, Camilla she became.
    To lonely woods and hill-tops fain to fly,
    Fierce swords and Volscians all around, he came
    Where Amasenus, with its waves bank-high,
Athwart him foamed; so vast a deluge rent the sky.

LXXI. "Prepared to plunge, he pauses, sore assailed
    By love, and terror for a charge so dear.
    All means revolving, this at last prevailed.
    Fire-dried and knotted, an enormous spear
    Of seasoned oak the warrior chanced to bear.
    To the mid shaft the tender babe he ties,
    Swathed in the covering of a cork-tree near,
    Then lifts the load, and, poising, ere it flies,
The ponderous lance, looks up, and thus invokes the skies:

LXXII. "'O Queen of woods, Latonia, virgin fair!
    To thee my daughter I devote this day,
    Thy handmaid. See, thus early through the air
    She bears thy weapons. Make her thine, I pray,
    And safely through the doubtful air convey.'
    So prayed the sire, and nerved him for the throw,
    Then aimed, and launched the missile on its way.
    The babe forlorn, while roars the stream below,
Link'd to the shaft, is borne across the current's flow.

LXXIII. "In plunges Metabus, the foemen near,
    And Trivia's gift, safe landing from the wave,
    Plucks from the grass,--the maiden and the spear.
    No town is his, to shelter and to save,
    His savage mood no shelter deigns to crave.
    A shepherd's life on lonely hills he leads,
    In tangled covert, or in woodland cave.
    The milk of beasts supplies his daughter's needs,
