the Romans anticipated the charge of the chariots by a charge of their
own and with a great clamor they rushed straight at them and repulsed
them, so that most of these vehicles turned in the direction of the
elephants. In their backward career they threw their own contingent
into confusion,--for their erratic course terrified and dispersed the
men marshaled close to them,--and a heavy rain which now came up
rendered weak the detachment of archers and slingers. A heavy,
all-enveloping mist succeeded, which was of no hindrance to the
Romans, who had the upper hand and were fighting at close range; but
in the case of their opponents, who were in dread and employed
cavalry and archers for the most part, it made it out of the question
to see which way to shoot their arrows and caused them to stumble over
one another, like men in the dark. Nevertheless Antiochus developed
sufficient power, by means of his armored cavalry, to rout the
antagonists directly confronting him and to advance in pursuit of them
as far as their camp. Indeed, he would have taken it, had not Marcus
AEmilius Lepidus, who was charged with guarding it, killed the first
Romans that came in after they had refused to heed his exhortations to
check their flight. As a result the rest of the party turned back and
the commander himself made a sortie with members of the garrison who
were free from the prevailing demoralization, and their united efforts
repulsed Antiochus. While this action was taking place, Zeuxis had
assailed the ramparts in another quarter, had succeeded in getting
within them, and continued to pillage until Lepidus became aware of it
and came to the rescue of his own interests. At the same time Scipio
captured the camp of Antiochus, wherein he found many human beings,
many horses, baggage animals, silver and gold coins, elephants, and a
number of precious objects besides. Antiochus after this defeat at
once retired into Syria, and the Asiatic Greeks made common cause with
the Romans.

After this, upon overtures made by Antiochus, an armistice was
arranged. Africanus was well disposed toward him for his son's sake,
and the consul, too, did not want to leave the victory to be grasped
by his successor, now approaching; consequently they laid upon
Antiochus conditions no more severe than those they had originally
set, before the battle. [Sidenote: B.C. 189 (_a.u._ 565)] Indeed,
Gnaeus Manlius who succeeded them in office was not pleased with the
agreement reached, and he made additional demands upon the king,
requiring him besides to give hostages, one of whom should be his son
Antiochus, and to deliver up all the deserters, among whom was
Hannibal. Antiochus reluctantly yielded obedience on all points: to
give up Hannibal, however, was out of his power, since that prince had
taken seasonable refuge with Prusias, king of Bithynia. On these terms
Antiochus was able to send envoys to Rome and effect a cessation of
hostilities. Lucius Scipio received praise for his victory, and it
gave him the title of Asiaticus in the same way as his brother had
been called Africanus for conquering Carthage, which had possessed the
most considerable power in Africa.

These brothers who had proved themselves men of such valor and as a
result of excellence had attained such a height of reputation were not
long afterward brought to court and handed over to the populace.
Lucius was condemned on the suspicion of his having appropriated no
inconsiderable share of the spoil, and Africanus nominally for having
made the conditions lighter out of gratitude for kindness shown his
son; (the true cause of his conviction was jealousy). [Sidenote: FRAG.
60] THAT THEY COULD NOT JUSTLY BE CHARGED WITH WRONGDOING IS MADE
PLAIN BOTH BY OTHER EVIDENCE AND MOST OF ALL BY THE FACT THAT WHEN THE
PROPERTY OF ASIATICUS WAS CONFISCATED IT WAS FOUND TO CONSIST MERELY
OF HIS ORIGINAL INHERITANCE, AND THAT THOUGH AFRICANUS RETIRED TO
LITERNUM AND ABODE THERE TO THE END, NO ONE EVER AGAIN PASSED SENTENCE
OF CONDEMNATION UPON HIM.

Manlius all this time was engaged in winning over Pisidia, Lycaonia,
and Pamphylia, and a large district of Galatia in Asia. For there
exists in that region too a race of Gauls which broke off from the
European stock. Years ago with their king, Brennus, at their head they
overran Greece and Thrace, and crossing thence to Bithynia they
detached certain portions of Phrygia, Paphlagonia, Mysia adjacent to
Olympus, and Cappadocia, and took up their residence in them; and they
constitute to-day a separate nation bearing the name of Gauls. This
people caused Manlius trouble, but he managed to overcome them too,
capturing their city Ancyra by assault and gaining control of the rest
of the towns by capitulation. This effected, he set sail for home
after he had received a large price for peace from Ariarathes, king of
Cappadocia.

IX, 21.--The AEtolians when they had sent ambassadors to Rome the
second time in regard to peace themselves raised the standard of
rebellion. Hence the Romans immediately dismissed the ambassadors and
referred the conduct of affairs in Greece to Marcus Fulvius. He set
out first for the large city of Ambracia (it had once been the royal
residence of Pyrrhus and was now occupied by the AEtolians) and
proceeded to besiege it. So the AEtolians held a conference with him
about peace, but finding him disinclined to a truce they sent a part
of their army into Ambracia. The Romans undertook to capture the town
by an underground passage and pushed their mine straight forward,
temporarily eluding the notice of the besieged party; but the latter
began to suspect the true state of affairs when the excavated earth
attained some dimensions. As they were not aware in what direction the
trench was being dug, they kept applying a bronze shield to the
surface of the ground all about the circuit of the walls. By means of
the resonance they found out the place and went to work in their turn
to dig a tunnel from inside and approached the Romans, with whom they
battled in obscurity. Finally they devised the following sort of
defence. They filled a huge jar with feathers and put fire in it. To
this they attached a bronze cover that had a number of holes bored in
it. Then, after carrying the jar into the mine and turning the mouth
of it toward the enemy, they inserted a bellows in the bottom, and by
blowing this bellows with vigor they caused a tremendous amount of
unpleasant smoke, such as feathers would naturally create, to pour
out, so that not one of the Romans could endure it. Hence the Romans
in despair of succeeding made a truce and raised the siege. When they
had agreed to treat, the AEtolians also changed their course and
secured an armistice. Subsequently they obtained a peace from the
People by the gift of considerable money and many hostages. Fulvius
induced Cephallenia to capitulate and reduced to order the
Peloponnesus, which was in a state of factional turmoil.

[Sidenote: B.C. 187 (_a.u._ 567)] After a little, in the consulship of
Gaius Flaminius and AEmilius Lepidus, Antiochus died and his son
Seleucus succeeded him. Much later, at the demise of Seleucus, the
Antiochus who spent some time as a hostage in Rome became king.
[Sidenote: B.C. 183 (_a.u._ 571)] And Philip had courage enough to
revolt because he had been deprived of some towns in Thessaly and of
AEnus and Maronea besides, but he was unable to do so on account of his
age and what had happened to his sons.--Some Gauls crossed the Alps
and desired to found a city to the south of the mountains. Marcus
Marcellus took away their arms and everything that they had brought:
the Romans in the capital, however, upon receiving an embassy from
them restored everything on condition that they should at once retire.

These years also saw the death of Hannibal. Envoys had been sent from
Rome to Prusias, monarch of Bithynia, and a part of their errand was
to make him give up Hannibal, who was at his court. The Carthaginian
had advance information of the facts and being unable to escape
committed suicide. [Sidenote: cp. FRAG. 64.] AN ORACLE HAD ONCE
ANNOUNCED TO HIM THAT HE SHOULD DIE IN THE LAND OF LIBYSSA, AND HE WAS
EXPECTING TO DIE IN LIBYA, HIS NATIVE COUNTRY, BUT, AS IT HAPPENED,
HIS DEMISE OCCURRED WHILE HE CHANCED TO BE STAYING IN A CERTAIN PLACE
CALLED LIBYSSA. Scipio Africanus also died at this time.


_(BOOK 20, BOISSEVAIN.)_

[Sidenote: B.C. 179 (_a.u._ 575)] IX, 22.--Philip, king of Macedonia,
had put to death his son Demetrius and was about to slay his other son
Perseus, when death overtook him. Because Demetrius had gained the
affection of the Roman people through his sojourn as hostage and
because he himself and the rest of the Macedonian people hoped that he
would secure the kingdom after Philip was done with it, Perseus, who
was his elder, became jealous of him and falsely reported him to be
plotting against his father. Thus Demetrius was forced to drink poison
and perished. Philip not long after ascertained the truth and desired
to take measures against Perseus; he did not, however, possess
sufficient strength and death overtook him. Perseus succeeded to the
kingdom. The Romans confirmed his claims to it and renewed the compact
of friendship enjoyed by his father.

In the period immediately following some events of importance took
place, yet they were not of so vital a character that one should deem
them worthy of record. Still later Perseus put himself in the position
of an enemy to the Romans, and in order to delay actual warfare until
he should reach a state of preparation he sent envoys to Rome
presumably to make a defence on the charges which were being pressed
against him. These messengers the Romans would not receive within the
wall, but they transacted business with them in the space before the
city; and no other answer was vouchsafed them than that they would
send a consul with whom he might confer on whatever topics he pleased.
They also caused them to depart the same day, having given them guides
to prevent their associating with anybody. And Perseus was forbidden
in the future to set foot on the soil of Italy.

The Romans next sent out Gnaeus Sicinius, a praetor, with a small force
(they had not yet made ready their greater armament) and Perseus made
a tentative invasion of Thessaly in which he won over the greater part
of that country. [Sidenote: B.C. 171 (_a.u._ 583)] When spring opened
they sent Licinius Crassus against him as well as a praetor, Gaius
Lucretius, in charge of the fleet. The latter first encountered
Perseus near Larissa and was worsted in a cavalry skirmish: later,
though, he got the best of him and Perseus accordingly retreated into
Macedonia. As for Crassus, he assailed the Greek cities which were
held in subjection by Philip and was repulsed from the majority of
them, although he did get possession of a few. Some he razed to the
ground and sold the captives. When the inhabitants of Rome learned
these details, they became indignant and later they imposed a money
fine on Crassus, liberated the captured cities, and bought back from
the purchasers such of their inhabitants as had been sold and were
then found in Italy.

So fared the Romans in these undertakings, but in the war against
Perseus as a whole they suffered many great reverses and their
fortunes at many points were at a low ebb. Perseus occupied the
greater part of Epirus and Thessaly, having gathered a large body of
troops. As a measure of defence against the Romans' elephants he had
trained a phalanx of heavy-armed warriors whose shields and helmets he
had taken care should be studded with sharp iron nails. Also, in order
to make sure that the beasts should not prove a source of terror to
the horses he constructed images of elephants that were smeared with
some kind of ointment to give them a fearful odor and were frightful
both to see and to hear (for a mechanical device enabled them to emit
a roar resembling thunder); and he kept continually leading the horses
up to these representations until they took courage. Perseus, then, as
a result of all this had acquired great confidence and entertained
hope that he might surpass Alexander in glory and in the size of his
domain; the people of Rome [Sidenote: B.C. 169 (_a.u._ 585)] when they
learned this sent out with speed Marcius Philippus, who was consul.
He, on reaching the camp in Thessaly, drilled the Romans and the
allies so that Perseus, becoming afraid, remained quietly in Dium of
Macedonia and close to Tempe, and continued to keep watch of the pass.
Philippus, encouraged by this behavior of his, crossed the mountain
range in the center and occupied some possessions of Perseus. But as
he was progressing toward Pydna he fell short of provisions and turned
back to Thessaly. Perseus gained boldness anew, recovered the places
that Philippus had occupied, and with his fleet damaged the Romans at
numerous points. He also secured allies [Sidenote: FRAG. 65^1] AND
HOPED TO EJECT THE ROMANS FROM GREECE ALTOGETHER, BUT THROUGH HIS
EXCESSIVE AND INOPPORTUNE PARSIMONY AND THE CONSEQUENT CONTEMPT OF HIS
ALLIES HE BECAME WEAK ONCE MORE. SO SOON AS ROMAN INFLUENCE WAS
DECLINING SLIGHTLY AND HIS OWN WAS INCREASING, HE WAS FILLED WITH
SCORN AND THOUGHT HE HAD NO FURTHER NEED OF HIS ALLIES, AND WOULD NOT
GIVE THEM THE MONEY WHICH HE HAD OFFERED. THE ZEAL OF SOME ACCORDINGLY
BECAME BLUNTED AND OTHERS ABANDONED HIM ENTIRELY, WHEREUPON HE WAS SO
OVERWHELMED BY DESPAIR AS ACTUALLY TO SUE FOR PEACE. AND HE WOULD HAVE
OBTAINED IT THROUGH EUMENES BUT FOR THE PRESENCE OF RHODIANS ALSO IN
THE EMBASSY. THEY, BY ADOPTING A HAUGHTY TONE WITH THE ROMANS,
PREVENTED HIM FROM OBTAINING PEACE.

[Sidenote: B.C. 168 (_a.u._ 586)] IX, 23.--At this point the war waged
against him was entrusted to AEmilius Paulus, now for the second time
consul. He rapidly traversed the distance separating him from Thessaly
and having first set the affairs of the soldiers in order forced his
way through Tempe, which was being guarded by only a few men, and
marched against Perseus. The latter had ere this erected breastworks
along the river Elpeus which intervened, had occupied and rendered
impassable by means of stone walls and palisades and buildings all the
ground between Olympus and the sea, and was encouraged by the lack of
water in the place. Yet even so the consul sought to effect a passage
and found a means of overcoming the prevailing drought. By piercing
the sand bed at the foot of Olympus he found water that was delicious
as well as drinkable.--Meanwhile envoys of the Rhodians reached him
animated by the same insolence which they had displayed on their
former embassy to Rome. He would make no statement to them beyond
saying that he would return an answer in a few days, and dismissed
them.--Since he could accomplish nothing by direct assault, but
learned that the mountains were traversable here and there, he sent a
portion of his army toward that pass across them which was the more
difficult of approach, to seize opportune points along the route (on
account of its difficulty of access it had an extremely small guard);
and he himself with the remainder of his army attacked Perseus that
the latter might not entertain any suspicion which might lead to his
guarding the mountains with especial care. After this, when the
heights had been occupied, he set out by night for the mountains and
by passing unnoticed at some points and employing force at others he
crossed them. Perseus on learning it became afraid that his enemy
might assail him from the rear or even get control of Pydna before he
could (for the Roman fleet was simultaneously sailing along the
coast), and he abandoned his fortification near the river and
hastening to Pydna encamped in front of the town. Paulus, too, came
there, but instead of immediately beginning an engagement they delayed
for a number of days. Paulus had found out prior to the event that the
moon was about to suffer an eclipse, and after collecting his army on
the evening when the eclipse was due to occur gave the men notice of
what would happen and warned them not to let it disturb them at all.
So the Romans on beholding the eclipse looked for no evil to come from
it, but it made an impression of terror upon the Macedonians and they
thought that the prodigy had a bearing on the cause of Perseus. While
each side was in this frame of mind an entirely accidental occurrence
the next day threw them into a fierce conflict and put an end to the
war. One of the Roman pack-animals had fallen into the water from
which a supply was being drawn, and the Macedonians laid hold of him,
while the water-carriers in turn tightened their grasp. At first they
fought by themselves; then the remainder of the forces gradually
issued from the respective camps to the assistance of their own men
and everybody on both sides became engaged. A disordered but sharp
conflict ensued in which the Romans were victorious and pursuing the
Macedonians as far as the sea slaughtered numbers of them by their own
efforts and allowed the fleet, which was drawing inshore, to slay
numbers more. Not one of them would have been left alive but for the
timely succor of night (for the battle had raged during the late
afternoon).

Perseus consequently made his escape to Amphipolis, where he intended
to rally the survivors and reorganize the campaign; but as nobody came
to him save Cretan mercenaries and he learned that Pydna and other
cities had espoused the Roman cause, he removed thence, and after
putting aboard some vessels all the money that he was carrying he
sailed away by night to Samothrace. Before long he ascertained that
Octavius was approaching at the head of his fleet and that Paulus was
in Amphipolis; so he sent him a letter requesting permission to confer
about terms. Since, however, he described himself in the letter as
"king", he did not get any answer. Subsequently he despatched a letter
without any such appellation contained in it and was granted a
conference to consider the question of peace, but the victor declared
that he would not sanction any conditions that did not include
Perseus's surrender of his person and all his possessions to the
Romans' keeping. Hence they failed to come to an agreement. [Sidenote:
FRAG. 65^3] AFTER THIS A DEMAND WAS MADE UPON PERSEUS BY THE ROMANS
FOR THE SURRENDER OF ONE EVANDER, A CRETAN, WHO HAD ASSISTED HIM IN
MANY SCHEMES AGAINST THEM AND WAS MOST FAITHFUL TO HIM. THE PRINCE,
FEARING THAT HE MIGHT DECLARE ALL THE INTRIGUES TO WHICH HE HAD BEEN
PRIVY, DID NOT DELIVER HIM BUT SECRETLY SLEW HIM AND HAD IT RUMORED
THAT THE MAN HAD PERISHED BY HIS OWN HAND. THEN THE ASSOCIATES OF
PERSEUS, FEARING HIS TREACHERY (for they were not ignorant of what had
occurred), BEGAN TO DESERT HIS STANDARD. Perseus, then, being afraid
that he should be delivered up to the Romans tried one night to escape
by flight and might have taken himself away unobserved to Cotys, a
Thracian potentate, but for the fact that the Cretans abandoned him.
They placed the money in boats and weighed anchor for home. So he
remained there for some days with Philip, one of his sons, hidden from
sight, but on ascertaining that the rest of his children and his
retinue had fallen into the hands of Octavius [Sidenote: FRAG. 65^4]
HE ALLOWED HIMSELF TO BE FOUND. UPON HIS BEING BROUGHT TO AMPHIPOLIS
PAULUS DID HIM NO INJURY, BUT BOTH ENTERTAINED HIM AND HAD HIM SIT AT
HIS TABLE, KEEPING HIM, LIKEWISE, ALTHOUGH A PRISONER, UNCONFINED, AND
SHOWING HIM COURTESY. After this Paulus returned through Epirus to
Italy.

IX, 24.--About the same time Lucius Anicius, a praetor sent to conduct
operations against Gentius, both conquered those who withstood him and
pursued Gentius, when he fled, to Scodra (where his palace was
located) and shut him up there. The place was built on a spur of the
mountain and had deep ravines containing boiling torrents winding
about it, besides being girt by a steadfast wall; and so the Roman
commander's siege of it would have come to naught, if Gentius
presuming greatly upon his own power had not voluntarily advanced to
battle. This act gave the control of his entire domain to Anicius, who
then proceeded, before Paulus could arrive, to Epirus and tamed the
quarrelsome pride of that district as well.

The Romans of the capital by some vague report heard of the victory of
Paulus on the fourth day after the battle, but they placed no sure
confidence in it. Then letters were brought from Paulus regarding his
success and they were mightily pleased and plumed themselves not
merely upon having vanquished Perseus and acquired Macedonia but upon
having beaten the renowned Philip of old time and Alexander himself
together with all that empire which he had held. When Paulus reached
