'I was not slow to perceive the peril with which these fears and
apprehensions, which rapidly became general, threatened my plans. I
strove to keep the men employed, and to occupy their thoughts as far as
possible with the enemy and his proceedings; but I soon found that even
here a danger lurked; for Maignan, coming to me by-and-by with a
grave face, told me that one of Bruhl's men had ventured out, and was
parleying with the guard on our side of the court. I went at once and
broke the matter off, threatening to shoot the fellow if he was not
under cover before I counted ten. But the scared, sultry faces he left
behind him told me that the mischief was done, and I could think of no
better remedy for it than to give M. d'Agen a hint, and station him at
the outer gate with his pistols ready.

The question of provisions, too, threatened to become a serious one; I
dared not leave to procure them myself, nor could I trust any of my
men with the mission. In fact the besiegers were rapidly becoming the
besieged. Intent on the rising haze and their own terrors, they forgot
all else. Vigilance and caution were thrown to the winds. The stillness
of the valley, its isolation, the distant woods that encircled us and
hung quivering in the heated air, all added to the panic. Despite all
my efforts and threats, the men gradually left their posts, and getting
together in little parties at the gate, worked themselves up to such a
pitch of dread that by two hours after noon they were fit for any folly;
and at the mere cry of 'plague!' would have rushed to their horses and
ridden in every direction.

It was plain that I could depend for useful service on myself and three
others only--of whom, to his credit be it said, Simon Fleix was one.
Seeing this, I was immensely relieved when I presently heard that
Fresnoy was again seeking to speak with me. I was no longer, it will be
believed, for standing on formalities; but glad to waive in silence the
punctilio on which I had before insisted, and anxious to afford him no
opportunity of marking the slackness which prevailed among my men, I
hastened to meet him at the door of the courtyard where Maignan had
detained him.

I might have spared my pains, however. I had no more than saluted him
and exchanged the merest preliminaries before I saw that he was in a
state of panic far exceeding that of my following. His coarse face,
which had never been prepossessing, was mottled and bedabbled with
sweat; his bloodshot eyes, when they met mine, wore the fierce yet
terrified expression of an animal caught in a trap. Though his first
word was an oath, sworn for the purpose of raising his courage, the
bully's bluster was gone. He spoke in a low voice, and his hands shook;
and for a penny-piece I saw he would have bolted past me and taken his
chance in open flight.

I judged from his first words, uttered, as I have said, with an oath,
that he was aware of his state. 'M. de Marsac,' he said, whining like a
cur, 'you know me, to be a man of courage.'

I needed nothing after this to assure me that he meditated something of
the basest; and I took care how I answered him. 'I have known you stiff
enough upon occasions,' I replied drily. 'And then, again, I have known
you not so stiff, M. Fresnoy.'

'Only when you were in question,' he muttered with another oath. 'But
flesh and blood cannot stand this. You could not yourself. Between
him and them I am fairly worn out. Give me good terms--good terms, you
understand, M. de Marsac?' he whispered eagerly, sinking his voice still
lower, 'and you shall have all you want.'

'Your lives, and liberty to go where you please,' I answered coldly.
'The two ladies to be first given up to me uninjured. Those are the
terms.'

'But for me?' he said anxiously.

'For you? The same as the others,' I retorted. 'Or I will make a
distinction for old acquaintance sake, M. Fresnoy; and if the ladies
have aught to complain of, I will hang you first.'

He tried to bluster and hold out for a sum of money, or at least for
his horse to be given up to him. But I had made up my mind to reward my
followers with a present of a horse apiece; and I was besides well aware
that this was only an afterthought on his part, and that he had fully
decided to yield. I stood fast, therefore. The result justified my
firmness, for he presently agreed to surrender on those terms.

'Ay, but M. de Bruhl?' I said, desiring to learn clearly whether he had
authority to treat for all. 'What of him?'

He looked at me impatiently. 'Come and see!' he said, with an ugly
sneer.

'No, no, my friend,' I answered, shaking my head warily. 'That is not
according to rule. You are the surrendering party, and it is for you to
trust us. Bring out the ladies, that I may have speech with them, and
then I will draw off my men.'

'Nom de Dieu!' he cried hoarsely, with so much fear and rage in his face
that I recoiled from him. 'That is just what I cannot do.'

'You cannot?' I rejoined with a sudden thrill of horror. 'Why not? why
not, man?' And in the excitement of the moment, conceiving the idea that
the worst had happened to the women, I pushed him back with so much fury
that he laid his hand on his sword.

'Confound you!' he stuttered, 'stand back! It is not that, I tell you!
Mademoiselle is safe and sound, and madame, if she had her senses, would
be sound too. It is not our fault if she is not. But I have not got the
key of the rooms. It is in Bruhl's pocket, I tell you!'

'Oh!' I made answer drily. 'And Bruhl?'

'Hush, man,' Fresnoy replied, wiping the perspiration from his brow, and
bringing his pallid, ugly face, near to mine, 'he has got the plague!'

I stared at him for a moment in silence; which he was the first to
break. 'Hush!' he muttered again, laying a trembling hand on my arm,
'if the men knew it--and not seeing him they are beginning to suspect
it--they would rise on us. The devil himself could not keep them here.
Between him and them I am on a razor's edge. Madame is with him, and
the door is locked. Mademoiselle is in a room upstairs, and the door
is locked. And he has the keys. What can I do? What can I do, man?' he
cried, his voice hoarse with terror and dismay.

'Get the keys,' I said instinctively.

'What?' From him?' he muttered, with an irrepressible shudder, which
shook his bloated cheeks. 'God forbid I should see him! It takes
stout men infallibly. I should be dead by night! By God, I should!' he
continued, whining. 'Now you are not stout, M. de Marsac. If you will
come with me I will draw off the men from that part; and you may go in
and get the key from him.'

His terror, which surpassed all feeling, and satisfied me without doubt
that he was in earnest, was so intense that it could not fail to infect
me. I felt my face, as I looked into his, grow to the same hue. I
trembled as he did and grew sick. For if there is a word which blanches
the soldier's cheek and tries his heart more than another, it is the
name of the disease which travels in the hot noonday, and, tainting the
strongest as he rides in his pride, leaves him in a few hours a poor
mass of corruption. The stoutest and the most reckless fear it; nor
could I, more than another, boast myself indifferent to it, or think of
its presence without shrinking. But the respect in which a man of birth
holds himself saves him from the unreasoning fear which masters the
vulgar; and in a moment I recovered myself, and made up my mind what it
behoved me to do.

'Wait awhile,' I said sternly, 'and I will come with you.'

He waited accordingly, though with manifest impatience, while I sent
for M. d'Agen, and communicated to him what I was about to do. I did not
think it necessary to enter into details, or to mention Bruhl's state,
for some of the men were well in hearing. I observed that the young
gentleman received my directions with a gloomy and dissatisfied air. But
I had become by this time so used to his moods, and found myself so
much mistaken in his character, that I scarcely gave the matter a second
thought. I crossed the court with Fresnoy, and in a moment had mounted
the outside staircase and passed through the heavy doorway.

The moment I entered, I was forced to do Fresnoy the justice of
admitting that he had not come to me before he was obliged. The three
men who were on guard inside tossed down their weapons at sight of me,
while a fourth, who was posted at a neighbouring window, hailed me with
a cry of relief. From the moment I crossed the threshold the defence was
practically at an end. I might, had I chosen or found it consistent with
honour, have called in my following and secured the entrance. Without
pausing, however, I passed on to the foot of a gloomy stone staircase
winding up between walls of rough masonry; and here Fresnoy stood on one
side and stopped. He pointed upwards with a pale face and muttered,'The
door on the left.'

Leaving him there watching me as I went upwards, I mounted slowly to the
landing, and by the light of an arrow-slit which dimly lit the ruinous
place found the door he had described, and tried it with my hand. It
was locked, but I heard someone moan in the room, and a step crossed
the floor, as if he or another came to the door and listened. I knocked,
hearing my heart beat in the silence. At last a voice quite strange to
me cried, 'Who is it?'

'A friend,' I muttered, striving to dull my voice that they might not
hear me below.

'A friend!' the bitter answer came. 'Go! You have made a mistake! We
have no friends.'

'It is I, M. de Marsac,' I rejoined, knocking more imperatively. 'I
would see M. de Bruhl. I must see him.'

The person inside, at whose identity I could now make a guess, uttered
a low exclamation, and still seemed to hesitate. But on my repeating my
demand I heard a rusty bolt withdrawn, and Madame de Bruhl, opening the
door a few inches, showed her face in the gap. 'What do you want?' she
murmured jealously.

Prepared as I was to see her, I was shocked by the change in her
appearance, a change which even that imperfect light failed to hide. Her
blue eyes had grown larger and harder, and there were dark marks under
them. Her face, once so brilliant, was grey and pinched; her hair had
lost its golden lustre. 'What do you want?' she repeated, eyeing me
fiercely.

'To see him,' I answered.

'You know?' she muttered. 'You know that he--'

I nodded.

And you still want to come in? My God! Swear you will not hurt him?'

'Heaven forbid!' I said; and on that she held the door open that I might
enter. But I was not half-way across the room before she had passed me,
and was again between me and the wretched makeshift pallet. Nay, when
I stood and looked down at him, as he moaned and rolled in senseless
agony, with livid face and distorted features (which the cold grey light
of that miserable room rendered doubly appalling), she hung over him and
fenced him from me: so that looking on him and her, and remembering how
he had treated her, and why he came to be in this place, I felt unmanly
tears rise to my eyes. The room was still a prison, a prison with broken
mortar covering the floor and loopholes for windows; but the captive was
held by other chains than those of force. When she might have gone free,
her woman's love surviving all that he had done to kill it, chained
her to his side with fetters which old wrongs and present danger were
powerless to break.

It was impossible that I could view a scene so strange without feelings
of admiration as well as pity; or without forgetting for a while, in
my respect for Madame de Bruhl's devotion, the risk which had seemed so
great to me on the stairs. I had come simply for a purpose of my own,
and with no thought of aiding him who lay here. But so great, as I
have noticed on other occasions, is the power of a noble example, that,
before I knew it, I found myself wondering what I could do to help this
man, and how I could relieve madame, in the discharge of offices which
her husband had as little right to expect at her hands as at mine. At
the mere sound of the word Plague I knew she would be deserted in this
wilderness by all, or nearly all; a reflection which suggested to me
that I should first remove mademoiselle to a distance, and then consider
what help I could afford here.

I was about to tell her the purpose with which I had come when a
paroxysm more than ordinarily violent, and induced perhaps by the
excitement of my presence--though he seemed beside himself--seized him,
and threatened to tax her powers to the utmost. I could not look on and
see her spend herself in vain; and almost before I knew what I was doing
I had laid my hands on him and after a brief struggle thrust him back
exhausted on the couch.

She looked at me so strangely after that that in the half-light which
the loopholes afforded I tried in vain to read her meaning. 'Why did you
come?' she cried at length, breathing quickly. 'You, of all men? Why did
you come? He was no friend of yours, Heaven knows!'

'No, madame, nor I of his,' I answered bitterly, with a sudden revulsion
of feeling.

'Then why are you here?' she retorted.

'I could not send one of my men,' I answered. 'And I want the key of the
room above.'

At the mention of that the room above--she flinched as if I had struck
her, and looked as strangely at Bruhl as she had before looked at me. No
doubt the reference to Mademoiselle de la Vire recalled to her mind
her husband's wild passion for the girl, which for the moment she had
forgotten. Nevertheless she did not speak, though her face turned very
pale. She stooped over the couch, such as it was, and searching his
clothes, presently stood up, and held out the key to me. 'Take it, and
let her out,' she said with a forced smile. 'Take it up yourself, and do
it. You have done so much for her it is right that you should do this.'

I took the key, thanking her with more haste than thought, and turned
towards the door, intending to go straight up to the floor above and
release mademoiselle. My hand was already on the door, which madame, I
found, had left ajar in the excitement of my entrance, when I heard her
step behind me. The next instant she touched me on the shoulder. 'You
fool!' she exclaimed, her eyes flashing, 'would you kill her?' Would you
go from him to her, and take the plague to her? God forgive me, it was
in my mind to send you. And men are such puppets you would have gone!'

I trembled with horror, as much at my stupidity as at her craft. For she
was right: in another moment I should have gone, and comprehension and
remorse would have come too late. As it was, in my longing at once
to reproach her for her wickedness and to thank her for her timely
repentance, I found no words; but I turned away in silence and went out
with a full heart.



CHAPTER XXX. STRICKEN.

Outside the door, standing in the dimness of the landing, I found M.
d'Agen. At any other time I should have been the first to ask him why he
had left the post which I had assigned to him. But at the moment I was
off my balance, and his presence suggested nothing more than that here
was the very person who could best execute my wishes. I held out the key
to him at arms length, and bade him release Mademoiselle de la Vire, who
was in the room above, and escort her out of the castle. 'Do not let
her linger here,' I continued urgently. 'Take her to the place where we
found the wood-cutters. You need fear no resistance.'

'But Bruhl?' he said, as he took the key mechanically from me.

'He is out of the question,' I answered in a low voice. 'We have done
with him. He has the plague.'

He uttered a sharp exclamation. 'What of madame, then?' he muttered.

'She is with him,' I said.

He cried out suddenly at that, sucking in his breath, as I have known
men do in pain. And but that I drew back he would have laid his hand on
my sleeve. 'With him?' he stammered. 'How is that?'

'Why, man, where else should she be?' I answered, forgetting that the
sight of those two together had at first surprised me also, as well as
moved me. 'Or who else should be with him? He is her husband.'

He stared at me for a moment at that, and then he turned slowly away
and began to go up; while I looked after him, gradually thinking out the
clue to his conduct. Could it be that it was not mademoiselle attracted
him, but Madame de Bruhl?

And with that hint I understood it all. I saw in a moment; the
conclusion to which he had come on hearing of the presence of madame
in my room. In my room at night! The change had dated from that time;
instead of a careless, light-spirited youth he had become in a moment
a morose and restive churl, as difficult to manage as an unbroken colt.
Quite clearly I saw now the meaning of the change; why he had shrunk
from me, and why all intercourse between us had been so difficult; and
so constrained.

I laughed to think how he had deceived himself, and how nearly I had
come to deceiving myself also. And what more I might have thought I
do not know, for my meditations were cut short at this point by a loud
outcry below, which, beginning in one or two sharp cries of alarm and
warning, culminated quickly in a roar of anger and dismay.

Fancying I recognised Maignan's voice, I ran down the stairs, seeking
a loophole whence I could command the scene; but finding none, and
becoming more and more alarmed, I descended to the court, which I
found, to my great surprise, as empty and silent as an old battle-field.
Neither on the enemy's side nor on ours was a single man to be seen.
With growing dismay I sprang across the court and darted through the
outer tower, only to find that and the gateway equally unguarded. Nor
was it until I had passed through the latter, and stood on the brow of
the slope, which we had had to clamber with so much toil, that I learned
what was amiss.

Far below me a string of men, bounding and running at speed, streamed
down the hill towards the horses. Some were shouting, some running
silently, with their elbows at their sides and their scabbards leaping
against their calves. The horses stood tethered in a ring near the edge
of the wood, and by some oversight had been left unguarded. The foremost
runner I made out to be Fresnoy; but a number of his men were close
upon him, and then after an interval came Maignan, waving his blade and
emitting frantic threats with every stride. Comprehending at once
that Fresnoy and his following, rendered desperate by panic and the
prospective loss of their horses, had taken advantage of my absence and
given Maignan the slip, I saw I could do nothing save watch the result
of the struggle.

This was not long delayed. Maignan's threats, which seemed to me mere
waste of breath, were not without effect on those he followed. There
is nothing which demoralises men like flight. Troopers who have stood
charge after charge while victory was possible will fly like sheep, and
like sheep allow themselves to be butchered, when they have once turned
the back. So it was here. Many of Fresnoy's men were stout fellows,
but having started to run they had no stomach for fighting. Their fears
caused Maignan to appear near, while the horses seemed distant; and one
after another they turned aside and made like rabbits for the wood.
Only Fresnoy, who had taken care to have the start of all, kept on,
and, reaching the horses, cut the rope which tethered the nearest, and
vaulted nimbly on its back. Safely seated there, he tried to frighten
the others into breaking loose; but not succeeding at the first attempt,
and seeing Maignan, breathing vengeance, coming up with him, he started
his horse, a bright bay, and rode off laughing along the edge of the
wood.

Fully content with the result--for our carelessness might have cost
us very dearly--I was about to turn away when I saw that Maignan had
mounted and was preparing to follow. I stayed accordingly to see the
end, and from my elevated position enjoyed a first-rate view of the race
which ensued. Both were heavy weights, and at first Maignan gained no
ground. But when a couple of hundred yards had been covered Fresnoy had
the ill-luck to blunder into some heavy ground, and this enabling his
pursuer, who had time to avoid it, to get within two-score paces of him,
the race became as exciting as I could wish. Slowly and surely Maignan,
who had chosen the Cid, reduced the distance between them to a score of
paces--to fifteen--to ten. Then Fresnoy, becoming alarmed, began to look
over his shoulder and ride in earnest. He had no whip, and I saw him
raise his sheathed sword, and strike his beast on the flank. It sprang
forward, and appeared for a few strides to be holding its own. Again he
repeated the blow but this time with a different result. While his hand
was still in the air, his horse stumbled, as it seemed to me, made a
desperate effort to recover itself, fell headlong and rolled over and
over.

Something in the fashion of the fall, which reminded me of the mishap I
had suffered on the way to Chize led me to look more particularly at the
horse as it rose trembling to its feet, and stood with drooping head.
Sure enough, a careful glance enabled me, even at that distance, to
identify it as Matthew's bay--the trick-horse. Shading my eyes, and
gazing on the scene with increased interest, I saw Maignan, who had
dismounted, stoop over something on the ground, and again after an
interval stand upright.

But Fresnoy did not rise. Nor was it without awe that, guessing what had
happened to him, I remembered how he had used this very horse to befool
me; how heartlessly he had abandoned Matthew, its owner; and by what
marvellous haps--which men call chances--Providence had brought it to
this place, and put it in his heart to choose it out of a score which
stood ready to his hand!

I was right. The man's neck was broken. He was quite dead. Maignan
passed the word to one, and he to another, and so it reached me on the
hill. It did not fail to awaken memories both grave and wholesome.
I thought of St. Jean d'Angely, of Chize, of the house in the Ruelle
d'Arcy; then in the midst of these reflections I heard voices, and
turned to find mademoiselle, with M. d'Agen behind me.

Her hand was still bandaged, and her dress, which she had not changed
since leaving Blois, was torn and stained with mud. Her hair was in
disorder; she walked with a limp. Fatigue and apprehension had stolen
the colour from her cheeks, and in a word she looked, when I turned, so
wan and miserable that for a moment I feared the plague had seized her.

The instant, however, that she caught sight of me a wave of colour
invaded, not her cheeks only, but her brow and neck. From her hair
to the collar of her gown she was all crimson. For a second she stood
gazing at me, and then, as I saluted her, she sprang forward. Had I not
stepped back she would have taken my hands.

My heart so overflowed with joy at this sight, that in the certainty her
blush gave me I was fain to toy with my happiness. All jealousy of M.
d'Agen was forgotten; only I thought it well not to alarm her by telling
her what I knew of the Bruhls. 'Mademoiselle,' I said earnestly, bowing,
but retreating from her, 'I thank God for your escape. One of your
enemies lies helpless here, and another is dead yonder.'

'It is not of my enemies I am thinking,' she answered quickly, 'but of
God, of whom you rightly remind me; and then of my friends.'

'Nevertheless,' I answered as quickly, 'I beg you will not stay to thank
them now, but go down to the wood with M. d'Agen, who will do all that
may be possible to make you comfortable.'

'And you, sir?' she said, with a charming air of confusion.

'I must stay here,' I answered, 'for a while.'

'Why?' she asked with a slight frown.

I did not know how to tell her, and I began lamely. 'Someone must stop
with madame,' I said without thought.

'Madame?' she exclaimed. 'Does she require assistance? I will stop.'

'God forbid!' I cried.

I do not know how she understood the words, but her face, which had been
full of softness, grew hard. She moved quickly towards me; but, mindful
of the danger I carried about me, I drew farther back. 'No nearer,
mademoiselle,' I murmured, 'if you please.'

She looked puzzled, and finally angry, turning away with a sarcastic
bow. 'So be it, then, sir,' she said proudly, 'if you desire it. M.
d'Agen, if you are not afraid of me, will you lead me down?'

I stood and watched them go down the hill, comforting myself with the
reflection that to-morrow, or the next day, or within a few days at
most, all would be well. Scanning her figure as she moved, I fancied
that she went with less spirit as the space increased between us. And I
pleased myself with the notion. A few days, a few hours, I thought, and
all would be well. The sunset which blazed in the west was no more than
a faint reflection of the glow which for a few minutes pervaded my mind,
long accustomed to cold prospects and the chill of neglect.

A term was put to these pleasant imaginings by the arrival of Maignan;
who, panting from the ascent of the hill, informed me with a shamefaced
air that the tale of horses was complete, but that four of our men were
missing, and had doubtless gone off with the fugitives. These proved
to be M. d'Agen's two lackeys and the two varlets M. de Rambouillet had
lent us. There remained besides Simon Fleix only Maignan's three men
from Rosny; but the state in which our affairs now stood enabled us to
make light of this. I informed the equerry--who visibly paled at the
news--that M. de Bruhl lay ill of the plague, and like to die; and I
bade him form a camp in the wood below, and, sending for food to
the house where we had slept the night before, make mademoiselle as
comfortable as circumstances permitted.

He listened with surprise, and when I had done asked with concern what I
intended to do myself.

'Someone must remain with Madam de Bruhl,' I answered. 'I have already
been to the bedside to procure the key of mademoiselle's room, and I run
no farther risk. All I ask is that you will remain in the neighbourhood,
and furnish us with supplies should it be necessary.'

He looked at me with emotion, which, strongly in conflict with his fears
as it was, touched me not a little. 'But morbleu! M. de Marsac,' he
said, 'you will take the plague and die.'

'If God wills,' I answered, very lugubriously I confess, for pale looks
in one commonly so fearless could not but depress me. 'But if not, I
shall escape. Any way, my friend,' I continued, 'I owe you a quittance.
Simon Fleix has an inkhorn and paper. Bid him bring them to this stone
and leave them, and I will write that Maignan, the equerry of the Baron
de Rosny, served me to the end as a brave soldier and an honest friend.
'What, MON AMI?' I continued, for I saw that he was overcome by this,
which was, indeed, a happy thought of mine. 'Why not? It is true, and
will acquit you with the Baron. Do it, and go. Advise M. d'Agen, and be
to him what you have been to me.'

He swore two or three great oaths, such as men of his kind use to hide
an excess of feeling, and after some further remonstrance went away to
carry out my orders; leaving me to stand on the brow in a strange kind
of solitude, and watch horses and men withdraw to the wood, until the
whole valley seemed left to me and stillness and the grey evening. For
