his back on Corentin, "he would leave those foxes to fight aristocrats,
and send his solders on other business."

Corentin looked coldly after the old soldier, whose face had brightened
at the resolve, and his eyes gleamed with a sardonic expression, which
showed the mental superiority of this subaltern Machiavelli.

"Give an ell of blue cloth to those fellows, and hang a bit of iron at
their waists," he said to himself, "and they'll think there's but one
way to kill people." Then, after walking up and down awhile very slowly,
he exclaimed suddenly, "Yes, the time has come, that woman shall be
mine! For five years I've been drawing the net round her, and I have
her now; with her, I can be a greater man in the government than Fouche
himself. Yes, if she loses the only man she has ever loved, grief will
give her to me, body and soul; but I must be on the watch night and
day."

A few moments later the pale face of this man might have been seen
through the window of a house, from which he could observe all who
entered the cul-de-sac formed by the line of houses running parallel
with Saint-Leonard, one of those houses being that now occupied by
Mademoiselle de Verneuil. With the patience of a cat watching a mouse
Corentin was there in the same place on the following morning, attentive
to the slightest noise, and subjecting the passers-by to the closest
examination. The day that was now beginning was a market-day. Although
in these calamitous times the peasants rarely risked themselves in
the towns, Corentin presently noticed a small man with a gloomy face,
wrapped in a goatskin, and carrying on his arm a small flat basket; he
was making his way in the direction of Mademoiselle de Verneuil's house,
casting careless glances about him. Corentin watched him enter the
house; then he ran down into the street, meaning to waylay the man as
he left; but on second thoughts it occurred to him that if he called
unexpectedly on Mademoiselle de Verneuil he might surprise by a single
glance the secret that was hidden in the basket of the emissary.
Besides, he had already learned that it was impossible to extract
anything from the inscrutable answers of Bretons and Normans.

"Galope-Chopine!" cried Mademoiselle de Verneuil, when Francine brought
the man to her. "Does he love me?" she murmured to herself, in a low
voice.

The instinctive hope sent a brilliant color to her cheeks and joy into
her heart. Galope-Chopine looked alternately from the mistress to the
maid with evident distrust of the latter; but a sign from Mademoiselle
de Verneuil reassured him.

"Madame," he said, "about two o'clock _he_ will be at my house waiting
for you."

Emotion prevented Mademoiselle de Verneuil from giving any other reply
than a movement of her head, but the man understood her meaning. At
that moment Corentin's step was heard in the adjoining room, but
Galope-Chopine showed no uneasiness, though Mademoiselle de Verneuil's
look and shudder warned him of danger, and as soon as the spy had
entered the room the Chouan raised his voice to an ear-splitting tone.

"Ha, ha!" he said to Francine, "I tell you there's Breton butter _and_
Breton butter. You want the Gibarry kind, and you won't give more than
eleven sous a pound; then why did you send me to fetch it? It is good
butter that," he added, uncovering the basket to show the pats which
Barbette had made. "You ought to be fair, my good lady, and pay one sou
more."

His hollow voice betrayed no emotion, and his green eyes, shaded by
thick gray eyebrows, bore Corentin's piercing glance without flinching.

"Nonsense, my good man, you are not here to sell butter; you are talking
to a lady who never bargained for a thing in her life. The trade you
run, old fellow, will shorten you by a head in a very few days"; and
Corentin, with a friendly tap on the man's shoulder, added, "you can't
keep up being a spy of the Blues and a spy of the Chouans very long."

Galope-Chopine needed all his presence of mind to subdue his rage,
and not deny the accusation which his avarice had made a just one. He
contented himself with saying:--

"Monsieur is making game of me."

Corentin turned his back on the Chouan, but, while bowing to
Mademoiselle de Verneuil, whose heart stood still, he watched him in
the mirror behind her. Galope-Chopine, unaware of this, gave a glance
to Francine, to which she replied by pointing to the door, and saying,
"Come with me, my man, and we will settle the matter between us."

Nothing escaped Corentin, neither the fear which Mademoiselle de
Verneuil could not conceal under a smile, nor her color and the
contraction of her features, nor the Chouan's sign and Francine's reply;
he had seen all. Convinced that Galope-Chopine was sent by the marquis,
he caught the man by the long hairs of his goatskin as he was leaving
the room, turned him round to face him, and said with a keen look:
"Where do you live, my man? I want butter, too."

"My good monsieur," said the Chouan, "all Fougeres knows where I live. I
am--"

"Corentin!" exclaimed Mademoiselle de Verneuil, interrupting
Galope-Chopine. "Why do you come here at this time of day? I am scarcely
dressed. Let that peasant alone; he does not understand your tricks any
more than I understand the motive of them. You can go, my man."

Galope-Chopine hesitated a moment. The indecision, real or feigned, of
the poor devil, who knew not which to obey, deceived even Corentin; but
the Chouan, finally, after an imperative gesture from the lady, left the
room with a dragging step. Mademoiselle de Verneuil and Corentin looked
at each other in silence. This time Marie's limpid eyes could not endure
the gleam of cruel fire in the man's look. The resolute manner in which
the spy had forced his way into her room, an expression on his face
which Marie had never seen there before, the deadened tones of his
shrill voice, his whole demeanor,--all these things alarmed her; she
felt that a secret struggle was about to take place between them,
and that he meant to employ against her all the powers of his evil
influence. But though she had at this moment a full and distinct view
of the gulf into which she was plunging, she gathered strength from her
love to shake off the icy chill of these presentiments.

"Corentin," she said, with a sort of gayety, "I hope you are going to
let me make my toilet?"

"Marie," he said,--"yes, permit me to call you so,--you don't yet know
me. Listen; a much less sagacious man than I would see your love for
the Marquis de Montauran. I have several times offered you my heart
and hand. You have never thought me worthy of you; and perhaps you are
right. But however much you may feel yourself too high, too beautiful,
too superior for me, I can compel you to come down to my level. My
ambition and my maxims have given you a low opinion of me; frankly, you
are mistaken. Men are not worth even what I rate them at, and that is
next to nothing. I shall certainly attain a position which will gratify
your pride. Who will ever love you better, or make you more absolutely
mistress of yourself and of him, than the man who has loved you now for
five years? Though I run the risk of exciting your suspicions,--for you
cannot conceive that any one should renounce an idolized woman out
of excessive love,--I will now prove to you the unselfishness of my
passion. If the marquis loves you, marry him; but before you do so, make
sure of his sincerity. I could not endure to see you deceived, for I do
prefer your happiness to my own. My resolution may surprise you; lay
it to the prudence of a man who is not so great a fool as to wish to
possess a woman against her will. I blame myself, not you, for the
failure of my efforts to win you. I hoped to do so by submission and
devotion, for I have long, as you well know, tried to make you happy
according to my lights; but you have never in any way rewarded me."

"I have suffered you to be near me," she said, haughtily.

"Add that you regret it."

"After involving me in this infamous enterprise, do you think that I
have any thanks to give you?"

"When I proposed to you an enterprise which was not exempt from blame to
timid minds," he replied, audaciously, "I had only your own prosperity
in view. As for me, whether I succeed or fail, I can make all results
further my ends. If you marry Montauran, I shall be delighted to serve
the Bourbons in Paris, where I am already a member of the Clichy club.
Now, if circumstances were to put me in correspondence with the princes
I should abandon the interests of the Republic, which is already on its
last legs. General Bonaparte is much too able a man not to know that he
can't be in England and in Italy at the same time, and that is how the
Republic is about to fall. I have no doubt he made the 18th Brumaire
to obtain greater advantages over the Bourbons when it came to
treating with them. He is a long-headed fellow, and very keen; but the
politicians will get the better of him on their own ground. The betrayal
of France is another scruple which men of superiority leave to fools.
I won't conceal from you that I have come here with the necessary
authority to open negotiations with the Chouans, _or_ to further their
destruction, as the case may be; for Fouche, my patron, is deep; he
has always played a double part; during the Terror he was as much for
Robespierre as for Danton--"

"Whom you basely abandoned," she said.

"Nonsense; he is dead,--forget him," replied Corentin. "Come, speak
honestly to me; I have set you the example. Old Hulot is deeper than
he looks; if you want to escape his vigilance, I can help you. Remember
that he holds all the valleys and will instantly detect a rendezvous. If
you make one in Fougeres, under his very eyes, you are at the mercy of
his patrols. See how quickly he knew that this Chouan had entered your
house. His military sagacity will show him that your movements betray
those of the Gars--if Montauran loves you."

Mademoiselle de Verneuil had never listened to a more affectionate
voice; Corentin certainly seemed sincere, and spoke confidingly. The
poor girl's heart was so open to generous impressions that she was on
the point of betraying her secret to the serpent who had her in his
folds, when it occurred to her that she had no proof beyond his own
words of his sincerity, and she felt no scruple in blinding him.

"Yes," she said, "you are right, Corentin. I do love the marquis, but
he does not love me--at least, I fear so; I can't help fearing that the
appointment he wishes me to make with him is a trap."

"But you said yesterday that he came as far as Fougeres with you,"
returned Corentin. "If he had meant to do you bodily harm you wouldn't
be here now."

"You've a cold heart, Corentin. You can draw shrewd conclusions as to
the ordinary events of human life, but not on those of passion.
Perhaps that is why you inspire me with such repulsion. As you are
so clear-sighted, you may be able to tell me why a man from whom I
separated myself violently two days ago now wishes me to meet him in a
house at Florigny on the road to Mayenne."

At this avowal, which seemed to escape her with a recklessness that was
not unnatural in so passionate a creature, Corentin flushed, for he
was still young; but he gave her a sidelong penetrating look, trying
to search her soul. The girl's artlessness was so well played, however,
that she deceived the spy, and he answered with crafty good-humor,
"Shall I accompany you at a distance? I can take a few solders with me,
and be ready to help and obey you."

"Very good," she said; "but promise me, on your honor,--no, I don't
believe in it; by your salvation,--but you don't believe in God; by your
soul,--but I don't suppose you have any! what pledge _can_ you give me
of your fidelity? and yet you expect me to trust you, and put more than
my life--my love, my vengeance--into your hands?"

The slight smile which crossed the pallid lips of the spy showed
Mademoiselle de Verneuil the danger she had just escaped. The man, whose
nostrils contracted instead of dilating, took the hand of his victim,
kissed it with every mark of the deepest respect, and left the room with
a bow that was not devoid of grace.

Three hours after this scene Mademoiselle de Verneuil, who feared the
man's return, left the town furtively by the Porte Saint-Leonard,
and made her way through the labyrinth of paths to the cottage of
Galope-Chopine, led by the dream of at last finding happiness, and also
by the purpose of saving her lover from the danger that threatened him.

During this time Corentin had gone to find the commandant. He had some
difficulty in recognizing Hulot when he found him in a little square,
where he was busy with certain military preparations. The brave veteran
had made a sacrifice, the full merit of which may be difficult to
appreciate. His queue and his moustache were cut off, and his hair had
a sprinkling of powder. He had changed his uniform for a goatskin, wore
hobnailed shoes, a belt full of pistols, and carried a heavy carbine.
In this costume he was reviewing about two hundred of the natives of
Fougeres, all in the same kind of dress, which was fitted to deceive the
eye of the most practised Chouan. The warlike spirit of the little town
and the Breton character were fully displayed in this scene, which
was not at all uncommon. Here and there a few mothers and sisters
were bringing to their sons and brothers gourds filled with brandy, or
forgotten pistols. Several old men were examining into the number and
condition of the cartridges of these young national guards dressed in
the guise of Chouans, whose gaiety was more in keeping with a hunting
expedition than the dangerous duty they were undertaking. To them, such
encounters with Chouannerie, where the Breton of the town fought the
Breton of the country district, had taken the place of the old chivalric
tournaments. This patriotic enthusiasm may possibly have been connected
with certain purchases of the "national domain." Still, the benefits
of the Revolution which were better understood and appreciated in the
towns, party spirit, and a certain national delight in war, had a great
deal to do with their ardor.

Hulot, much gratified, was going through the ranks and getting
information from Gudin, on whom he was now bestowing the confidence and
good-will he had formerly shown to Merle and Gerard. A number of the
inhabitants stood about watching the preparations, and comparing the
conduct of their tumultuous contingent with the regulars of Hulot's
brigade. Motionless and silent the Blues were awaiting, under control of
their officers, the orders of the commandant, whose figure they followed
with their eyes as he passed from rank to rank of the contingent. When
Corentin came near the old warrior he could not help smiling at the
change which had taken place in him. He looked like a portrait that has
little or no resemblance to the original.

"What's all this?" asked Corentin.

"Come with us under fire, and you'll find out," replied Hulot.

"Oh! I'm not a Fougeres man," said Corentin.

"Easy to see that, citizen," retorted Gudin.

A few contemptuous laughs came from the nearest ranks.

"Do you think," said Corentin, sharply, "that the only way to serve
France is with bayonets?"

Then he turned his back to the laughers, and asked a woman beside him if
she knew the object of the expedition.

"Hey! my good man, the Chouans are at Florigny. They say there are more
than three thousand, and they are coming to take Fougeres."

"Florigny?" cried Corentin, turning white; "then the rendezvous is not
there! Is Florigny on the road to Mayenne?" he asked.

"There are not two Florignys," replied the woman, pointing in the
direction of the summit of La Pelerine.

"Are you going in search of the Marquis de Montauran?" said Corentin to
Hulot.

"Perhaps I am," answered the commandant, curtly.

"He is not at Florigny," said Corentin. "Send your troops there by all
means; but keep a few of those imitation Chouans of yours with you, and
wait for me."

"He is too malignant not to know what he's about," thought Hulot as
Corentin made off rapidly, "he's the king of spies."

Hulot ordered the battalion to start. The republican soldiers marched
without drums and silently through the narrow suburb which led to the
Mayenne high-road, forming a blue and red line among the trees and
houses. The disguised guard followed them; but Hulot, detaining Gudin
and about a score of the smartest young fellows of the town, remained in
the little square, awaiting Corentin, whose mysterious manner had piqued
his curiosity. Francine herself told the astute spy, whose suspicions
she changed into certainty, of her mistress's departure. Inquiring of
the post guard at the Porte Saint-Leonard, he learned that Mademoiselle
de Verneuil had passed that way. Rushing to the Promenade, he was,
unfortunately, in time to see her movements. Though she was wearing a
green dress and hood, to be less easily distinguished, the rapidity
of her almost distracted step enabled him to follow her with his eye
through the leafless hedges, and to guess the point towards which she
was hurrying.

"Ha!" he cried, "you said you were going to Florigny, but you are in
the valley of Gibarry! I am a fool, she has tricked me! No matter, I can
light my lamp by day as well as by night."

Corentin, satisfied that he knew the place of the lovers' rendezvous,
returned in all haste to the little square, which Hulot, resolved not to
wait any longer, was just quitting to rejoin his troops.

"Halt, general!" he cried to the commandant, who turned round.

He then told Hulot the events relating to the marquis and Mademoiselle
de Verneuil, and showed him the scheme of which he held a thread. Hulot,
struck by his perspicacity, seized him by the arm.

"God's thunder! citizen, you are right," he cried. "The brigands are
making a false attack over there to keep the coast clear; but the two
columns I sent to scour the environs between Antrain and Vitre have not
yet returned, so we shall have plenty of reinforcements if we need them;
and I dare say we shall, for the Gars is not such a fool as to risk his
life without a bodyguard of those damned owls. Gudin," he added, "go and
tell Captain Lebrun that he must rub those fellows' noses at Florigny
without me, and come back yourself in a flash. You know the paths.
I'll wait till you return, and _then_--we'll avenge those murders at La
Vivetiere. Thunder! how he runs," he added, seeing Gudin disappear as if
by magic. "Gerard would have loved him."

On his return Gudin found Hulot's little band increased in numbers by
the arrival of several soldiers taken from the various posts in the
town. The commandant ordered him to choose a dozen of his compatriots
who could best counterfeit the Chouans, and take them out by the Porte
Saint-Leonard, so as to creep round the side of the Saint-Sulpice rocks
which overlooks the valley of Couesnon and on which was the hovel of
Galope-Chopine. Hulot himself went out with the rest of his troop by
the Porte Saint-Sulpice, to reach the summit of the same rocks, where,
according to his calculations, he ought to meet the men under Beau-Pied,
whom he meant to use as a line of sentinels from the suburb of
Saint-Sulpice to the Nid-aux-Crocs.

Corentin, satisfied with having delivered over the fate of the Gars to
his implacable enemies, went with all speed to the Promenade, so as to
follow with his eyes the military arrangements of the commandant. He
soon saw Gudin's little squad issuing from the valley of the Nancon
and following the line of the rocks to the great valley, while Hulot,
creeping round the castle of Fougeres, was mounting the dangerous path
which leads to the summit of Saint-Sulpice. The two companies were
therefore advancing on parallel lines. The trees and shrubs, draped by
the rich arabesques of the hoarfrost, threw whitish reflections which
enabled the watcher to see the gray lines of the squads in motion. When
Hulot reached the summit of the rocks, he detached all the soldiers in
uniform from his main body, and made them into a line of sentinels, each
communicating with the other, the first with Gudin, the last with Hulot;
so that no shrub could escape the bayonets of the three lines which were
now in a position to hunt the Gars across field and mountain.

"The sly old wolf!" thought Corentin, as the shining muzzle of the last
gun disappeared in the bushes. "The Gars is done for. If Marie had only
betrayed that damned marquis, she and I would have been united in the
strongest of all bonds--a vile deed. But she's mine, in any case."

The twelve young men under Gudin soon reached the base of the rocks
of Saint-Sulpice. Here Gudin himself left the road with six of them,
jumping the stiff hedge into the first field of gorse that he came to,
while the other six by his orders did the same on the other side of the
road. Gudin advanced to an apple-tree which happened to be in the middle
of the field. Hearing the rustle of this movement through the gorse,
seven or eight men, at the head of whom was Beau-Pied, hastily hid
behind some chestnut-trees which topped the bank of this particular
field. Gudin's men did not see them, in spite of the white reflections
of the hoar-frost and their own practised sight.

"Hush! here they are," said Beau-Pied, cautiously putting out his head.
"The brigands have more men than we, but we have 'em at the muzzles of
our guns, and we mustn't miss them, or, by the Lord, we are not fit to
be soldiers of the pope."

By this time Gudin's keen eyes had discovered a few muzzles pointing
through the branches at his little squad. Just then eight voices cried
in derision, "Qui vive?" and eight shots followed. The balls whistled
round Gudin and his men. One fell, another was shot in the arm. The
five others who were safe and sound replied with a volley and the cry,
"Friends!" Then they marched rapidly on their assailants so as to reach
them before they had time to reload.

"We did not know how true we spoke," cried Gudin, as he recognized the
uniforms and the battered hats of his own brigade. "Well, we behaved
like Bretons, and fought before explaining."

The other men were stupefied on recognizing the little company.

"Who the devil would have known them in those goatskins?" cried
Beau-Pied, dismally.

"It is a misfortune," said Gudin, "but we are all innocent if you were
not informed of the sortie. What are you doing here?" he asked.

