seamen, soldiers, labourers, and mechanics; a most valuable acquisition
to a trading country, exposed to foreign wars, and obliged to maintain
a number of settlements in all the four quarters of the globe. In the
course of seven years, during the last war, Scotland furnished the
English army and navy with seventy thousand men, over and above those
who migrated to their colonies, or mingled with them at home in the
civil departments of life. This was a very considerable and seasonable
supply to a nation, whose people had been for many years decreasing in
number, and whose lands and manufactures were actually suffering for
want of hands. I need not remind you of the hackneyed maxim, that, to a
nation in such circumstances, a supply of industrious people is a
supply of wealth; nor repeat an observation, which is now received as
an eternal truth, even among the English themselves, that the Scots who
settle in South-Britain are remarkably sober, orderly, and industrious.'

I allowed the truth of this remark, adding, that by their industry,
oeconomy, and circumspection, many of them in England, as well as in her
colonies, amassed large fortunes, with which they returned to their own
country, and this was so much lost to South-Britain.--'Give me leave,
sir (said he), to assure you, that in your fact you are mistaken, and
in your deduction erroneous. Not one in two hundred that leave Scotland
ever returns to settle in his own country; and the few that do
return, carry thither nothing that can possibly diminish the stock of
South-Britain; for none of their treasure stagnates in Scotland--There
is a continual circulation, like that of the blood in the human body,
and England is the heart, to which all the streams which it distributes
are refunded and returned: nay, in consequence of that luxury which our
connexion with England hath greatly encouraged, if not introduced,
all the produce of our lands, and all the profits of our trade, are
engrossed by the natives of South-Britain; for you will find that the
exchange between the two kingdoms is always against Scotland; and
that she retains neither gold nor silver sufficient for her own
circulation.--The Scots, not content with their own manufactures and
produce, which would very well answer all necessary occasions, seem to
vie with each other in purchasing superfluities from England; such as
broad-cloth, velvets, stuffs, silks, lace, furs, jewels, furniture of
all sorts, sugar, rum, tea, chocolate and coffee; in a word, not only
every mode of the most extravagant luxury, but even many articles of
convenience, which they might find as good, and much cheaper in their
own country. For all these particulars, I conceive, England may touch
about one million sterling a-year.--I don't pretend to make an exact
calculation; perhaps, it may be something less, and perhaps, a great
deal more. The annual revenue arising from all the private estates of
Scotland cannot fall short of a million sterling; and, I should imagine,
their trade will amount to as much more.--I know the linen manufacture
alone returns near half a million, exclusive of the home-consumption
of that article.--If, therefore, North-Britain pays a ballance of a
million annually to England, I insist upon it, that country is
more valuable to her in the way of commerce, than any colony in her
possession, over and above the other advantages which I have specified:
therefore, they are no friends, either to England or to truth, who
affect to depreciate the northern part of the united kingdom.'

I must own, I was at first a little nettled to find myself schooled in
so many particulars.--Though I did not receive all his assertions
as gospel, I was not prepared to refute them; and I cannot help now
acquiescing in his remarks so far as to think, that the contempt for
Scotland, which prevails too much on this side the Tweed, is founded on
prejudice and error.--After some recollection, 'Well, captain (said I),
you have argued stoutly for the importance of your own country: for my
part, I have such a regard for our fellow-subjects of North-Britain,
that I shall be glad to see the day, when your peasants can afford to
give all their oats to their cattle, hogs, and poultry, and indulge
themselves with good wheaten loaves, instead of such poor, unpalatable,
and inflammatory diet.' Here again I brought my self into a premunire
with the disputative Caledonian. He said he hoped he should never see
the common people lifted out of that sphere for which they were intended
by nature and the course of things; that they might have some reason to
complain of their bread, if it were mixed, like that of Norway, with saw
dust and fish-bones; but that oatmeal was, he apprehended, as nourishing
and salutary as wheat-flour, and the Scots in general thought it at
least as savoury.--He affirmed, that a mouse, which, in the article of
self-preservation, might be supposed to act from infallible instinct,
would always prefer oats to wheat, as appeared from experience; for, in
a place where there was a parcel of each, that animal has never begun
to feed upon the latter till all the oats were consumed: for their
nutritive quality, he appealed to the hale, robust constitutions of
the people who lived chiefly upon oatmeal; and, instead of being
inflammatory, he asserted, that it was a cooling sub-acid, balsamic and
mucilaginous; insomuch, that in all inflammatory distempers, recourse
was had to water-gruel, and flummery made of oatmeal.

'At least (said I), give me leave to wish them such a degree of commerce
as may enable them to follow their own inclinations.'--'Heaven forbid!
(cried this philosopher). Woe be to that nation, where the multitude is
at liberty to follow their own inclinations! Commerce is undoubtedly
a blessing, while restrained within its proper channels; but a glut
of wealth brings along with it a glut of evils: it brings false taste,
false appetite, false wants, profusion, venality, contempt of order,
engendering a spirit of licentiousness, insolence, and faction, that
keeps the community in continual ferment, and in time destroys all the
distinctions of civil society; so that universal anarchy and uproar must
ensue. Will any sensible man affirm, that the national advantages of
opulence are to be sought on these terms?' 'No, sure; but I am one of
those who think, that, by proper regulations, commerce may produce every
national benefit, without the allay of such concomitant evils.'

So much for the dogmata of my friend Lismahago, whom I describe the
more circumstantially, as I firmly believe he will set up his rest in
Monmouthshire. Yesterday, while I was alone with him he asked, in some
confusion, if I should have any objection to the success of a gentleman
and a soldier, provided he should be so fortunate as to engage my
sister's affection. I answered without hesitation, that my sister was
old enough to judge for herself; and that I should be very far from
disapproving any resolution she might take in his favour.--His eyes
sparkled at this declaration. He declared, he should think himself the
happiest man on earth to be connected with my family; and that he should
never be weary of giving me proofs of his gratitude and attachment. I
suppose Tabby and he are already agreed; in which case, we shall have
a wedding at Brambleton-hall, and you shall give away the bride.--It is
the least thing you can do, by way of atonement for your former cruelty
to that poor love-sick maiden, who has been so long a thorn in the side
of


Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE Sept. 20.

We have been at Buxton; but, as I did not much relish either the company
or the accommodations, and had no occasion for the water, we stayed but
two nights in the place.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

Adventures begin to thicken as we advance to the southward. Lismahago
has now professed himself the admirer of our aunt, and carries on his
addresses under the sanction of her brother's approbation; so that we
shall certainly have a wedding by Christmas. I should be glad you was
present at the nuptials, to help me throw the stocking, and perform
other ceremonies peculiar to that occasion.--I am sure it will be
productive of some diversion; and, truly, it would be worth your while
to come across the country on purpose to see two such original figures
in bed together, with their laced night caps; he, the emblem of good
cheer, and she, the picture of good nature. All this agreeable prospect
was clouded, and had well nigh vanished entirely, in consequence of
a late misunderstanding between the future brothers-in-law, which,
however, is now happily removed.

A few days ago, my uncle and I, going to visit a relation, met with lord
Oxmington at his house, who asked us to dine with him, next day, and we
accepted the invitation.--Accordingly, leaving our women under the
care of captain Lismahago, at the inn where we had lodged the preceding
night, in a little town, about a mile from his lordship's dwelling, we
went at the hour appointed, and had a fashionable meal served up with
much ostentation to a company of about a dozen persons, none of whom
he had ever seen before.--His lordship is much more remarkable for his
pride and caprice, than for his hospitality and understanding; and,
indeed, it appeared, that he considered his guests merely as objects to
shine upon, so as to reflect the lustre of his own magnificence--There
was much state, but no courtesy; and a great deal of compliment without
any conversation.--Before the desert was removed, our noble entertainer
proposed three general toasts; then calling for a glass of wine, and
bowing all round, wished us a good afternoon. This was the signal for
the company to break up, and they obeyed it immediately, all except our
'squire who was greatly shocked at the manner of this dismission--He
changed countenance, bit his lip in silence, but still kept his seat,
so that his lordship found himself obliged to give us another hint, by
saying, he should be glad to see us another time. 'There is no time like
the present (cried Mr Bramble); your lordship has not yet drank a
bumper to the best in Christendom.' 'I'll drink no more bumpers to-day
(answered our landlord); and I am sorry to see you have drank too
many.--Order the gentleman's carriage to the gate.'--So saying, he rose
and retired abruptly; our 'squire starting up at the same time, laying
his hand upon his sword, and eyeing him with a most ferocious aspect.
The master having vanished in this manner, our uncle bad one of the
servants to see what was to pay; and the fellow answering, 'This is no
inn,' 'I cry you mercy (cried the other), I perceive it is not; if it
were, the landlord would be more civil. There's a guinea, however; take
it, and tell your lord, that I shall not leave the country till I
have had the opportunity to thank him in person for his politeness and
hospitality.'

We then walked down stairs through a double range of lacqueys, and
getting into the chaise, proceeded homewards. Perceiving the 'squire
much ruffled, I ventured to disapprove of his resentment, observing,
that as lord Oxmington was well known to have his brain very ill
timbered, a sensible man should rather laugh, than be angry at his
ridiculous want of breeding.--Mr Bramble took umbrage at my presuming to
be wiser than he upon this occasion; and told me, that as he had always
thought for himself in every occurrence in life, he would still use the
same privilege, with my good leave.

When we returned to our inn, he closeted Lismahago; and having explained
his grievance, desired that gentleman to go and demand satisfaction of
lord Oxmington in his name.--The lieutenant charged himself with this
commission, and immediately set out a horseback for his lordship's
house, attended, at his own request, by my man Archy Macalpine, who had
been used to military service; and truly, if Macalpine had been mounted
upon an ass, this couple might have passed for the knight of La Mancha
and his 'squire Panza. It was not till after some demur that Lismahago
obtained a private audience, at which he formally defied his lordship to
single combat, in the name of Mr Bramble, and desired him to appoint
the time and place. Lord Oxmington was so confounded at this unexpected
message, that he could not, for some time, make any articulate reply;
but stood staring at the lieutenant with manifest marks of perturbation.
At length, ringing a bell with great vehemence, he exclaimed, 'What!
a commoner send a challenge to a peer of the realm!--Privilege!
privilege!--Here's a person brings me a challenge from the Welshman that
dined at my table--An impudent fellow.--My wine is not yet out of his
head.'

The whole house was immediately in commotion.--Macalpine made a
soldierly retreat with two horses; but the captain was suddenly
surrounded and disarmed by the footmen, whom a French valet de chambre
headed in this exploit; his sword was passed through a close-stool, and
his person through the horse-pond. In this plight he returned to
the inn, half mad with his disgrace. So violent was the rage of his
indignation, that he mistook its object.--He wanted to quarrel with Mr
Bramble; he said, he had been dishonoured on his account, and he looked
for reparation at his hands.--My uncle's back was up in a moment; and he
desired him to explain his pretensions.--'Either compel lord Oxmington
to give me satisfaction (cried he), or give it me in your own person.'
'The latter part of the alternative is the most easy and expeditious
(replied the 'squire, starting up): if you are disposed for a walk, I'll
attend you this moment.'

Here they were interrupted by Mrs Tabby, who had overheard all that
passed.--She now burst into the room, and running betwixt them, in great
agitation, 'Is this your regard for me (said she to the lieutenant), to
seek the life of my brother?' Lismahago, who seemed to grow cool as my
uncle grew hot, assured her he had a very great respect for Mr Bramble,
but he had still more for his own honour, which had suffered pollution;
but if that could be once purified, he should have no further cause of
dissatisfaction. The 'squire said, he should have thought it incumbent
upon him to vindicate the lieutenant's honour; but, as he had now carved
for himself, he might swallow and digest it as well as he could--In a
word, what betwixt the mediation of Mrs Tabitha, the recollection of
the captain, who perceived he had gone too far, and the remonstrances
of your humble servant, who joined them at this juncture, those two
originals were perfectly reconciled; and then we proceeded to deliberate
upon the means of taking vengeance for the insults they had received
from the petulant peer; for, until that aim should be accomplished,
Mr Bramble swore, with great emphasis, that he would not leave the inn
where we now lodged, even if he should pass his Christmas on the spot.

In consequence of our deliberations, we next day, in the forenoon,
proceeded in a body to his lordship's house, all of us, with our
servants, including the coachman, mounted a-horseback, with our pistols
loaded and ready primed.--Thus prepared for action, we paraded solemnly
and slowly before his lordship's gate, which we passed three times in
such a manner, that he could not but see us, and suspect the cause
of our appearance.--After dinner we returned, and performed the same
cavalcade, which was again repeated the morning following; but we had no
occasion to persist in these manoeuvres. About noon, we were visited by
the gentleman, at whose house we had first seen lord Oxmington.--He now
came to make apologies in the name of his lordship, who declared he had
no intention to give offence to my uncle, in practising what had been
always the custom of his house; and that as for the indignities which
had been put upon the officer, they were offered without his Lordship's
knowledge, at the instigation of his valet de chambre.--'If that be the
case (said my uncle, in a peremptory tone), I shall be contented
with lord Oxmington's personal excuses; and I hope my friend will be
satisfied with his lordship's turning that insolent rascal out of his
service.'--'Sir (cried Lismahago), I must insist upon taking personal
vengeance for the personal injuries I have sustained.'

After some debate, the affair was adjusted in this manner.--His
lordship, meeting us at our friend's house, declared he was sorry for
what had happened; and that he had no intention to give umbrage.--The
valet de chambre asked pardon of the lieutenant upon his knees, when
Lismahago, to the astonishment of all present, gave him a violent kick
on the face, which laid him on his back, exclaiming in a furious tone,
'Oui je te pardonne, gens foutre.'

Such was the fortunate issue of this perilous adventure, which
threatened abundance of vexation to our family; for the 'squire is one
of those who will sacrifice both life and fortune, rather than leave
what they conceive to be the least speck or blemish upon their honour
and reputation. His lordship had no sooner pronounced his apology, with
a very bad grace, than he went away in some disorder, and, I dare say,
he will never invite another Welchman to his table.

We forthwith quitted the field of this atchievement, in order to
prosecute our journey; but we follow no determinate course. We make
small deviations, to see the remarkable towns, villas, and curiosities
on each side of our route; so that we advance by slow steps towards the
borders of Monmouthshire: but in the midst of these irregular motions,
there is no abberration nor eccentricity in that affection with which I
am, dear Wat,


Yours always, J. MELFORD Sept. 28.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

At what time of life may a man think himself exempted from the necessity
of sacrificing his repose to the punctilios of a contemptible world? I
have been engaged in a ridiculous adventure, which I shall recount at
meeting; and this, I hope, will not be much longer delayed, as we have
now performed almost all our visits, and seen every thing that I think
has any right to retard us in our journey homewards--A few days ago,
understanding by accident, that my old friend Baynard was in the
country, I would not pass so near his habitation without paying him a
visit, though our correspondence had been interrupted for a long course
of years.

I felt my self very sensibly affected by the idea of our past intimacy,
as we approached the place where we had spent so many happy days
together; but when we arrived at the house, I could not recognize
any one of those objects, which had been so deeply impressed upon my
remembrance--The tall oaks that shaded the avenue, had been cut down,
and the iron gates at the end of it removed, together with the high wall
that surrounded the court yard. The house itself, which was formerly a
convent of Cistercian monks, had a venerable appearance: and along the
front that looked into the garden, was a stone gallery, which afforded
me many an agreeable walk, when I was disposed to be contemplative. Now
the old front is covered with a screen of modern architecture; so that
all without is Grecian, and all within Gothic. As for the garden, which
was well stocked with the best fruit which England could produce,
there is not now the least vestage remaining of trees, walls, or
hedges--Nothing appears but a naked circus of loose sand, with a dry
bason and a leaden triton in the middle.

You must know, that Baynard, at his father's death, had a clear estate
of fifteen hundred pounds a-year, and was in other respects extremely
well qualified to make a respectable figure in the commonwealth;
but, what with some excesses of youth, and the expence of a contested
election, he in a few years found himself encumbered with a debt of ten
thousand pounds, which he resolved to discharge by means of a prudent
marriage. He accordingly married a miss Thomson, whose fortune amounted
to double the sum that he owed--She was the daughter of a citizen, who
had failed in trade; but her fortune came by an uncle, who died in the
East-Indies--Her own parents being dead, she lived with a maiden aunt,
who had superintended her education; and, in all appearance, was well
enough qualified for the usual purposes of the married state--Her
virtues, however, stood rather upon a negative, than a positive
foundation--She was neither proud, insolent, nor capricious, nor given
to scandal, nor addicted to gaming, nor inclined to gallantry. She could
read, and write, and dance, and sing, and play upon the harpsichord,
and smatter French, and take a hand at whist and ombre; but even these
accomplishments she possessed by halves--She excelled in nothing.
Her conversation was flat, her stile mean, and her expression
embarrassed--In a word, her character was totally insipid. Her person
was not disagreeable; but there was nothing graceful in her address, nor
engaging in her manners; and she was so ill qualified to do the honours
of the house, that when she sat at the head of the table, one was always
looking for the mistress of the family in some other place.

Baynard had flattered himself, that it would be no difficult matter
to mould such a subject after his own fashion, and that she would
chearfully enter into his views, which were wholly turned to domestic
happiness. He proposed to reside always in the country, of which he was
fond to a degree of enthusiasm; to cultivate his estate, which was very
improvable; to enjoy the exercise of rural diversions; to maintain an
intimacy of correspondence with some friends that were settled in
his neighbourhood; to keep a comfortable house, without suffering his
expence to exceed the limits of his income; and to find pleasure and
employ merit for his wife in the management and avocations of her own
family--This, however, was a visionary scheme, which he never was able
to realize. His wife was as ignorant as a new-born babe of everything
that related to the conduct of a family; and she had no idea of a
country-life. Her understanding did not reach so far as to comprehend
the first principles of discretion; and, indeed, if her capacity had
been better than it was, her natural indolence would not have permitted
her to abandon a certain routine, to which she had been habituated. She
had not taste enough to relish any rational enjoyment; but her ruling
passion was vanity, not that species which arises from self-conceit
of superior accomplishments, but that which is of a bastard and idiot
nature, excited by shew and ostentation, which implies not even the
least consciousness of any personal merit.

The nuptial peal of noise and nonsense being rung out in all the usual
changes, Mr Baynard thought it high time to make her acquainted with
the particulars of the plan which he had projected--He told her that his
fortune, though sufficient to afford all the comforts of life, was not
ample enough to command all the superfluities of pomp and pageantry,
which, indeed, were equally absurd and intolerable--He therefore hoped
she would have no objection to their leaving London in the spring, when
he would take the opportunity to dismiss some unnecessary domestics,
whom he had hired for the occasion of their marriage--She heard him in
silence, and after some pause, 'So (said she) I am to be buried in the
country!' He was so confounded at this reply, that he could not speak
for some minutes: at length he told her, he was much mortified to find
he had proposed anything that was disagreeable to her ideas--'I am sure
(added he) I meant nothing more than to lay down a comfortable plan of
living within the bounds of our fortune, which is but moderate.' 'Sir
(said she), you are the best judge of your own affairs--My fortune,
I know, does not exceed twenty thousand pounds--Yet, even with that
pittance, I might have had a husband who would not have begrudged me a
house in London'--'Good God! my dear (cried poor Baynard, in the
utmost agitation), you don't think me so sordid--I only hinted what I
thought--But, I don't pretend to impose--' 'Yes, sir (resumed the lady),
it is your prerogative to command, and my duty to obey' So saying, she
burst into tears and retired to her chamber, where she was joined by her
aunt--He endeavoured to recollect himself, and act with vigour of mind
on this occasion; but was betrayed by the tenderness of his nature,
which was the greatest defect of his constitution. He found the aunt
in tears, and the niece in a fit, which held her the best part of eight
hours, at the expiration of which, she began to talk incoherently about
death and her dear husband, who had sat by her all this time, and now
pressed her hand to his lips, in a transport of grief and penitence
for the offence he had given--From thence forward, he carefully avoided
mentioning the country; and they continued to be sucked deeper and
deeper into the vortex of extravagance and dissipation, leading what
is called a fashionable life in town--About the latter end of July,
however, Mrs Baynard, in order to exhibit a proof of conjugal obedience,
desired of her own accord, that they might pay a visit to his country
house, as there was no company left in London. He would have excused
himself from this excursion which was no part of the oeconomical plan he
had proposed; but she insisted upon making this sacrifice to his taste
and prejudices, and away they went with such an equipage as astonished
the whole country. All that remained of the season was engrossed by
receiving and returning visits in the neighbourhood; and, in
this intercourse it was discovered that sir John Chickwell had a
house-steward and one footman in livery more than the complement of
Mr Baynard's household. This remark was made by the aunt at table, and
assented to by the husband, who observed that sir John Chickwell might
very well afford to keep more servants than were found in the family
of a man who had not half his fortune. Mrs Baynard ate no supper that
evening; but was seized with a violent fit, which completed her triumph
over the spirit of her consort. The two supernumerary servants were
added--The family plate was sold for old silver, and a new service
procured; fashionable furniture was provided, and the whole house turned
topsy turvy.

At their return to London in the beginning of winter, he, with a heavy
heart, communicated these particulars to me in confidence. Before his
marriage, he had introduced me to the lady as his particular friend;
and I now offered in that character, to lay before her the necessity of
reforming her oeconomy, if she had any regard to the interest of her own
family, or complaisance for the inclinations of her husband--But Baynard
declined my offer, on the supposition that his wife's nerves were
too delicate to bear expostulation; and that it would only serve to
overwhelm her with such distress as would make himself miserable.

Baynard is a man of spirit, and had she proved a termagant, he would
have known how to deal with her; but, either by accident or instinct,
she fastened upon the weak side of his soul, and held it so fast, that
he has been in subjection ever since--I afterwards advised him to carry
her abroad to France or Italy, where he might gratify her vanity for
half the expence it cost him in England: and this advice he followed
accordingly. She was agreeably flattered with the idea of seeing and
knowing foreign parts, and foreign fashions; of being presented to
sovereigns, and living familiarly with princes. She forthwith seized the
hint which I had thrown out on purpose, and even pressed Mr Baynard to
hasten his departure; so that in a few weeks they crossed the sea to
France, with a moderate train, still including the aunt; who was
her bosom counsellor, and abetted her in all her oppositions to her
husband's will--Since that period, I have had little or no opportunity
to renew our former correspondence--All that I knew of his transactions,
amounted to no more than that after an absence of two years, they
returned so little improved in oeconomy, that they launched out into
new oceans of extravagance, which at length obliged him to mortgage his
estate--By this time she had bore him three children, of which the last
only survives, a puny boy of twelve or thirteen, who will be ruined in
his education by the indulgence of his mother.

As for Baynard, neither his own good sense, nor the dread of indigence,
nor the consideration of his children, has been of force sufficient to
stimulate him into the resolution of breaking at once the shameful spell
by which he seems enchanted--With a taste capable of the most refined
enjoyment, a heart glowing with all the warmth of friendship and
humanity, and a disposition strongly turned to the more rational
pleasures of a retired and country life, he is hurried about in a
perpetual tumult, amidst a mob of beings pleased with rattles, baubles,
and gewgaws, so void of sense and distinction, that even the most acute
philosopher would find it a very hard task to discover for what wise
purpose of providence they were created--Friendship is not to be found;
nor can the amusements for which he sighs be enjoyed within the rotation
of absurdity, to which he is doomed for life. He has long resigned
