THE CATACOMBS OF GENEROSA. In 1867, while watching with my friend
commendatore Visconti (the present director of the Vatican Museum) the
excavations of the Sacred Grove of the Arvales, on the Via Campana,
five miles outside the Porta Portese, I witnessed for the first time
the discovery of a catacomb. The experience could not have been more
pleasant, nor the history of the first occupants of these crypts more
interesting.

In the persecution of Diocletian two brothers, Simplicius and
Faustinus, were tortured and put to death for their faith, and their
bodies were thrown into the Tiber from the bridge of AEmilius Lepidus.
The stream carried them to a considerable distance, and their young
sister Beatrix, who was anxiously watching the banks of the river for
the recovery of their dear remains, discovered them lying in the
shallows of la Magliana, near the grove of the Arvales. She buried
them in a small Christian cemetery which a certain Generosa had
excavated close by, under the boundary line of the grove itself.
Beatrix, left alone in the world, found shelter in the house of one of
the Lucinas; but the persecutors, to whom her pious action had
evidently been reported, discovered her retreat, and killed her by
suffocation, seven months after the execution of Simplicius and
Faustinus. Lucina laid her to rest in the same cemetery of Generosa,
by the side of her brothers. This touching story is related in
contemporary documents.

Pope Damasus, who in his younger days had been notary and stenographer
of the church of Rome, and was acquainted with every detail of the
last persecution, raised a small oratory to the memory of the three
martyrs, and sanctified the ground which for eleven centuries had been
the seat of the worship of the Dea Dia. The chapel lasted until the
pontificate of Leo II., when it became evident that the only way of
saving the remains of Beatrix, Simplicius, and Faustinus from
profanation and robbery, was to remove them from a place so
conspicuous for many miles around, and directly in the path of pirates
and invaders from the sea, and to place them under the protection of
the city walls. The translation took place in 682; the bodies were
removed to the church of Santa Biviana, or the Bibiana, on the
Esquiline, and placed in a sarcophagus, with the record: "Here lie in
peace Simplicius and Faustinus, martyrs, drowned in the Tiber and
buried in the cemetery of Generosa, above the landing-place called ad
Sextum Philippi." Sarcophagus and inscription are still in existence.
The discovery of the oratory of Pope Damasus and the cemetery of
Generosa took place, as already stated, in the spring of 1867, when a
fragment of the architrave of the altar was found in front of the
apse, inscribed with the names, ... STINO . VIATRICI, engraved in the
best Damasian calligraphy. The spelling of the second name deserves
attention, because it is certainly intentional, as Damasus and his
engraver Furius Dionysius Philocalus are distinguished for absolute
epigraphic correctness. _Viatrix_, the feminine of _Viator_, is
altogether different from _Beatrix_, and has its own Christian
meaning, as an allusion to the eventful journey of human life. Must we
take the word _Beatrix_ as a new form, more or less connected with the
adjective _beatus_, or as a corruption of the genuine name? No doubt
it is a corruption, as the oldest martyrologies and liturgies have the
genuine spelling. The substitution of the B instead of the V took
place in the eighth or ninth century, and appears for the first time
in the Codex of Berne. The grammarian who wrote it was evidently of
the opinion that _Viatrix_ was not the right spelling; and so the true
and beautiful name of the sister of Faustinas and Simplicius became
corrupted.

[Illustration: Sancta Viatrix.]

The accompanying illustration represents the portrait of Viatrix
discovered in the Catacomb of Generosa in the spring of 1868.


THE CEMETERY OF DOMITILLA. The farm of Torre Marancia, at the crossing
of the Via Ardeatina and the Via delle Sette Chiese, is familiar to
archaeologists on account of the successful excavations which the
duchess of Chablais made there in the spring of the years 1817 and
1822. Bartolomeo Borghesi, who first visited them in April, 1817,
describes the remains of a noble villa of the first century, with
mosaic pavements, fountains, statuary, candelabra, and frescos. The
pictures of Pasiphae, Canace, Phaedra, Myrrha, and Scylla, which are
now in the Cabinet of the Aldobrandini Marriage, in the Vatican
Library, were discovered in one of the bedrooms of the villa. Other
works of art, now exhibited in the third compartment of the Galleria
dei Candelabri, were found in the peristyle. An exact description of
these discoveries, with maps and illustrations, is given by Marchese
Biondi in a volume called "Monumenti Amaranziani," published in Rome
in 1825.

The Villa Amaranthiana, from which the modern name of Torre Marancia
is derived, belonged to two ladies, one of imperial descent, Flavia
Domitilla, a relative of Domitian and Titus, the other of patrician
birth, Munatia Procula, the daughter of Marcus. Domitilla's name
appears twice in documents attesting her ownership of the ground; the
first is the grant of a sepulchral area, measuring thirty-five feet by
forty, to Sergius Cornelius Julianus _ex indulgentia Flaviae
Domitillae_; the other mentions the construction of another tomb,
_Flaviae Domitillae divi Vespasiani neptis beneficio_.[158] These
concessions refer to burial-plots above ground, on the Via Ardeatina.
Much more important was the permission given by Domitilla for the
excavation of a catacomb in the service of the Church, which had just
been established in Rome by the apostles. The catacomb consisted
originally of two sections; one for the use of those members of the
imperial Flavian family who had been converted to the gospel, and one
for common use. I have already given a brief account of the first (see
p. 10). The entrance to the crypts was built in a conspicuous place,
under the safeguard of the law which guaranteed the inviolability of
private tombs. The place can still be visited. On each side of the
entrance are apartments for the celebration of anniversary banquets,
the [Greek: agapai] or love-feasts of the early Church. Those on the
left are decorated in the so-called Pompeian style, with birds and
festoons on a red ground. Here is the well, the drinking-fountain, the
washing-trough, and the wardrobe. On the opposite side is the
_schola_, or banqueting-room, with benches on three sides. There is no
doubt that the builders and owners of these crypts were Christians;
because the graves within were arranged for the interment of bodies,
not for cremation; that is, for sarcophagi and coffins, not for
cinerary urns; and, as I stated at the beginning of the previous
chapter, the pagans of the first century, and of the first half of the
second, were never interred. The Domitilla after whom the catacombs
were named was a niece of Vespasian, _Divi Vespasiani neptis_. The
reader will remember that in chapter i. I quoted Xiphilinus as saying
that in the year 95 some members of the imperial family were condemned
by Domitian on the charge of atheism, together with other leading
personages, who had adopted "the customs and persuasion of the
Jews,"--an expression which means the Christian faith. Among those
condemned he mentions Clemens and Domitilla, whose genealogy is still
subject to some uncertainty.

A tombstone discovered in 1741, by Marangoni, in these very catacombs,
mentions two names, Flavius Sabinus and Flavia Titiana. They are
descendants, perhaps grandchildren, of Flavius Sabinus, the brother of
Vespasian. Sabinus was prefect of Rome during the persecution of Nero;
but Tacitus[159] describes him as a gentle man, who hated violence
(_mitem virum abhorrentem a sanguine et caedibus_). His second son,
Titus Flavius Clemens, consul A. D. 82, was executed in 95 on account
of his Christian faith; and Flavia Domitilla, his daughter-in-law, was
banished for the same cause to the island Pandataria. There is a
record of the banishment of another Flavia Domitilla to the island of
Pontia; but her genealogy and relationship with the former have not
been yet clearly established. Some writers, however, have identified
her with the niece of Vespasian, mentioned in the inscription referred
to above, as owner of the villa of Torre Marancia and founder of the
catacombs. The small island, where she spent many years in solitary
confinement, is described by S. Jerome as one of the leading places of
pilgrimage in the fourth century of our era.

The "Acta Martyrum" state that Flavia Domitilla, niece of Flavius
Clemens, was buried at Terracina, with her attendants, Theodora and
Euphrosyne; and that her body-servants, or _cubicularii_, Nereus and
Achilleus, who were executed for the same reason, were laid to rest in
the crypts of the Villa Amaranthiana, half a mile from Rome, near the
tomb of Petronilla, the so-called daughter of S. Peter. In the early
itineraries the place is also indicated as the "cemetery of
Domitilla, Nereus, and Achilleus, near Santa Petronilla." Bosio
discovered it towards the end of the sixteenth century, and mistook it
for the Cemetery of Callixtus. The discoveries made in 1873 leave no
doubt as to its identification with the famous burial-place of the
Flavians; they brought to light, not a crypt of ordinary dimensions,
but a basilica equal in size to the one dedicated to S. Lorenzo by
Constantine.

[Illustration: Basilica of Nereus, Achilleus and Petronilla.]

The pavement of the basilica is sunk to the level of the second floor
of the catacombs, in order that the graves of Nereus, Achilleus, and
Petronilla could be enclosed in the altar, without being raised, or
touched at all. The body of the church is divided into nave and aisles
by two rows of columns, mostly of _cipollino_, some of which were
stolen in 1871 by the farmer; the others were found in 1876 lying on
the floor, in parallel lines from northeast to southwest, as if they
had been overthrown by an earthquake.

A fragment of one of the four columns which supported the ciborium
above the high altar has been found in the apse. This fragment
contains a bas-relief representing the execution of a martyr. The
young man is tied to a stake, which is surmounted by a cross-beam,
like a [Symbol: T], the true shape of the _patibulum cruciforme_. A
soldier, dressed in a tunic and mantle, seizes the prisoner with the
right hand, and stabs him in the neck with the left. The weapon used
is not a lictor's axe, nor the sword of a legionary, but a sort of
cutlass, which would be more likely to cut the throat than to sever
the head from the body. The cross is crowned by a triumphal wreath, as
a symbol of the immortal recompense which awaits the confessor of the
Faith. The historical value of this rare sculpture is determined by
the name, ACILLEVS, engraved above it.

[Illustration: The Execution of Acilleus.]

The character of the letters and the style of the bas-relief are those
of the second half of the fourth century. Of the sister column, with
the name and martyrdom of NEREVS, only a small bit has been found.
Another monument of equal value is a broken slab containing, in the
first line, the letters ....RVM; in the second, the letters ....ORVM;
and below these, the cross-shaped anchor, the mysterious but certain
emblem of Christian hope. As the position of the symbol determines the
middle point of the inscription, it is easy to reconstruct the whole
text, by a careful calculation of the size of each letter:--

[Illustration: SEPVLCRVM FLAVIORVM]

"the tomb of the Flavian family," namely, of those relatives of
Domitilla who had embraced the Christian faith.

Under the pavement of the nave, aisles, and presbytery, are numberless
graves, some of which belong to the original catacombs, before they
were cut and disarranged by the building of the basilica; others are
built in accordance with the architectural lines of the basilica
itself. A grave belonging to the first series, that is, to a gallery
of the catacombs which had been blocked by the foundations of the left
aisle, bears the date of the year 390; while a sarcophagus placed at
the foot of the altar is dated Monday, May 12, 395. It is evident,
therefore, that the basilica was built between 390 and 395, during the
pontificate of Siricius.

No memorial of Petronilla, the third saint for whom the building was
named, has been found within the sacred enclosure,--a fact not wholly
unexpected, because the coffin in which her remains were placed is
known to have been removed to the Vatican by Paul I. (755-756), at the
request of the king of France. In November, 1875, a cubiculum was
found at the back of the apse, connected with it by a corridor which
opens near the episcopal chair. The walls of this passage are covered
with _graffiti_ and other records of pilgrims. The cubiculum contains
two graves: one empty, in the arcosolium, the place of honor; the
other, in front of it, of a much later date. The front of the
arcosolium is closed by a wall, on the surface of which is an
interesting fresco, which is here reproduced.

[Illustration: Petronilla and Veneranda.]

The younger figure, on the right, is Petronilla Martyr; the elder is a
matron named Veneranda, buried January 7 (DEP_osita_ VI. IDVS.
IANVARIAS), in the sarcophagus below the picture. There is no doubt
that Petronilla was buried in close proximity to this cubiculum. The
story of her relationship to S. Peter has no foundation whatever; it
rests on an etymological mistake, by which the name Petronilla is
treated as a diminutive of Petrus, as is Plautilla of Plautius or
Plautia, and Domitilla of Domitius or Domitia. Petrus is not a Latin
name; it came into use with the spreading of the gospel, and only in
rare and exceptional cases. The young martyr was named after a member
of the same Flavian family to which this cemetery belonged, Titus
Flavius Petron, an uncle of Vespasian. Her kinship with the apostle
must consequently be taken in a spiritual sense.

Towards the end of 1881 another remarkable discovery took place in
these catacombs: that of a cubiculum which in style of decoration is
unique. It looks more like the room of a Pompeian house than a
Christian crypt. Its architectural paintings with groups of frail
columns supporting fantastic friezes, and enclosing pastoral
landscapes, might be compared to the frescoes of the Golden House of
Nero, or those of the house of Germanicus on the Palatine; but they
find no parallel in "subterranean Rome."

The name of the owner of this conspicuous tomb is engraved above the
arcosolium: AMPLIATI. The size and the beauty of the letters, the
peculiarity of a single cognomen in a possessive case, the fact that a
man of inferior condition[160] should own such a tomb; that at a later
period, a staircase had been cut through the rock, to provide a direct
communication between the Via Ardeatina and the tomb, for the
accommodation of pilgrims; the care used to keep the tomb in good
order, as shown by later restorations,--all these circumstances make
us believe that Ampliatus was a prominent leader of our early
Christian community.

Such being the case, the mind runs at once to the paragraph of S.
Paul's Epistle to the Romans (xvi. 8): "Salute Ampliatus my beloved in
the Lord," and one feels inclined to kneel before the tomb of the dear
friend of the apostle. However, when discoveries of this kind happen,
it is wise to proceed with caution, and examine every detail from a
sceptical point of view. Doubtless the cubiculum of Ampliatus was made
and painted in the first century of our era. The type of the letters
engraved above the tomb is peculiar to painted or written inscriptions
of the beginning of the second century. It is possible, therefore,
that the name was at first painted on the white plaster, and engraved
on marble many years after the deposition of Ampliatus. As regards
Ampliatus himself, it is true that according to Greek tradition he
died when Bishop of Moesia,[161] but the tradition is derived from
an apocryphal source. There are those who doubt whether all the
salutations contained in S. Paul's epistle are really addressed to the
faithful residing in Rome and belonging to the Roman community.[162]
Another difficulty arises from the fact that in the same cubiculum a
tombstone has been found, inserted in the wall above the arcosolium,
between two painted peacocks, with this inscription: "Aurelius
Ampliatus and his son Gordianus have placed this memorial to Aurelia
Bonifatia, wife and mother incomparable, and truly chaste, who lived
25 years, 2 months, 4 days, and 2 hours." Although the name Aurelius
is not uncommon on tombstones of the first century in this very
Cemetery of Domitilla, there is no doubt that the tablet of Aurelia
Bonifatia belongs to a later period. The name Bonifatius--derived from
_bonum fatum_, not from _bonum facere_ as commonly believed--did not
come into use before the middle of the second century. At all events,
Ampliatus, husband of Bonifatia and father of Gordianus, may be the
son, grandson, or even a later descendant of the man in whose memory
the cubiculum was originally built.

Shall we recognize in this man the friend of S. Paul? I do not think
the question can as yet be answered with certainty. Further
excavations in the galleries radiating from the crypt may disclose
fresh particulars, and supply more conclusive evidence.

The discoveries of which a summary description has here been given
deserve a place of honor in the comments to Suetonius' "Lives of the
Emperors." The exploration of underground Rome must be greeted with
pleasure, not only by the pious believers in Christ and his martyrs,
but also by agnostic students of classical history. A tombstone, which
on one side is inscribed with the records of the victories gained by
the imperial legions, on the other with the simple and humble name of
a Christian who has given his life for his faith, is a monument worthy
the consideration of all thoughtful men. Christian archaeology has an
intimate and indissoluble connection with classical studies, and there
is no discovery referring to the first century of Christianity which
does not throw new and often unexpected light on general history, art,
and science. Those made at Torre Marancia in 1875 illustrate the
history of Rome and the Campagna, after the fall of the empire. In the
niche where the episcopal chair was placed,--behind the high altar, in
the middle of the apse,--a rough hand has sketched the figure of a
priest, dressed in a casula, in the act of preaching from his seat.
This sketch reminds us of Gregory the Great, when in this very
cemetery of Nereus and Achilleus, in this very apse, he read one of
his homilies from this episcopal chair, deploring to the
panic-stricken congregation the state of the city, the queen of the
world, desolated by famine, by pestilence, and by the Lombards, who at
that very moment were burning and plundering the villas and farms of
the surrounding Campagna.


CEMETERY AD CATACUMBAS.[163] The cemetery near the church of S.
Sebastiano was originally called in an indefinite way _cimiterium ad
catacumbas_. The etymology of the name is uncertain. De Rossi suggests
the roots _cata_, a Graeco-Latin preposition of the decadence,
signifying "near," and _cumba_, a resting-place. The word would
therefore mean _apud accubitoria_, "near the resting-places," an
allusion to the many tombs which surrounded the old crypt above and
below ground. This crypt dates from apostolic times, or, at all
events, from a period much earlier than the martyrdom of Sebastian,
the Christian officer whose name it now bears.

The great interest of the cemetery is derived from the shelter which
the bodies of the apostles are said to have had in its recesses during
the fiercest times of persecution. The temporary transferment of the
remains of SS. Peter and Paul, from their graves on the Via Cornelia
and the Via Ostiensis, to the catacombs, is not a mere tradition. It
is described by Pope Damasus in a metric inscription published by de
Rossi,[164] and by Pope Gregory in an epistle to the empress
Constantina, no. 30 of book iv. A curious entry in the calendar called
_Bucherianum_, from its first editor, seems to point to a double
transferment. The entry is dated June 29, A. D. 258:--

_Tertio Kalendas Julias, Tusco et Basso consulibus, Petri in Vaticano,
Pauli in via Ostiensis--utriusque in Catacumbas._

Since, in early calendars, the date is only appended in case of
transferment of remains, archaeologists have suggested the theory that
the bodies of the apostles may possibly have found shelter in the
catacombs of the Appian Way a second time, during the persecution of
Valerian (A. D. 258). Marchi asserts that the evidences of a double
concealment are still to be found in the frescoes of the crypt, some
of which belong to the first, others to the third, century; but this
hardly seems to be the case. I lowered myself into the hiding-place on
February 23 of the present year, and, after careful examination, have
come to the conclusion that its paintings are by one hand and of one
epoch, the epoch of Damasus. However, whether they were laid there
once or twice, its temporary connection with the apostles made the
"locus ad catacumbas" one of the great suburban sanctuaries. The
cubiculum, called Platonia, was decorated by Damasus with marble
incrustations. According to the Acts of S. Sebastian (January 20) he
expressed the wish to be buried "_ad catacumbas_, at the entrance of
the crypt, near the memorial of the apostles." These events were
represented in the frescoes of the old portico of S. Peter's,
destroyed in 1606-1607 by Paul V. One of them showed the bodies of
the apostles, bandaged like mummies, being lowered into the place of
concealment; the other, Lucina and Cornelius bringing back the bodies
to their original graves in the Via Cornelia and the Via Ostiensis.

A remarkable monument was discovered in the crypt four years ago. It
is a marble bust, or rather the fragment of a bust, of the Redeemer,
with locks of hair descending on each shoulder,[165] a work of the
fourth century.

It is well known that the oldest representations of the Redeemer are
purely ideal. He appears as a young man, with no beard, his hair
arranged in the Roman style, wearing a short tunic, and showing the
amiable countenance of the Good Shepherd. I give here a characteristic
specimen of this type, a statue of the first quarter of the third
century, now in the Lateran Museum.[166] Whether performing one of the
miracles which prove his divinity, or teaching the new doctrine to the
disciples, the type never varies. It is evident that the Christian
painters or sculptors of the first three centuries, in drawing or
modelling the head of Jesus, had no intention of making a likeness,
but only a conventional type, noble and classic, and suggestive of the
eternal youth of the Word. A new tendency appears in Christian art
towards the middle of the fourth century, the attempt to reproduce the
genuine portrait of Christ, or what was regarded as such by the
Orientals. The change was a consequence of the peace and freedom given
to the Church, and of the cessation of that overbearing contempt in
which the Gentiles had held a religion which they believed to be that
of the vile followers of a crucified Jew. It had been considered
prudent, at the outset, to present the Redeemer to the neophytes, who
were not yet entirely free from pagan ideas, in a type which was
familiar and pleasing to the Roman eye, rather than with the
characteristics of a despised race. The triumph of the Church made
these precautions unnecessary, and then arose the desire of exhibiting
a truer portraiture of Christ. The first addition to the conventional
type was that of the beard, and probably of the hair parted in the
middle.

[Illustration: The portrait head of Jesus in the Sancta Sanctorum.]

[Illustration: THE IDEAL ROMAN FIGURE OF CHRIST]

Ancient writers have left but little information about the personal
appearance of the Saviour; and the vagueness of their accounts proves
the absence of a type which was universally recognized as authentic.
Many documents concerning this subject must be rejected as forgeries
of a later age. Such is the pretended letter of Lentulus, governor of
Judaea, to the Senate, describing the appearance of Jesus. In the same
way we should regard the images attributed to Nicodemus and Luke, and
those called _acheiropitae_ (not painted by human hands), like the
famous one of the chapel of the Sancta Sanctorum,[167] the first
historical mention of which dates from A. D. 752, when Pope Stephen
II. carried it in a procession from the Lateran to S. Maria Maggiore,
to obtain divine protection against Aistulphus. Garrucci questions
whether it may not be that of Camulianus, described by Gregory of
Nyssa; or a copy of the image alleged to have been sent by the Saviour
himself to Abgar, king of Edessa,[168] with an autograph letter. Must
we consider these and other portraits, like the "Volto Santo" in the
Vatican, as fanciful as the old youthful Roman type of the Good
Shepherd? There can be no doubt that in some provinces of the East,
like Palestine, Syria, and Phoenicia, the oral traditions about the
personal appearance of the Saviour were kept for many generations. It
is also probable that the tradition was confirmed by some work of art,
like the celebrated group of Paneas (Banias). With regard to this,
Eusebius says that the woman with the issue of blood, grateful to the
Saviour for her cure (Mark v., 25-34), caused a statue, representing
Him in the act of performing the miracle, to be set up in front of her
house; that it still existed when he wrote, and was held in great
veneration throughout Palestine and the whole East. Sozomenos adds
that Julian the Apostate substituted his own statue for it, but that
the imperial image was struck by lightning. This excited the wrath of
