    Seeking thy mother, counsel her to wed
    The noblest, and who offers richest dow'r,
    That thou, for thy peculiar, may'st enjoy
    Thy own inheritance in peace and ease,
    And she, departing, find another home.
      To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied.
    I swear by Jove, and by my father's woes,                        410
    Who either hath deceased far from his home,
    Or lives a wand'rer, that I interpose
    No hindrance to her nuptials. Let her wed
    Who offers most, and even whom she will.
    But to dismiss her rudely were a deed
    Unfilial--That I dare not--God forbid!
      So spake Telemachus. Then Pallas struck
    The suitors with delirium; wide they stretch'd
    Their jaws with unspontaneous laughter loud;
    Their meat dripp'd blood; tears fill'd their eyes, and dire
    Presages of approaching woe, their hearts.                       421
    Then thus the prophet Theoclymenus.[95]
      Ah miserable men! what curse is this
    That takes you now? night wraps itself around
    Your faces, bodies, limbs; the palace shakes
    With peals of groans--and oh, what floods ye weep!
    I see the walls and arches dappled thick
    With gore; the vestibule is throng'd, the court
    On all sides throng'd with apparitions grim
    Of slaughter'd men sinking into the gloom                        430
    Of Erebus; the sun is blotted out
    From heav'n, and midnight whelms you premature.
      He said, they, hearing, laugh'd; and thus the son
    Of Polybus, Eurymachus replied.
      This wand'rer from a distant shore hath left
    His wits behind. Hoa there! conduct him hence
    Into the forum; since he dreams it night
    Already, teach him there that it is day.
      Then answer'd godlike Theoclymenus.
    I have no need, Eurymachus, of guides                            440
    To lead me hence, for I have eyes and ears,
    The use of both my feet, and of a mind
    In no respect irrational or wild.
    These shall conduct me forth, for well I know
    That evil threatens you, such, too, as none
    Shall 'scape of all the suitors, whose delight
    Is to insult the unoffending guest
    Received beneath this hospitable roof.
      He said, and, issuing from the palace, sought
    Piraeus' house, who gladly welcom'd him.                          450
    Then all the suitors on each other cast
    A look significant, and, to provoke
    Telemachus the more, fleer'd at his guests.
    Of whom a youth thus, insolent began.
      No living wight, Telemachus, had e'er
    Guests such as thine. Witness, we know not who,
    This hungry vagabond, whose means of life
    Are none, and who hath neither skill nor force
    To earn them, a mere burthen on the ground.
    Witness the other also, who upstarts                             460
    A prophet suddenly. Take my advice;
    I counsel wisely; send them both on board
    Some gallant bark to Sicily for sale;
    Thus shall they somewhat profit thee at last.
      So spake the suitors, whom Telemachus
    Heard unconcern'd, and, silent, look'd and look'd
    Toward his father, watching still the time
    When he should punish that licentious throng.
    Meantime, Icarius' daughter, who had placed
    Her splendid seat opposite, heard distinct                       470
    Their taunting speeches. They, with noisy mirth,
    Feasted deliciously, for they had slain
    Many a fat victim; but a sadder feast
    Than, soon, the Goddess and the warrior Chief
    Should furnish for them, none shall ever share.
    Of which their crimes had furnish'd first the cause.


FOOTNOTES:

[88] That is, how shall I escape the vengeance of their kindred?

[89] Aedon, Cleothera, Merope.

[90] +muelon andron+.

[91] The new moon.

[92] He is often called--+pater andron te theon te+.

[93] Household Gods who presided over the hearth.

[94] A smile of displeasure.

[95] Who had sought refuge in the ship of Telemachus when he left Sparta,
and came with him to Ithaca.




BOOK XXI

ARGUMENT

Penelope proposes to the suitors a contest with the bow, herself the
prize. They prove unable to bend the bow; when Ulysses having with some
difficulty possessed himself of it, manages it with the utmost ease, and
dispatches his arrow through twelve rings erected for the trial.


    Minerva, now, Goddess caerulean-eyed,
    Prompted Icarius' daughter, the discrete
    Penelope, with bow and rings to prove
    Her suitors in Ulysses' courts, a game
    Terrible in conclusion to them all.
    First, taking in her hand the brazen key
    Well-forged, and fitted with an iv'ry grasp,
    Attended by the women of her train
    She sought her inmost chamber, the recess
    In which she kept the treasures of her Lord,                      10
    His brass, his gold, and steel elaborate.
    Here lay his stubborn bow, and quiver fill'd
    With num'rous shafts, a fatal store. That bow
    He had received and quiver from the hand
    Of godlike Iphitus Eurytides,
    Whom, in Messenia,[96] in the house he met
    Of brave Orsilochus. Ulysses came
    Demanding payment of arrearage due
    From all that land; for a Messenian fleet
    Had borne from Ithaca three hundred sheep,                        20
    With all their shepherds; for which cause, ere yet
    Adult, he voyaged to that distant shore,
    Deputed by his sire, and by the Chiefs
    Of Ithaca, to make the just demand.
    But Iphitus had thither come to seek
    Twelve mares and twelve mule colts which he had lost,
    A search that cost him soon a bloody death.
    For, coming to the house of Hercules
    The valiant task-performing son of Jove,
    He perish'd there, slain by his cruel host                        30
    Who, heedless of heav'n's wrath, and of the rights
    Of his own board, first fed, then slaughter'd him;
    For in _his_ house the mares and colts were hidden.
    He, therefore, occupied in that concern,
    Meeting Ulysses there, gave him the bow
    Which, erst, huge Eurytus had borne, and which
    Himself had from his dying sire received.
    Ulysses, in return, on him bestowed
    A spear and sword, pledges of future love
    And hospitality; but never more                                   40
    They met each other at the friendly board,
    For, ere that hour arrived, the son of Jove
    Slew his own guest, the godlike Iphitus.
    Thus came the bow into Ulysses' hands,
    Which, never in his gallant barks he bore
    To battle with him, (though he used it oft
    In times of peace) but left it safely stored
    At home, a dear memorial of his friend.
      Soon as, divinest of her sex, arrived
    At that same chamber, with her foot she press'd                   50
    The oaken threshold bright, on which the hand
    Of no mean architect had stretch'd the line,
    Who had erected also on each side
    The posts on which the splendid portals hung,
    She loos'd the ring and brace, then introduced
    The key, and aiming at them from without,[97]
    Struck back the bolts. The portals, at that stroke,
    Sent forth a tone deep as the pastur'd bull's,
    And flew wide open. She, ascending, next,
    The elevated floor on which the chests                            60
    That held her own fragrant apparel stood,
    With lifted hand aloft took down the bow
    In its embroider'd bow-case safe enclosed.
    Then, sitting there, she lay'd it on her knees,
    Weeping aloud, and drew it from the case.
    Thus weeping over it long time she sat,
    Till satiate, at the last, with grief and tears,
    Descending by the palace steps she sought
    Again the haughty suitors, with the bow
    Elastic, and the quiver in her hand                               70
    Replete with pointed shafts, a deadly store.
    Her maidens, as she went, bore after her
    A coffer fill'd with prizes by her Lord,
    Much brass and steel; and when at length she came,
    Loveliest of women, where the suitors sat,
    Between the pillars of the stately dome
    Pausing, before her beauteous face she held
    Her lucid veil, and by two matrons chaste
    Supported, the assembly thus address'd.
      Ye noble suitors hear, who rudely haunt                         80
    This palace of a Chief long absent hence,
    Whose substance ye have now long time consumed,
    Nor palliative have yet contrived, or could,
    Save your ambition to make me a bride--
    Attend this game to which I call you forth.
    Now suitors! prove yourselves with this huge bow
    Of wide-renown'd Ulysses; he who draws
    Easiest the bow, and who his arrow sends
    Through twice six rings, he takes me to his home,
    And I must leave this mansion of my youth                         90
    Plenteous, magnificent, which, doubtless, oft
    I shall remember even in my dreams.
      So saying, she bade Eumaeus lay the bow
    Before them, and the twice six rings of steel.
    He wept, received them, and obey'd; nor wept
    The herdsman less, seeing the bow which erst
    His Lord had occupied; when at their tears
    Indignant, thus, Antinoues began.
      Ye rural drones, whose purblind eyes see not
    Beyond the present hour, egregious fools!                        100
    Why weeping trouble ye the Queen, too much
    Before afflicted for her husband lost?
    Either partake the banquet silently,
    Or else go weep abroad, leaving the bow,
    That stubborn test, to us; for none, I judge,
    None here shall bend this polish'd bow with ease,
    Since in this whole assembly I discern
    None like Ulysses, whom myself have seen
    And recollect, though I was then a boy.
      He said, but in his heart, meantime, the hope                  110
    Cherish'd, that he should bend, himself, the bow,
    And pass the rings; yet was he destin'd first
    Of all that company to taste the steel
    Of brave Ulysses' shaft, whom in that house
    He had so oft dishonour'd, and had urged
    So oft all others to the like offence.
    Amidst them, then, the sacred might arose
    Of young Telemachus, who thus began.
      Saturnian Jove questionless hath deprived
    Me of all reason. My own mother, fam'd                           120
    For wisdom as she is, makes known to all
    Her purpose to abandon this abode
    And follow a new mate, while, heedless, I
    Trifle and laugh as I were still a child.
    But come, ye suitors! since the prize is such,
    A woman like to whom none can be found
    This day in all Achaia; on the shores
    Of sacred Pylus; in the cities proud
    Of Argos or Mycenae; or even here
    In Ithaca; or yet within the walls                               130
    Of black Epirus; and since this yourselves
    Know also, wherefore should I speak her praise?
    Come then, delay not, waste not time in vain
    Excuses, turn not from the proof, but bend
    The bow, that thus the issue may be known.
    I also will, myself, that task essay;
    And should I bend the bow, and pass the rings,
    Then shall not my illustrious mother leave
    Her son forlorn, forsaking this abode
    To follow a new spouse, while I remain                           140
    Disconsolate, although of age to bear,
    Successful as my sire, the prize away.
      So saying, he started from his seat, cast off
    His purple cloak, and lay'd his sword aside,
    Then fix'd, himself, the rings, furrowing the earth
    By line, and op'ning one long trench for all,
    And stamping close the glebe. Amazement seized
    All present, seeing with how prompt a skill
    He executed, though untaught, his task.
    Then, hasting to the portal, there he stood.                     150
    Thrice, struggling, he essay'd to bend the bow,
    And thrice desisted, hoping still to draw
    The bow-string home, and shoot through all the rings.[98]
    And now the fourth time striving with full force
    He had prevail'd to string it, but his sire
    Forbad his eager efforts by a sign.
    Then thus the royal youth to all around--
      Gods! either I shall prove of little force
    Hereafter, and for manly feats unapt,
    Or I am yet too young, and have not strength                     160
    To quell the aggressor's contumely. But come--
    (For ye have strength surpassing mine) try ye
    The bow, and bring this contest to an end.
      He ceas'd, and set the bow down on the floor,
    Reclining it against the shaven pannels smooth
    That lined the wall; the arrow next he placed,
    Leaning against the bow's bright-polish'd horn,
    And to the seat, whence he had ris'n, return'd.
    Then thus Eupithes' son, Antinoues spake.
      My friends! come forth successive from the right,[99]          170
    Where he who ministers the cup begins.
      So spake Antinoues, and his counsel pleased.
    Then, first, Leiodes, Oenop's son, arose.
    He was their soothsayer, and ever sat
    Beside the beaker, inmost of them all.
    To him alone, of all, licentious deeds
    Were odious, and, with indignation fired,
    He witness'd the excesses of the rest.
    He then took foremost up the shaft and bow,
    And, station'd at the portal, strove to bend                     180
    But bent it not, fatiguing, first, his hands
    Delicate and uncustom'd to the toil.
    He ceased, and the assembly thus bespake.
      My friends, I speed not; let another try;
    For many Princes shall this bow of life
    Bereave, since death more eligible seems,
    Far more, than loss of her, for whom we meet
    Continual here, expecting still the prize.
    Some suitor, haply, at this moment, hopes
    That he shall wed whom long he hath desired,                     190
    Ulysses' wife, Penelope; let him
    Essay the bow, and, trial made, address
    His spousal offers to some other fair
    Among the long-stoled Princesses of Greece,
    This Princess leaving his, whose proffer'd gifts
    Shall please her most, and whom the Fates ordain.
      He said, and set the bow down on the floor,
    Reclining it against the shaven pannels smooth
    That lined the wall; the arrow, next, he placed,
    Leaning against the bow's bright-polish'd horn,                  200
    And to the seat whence he had ris'n return'd.
    Then him Antinoues, angry, thus reproved.
      What word, Leiodes, grating to our ears
    Hath scap'd thy lips? I hear it with disdain.
    Shall this bow fatal prove to many a Prince,
    Because thou hast, thyself, too feeble proved
    To bend it? no. Thou wast not born to bend
    The unpliant bow, or to direct the shaft,
    But here are nobler who shall soon prevail.
      He said, and to Melanthius gave command,                       210
    The goat-herd. Hence, Melanthius, kindle fire;
    Beside it place, with fleeces spread, a form
    Of length commodious; from within procure
    A large round cake of suet next, with which
    When we have chafed and suppled the tough bow
    Before the fire, we will again essay
    To bend it, and decide the doubtful strife.
      He ended, and Melanthius, kindling fire
    Beside it placed, with fleeces spread, a form
    Of length commodious; next, he brought a cake                    220
    Ample and round of suet from within,
    With which they chafed the bow, then tried again
    To bend, but bent it not; superior strength
    To theirs that task required. Yet two, the rest
    In force surpassing, made no trial yet,
    Antinoues, and Eurymachus the brave.
      Then went the herdsman and the swine-herd forth
    Together; after whom, the glorious Chief
    Himself the house left also, and when all
    Without the court had met, with gentle speech                    230
    Ulysses, then, the faithful pair address'd.
      Herdsman! and thou, Eumaeus! shall I keep
    A certain secret close, or shall I speak
    Outright? my spirit prompts me, and I will.
    What welcome should Ulysses at your hands
    Receive, arriving suddenly at home,
    Some God his guide; would ye the suitors aid,
    Or would ye aid Ulysses? answer true.
      Then thus the chief intendant of his herds.
    Would Jove but grant me my desire, to see                        240
    Once more the Hero, and would some kind Pow'r,
    Restore him, I would shew thee soon an arm
    Strenuous to serve him, and a dauntless heart.
      Eumaeus, also, fervently implored
    The Gods in pray'r, that they would render back
    Ulysses to his home. He, then, convinced
    Of their unfeigning honesty, began.
      Behold him! I am he myself, arrived
    After long suff'rings in the twentieth year!
    I know how welcome to yourselves alone                           250
    Of all my train I come, for I have heard
    None others praying for my safe return.
    I therefore tell you truth; should heav'n subdue
    The suitors under me, ye shall receive
    Each at my hands a bride, with lands and house
    Near to my own, and ye shall be thenceforth
    Dear friends and brothers of the Prince my son.
    Lo! also this indisputable proof
    That ye may know and trust me. View it here.
    It is the scar which in Parnassus erst                           260
    (Where with the sons I hunted of renown'd
    Autolycus) I from a boar received.
      So saying, he stripp'd his tatters, and unveil'd
    The whole broad scar; then, soon as they had seen
    And surely recognized the mark, each cast
    His arms around Ulysses, wept, embraced
    And press'd him to his bosom, kissing oft
    His brows and shoulders, who as oft their hands
    And foreheads kiss'd, nor had the setting sun
    Beheld them satisfied, but that himself                          270
    Ulysses thus admonished them, and said.
      Cease now from tears, lest any, coming forth,
    Mark and report them to our foes within.
    Now, to the hall again, but one by one,
    Not all at once, I foremost, then yourselves,
    And this shall be the sign. Full well I know
    That, all unanimous, they will oppose
    Deliv'ry of the bow and shafts to me;
    But thou, (proceeding with it to my seat)
    Eumaeus, noble friend! shalt give the bow                         280
    Into my grasp; then bid the women close
    The massy doors, and should they hear a groan
    Or other noise made by the Princes shut
    Within the hall, let none set step abroad,
    But all work silent. Be the palace-door
    Thy charge, my good Philoetius! key it fast
    Without a moment's pause, and fix the brace.[100]
      He ended, and, returning to the hall,
    Resumed his seat; nor stay'd his servants long
    Without, but follow'd their illustrious Lord.                    290
    Eurymachus was busily employ'd
    Turning the bow, and chafing it before
    The sprightly blaze, but, after all, could find
    No pow'r to bend it. Disappointment wrung
    A groan from his proud heart, and thus he said.
      Alas! not only for myself I grieve,
    But grieve for all. Nor, though I mourn the loss
    Of such a bride, mourn I that loss alone,
    (For lovely Greecians may be found no few
    In Ithaca, and in the neighbour isles)                           300
    But should we so inferior prove at last
    To brave Ulysses, that no force of ours
    Can bend his bow, we are for ever shamed.
      To whom Antinoues, thus, Eupithes' son.
    Not so; (as even thou art well-assured
    Thyself, Eurymachus!) but Phoebus claims
    This day his own. Who then, on such a day,
    Would strive to bend it? Let it rather rest.
    And should we leave the rings where now they stand,
    I trust that none ent'ring Ulysses' house                        310
    Will dare displace them. Cup-bearer, attend!
    Serve all with wine, that, first, libation made,
    We may religiously lay down the bow.
    Command ye too Melanthius, that he drive
    Hither the fairest goats of all his flocks
    At dawn of day, that burning first, the thighs
    To the ethereal archer, we may make
    New trial, and decide, at length, the strife.
      So spake Antinoues, and his counsel pleased.
    The heralds, then, pour'd water on their hands,                  320
    While youths crown'd high the goblets which they bore
    From right to left, distributing to all.
    When each had made libation, and had drunk
    Till well sufficed, then, artful to effect
    His shrewd designs, Ulysses thus began.
      Hear, O ye suitors of the illustrious Queen,
    My bosom's dictates. But I shall entreat
    Chiefly Eurymachus and the godlike youth
    Antinoues, whose advice is wisely giv'n.
      Tamper no longer with the bow, but leave                       330
    The matter with the Gods, who shall decide
    The strife to-morrow, fav'ring whom they will.
    Meantime, grant _me_ the polish'd bow, that I
    May trial make among you of my force,
    If I retain it still in like degree
    As erst, or whether wand'ring and defect
    Of nourishment have worn it all away.
      He said, whom they with indignation heard
    Extreme, alarm'd lest he should bend the bow,
    And sternly thus Antinoues replied.                               340
      Desperate vagabond! ah wretch deprived
    Of reason utterly! art not content?
    Esteem'st it not distinction proud enough
    To feast with us the nobles of the land?
    None robs thee of thy share, thou witnessest
    Our whole discourse, which, save thyself alone,
    No needy vagrant is allow'd to hear.
    Thou art befool'd by wine, as many have been,
    Wide-throated drinkers, unrestrain'd by rule.
    Wine in the mansion of the mighty Chief                          350
    Pirithoues, made the valiant Centaur mad
    Eurytion, at the Lapithaean feast.[101]
    He drank to drunkenness, and being drunk,
    Committed great enormities beneath
    Pirithoues' roof, and such as fill'd with rage
    The Hero-guests; who therefore by his feet
    Dragg'd him right through the vestibule, amerced
    Of nose and ears, and he departed thence
    Provoked to frenzy by that foul disgrace,
    Whence war between the human kind arose                          360
    And the bold Centaurs--but he first incurred
    By his ebriety that mulct severe.
    Great evil, also, if thou bend the bow,
    To thee I prophesy; for thou shalt find
    Advocate or protector none in all
    This people, but we will dispatch thee hence
    Incontinent on board a sable bark
    To Echetus, the scourge of human kind,
    From whom is no escape. Drink then in peace,
    And contest shun with younger men than thou.                     370
      Him answer'd, then, Penelope discrete.
    Antinoues! neither seemly were the deed
    Nor just, to maim or harm whatever guest
    Whom here arrived Telemachus receives.
    Canst thou expect, that should he even prove
    Stronger than ye, and bend the massy bow,
    He will conduct me hence to his own home,
    And make me his own bride? No such design
    His heart conceives, or hope; nor let a dread
    So vain the mind of any overcloud                                380
    Who banquets here, since it dishonours me.
      So she; to whom Eurymachus reply'd,
    Offspring of Polybus. O matchless Queen!
    Icarius' prudent daughter! none suspects
    That thou wilt wed with him; a mate so mean
    Should ill become thee; but we fear the tongues
    Of either sex, lest some Achaian say
    Hereafter, (one inferior far to us)
    Ah! how unworthy are they to compare
    With him whose wife they seek! to bend his bow                   390
    Pass'd all their pow'r, yet this poor vagabond,
    Arriving from what country none can tell,
    Bent it with ease, and shot through all the rings.
    So will they speak, and so shall we be shamed.
      Then answer, thus, Penelope return'd.
    No fair report, Eurymachus, attends
    Their names or can, who, riotous as ye,
    The house dishonour, and consume the wealth
    Of such a Chief. Why shame ye thus _yourselves_?
    The guest is of athletic frame, well form'd,                     400
    And large of limb; he boasts him also sprung
    From noble ancestry. Come then--consent--
    Give him the bow, that we may see the proof;
    For thus I say, and thus will I perform;
    Sure as he bends it, and Apollo gives
    To him that glory, tunic fair and cloak
    Shall be his meed from me, a javelin keen
    To guard him against men and dogs, a sword
    Of double edge, and sandals for his feet,
    And I will send him whither most he would.                       410
      Her answer'd then prudent Telemachus.
    Mother--the bow is mine; and, save myself,
    No Greek hath right to give it, or refuse.
    None who in rock-bound Ithaca possess
    Dominion, none in the steed-pastured isles
    Of Elis, if I chose to make the bow
    His own for ever, should that choice controul.
    But thou into the house repairing, ply
    Spindle and loom, thy province, and enjoin
    Diligence to thy maidens; for the bow                            420
    Is man's concern alone, and shall be mine
    Especially, since I am master here.
      She heard astonish'd, and the prudent speech
    Reposing of her son deep in her heart,
    Withdrew; then mounting with her female train
    To her superior chamber, there she wept
    Her lost Ulysses, till Minerva bathed
    With balmy dews of sleep her weary lids.
    And now the noble swine-herd bore the bow
    Toward Ulysses, but with one voice all                           430
    The suitors, clamorous, reproved the deed,
    Of whom a youth, thus, insolent exclaim'd.
      Thou clumsy swine-herd, whither bear'st the bow,
    Delirious wretch? the hounds that thou hast train'd
    Shall eat thee at thy solitary home
    Ere long, let but Apollo prove, at last,
    Propitious to us, and the Pow'rs of heav'n.
      So they, whom hearing he replaced the bow
    Where erst it stood, terrified at the sound
    Of such loud menaces; on the other side                          440
    Telemachus as loud assail'd his ear.
      Friend! forward with the bow; or soon repent
    That thou obey'dst the many. I will else
    With huge stones drive thee, younger as I am,
    Back to the field. My strength surpasses thine.
    I would to heav'n that I in force excell'd
    As far, and prowess, every suitor here!
    So would I soon give rude dismission hence
    To some, who live but to imagine harm.
      He ceased, whose words the suitors laughing heard.             450
    And, for their sake, in part their wrath resign'd
    Against Telemachus; then through the hall
    Eumaeus bore, and to Ulysses' hand
    Consign'd the bow; next, summoning abroad
    The ancient nurse, he gave her thus in charge.
      It is the pleasure of Telemachus,
    Sage Euryclea! that thou key secure
    The doors; and should you hear, perchance, a groan
    Or other noise made by the Princes shut
    Within the hall, let none look, curious, forth,                  460
    But each in quietness pursue her work.
      So he; nor flew his words useless away,
    But she, incontinent, shut fast the doors.
    Then, noiseless, sprang Philoetius forth, who closed
    The portals also of the palace-court.
    A ship-rope of AEgyptian reed, it chanced,
    Lay in the vestibule; with that he braced
    The doors securely, and re-entring fill'd
    Again his seat, but watchful, eyed his Lord.
