daughters. How they will scold, and what a rage they will be in, when I
come to take the head of the table! But I give them only a month to
be angry; at the end of that time they shall love me every one, and
so shall Lord Arran, and so shall all his Grace's Scots vassals and
followers in the Highlands. I'm bent on it; and when I take a thing in
my head, 'tis done. His Grace is the greatest gentleman in Europe, and
I'll try and make him happy; and, when the King comes back, you may
count on my protection, Cousin Esmond--for come back the King will and
shall; and I'll bring him back from Versailles, if he comes under my
hoop."

"I hope the world will make you happy, Beatrix," says Esmond, with a
sigh. "You'll be Beatrix till you are my Lady Duchess--will you not? I
shall then make your Grace my very lowest bow."

"None of these sighs and this satire, cousin," she says. "I take his
Grace's great bounty thankfully--yes, thankfully; and will wear his
honors becomingly. I do not say he hath touched my heart; but he has my
gratitude, obedience, admiration--I have told him that, and no more;
and with that his noble heart is content. I have told him all--even the
story of that poor creature that I was engaged to--and that I could not
love; and I gladly gave his word back to him, and jumped for joy to get
back my own. I am twenty-five years old."

"Twenty-six, my dear," says Esmond.

"Twenty-five, sir--I choose to be twenty-five; and in eight years no man
hath ever touched my heart. Yes--you did once, for a little, Harry, when
you came back after Lille, and engaging with that murderer Mohun, and
saving Frank's life. I thought I could like you; and mamma begged me
hard, on her knees, and I did--for a day. But the old chill came over
me, Henry, and the old fear of you and your melancholy; and I was glad
when you went away, and engaged with my Lord Ashburnham, that I might
hear no more of you, that's the truth. You are too good for me, somehow.
I could not make you happy, and should break my heart in trying, and
not being able to love you. But if you had asked me when we gave you
the sword, you might have had me, sir, and we both should have been
miserable by this time. I talked with that silly lord all night just to
vex you and mamma, and I succeeded, didn't I? How frankly we can talk
of these things! It seems a thousand years ago: and, though we are here
sitting in the same room, there is a great wall between us. My dear,
kind, faithful, gloomy old cousin! I can like now, and admire you too,
sir, and say that you are brave, and very kind, and very true, and a
fine gentleman for all--for all your little mishap at your birth," says
she, wagging her arch head.

"And now, sir," says she, with a curtsy, "we must have no more talk
except when mamma is by, as his Grace is with us; for he does not half
like you, cousin, and is jealous as the black man in your favorite
play."

Though the very kindness of the words stabbed Mr. Esmond with the
keenest pang, he did not show his sense of the wound by any look of his
(as Beatrix, indeed, afterwards owned to him), but said, with a perfect
command of himself and an easy smile, "The interview must not end yet,
my dear, until I have had my last word. Stay, here comes your mother"
(indeed she came in here with her sweet anxious face, and Esmond going
up kissed her hand respectfully). "My dear lady may hear, too, the
last words, which are no secrets, and are only a parting benediction
accompanying a present for your marriage from an old gentleman your
guardian; for I feel as if I was the guardian of all the family, and an
old old fellow that is fit to be the grandfather of you all; and in this
character let me make my Lady Duchess her wedding present. They are the
diamonds my father's widow left me. I had thought Beatrix might have
had them a year ago; but they are good enough for a duchess, though not
bright enough for the handsomest woman in the world." And he took the
case out of his pocket in which the jewels were, and presented them to
his cousin.

She gave a cry of delight, for the stones were indeed very handsome,
and of great value; and the next minute the necklace was where Belinda's
cross is in Mr. Pope's admirable poem, and glittering on the whitest and
most perfectly-shaped neck in all England.

The girl's delight at receiving these trinkets was so great, that after
rushing to the looking-glass and examining the effect they produced upon
that fair neck which they surrounded, Beatrix was running back with her
arms extended, and was perhaps for paying her cousin with a price, that
he would have liked no doubt to receive from those beautiful rosy
lips of hers, but at this moment the door opened, and his Grace the
bridegroom elect was announced.

He looked very black upon Mr. Esmond, to whom he made a very low bow
indeed, and kissed the hand of each lady in his most ceremonious manner.
He had come in his chair from the palace hard by, and wore his two stars
of the Garter and the Thistle.

"Look, my Lord Duke," says Mistress Beatrix, advancing to him, and
showing the diamonds on her breast.

"Diamonds," says his Grace. "Hm! they seem pretty."

"They are a present on my marriage," says Beatrix.

"From her Majesty?" asks the Duke. "The Queen is very good."

"From my cousin Henry--from our cousin Henry"--cry both the ladies in a
breath.

"I have not the honor of knowing the gentleman. I thought that my Lord
Castlewood had no brother: and that on your ladyship's side there were
no nephews."

"From our cousin, Colonel Henry Esmond, my lord," says Beatrix, taking
the Colonel's hand very bravely,--"who was left guardian to us by our
father, and who has a hundred times shown his love and friendship for
our family."

"The Duchess of Hamilton receives no diamonds but from her husband,
madam," says the Duke--"may I pray you to restore these to Mr. Esmond?"

"Beatrix Esmond may receive a present from our kinsman and benefactor,
my Lord Duke," says Lady Castlewood, with an air of great dignity. "She
is my daughter yet: and if her mother sanctions the gift--no one else
hath the right to question it."

"Kinsman and benefactor!" says the Duke. "I know of no kinsman: and I do
not choose that my wife should have for benefactor a--"

"My lord!" says Colonel Esmond.

"I am not here to bandy words," says his Grace: "frankly I tell you
that your visits to this house are too frequent, and that I choose no
presents for the Duchess of Hamilton from gentlemen that bear a name
they have no right to."

"My lord!" breaks out Lady Castlewood, "Mr. Esmond hath the best right
to that name of any man in the world: and 'tis as old and as honorable
as your Grace's."

My Lord Duke smiled, and looked as if Lady Castlewood was mad, that was
so talking to him.

"If I called him benefactor," said my mistress, "it is because he has
been so to us--yes, the noblest, the truest, the bravest, the dearest of
benefactors. He would have saved my husband's life from Mohun's sword.
He did save my boy's, and defended him from that villain. Are those no
benefits?"

"I ask Colonel Esmond's pardon," says his Grace, if possible more
haughty than before. "I would say not a word that should give him
offence, and thank him for his kindness to your ladyship's family. My
Lord Mohun and I are connected, you know, by marriage--though neither
by blood nor friendship; but I must repeat what I said, that my wife can
receive no presents from Colonel Esmond."

"My daughter may receive presents from the Head of our House: my
daughter may thankfully take kindness from her father's, her mother's,
her brother's dearest friend; and be grateful for one more benefit
besides the thousand we owe him," cries Lady Esmond. "What is a string
of diamond stones compared to that affection he hath given us--our
dearest preserver and benefactor? We owe him not only Frank's life, but
our all--yes, our all," says my mistress, with a heightened color and a
trembling voice. "The title we bear is his, if he would claim it. 'Tis
we who have no right to our name: not he that's too great for it. He
sacrificed his name at my dying lord's bedside--sacrificed it to my
orphan children; gave up rank and honor because he loved us so nobly.
His father was Viscount of Castlewood and Marquis of Esmond before
him; and he is his father's lawful son and true heir, and we are the
recipients of his bounty, and he the chief of a house that's as old as
your own. And if he is content to forego his name that my child may
bear it, we love him and honor him and bless him under whatever name he
bears"--and here the fond and affectionate creature would have knelt to
Esmond again, but that he prevented her; and Beatrix, running up to her
with a pale face and a cry of alarm, embraced her and said, "Mother,
what is this?"

"'Tis a family secret, my Lord Duke," says Colonel Esmond: "poor Beatrix
knew nothing of it; nor did my lady till a year ago. And I have as good
a right to resign my title as your Grace's mother to abdicate hers to
you."

"I should have told everything to the Duke of Hamilton," said my
mistress, "had his Grace applied to me for my daughter's hand, and not
to Beatrix. I should have spoken with you this very day in private, my
lord, had not your words brought about this sudden explanation--and now
'tis fit Beatrix should hear it; and know, as I would have all the world
know, what we owe to our kinsman and patron."

And then in her touching way, and having hold of her daughter's hand,
and speaking to her rather than my Lord Duke, Lady Castlewood told the
story which you know already--lauding up to the skies her kinsman's
behavior. On his side Mr. Esmond explained the reasons that seemed quite
sufficiently cogent with him, why the succession in the family, as at
present it stood, should not be disturbed; and he should remain as he
was, Colonel Esmond.

"And Marquis of Esmond, my lord," says his Grace, with a low bow.
"Permit me to ask your lordship's pardon for words that were uttered in
ignorance; and to beg for the favor of your friendship. To be allied to
you, sir, must be an honor under whatever name you are known" (so his
Grace was pleased to say); "and in return for the splendid present you
make my wife, your kinswoman, I hope you will please to command any
service that James Douglas can perform. I shall never be easy until I
repay you a part of my obligations at least; and ere very long, and with
the mission her Majesty hath given me," says the Duke, "that may perhaps
be in my power. I shall esteem it as a favor, my lord, if Colonel Esmond
will give away the bride."

"And if he will take the usual payment in advance, he is welcome," says
Beatrix, stepping up to him; and, as Esmond kissed her, she whispered,
"Oh, why didn't I know you before?"

My Lord Duke was as hot as a flame at this salute, but said never a
word: Beatrix made him a proud curtsy, and the two ladies quitted the
room together.

"When does your Excellency go for Paris?" asks Colonel Esmond.

"As soon after the ceremony as may be," his Grace answered. "'Tis fixed
for the first of December: it cannot be sooner. The equipage will not be
ready till then. The Queen intends the embassy should be very grand--and
I have law business to settle. That ill-omened Mohun has come, or is
coming, to London again: we are in a lawsuit about my late Lord Gerard's
property; and he hath sent to me to meet him."




CHAPTER V.

MOHUN APPEARS FOR THE LAST TIME IN THIS HISTORY.


Besides my Lord Duke of Hamilton and Brandon, who for family reasons had
kindly promised his protection and patronage to Colonel Esmond, he had
other great friends in power now, both able and willing to assist him,
and he might, with such allies, look forward to as fortunate advancement
in civil life at home as he had got rapid promotion abroad. His Grace
was magnanimous enough to offer to take Mr. Esmond as secretary on
his Paris embassy, but no doubt he intended that proposal should be
rejected; at any rate, Esmond could not bear the thoughts of attending
his mistress farther than the church-door after her marriage, and so
declined that offer which his generous rival made him.

Other gentlemen in power were liberal at least of compliments and
promises to Colonel Esmond. Mr. Harley, now become my Lord Oxford and
Mortimer, and installed Knight of the Garter on the same day as his
Grace of Hamilton had received the same honor, sent to the Colonel to
say that a seat in Parliament should be at his disposal presently,
and Mr. St. John held out many flattering hopes of advancement to
the Colonel when he should enter the House. Esmond's friends were all
successful, and the most successful and triumphant of all was his dear
old commander, General Webb, who was now appointed Lieutenant-General of
the Land Forces, and received with particular honor by the Ministry, by
the Queen, and the people out of doors, who huzza'd the brave chief
when they used to see him in his chariot going to the House or to the
Drawing-room, or hobbling on foot to his coach from St. Stephen's upon
his glorious old crutch and stick, and cheered him as loud as they had
ever done Marlborough.

That great Duke was utterly disgraced; and honest old Webb dated all
his Grace's misfortunes from Wynendael, and vowed that Fate served the
traitor right. Duchess Sarah had also gone to ruin; she had been forced
to give up her keys, and her places, and her pensions:--"Ah, ah!" says
Webb, "she would have locked up three millions of French crowns with her
keys had I but been knocked on the head, but I stopped that convoy at
Wynendael." Our enemy Cardonnel was turned out of the House of Commons
(along with Mr. Walpole) for malversation of public money. Cadogan lost
his place of Lieutenant of the Tower. Marlborough's daughters resigned
their posts of ladies of the bedchamber; and so complete was the Duke's
disgrace, that his son-in-law, Lord Bridgewater, was absolutely obliged
to give up his lodgings at St. James's, and had his half-pension,
as Master of the Horse, taken away. But I think the lowest depth of
Marlborough's fall was when he humbly sent to ask General Webb when he
might wait upon him; he who had commanded the stout old General, who
had injured him and sneered at him, who had kept him dangling in his
ante-chamber, who could not even after his great service condescend to
write him a letter in his own hand. The nation was as eager for peace as
ever it had been hot for war. The Prince of Savoy came amongst us, had
his audience of the Queen, and got his famous Sword of Honor, and strove
with all his force to form a Whig party together, to bring over the
young Prince of Hanover to do anything which might prolong the war, and
consummate the ruin of the old sovereign whom he hated so implacably.
But the nation was tired of the struggle: so completely wearied of it
that not even our defeat at Denain could rouse us into any anger, though
such an action so lost two years before would have set all England in
a fury. 'Twas easy to see that the great Marlborough was not with the
army. Eugene was obliged to fall back in a rage, and forego the dazzling
revenge of his life. 'Twas in vain the Duke's side asked, "Would we
suffer our arms to be insulted? Would we not send back the only
champion who could repair our honor?" The nation had had its bellyful of
fighting; nor could taunts or outcries goad up our Britons any more.

For a statesman that was always prating of liberty, and had the grandest
philosophic maxims in his mouth, it must be owned that Mr. St. John
sometimes rather acted like a Turkish than a Greek philosopher, and
especially fell foul of one unfortunate set of men, the men of letters,
with a tyranny a little extraordinary in a man who professed to respect
their calling so much. The literary controversy at this time was very
bitter, the Government side was the winning one, the popular one, and
I think might have been the merciful one. 'Twas natural that the
opposition should be peevish and cry out: some men did so from their
hearts, admiring the Duke of Marlborough's prodigious talents, and
deploring the disgrace of the greatest general the world ever knew:
'twas the stomach that caused other patriots to grumble, and such men
cried out because they were poor, and paid to do so. Against these my
Lord Bolingbroke never showed the slightest mercy, whipping a dozen into
prison or into the pillory without the least commiseration.

From having been a man of arms Mr. Esmond had now come to be a man of
letters, but on a safer side than that in which the above-cited poor
fellows ventured their liberties and ears. There was no danger on ours,
which was the winning side; besides, Mr. Esmond pleased himself by
thinking that he writ like a gentleman if he did not always succeed as a
wit.

Of the famous wits of that age, who have rendered Queen Anne's reign
illustrious, and whose works will be in all Englishmen's hands in ages
yet to come, Mr. Esmond saw many, but at public places chiefly; never
having a great intimacy with any of them, except with honest Dick Steele
and Mr. Addison, who parted company with Esmond, however, when that
gentleman became a declared Tory, and lived on close terms with the
leading persons of that party. Addison kept himself to a few friends,
and very rarely opened himself except in their company. A man more
upright and conscientious than he it was not possible to find in public
life, and one whose conversation was so various, easy, and delightful.
Writing now in my mature years, I own that I think Addison's politics
were the right, and were my time to come over again, I would be a Whig
in England and not a Tory; but with people that take a side in politics,
'tis men rather than principles that commonly bind them. A kindness or a
slight puts a man under one flag or the other, and he marches with it
to the end of the campaign. Esmond's master in war was injured by
Marlborough, and hated him: and the lieutenant fought the quarrels of
his leader. Webb coming to London was used as a weapon by Marlborough's
enemies (and true steel he was, that honest chief); nor was his
aide-de-camp, Mr. Esmond, an unfaithful or unworthy partisan. 'Tis
strange here, and on a foreign soil, and in a land that is independent
in all but the name, (for that the North American colonies shall remain
dependants on yonder little island for twenty years more, I never can
think,) to remember how the nation at home seemed to give itself up to
the domination of one or other aristocratic party, and took a Hanoverian
king, or a French one, according as either prevailed. And while the
Tories, the October club gentlemen, the High Church parsons that held by
the Church of England, were for having a Papist king, for whom many of
their Scottish and English leaders, firm churchmen all, laid down their
lives with admirable loyalty and devotion; they were governed by men who
had notoriously no religion at all, but used it as they would use any
opinion for the purpose of forwarding their own ambition. The Whigs, on
the other hand, who professed attachment to religion and liberty too,
were compelled to send to Holland or Hanover for a monarch around
whom they could rally. A strange series of compromises is that English
History; compromise of principle, compromise of party, compromise of
worship! The lovers of English freedom and independence submitted their
religious consciences to an Act of Parliament; could not consolidate
their liberty without sending to Zell or the Hague for a king to live
under; and could not find amongst the proudest people in the world a
man speaking their own language, and understanding their laws, to govern
them. The Tory and High Church patriots were ready to die in defence of
a Papist family that had sold us to France; the great Whig nobles, the
sturdy republican recusants who had cut off Charles Stuart's head for
treason, were fain to accept a king whose title came to him through a
royal grandmother, whose own royal grandmother's head had fallen under
Queen Bess's hatchet. And our proud English nobles sent to a petty
German town for a monarch to come and reign in London and our prelates
kissed the ugly hands of his Dutch mistresses, and thought it no
dishonor. In England you can but belong to one party or t'other, and you
take the house you live in with all its encumbrances, its retainers, its
antique discomforts, and ruins even; you patch up, but you never build
up anew. Will we of the new world submit much longer, even nominally,
to this ancient British superstition? There are signs of the times which
make me think that ere long we shall care as little about King George
here, and peers temporal and peers spiritual, as we do for King Canute
or the Druids.

This chapter began about the wits, my grandson may say, and hath
wandered very far from their company. The pleasantest of the wits I
knew were the Doctors Garth and Arbuthnot, and Mr. Gay, the author of
"Trivia," the most charming kind soul that ever laughed at a joke or
cracked a bottle. Mr. Prior I saw, and he was the earthen pot swimming
with the pots of brass down the stream, and always and justly frightened
lest he should break in the voyage. I met him both at London and Paris,
where he was performing piteous congees to the Duke of Shrewsbury, not
having courage to support the dignity which his undeniable genius and
talent had won him, and writing coaxing letters to Secretary St. John,
and thinking about his plate and his place, and what on earth should
become of him should his party go out. The famous Mr. Congreve I saw
a dozen of times at Button's, a splendid wreck of a man, magnificently
attired, and though gouty, and almost blind, bearing a brave face
against fortune.

The great Mr. Pope (of whose prodigious genius I have no words to
express my admiration) was quite a puny lad at this time, appearing
seldom in public places. There were hundreds of men, wits, and pretty
fellows frequenting the theatres and coffee-houses of that day--whom
"nunc perscribere longum est." Indeed I think the most brilliant of that
sort I ever saw was not till fifteen years afterwards, when I paid my
last visit in England, and met young Harry Fielding, son of the Fielding
that served in Spain and afterwards in Flanders with us, and who for fun
and humor seemed to top them all. As for the famous Dr. Swift, I can say
of him, "Vidi tantum." He was in London all these years up to the death
of the Queen; and in a hundred public places where I saw him, but no
more; he never missed Court of a Sunday, where once or twice he was
pointed out to your grandfather. He would have sought me out eagerly
enough had I been a great man with a title to my name, or a star on my
coat. At Court the Doctor had no eyes but for the very greatest. Lord
Treasurer and St. John used to call him Jonathan, and they paid him
with this cheap coin for the service they took of him. He writ their
lampoons, fought their enemies, flogged and bullied in their service,
and it must be owned with a consummate skill and fierceness. 'Tis said
he hath lost his intellect now, and forgotten his wrongs and his rage
against mankind. I have always thought of him and of Marlborough as the
two greatest men of that age. I have read his books (who doth not know
them?) here in our calm woods, and imagine a giant to myself as I think
of him, a lonely fallen Prometheus, groaning as the vulture tears him.
Prometheus I saw, but when first I ever had any words with him, the
giant stepped out of a sedan chair in the Poultry, whither he had come
with a tipsy Irish servant parading before him, who announced him,
bawling out his Reverence's name, whilst his master below was as yet
haggling with the chairman. I disliked this Mr. Swift, and heard many a
story about him, of his conduct to men, and his words to women. He could
flatter the great as much as he could bully the weak; and Mr. Esmond,
being younger and hotter in that day than now, was determined, should he
ever meet this dragon, not to run away from his teeth and his fire.

Men have all sorts of motives which carry them onwards in life, and are
driven into acts of desperation, or it may be of distinction, from a
hundred different causes. There was one comrade of Esmond's, an honest
little Irish lieutenant of Handyside's, who owed so much money to a camp
sutler, that he began to make love to the man's daughter, intending to
pay his debt that way; and at the battle of Malplaquet, flying away from
the debt and lady too, he rushed so desperately on the French lines,
that he got his company; and came a captain out of the action, and had
to marry the sutler's daughter after all, who brought him his cancelled
debt to her father as poor Roger's fortune. To run out of the reach of
bill and marriage, he ran on the enemy's pikes; and as these did not
kill him he was thrown back upon t'other horn of his dilemma. Our great
Duke at the same battle was fighting, not the French, but the Tories in
England; and risking his life and the army's, not for his country but
for his pay and places; and for fear of his wife at home, that only
being in life whom he dreaded. I have asked about men in my own company,
(new drafts of poor country boys were perpetually coming over to us
during the wars, and brought from the ploughshare to the sword,) and
found that a half of them under the flags were driven thither on account
of a woman: one fellow was jilted by his mistress and took the shilling
in despair; another jilted the girl, and fled from her and the parish
to the tents where the law could not disturb him. Why go on
particularizing? What can the sons of Adam and Eve expect, but to
continue in that course of love and trouble their father and mother set
out on? Oh, my grandson! I am drawing nigh to the end of that period of
my history, when I was acquainted with the great world of England and
Europe; my years are past the Hebrew poet's limit, and I say unto thee,
all my troubles and joys too, for that matter, have come from a woman;
as thine will when thy destined course begins. 'Twas a woman that made a
soldier of me, that set me intriguing afterwards; I believe I would have
spun smocks for her had she so bidden me; what strength I had in my head
I would have given her; hath not every man in his degree had his Omphale
and Delilah? Mine befooled me on the banks of the Thames, and in dear
old England; thou mayest find thine own by Rappahannock.

To please that woman then I tried to distinguish myself as a soldier,
and afterwards as a wit and a politician; as to please another I would
have put on a black cassock and a pair of bands, and had done so but
that a superior fate intervened to defeat that project. And I say, I
think the world is like Captain Esmond's company I spoke of anon;
and could you see every man's career in life, you would find a woman
clogging him; or clinging round his march and stopping him; or cheering
him and goading him: or beckoning him out of her chariot, so that he
goes up to her, and leaves the race to be run without him or bringing
him the apple, and saying "Eat;" or fetching him the daggers and
whispering "Kill! yonder lies Duncan, and a crown, and an opportunity."

Your grandfather fought with more effect as a politician than as a
wit: and having private animosities and grievances of his own and
his General's against the great Duke in command of the army, and more
information on military matters than most writers, who had never seen
beyond the fire of a tobacco-pipe at "Wills's," he was enabled to do
good service for that cause which he embarked in, and for Mr. St. John
and his party. But he disdained the abuse in which some of the Tory
writers indulged; for instance, Dr. Swift, who actually chose to doubt
the Duke of Marlborough's courage, and was pleased to hint that his
Grace's military capacity was doubtful: nor were Esmond's performances
worse for the effect they were intended to produce, (though no doubt
they could not injure the Duke of Marlborough nearly so much in the
public eyes as the malignant attacks of Swift did, which were carefully
directed so as to blacken and degrade him,) because they were writ
openly and fairly by Mr. Esmond, who made no disguise of them, who was
now out of the army, and who never attacked the prodigious courage and
talents, only the selfishness and rapacity, of the chief.

The Colonel then, having writ a paper for one of the Tory journals,
called the Post-Boy, (a letter upon Bouchain, that the town talked about
for two whole days, when the appearance of an Italian singer supplied
a fresh subject for conversation,) and having business at the Exchange,
where Mistress Beatrix wanted a pair of gloves or a fan very likely,
Esmond went to correct his paper, and was sitting at the printer's, when
the famous Doctor Swift came in, his Irish fellow with him that used
to walk before his chair, and bawled out his master's name with great
dignity.

Mr. Esmond was waiting for the printer too, whose wife had gone to the
tavern to fetch him, and was meantime engaged in drawing a picture of
a soldier on horseback for a dirty little pretty boy of the printer's
wife, whom she had left behind her.

"I presume you are the editor of the Post-Boy, sir?" says the Doctor,
in a grating voice that had an Irish twang; and he looked at the Colonel
from under his two bushy eyebrows with a pair of very clear blue eyes.
His complexion was muddy, his figure rather fat, his chin double. He
wore a shabby cassock, and a shabby hat over his black wig, and he
pulled out a great gold watch, at which he looks very fierce.

"I am but a contributor, Doctor Swift," says Esmond, with the little boy
still on his knee. He was sitting with his back in the window, so that
the Doctor could not see him.

"Who told you I was Dr. Swift?" says the Doctor, eying the other very
haughtily.

"Your Reverence's valet bawled out your name," says the Colonel. "I
should judge you brought him from Ireland?"

"And pray, sir, what right have you to judge whether my servant came
from Ireland or no? I want to speak with your employer, Mr. Leach. I'll
thank ye go fetch him."

"Where's your papa, Tommy?" asks the Colonel of the child, a smutty
little wretch in a frock.

Instead of answering, the child begins to cry; the Doctor's appearance
had no doubt frightened the poor little imp.

"Send that squalling little brat about his business, and do what I bid
ye, sir," says the Doctor.

"I must finish, the picture first for Tommy," says the Colonel,
laughing. "Here, Tommy, will you have your Pandour with whiskers or
without?"

"Whisters," says Tommy, quite intent on the picture.

"Who the devil are ye, sir?" cries the Doctor; "are ye a printer's man
or are ye not?" he pronounced it like NAUGHT.

"Your reverence needn't raise the devil to ask who I am," says Colonel
Esmond. "Did you ever hear of Doctor Faustus, little Tommy? or Friar
Bacon, who invented gunpowder, and set the Thames on fire?"

Mr. Swift turned quite red, almost purple. "I did not intend any
offence, sir," says he.

"I dare say, sir, you offended without meaning," says the other, dryly.

"Who are ye, sir? Do you know who I am, sir? You are one of the pack
of Grub Street scribblers that my friend Mr. Secretary hath laid by the
heels. How dare ye, sir, speak to me in this tone?" cries the Doctor, in
a great fume.

"I beg your honor's humble pardon if I have offended your honor," says
Esmond in a tone of great humility. "Rather than be sent to the Compter,
or be put in the pillory, there's nothing I wouldn't do. But Mrs.
Leach, the printer's lady, told me to mind Tommy whilst she went for her
husband to the tavern, and I daren't leave the child lest he should fall
into the fire; but if your Reverence will hold him--"

"I take the little beast!" says the Doctor, starting back. "I am
engaged to your betters, fellow. Tell Mr. Leach that when he makes an
appointment with Dr. Swift he had best keep it, do ye hear? And keep a
respectful tongue in your head, sir, when you address a person like me."

"I'm but a poor broken-down soldier," says the Colonel, "and I've seen
better days, though I am forced now to turn my hand to writing. We can't
help our fate, sir."

"You're the person that Mr. Leach hath spoken to me of, I presume. Have
the goodness to speak civilly when you are spoken to--and tell Leach
to call at my lodgings in Bury Street, and bring the papers with him
to-night at ten o'clock. And the next time you see me, you'll know me,
and be civil, Mr. Kemp."

Poor Kemp, who had been a lieutenant at the beginning of the war, and
fallen into misfortune, was the writer of the Post-Boy, and now took
honest Mr. Leach's pay in place of her Majesty's. Esmond had seen this
gentleman, and a very ingenious, hardworking honest fellow he was,
toiling to give bread to a great family, and watching up many a long
winter night to keep the wolf from his door. And Mr. St. John, who had
liberty always on his tongue, had just sent a dozen of the opposition
writers into prison, and one actually into the pillory, for what he
called libels, but libels not half so violent as those writ on our
side. With regard to this very piece of tyranny, Esmond had remonstrated
strongly with the Secretary, who laughed and said the rascals were
served quite right; and told Esmond a joke of Swift's regarding the
matter. Nay, more, this Irishman, when St. John was about to pardon
a poor wretch condemned to death for rape, absolutely prevented the
Secretary from exercising this act of good-nature, and boasted that he
had had the man hanged; and great as the Doctor's genius might be, and
splendid his ability, Esmond for one would affect no love for him, and
never desired to make his acquaintance. The Doctor was at Court every
Sunday assiduously enough, a place the Colonel frequented but rarely,
though he had a great inducement to go there in the person of a fair
maid of honor of her Majesty's; and the airs and patronage Mr.
Swift gave himself, forgetting gentlemen of his country whom he knew
perfectly, his loud talk at once insolent and servile, nay, perhaps his
very intimacy with Lord Treasurer and the Secretary, who indulged all
his freaks and called him Jonathan, you may be sure, were remarked by
many a person of whom the proud priest himself took no note, during that
time of his vanity and triumph.

'Twas but three days after the 15th of November, 1712 (Esmond minds him
well of the date), that he went by invitation to dine with his General,
the foot of whose table he used to take on these festive occasions, as
he had done at many a board, hard and plentiful, during the campaign.
This was a great feast, and of the latter sort; the honest old gentleman
loved to treat his friends splendidly: his Grace of Ormonde, before he
joined his army as generalissimo, my Lord Viscount Bolingbroke, one of
her Majesty's Secretaries of State, my Lord Orkney, that had served
with us abroad, being of the party. His Grace of Hamilton, Master of
the Ordnance, and in whose honor the feast had been given, upon his
approaching departure as Ambassador to Paris, had sent an excuse to
General Webb at two o'clock, but an hour before the dinner: nothing but
the most immediate business, his Grace said, should have prevented him
having the pleasure of drinking a parting glass to the health of General
Webb. His absence disappointed Esmond's old chief, who suffered much
