food for the mind, which had again returned to its natural state of
inquiring reflection and ardour for knowledge.

Daily Malcolm woke early, attended Matins and Mass in the chapel, studied
grammar and logic, mastered difficult passages in the Fathers, or copied
out portions for himself in the chamber which he as a gentleman commoner,
as we should call him, possessed, instead of living in a common dormitory
with the other scholars.  Or in the open cloister he listened and took
notes of the lectures of the fellows and tutors of the college, and
seated on a bench or walking up and down received special instructions.
Then ensued the meal, spread in the hall; the period of recreation, in
the meadows, or in the licensed sports, or on the river; fresh studies,
chapel, and a social but quiet evening over the supper in the hall.  All
this was varied by Latin sermons at St. Mary's, or disputations and
lectures by notable doctors, and public arguments between scholars, by
which they absolutely fought out their degrees.  There were few colleges
as yet, and those resident in them were the _elite_; beyond, there was a
great mob of scholars living in rooms as they could, generally very poor,
and often very disorderly; but they did not mar the quiet semi-monastic
stillness within the foundations, and to Malcolm it seemed as if the
truly congenial home was opened.

The curriculum of science began to reveal itself to him with all the
stages so inviting to a mind conscious of power and longing for
cultivation.  The books, the learned atmosphere, the infinite
possibilities, were delightful to him, and opened a more delightful
future.  His metaphysical Scottish mind delighted in the scholastic
arguments that were now first set before him, and his readiness,
appreciation, and eager power of acquiring surprised his teachers, and
made him the pride of New College.

When he looked back at his year of court and camp, he could only marvel
at having ever preferred them.  In war his want of bodily strength would
make real distinction impossible; here he felt himself excelling; here
was absolute enjoyment, and of a kind without drawback.  Scholarship must
be his true element and study: the deep universal study of the sisterhood
of science that the University offered was his veritable vocation.  Surely
it was not without significance that the ring that shone on his finger
betrothed him to Esclairmonde, the Light of the World; for though in
person the maiden was never to be his own, she was the emblem to him of
the pure virgin light of truth and wisdom that he would be for ever
wooing, and winning only to see further lights beyond.  Human nature felt
a pang at the knowledge that he was bound to deliver up the ring and
resign his connection with that fair and stately maiden; but the pain
that had been sore at first had diminished under the sense that he stood
in a post of generous trust, and that his sacrifice was the passport to
her grateful esteem.  He knew her to be with Lady Montagu, awaiting a
vacancy at St. Katharine's, and this would be the signal for dissolving
the contract of marriage, after which his present vision was to bestow
Lilias upon Patrick, make over his estates to them, take minor orders,
and set forth for Italy, there to pursue those deeper studies in theology
and language for which Padua and Bologna were famous.  It was many months
since he had heard of Lilias; but this did not give him any great
uneasiness, for messengers were few, and letter-writing far from being a
common practice.  He had himself written at every turning-point of his
life, and sent his letters when the King communicated with Scotland; but
from his sister he had heard nothing.

He had lately won his first degree as Bachelor of Arts, and was
descending the stair from the Hall after a Lenten meal on salt fish, when
he saw below him the well-known figure of King James's English servant,
who doffing his cap held out to him a small strip of folded paper,
fastened by a piece of crimson silk and the royal seal.  It only bore the
words:--

   '_To our right trusty and well-beloved Cousin the Lord Malcolm Stewart
   of Glenuskie this letter be taken_.

   'DEAR COUSIN,

   'We greet you well, and pray you to come to us without loss of time,
   having need of you, we being a free man and no captive.

   'Yours,
   'JAMES R.

   'Written at the Castle of Windsor this St. David's Day, 1424.'

'A free man:' the words kept ringing in Malcolm's ears while he hastened
to obtain license from Warden John Bonke, and to take leave of Dr.
Bennet.  He had not left Oxford since the beginning of his residence
there.  Vacations were not general dispersions when ways and means of
transit were so scarce and tardy, and Malcolm had been long without
seeing his king.  Joy on his sovereign's account, and his country's,
seemed to swallow up all other thoughts; as to himself, when he bade his
friends and masters farewell, he declared it was merely for a time, and
when they shook their heads and augured otherwise, he replied: 'Nay,
think you I could live in the Cimmerian darkness yonder, dear sirs?  Our
poor country hath nothing better than mere monastery schools, and light
of science having once shone on me, I cannot but dwell in her courts for
ever!  Soon shall I be altogether her son and slave!'

Nevertheless, Malcolm was full of eagerness, and pressed on rapidly
through the lanes between Oxford and Windsor, rejoicing to find himself
amid the noble trees of the forest, over which arose in all its grandeur
the Castle and Round Tower, as beautiful though less unique than now, and
bearing on it the royal standard, for the little King was still nursed
there.

Under the vaulted gateway James--with Patrick and Bairdsbrae behind
him--met Malcolm, and threw his arms round him, crying: 'Ay, kiss me,
boy; 'tis a king and no caitiff you kiss now!  Another six weeks, and
then for the mountain and the moor and the bonnie north countree.'

'And why not for a month?' was Malcolm's question, as hand and eye and
face responded heartily.

'Why?  Why, because moneys must be told down, and treaties signed; ay,
and Lent is no time for weddings, nor March for southland roses to travel
to our cold winds.  Ay, Malcolm, you see a bridegroom that is to be!  Did
you think I was going home without her?'

'I did not think you would be in such glee even at being free, my lord,
if you were.'

'And now, Malcolm, ken ye of ony fair Scottish lassie--a cousin of mine
ain, who could be had to countenance my bride at our wedding, and ride
with us thereafter to Scotland?'

'I know whom your Grace means,' said Malcolm, smiling.

'An if you do, maybe, Malcolm, sin she bides not far frae the border,
ye'd do me the favour of riding with Sir Patrick here, and bringing her
to the bridal,' said the King, making his accent more home-like and
Scottish than Malcolm had ever heard it before.

The happiness of that spring afternoon was surpassing.  The King linked
his arm into Malcolm's, and walked up and down with him on the slopes,
telling him all that had led to this consummation; how Walter Stewart and
his brothers had become so insolent and violent as to pass the endurance
of their father the Regent, as well as of all honest Scots; and how,
after secret negotiations and vain endeavours to obtain from him a pledge
of indemnity for all that had happened, the matter had been at length
opened with Gloucester, Beaufort, and the Council.  The Scottish nation,
with Albany at the head, was really recalling the King.  This was the
condition on which Henry V. had always declared that he should be
liberated; these were the terms on which he had always hoped to return;
and his patience was at last rewarded.  Bedford had sent his joyful
consent, and all was now concluded.  James was really free, and waited
only for his marriage.

'I would not tell you, Malcolm, while there might yet be a slip between
cup and lip,' said the King; 'it might have hindered the humanities; and
yet I needed you as much when I was glad as when all seemed like to
fail!'

'You had Patrick,' said Malcolm.

'Patrick's a tall and trusty fellow,' said the King, 'with a shrewd wit,
and like to be a right-hand man; but there's something in you, Malcolm,
that makes a man turn to you for fellow-feeling, even as to a wife.'

Nevertheless, the King and Patrick had grown much attached to each other,
though the latter, being no lover of books, had wearied sorely of the
sojourn at Windsor, which the King himself only found endurable by much
study and reflection.  Their only variety had been keeping Christmas at
Hertford with Queen Catherine; 'sorry pastime,' as Drummond reported it
to him, though gladdened to the King by Joan Beaufort's presence, in all
her charms.

'The Demoiselle of Luxemburg was there too, statelier than ever,' said
James.  'She is now at Middleham Castle, with the Lady Montagu, and you
might make it your way northward, and lodge a night there.  If you can
win her consent, it were well to be wedded when we are.'

'Never shall I, my lord.  I should not dare even to speak of it.'

'It is well; but, Malcolm, you merit something from the damsel.  You are
ten times the man you were when she flouted you.  If women were not
mostly witless, you would be much to be preferred to any mere Ajax or
Fierabras; and if this damsel should have come to the wiser mind that it
were pity to be buried to the world--'

'Sir, I pray you say no more.  I were forsworn to ask such a thing.'

'I bid you not, only I would I were there to see that all be not lost for
want of a word in season; and it is high time that something be done.
Here be letters from my Lord of Therouenne, demanding the performance of
the contract ere our return home.'

'He cannot reach her here,' said Malcolm.

'No; but his outcry can reach your honour; and it were ill to have such a
house as that of Luxemburg crying out upon you for breach of faith to
their daughter.'

Malcolm smiled.  'That I should heed little, Sir.  I would fain bear
something for her.'

'Why, this is mere sublimated devoir, too fine for our gross
understandings,' said James, ironically.  'Mayhap the sight of the soft
roseate cheek may bring it somewhat down to poor human flesh and blood
once more.'

'Once I was tempted, Sir,' said Malcolm, blushing deeply; 'but did I not
know that her holiness is the guardian of her earthly beauty, I would not
see her again.'

'Nay, there I command you,' said the King; 'soon I shall have subjects
enough; but while I have but half a dozen, I cannot be disobeyed by them!
I bid you go to Middleham, and there I leave all to the sight.'

The King spoke gaily, and with such kind good-humour that Malcolm,
humiliated by the thought of the past, durst not make fresh
asseverations.  James, in the supreme moment of the pure and innocent
romance of which he was the hero, looked on love like his own as the
highest crown of human life, and distrusted the efforts after the
superhuman which too often were mere simulation or imitation; but a
certain recollection of Henry's warnings withheld him from pressing the
matter, and he returned to his own joys and hopes, looking on the
struggles he expected with a strong man's exulting joy, and not even
counting the years of his captivity wasted, though they had taken away
his first youth.

'What should I have been,' he said, 'bred up in the tumults at home?  What
could I have known better than Perth?  Nay, had I been sent home when I
came to age, as a raw lad, how would one or other by fraud or force have
got the upper hand, so as I might never have won it back.  No, I would
not have foregone one year of study--far less that campaign in France,
and the sight of Harry in war and in policy.'

James also took Malcolm to see the child king, his little master.  This,
the third king of James's captivity, was now a fair creature of two years
old.  He trotted to meet his visitor, calling him by a baby name for
brother, and stretching out his arms to be lifted up and fondled; for, as
Dame Alice Boteller, his _gouvernante_, muttered, he knew the King of
Scots better than he did his own mother.

A retinue had been already collected, and equipments prepared, so that
there was no delay in sending forth Malcolm and Patrick upon their
northward journey.  At the nearest town they halted, sending forward a
messenger to announce their neighbourhood to the old Countess of
Salisbury and her grand-daughter Lady Montagu, and to request permission
to halt for 'Mothering Sunday' at the Castle.

In return a whole band of squires and retainers came forth, headed by the
knightly seneschal, to invite Lord Malcolm Stewart and his companion to
the Castle; whereupon Sir Patrick proceeded to don his gayest gown and
chaperon, and was greatly scandalized that Malcolm's preparation
consisted in putting on his black serge bachelor's gown and hood of
rabbit's fur such as he wore at Oxford, looking, as Patrick declared, no
better than a begging scholar.  But Malcolm had made up his mind that if
he appeared before Esclairmonde at all it should be in no other guise;
and thus it was that he rode like a black spot in the midst of the
cavalcade, bright with the colours of Nevil and of Montagu, and was
marshalled up the broad stairs by the silver wand of the seneschal.

Lord Montagu had gone back to the wars; so the family at home consisted
of the grand, stately, and distant old Countess of Salisbury, and her
young grand-daughter, the Lady Montagu, with her three months' old son.
Each had an almost royal suite of well-born dames and damsels in
attendance, among whom the Demoiselle de Luxemburg alone was on an
equality with the mistresses of the house.  Even Queen Catherine's
presence-chamber had hardly equalled the grand baronial ceremony of the
hall, where sat the three ladies in the midst of their circle of
attendants, male and female ranged on opposite sides; and old Lady
Salisbury knew the exact number of paces that it befitted her and Lady
Montagu to advance to receive the royal infusion of blood that flowed in
the veins of my Lord of Glenuskie.  And yet it was the cheek, and not the
hand, that were offered in salutation by both ladies, as well as by
Esclairmonde.  Malcolm, however, only durst kneel on one knee and salute
her hand, and felt himself burning with crimson as the touch and voice
brought back those longings that, as James had said, proved him human
still.  He was almost glad that etiquette required him to hand the aged
Countess to her seat and to devote his chief attention to her.

Punctilio reigned supreme in such a house as this.  Nowhere had Malcolm
seen such observance of ceremony, save in the court of the Duke of
Burgundy, and there it was modified by the presence of rough and ready
warriors; but an ancient dame like Lady Salisbury thought it both the due
and the safeguard of her son's honour, and exacted it rigorously of all
who approached her.

Alice of Montagu had the sweet fragile look of a young mother about her,
but her frightened fawn air was gone; she was in her home, had found her
place, and held it with a simple dignity of her own, quite ready to ripen
into all the matronly authority, without the severe formality, of her
grand-dame.

She treated Malcolm with a gentle smiling courtesy such as she had never
vouchsafed to him before, and all the shyness that had once made her
silent was gone, when at the supper-table, and afterwards seated around
the fire, the tidings of the camp and court were talked over with all the
zest of those to whom King Harry's last campaign was becoming 'old
times'; and what with her husband's letters and opinions, little Alice
was really the best-informed as to the present state of things.
Esclairmonde took her part in the conversation, but there was no
opportunity of exchanging a private or personal word between her and
Malcolm in a party of five, where one was as vigilant and grave-eyed as
my Lady Salisbury.

However, the next was a peculiar day, the Fourth Sunday in Lent, called
'Mothering Sunday' because on that day it was originally the custom for
offerings to be carried from all the country round to the cathedral or
mother church on that day.  This custom had been modified, but it was
still the rule that all the persons, who at other times worshipped at the
nearest monastery chapel or at a private chapel in their own houses,
should on that day repair to their parish church, and there make a
special offering at the Mass--that offering which has since become the
Easter dues.  It was a festival Sunday too--'Refreshing Sunday'--then, as
now, marked by the Gospel on the feeding of the multitude; and from this,
as well as from the name, the pretty custom had begun of offering the
mother of each house her rich simnal cake, with some other gift from each
of her children.

Hearing a pattering of feet in the early morning, Malcolm looked out and
beheld a whole troop of small children popping in and out of a low
archway.  If he could have peeped in, he would have known how many
simnals Ladies Esclairmonde and Alice were sending down--with something
more substantial--to be given to mothers by the children who as yet had
nothing to bring of their own.

But when the household assembled in the castle hall, they did see fair
young Lady Montagu kneel at the chair of the grave old Countess, and hold
up a silver dish, wherein lay the simnal, mixed, kneaded, and moulded by
her own hands, and bearing on it a rich ruby clasp, sent by her father,
the Earl, as his special gift to his mother on this Sunday.

And then, when the old lady, with glistening eyes, had spoken her
blessing on the fair young head bent down before her, and the grandchild
rose up, there was the pretty surprise for her of her little swaddled
son, lying in Esclairmonde's arms, and between the small fingers, that as
yet knew not how to grasp, the tiny simnal; and moreover a fair pearl
devised in like manner by the absent Sir Richard as a gift for his wife's
first 'Mothering Sunday.'  There was no etiquette here to hinder sweet
Alice from passionately clasping her child, and covering him with kisses,
as many for his father as for himself, as she laughed at the baby smiles
and helpless gestures of the future king-maker, whose ambition and
turbulence were to be the ruin of that fair and prosperous household, and
bring the gentle Alice to a widowed, bereaved, and attainted old age.

Well that none there present saw the future, as she proudly claimed the
admiration of Malcolm for her babe!

She was equipped for the expedition to the parish church, as likewise
were Esclairmonde and almost all the rest; but the aged Countess could
not encounter the cold March winds, and had a dispensation; and thus
Alice, being the lady of the procession, contrived at the same time to
call Sir Patrick to her side, and bid Lord Malcolm lead the Lady
Esclairmonde.

For as the weather was dry and cold, Lady Montagu had chosen to go on
foot; and a grand procession it was that she led, of gentlemen and
ladies, two and two, in their bright dresses and adornments that
delighted the eyes of the homely yeomen and their wives, flocking in from
their homesteads with baskets of offerings, often in kind.

Meantime, Malcolm, holding the tips of Esclairmonde's fingers, durst not
speak till she began: 'This is a devout and pious household--full of
peace and good government.'

'And your time goes happily here?' asked Malcolm.

'Yes, it has been a peaceful harbour wherein to wait,' said Esclairmonde.
'And even if Alice were called to her husband in France, my Lady Countess
will keep me with her till there be a vacancy for me at St. Katharine's.'

'Have you the promise from Queen Joan?'

'Yes,' replied Esclairmonde.  'The Countess had been a lady of hers, and
wrought with her, so that whenever the post of bedeswoman is in her gift
I shall be preferred to it.'

'You, the heiress, accept the charity!' Malcolm could not help
exclaiming.

'The better for all remnants of pride,' returned the lady.  'And you, my
lord, has it fared well with you?'

Malcolm, happy in her interest, poured forth all that he had to tell, and
she listened as Esclairmonde alone could listen.  There was something in
her very expression of attention that seemed to make the speaker take out
the alloy and leave only his purest gold to meet her ears.  Malcolm
forgot those throbs of foolish wild hope that had shot across him like
demon temptations to hermit saints, and only felt that the creature of
his love and reverence was listening benignly as he told her of the
exceeding delight that he was unravelling in learned lore; how each step
showed him further heights, and how he had come to view the Light of the
World as the light of wisdom, to the research of which he meant to devote
his entire life, among universities and manuscripts.

'The Light of Wisdom,' repeated Esclairmonde--'so it may be, for Christ
is Heavenly Wisdom; but I doubt me if the Light of the World lies solely
in books and universities.'

'Nay,' said Malcolm.  'Once I was fool enough to fancy it was the light
of glory, calling knights to deeds of fame and chivalry.  I have seen
