agreeing with her constitution she had been hectic and dropsical a
good while, and was now at Bath, in order to drink the waters for the
recovery of her health; that her niece had accompanied her thither
at her request, and attended her with the same affection as before,
notwithstanding the mistake she had committed: and that the nephew,
who had been exasperated at the loss of her fortune, did not give his
attendance out of good will, but purely to have an eye on his sister,
lest she should likewise throw herself away without his consent or
approbation. Having enjoyed ourselves in this manner, and made an
assignation to meet next day at a certain place, Miss Williams took her
leave; and Strap's looks being very inquisitive about the nature of
the communication subsisting between us, I made him acquainted with the
whole affair, to his great astonishment and satisfaction.






CHAPTER LVI

I become acquainted with Narcissa's brother, who invites me to his
House, where I am introduced to that adorable Creature--after dinner,
the Squire retires to take his nap--Freeman, guessing the Situation of
my Thought, withdraws likewise, on pretence of Business--I declare
my passion for Narcissa--am well-received--charmed with her
Conversation--the Squire detains us to Supper--I elude his design by a
Stratagem, and get home sober

In the afternoon, I drank tea at the house of Mr. Freeman, to whom I had
been recommended by Banter; where I had not sat five minutes, till the
foxhunter came in, and by his familiar behaviour appeared to be intimate
with my friend. I was, at first, under some concern, lest he should
recollect my features; but when I found myself introduced to him as
a gentleman from London, without being discovered, I blessed the
opportunity that brought me into his company; hoping that, in the course
of my acquaintance, he would invite me to his house; nor were my hopes
frustrated, for, as we spent the evening together, he grew extremely
fond of my conversation, asked a great many childish questions about
France and foreign parts; and seemed so highly entertained with my
answers, that in his cups he shook me often by the hand, pronounced me
an honest fellow, and in fine desired our company at dinner next day, at
his civil house. My imagination was so much employed in anticipating the
happiness I was to enjoy next day, that I slept very little that night;
but, rising early in the morning, went to the place appointed, where I
met my she-friend, and imparted to her my success with the squire. She
was very much pleased at the occasion, "which," she said, "could not
fail of being agreeable to Narcissa, who, in spite of her passion
for me, had mentioned some scruples relating to my true situation and
character, which the delicacy of her sentiments suggested, and which she
believed I would find it necessary to remove, though she did not know
how." I was a good deal startled at this insinuation, because I foresaw
the difficulty I should find in barely doing myself justice: for,
although it never was my intention to impose myself upon any woman, much
less on Narcissa, I laid claim to the character of a gentleman by birth,
education, and behaviour; and yet (so unlucky had the circumstances of
my life fallen out) I should find it a very hard matter to make good my
pretensions even to these, especially to the last, which was the most
essential. Miss Williams was as sensible as I of this my disadvantage,
but comforted me with observing that, when once a woman has bestowed her
affections on a man, she cannot help judging of him in all respects
with a partiality easily influenced in his favour: she remarked that,
although some situations of my life had been low, yet none of them had
been infamous; that my indigence had been the crime not of me, but
of fortune; and that the miseries I had undergone, by improving the
faculties both of mind and body, qualified me the more for any dignified
station; and would of consequence recommend me to the good graces of
any sensible woman: she therefore advised me to be always open and
unreserved to the inquiries of my mistress, without unnecessarily
betraying the meanest occurrences of my fate; and trust to the strength
of her love and reflection for the rest.

The sentiments of this sensible young woman on this, as well as on
almost every other subject, perfectly agreed with mine. I thanked her
for the care she took of my interests, and, promising to behave myself
according to her directions we parted, after she had assured me that I
depend upon her best offices with her mistress, and that she would from
time to time communicate to me such intelligence as she could procure,
relating to my flame. Having dressed myself to the best advantage, I
waited for the time of dinner with the most fearful impatience; and, as
the hour drew near, my heart beat with such increased velocity, and my
spirits contracted such disorder, that I began to suspect my resolution,
and even to wish myself disengaged. At last Mr. Freeman called at my
lodgings in his way, and I accompanied him to the house where all my
happiness was deposited. We were very kindly received by the squire, who
sat smoking his pipe in a parlour, and asked if we chose to drink any
thing before dinner: though I never had more occasion for a cordial, I
was ashamed to accept his offer, which was also refused, by my friend.
We sat down, however, entered into conversation, which lasted half-an
hour, so that I had time to recollect myself; and (so capricious were
my thoughts) even to hope that Narcissa would not appear--when, all of
a sudden, a servant coming in, gave us notice that dinner was upon the
table, and my perturbation returned with such violence that I could
scarcely conceal it from the company, as I ascended the staircase. When
I entered the dining-room, the first object that saluted my ravished
eyes was the divine Narcissa, blushing like Aurora, adorned with all the
graces that meekness, innocence, and beauty can diffuse! I was seized
with a giddiness, my knees tottered and I scarce had strength enough to
perform the ceremony of salutation, when her brother, slapping me on the
shoulder, cried, "Measure Randan, that there is my sister." I approached
her with eagerness and fear; but in the moment of our embrace, my soul
was agonized with rapture! It was a lucky circumstance for us both, that
my entertainer was not endued with an uncommon stock of penetration; for
our mutual confusion was so manifest that Mr. Freeman perceived it, and
as we went home together, congratulated me on my good fortune. But so
far was Bruin from entertaining the least suspicion, that he encouraged
me to begin a conversation with my mistress in a language unknown to
him, by telling her, that he had a gentleman who could jabber with
her in French and other foreign lingoes as fast as she pleased; then,
turning to me, said, "Odds bobs! I wish you would hold discourse with
her in your French or Italian, and tell me if she understands it as well
as she would be thought to do. There's her aunt and she will chatter
together whole days in it, and I can't have a mouthful of English for
love or money." I consulted the look of my amiable mistress and found
her averse to his proposal, which indeed she declined with a sweetness
of denial peculiar to herself, as a piece of disrespect to that part of
the company which did not understand the language in question. As I had
the happiness of sitting opposite to her, I feasted my eyes much more
than my palate which she tempted in vain with the most delicious bits
carved by her fair hand, and recommended by her persuasive tongue; but
all my other appetites were swallowed up in immensity of my love,
which I fed by gazing incessantly on the delightful object. Dinner was
scarcely ended, when the squire became very drowsy, and after several
dreadful yawns, got up, stretched himself, took two or three turns
across the room, begged we would allow him to take a short nap, and,
having laid a strong injunction on his sister to detain us till his
return, went to his repose without further ceremony. He had not been
gone many minutes, when Freeman, guessing the situation of my heart, and
thinking he could not do me a greater favour than to leave me alone with
Narcissa, pretended to recollect himself all of a sudden, and, starting
up, begged the lady pardon for half-an-hour, for he had unluckily
remembered an engagement of some consequence, that he must perform at
that instant: so saying, he took his leave, promising to come back time
enough for tea, leaving my mistress and me in great confusion.

Now that I enjoyed an opportunity of disclosing the paintings of
my soul, I had not the power to use it. I studied many pathetic
declarations, but, when I attempted to give them utterance, my tongue
denied its office and she sat silent with a downcast look full of
anxious alarm, her bosom heaving with expectation of some great event.
At length I endeavoured to put an end to this solemn pause, and began
with, "It is very surprising, madam, madam"--here the sound dying away,
I made a full stop; while Narcissa, starting, blushed, and, with a timid
accent answered, "Sir?" Confounded at this note of interrogation, I
pronounced with the most sheepish bashfulness, "Madam!" To which she
replied, "I beg pardon--I thought you had spoken to me." Another pause
ensued--I made another effort, and, though my voice faltered very much
at the beginning, made shift to express myself in this manner: "I say,
madam, it is very surprising that love should act so inconsistently with
itself, as to deprive its votaries of the use of their faculties, when
they have most need of them. Since the happy occasion of being alone
with you presented itself, I have made many unsuccessful attempts to
declare a passion for the loveliest of her sex--a passion which took
possession of my soul, while my cruel fate compelled me to wear a
servile disguise so unsuitable to my birth, sentiments, and let me
add, my deserts; yet favourable in one respect, as it furnished me with
opportunities of seeing and adoring your perfections. Yes, madam, it was
then your dear idea entered my bosom, where it has lived unimpaired
in the midst of numberless cares, and animated me against a thousand
dangers and calamities!"

While I spoke thus, she concealed her face with her fan, and when I
ceased speaking, recovering herself from the most beautiful confusion,
told me she thought herself very much obliged by my favourable opinion
of her, and that she was very sorry to hear I had been unfortunate.
Encouraged by this gentle reply, I proceeded, owned myself sufficiently
recompensed by her kind compassion for what I had undergone, and
declared the future happiness of my life depended solely upon her.
"Sir," said she, "I should be very ungrateful, if after the signal
protection you once afforded me, I should refuse to contribute towards
your happiness in any reasonable condescension." Transported at this
acknowledgment I threw myself at her feet, and begged she would regard
my passion with a favourable eye. She was alarmed at my behaviour,
entreated me to rise lest her brother should discover me in that
posture, and to spare her for the present upon a subject for which she
was altogether unprepared. In consequence of this remonstrance, I rose,
assuring her I would rather die than disobey her: but in the meantime
begged her to consider how precious the minutes of this opportunity
were, and what restraint I put upon my inclinations, in sacrificing them
to her desire. She smiled with unspeakable sweetness, and said there
would be no want of opportunities, provided I could maintain the good
opinion her brother had conceived of me, and I, enchanted by her charms,
seized her hand, which I well nigh devoured with kisses. But she checked
my boldness with a severity of countenance, and desired I would not so
far forget myself to her, as to endanger the esteem she had for me;
she reminded me of our being almost strangers to each other, and of the
necessity there was for her knowing me better, before she could take any
resolution in my favour; and, in short, mingled so much good sense
and complacency in her reproof, that I became as much enamoured of her
understanding as I had been before of her beauty, and asked pardon for
my presumption with the utmost reverence of conviction. She forgave my
offence with her usual affability, and sealed my pardon with a look so
full of bewitching tenderness, that, for some minutes, my senses were
lost in ecstacy! I afterwards endeavoured to regulate my behaviour
according to her desire, and turn the conversation upon a more
indifferent subject; but her presence was an insurmountable obstacle to
my design; while I beheld so much excellence, I found it impossible to
call my attention from the contemplation of it! I gazed with unutterable
fondness! I grew mad with admiration! "My condition is insupportable!"
cried I: "I am distracted with passion! Why are you so exquisitely
fair?--why are you so enchantingly good?--why has nature dignified you
with charms so much above the standard of woman? and, wretch that I am,
how dare my unworthiness aspire to the enjoyment of such perfection!"

She was startled at my ravings, reasoned down my transport, and by
her irresistible eloquence, soothed my soul into a state of tranquil
felicity; but, lest I might suffer a relapse, industriously promoted
other subjects to entertain my imagination. She chid me for having
omitted to inquire about her aunt who (she assured me), in the midst
of all her absence of temper, and detachment from common affairs, often
talked of me with uncommon warmth. I professed my veneration for the
good lady, excused my omission, by imputing it to the violence of my
love, which engrossed my whole soul, and desired to know the situation
of her health. Upon which, the amiable Narcissa repeated what I had
heard before of her marriage, with all the tenderness for her reputation
that the subject would admit of; told me she lived with her husband
hard by, and was so much afflicted with the dropsy, and wasted by a
consumption, that she had small hopes of her recovery. Having expressed
my sorrow for her distemper, I questioned her about my good friend, Mrs.
Sagely, who, I learned to my great satisfaction, was in good health,
and who had by the encomiums she bestowed upon me after I was gone,
confirmed the favourable impression my behaviour at parting had made
on Narcissa's heart. This circumstance introduced an inquiry into the
conduct of Sir Timothy Thicket, who (she informed me) had found means to
incense her brother so much against me that she found it impossible
to undeceive him: but, on the contrary, suffered very much in her own
character by his scandalous insinuations; that the whole parish was
alarmed, and actually in pursuit of me; so that she had been in the
utmost consternation on my account, well knowing how little my own
innocence and her testimony would have weighed with the ignorance,
prejudice, and brutality of those who must have judged me, had I
been apprehended; that Sir Timothy, having been seized with a fit of
apoplexy, from which with great difficulty he was recovered, began to be
apprehensive of death, and to prepare himself accordingly for that great
event; as a step to which he sent for her brother, owned with great
contrition the brutal design he had upon her, and in consequence
acquitted me of the assault, robbery, and correspondence with her, which
he had laid to my charge; after which confession he lived about a month
in a languishing condition, and was carried off by a second assault.

Every word that this dear creature spoke, riveted the chains with
which she held me enslaved! My mischievous fancy began to work, and
the tempest of my passion to wake again, when the return of Freeman
destroyed the tempting opportunity, and enabled me to quell the rising
tumult. A little while after, the squire staggered into the room,
rubbing his eyes, and called for his tea, which he drank out of a small
bowl, qualified with brandy; while we took it in the usual way, Narcissa
left us in order to visit her aunt; and when Freeman and I proposed to
take our leave, the foxhunter insisted on our spending the evening at
his house with such obstinacy of affection, that we were obliged to
comply. For my own part, I should have been glad of the invitation, by
which, in all likelihood, I should be blessed with more of his sisters
company, had I not been afraid of risking her esteem, by entering into
a debauch of drinking with him, which, from the knowledge of his
character, I foresaw would happen: but there was no remedy. I was forced
to rely upon the strength of my constitution, which I hoped would resist
intoxication longer than the squire's, and to trust to the good nature
and discretion of my mistress for the rest.

Our entertainer, resolving to begin by times, ordered the table to
be furnished with liquor and glasses immediately after tea, but we
absolutely refused to set in for drinking so soon; and prevailed upon
him to pass away an hour or two at whist, in which we engaged as soon
as Narcissa returned. The savage and I happened to be partners at first,
and, as my thoughts were wholly employed in a more interesting game, I
played so ill that he lost all patience, swore bitterly, and threatened
to call for wine, if they would not grant him another associate. This
desire was gratified, and Narcissa and I were of a side; he won for
the same reason that made him lose before; I was satisfied, my lovely
partner did not repine, and the time slipped away very agreeably, until
we were told that supper was served in another room.

The squire was enraged to find the evening so unprofitably spent, and
wreaked his vengeance on the cards, which he tore, and committed to the
flames with many execrations; threatening to make us redeem our loss
with a large glass and quick circulation; and indeed we had no sooner
supped, and my charmer withdrawn, than he began to put his threat in
execution. Three bottles of port (for he drank no other sort of
wine) were placed before us, with as many water glasses, which were
immediately filled to the brim, after his example, by each out of his
respective allowance, and emptied in a trice to the best in Christendom.
Though I swallowed this, and the next, as fast as the glass could be
replenished, without hesitation or show of reluctance, I perceived
that my brain would not be able to bear many bumpers of this sort, and
dreading the perseverance of a champion who began with such vigour, I
determined to make up for the deficiency of my strength by a stratagem,
which I actually put in practice when the second course of bottles was
called for. The wine being strong and heady, I was already a good deal
discomposed by the dispatch we had made. Freeman's eyes began to reel,
and Bruin himself was elevated into a song, which he uttered with
great vociferation. When I therefore saw the second round brought in, I
assumed a gay air, entertained him with a French catch on the subject of
drinking, which, though he did rot understand it, delighted him highly;
and, telling him your choice spirits at Paris never troubled themselves
with glasses, asked if he had not a bowl or cup in the house that would
contain a whole quart of wine. "Odds niggers!" cried he, "I have a
silver candle cup that holds just the quantity, for all the world; fetch
it hither, Numps." The vessel being produced, I bade him decant his
bottle into it, which he having done, I nodded in a very deliberate
manner, and said, "Pledge you." He stared at me for some time, and
crying, "What! all at one pull, Measter Randan?" I answered, "At one
pull, Sir, you are no milk-sop--we shall do you justice." "Shall you?"
said he, shaking me by the hand; "odds then, I'll see it out, an't
were a mile to the bottom: here's to our better acquaintance, measter
Randan," So saying, he applied it to his lips, and emptied it in a
breath. I knew the effect of it would be almost instantaneous; therefore
taking the cup, began to discharge my bottle into it, telling him he
was now qualified to drink with the Cham of Tartary. I had no sooner
pronounced these words than he took umbrage at them, and after several
attempts to spit, made shift to stutter, "A f--t for your Chams of
T--Tartary! I am a f--f--freeborn Englishman, worth th--three thousand
a-year, and v--value no man, d--me." Then, dropping his jaw, and fixing
his eyes, he hiccuped aloud, and fell upon the floor as mute as n
flounder. Mr. Freeman, heartily glad at his defeat, assisted me in
carrying him to bed, where we left him to the care of his servants, and
went home to our respective habitations, congratulating each other on
our good fortune.






CHAPTER LVII

Miss Williams informs me of Narcissa's Approbation of my Flame--I
appease the Squire--write to my Mistress--am blessed with an Answer--beg
Leave of her Brother to dance with her at a Ball--obtain his Consent
and hers--enjoy a private Conversation with her--am perplexed with
Reflections--have the Honour of appearing her Partner at a Ball--we
are complimented by a certain Nobleman--he discovers some Symptoms of
a Passion for Narcissa--I am stung with Jealousy--Narcissa, alarmed,
retires--I observe Melinda in the company--the Squire is captivated by
her Beauty

I was met next morning at the usual place by Miss Williams, who gave
me joy of the progress I had made in the affection of her mistress, and
blessed me with an account of that dear creature's conversation with
her, after she had retired the night before from our company. I could
scarce believe her information, when she recounted her expressions in my
favour, so much more warm and passionate were they than my most sanguine
hopes had presaged; and was particularly pleased to hear that she
approved of my behaviour to her brother after she withdrew. Transported
at the news of my happiness, I presented my ring to the messenger as
a testimony of my gratitude and satisfaction; but she was above
such mercenary considerations, and refused my compliment with some
resentment, saying, she was not a little mortified to see my opinion
of her so low and contemptible. I did myself a piece of justice by
explaining my behaviour on this head, and to convince her of my esteem,
promised to be ruled by her directions in the prosecution of the
whole affair, which I had so much at heart, that the repose of my life
depended upon the consequence.

As I fervently wished for another interview, where I might pour out the
effusion of my love without danger of being interrupted, and perhaps
reep some endearing return from the queen of my desires, I implored
her advice and assistance in promoting this event: but she gave me to
understand, that Narcissa would make no precipitate compliances of this
kind, and I would do well to cultivate her brother's acquaintance, in
the course of which I should not want opportunities of removing that
reserve which my mistress thought herself obliged to maintain during the
infancy of our correspondence. In the meantime she promised to tell her
lady that I had endeavoured by presents and persuasions, to prevail upon
her (Miss Williams) to deliver a letter from me, which she had refused
to charge herself with, until she should know Narcissa's sentiments of
the matter; and said, by these means she did not doubt of being able
to open a literary communication between us, which could not fail of
introducing more intimate connections.

I approved of her counsel, and, our appointment being renewed for the
next day, left her with an intent of falling upon some method of being
reconciled to the squire, who, I supposed, would be offended with the
trick we had put upon him. With this view I consulted Freeman, who, from
his knowledge of the foxhunter's disposition, assured me there was no
other method of pacifying him, than that of sacrificing ourselves for
one night to an equal match with him in drinking. This expedient I found
myself necessitated to comply with for the interest of my passion, and
therefore determined to commit the debauch at my own lodgings, that I
might run no risk of being discovered by Narcissa, in a state of brutal
degeneracy. Mr. Freeman, who was to be of the party, went, at my desire,
to the squire, in order to engage him, while I took care to furnish
myself for his reception. My invitation was accepted, my guests honoured
me with their company in the evening, when Bruin gave me to understand
that he had drunk many tons of wine in his life, but was never served
such a trick as I had played upon him the night before. I promised to
atone for my trespass, and, having ordered to every man his bottle,
began the contest with a bumper to the health of Narcissa. The toasts
circulated with great devotion, the liquor began to operate, our mirth
grew noisy, and, as Freeman said, I had the advantage of drinking small
French claret, the savage was effectually tamed before our senses were
in the least affected, and carried home in an apoplexy of drunkenness.

I was next morning, as usual, favoured with a visit from my kind and
punctual confidante, who, telling me she was permitted to receive my
letters for her mistress, I took up the pen immediately, and, following
the first dictates of my passion, wrote as follows:


"Dear Madam,

"Were it possible for the powers of utterance to reveal the soft
emotions of my soul, the fond anxiety, the glowing hopes, the chilling
flame, that rule my breast by turns, I should need no other witness than
this paper, to evince the purity and ardour of that flame your charms
have kindled in my heart, But alas! expression wrongs my love! I am
inspired with conceptions that no language can convey! Your beauty fills
me with wonder, your understanding with ravishment, and your goodness
with adoration! I am transported with desire, distracted with doubts,
and tortured with impatience. Suffer me then, lovely arbitress of my
fate, to approach you in person, to breathe in soft murmurs my passion
to your ear, to offer the sacrifice of a heart overflowing with the
most genuine and disinterested love, to gaze with ecstacy on the divine
object of my wishes, to hear the music of her enchanting tongue, and
to rejoice in her smiles of approbation, which will banish the most
intolerable suspense from the bosom of

"Your enraptured, R-- R--."

Having finished this effusion, I committed it to the care of my faithful
friend, with an injunction to second my entreaty with all her eloquence
and influence, and in the meantime went to dress, with an intention of
visiting Mrs. Snapper and Miss, whom I had utterly neglected, and indeed
almost forgotten, since my dear Narcissa had resumed the empire of my
soul. The old gentlewoman received me very kindly, and Miss affected a
frankness and gaiety which, however, I could easily perceive was forced
and dissembled: among other things, she pretended to joke me upon my
passion for Narcissa, which she averred was no secret, and asked if
I intended to dance with her at the next assembly. I was a good deal
concerned to find myself become the town talk on this subject, lest the
squire, having notice of my inclinations, should disapprove of them,
and, by breaking off all correspondence with me, deprive me of the
opportunities I now enjoyed. But I resolved to use the interest I
had with him, while it lasted; and that very night, meeting him
occasionally, asked his permission to solicit her company at the ball,
which he very readily granted, to my inexpressible satisfaction.

Having been kept awake the greatest part of the night by a thousand
delightful reveries that took possession of my fancy, I got up by
times, and, flying to the place of rendezvous, had in a little time
the pleasure of seeing Miss Williams approach with a smile on her
countenance, which I interpreted into a good omen. Neither was I
mistaken in my presage. She presented me with a letter from the idol
of my soul, which, after having kissed it devoutly, I opened with the
utmost eagerness, and was blessed with her approbation in these terms:


"Sir,

"To say I look upon you with indifference would be a piece of
dissimulation which I think no decorum requires, and no custom can
justify. As my heart never felt an impression that my tongue was ashamed
to declare, I will not scruple to own myself pleased with your passion;
confident of your integrity, and so well convinced of my own discretion,
that I should not hesitate in granting you the interview you desire,
were I not overawed by the prying curiosity of a malicious world, the
censure of which might be fatally prejudicial to the reputation of

"Your Narcissa."

No anchorite in the ecstacy of devotion ever adored a relic with more
fervour than that with which I kissed this inimitable proof of my
charmer's candour, generosity, and affection! I read it over a hundred
times, was ravished with her confession in the beginning; but the
subscription of Your Narcissa yielded me such delight as I had never
felt before! My happiness was still increased by Miss Williams, who
blessed me with a repetition of her lady's tender expressions in my
favour, when she received and read my letter. In short, I had all the
reason in the world to believe that this gentle creature's bosom was
possessed by a passion for me, as warm, though perhaps not so impetuous
as mine for her.

I informed my friend of the squire's consent to my dancing with Narcissa
at the ball and desired her to tell her mistress, that I would do myself
the honour of visiting her in the afternoon, in consequence of his
permission, when I hoped to find her as indulgent as her brother had
been complaisant in that particular. Miss Williams expressed a good
deal of joy at hearing I was so much in favour with the foxhunter,
and ventured to assure me, that my visit would be very agreeable to my
mistress, the rather because Bruin was engaged to dine abroad. This was
a circumstance which, I scarce need say, pleased me. I went immediately
to the Long Room, where I found him, and, affecting to know nothing of
his engagement, told him, I would do myself the pleasure to wait upon
him in the afternoon, and to present his sister with a ticket for the
ball. He shook me by the hand, according to custom, and, giving me to
understand that he was to dine abroad, desired me to go and drink tea
with Narcissa notwithstanding, and promised to prepare her for my visit
in the meantime.

Everything succeeding thus to my wish, I waited with incredible
impatience for the time, which no sooner arrived than I hastened to
the scene, which my fancy had preoccupied long before. I was introduced
accordingly to the dear enchantress, whom I found accompanied by Miss
Williams, who, on pretence of ordering tea, retired at my approach. This
favourable accident, which alarmed my whole soul, disordered her also. I
found myself actuated by an irresistible impulse; I advanced to her with
eagerness and awe; and, profiting by the confusion that prevailed over
her, clasped the fair angel in my arms, and imprinted a glowing kiss
upon her lips, more soft and fragrant than the dewy rosebud just
bursting from the stem! Her face was in an instant covered with blushes,
her eyes sparkled with resentment; I threw myself at her feet, and
implored her pardon. Her love became advocate in my cause; her look
softened into forgiveness; she raised me up, and chid me with so much
sweetness of displeasure that I could have been tempted to repeat
the offence, had not the coming in of the servant with the tea-board
prevented my presumption. While we were subject to be interrupted
or overheard, we conversed about the approaching ball, at which she
promised to grace me as a partner, but, when the equipage was removed,
and we were left alone, I resumed the more interesting theme, and
expressed myself with such transport and agitation, that my mistress,
fearing I should commit some extravagance, rang the bell for her maid,
whom she detained in the room, as a check upon my vivacity. I was
not sorry for this precaution, because I could unbosom myself without
reserve before Miss Williams, who was the confidante of us both. I
therefore gave a loose to the inspirations of my passion, which operated
so successfully upon the tender affections of Narcissa, that she laid
aside the constraint she had hitherto worn, and blessed me with the most
melting declaration of her mutual flame! It was impossible for me to
forbear taking the advantage of this endearing condescension. She now
gently yielded to my embraces; while I, encircling all that I held dear
within my arms, tasted in advance the joys of that paradise I hoped in a
little time wholly to possess! We spent the afternoon in all the ecstacy
of hope that the most fervent love exchanged by mutual vows could
inspire; and Miss Williams was so much affected with our chaste
caresses, which recalled the sad remembrance of what she was, that her
eyes were filled with tears.

The evening being pretty far advanced, I forced myself from the dear
object of my flame, who indulged me in a tender embrace at parting,
and, repairing to my lodgings, communicated to my friend Strap every
circumstance of my happiness, which filled him with so much pleasure,
that it ran over at his eyes; and he prayed heartily, that no envious
devil might, as formerly, dash the cup of blessing from my lip. When
I reflected on what had happened, and especially on the unreserved
protestations of Narcissa's love, I could not help being amazed at
her omitting to inquire into the particular circumstances of life and
fortune of one whom she had favoured with her affection, and I began to
be a little anxious about the situation of her finances; well knowing
that I should do an irreparable injury to the person my soul held most
dear, if I should espouse her without being able to support her in the
rank which was certainly her due. I had heard, indeed, while I served
her aunt, that her father had left her a considerable sum; and
that everybody believed she would inherit the greatest part of her
kinswoman's dowry, but I did not know how far she might be restricted by
the old gentleman's will in the enjoyment of what he left her: and I was
too well informed of the virtuoso's late conduct, to think my mistress
could have any expectation from that quarter. I confided, however, in
the good sense and policy of my charmer, who, I was sure, would not
consent to unite her fate with mine, before she had fully considered and
provided for the consequence.

The ball night being arrived, I dressed myself in a suit I had reserved
for some grand occasion; and, having drunk tea with Narcissa and her
brother, conducted my angel to the scene, where she, in a moment,
eclipsed all her female competitors for beauty, and attracted the
admiration of the whole assembly. My heart dilated with pride on this
occasion, and my triumph rejected all bounds, when, after we had danced
together, a certain nobleman, remarkable for his figure, and influence
in the beau monde, came up, and in the hearing of all present, honoured
us with a very particular compliment upon our accomplishments and
appearance; but this transport was soon checked, when I perceived his
lordship attach himself with great assiduity to my mistress, and say
some warm things, which, I thought, savoured too much of passion. It
was then I began to feel the pangs of jealousy; I dreaded the power and
address of my rival; I sickened at his discourse; when she opened her
lips to answer, my heart died within me; when she smiled, I felt the
pains of the damned! I was enraged at his presumption: I cursed her
complaisance: at length he quitted her, and went to the other side of
the room. Narcissa, suspecting nothing of the rage that inflamed me, put
some questions to me as soon as he was gone, to which I made no reply,
but assumed a grim look, which too well denoted the agitation of my
breast, and surprised her not a little. She no sooner observed my
emotion than she changed colour, and asked what ailed me? but before I
could make answer, her brother, pulling me by the sleeve, bade me take
notice of a lady who sat fronting us, whom I immediately, to my vast
astonishment, distinguished to be Melinda, accompanied by her mother,
and an elderly gentleman, whom I did not know. "Wounds! Mr. Randan,"
cried the squire, "is she not a delicate piece of stuff? 'Sdeath! I have
a good mind--if I thought she was a single person."

Notwithstanding the perplexity I was in, I had reflection enough to
