to spare for the cattle. But on the third night the poor beasts being
maddened by thirst, broke out of the kraal and rushing to the spring,
so trampled it with their hoofs that its waters were sealed up, and only
very little could be obtained even by digging, for here the rock came
near to the surface of the soil, and it would seem as though the course
of the spring was turned or choked beneath it.

Then all those upon that mountain began to suffer the horrors of thirst.
Soon the cattle were altogether mad and rushing to and fro in herds,
bellowing furiously and goring everyone they met, or trampling them to
the earth. Now the Umpondwana strove to be rid of them by driving them
down the gorge, but the Zulus, guessing the trouble that the presence
of these beasts was bringing upon the besieged would not suffer them to
pass. Next they attempted to force them over the edge of the precipice,
but when they were driven to it the oxen turned and charged through
them, killing several men. After this they contented themselves with
stabbing the most dangerous of the animals, and leaving the rest to rush
to and fro as they would, for they did not care to kill them all lest
their carcasses should breed a pestilence.

The sixth day came, and, oh! the great kraal of the Umpondwana was but
as a hell wherein lost souls wandered in torment, for the sun beat down
upon it fiercely and everywhere roamed or lay men, women and children
overcome with the torture of thirst; indeed, of the last, some were
already dead, especially those who were at the breast, for their
mothers' milk was dry. Here three men had dragged an old wife from her
hut, and were beating her to make her reveal the store of water which
she was believed to have hidden; there others were cutting the throat
of an ox that they might drink its blood, and yonder a little girl
was turning stones to lick the damp side of them with her poor parched
tongue.

In the midst of these scenes which passed outside her hut, sat Sihamba
brooding. As chieftainess she still had about a pint of water stored
in a jar, but though she had made Suzanne drink, herself she drank but
little, for she would not consent to suffer less than those about her.

Now Sihamba's eyes fell upon the child who was licking stones, and her
heart was wrung with pity. Going into the hut she fetched most of the
water in a gourd, and calling to the child, who staggered towards her,
for she could scarcely walk, she gave it to her, bidding her drink
slowly.

In a moment it was gone, every drop of it, and, behold! the dim eyes
brightened, and the shrunken limbs seemed to grow round again, while the
young voice, no longer high and cracked, praised and blessed her name.
Sihamba motioned the child away, then she went into the hut to weep,
only weep she could not, since her eyes were too dry for tears.

"Three more days," she thought to herself, "and they will all be
dead unless rain should fall. Yes, the cowards, and those whom their
cowardice has betrayed will all be dead together."

As she thought thus, Suzanne entered the hut, and there was tidings in
her eyes.

"What is it, sister," asked Sihamba, "and whence do you come?"

"I come from the high seat upon the edge of the cliff," she answered,
"where I have sat all day, for I can no longer bear these sights, and I
have this to tell, that the Zulus are marching across the plain, but not
towards Zululand, since they head for the Quathlamba Mountains."



CHAPTER XXX

SIHAMBA PREVAILS

Now a fire of hope shot up in Sihamba's eyes, but soon it died out
again.

"It is a trick, it must be a trick," she said, "for who ever heard of a
Zulu loosing the prey that was in his hand? Never dare he do it save
by the command of the king," and she left the hut to be met by others
running with the same tidings. Of these she sent some down the gorge
to bring her report of what had happened, and with them Zinti, for she
could not altogether trust the word of her own people.

Within an hour the messengers returned, and on their faces was a strange
look which, clever as she was, Sihamba did not understand.

"Is the path clear?" she asked.

"No, chieftainess," they replied, "it is still blocked, for though
the Zulus have gone we know not where by order received from Dingaan,
Bull-Head holds it with such of his own men as are left alive."

"Had you speech with the white man?" she asked.

"Yes, lady."

"Say on."

Now they looked about them like people who are ashamed, but at last the
oldest of them spoke.

"Chieftainess," he said, "Bull-Head made us this offer and in these
words: 'You people of the Umpondwana, you are dying of thirst and I know
it; yes, though the Zulus have gone and but few of us are left here, yet
you cannot force the narrow way against us, so that I have only to sit
here for a few days longer and you will be dead of thirst, everyone of
you, you and your cattle together. But I do not wish that you should
die, for with you I have no quarrel; also if you die one will perish
among you whom I desire to keep alive. Therefore I make you this offer.
Hand over to me your ruler, Sihamba Ngenyanga, and with her the white
woman named Swallow, and you yourselves shall go free, everyone of you;
more, although I will take this stronghold of yours to live in myself, I
will give back to you the half of the cattle. Now, answer.'

"Lady, when he had finished speaking we consulted together and answered
Bull-Head thus: 'We cannot give over to you our chieftainess and her
white sister, for it is better to die than that such dishonour should
lie upon our names. But if you will let us go, you can take them from
among our number as we pass before you, for that will be no fault of
ours, or if they do not choose to accompany us, after we have gone by
you can ascend the mountain and take them.'

"To this Bull-Head assented, saying, 'Set the Lady Swallow in her chair
upon the cliff edge and Sihamba at her side so that my eyes seeing them
may know that they are safe, and you shall go.' So it was agreed between
us that to-morrow at the dawn he will open the wall and let us down to
the river to drink, after which we may pass whither we will."

Now when Sihamba heard these shameful words her rage was so great that
for a while she could not even speak. At length she found her tongue and
gasped out:

"Oh! father of cowards, do you dare to sing such a song in my ears? Why
do not you, who are many, storm the pass and take the water?"

"Lady," answered the old man coldly, "we dare because we must, for
honour cannot live before the assegai of thirst. You talk to us of
storming the pass; we cannot storm it, for ten men can hold that place
against a hundred; also our arms are weak and we are weary of war.
Listen; on the one hand are the lives of thousands, with them your
own and that of the White Swallow, and on the other this dishonour. We
choose the dishonour, since if you and the Swallow do not desire to fall
into the hands of Bull-Head, you can still do what you must have done
had we chosen honour. Lady, you can die, knowing that by your death you
have saved the lives of the multitude over whom you rule.

"Listen again, lady, we did not seek you, it was you who came back to us
after the death of the chief, your brother. We accepted you and you
have ruled us justly for these two years, but you wish to make of us
a fighting people who are and who desire to remain a people of peace.
Moreover, you promised that the white chieftainess, your companion,
would bring us prosperity and good, whereas to us she has been a bird of
ill-omen, for since she came here on her account there has been war
and nothing but war. Yes, because of her we have been cooped up on
this mountain and killed whenever we ventured on to the plains beyond;
therefore we will have no more of her, she must find her own fortune,
for we have our lives and those of our wives and children to save.

"Further, I say this: the news of the offer of Bull-Head has gone abroad
among the people, and had we refused they would have torn us limb from
limb, yes, and you and the White Swallow also. Our hearts are sad, but
lady, who can fight against fate?"

"I can," answered Sihamba, "but have no fear; to-morrow at the dawn you
shall see us sit out upon the cliff point; and now, father of cowards,
begone, and let me see your face no more. Betray us if you will, you who
were not men enough to hold the water, you who are not men enough to cut
a path to it as you might, and therefore must complete your cowardice
with treachery. Betray us if you will, but I tell you that you shall not
go free from this disgrace. The curse of Chaka shall fall upon you and
the blade of the spear shall be the inheritance of you who are afraid to
grasp its shaft. Begone!" and withered by her words and the fire of her
eyes, the spokesmen of the Umpondwana crept like beaten hounds from the
presence of their deserted chieftainess.



Here I will stop the tale to say that this prophecy of Sihamba's came
true, as did all the prophecies of that strange woman, who, with other
gifts, without doubt had that of foresight. A few years later, when
Panda was king, and their wars with us Boers were ended, the Zulus, who
never forgot a quarrel, swooped down upon the Umpondwana unawares, and
storming the mountain by night, put all the men on it to the spear, and
carried away the women and children to Zululand, so that of this tribe
there remains nothing but some crumbling walls and a name of shame.



Now the sun had set upon that home of thirst, and all was silent in it
save for the sound of the hoofs of the galloping cattle as they rushed
hither and thither, and the groaning of the women and children, who
wandered about seeking grass to chew, for the sake of the night damps
that gathered on it. Sihamba went into the great hut where she always
slept with Suzanne, whom she found seated upon a stool, wan-faced, and
her eyes set wide with misery of mind and body.

"What passes now?" asked Suzanne.

The little woman came to her, and throwing her arms about her neck she
kissed her, answering:

"Alas! sister, all things pass, and with them our lives," and she told
her of the surrender of the Umpondwana and its terms.

Suzanne listened in silence, for grief and despair had done their worst
with her, and her heart could hold no more pain.

"So it is finished at last," she said, when Sihamba had spoken, "and
this is the end of all our toil and strivings and of our long fight
against fate. Yes, this is the end: that we must die, or at the least I
must die, for I will choose death rather than that Van Vooren should
lay a finger upon me. Well, I should care little were it not that now
I believe my husband to be still alive, and it is hard to go before him
into yonder darkness, though I believe also that the darkness which we
fear will prove such a happy light as does not shine upon this earth,"
and she laid her head upon Sihamba's breast and they wept together.

Presently Sihamba said, "My mind, that was wont to be so clear, is
darkened. Pray to your God, you who are of His people that He may send
light upon it, so that I can think once more while there is yet time.
Now we wander in the forest of despair, but never yet was there a forest
so thick that it cannot be passed. Pray then that I may be given light,
for your life hangs upon it."

So Suzanne prayed, and presently, as she prayed, her weariness overcame
her and she slept, and Sihamba slept also. When Sihamba awoke it was
within an hour of midnight. A little lamp of oil burnt in the hut, and
by the light of it she could see the white face of Suzanne lying at her
side, and groaned in her bitterness to think that before the sun set
again that face must be whiter still, for she knew that the Swallow was
not of the mind of the Umpondwana, who preferred dishonour to death.
"Oh! that my wisdom might come back to me," she murmured. "Oh!
Great-Great, God of my sister, give me back my wisdom and I will pay my
life for it. Oh! Lighter of the stars, for myself I ask nothing, who am
not of Thy children. Let eternal death be my portion, but give me back
my wisdom that I may save my sister who serves Thee."

Thus prayed Sihamba out of the depth of her untutored heart, not for
herself but for another, and it would seem that her prayer was heard;
though many among our people think that God does not listen to the black
creatures. At the least, as her eyes wandered around the hut, they fell
upon certain jars of earthenware. Now during the years that she dwelt
among the Umpondwana Suzanne had but two pastimes. One of them was to
carve wood with a knife, and the other to paint pictures upon jars, for
which art she always had a taste, these jars being afterwards burnt in
the fire. For pigments she used certain clays or ochres, red and black
and white and yellow, which were found in abundance on the slopes of
the mountain, and also a kind of ink that she made by boiling down the
kernels of the fruit of the green-leaved tree which grew by the banks of
the river.

Now it was as she gazed at these jars of pigments and the brushes of
goat's hair that the wisdom which she sought came to Sihamba; yes, in a
moment it came to her, in a moment her plan was made, and she knew that
it would not fail. To-morrow at the dawn the Umpondwana, to the number
of several thousands, would pour through the pass on to the plain
beyond. Well, Suzanne should go with them, she should go _as a black
woman!_ Already her hair and eyes were dark, and with those pigments her
snow-white flesh could be darkened also, and then in the crowd who would
know her from a Kaffir girl, she who could talk the language as though
she had been born a Kaffir. Stay! Bull-Head was artful and clever, and
perhaps he might be ready for such a trick. How could she deceive him?

Again she looked at the jars, and again wisdom came to her. It was
the habit of Suzanne to sit in her dizzy chair of rock and watch the
sunrise, hoping ever that in the light of it she might see white men
riding to rescue her, and this Van Vooren knew, for she could be seen
from the mouth of the pass below, where from hour to hour he would stand
gazing at her five hundred feet above his head.

Well, to-morrow at the dawn another white woman should be seated yonder
to satisfy his eyes, or at least a woman who seemed to be white. On the
cliff edge, not far from this very rock lay the body of a poor girl who
that day had died of thirst. If its face and arms and feet were painted
white, and Suzanne's cloak of white goat's hair were set upon its
shoulders, and the corpse itself placed upright in the chair, who,
looking at it from hundreds of feet beneath, could guess that it was not
Suzanne, and who, seeing it set aloft, would seek for Suzanne among the
crowd of escaping Kaffirs? The plan was good; it could scarcely fail,
only time pressed.

"Sister, awake," whispered Sihamba. Suzanne sat up at once, for the
sleep of the doomed is light. "Listen, sister," went on Sihamba, "that
wisdom for which you prayed has come to me," and she told her all the
plan.

"It is very clever, and it may serve," answered Suzanne, "for I
understand these paints and can stain myself so that if my hair is cut
none would know me from a Kaffir. But, Sihamba, there is one thing which
I do not understand. What will you do? For if you attempt to escape your
stature will betray you."

"I?" hesitated the little woman, "nay, I do not know, I have never
thought of it. Doubtless I shall win through in this way or in that."

"You are deceiving me, Sihamba. Well, there is an end, I will not go
without you."

"Can you think of death and say that you will not go without me?"

"I can Sihamba."

"Can you think of your father and your mother and say that you will not
go without me?"

"I can, Sihamba."

"Can you think of your husband and say that you will not go without me?"

"I can," faltered Suzanne.

"Truly you are brave," laughed the little woman. "There is more courage
in that white heart of yours than in those of all the Umpondwana. Well,
sister, I also am brave, or at the least for these many moons I have set
myself a task, nor will I shrink from it at the end, and that is to save
you from Piet Van Vooren as once at a dearer price you saved me. Now,
hearken, for myself I have no fear; as I have said, doubtless in this
way or in that I shall win through, but it cannot be at your side. I
must rejoin you afterwards. What, you refuse to go? Then, Lady Swallow,
you send me down to death and your hands are red with my blood. I am
weary, I will not live to see more trouble; life is hard and death is
easy. Finish your own battle, Swallow, and fly out your flight alone,"
and drawing a knife from her girdle Sihamba laid it upon her knee.

"Do you mean that you will kill yourself if I refuse your prayer?"

"Nothing less, sister, and at once, for I thirst, and would seek some
land where there is water, or where we need none. It comes to this,
then: if you consent I may live, if you refuse I must die."

"I cannot do it," moaned Suzanne. "Let us die together."

Now Sihamba crept to her and whispered in her ear:

"Think of Ralph Kenzie and of what his life must be if you should die.
Think of those children who will come, and of that first kiss of love
found again which you must miss in death, whatever else it may have to
give. Think of the knife's point that you would change for it, or the
last sick rush down a mountain height of space. Think of your husband.
Hark! I hear him calling you."

Then Suzanne yielded.

"O woman with a noble heart," she murmured, "I listen to your tempting;
may God forgive me and God reward you, O woman with the noble heart."



CHAPTER XXXI

SIHAMBA'S FAREWELL

Then they began the work, for much must be done before the daylight
came. First Sihamba took a sharp knife, and with it cut off Suzanne's
beautiful hair close to the head, over which what was left of it curled
naturally. To disguise it further, for though it was dark it was too
fine for the hair of a native, she put grease upon it and powdered
it with the blue dust that Kaffir women use. This done, the poor girl
stripped herself, and with the help of Sihamba smeared all her body,
every inch of it down to the soles of her feet, with the ink-like juice
mixed with the black earth and grease, which when it was dry made her
the colour of a Kaffir. Next Sihamba dressed her in a native woman's
moocha made of skin and beads, and gave her an old skin blanket to wear
upon her shoulders and hide sandals for her feet, together with anklets
of beads and copper wire. Then having examined her all over to see that
no sign of her white skin could be seen through the pigments, and burned
the long tresses of her hair, Sihamba went to the door of the hut.

"Where are you going?" asked Suzanne.

"To find Zinti," she answered, "for now we must have his help."

"No, no," cried Suzanne, "I am ashamed to be seen thus by any man."

