Waverley communicated that remarkable history, so far as it had
then transpired, to which Fergus listened with deep interest. He
then asked after several other friends; and made many minute
inquiries concerning the fate of his own clansmen. They had
suffered less than other tribes who had been engaged in the
affair; for, having in a great measure dispersed and returned home
after the captivity of their Chieftain, according to the universal
custom of the Highlanders, they were not in arms when the
insurrection was finally suppressed, and consequently were treated
with less rigour. This Fergus heard with great satisfaction.

'You are rich,' he said, 'Waverley, and you are generous. When you
hear of these poor Mac-Ivors being distressed about their
miserable possessions by some harsh overseer or agent of
government, remember you have worn their tartan and are an adopted
son of their race, The Baron, who knows our manners and lives near
our country, will apprise you of the time and means to be their
protector. Will you promise this to the last Vich Ian Vohr?'

Edward, as may well be believed, pledged his word; which he
afterwards so amply redeemed that his memory still lives in these
glens by the name of the Friend of the Sons of Ivor.

'Would to God,' continued the Chieftain, 'I could bequeath to you
my rights to the love and obedience of this primitive and brave
race; or at least, as I have striven to do, persuade poor Evan to
accept of his life upon their terms, and be to you what he has
been to me, the kindest, the bravest, the most devoted--'

The tears which his own fate could not draw forth fell fast for
that of his foster-brother.

'But,' said he, drying them,'that cannot be. You cannot be to them
Vich Ian Vohr; and these three magic words,' said he, half
smiling, 'are the only Open Sesame to their feelings and
sympathies, and poor Evan must attend his foster-brother in death,
as he has done through his whole life.'

'And I am sure,' said Maccombich, raising himself from the floor,
on which, for fear of interrupting their conversation, he had lain
so still that, in the obscurity of the apartment, Edward was not
aware of his presence--'I am sure Evan never desired or deserved a
better end than just to die with his Chieftain.'

'And now,' said Fergus, 'while we are upon the subject of
clanship--what think you now of the prediction of the Bodach
Glas?' Then, before Edward could answer, 'I saw him again last
night: he stood in the slip of moonshine which fell from that high
and narrow window towards my bed. "Why should I fear him?" I
thought; "to-morrow, long ere this time, I shall be as immaterial
as he." "False spirit," I said, "art thou come to close thy walks
on earth and to enjoy thy triumph in the fall of the last
descendant of thine enemy?" The spectre seemed to beckon and to
smile as he faded from my sight. What do you think of it? I asked
the same question of the priest, who is a good and sensible man;
he admitted that the church allowed that such apparitions were
possible, but urged me not to permit my mind to dwell upon it, as
imagination plays us such strange tricks. What do you think of
it?'

'Much as your confessor,' said Waverley, willing to avoid dispute
upon such a point at such a moment. A tap at the door now
announced that good man, and Edward retired while he administered
to both prisoners the last rites of religion, in the mode which
the Church of Rome prescribes.

In about an hour he was re-admitted; soon after, a file of
soldiers entered with a blacksmith, who struck the fetters from
the legs of the prisoners.

'You see the compliment they pay to our Highland strength and
courage; we have lain chained here like wild beasts, till our legs
are cramped into palsy, and when they free us they send six
soldiers with loaded muskets to prevent our taking the castle by
storm!'

Edward afterwards learned that these severe precautions had been
taken in consequence of a desperate attempt of the prisoners to
escape, in which they had very nearly succeeded.

Shortly afterwards the drums of the garrison beat to arms. 'This
is the last turn-out,' said Fergus, 'that I shall hear and obey.
And now, my dear, dear Edward, ere we part let us speak of Flora--
a subject which awakes the tenderest feeling that yet thrills
within me'

'We part not here!' said Waverley.

'O yes, we do; you must come no farther. Not that I fear what is
to follow for myself,' he said proudly. 'Nature has her tortures
as well as art, and how happy should we think the man who escapes
from the throes of a mortal and painful disorder in the space of a
short half hour? And this matter, spin it out as they will, cannot
last longer. But what a dying man can suffer firmly may kill a
living friend to look upon. This same law of high treason,' he
continued, with astonishing firmness and composure, 'is one of the
blessings, Edward, with which your free country has accommodated
poor old Scotland; her own jurisprudence, as I have heard, was
much milder. But I suppose one day or other--when there are no
longer any wild Highlanders to benefit by its tender mercies--they
will blot it from their records as levelling them with a nation of
cannibals. The mummery, too, of exposing the senseless head--they
have not the wit to grace mine with a paper coronet; there would
be some satire in that, Edward. I hope they will set it on the
Scotch gate though, that I may look, even after death, to the blue
hills of my own country, which I love so dearly. The Baron would
have added,

    Moritur, et moriens dukes reminiscitur Argos.'

A bustle, and the sound of wheels and horses' feet, was now heard
in the court-yard of the Castle. 'As I have told you why you must
not follow me, and these sounds admonish me that my time flies
fast, tell me how you found poor Flora.'

Waverley, with a voice interrupted by suffocating sensations, gave
some account of the state of her mind.

'Poor Flora!' answered the Chief, 'she could have borne her own
sentence of death, but not mine. You, Waverley, will soon know the
happiness of mutual affection in the married state--long, long may
Rose and you enjoy it!--but you can never know the purity of
feeling which combines two orphans like Flora and me, left alone
as it were in the world, and being all in all to each other from
our very infancy. But her strong sense of duty and predominant
feeling of loyalty will give new nerve to her mind after the
immediate and acute sensation of this parting has passed away. She
will then think of Fergus as of the heroes of our race, upon whose
deeds she loved to dwell.'

'Shall she not see you then?' asked Waverley. 'She seemed to
expect it.'

'A necessary deceit will spare her the last dreadful parting. I
could not part with her without tears, and I cannot bear that
these men should think they have power to extort them. She was
made to believe she would see me at a later hour, and this letter,
which my confessor will deliver, will apprise her that all is
over.'

An officer now appeared and intimated that the High Sheriff and
his attendants waited before the gate of the Castle to claim the
bodies of Fergus Mac-Ivor and Evan Maccombich. 'I come,' said
Fergus. Accordingly, supporting Edward by the arm and followed by
Evan Dhu and the priest, he moved down the stairs of the tower,
the soldiers bringing up the rear. The court was occupied by a
squadron of dragoons and a battalion of infantry, drawn up in
hollow square. Within their ranks was the sledge or hurdle on
which the prisoners were to be drawn to the place of execution,
about a mile distant from Carlisle. It was painted black, and
drawn by a white horse. At one end of the vehicle sat the
executioner, a horrid-looking fellow, as beseemed his trade, with
the broad axe in his hand; at the other end, next the horse, was
an empty seat for two persons. Through the deep and dark Gothic
archway that opened on the drawbridge were seen on horseback the
High Sheriff and his attendants, whom the etiquette betwixt the
civil and military powers did not permit to come farther. 'This is
well GOT UP for a closing scene,' said Fergus, smiling
disdainfully as he gazed around upon the apparatus of terror. Evan
Dhu exclaimed with some eagerness, after looking at the dragoons,'
These are the very chields that galloped off at Gladsmuir, before
we could kill a dozen o' them. They look bold enough now,
however.' The priest entreated him to be silent.

The sledge now approached, and Fergus, turning round, embraced
Waverley, kissed him on each side of the face, and stepped nimbly
into his place. Evan sat down by his side. The priest was to
follow in a carriage belonging to his patron, the Catholic
gentleman at whose house Flora resided. As Fergus waved his hand
to Edward the ranks closed around the sledge, and the whole
procession began to move forward. There was a momentary stop at
the gateway, while the governor of the Castle and the High Sheriff
went through a short ceremony, the military officer there
delivering over the persons of the criminals to the civil power.
'God save King George!' said the High Sheriff. When the formality
concluded, Fergus stood erect in the sledge, and, with a firm and
steady voice, replied,' God save King JAMES!' These were the last
words which Waverley heard him speak.

The procession resumed its march, and the sledge vanished from
beneath the portal, under which it had stopped for an instant. The
dead march was then heard, and its melancholy sounds were mingled
with those of a muffled peal tolled from the neighbouring
cathedral. The sound of military music died away as the procession
moved on; the sullen clang of the bells was soon heard to sound
alone.

The last of the soldiers had now disappeared from under the
vaulted archway through which they had been filing for several
minutes; the court-yard was now totally empty, but Waverley still
stood there as if stupefied, his eyes fixed upon the dark pass
where he had so lately seen the last glimpse of his friend. At
length a female servant of the governor's, struck with compassion,
at the stupefied misery which his countenance expressed, asked him
if he would not walk into her master's house and sit down? She was
obliged to repeat her question twice ere he comprehended her, but
at length it recalled him to himself. Declining the courtesy by a
hasty gesture, he pulled his hat over his eyes, and, leaving the
Castle, walked as swiftly as he could through the empty streets
till he regained his inn, then rushed into an apartment and bolted
the door.

In about an hour and a half, which seemed an age of unutterable
suspense, the sound of the drums and fifes performing a lively
air, and the confused murmur of the crowd which now filled the
streets, so lately deserted, apprised him that all was finished,
and that the military and populace were returning from the
dreadful scene. I will not attempt to describe his sensations.

In the evening the priest made him a visit, and informed him that
he did so by directions of his deceased friend, to assure him that
Fergus Mac-Ivor had died as he lived, and remembered his
friendship to the last. He added, he had also seen Flora, whose
state of mind seemed more composed since all was over. With her
and sister Theresa the priest proposed next day to leave Carlisle
for the nearest seaport from which they could embark for France.
Waverley forced on this good man a ring of some value and a sum of
money to be employed (as he thought might gratify Flora) in the
services of the Catholic church for the memory of his friend.
'Fun-garque inani munere,' he repeated, as the ecclesiastic
retired. 'Yet why not class these acts of remembrance with other
honours, with which affection in all sects pursues the memory of
the dead?'

The next morning ere daylight he took leave of the town of
Carlisle, promising to himself never again to enter its walls. He
dared hardly look back towards the Gothic battlements of the
fortified gate under which he passed, for the place is surrounded
with an old wall. 'They're no there,' said Alick Polwarth, who
guessed the cause of the dubious look which Waverley cast
backward, and who, with the vulgar appetite for the horrible, was
master of each detail of the butchery--'the heads are ower the
Scotch yate, as they ca' it. It's a great pity of Evan Dhu, who
was a very weel-meaning, good-natured man, to be a Hielandman;
and indeed so was the Laird o' Glennaquoich too, for that matter,
when he wasna in ane o' his tirrivies.'





CHAPTER LXX

DULCE DOMUM


The impression of horror with which Waverley left Carlisle
softened by degrees into melancholy, a gradation which was
accelerated by the painful yet soothing task of writing to Rose;
and, while he could not suppress his own feelings of the calamity,
he endeavoured to place it in a light which might grieve her
without shocking her imagination. The picture which he drew for
her benefit he gradually familiarised to his own mind, and his
next letters were more cheerful, and referred to the prospects of
peace and happiness which lay before them. Yet, though his first
horrible sensations had sunk into melancholy, Edward had reached
his native country before he could, as usual on former occasions,
look round for enjoyment upon the face of nature.

He then, for the first time since leaving Edinburgh, began to
experience that pleasure which almost all feel who return to a
verdant, populous, and highly cultivated country from scenes of
waste desolation or of solitary and melancholy grandeur. But how
were those feelings enhanced when he entered on the domain so long
possessed by his forefathers; recognised the old oaks of Waverley-
Chace; thought with what delight he should introduce Rose to all
his favourite haunts; beheld at length the towers of the venerable
hall arise above the woods which embowered it, and finally threw
himself into the arms of the venerable relations to whom he owed
so much duty and affection!

The happiness of their meeting was not tarnished by a single word
of reproach. On the contrary, whatever pain Sir Everard and Mrs.
Rachel had felt during Waverley's perilous engagement with the
young Chevalier, it assorted too well with the principles in which
they had been brought up to incur reprobation, or even censure.
Colonel Talbot also had smoothed the way with great address for
Edward's favourable reception by dwelling upon his gallant
behaviour in the military character, particularly his bravery and
generosity at Preston; until, warmed at the idea of their nephew's
engaging in single combat, making prisoner, and saving from
slaughter so distinguished an officer as the Colonel himself, the
imagination of the Baronet and his sister ranked the exploits of
Edward with those of Wilibert, Hildebrand, and Nigel, the vaunted
heroes of their line.

The appearance of Waverley, embrowned by exercise and dignified by
the habits of military discipline, had acquired an athletic and
hardy character, which not only verified the Colonel's narration,
but surprised and delighted all the inhabitants of Waverley-
Honour. They crowded to see, to hear him, and to sing his praises.
Mr. Pembroke, who secretly extolled his spirit and courage in
embracing the genuine cause of the Church of England, censured his
pupil gently, nevertheless, for being so careless of his
manuscripts, which indeed, he said, had occasioned him some
personal inconvenience, as, upon the Baronet's being arrested by a
king's messenger, he had deemed it prudent to retire to a
concealment called 'The Priest's Hole,' from the use it had been
put to in former days; where, he assured our hero, the butler had
thought it safe to venture with food only once in the day, so that
he had been repeatedly compelled to dine upon victuals either
absolutely cold or, what was worse, only half warm, not to mention
that sometimes his bed had not been arranged for two days
together. Waverley's mind involuntarily turned to the Patmos of
the Baron of Bradwardine, who was well pleased with Janet's fare
and a few bunches of straw stowed in a cleft in the front of a
sand-cliff; but he made no remarks upon a contrast which could
only mortify his worthy tutor.

All was now in a bustle to prepare for the nuptials of Edward, an
event to which the good old Baronet and Mrs. Rachel looked forward
as if to the renewal of their own youth. The match, as Colonel
Talbot had intimated, had seemed to them in the highest degree
eligible, having every recommendation but wealth, of which they
themselves had more than enough. Mr. Clippurse was therefore
summoned to Waverley-Honour, under better auspices than at the
commencement of our story. But Mr. Clippurse came not alone; for,
being now stricken in years, he had associated with him a nephew,
a younger vulture (as our English Juvenal, who tells the tale of
Swallow the attorney, might have called him), and they now carried
on business as Messrs. Clippurse and Hookem. These worthy
gentlemen had directions to make the necessary settlements on the
most splendid scale of liberality, as if Edward were to wed a
peeress in her own right, with her paternal estate tacked to the
fringe of her ermine.

But before entering upon a subject of proverbial delay, I must
remind my reader of the progress of a stone rolled downhill by an
idle truant boy (a pastime at which I was myself expert in my more
juvenile years), it moves at first slowly, avoiding by inflection
every obstacle of the least importance; but when it has attained
its full impulse, and draws near the conclusion of its career, it
smokes and thunders down, taking a rood at every spring, clearing
hedge and ditch like a Yorkshire huntsman, and becoming most
furiously rapid in its course when it is nearest to being
consigned to rest for ever. Even such is the course of a narrative
like that which you are perusing. The earlier events are
studiously dwelt upon, that you, kind reader, may be introduced to
the character rather by narrative than by the duller medium of
direct description; but when the story draws near its close, we
hurry over the circumstances, however important, which your
imagination must have forestalled, and leave you to suppose those
things which it would be abusing your patience to relate at
length.

We are, therefore, so far from attempting to trace the dull
progress of Messrs. Clippurse and Hookem, or that of their worthy
official brethren who had the charge of suing out the pardons of
Edward Waverley and his intended father-in-law, that we can but
touch upon matters more attractive. The mutual epistles, for
example, which were exchanged between Sir Everard and the Baron
upon this occasion, though matchless specimens of eloquence in
their way, must be consigned to merciless oblivion. Nor can I tell
you at length how worthy Aunt Rachel, not without a delicate and
affectionate allusion to the circumstances which had transferred
Rose's maternal diamonds to the hands of Donald Bean Lean, stocked
her casket with a set of jewels that a duchess might have envied.
Moreover, the reader will have the goodness to imagine that Job
Houghton and his dame were suitably provided for, although they
could never be persuaded that their son fell otherwise than
fighting by the young squire's side; so that Alick, who, as a
lover of truth, had made many needless attempts to expound the
real circumstances to them, was finally ordered to say not a word
more upon the subject. He indemnified himself, however, by the
liberal allowance of desperate battles, grisly executions, and
raw-head and bloody-bone stories with which he astonished the
