the Bavarian army. He did not, however, care about remaining in Hall,
which might be occupied by the Bavarians if they fell back, and they
therefore, after entering the town with the waggons, purchased a store
of provisions, and, going out again, established themselves in a small
farmhouse, whose occupants had deserted it and fled into the town upon
hearing that the French were but some thirty miles distant.

Every day Hector went into the place to gather news, and learned that
Wimpfen had been captured by the French by a sudden assault, and that
they had crossed the Neckar. On returning he at once started with Paolo,
but on approaching the Neckar learned that the French had marched on to
Rothenburg. They fell in, however, with a detachment which had been left
on the Neckar. Hector found among them several officers to whom he was
known, and, borrowing Paolo's money, fitted himself and follower
out again, bought a couple of horses that had been captured from the
Bavarians, who had, he learned, retired to Franconia, and set out
to join the army. Rothenburg had been, he found out on his arrival,
captured in a few hours, and the main body of the French had marched
to Dinkelsbuhl, and there he came up with them. He had learned from the
party on the Neckar of the defection of Konigsmark and the Swedes, and
that Conde and Turenne's united army did not exceed twenty thousand men,
and, as he knew, that of Merci was at least equal to it in strength. His
first question on entering the camp was as to the quarters of his own
regiment, and he at once rode there. As soon as he was recognized
the men ran to him, cheering wildly, and so great was the tumult that
Turenne himself, whose headquarters were but a short distance away,
rode to the spot to enquire the cause of the tumult. When he saw Hector
surrounded by his cheering soldiers he passed through the crowd, and,
reaching him, shook him warmly by the hand.

"I had hoped that we might have made an exchange for you during the
winter, colonel, but I had not thought it possible that I should see you
again before that time; for in the first place, we captured no prisoners
in this campaign, but, on the contrary, have had many of our own
officers taken; and in the second place, we have been too busy ever
since Marienthal to enter into negotiations. You have, I suppose, given
them the slip, you and that varlet of yours, for I see him over there."

"Yes, marshal; we had no very great difficulty in getting away. I have
been very well treated, and until I heard that you were again taking the
offensive, I had no reason to fret over my imprisonment."

"Well, you have joined us just in time, for at any moment we may fight a
great battle. When you have leisure this evening come over to my tent.
I shall be glad to hear how you managed to escape, and any news you have
gained as to Merci's force and intentions."

As soon as the marshal had ridden off, his officers pressed round him,
but before speaking to them individually Hector said a few words to the
men, thanking them for the greeting they had given him, and saying that
he was glad indeed to be back among them. Then he talked for a time to
the officers, two or three of whom, after saying a few words apart to
Captain de Thiou, had hurried away. Half an hour later de Thiou said:

"I have no doubt that you will be glad of supper, colonel. Ours is just
prepared, and we hope that you will join us."

"I am hungry, de Thiou, now I come to think of it, for except a crust of
bread this morning I have not touched anything today."

"It is fortunate that we are better off than usual," de Thiou said. "We
had the luck to buy a pig from one of Weimar's troopers. The cavalry get
the best of it, for though there are orders against pillaging, there is
no doubt that a good deal of it goes on; and, marching as we have been,
there is no one to see that orders are strictly carried out. However, we
have benefited by it this afternoon."

Accompanying de Thiou, Hector was surprised to find that at a short
distance in front of the spot where the regiment was bivouacked a large
arbour had been erected.

"I did not notice this as I rode in," he said.

"It was not even thought of then, colonel; it was begun a few minutes
after you rode up, and the men have worked right willingly, and
fortunately there was a copse hard by. I may say that it was the
men's own idea. I had given orders that a table should be made of any
materials that came to hand, and one of the men started the idea of
building an arbour over it, and as many hands make quick work it has, as
you see, been constructed in little over half an hour."

As the evening was warm the front of the arbour had been left open.
Inside, a rough table had been constructed of empty casks, planks taken
from the bottom of the waggons, and a couple of doors from cottages
near, while powder barrels served as seats.

"Now, colonel, will you take the head of the table?" de Thiou said.

"Certainly not, de Thiou. I am your guest upon this occasion, so do you
take that place, and I will sit upon your right hand."

"I only wish that we could have given you a dinner like those you so
often gave us at St. Denis."

"I shall enjoy it as much as if it were a royal feast," Hector said,
seating himself; "for indeed since I escaped from Ingoldstadt some ten
days ago I have been living on black bread, sausage, and cheese."

The meal was a joyous one, for at the assault of Rothenburg on the
previous day several barrels of wine had been captured by the soldiers
of the regiment. These had been bought from them by the officers, who
had feared that some of the men might drink to excess, and so damage the
reputation which the regiment had obtained for sobriety and discipline.
One of these had been broached, and this and the pork afforded an
excellent supper even though the bread was of the worst possible
quality. When the meal was over, de Thiou stood up and proposed the
health of the colonel, and congratulated him most warmly upon his escape
from the enemy, expressing the extreme satisfaction of all the men as
well as officers at his return. The toast was drunk with enthusiasm,
and Hector briefly returned thanks. Then, in accordance with the general
request, he related the particulars of his escape from Ingoldstadt and
of his journey. Paolo, who had been waiting behind his master's chair,
came in for warm praise for the share he had taken in the matter.

"I certainly did not think when I first, against the advice of everyone,
took Paolo as my lackey five years ago, that he would turn out so
valuable a servant as he has done," Hector said as de Thiou handed a
goblet of wine to the man. "He has been more than a servant, he has
taken part in all my adventures, and truly I regard him as my friend.
Indeed, gentlemen, had it not been for him I certainly should not be
here tonight, for my own money gave out altogether at Hall, and I had to
borrow from his store the means of buying clothes and horses."

"By the way, colonel," de Thiou said, "from the day that you were
captured I have drawn your pay for you, knowing that if it fell into
arrear you would have had hard work in getting it, so that I have now
three months of your money in the regimental chest."

"Thank you, de Thiou, it will be very welcome; though Paolo would not
have been a very hard creditor."

At eight o'clock the party broke up, and Hector walked across to
Turenne's quarters. The latter had just returned from a consultation
with the other generals.

"We shall open our trenches here tonight; the place is of some
importance, as it is on the direct road to Nordlingen, and it is as well
not to leave it behind us. This, however, we shall do, if news comes
that Merci is marching to give us battle before that city, which we
expect he will do. The Imperialists will like to fight there, for it
was the scene of their great victory over the Duke of Weimar and the
Swedes."

"We must hope that we shall reverse matters this time, marshal."

"We must hope so," the latter said gravely; "if we fight on a fair
field I have no misgivings whatever. But Merci always takes up strong
positions and entrenches himself, and Enghien is so anxious to fight
that he will do so at a disadvantage rather than wait until we can meet
them on even terms. You know what happened at Freiburg, where we lost
some nine thousand men and gained no great advantage; while if we had
moved round and threatened their line of retreat the enemy must have
fallen back at once, we should have obtained our object without the loss
of a man, and might possibly have fallen upon Merci in his retreat, and
well nigh annihilated his army. Do not think, Campbell, that I am for a
moment underestimating Enghien's genius. It is extraordinary, and in the
hour of battle he is superb, not only from his extreme personal bravery,
but from the quickness with which he grasps every point, seizes upon
the spot where a blow can be best delivered, and snatches victory, where
another would see only defeat before him. But he is reckless of life so
long as he carries his point, and rather than lose a day in turning the
enemy's position and so forcing him to relinquish it, will sacrifice
whole regiments by marching straight against the most formidable
entrenchments. Had he but patience in addition to his own splendid
qualities, I think he would be the greatest military genius the world
has ever seen. And now let me hear what happened to you after you left
my side that night after Marienthal."

Hector again related his adventures. Turenne laughed at the account of
his escape, hidden under the flour bags.

"It was a good scheme," he said; "and it was well that you had that
lackey of yours with you, for I do not think that you could ever have
managed it unaided."

"I am sure I could not, marshal; it was entirely his suggestion, and he
arranged all the details splendidly. He was equally valuable in another
way afterwards;" and he described the fight in the cabaret.

"That was more dangerous than taking part in a pitched battle; seven
against two are heavy odds indeed, though you had the advantage of
weapons. The fellow has a ready wit to think of rolling against the man
who was waiting for a chance of running in and stabbing you; he would
have made his fortune somehow even if he had not had the good luck to
fall in with you. In some respects you resemble each other; you both
have enterprise, quickness, and daring, but he lacks your studious
habits, your determination to master everything connected with your
profession, and your ability to turn your knowledge to account. He would
have made a good soldier, an excellent leader of an irregular corps, but
he would never have gained distinction. Well, I am very glad to have had
a quiet talk with you; it takes one out of one's worries and anxieties.
By the way, I had a letter from Mazarin; it reached me while I was at
Spires. He said he was sorry to hear that you had been taken prisoner,
and requested me to make an exchange for you as soon as possible, even
if I had to give a general officer for you, for he was very deeply your
debtor, and had the highest esteem for you. What have you been doing to
make him your debtor? You never mentioned anything of the sort to me."

"The matter was to some degree a state one, marshal, or I should
have told you of it; but as it took place nearly a year ago, and the
circumstances are altogether changed, I can mention them to you in
confidence--for even now, were it known, it might make me some powerful
enemies." He then related how it was that he had thwarted the attempt on
Mazarin's life.

"That was a piece of singular good fortune," Turenne said. "Mazarin is
a staunch friend and a bitter enemy. I owe him no goodwill, for he has
behaved shamefully to de Bouillon, refusing to hand to him the estates
for which he exchanged his principality of Sedan; but I do not permit
myself to allow family interests to weigh with me against my duties to
France. Truly, as you say, it were well to hide your share in a business
that sent De Beaufort and a score of others to prison, and a dozen
members of powerful families into exile; it might well cause you serious
trouble were it known. You did well to keep the matter to yourself, and
you did specially well to refuse to accept any personal honour, for had
you done so Mazarin's enemies would at once have connected that fact
with the discovery of the plot."

On returning to his regiment, Hector found that an order had come just
after he left, for four companies to march down under the guidance of an
engineer officer to begin work on the trenches. De Thiou, knowing
that he had gone to the marshal's, had gone down with the four
leading companies. The other infantry regiments had furnished similar
contingents, showing that the siege was to be pushed forward with all
haste.

"Enghien does not allow the grass to grow under his feet," Captain
Mieville said. "We stormed Wimpfen a few hours after our arrival before
it; we carried Rothenburg in a single night, and I expect that by
tomorrow evening we shall be masters of this place."

In the morning four more companies went down to relieve those who had
been at work all night, and these had made great progress when, in the
afternoon, the news came that Merci was marching with all his strength
towards Nordlingen. Trumpets at once sounded to recall the troops from
the trenches, a meal was hastily cooked, and at sunset the army marched
for Nordlingen. All night they pushed on through the forest, and just
as the leading squadrons emerged from it on to the plain, Merci's forces
were seen issuing out from the forest facing them. Both armies at once
formed in order of battle.

Enghien, anxious to attack, rode forward with Turenne, de Gramont, and
Geis to reconnoitre the ground. It was found that between the armies
there was a small river, with great pools and swamps on either side,
and that the only approaches were by narrow and winding paths where two
horsemen could scarcely ride abreast. Even Enghien felt that it would
be madness to venture upon an attack. His artillery opened fire, that of
the Bavarians replied, and the cannonade was continued till nightfall,
inflicting a certain amount of loss on either side but in no way
altering the position. Seeing that a battle could not be brought on
here, Enghien marched two hours before daybreak for Nordlingen. At nine
the army came down on to the great plain in front of that town, but he
found that Merci had been beforehand with him, and had already taken up
a strong position two leagues away, and between him and the city, and
that his troops were already at work throwing up intrenchments. The
prince ordered all the baggage to be left behind, and at once marched
against the enemy. At four o'clock they were facing each other. Merci
had, as usual, chosen his position with great judgment. In the middle
of the plain rose two little hills about a thousand yards apart. On the
hill on his left stood the castle of Allersheim, and here Merci's left
wing, under General John de Werth, was posted; while at Weinberg his
right, commanded by General Gleen, took up its station. The main body of
the army, under Merci himself, lay behind a village a couple of hundred
yards beyond the hills, and at the head of the passage between them. He
had his cavalry on his two wings, his infantry in the centre, and had
thrown forward some regiments to hold the village. On the two hills he
had planted his cannon, sheltered by intrenchments, and in a position to
sweep the entrance to the valley.

His army consisted of between fourteen and fifteen thousand men, that of
Enghien of seventeen thousand. After examining the position a council
of war was held. Turenne was strongly against attacking the enemy in a
position of such strength, but Enghien as usual overruled his opinion.
Turenne then urged that the cavalry on the wings should not charge up
the hills and attack the positions held there until the enemy's centre
had been defeated, and his advice in this respect was taken. The
generals then separated and rode to their respective commands. De
Gramont commanded the right wing, consisting of all the French cavalry,
and having as a second line a reserve consisting of four battalions of
infantry and six squadrons of horse commanded by Chevalier de Chabot.
Turenne commanded the left, which consisted of his own army, with twelve
squadrons of Weimar's cavalry, with the Hessian army--six battalions
and six squadrons--as a second line. The centre, consisting of ten
battalions and five squadrons of horse, was commanded by Count de
Marsin. Enghien took no special command, preferring to remain free to go
where his presence was most needed.



CHAPTER XVIII: NORDLINGEN


It was five o'clock in the afternoon when all the arrangements for the
attack were completed. But as on the 3rd of August the evening is long,
it was judged that there would be sufficient daylight to carry out the
battle. The French began with a cannonade against the village, and this
was replied to by the guns on the two hills. Not only did the position
of the latter give them great superiority, but much time was lost by the
French in being obliged to move forward their guns as the army advanced,
a slow and tedious process in days when cannon were very heavy and
cumbrous. Seeing that they were losing time and suffering more loss than
they inflicted, Enghien gave the order to the infantry of the centre to
advance.

They went forward with great speed and eagerness, for they were burning
to retrieve their cowardly conduct at Marienthal. They carried the
intrenchments Merci had thrown up at the mouth of the pass, and,
heedless of the firing of the guns, rushed at the village. Here,
however, they were received by so heavy a fire of musketry from the
infantry posted there, who had loopholed all the walls and houses, that
they came to a stop, and, being shot down in great numbers, turned
and fled. The Count de Marsin was himself dangerously wounded. The Duc
d'Enghien sent the Marquis de la Moussaie forward with a reinforcement
of several regiments, but these, too, fell back before the Imperialists'
fire. The Duc d'Enghien then rallied the infantry, added to them all
those not yet engaged, and himself led them to the charge. Merci on his
part brought forward his main body to the village.

The battle was now a desperate one. Enghien seemed to lead a charmed
life. He was ever where the fight was hottest, encouraging the soldiers
and setting them an example. His clothes were shot through in many
places. Two horses were killed under him, and he received a contusion in
the thigh. Merci on his part showed equal valour and intrepidity; but
he was less fortunate, for he was struck by a musketball and killed. The
news of his fall excited his soldiers to fury, and, hurling themselves
on their assailants they cut the greater part of the infantry to pieces.

The French on the right had done no better, for the Bavarian cavalry
charged them with such impetuosity that although they fought sturdily
they were broken and routed. De Gramont did all that a leader could do
to check their flight and lead them back to the battle; and when he
saw that he was powerless to do this he put himself at the head of two
regiments that had not yet been engaged, received the Bavarian horse
with a heavy volley, and leading his troopers to the charge, broke into
them, but advancing too far was surrounded and taken prisoner. John
de Werth then fell on the reserve, broke them, penetrated the baggage,
which was plundered, and then pursued the fugitives far away from the
field of battle. Had he, instead of allowing his troops and himself to
be carried away by their ardour, brought them round and attacked
the French left in the rear, the Imperialist victory would have been
complete.

Here for a time the conflict was doubtful. Turenne, in spite of the fire
of the Imperialist artillery, led his troops in good order up the hill
of Weinberg. His horse was shot under him and his cuirass was struck,
but not pierced, by a musketball. On gaining the top of the hill a
terrible fight took place between the Weimar and Hessian troops on one
side, and the Austrians and Bavarians on the other. The former showed
valour in strong contrast with the conduct of their French allies; and
after repeated volleys had been exchanged infantry and cavalry rushed
upon each other and fought with bayonet and sword. At last the first
line of Imperialists gave way, but General Gleen brought up the second
line and threw Turenne's first line into disorder, although they still
maintained their ground. At this moment Conde, seeing that his centre
was destroyed and his right utterly dispersed, came up and joined
Turenne, and placing himself at the head of the Hessians, who formed the
second line, brought them forward. The enemy's squadrons were
broken, and the infantry defeated. The guns were then turned upon the
Imperialists on the slope of the hill leading down to the village, and
when they were shaken by the fire Turenne's squadron charged down upon
them and completed their defeat. General Gleen was taken prisoner, and
Turenne's troops, descending the hill, took the village in flank.

Had the defenders here fought with the same courage that they had
previously evinced, they would have given time to John de Werth to
return, and the fate of the battle would have been doubtful, but they
were seized with unreasoning panic, and at once surrendered. The night
had long since closed in, and so far as the fighting had gone the
battle might be considered a drawn one. The French right and centre
were utterly routed, but their left had captured one of the keys of the
position and the village behind it. Had John de Werth, when he
returned from the pursuit, shown himself an able general, rallied
the Imperialists and sent them to recapture the village, and with
his victorious cavalry made a circuit of the Weinberg and fallen upon
Turenne's rear, the Imperialist success would have been as complete and
striking as that which they had won on nearly the same ground over the
Swedes; but although an impetuous leader of cavalry, he had no military
genius, and on returning after dark, and hearing that the Weinberg was
lost and the village captured, he drew off from the field.

He was joined by the Imperialist infantry, and when the morning broke
Turenne's division stood victors on the field. A number of officers,
many standards, and all the cannon of the enemy fell into their hands.
Of the French infantry not more than fifteen hundred were rallied after
the battle, and of the allied army Turenne's German troops, although
they had suffered severely, alone remained intact. John de Werth
retreated with the remains of the Imperialist force to Donauworth, and
crossed to the other side of the Danube, although his force was still
superior to that of Turenne, for the loss suffered by the French
and Turenne's German troops was very much greater than that of
the Imperialists. Enghien, in his despatch announcing the victory,
acknowledged in his letter to the queen that it was due to the valour
and honour of Turenne.

Nordlingen and Dinkelsbuhl opened their gates to the victors. Enghien
fell ill and was forced to return to France, leaving Turenne in command.
De Gramont was exchanged for Gleen, and he and Turenne took counsel
as to the course that had best be pursued. John de Werth had already
recrossed the Danube, and the French generals fell back to Hall, where
they remained for twelve days to refresh the troops, provisions being
plentiful in the neighbourhood.

But their position was daily becoming more untenable. The Duke of
Bavaria, greatly alarmed by the result of the battle of Nordlingen,
wrote to the emperor that unless Austria largely increased her force in
the field he should retire from the contest, of which he had hitherto
borne the brunt, and make terms with the French. The emperor, who had
just brought a war with Hungary to a close, despatched the Archduke
Leopold, his son, with a great body of horse, and he soon effected a
junction with Gleen and John de Werth, and together they pushed forward
at the utmost speed to surprise the French. As soon as Turenne received
news of the movement he and de Gramont agreed that an instant retreat
must be made, seeing that their force was less than half that which was
advancing to attack them. The baggage was abandoned, and as there was
no bridge available the army crossed the Neckar by swimming, each
cavalryman taking one of the infantry behind him. They continued their
retreat until they arrived at Philippsburg. Here Turenne with the whole
of his army took up his position, covered by the guns of the fortress,
while Gramont passed the river with the remains of Enghien's army and
all the cavalry.

The Imperialists, after examining Turenne's position, came to the
conclusion that it could not be attacked, and, marching away, besieged
and captured all the towns taken by the French in their advance. Thus
beyond the empty honour of a nominal victory at Nordlingen, the campaign
under Enghien and Turenne ended, without any solid advantage whatever
being gained by the French.

The Poitou regiment, which was the only French battalion in the army of
Turenne, had been placed with the Hessians in the second line. It had
fought with distinguished bravery on the crest of the Weinberg, and
had publicly been thanked by Enghien, who had on the day of the battle
ridden by the side of Hector at their head when they fell upon the
Imperialists. They had suffered but a small number of casualties,
for the enemy were already shaken before they charged, and had, after
receiving a shattering volley, broken and fled as the regiment charged
with fixed bayonets. Turenne was always anxious to impress upon Hector
