firmly.

"Yes, dear!" the count said gently, "but it is not death you have to
face; with a fresh and unbroken spirit, it were comparatively easy to
die, but it needs an energy and a spirit almost superhuman to resist the
pressure which may be placed on those who are committed to a convent.
The hopelessness, the silence, the gloom, to say nothing of threats,
menaces, and constant and unremitting pressure, are sufficient to break
down the firmest resolution. The body becomes enfeebled, the nerves
shattered, and the power of resistance enfeebled. No, my darling, brave
as you are in your young strength, you could not resist the influence
which would be brought to bear upon you."

"Then it is clear," Malcolm said cheerfully, "that we must get your
daughter out of the clutches of the emperor and the nuns."

"That is what I have thought over again and again as I have lain here
helpless, but I can see no means of doing so. We have no friends in the
city, and, could the child be got safely out of this place, there is
nowhere whither she could go."

"And it is for that I have sent for you," the countess said. "I knew
that if it were in any way possible you would contrive her escape and
aid her to carry it out."

"Assuredly I will, my dear countess," Malcolm said. "You only wanted a
friend outside, and now you have got one. I see no difficulty about it."

At this moment the door suddenly opened; the waiting maid put in her
head and exclaimed, "The governor is alighting at the door." Malcolm at
once seated himself at the side table and began oiling the wheels of the
clock, while the countess and Thekla took up their work again and seated
themselves, as before, by the couch of the count. A moment later the
attendant opened the door and in a loud voice announced the Baron of
Steinburg.

The governor as he entered cast a keen glance at Malcolm, and then
bowing ceremoniously approached the count and inquired after his health,
and paid the usual compliments to the countess. The count replied
languidly that he gained strength slowly, while the countess said
quietly that he had slept but badly and that his wound troubled him
much. It was well for Thekla that she was not obliged to take part
in the conversation, for she would have found it impossible to speak
quietly and indifferently, for every nerve was tingling with joy at
Malcolm's last words. The prospect had seemed so hopeless that her
spirits had sunk to the lowest ebb. Her mother had done her best to
cheer her, but the count, weakened by pain and illness, had all along
taken the most gloomy view. He had told himself that it was better for
the girl to submit to her fate than to break her heart like a wild bird
beating out its life against the bars of its cage, and he wished to show
her that neither he nor the world would blame her for yielding to the
tremendous pressure which would be put upon her.

For himself, he would have died a thousand times rather than renounce
his faith; but he told himself that Thekla was but a child, that women
cared little for dogmas, and that she would learn to pray as sincerely
in a Catholic as in a Protestant church, without troubling her mind as
to whether there were gross abuses in the government of the church, in
the sale of absolutions, or errors in abstruse doctrines. But to Thekla
it had seemed impossible that she could become a Catholic.

The two religions stood in arms against each other; Catholics and
Protestants differed not only in faith but in politics. In all things
they were actively and openly opposed to each other, and the thought
that she might be compelled to abjure her faith was most terrible to the
girl; and she was firmly resolved that, so long as her strength lasted
and her mind was unimpaired, she would resist whatever pressure might
be placed upon her, and would yield neither to menaces, to solitary
confinement, or even to active cruelty. The prospect, however; had
weighed heavily upon her mind. Her father had appeared to consider any
escape impossible; her mother had said nothing of her hopes; and the
words which Malcolm had spoken, indicating something like a surety of
freeing her from her terrible position, filled her with surprise and
delight.

"Whom have you here?" the governor asked, indicating Malcolm by a motion
of the head.

"It is a craftsman from Nuremberg. The clock had stopped, and the count,
with whom the hours pass but slowly, fretted himself at not being able
to count them; so I asked our attendant to bring hither a craftsman
to put it in order, first sending her with a note to you asking for
permission for him to come; as you were out your deputy signed the
order."

"He should not have done so," the baron said shortly, "for the orders
are strict touching the entry of any here. However, as he has taken the
clock to pieces, he can put it together again." So saying he went over
to the table where Malcolm was at work and stood for a minute or two
watching him. The manner in which Malcolm fitted the wheels into their
places, filing and oiling them wherever they did not run smoothly,
satisfied him that the youth was what he seemed.

"You are young to have completed your apprenticeship," he said.

"It is expired but two months, sir," Malcolm said, standing up
respectfully.

"Under whom did you learn your trade?" the governor asked; "for I have
been in Nuremberg and know most of the guild of clockmakers by name."

"Under Jans Boerhoff, the syndic of the guild," Malcolm replied.

"Ah!" the baron said shortly; "and his shop is in--"

"The Cron Strasse," Malcolm said promptly in answer to the implied
question.

Quite satisfied now, the baron turned away and conversed a few minutes
with the count, telling him that as the surgeon said he could now be
safely removed he would in three days be transferred to an apartment in
the fortress.

"Will the countess be permitted to accompany me?" the count asked.

"That I cannot tell you," the baron replied. "We are expecting a
messenger with his majesty's orders on the subject tomorrow or next day.
I have already informed you that, in his solicitude for her welfare, his
majesty has been good enough to order that the young countess shall
be placed in the care of the lady superior of the Convent of St.
Catherine."

A few minutes later he left the room. Not a word was spoken in the room
until the sound of horse's hoofs without told that he had ridden off.

As the door closed the countess and Thekla had dropped their work and
sat anxiously awaiting the continuance of the conversation. The count
was the first to speak.

"How mean you, Malcolm? How think you it possible that Thekla can
escape, and where could she go?"

"I like not to make the proposal," Malcolm said gravely, "nor under
any other circumstances should I think of doing so; but in a desperate
position desperate measures must be adopted. It is impossible that in
your present state you can escape hence, and the countess will not leave
you; but what is absolutely urgent is that your daughter should be freed
from the strait. Save myself you have no friends here; and therefore,
count, if she is to escape it must be through my agency and she must be
committed wholly to my care. I know it is a great responsibility; but if
you and the countess can bring yourselves to commit her to me I swear to
you, as a Scottish gentleman and a Protestant soldier, that I will watch
over her as a brother until I place her in all honour in safe hands."

The count looked at the countess and at Thekla, who sat pale and still.

"We can trust you, Malcolm Graheme," he said after a pause. "There are
few, indeed, into whose hands we would thus confide our daughter; but we
know you to be indeed, as you say, a Scottish gentleman and a Protestant
soldier. Moreover, we know you to be faithful, honourable, and true.
Therefore we will, seeing that there is no other mode of escape from the
fate which awaits her, confide her wholly to you. And now tell us what
are your plans?"



CHAPTER XXI FLIGHT


"I THANK you, count, and you, dear lady," Malcolm said gratefully, "for
the confidence you place in me, and will carry out my trust were it to
cost me my life. My plan is a simple one. The guard will be changed in
half an hour's time. I have brought hither a suit of boy's garments,
which I must pray the Countess Thekla to don, seeing that it will be
impossible for her to sally out in her own garb. I show my pass to
the sentry, who will deem that my companion entered with me, and is my
apprentice, and will suppose that, since the sentry who preceded him
suffered him to enter with me he may well pass him out without question.
In the town I have a wagon in readiness, and shall, disguised as a
peasant, start with it this evening. Thekla will be in the bottom
covered with straw. We shall travel all night.

"Tomorrow, when your attendant discovers that your daughter has escaped,
she will at once take the news to the governor. The sentries will all be
questioned, and it will be found that, whereas but one clockmaker came
in two went out. The city will be searched and the country round scoured
but if the horsemen overtake me they will be looking for a craftsman and
his apprentice, and will not suspect a solitary peasant with a wagon.

"The first danger over I must be guided by circumstances; but in any
case Thekla must travel as a boy to the end of the journey, for in such
troubled times as these it were unsafe indeed for a young girl to travel
through Germany except under a strong escort of men-at-arms. I design
to make my way to Nuremberg, and shall then place her in the hands of
my good friend Jans Boerhoff, whose wife and daughters will, I am sure,
gladly receive and care for her until the time, which I hope is not far
off, that peace be made and you can again rejoin her."

"The plan is a good one," the count said when Malcolm had concluded,
"and offers every prospect of success. 'Tis hazardous, but there is no
escape from such a strait as ours without risk. What say you, wife?"

"Assuredly I can think of nothing better. But what say you, Thekla?
Are you ready to run the risks, the danger, and the hardships of such a
journey under the protection only of this brave Scottish gentleman?"

"I am ready, mother," Thekla said quickly, "but I wish--I wish"--and she
hesitated.

"You wish you could go in your own garments, Thekla, with jewels on
your fingers and a white horse to carry you on a pillion behind your
protector," the count said with a smile, for his spirits had risen
with the hope of his daughter's escape from the peril in which she was
placed. "It cannot be, Thekla. Malcolm's plan must be carried out to the
letter, and I doubt not that you will pass well as a 'prentice boy. But
your mother must cut off that long hair of yours; I will keep it, my
child, and will stroke it often and often in my prison as I have done
when it has been on your head; your hair may be long again before I next
see you."

His eyes filled with tears as he spoke, and Thekla and the countess both
broke into a fit of crying. Leaving them by themselves, Malcolm returned
to his work, and in half an hour had replaced the machinery of the clock
and had set it in motion, while a tender conversation went on between
the count and countess and their daughter. By this time the sun had
set, and the attendant entered and lighted the candles in the apartment,
saying, as she placed one on the table by Malcolm, "You must need a
light for your work." No sooner had she left the room than Malcolm said:

"I would not hurry your parting, countess, but the sooner we are off now
the better."

Without a word the countess rose, and, taking the clothes which Malcolm
produced from his doublet, retired to her chamber, followed by Thekla.

"Malcolm Graheme," the count said, "it may be that we shall not meet
again. The emperor is not tender with obstinate prisoners, and I have no
strength to support long hardships. Should aught happen to me I beseech
you to watch over the happiness of my child. Had she been a year older,
and had you been willing, I would now have solemnly betrothed her to
you, and should then have felt secure of her future whatever may befall
me. Methinks she will make a good wife, and though my estates may be
forfeited by the emperor her mother's lands will make a dowry such as
many a German noble would gladly accept with his wife.

"I might betroth her to you now, for many girls are betrothed at a far
younger age, but I would rather leave it as it is. You are young yet,
and she in most matters is but a child, and it would be better in every
way did she start on this adventure with you regarding you as a brother
than in any other light. Only remember that if we should not meet again,
and you in future years should seek the woman who is now a child as your
wife, you have my fullest approval and consent--nay, more, that it is my
dearest wish."

"I thank you most deeply for what you have said, count," Malcolm replied
gravely. "As I have seen your daughter growing up from a child I have
thought how sweet a wife she would make, but I have put the thought from
me, seeing that she is heiress to broad lands and I a Scottish soldier
of fortune, whose lands, though wide enough for me to live in comfort at
home, are yet but a mere farm in comparison with your broad estates.
I have even told myself that as she grew up I must no longer make long
stays in your castle, for it would be dishonourable indeed did I reward
your kindness and hospitality by winning the heart of your daughter; but
after what you have so generously said I need no longer fear my heart,
and will, when the time comes, proudly remind you of your promise. For
this journey I will put all such thoughts aside, and will regard Thekla
as my merry playfellow of the last three years. But after I have once
placed her in safety I shall thenceforward think of her as my wife who
is to be, and will watch over her safety as over my greatest treasure,
trusting that in some happy change of times and circumstances you
yourself and the dear countess, whom I already regard almost as my
parents, will give her to me."

"So be it," the count said solemnly. "My blessing on you both should
I ne'er see you again. I can meet whatever fate may be before me with
constancy and comfort now that her future is assured--but here they
come."

The door opened, and the countess appeared, followed by Thekla,
shrinking behind her mother's skirts in her boyish attire.

"You will pass well," the count said gravely, for he knew that jest now
would jar upon her. "Keep that cap well down over your eyes, and try
and assume a little more of the jaunty and impudent air of a boy.
Fortunately it will be dark below, and the sentry will not be able
to mark how fair is your skin and how delicate your hands. And now
farewell, my child. Let us not stand talking, for the quicker a parting
is over the better. May God in heaven bless you and keep you! Malcolm
knows all my wishes concerning you, and when I am not with you trust
yourself to his advice and guidance as you would to mine. There, my
darling, do not break down. You must be brave for all our sakes. Should
the emperor hold me in durance your mother will try and join you ere
long at Nuremberg."

While the count was embracing Thekla, as she bravely but in vain tried
to suppress her tears, the countess opened the door, and glanced into
the anteroom to see that all was clear and the attendant in her own
apartment. Then she returned, kissed her daughter fondly, and placed her
hand in Malcolm's, saying to the latter, "God bless you, dear friend!
Take her quickly away for her sake and ours." One last adieu and Malcolm
and Thekla stood alone in the anteroom.

"Now, Thekla," he said firmly, "be brave, the danger is at hand, and
your safety and escape from your fate, and my life, depend upon your
calmness. Do you carry this basket of tools and play your part as my
apprentice. Just as we open the door drop the basket and I will rate you
soundly for your carelessness. Keep your head down, and do not let the
light which swings over the door fall upon your face."

For a minute or two Thekla stood struggling to master her emotions. Then
she said, in a quiet voice, "I am ready now," and taking up the basket
of tools she followed Malcolm down the stairs. Malcolm opened the door,
and as he did so Thekla dropped the basket.

"How stupid you are!" Malcolm exclaimed sharply. "How often have I told
you to be careful! You don't suppose that those fine tools can stand
being knocked about in that way without injury? Another time an' you are
so careless I will give you a taste of the strap, you little rascal."

"What is all this?" the sentry asked, barring the way with his pike,
"and who are you who are issuing from this house with so much noise? My
orders are that none pass out here without an order from the governor."

"And such an order have I," Malcolm said, producing the document.
"There's the governor's seal. I have been sent for to repair the clock
in the Count of Mansfeld's apartment, and a rare job it has been."

The sentry was unable to read, but he looked at the seal which he had
been taught to recognize.

"But there is only one seal," he said, "and there are two of you."

"Pooh!" Malcolm said scornfully. "Dost think that when ten persons are
admitted to pass in together the governor puts ten seals on the pass?
You see for yourself that it is but a young boy, my apprentice. Why, the
governor himself left scarce an hour ago, and was in the apartment with
me while I was at work. Had it not been all right he would have hauled
me to the prison quickly enough."

As the sentry knew that the governor had left but a short time before
he came on guard this convinced him, and, standing aside, he allowed
Malcolm and his companion to pass. Malcolm made his way first to the
apartment he had occupied, where he had already settled for his lodging.

Leaving Thekla below he ran upstairs, and hastily donned the suit of
peasant's clothes, and then making the others into a bundle descended
again, and with Thekla made his way to the quiet spot outside the city
gates where the wagon was standing ready for a start. He had already
paid the peasant half the sum agreed, and now handed him the remainder.

"I should scarce have known you," the peasant said, examining Malcolm by
the light of his pinewood torch. "Why, you look like one of us instead
of a city craftsman."

"I am going to astonish them when I get home," Malcolm said, "and shall
make the old folks a present of the wagon. So I am going to arrive just
as I was when I left them."

The peasant asked no farther questions, but, handing the torch to
Malcolm, and telling him that he would find half a dozen more in the
wagon, he took his way back to the town, where he intended to sleep in
the stables and to start at daybreak for his home.

He thought that the transaction was a curious one; but, as he had
been paid handsomely for his wagon, he troubled not his head about any
mystery there might be in the matter. As soon as he had gone Malcolm
arranged the straw in the bottom of the wagon so as to form a bed; but
Thekla said that for the present she would rather walk with him.

"It is weeks since I have been out, and I shall enjoy walking for a
time; besides, it is all so strange that I should have no chance to
sleep were I to lie down."

Malcolm at once consented, and taking his place at the head of the oxen,
he started them, walking ahead to light the way and leading them by
cords passed through their nostrils. He had not the least fear of
pursuit for the present, for it had been arranged that the countess
should inform their attendant that Thekla was feeling unwell, and had
retired to bed, and the woman, whatever she might suspect, would
take care not to verify the statement, and it would be well on in the
