to request Madame Esperance to come to her immediately on business.
Eustacie, who always had a certain self-willed sense of opposition when
the Duchess showed herself peremptory towards her, at first began to
make answer that she would come as soon as her business was concluded;
but the steward made a gesture towards the great lady sailing up and
down as she paced the _dais_ in stately impatience. 'Good fellow,'
she said, 'I will return quickly, and see you again, though I am now
interrupted. Stay there, little one, with good Mademoiselle Perrot;
mother will soon be back.'

Rayonette, in her tooth-fretfulnes, was far from enduring to be forsaken
so near a strange man, and her cry made it necessary for Eustacie to
take her in arms, and carry her to the _dais_ where the Duchess was
waiting.

'So!' said the lady, 'I suspected that the fellow was a quack as well as
a cheat.'

'Madame,'said Eustacie, with spirit, 'he sold me unguents that greatly
relieved my father last spring.'

'And because rubbing relieved an old man's rheumatics, you would let a
vagabond cheat drug and sicken this poor child for what is not ailment
at all--and the teeth will relieve in a few days. Or, if she were
feverish, have not we decoctions brewed from Heaven's own pure herbs in
the garden, with no unknown ingredient?'

'Madame,' said Eustacie, ruffling into fierceness, 'you are very good to
me; but I must keep the management of my daughter to myself.'

The Duchess looked at her from head to foot. Perhaps it was with an
impulse to treat her impertinence as she would have done that of a
dependant; but the old lady never forgot herself: she only shrugged
her shoulders and said, with studied politeness, 'When I unfortunately
interrupted your consultation with this eminent physician, it was to ask
you a question regarding this English family. Will you do me the honour
to enter my cabinet?'

And whereas no one was looking, the old lady showed her displeasure by
ushering Madame de Ribaumont into her cabinet like a true noble stranger
guest; so that Eustacie felt disconcerted.

The Duchess then began to read aloud her own letter to Lord Walwyn,
pausing at every clause, so that Eustacie felt the delay and discussion
growing interminable, and the Duchess then requested to have Madame de
Ribaumont's own letter at once, as she wished to inclose it, make up her
packet, and send it without delay. Opening a secret door in her cabinet,
she showed Eustacie stair by which she might reach Maitre Gardon's room
without crossing the hall. Eustacie hoped to find him there and tell him
how intolerable was the Duchess; but, though she found him, it was in
company with the tutor, who was spending an afternoon on Plato with him.
She could only take up her letter and retreat to Madame's cabinet, where
she had left her child. She finished it as best she might, addressed
it after the herald's spelling of the title, bound it with some of the
Duchess's black floss silk--wondering meanwhile, but little guessing
that the pedlar knew, where was the tress that had bound her last
attempt at correspondence, guessing least of all that that tress lay
on a heart still living and throbbing for her. All this had made her a
little forget her haste to assert her liberty of action by returning to
the pedlar; but, behold, when she came back to the hall, it had resumed
its pristine soberness, and merely a few lingering figures were to be
seen, packing up their purchases.

While she was still looking round in dismay, Mademoiselle Perrot came
up to her and said, 'Ah! Madame, you may well wonder! I never saw Maitre
Benoit there so cross; the poor man did but offer to sell little Fanchon
the elizir that secures a good husband, and old Benoit descended on
him like a griffin enraged, would scarce give him time to compute his
charges or pack his wares, but hustled him forth like a mere thief! And
I missed my bargain for that muffler that had so taken my fancy. But,
Madame, he spoke to me apart, and said you were an old customer of his,
and that rather than the little angel should suffer with her teeth,
which surely threaten convulsions, he would leave with you this
sovereign remedy of sweet syrup--a spoonful to be given each night.'

Eustacie took the little flask. She was much inclined to give the syrup
by way of precaution, as well as to assure herself that she was not
under the Duchess's dominion; but some strong instinct of the truth of
the lady's words that the child was safer and healthier undoctored,
made her resolve at least to defer it until the little one showed any
perilous symptom. And as happily Rayonette only showed two little white
teeth, and much greater good-humour, the syrup was nearly forgotten,
when, a fortnight after, the Duchess received a dispatch from her son
which filled her with the utmost indignation. The courier had
indeed arrived, but the packet had proved to be filled with hay and
waste-paper. And upon close examination, under the lash, the courier had
been forced to confess to having allowed himself to be overtaken by the
pedlar, and treated by him to a supper at a _cabaret_. No doubt,
while he was afterwards asleep, the contents of his packet had been
abstracted. There had been important documents for the Duke besides
Eustacie's letters, and the affair greatly annoyed the Duchess, though
she had the compensation of having been proved perfectly right in her
prejudice against pedlars, and her dislike of her son's courier. She
sent for Eustacie to tell her privately of the loss, and of course the
young mother at once turned pale and exclaimed, 'The wicked one! Ah!
what a blessing that I gave my little darling none of his dose!'

'_Hein_? You had some from him then!' demanded the Duchess with
displeasure.

'No, Madame, thanks, thanks to you. Oh! I never will be self-willed and
naughty again. Forgive me, Madame.' And down she dropped on her knee,
with clasped hands and glistening eyes.

'Forgive you, silly child, for what?' said Madame de Quinet, nearly
laughing.

'Ah! for the angry, passionate thoughts I had! Ah! Madame, I was all
but giving the stuff to my little angel in very spite--and then---'
Eutacie's voice was drowned in passion of tears, and she devoured the
old lady's hand with her kisses.

'Come, come,' said the Duchess, 'let us be reasonable. A man may be a
thief, but it does not follow that he is a poisoner.'

'Nay, that will we see,' cried Eutacie. 'He was resolved that the little
lamb should not escape, and he left a flask for her with Mademoiselle
Perrot. I will fetch it, if Madame will give me leave. Oh, the great
mercy of Heaven that made her so well that I gave her none!'

Madame de Quinet's analytic powers did not go very far; and would
probably have decided against the syrup if it had been nothing but
virgin honey. She was one who fully believed that her dear Queen Jeanne
had been poisoned with a pair of gloves, and she had unlimited faith in
the powers of evil possessed by Rene of Milan. Of course, she detected
the presence of a slow poison, whose effects would have been attributed
to the ailment it was meant to cure; and though her evidence was
insufficient, she probably did Ercole no injustice. She declined testing
the compound on any unfortunate dog or cat, but sealed it up in the
presence of Gardon, Eutacie, and Mademoiselle Perrot, to be produced
against the pedlar if ever he should be caught.

Then she asked Eutacie if there was any reason to suspect that he
recognized her. Eutacie related the former dealings with him, when she
had sold him her jewels and her hair, but she had no notion of his being
the same person whom she had seen when at Montpipeau. Indeed, he had
altered his appearance so much that he had been only discovered at
Nid-de-Merle by eyes sharpened by distrust of his pretensions to magic
arts.

Madame de Quinet, however, concluded that Eutacie had been known, or
else that her jewels had betrayed her, and that the man must have been
employed by her enemies. If it had not been the depth of winter, she
would have provided for the persecuted lady's immediate transmission
to England; but he storms of the Bay of Biscay would have made this
impossible in the state of French navigation, even if Isaac Gardon had
been in a condition to move; for the first return of cold had brought
back severe rheumatic pains, and with them came a shortness of breath
which even the Duchess did not know to be the token of heart complaint.
He was confined to his room, and it was kneeling by his bedside that
Eutacie poured out her thankfulness for her child's preservation, and
her own repentance for the passing fit of self-will and petulance. The
thought of Rayonette's safety seemed absolutely to extinguish the fresh
anxiety that had arisen since it had become evident that her enemies no
longer supposed her dead, but were probably upon her traces. Somehow,
danger had become almost a natural element to her, and having once
expressed her firm resolution that nothing should separate her from
her adopted father, to whom indeed her care became constantly more
necessary, she seemed to occupy herself very little with the matter; she
nursed him as merrily as ever, and left to him and Madame de Quinet the
grave consultations as to what was to be done for her security. There
was a sort of natural buoyancy about her that never realized a danger
till it came, and then her spirit was roused to meet it.




CHAPTER XXXVI. SPELL AND POTION



     Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
     All the power this charm doth owe
                   MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM


Her rival lived! The tidings could not but be communicated to Diane
de Selinville, when her father set out _en grande tenue_ to demand his
niece from the Duke de Quinet. This, however, was not till spring was
advancing; for the pedlar had not been able to take a direct route back
to Nid-de-Merle, since his first measure had necessarily been to
escape into a province where the abstraction of a Huguenot nobleman's
despatches would be considered as a meritorious action. Winter weather,
and the practice of his profession likewise, delayed Ercole so much that
it was nearly Easter before he brought his certain intelligence to the
Chevalier, and to the lady an elixir of love, clear and coloured as
crystal, and infallible as an inspirer of affection.

Should she administer it, now that she knew her cousin not to be the
lawful object of affection she had so long esteemed him, but, as he
persisted in considering himself, a married man? Diane had more scruples
than she would have had a year before, for she had not so long watched
and loved one so true and conscientious as Berenger de Ribaumont without
having her perceptions elevated; but at the same time the passion of
love had become intensified, both by long continuance and by resistance.
She had attached herself, believing him free, and her affections could
not be disentangled by learning that he was bound--rather the contrary.

Besides, there was plenty of sophistry. Her father had always assured
her of the invalidity of the marriage, without thinking it necessary
to dwell on his own arrangements for making it invalid, so that was no
reasonable ground of objection; and a lady of Diane's period, living in
the world where she had lived, would have had no notion of objecting
to her lover for a previous amour, and as such was she bidden to rank
Berenger's relations with Eutacie. And there was the less scruple on
Eutacie's account, because the Chevalier, knowing that the Duchess had
a son and two grandsons, had conceived a great terror that she meant to
give his niece to one of them; and this would be infinitely worse,
both for the interests of the family and of their party, than even
her reunion with the young Baron. Even Narcisse, who on his return had
written to Paris a grudging consent to the experiment of his father and
sister, had allowed that the preservation of Berenger's life was needful
till Eutacie should be in their power so as to prevent such a marriage
as that! To Diane, the very suggestion became certainty: she already saw
Eutacie's shallow little heart consoled and her vanity excited by these
magnificent prospects, and she looked forward to the triumph of her own
constancy, when Berenger should find the image so long enshrined in his
heart crumble in its sacred niche.

Yet a little while then would she be patient, even though nearly a
year had passed and still she saw no effect upon her prisoners, unless,
indeed, Philip had drunk of one of her potions by mistake and his clumsy
admiration was the consequence. The two youths went on exactly in
the same manner, without a complaint, without a request, occupying
themselves as best they might--Berenger courteously attentive recovered
his health, and the athletic powers displayed by the two brothers when
wrestling, fencing, or snow-balling in the courtyard, were the amazement
and envy of their guard. Twice in the course of the winter there had
been an alarm of wolves, and in their eagerness and excitement about
this new sport, they had accepted the Chevalier's offer of taking their
parole for the hunt. They had then gone forth with a huge posse of
villagers, who beat the woods with their dogs till the beast was aroused
from its lair and driven into the alleys, where waited gentlemen,
gendarmes, and game keepers with their guns. These two chases were
chiefly memorable to Berenger, because in the universal intermingling
of shouting peasants he was able in the first to have some conversation
with Eutacie's faithful protector Martin, who told him the incidents of
her wanderings, with tears in his eyes, and blessed him for his faith
that she was not dead; and in the second, he actually found himself
in the ravine of the Grange du Temple. No need to ask, every voice was
shouting the name, and though the gendarmes were round him and he durst
not speak to Rotrou, still he could reply with significative earnestness
to the low bow with which the farmer bent to evident certainty that here
was the imprisoned Protestant husband of the poor lady. Berenger wore
his black vizard mask as had been required of him, but the man's eyes
followed him, as though learning by heart the outline of his tall
figure. The object of the Chevalier's journey was, of course, a secret
from the prisoners, who merely felt its effects by having their meals
served to them in their own tower; and when he returned after about a
month's absence though him looking harassed, aged, and so much out of
humour that he could scarcely preserve his usual politeness. In effect
he was greatly chagrined.

'That she is in their hands is certain, the hypocrites!' he said to his
daughter and sister; 'and no less so that they have designs on her; but
I let them know that these could be easily traversed.'

'But where is she, the unhappy apostate child?' said the Abbess. 'They
durst not refuse her to you.'

'I tell you they denied all present knowledge of her. The Duke himself
had the face to make as though he never heard of her. He had no concern
with his mother's household and guests forsooth! I do not believe he
has; the poor fellow stands in awe of that terrible old heretic dragon,
and keeps aloof from her as much as he can. But he is, after all, a
_beau jeune home_; nor should I be surprised if he were the girl's gay
bridegroom by this time, though I gave him a hint that there was an
entanglement about the child's first marriage which, by French law,
would invalidate any other without a dispensation from the Pope.'

'A hard nut that for a heretic,' laughed the Abbess.

'He acted the ignorant--knew nothing about the young lady; but had the
civility to give me a guide and an escort to go to Quinet. _Ma foi_! I
believe they were given to hinder me--take me by indirect roads, make
me lose time at chateaux. When I arrived at the grim old chateau--a true
dungeon, precise as a convent--there was the dame, playing the Queen
Jeanne as well as she could, and having the insolence to tell me that it
was true that Madame la Baronne de Ribaumont, as she was pleased to call
her, had honoured her residence for some months, but that she had now
quitted it, and she flatly refused to answer any question whither she
was gone! The hag! she might at least have had the decorum to deny all
knowledge of her, but nothing is more impertinent that the hypocritical
sincerity of the heretics.'

'But her people,' exclaimed the Abbess; 'surely some of them knew, and
could be brought to speak.'

'All the servants I came in contact with played the incorruptible; but
still I have done something. There were some fellows in the village who
are not at their ease under that rule. I caused my people to inquire
them out. They knew nothing more than that the old heretic Gardon with
his family had gone away in Madame la Duchesse's litter, but whither
they could not tell. But the _cabaretier_ there is furious secretly with
the Quinets for having spoilt his trade by destroying the shrine at the
holy well, and I have made him understand that it will be for his
profit to send me off intelligence so soon as there is any communication
between them and the lady. I made the same arrangement with a couple of
gendarmes of the escort the Duke gave me. So at least we are safe for
intelligence such as would hinder a marriage.'

'But they will be off to England!' said the Abbess.

'I wager they will again write to make sure of a reception. Moreover,
I have set that fellow Ercole and others of his trade to keep a strict
watch on all the roads leading to the ports, and give me due notice of
their passing thither. We have law on our side, and, did I once claim
her, no one could resist my right. Or should the war break out, as is
probable, then could my son sweep their whole province with his troops.
This time she cannot escape us.

The scene that her father's words and her own imagination conjured up,
of Eustacie attracting the handsome widower-duke, removed all remaining
scruples from Madame de Selinville. For his own sake, the Baron must be
made to fulfil the prophecy of the ink-pool, and allow his prison doors
to be opened by love. Many and many a tender art did Diane rehearse;
numerous were her sighs; wakeful, languishing, and restless her nights
and days; and yet, whatever her determination to practise upon her
cousin the witcheries that she had learnt in the _Escadron de la
Reine-mere_, and seen played off effectually where there was not one
grain of love to inspire them, her powers and her courage always failed
her in the presence of him whom she sought to attract. His quiet reserve
and simplicity always disconcerted her, and any attempt at blandishment
that he could not mistake was always treated by him as necessarily
an accidental error, as if any other supposition would render her
despicable; and yet there was now and then a something that made her
detect an effort in his restraint, as if it were less distaste
than self-command. Her brother had contemptuously acquiesced in the
experiment made by herself and her father, and allowed that so long as
there was any danger of the Quinet marriage, the Baron's existence was
needful. He would not come to Nid-de-Merle, nor did they want him there,
knowing that he could hardly have kept his hands off his rival. But when
the war broke out again in the summer of 1575 he joined that detachment
of Guise's army which hovered about the Loire, and kept watch on the
Huguenot cities and provinces of Western France. The Chevalier made
several expeditions to confer with his son, and to keep up his relations
with the network of spies whom he had spread over the Quinet provinces.
The prisoners were so much separated from all intercourse with the
dependants that they were entirely ignorant of the object of his absence
from home. On these occasions they never left their tower and its court,
and had no enlivenment save an occasional gift of dainties or message
of inquiry from the ladies at Bellaise. These were brought by a handsome
but slight, pale lad called Aime de Selinville, a relative of the late
Count, as he told them, who had come to act as a gentleman attendant
upon the widowed countess. The brothers rather wondered how he was
disposed of at the convent, but all there was so contrary to their
preconceived notions that they acquiesced. The first time he arrived
it was on a long, hot summer day, and he then brought them a cool iced
sherbet in two separate flasks, that for Philip being mixed with wine,
which was omitted for Berenger; and the youth stood lingering and
watching, anxious, he said, to be able to tell his lady how the drinks
were approved. Both were excellent, and to that effect the prisoners
replied; but no sooner was the messenger gone than Berenger said
smilingly, 'That was a love potion, Phil.'

'And you drank it!' cried Philip, in horror.

'I did not think of it till I saw how the boy's eyes were gazing
curiously at me as I swallowed it. You look at me as curiously, Phil.
Are you expecting it to work? Shall I be at the fair lady's feet next
time we meet?'

'How can you defy it, Berry?'

'Nay, Phil; holy wedded love is not to be dispelled by a mountebank's
decoction.'

'But suppose it were poisonous, Berry, what can be done?' cried Philip,
starting up in dismay.

'Then you would go home, Phil, and this would be over. But'--seeing his
brother's terror--'there is no fear of that. She is not like to wish to
poison me.'

And the potion proved equally ineffective on mind and body, as indeed
did all the manipulations exercised upon a little waxen image that was
supposed to represent M. le Baron. Another figure was offered to Diane,
in feminine form, with black beads for eyes and a black plaster for
hair, which, when stuck full of pins and roasted before the fire, was to
cause Eustacie to peak and pine correspondingly. But from this measure
Diane shrank. If aught was done against her rival it must be by her
father and brother, not by herself; and she would not feel herself
directly injuring her little cousin, nor sinking herself below him whom
she loved. Once his wife, she would be good for ever, held up by his
strength.

Meantime Berenger had received a greater shock than she or her father
understood in the looking over of some of the family parchments kept in
store at the castle. The Chevalier, in showing them to him, had chiefly
desired to glorify the family by demonstrating how its honours had been
won, but Berenger was startled at finding that Nid-de-Merle had been, as
it appeared to him, arbitrarily and unjustly declared to be forfeited by
the Sieur de Bellaise, who had been thrown into prison by Louis XI. for
some demonstration in favour of the poor Duke de Berri, and granted
to the favourite Ribaumont. The original grant was there, and to his
surprise he found it was to male heirs--the male heirs alone of the
direct line of the Ribaumont--to whom the grant was made. How, then,
came it to Eustacie? The disposal had, with almost equal injustice, been
changed by King Henry II. and the late Count de Ribaumont in favour of
the little daughter whose union with the heir of the elder line was to
conclude all family feuds. Only now did Berenger understand what his
father had said on his death-bed of flagrant injustice committed in his
days of darkness. He felt that he was reaping the reward of the injuries
committed against the Chevalier and his son on behalf of the two
unconscious children. He would willingly at once have given up all claim
to the Nid-de-Merle estate--and he was now of age; two birthdays had
passed in his captivity and brought him to years of discretion--but he
had no more power than before to dispose of what was the property of
Eustacie and her child; and the whole question of the validity of his
marriage would be given up by his yielding even the posthumous claim
that might have devolved on him in case of Eustacie's death. This would
be giving up her honour, a thing impossible.

'Alas!' he sighed, 'my poor father might well say he had bound a heavy
burthen round my neck.'

And from that time his hopes sank lower as the sense of the justice of
his cause left him. He could neither deny his religion nor his marriage,
and therefore could do nothing for his own deliverance; and he knew
himself to be suffering in the cause of a great injustice; indeed, to be
bringing suffering on the still more innocent Philip.

The once proudly indifferent youth was flagging now; was losing
appetite, flesh, and colour; was unwilling to talk or to take exercise;
and had a wan and drooping air that was most painful to watch. It seemed
as if the return of summer brought a sense of the length and weariness
of the captivity, and that the sunshine and gaiety of the landscape had
become such a contrast to the captives' deadness of spirit that they
could hardly bear to behold them, and felt the dull prison walls more
congenial to their feelings than the gaiety of the summer hay and
harvest-fields.




CHAPTER XXXVII. BEATING AGAINST THE BARS



My horse is weary of the stall, And I am sick of captive thrall.--LADY
OF THE LAKE


Letters! They were hailed like drops of water in a thirsty land. No
doubt they had been long on the way, ere they had reached the hands of
the Chevalier de Ribaumont, and it was quite possible that they had been
read and selected; but, as Berenger said, he defied any Frenchman to
imitate either Lord Walwyn's style or Sir Marmaduke's, and when late
in the autumn the packet was delivered to him, the two captives gloated
over the very outsides before they opened them.

The first intelligence that greeted them made them give a cry of
amusement and surprise. Lady Thistlewood, whose regrets that each of her
girls was not a boy had passed into a proverb, had at length, in Dolly's
seventh year, given birth to a son on Midsummer Day.

'Well,' said Philip, sighing, 'we must drink his health tonight! It is
well, if we are to rot here, that some one should make it up to them!'

'And join Walwyn and Hurst!' said Berenger; and then both faces grew
much graver, as by these letters, dated three months since, they
understood how many they must have missed, and likewise that nothing had
been heard of themselves since they had left Paris sixteen months ago.
Their letters, both to their relations and to Sir Francis Walsingham,
had evidently been suppressed; and Lord North, who had succeeded
Walsingham as ambassador, had probably been misled by design, either
by Narcisse de Nid-de-Merle himself, or by some of his agents, for Lord
Walwyn had heard from him that the young men were loitering among the
castles and garrisons of Anjou, leading a gay and dissipated life,
and that it was universally believed that the Baron de Ribaumont had
embraced the Catholic faith, and would shortly be presented to Henry
III. to receive the grant of the Selinville honours, upon his
marriage with his cousin, the widow of the last of the line. With much
earnestness and sorrow did good old Lord Walwyn write to his grandson,
conjuring him to bethink himself of his some, his pure faith, his loving
friends, and the hopes of his youth: and, at least, if he himself had
been led away by the allurements of the other party, to remember that
Philip had been intrusted to him in full confidence, and to return him
to his home. 'It was grief and shame to him,' said the good old man,
'to look at Sir Marmaduke, who had risked his son in the charge of one
hitherto deemed trustworthy; and even if Berenger had indeed forgotten
and cast away those whom he had once seemed to regard with love and
duty, he commanded him to send home Philip, who owed an obedience to
his father that could not be gainsaid.' Lord Walwyn further bade his
grandson remember that the arrangements respecting his inheritance had
been made in confidence that his heir was English in heart and faith,
and that neither the Queen nor his own conscience would allow him to let
his inheritance pass into French of Papist hands. There was scarcely a
direct reproach, but the shaken, altered handwriting showed how stricken
the aged man must be; and after his signature was added one still more
trembling line, 'An ye return not speedily, ye will never see the old
grandsire more.'

Berenger scarcely finished the letter through his burning tears of
agony, and then, casting it from him, began to pace the room in fierce
agitation, bursting out into incoherent exclamations, grasping at
his hair, even launching himself against the massive window with such
frenzied gestures and wild words that Philip, who had read through all
with his usual silent obtuseness, became dismayed, and, laying hold of
him, said, 'Prithee, brother, do not thus! What serves such passion?'

Berenger burst into a strange loud laugh at the matter-of-fact tone.
'What serves it! what serves anything!' he cried, 'but to make me feel
what a miserable wretch I am? But he will die, Philip--he will die--not
having believed me! How shall we keep ourselves from the smooth-tongued
villain's throat? That I should be thus judged a traitor by my
grandfather----'

And with a cry as of bodily anguish, he hid his face on the table, and
groaned as he felt the utter helplessness of his strong youth in bonds.

'It can't be helped,' was the next of the unconsolatory platitudes
uttered by Philip, who always grew sullen and dogged when his brother's
French temperament broke forth under any sudden stroke. 'If they will
believe such things, let them! You have not heard what my father says to
it.'

'It will be all the same,' groaned Berenger.

'Nay! now that's a foul slander, and you should be ashamed of doing my
father such wrong,' said Philip, 'Listen;' and he read: 'I will believe
no ill of the lad no more than of thee, Phil. It is but a wild-goose
chase, and the poor young woman is scarce like to be above ground;
but, as I daily tell them, 'tis hard a man should forfeit his land for
seeking his wife. My Lord North sends rumours that he is under Papist
guiding, and sworn brother with the Black Ribaumonts; and my Lady, his
grandmother, is like to break her heart, and my Lord credits them more
than he ought, and never a line as a token comes from you. Then there's
Dame Annora, as proud of the babe as though neither she nor woman born
ever had a son before, and plains over him, that both his brothers
should be endowed, and he but a younger son. What will be the end on't I
cannot tell. I will stand up for the right as best man may do, and never
forget that Berry is her first-born, and that his child may be living;
but the matter is none of mine, and my Lord is very aged, nor can a man
meddle between his wife and her father. So this I tell you that you may
make your brother lay it to heart. The sooner he is here the better,
if he be still, as I verily believe and maintain him to be, an honest
English heart that snaps his fingers at French papistry.' 'There,'
conclude Philip triumphantly, 'he knows an honest man! He's friend and
good father to you as much as ever. Heed none of the rest. He'll never
let this little rogue stand in your light.'

'as if I cared for that!' said Berenger, beginning his caged-tiger walk
again, and, though he tried to repress his anguish, breaking out at
times into fierce revilings of the cruel toils that beset him, and
despairing lamentations over those beloved ones at home, with sobs,
groans, and tears, such as Philip could not brook to witness. Both
because they were so violent and mourn-full, and because he thought them
womanish, though in effect no woman's grief could have had half that
despairing force. The _fierte_ of the French noble, however, came to
his aid. At the first sound of the great supper-bell he dashed away his
tears, composed his features, washed his face, and demanded haughtily
of Philip, whether there were any traces in his looks that the cruel
hypocrite, their jailer, could gloat over.

And with proud step and indifferent air he marched into the hall,
answered the Chevalier's polite inquiry whether the letter had brought
good tidings by coolly thanking him and saying that all at home were
well; and when he met the old man's inquiring glance out of the little
keen black bead in the puckered, withered eyelid, he put a perfectly
stony unmeaningness into his own gaze, till his eyes looked like the
blue porcelain from China so much prized by the Abbess. He even played
at chess all the evening with such concentrated attention as to be
uniformly victorious.

Yet half the night Philip heard suppressed moans and sobs--then knew
that he was on his knees--then, after long and comparatively silent
weeping, he lay down again, and from the hour when he awoke in the
morning, he returned no more to the letters; and though for some little
time more sad and dispirited, he seemed to have come to regard the
misjudgment at home as a part of the burthen he was already bearing.

That burthen was, however, pressing more heavily. The temperaments of
the two brothers so differed that while the French one was prostrated by
the agony of a stroke, and then rallied patiently to endure the effects,
the English character opposed a passive resistance to the blow, gave no
sign of grief or pain, and from that very determination suffered a sort
of exhaustion that made the effects of the evil more and more left.
Thus, from the time Philip's somewhat tardy imagination had been made
to realize his home, his father, and his sisters, the home-sickness,
and weariness of his captivity, which had already begun to undermine his
health and spirits, took increasing effect.

He made no complaint--he never expressed a wish--but, in the words of
the prophet, he seemed 'pining away on his feet.' He did not sleep, and
though, to avoid remark, he never failed to appear at meals, he scarcely
tasted food. He never willingly stirred from cowering over the fire, and
was so surly and ill-tempered that only Berenger's unfailing good-humour
could have endured it. Even a wolf-hunt did not stir him. He only said
he hated outlandish beasts, and that it was not like chasing the hare in
Dorset. His calf-love for Madame de Selinville had entirely faded away
in his yearnings after home. She was only one of the tediously recurring
sights of his captivity, and was loathed like all the rest. The
regulation rides with the Chevalier were more detestable than ever,
and by and by they caused such fatigue that Berenger perceived that
his strength must be warning, and became so seriously alarmed that one
evening, when Philip had barely dragged himself to the hall, tasted
nothing but a few drops of wine, and then dropped into an uneasy slumber
in his chair, he could not but turn to the Chevalier an appealing,
indignant countenance, as he said, in a low but quivering voice, 'You
see, sir, how he is altered!'

'Alas! fair nephew, it is but too plain. He is just of the age when such
restraint tells severely upon the health.'

Then Berenger spoke out upon the foul iniquity of the boy's detention.
For himself, he observed, he had nothing to say; he knew the term of his
release, and had not accepted them; but Philip, innocent of all damage
to the Ribaumont interests, the heir of an honourable family, what had
he done to incur the cruel imprisonment that was eating away his life?

'I tell you, sir,' said Berenger, with eyes filled with tears,' that his
liberty is more precious to me than my own. Were he but restored to our
home, full half the weight would be gone from my spirit.'

'Fair nephew,' said the Chevalier, 'you speak as though I had any power
in the matter, and were not merely standing between you and the King.'

'Then if so,' said Berenger, 'let the King do as he will with me, but
let Philip's case be known to our Ambassador.'

'My poor cousin,' said the Chevalier, 'you know not what you ask. Did I
grant your desire, you would only learn how implacable King Henri is
to those who have personally offended him--above all, to heretics. Nor
could the Ambassador do anything for one who resisted by force of
arms the King's justice. Leave it to me; put yourself in my hands, and
deliverance shall come for him first, then for you.'

'How, sir?'

'One token of concession--one attendance at mass--one pledge that
the alliance shall take place when the formalities have been complied
with--then can I report you our own; give you almost freedom at once;
despatch our young friend to England without loss of time; so will
brotherly affection conquer those chivalrous scruples, most honourable
in you, but which, carried too far, become cruel obstinacy.'

Berenger looked at Philip; saw how faded and wan was the ruddy sun-burnt
complexion, how lank and bony the sturdy form, how listless and wasted
the hands. Then arose, bursting within him, the devoted generosity of
the French nature, which would even accept sin and ruin for self, that
so the friend may be saved; and after all, had he not gone to mass out
of mere curiosity?--did he not believe that there was salvation in the
Gallican Church? Was it not possible that, with Philip free to tell
his story at home, his own deliverance might come before he should be
