sway.  When they arrived, he was at Huntingtower, and thither they
went.  The meeting was fraught with many mingled feelings.  Helen had
not seen her uncle since the death of her father; and, as soon as the
first gratulations were over, she retired to an apartment to weep alone.

On Cummin's being presented to Lord Ruthven, the earl told him he must
now salute him as Lord Badenoch, his brother having been killed a few
days before in a skirmish on the skirts of Ettrick Forest.  Ruthven
then turned to welcome the entrance of Bruce, who, raising his visor,
received from the loyal chief the homage due to his sovereign dignity.
Wallace and the prince soon engaged him in a discourse immediately
connected with the design of their return; and learned that Scotland
did indeed require the royal arm, and the counsel of its best and
lately almost banished friend.  Much of the eastern part of the country
was again in possession of Edward's generals.  They had seized on every
castle in the Lowlands; none having been considered too insignificant
to escape their hands.  Nor could the quiet of reposing age elude the
general devastation; and after a dauntless defense of his castle, the
veteran Knight of Thirlestane had fallen, and with him his only son.
On hearing this disaster, the sage of Ercildown, having meanwhile
protected Lady Isabella mar at Learmont, conveyed her northward; but
falling sick at Roslyn, he had stopped there; and the messenger he
dispatched to Huntingtower with these calamitous tidings (who happened
to be that brave young Gordon whose borrowed breastplate had been that
of Bruce's, in his first battle for Scotland!), bore also information
that besides several parties of the enemy which were hovering on the
heights near Roslyn, an immense army was approaching from
Northumberland.  Ercildown said he understood Sir Simon Fraser was
hastening forward with a small body to attempt cutting off these
advanced squadrons; but, he added, while the contentions continued
between Athol and Soulis for the vacant regency, no man could have hope
of any steady stand against England.

At this communication, Cummin bluntly proposed himself as the
terminator of this dispute.  "If the regency were allowed to my brother
as head of the house of Cummin, that dignity now rests with me.  Give
the word, my sovereign," said he, addressing Bruce, "and none there
shall dare oppose my rights."  Ruthven approved this proposal; and
Wallace, deeming it not only the best way of silencing the pretensions
of those old disturbers of the public tranquility, but a happy
opportunity of putting the chief magistracy into the hands of a
confidant of their design, seconded the advice of Ruthven.  Thus John
Cummin, Lord Badenoch, was invested with the regency, and immediately
dispatched to the army, to assume it as if in right of his being the
next heir to the throne in default of the Bruce.

Wallace sent Lord Douglas privately into Clydesdale, to inform Earl
Bothwell of his arrival, and to request his instant presence with the
Lanark division and his own troops on the banks of the Eske.  Ruthven
ascended the Grampians, to call out the numerous clans of Perthshire,
and Wallace, with his prince, prepared themselves for meeting the
auxiliaries before the towers of Roslyn.  Meanwhile, as Huntingtower
would be an insecure asylum for Helen, when it must be left to
domestics alone, Wallace proposed to Edwin that he should escort his
cousin to Braemar, and place her under the care of his mother and the
widowed countess.  "Thither," continued he, "we will send Lady Isabella
also, should Heaven bless our arms at Roslyn."  Edwin acquiesced, as he
was to return with all speed to join his friend on the southern bank of
the Forth; and Helen, aware that scenes of blood were no scenes for
her, while her heart was wrung to agony at the thought of relinquishing
Wallace to new dangers, yielded a reluctant assent, not merely to go,
but to take that look of him which might be the last.

The sight of her uncle, and the objects around, had so recalled the
image of her father, that ever since her arrival a foreboding sadness
had hung over her spirits.  She remembered that a few months ago she
had seen that beloved parent go out to battle, whence he never
returned.  Should the same doom await her with regard to Wallace!  The
idea shook her frame with an agitation that sunk her, in spite of
herself, on the bosom of this trust of friends, when Edwin approached
to lead her to her horse.  Her emotions penetrated the heart against
which she leaned.

"My gentle sister," said Wallace, "do not despair of our final success;
of the safety of all whom you regard."

"Ah!  Wallace," faltered she, in a voice rendered hardly audible by
tears, "but did I not lose my father?"

"Sweet Helen," returned he, tenderly grasping her trembling hand, "you
lost him, but he gained by the exchange.  And should the peace of
Scotland be purchased by the lives of your friends--if Bruce survives,
you must still think your prayers blessed.  Were I to fall, my sister,
my sorrows would be over; and from the region of universal blessedness
I should enjoy the sight of Scotland's happiness."

"Were we all to enter those regions at one time," faintly replied
Helen, "there would be comfort in such thoughts; but as it is--"  Here
she paused; tears stopped her utterance.  "A few years is a short
separation," returned Wallace, "when we are hereafter to be united to
all eternity.  This is my consolation, when I think of Marion--when
memory dwells with the friends lost in these dreadful conflicts; and
whatever may be the fate of those who now survive, call to remembrance
my words, dear Helen, and the God who was my instructor will send you
comfort."

"Then farewell, my friend, my brother!" cried she, forcibly tearing
herself away, and throwing herself into the arms of Edwin; "leave me
now; and the angel of the just will bring you in glory, here or
hereafter, to your sister Helen."  Wallace fervently kissed the hand
she again extended to him; and, with an emotion which he had thought he
would never feel again for mortal woman, left the apartment.




Chapter LXVIII.

Roslyn.


The day after the departure of Helen, Bruce became impatient to take
the field; and, to indulge this laudable eagerness, Wallace set forth
with him to meet the returning steps of Ruthven and his gathered
legions.

Having passed along the borders of Invermay, the friends descended
toward the precipitous banks of the Earn, at the foot of the Grampians.
In these green labyrinths they wound their way, till Bruce, who had
never before been in such mountain wilds, expressed a fear that Wallace
had mistaken the track; for this seemed far from any human footstep.

Wallace replied, with a smile.  "The path is familiar to me as the
garden of Huntingtower."

The day, which had been cloudy, suddenly turned to wind and rain, which
certainly spread an air of desolation over the scene, very dreary to an
eye accustomed to the fertile plains and azure skies of the south.  The
whole of the road was rough, dangerous, and dreadful.  The steep and
black rocks, towering above their heads, seemed to threaten the
precipitation of their impending masses into the path below.  But
Wallace had told Bruce they were in the right track, and he gaily
breasted both the storm and the perils of the road.  They ascended a
mountain, whose enormous piles of granite, torn by many a winter
tempest, projected their barren summits from a surface of moorland, on
which lay a deep incrustation of snow.  The blast now blew a tempest,
and the rain and sleet beat so hard, that Bruce, laughing, declared he
believed the witches of his country were in league with Edward, and,
hid in shrouds of mist, were all assembled here to drive their lawful
prince into the roaring cataracts beneath.

Thus enveloped in a sea of vapors, with torrents of water pouring down
the sides of their armor, did the friends descend the western brow of
this part of the Grampians until they approached Loch Earn.  They had
hardly arrived there before the rain ceased, and the clouds, rolling
away from the sides of the mountains, discovered the vast and
precipitous Ben Vorlich.  Its base was covered with huge masses of
cliffs, scattered in fragments, like the wreck of some rocky world, and
spread abroad in wide and horrid desolation.  The mountain itself, the
highest in this chain of the Grampians, was in every part marked by
deep and black ravines, made by the rushing waters in the time of
floods; but where its blue head mingled with the clouds, a stream of
brightness issued that seemed to promise the dispersion of its vapors;
and consequently a more secure path for Wallace, to lead his friend
over its perilous heights.**

**This description of Ben Vorlich, written ten years before the journey
of the author's brother, Sir. R. K. Porter, into Armenia and Persia, on
her reperusing it now, while revising these volumes, reminds her
strongly of his account of the appearance of Mount Arafat, as he saw it
under a storm, and which he describes with so much, she must be allowed
to say, sacred interest, in his travels through those
countries.--(1840.)

This appearance did not deceive.  The whole mantle of clouds, with
which the tops of all the mountains had been obscured, rolled away
toward the west, and discovered to the eye of Wallace that this line of
light which he had discerned through the mist, was the host of Ruthven
descending Ben Vorlich in defiles.  From the nature of the path, they
were obliged to move in a winding direction, and as the sun now shone
full upon their arms, and their lengthened lines gradually extended
from the summit of the mountain to its base, no sight could contain
more of the sublime, none of truer grandeur to the enraptured mind of
Bruce.  He forgot his horror of the wastes he had passed over in the
joy of beholding so noble an army of his countrymen thus approaching to
place him upon the throne of his ancestors.  "Wallace," cried he,
"these brave hearts deserve a more cheerful home!  My scepter must turn
this Scotia desrta into Scotia felix; and so shall I reward the service
they this day bring me."

"They are happy in these wilds," returned Wallace, "their flocks browse
the hills, their herds the valleys.  The soil yields sufficient to
support its sons; and their luxuries are, a minstrel's song and the lip
of their brides.  Their ambition is satisfied with following their
chief to the field; and their honor lies in serving their God and
maintaining the freedom of their country.  Beware, then, my dear
prince, of changing the simple habits of those virtuous mountaineers.
Introduce the luxurious cultivation of France into these tracts, you
will infect them with artificial wants; and, with every want, you put a
link to a chain which will fasten them to bondage whenever a tyrant
chooses to grasp it.  Leave them then their rocks as you find them, and
you will ever have a hardy race, ready to perish in their defense, or
to meet death for the royal guardian of their liberties."

Lord Ruthven no sooner reached the banks of Loch Earn, than he espied
the prince and Wallace.  He joined them; then marshaling his men in a
wide tract of land at the head of that vast body of water, placed
himself with the two supposed De Longuevilles in the van; and in this
array marched through the valleys of Strathmore and Strathallen, into
Stirlingshire.  The young Earl of Fife held the government of the
castle and town of Stirling; and as he had been a zealous supporter of
the rebellious Lord Badenoch, Bruce negatized Ruthven's proposal to
send in a messenger for the earl's division of the troops.

"No, my lord," said he, "like my friend Wallace, I will have no divided
spirits near me; all must be earnest in my cause, or entirely out of
the contest.  I am content with the brave men around me."

After rapid marchings and short haltings, they arrived safe at
Linlithgow, where Wallace proposed staying a night to refresh the
troops, who were now joined by Sir Alexander Ramsay, at the head of a
thousand of his clan.  While the men took rest, the chiefs waked to
think for them.  And Wallace, with Bruce and Ruthven, and the brave
Ramsay (to whom Wallace had revealed himself, but still kept Bruce
unknown), were in deep consultation when Grimsby entered to inform his
master that a young knight desired to speak with Sir Guy de Longueville.

"His name?" demanded Wallace.

"He refused to tell it," replied Grimsby, "and wears his beaver shut."

Wallace looked around with a glance that inquired whether the stranger
should be admitted.

"Certainly," said Bruce, "but first put on your mask."

Wallace closed his visor, and the moment after Grimsby reentered, with
a knight of elegant mien, habited in a suit of green armor, linked with
gold.  He wore a close helmet, from which streamed a long feather, of
the same hue.  Wallace rose at his entrance; the stranger advanced to
him.

"You are he whom I seek.  I am a Scot, and a man of few words.  Accept
my services, allow me to attend you in this war, and I will serve you
faithfully."

Wallace replied: "And who is the brave knight to whom Sir Guy de
Longueville must owe so great an obligation?"

"My name," answered the stranger, "shall not be revealed till he who
now wears that of the Reaver proclaims his own in the day of victory.
I know you, sir, but your secret is as safe with me as in your own
breast.  Place me to fight by your side, and I am yours forever."

Wallace was surprised, but not confounded by this speech.  "I have only
one question to ask you, noble stranger," replied he, "before I confide
a cause dearer to me than life in your integrity.  How did you become
master of a secret, which I believed out of the power of treachery to
betray?"

"No one betrayed your secret to me.  I came by my information in an
honorable manner, but the means I shall not reveal till I see the time
to declare my name, and that, perhaps, may be in the moment when the
assumed brother of yon young Frenchman," added the stranger, turning to
Bruce, and lowering his voice, "again appears publicly in Scotland, as
Sir William Wallace."

"I am satisfied," replied he, well pleased that whoever this knight
might be, Bruce yet remained undiscovered; "I grant your request.  Yon
brave youth, whose name I share, forgives me the success of my sword.
I slew the red Reaver, and therefore would restore a brother to Thomas
de Longueville, in myself.  He fights on my right hand, you shall be
stationed at my left."

"On the side next your heart!" exclaimed the stranger, "let that ever
be my post, there to guard the bulwark of Scotland, the life of the
bravest of men."

This enthusiasm did not surprise any present; it was the usual language
of all who approached Sir William Wallace; and Bruce, particularly
pleased with the heartfelt energy with which it was uttered, forgot his
disguise in the amiable fervor of approbation, and half arose to
welcome him to his cause; but a look from Wallace (who on being known
had uncovered his face), arrested his intention and the prince sat down
again, thankful for so timely a check on his precipitancy.

In passing the Pentland Hills, into Mid-Lothian, the chiefs were met by
Edwin, who had crossed from the north by the Frith of Forth; and having
heard no tidings of the Scottish army in the neighborhood of Edinburgh,
he had turned to meet it on the most probably road.  Wallace introduced
him to the Knight of the Green Plume, for that was the appellation by
which the stranger desired to be known--and then made inquiries how
Lady Helen had borne the fatigues of her journey to Braemar.  "Pretty
well there," replied he, "but much better back again."  He then
explained that on his arrival with her, neither Lady Mar nor his mother
would consent to remain so far from the spot where Wallace was to
contend again for the safety of their country.  Helen did not say
anything in opposition to their wishes; and at last Edwin yielded to
the entreaties and tears of his mother and aunt, to bring them to where
they might, at least, not long endure the misery of suspense.  Having
consented, without an hour's delay, he set forth with the ladies, to
retrace his steps to Huntingtower; and there he left them, under a
guard of three hundred men, whom he brought from Braemar for that
purpose.

Bruce, whose real name had not been revealed to the other ladies of
Ruthven's family, in a lowered tone, asked Edwin some questions
relative to the spirits in which Helen had parted with him.  "In losing
her," added he, "my friend and I feel but as part of what we were.  Her
presence seemed to ameliorate the fierceness of our war-councils, and
ever reminded me of the angelic guard by whom Heaven points our way."

"I left her with looks like the angel you speak of," answered Edwin;
"but she bade me farewell upon the platform of the eastern tower of the
castle.  When I gave her the parting embrace, she raised herself from
my breast, and stretching her arms to heave, with her pure soul in her
eyes, she exclaimed, 'Bless him, gracious God; bless him, and his noble
commander! may they ever, with the prince they love, be thine especial
care!'  I knelt by her as she uttered this; and touching the hem of her
garments as some holy thing, hurried from the spot."

"Her prayers," cried Bruce, "will fight for us.  They are arms well
befitting the virgins of Scotland to use against its foes."

"And without such unction," rejoined Wallace, looking to that Heaven
she had invoked, "the warrior may draw his steel in vain."

On Edwin's introduction, the stranger knight engaged himself in
conversation with Ramsay.  But Lord Ruthven interrupted the discourse,
by asking Ramsay some questions relative to the military positions on
the banks of the Eske.  Sir Alexander, being the grandson of the Lord
of Roslyn, and having passed his youth in its neighborhood, was well
qualified to answer these questions.  In such discourses, the Scottish
leaders marched along, till, passing before the lofty ridge of the
Corstophine Hills, they were met by groups of flying peasantry.  At
sight of the Scottish banners they stopped, and informed their armed
countrymen, that the new regent, John of Badenoch, having rashly
attacked the Southron army in its vantage ground, near Borthwick
Castle, had suffered defeat, and was in full and disordered retreat
toward Edinburgh, while the country people fled on all sides before the
victors.  These reporters magnified the number of the enemy to an
incredible amount.

Wallace was at no loss in comprehending how much to believe in this
panic; but determining, whether great or small the power of his
adversary, to intercept him at Roslyn, he sent to Cummin and to Fraser,
the two commanders in the beaten and dispersed armies, to rendezvous on
the banks of the Eske.  The brave troops which he led, though ignorant
of their real leader, obeyed his direction under an idea they were Lord
Ruthven's, who was their ostensible general, and steadily pursued their
march.  Every village and solitary cot seemed recently deserted; and
through an awful solitude they took their rapid way, till the towers of
Roslyn Castle hailed them as a beacon from amidst the wooded heights of
the northern Eske.

"There," cried Ramsay, pointing to the embattled rock, "stands the
fortress of my forefathers!  It must this day be made famous by the
actions performed before its walls!"

Wallace, whose knowledge of this part of the country was not quite so
familiar as that of Ramsay, learned sufficient from him to decide at
once which would be the most favourable position for a small and
resolute band to assume against a large and conquering army; and,
accordingly disposing his troops, which did not amount to more than
eight thousand men, he dispatched one thousand, under the command of
Ramsay, to occupy the numerous caves in the southern banks of the Eske,
where they were to issue in various divisions, and with shouts, on the
first appearance of advantage, either on his side or on the enemy's.

Ruthven, meanwhile, went for a few minutes into the castle to embrace
his niece, and to assure the venerable Lord of Roslyn that assistance
approached his beleaguered walls.

Edwin, who, with Grimsby, had volunteered the dangerous service of
reconnoitering the enemy, returned within an hour, bringing in a
straggler from the English camp.  His life was promised him on
condition of his revealing the strength of the advancing army.  The
terrified wretch did not hesitate; and from him they learned that it
was commanded by Sir John Segrave and Ralph Confrey, who, deeming the
country subdued by the two last battles gained over the Black and Red
Cummins,** were preparing for a general plundering.  And, to sweep the
land at once, Segrave had divided his army into three divisions, to
scatter themselves over the country, and everywhere gather in the
spoil.  To be assured of this being the truth, while Grimsby remained
to guard the prisoner, Edwin went alone into the track he was told the
Southrons would take, and from a height he discerned about ten thousand
of them winding along the valley.  With this confirmation of the man's
account, he brought him to the Scottish lines; and Wallace, who well
knew how to reap advantage from the errors of his enemies, being joined
by Fraser and the discomfited regent, made the concerted signal to
Ruthven.  That nobleman immediately pointed out to his men the waving
colors of the Southron host, as it approached beneath the overhanging
woods of Hawthorndean.  He exhorted them, by their fathers, wives, and
children, to breast the enemy at this spot; to grapple with him till he
fell.  "Scotland," cried he, "is lost or won, this day.  You are
freemen or slaves; your families are your own, or the property of
tyrants!  Fight stoutly, and God will yield you an invisible support."

**The Red Cummin was an attributive appellation of John, the last
regent before the accession of Bruce.  His father, the princely Earl of
Badenoch, was called the Black Cummin.

The Scots answered their general by a shout, and calling on him to lead
them forward, Ruthven placed himself, with the regent and Fraser, in
the van, and led the charge.  Little expecting an assault from an
adversary they had so lately driven off the field, the Southrons were
taken by surprise.  But they fought well, and resolutely stood their
ground till Wallace and Bruce, who commanded the flanking divisions,
closed in upon them with an impetuosity that drove Confrey's division
into the river.  Then the ambuscade of Ramsay poured from his caves,
the earth seemed teeming with mailed warriors, and the Southrons,
seeing the surrounding heights and the deep defiles filled with the
same terrific appearances, fled with precipitation toward their second
division, which lay a few miles southward.  Thither the conquering
squadrons of the Scots followed them.  The fugitives, leaping the
trenches of the encampment, called out to their comrades: "Arm! arm!
Hell is in league against us!"  Segrave was soon at the head of his
legions, and a battle more desperate than the first blazed over the
field.  The flying troops of the slain Confrey, rallying around the
standard of their general-in-chief, fought with the spirit of revenge,
and, being now a body of nearly 20,000 men, against 8000 Scots, the
conflict became tremendous.  In several points the Southrons gained so
greatly the advantage that Wallace and Bruce threw themselves
successively into those parts where the enemy most prevailed, and by
exhortations, example and prowess they a thousand times turned the fate
of the day, appearing as they shot from rank to rank to be two comets
of fire sent before the Scottish troops to consume all who opposed
them.  Segrave was taken, and forty English knights besides.

The green borders of the Eske were dyed red with Southron blood; and
the enemy on all sides were calling for quarter, when, of a sudden, the
cry of "Havoc and St. George!" issued from the adjoining hill.  At the
same moment, a posse of country people (who, for the sake of plunder,
had stolen into the height), seeing the advancing troops of a third
division of the enemy, like guilty cowards rushed down amongst their
brave defenders, echoing the war-cry of England, and exclaiming, "We
are lost--a host, reaching to the horizon, is upon us!"  Terror struck
to many a Scottish heart.  The Southrons who were just about giving up
their arms, leaped upon their feet.  The fight recommenced with
redoubled fury.  Sir Robert Neville, at the head of the new
reinforcement, charged into the center of the Scottish legions.  Bruce
and Edwin threw themselves into the breach which this impetuous onset
had made in that part of their line, and fighting man to man, would
have taken Neville, had not a follower of that nobleman, wielding a
ponderous mace, struck Bruce so terrible a blow, as to fracture his
helmet, and cast him from his horse to the ground.  The fall of so
active a leader excited as much dismay in the surrounding Scots as it
encouraged the reviving spirits of the enemy.  Edwin exerted himself to
preserve his prince from being trampled on; and while he fought for
that purpose, and afterward sent his senseless body off the field,
under charge of young Gordon (who had been chosen by the disguised
Bruce as his especial aid), to Roslyn Castle, Neville rescued Segrave
and his knights.  Lord Ruthven now contended with a feeble arm.
Fatigued with the two preceding conflicts, covered with wounds, and
perceiving indeed a host pouring upon them on all sides (for the whole
of Segrave's original army of 30,000 men, excepting those who had
fallen in the preceding engagements, were now restored to the assault),
the Scots, in despair, gave ground: some threw away their arms, to fly
the faster; and by thus exposing themselves, panic-struck, to the
swords of their enemies, redoubled the confusion.

Indeed, so great was the havoc, that the day must have ended in the
universal destruction of every Scot on the field, had not Wallace felt
the crisis, and that as Guy de Longueville he shed his blood in vain.
In vain his terrified countrymen saw him rush into the thickest of the
carnage; in vain he called to them, by all that was sacred to man, to
stand to the last.  He was a foreigner, and they had no confidence in
his exhortations; death was before them, and they turned to fly.  The
fate of his country was hung on an instant.  The last rays of the
setting sun shone full on the rocky promontory of the hill which
projected over the field of combat.  He took his resolution; and
spurring his steed up the steep ascent, stood on the summit, where he
could be seen by the whole army then taking off his helmet, he waved it
in the air with a shout, and having drawn all eyes upon him, suddenly
exclaimed, "Scots! you have this day vanquished the Southrons twice! if
you be men, remember Cambus-Kenneth, and follow William Wallace to a
third victory!"  The cry which issued from the amazed troops was that
of a people who beheld the angel of their deliverance.  "Wallace!" was
the chargeword of every heart.  The hero's courage seemed
instantaneously diffused through every breast; and, with braced arms
and determined spirits, forming at once into the phalanx his thundering
voice dictated, the Southrons again felt the weight of the Scottish
steel; and a battle ensued, which made the bright Eske run purple to
the sea, and covered the pastoral glades of Hawthorndean with the
bodies of its invaders.

Sir John Segrave and Neville were both taken; and ere night closed in
upon the carnage, Wallace granted quarter to those who sued for it,
and, receiving their arms, left them to repose in their before
depopulated camp.




Chapter LXIX.

Roslyn Castle.


Wallace, having planted an adequate force in charge of the prisoners,
went to the two Southron commanders to pay them the courtesy he thought
due to their bravery and rank, before he retired with his victorious
followers toward Roslyn Castle.  He entered their tent alone.  At sight
of the warrior who had given them so signal a defeat, the generals
rose.  Neville, who had received a slight wound in one of his arms,
stretched out the other to Wallace.  "Sir William Wallace," said he,
"that you were obliged to declare a name so deservedly renowned, before
the troops I led, could be made to relinquish one step of their
hard-earned advantage, was an acknowledgment in their favor almost
equivalent to a victory."

Sir John Segrave, who stood leaning on his sword with a disturbed
countenance, interrupted him.  "The fate of this day cannot be
attributed to any earthly name or hand.  I believe my sovereign will
allow the zeal with which I have served him; and yet thirty thousand as
brave men as ever crossed the marshes, have fallen before a handful of
Scots.  Three victories, won over Edward's troops in one day, are not
events of a commonplace nature.  God alone has been our vanquisher."

"I acknowledge it," cried Wallace; "and that He is on the side of
justice, let the return of St. Matthias' Day ever remind your
countrymen!"

When Segrave gave the victory to the Lord of Hosts, he did it more from
jealousy of what might be Edward's opinion of his conduct, when
compared with Neville's, than from any intention to imply that the
cause of Scotland was justly Heaven-defended.  Such are the impious
inconsistencies of unprincipled men!  He frowned at the reply of
Wallace, and turned gloomily away.  Neville returned a respectful
answer, and their conqueror soon after left them.

Edwin, with the Knight of the Green Plume (who had indeed approved his
valor by many a brave deed performed at his commander's side), awaited
Wallace's return from his prisoners' tent.  Ruthven came up with
Wallace before he joined them, and told him that Bruce was safe under
the care of the sage of Ercildown, and that the regent, who had been
wounded in the beginning of the day, was also in Roslyn Castle.
Wallace then called Edwin to him, giving him orders that all of the
survivors who had suffered in these three desperate battles, should be
collected from amongst the slain, and carried into the neighboring
castles of Hawthorndean, Brunston, and Dalkeith.  The rest of the
soldiers were commanded to take their refreshment still under arms.
These duties performed, Wallace turned with the eagerness of friendship
and loyalty to see how Bruce fared.

The moon shone brightly as his party rode forward.  Wallace ascended
the steep acclivity on which Roslyn Castle stands.  In crossing the
drawbridge which divides its rocky peninsula from the main land, he
looked around and sighed.  The scene reminded him of Ellerslie.  A deep
shadow lay on the woods beneath; and the pensile branches of the now
leafless trees bending to meet the flood, seemed mourning the deaths
which now polluted its stream.  The water lay in profound repose at the
base of these beautiful craigs, as if peace longed to become an
inhabitant of so lovely a scene.

At the gate of the castle its aged master, the Lord Sinclair, met
Wallace, to bid him welcome.

"Blessed be the saint of this day," exclaimed he, "for thus bringing
our best defender, even as by a miracle, to snatch us as a brand from
the fire!  My gates, like my heart, open to receive the true Regent of
Scotland."

"I have only done a Scotchman's duty, venerable Sinclair," replied
Wallace, "and must not arrogate a title which Scotland has transferred
to other hands."

"Not Scotland, but rebellion," replied the old chief.  "It was
rebellion against the just gratitude of the nation that invested the
Black Cummin with the regency; and only some similar infatuation has
bestowed the same title on his brother.  What did he not lose till you,
Scotland's true champion, have reappeared to rescue her again from
bondage?"

"The present Lord Badenoch is an honest and a brave man," replied
Wallace; "and as I obey the power which gave him his authority, I am
ready, by fidelity to him, to serve Scotland with as vigorous a zeal as
ever; so, noble Sinclair, when our rulers cast not trammels on our
virtue, we must obey them as the vicegerents of Heaven."

Wallace then asked to be conducted to his wounded friend, Sir Thomas de
Longueville, for Sinclair was ignorant of the real rank of his guest.
Eager to oblige him, his noble host immediately led the way through a
gallery, and opening the door of an apartment, discovered to him Bruce,
lying on a couch; and a venerable figure, whose silver beard and
sweeping robes, announced him to be the sage of Ercildown, was bathing
the wounded chief's temples with balsams.  A young creature, beautiful
as a ministering seraph, also hung over the prostrate chief.  She held
a golden casket in her hand, out of which the sage drew the unctions he
applied.

At the sound of Wallace's voice, who spoke in a suppressed tone to
Ruthven while entering the chamber, the wounded prince started on his
arm to greet his friend; but he as instantly fell back.  Wallace
hastened forward.  When Bruce recovered from the swoon into which the
suddenness of his attempt to rise had thrown him, he felt a hand
grasping his; he guessed to whom it belonged, and gently pressed it,
smiled; a moment afterward he opened his eyes, and in a low voice,
articulated from his wounded lips:

"My dear Wallace, you are victorious?"

"Completely so, my prince and king," returned he, in the same tone;
"all is now plain before you; speak but the word, and render Scotland
happy!"

"Not yet; oh, not yet!" whispered he.  "My more than brother, allow
Bruce to be himself again before he is known in the land of his
fathers!  This cruel wound in my head must heal first, and then I may
again share your dangers and your glory!  Oh, Wallace, not a Southron
must taint our native lands when my name is proclaimed in Scotland!"**

**It is a curious circumstance, that when the body of Bruce was
discovered a few years ago in the abbey of Dunfermline, his head
retained all its teeth excepting two in front, evidently originally
injured by a stroke of violence.  Beside this, the evidence remained in
the bone of the chest of the fact of its having been cut open after his
death, for the heart to be taken out, according to his dying command,
to be sent to the Holy Land.

Wallace saw that his prince was not in a state to bear argument, and as
all had retired far from the couch when he approached it, in gratitude
for this propriety (for it had left him and his friend free to converse
unobserved), he turned toward the other inmates of the chamber.  The
sage advanced to him, and recognizing in Wallace's now manly form the
fine youth he had seen with Sir Ronald Crawford at the claiming of the
crown, he saluted him with a paternal affection, tempering the sublime
feelings with which even he approached the resistless champion of his
country, and then beckoning the beautiful girl who had so
compassionately hung over the couch of Bruce, she drew near the sage.
He took her hand: "Sir William Wallace," said he, "this sweet child is
the youngest daughter of the brave Mar, who died in the field of glory
on the Carron.  Her grandfather, the stalwart knight of Thirlestane,
fell a few weeks ago, defending his castle, and I am almost all that is
left to her, though she has, or had a sister, of whom we can learn no
tidings."  Isabella, for it was she, covered her face to conceal her
emotions.

"Dear lady," said Wallace, "these venerable heroes were both known to
and beloved by me.  And now that Heaven has resumed them to itself, as
the last act of friendship that I, perhaps, may be fated to pay to
their offspring, I shall convey you to that sister whose matchless
heart yearns to receive so dear a consolation."

To disengage Isabella's thoughts from the afflicting remembrances, now
bathing her fair cheeks with tears, Ercildown put a cup, of the mingled
juice of herbs, into her hand, and commissioned her to give it to their
invalid.  Wallace now learned that his friend's wound was not only in
the head, accompanied by a severe concussion, but that it must be many
days before he could remove him from his bed without danger.  Anxious
to release him from even the scarcely breathed whispers of his martial
companions, who stood at some distance from his couch, Wallace
immediately proposed leaving him to rest, and beckoning the chiefs,
they followed him out of the apartment.

On the following morning he was aroused at daybreak by the abrupt
entrance of Andrew Lord Bothwell into his tent.  The well-known sounds
of his voice made Wallace start from his pillow, and extend his arms to
receive him.

"Murray! My brave, invaluable Murray!" cried he, "thou art welcome once
more to the side of thy brother in arms.  Thee and thine must ever be
first in my heart!"

The young Lord Bothwell returned his warm embrace in silent eloquence;
but sitting down by Wallace's couch, he grasped his hand, and pressing
it to his breast, said, "I feel a happiness here which I have never
known since the day of Falkirk.  You quitted us, Wallace, and all good
seemed gone with you, or buried in my father's grave.  But you return!
You bring conquest and peace with you, you restore our Helen to her
family, you bless us with yourself!  And shall you not see again the
gay Andrew Murray?  It must be so, my friend, melancholy is not my
climate, and I shall now live in your beams."

"Dear Murray!" returned Wallace, "this generous enthusiasm can only be
equaled by my joy in all that makes you and Scotland happy."

He then proceeded to confide to him all that related to Bruce; and to
describe the minutiae of those plans for his establishment, which had
only been hinted in his letters from France.  Bothwell entered with
ardor into these designs, and regretted that the difficulty he found in
persuading the veterans of Lanark to follow him to any field where they
did not expect to find their beloved Wallace, had deprived him of the
participation of the late danger and new glory of his friend.

"To compensate for that privation," replied Wallace, "while our prince
is disabled from pursuing victory in his own person, we must not allow
our present advantages to lose their expected effects.  You shall
accompany me through the Lowlands, where we must recover the places
which the ill-fortune of James Cummin has lost."

Murray gladly embraced this opportunity of again sharing the field with
Wallace, and the chiefs joined Bruce.  Bothwell was presented to his
young sovereign, and Douglas entering, the discourse turned on their
different posts of duty.  Wallace suggested to his royal friend, that
as his restoration to health could not be so speedy as the cause
required, it would be necessary not to await that event, but begin the
recovery of the border counties before Edward could reinforce their
garrisons.  Bruce sighed; but with a generous glow suffusing his pale
face, said:

"Go, my friend!  Bless Scotland which way you will, and let my ready
acquiescence convince future ages, that I love my country beyond my own
fame; for her sake I relinquish to you the whole glory of delivering
her out of the hands of the tyrant who has so long usurped my rights.
Men may say when they hear this, that I do not merit the crown you will
put upon my head; that I have lain on a couch while you fought for me;
but I will bear all obloquy rather than deserve its slightest charge,
by withholding you an hour from the great work of Scotland's peace."

"It is not for the breath of men, my dear prince," returned Wallace,
"that either you or I act.  It is sufficient for us that we effect
their good, and whether the agent be one or the other, the end is the
same.  Our deeds and intentions have one great Judge, and He will award
the only true glory."

Such were the principles which filled the hearts of these two friends,
worthy of each other, and alike honorable to the country that gave them
birth.  Gordon had won their confidence, and watched by his prince's
pillow.

Though the wounded John Cummin remained possessed of the title of
regent, Wallace was virtually endowed with the authority.  Whatever he
suggested was acted upon as by a decree--all eyes looked to him as to
the cynosure by which every order of men in Scotland were to shape
their course.  The jealousies which had driven him from his former
supreme seat, seemed to have died with their prime instigator, the late
regent; and no chief of any consequence, excepting Soulis and Athol,
who had retired in disgust to their castles, breathed a word of
opposition to the general gratitude.

Wallace having dictated his terms and sent his prisoners to England,
commenced the march that was to clear the Lowlands of the foe.  His own
valiant band, headed by Scrymgeour and Lockhart of Lee,** rushed toward
his standard, with a zeal that rendered each individual a host in
himself.  The fame of his new victories, seconded by the enthusiasm of
the people and the determination of the troops, soon made him master of
all the lately lost fortresses.

**The crusading ancestor of this Lockhart was the bringer of the famous
Lee penny from the Holy Land, and from his sprung the three brave
branches of the name--Lockhart of Lee, Lockhart of Carnwarth, and
Lockhart of Drydean.

Hardly four weeks were consumed in these conquests, and not a rood of
land remained south of the Tay in the possession of England, excepting
Berwick.  Before that often-disputed stronghold, Wallace drew up his
forces to commence a regular siege.  The governor, intimidated by the
powerful works which he saw the Scottish chief forming against the
town, dispatched a messenger to Edward with the tidings; not only
praying for succors, but to inform him that if he continued to refuse
the peace for which the Scots fought, he would find it necessary to
begin the conquest of the kingdom anew.




Chapter LXX.

Berwick.


While Wallace, accompanied by his brave friends, was thus carrying all
before him from the Grampian to the Cheviot Hills, Bruce was rapidly
recovering.  His eager wishes seemed to heal his wounds, and on the
tenth day after the departure of Wallace, he left the couch which had
been beguiled of its irksomeness by the smiling attentions of the
tender Isabella.  The ensuing Sabbath beheld him still more restored,
and having imparted his intentions to the Lords Ruthven and Douglas,
who were both with him, the next morning he joyfully buckled on his
armor.  Isabella, when she saw him thus clad, started, and the roses
left her cheek.  "I am armed to be your guide to Huntingtower," said
he, with a look that showed her he read her thoughts.  He then called
for pen and ink, to write to Wallace.  The reassured Isabella,
rejoicing in the glad beams of his brightening eyes, held the standish.
As he dipped his pen, he looked at her with a grateful tenderness that
thrilled her soul, and made her bend her blushing face to hide emotions
which whispered bliss in every beat of her happy heart.  Thus, with a
spirit wrapped in felicity, for victory hailed him from without, and
love seemed to woo him to the dearest transports within, he wrote the
following letter to Wallace:

"I am now well, my best friend!  This day I attend my lovely nurse,
with her venerable guardian, to Huntingtower.  Eastward of Perth,
almost every castle of consequence is yet filled by the Southrons, whom
the folly of James Cummin allowed to reoccupy the places whence you had
so lately driven them.  I go to root them out; to emulate in the north,
what you are now doing in the south!  You shall see me again when the
banks of the Spey are as free as you have made the Forth.  In all this
I am yet Thomas de Longueville.  Isabella, the sweet soother of my
hours, knows me as no other; for would she not despise the unfamed
Bruce?  To deserve and win her love as De Longueville, and to marry her
as King of Scotland, is the fond hope of your friend and brother,
Robert ---.  God speed me, and I shall send you dispatches of my
proceedings."

Wallace had just made a successful attack upon the outworks of Berwick,
when this letter was put into his hand.  He was surrounded by his
chieftains; and having read it, he informed them that Sir Thomas de
Longueville was going to the Spey to rid its castles of the enemy.

"The hopes of his enterprising spirit," continued Wallace, "are so
seconded by his determination, I doubt not that what he promises, God
and the justice of our cause will perform; and we may soon expect to
hear Scotland has no enemies in her Highlands."

But in this hope Wallace was disappointed.  Day after day passed, and
no tidings from the north.  He became anxious; Bothwell and Edwin too
began to share his uneasiness.  Continued successes against Berwick had
assured them a speedy surrender, when unexpected succors being thrown
in by sea, the confidence of the garrison became re-excited, and the
ramparts appeared doubly manned.  Wallace saw that the only alternative
was to surprise and take possession of the ships, and turn the siege
into a blockade.  Still trusting that Bruce would be prosperous in the
Highlands, he calculated on full leisure to await the fall of Berwick
on this plan; and so much blood might be spared.  Intent and execution
were twin-born in the breast of Wallace.  By a masterly stroke he
effected his design on the shipping; and having closed the Southrons
within their walls, he dispatched Lord Bothwell to Huntingtower, to
learn the state of military operations there, and above all to bring
back tidings of the prince's health.

On the evening of the very day in which Murray left Berwick, a
desperate sully was made by the garrison; but they were beaten back
with such effect, that Wallace gained possession of one of their most
commanding towers.  The contest did not end till night; and after
passing a brief while in the council-tent listening to the suggestions
of his friends relative to the use that might be made of the new
acquisition, he retired to his own quarters at a late hour.  At these
momentous periods he never seemed to need sleep; and sitting at his
table setting the dispositions for the succeeding day, he marked not
the time till the flame of his exhausted lamp expired in the socket.
He replenished it and had again resumed his military labors, when the
curtain which covered the door of his tent was drawn aside, and an
armed man entered.  Wallace looked up, and seeing that it was the
Knight of the Green Plume, asked if anything had occurred from the town.

"Nothing," replied the knight, in an agitated voice, and seating
himself beside Wallace.

"Any evil tidings from Perthshire?" demanded Wallace, who now hardly
doubted that ill news had arrived of Bruce.

"None," was the knight's reply; "but I am come to fulfill my promise to
you, to unite myself forever heart and soul to your destiny, or you
behold me this night for the last time."

Surprised at this address, and the emotion which shook the frame of the
unknown warrior, Wallace answered him with expressions of esteem, and
added:

"If it depend on me to unite so brave a man to my friendship forever,
only speak the word, declare your name, and I am ready to seal the
compact."

"My name," declared the knight, "will indeed put these protestations to
the proof.  I have fought by your side, Sir William Wallace; I would
have died at any moment to have spared that breast a wound, and yet I
dread to raise my visor to show you who I am.  A look will make me live
or blast me."

"Your language confounds me, noble knight," replied Wallace.  "I know
of no man living, save the base violators of Lady Helen Mar's liberty,
who need tremble before my eyes.  It is not possible that either of
these men is before me; and whoever you are, whatever you may have
been, brave chief, your deeds have proved you worthy of a soldier's
friendship, and I pledge you mine."

The knight was silent.  He took Wallace's hand--he grasped it; the arms
that held it did indeed tremble.  Wallace again spoke.

"What is the meaning of this?  I have a power to benefit, but none to
injure."

"To benefit and to injure!" cried the knight, in a transport of
emotion; "you have my life in your hands.  Oh! grant it, as you value
your own happiness and honor!  Look on me and say whether I am to live
or die."

As the warrior spoke, he cast himself impetuously on his knees, and
threw open his visor.  Wallace saw a fine but flushed face.  It was
much overshadowed by the helmet.

"My friend," said he, attempting to raise him by the hand which clasped
his, "your words are mysteries to me; and so little right can I have to
the power you ascribe to me, that although it seems to me as if I had
seen your features before, yet--"

"You forget me!" cried the knight, starting on his feet, and throwing
off his helmet to the ground; "again look on this face and stab me at
once by a second declaration that I am remembered no more!"

The countenance of Wallace now showed that he too well remembered it.
He was pale and aghast.

"Lady Mar," cried he, "not expecting to see you under a warrior's
casque--you will pardon me, that when so appareled I should not
immediately recognize the widow of my friend."

She gasped for articulation.

"And it is thus," cried she, "you answer the sacrifices I have made for
you?  For you I have committed an outrage on my nature; I have put on
me this abhorrent steel; I have braved the dangers of many a
hard-fought day, and all to guard your life! to convince you of a love
unexampled in woman! and thus you recognize her who has risked honor
and life for you--with coldness and reproach!"

"With neither, Lady Mar," returned he, "I am grateful for the generous
motives of your conduct; but for the sake of the fair fame you confess
you have endangered, in respect to the memory of him whose name you
bear, I cannot but wish that so hazardous an instance of interest in me
had been left undone."

"If that is all," returned she, drawing toward him, "it is in your
power to ward from me every stigma!  Who will dare to cast one
reflection on my fair fame when you bear testimony to my purity?  Who
will asperse the name of Mar when you displace it with that of Wallace?
Make me yours, dearest of men," cried she, clasping his hands, "and
you will receive one to your heart who never knew how to love before,
who will be to you what your heart who never knew how to love before,
who will be to you what woman never yet was, and who will endow you
with territories nearly equal to those of the King of Scotland.  My
father is no more; and now, as Countess of Strathearn and Princess of
the Orkneys, I have it in my power to earn and Princess of the Orkneys,
I have it in my power to bring a sovereignty to your head, and the
fondest of wives to your bosom."  As she vehemently spoke, and clung to
Wallace, as if she had already a right to seek comfort within his arms,
her tears and violent agitations so disconcerted him that for a few
moments he could not find a reply.  This short endurance of her passion
aroused her almost drooping hopes, and intoxicated with so rapturous an
illusion, she threw off the little restraint in which the awe of
Wallace's coldness had confined her, and flinging herself on his
breast, poured forth all her love and fond ambitions for him.  In vain
he attempted to interrupt her, to raise her with gentleness from her
indecorous situation; she had no perception but the idea which had now
taken possession of her heart, and whispering to him softly, said: "Be
but my husband, Wallace, and all rights shall perish before my love and
your aggrandizement.  In these arms, you shall bless the day you first
saw Joanna of Strathearn!"

The prowess of the Knight of the Green Plume, the respect he owed to
the widow of the Earl of Mar, the tenderness he ever felt for all of
womankind, were all forgotten in the disgusting blandishments of this
disgrace to her sex.  She wooed to be his wife, but not with the chaste
appeal of the widow of Mahlon.  "Let me find favor in thy sight, for
thou hast comforted me!  Spread thy garment over me, and let me be thy
wife!" said the fair Moabitess who in a strange land cast herself at
the feet of her deceased husband's friend.  She was answered, "I will
do all that thou requirest, for thou art a virtuous woman!"  But
neither the actions nor the words of Lady Mar bore witness that she
deserved this appellation.  The were the dictates of a passion impure
as it was intemperate.  Blinded by its fumes, she forgot the nature of
the heart she sought to pervert to sympathy with hers.  She saw not
that every look and movement on her part filled Wallace with aversion,
and not until he forcibly broke from her did she doubt the success of
her fond caresses.

"Lady mar," said he, "I must repeat that I am not ungrateful for the
proofs of regard you have bestowed on me; but such excess of attachment
is lavished upon a man that is a bankrupt in love.  I am cold as
monumental marble to every touch of that passion to which I was once
but too entirely devoted.  Bereaved of the object, I am punished; thus
is my heart doomed to solitude on earth for having made an idol of the
angel that was sent to cheer my path to Heaven."  Wallace said even
more than this.  He remonstrated with her on the shipwreck she was
making of her own happiness, in adhering thus tenaciously to a man who
could only regard her with the general sentiment of esteem.  He urged
her beauty and yet youthful years, and how many would be eager to win
her love, and to marry her with honor.  While he continued to speak to
her with the tender consideration of a brother, she, who knew no
gradations in the affections of the heart, doubted his words, and
believed that a latent fire glowed in his breast which her art might
yet blow into a flame.  She threw herself upon her knees, she wept, she
implored his pity, she wound her arms around his, and bathed his hands
with her tears, but still he continued to urge her, by every argument
of female delicacy, to relinquish her ill-directed love, to return to
her domains before her absence could be generally known.  She looked up
to read his countenance.  A friend's anxiety, nay, authority, was
there, but no glow of passion; all was calm and determined.  Her
beauty, then, had been shown to a man without eyes, her tender
eloquence poured on an ear that was deaf, her blandishments lavished on
a block of marble!  In a paroxysm of despair she dashed the hand she
held far from her, and standing proudly on her feet--"Hear me, thou man
of stone!" cried she, "and answer me on your life and honor, for both
depend on your reply; is Joanna of Strathearn to be your wife?"

"Cease to urge me, unhappy lady," returned Wallace; "you already know
the decision of this ever-widowed heart."

Lady Mar looked steadfastly at him.

"Then receive my last determination!" and drawing near him with a
desperate and portentous countenance, as if she meant to whisper in his
ear, she suddenly plucked St. Louis' dagger from his girdle and struck
it into his breast.  He caught the hand which grasped the hilt.  Her
eyes glared with the fury of a maniac, and, with a horrid laugh, she
exclaimed: "I have slain thee, insolent triumpher in my love and
agonies!  Thou shalt not now deride me in the arms of thy minion; for,
I know that it is not for the dead Marion you have trampled on my heart
but for the living Helen!"

As she spoke, he moved her hold from the dagger, and drew the weapon
from the wound.  A torrent of blood flowed over his vest, and stained
