regarded as the champion of Protestantism against Popery, and who
combined in himself a remarkable mixture of qualities seldom found
existing in one person. He was brave to excess and apparently
reckless in action, and yet astute, prudent, and calculating in
council. With a manner frank, open, and winning, he was yet able to
match the craftiest of opponents at their own weapons of scheming
and duplicity. The idol of the Huguenots of France, he was ready to
purchase the crown of France at the price of accepting the Catholic
doctrines, for he saw that it was hopeless for him in the long run
to maintain himself against the hostility of almost all the great
nobles of France, backed by the great proportion of the people and
aided by the pope and the Catholic powers, so long as he remained
a Protestant. But this change of creed was scarcely even foreseen
by those who followed him, and it was the apparent hopelessness
of his cause, and the gallantry with which he maintained it, that
attracted the admiration of Europe.

Henry's capital was at the time garrisoned by the troops of the
pope and Spain. The great nobles of France, who had long maintained
a sort of semi independence of the crown, were all against him,
and were calculating on founding independent kingdoms. He himself
was excommunicated. The League were masters of almost the whole
of France, and were well supplied with funds by the pope and the
Catholic powers while Henry was entirely dependent for money upon
what he could borrow from Queen Elizabeth and the States of Holland.
But no one who listened to the merry laugh of the king as he chatted
with the little group of English gentlemen would have thought that
he was engaged in a desperate and well nigh hopeless struggle, and
that the following day was to be a decisive one as to his future
fortunes.

"Well, gentlemen," he said as he turned his horse to ride away,
"I must ask you to lie down as soon as possible. As long as the
officers are awake and talking the men cannot sleep; and I want
all to have a good night's rest. The enemy's camp is close at hand
and the battle is sure to take place at early dawn."

As the same orders were given everywhere, the camp was quiet early,
and before daylight the troops were called under arms and ranged
in the order appointed for them to fight in.

The army of the League was astir in equally good time. In its
centre was the battalia composed of six hundred splendid cavalry,
all noblemen of France, supported by a column of three hundred Swiss
and two thousand French infantry. On the left were six hundred French
cuirassiers and the eighteen hundred troops of Parma, commanded by
Count Egmont. They were supported by six regiments of French and
Lorrainers, and two thousand Germans. The right wing was composed
of three regiments of Spanish lancers, two troops of Germans, four
hundred cuirassiers, and four regiments of infantry.

When the sun rose and lighted up the contending armies, the difference
between their appearance was very marked. That of the League was
gay with the gilded armour, waving plumes, and silken scarfs of the
French nobles, whose banners fluttered brightly in the air, while
the Walloons and Flemish rivalled their French comrades in the
splendour of their appointments. In the opposite ranks there was
neither gaiety not show. The Huguenot nobles and gentlemen, who had
for so many years been fighting for life and religion, were clad
in armour dinted in a hundred battlefields; and while the nobles
of the League were confident of victory and loud in demanding
to be led against the foe, Henry of Navarre and his soldiers were
kneeling, praying to the God of battles to enable them to bear
themselves well in the coming fight. Henry of Navarre wore in his
helmet a snow white plume, which he ordered his troops to keep in
view, and to follow wherever they should see it waving, in case
his banner went down.

Artillery still played but a small part in battles on the field
and there were but twelve pieces on the ground, equally divided
between the two armies. These opened the battle, and Count Egmont,
whose cavalry had suffered from the fire of the Huguenot cannon,
ordered a charge, and the splendid cavalry of Parma swept down
upon the right wing of Henry. The cavalry under Marshal Biron were
unable to withstand the shock and were swept before them, and Egmont
rode on right up to the guns and sabred the artillerymen. Almost
at the same moment the German riders under Eric of Brunswick, the
Spanish and French lancers, charged down upon the centre of the
Royal Army. The rout of the right wing shook the cavalry in the
centre. They wavered, and the infantry on their flanks fell back but
the king and his officers rode among them, shouting and entreating
them to stand firm. The ground in their front was soft and checked
the impetuosity of the charge of the Leaguers, and by the time they
reached the ranks of the Huguenots they were broken and disordered,
and could make no impression whatever upon them.

As soon as the charge was repulsed, Henry set his troops in motion,
and the battalia charged down upon the disordered cavalry of the
League. The lancers and cuirassiers were borne down by the impetuosity
of the charge, and Marshal Biron, rallying his troops, followed
the king's white plume into the heart of the battle. Egmont brought
up the cavalry of Flanders to the scene, and was charging at their
head when he fell dead with a musketball through the heart.

Brunswick went down in the fight, and the shattered German and
Walloon horse were completely overthrown and cut to pieces by the
furious charges of the Huguenot cavalry.

At one time the victorious onset was checked by the disappearance
of the king's snow white plumes, and a report ran through the army
that the king was killed. They wavered irresolutely. The enemy,
regaining courage from the cessation of their attacks, were again
advancing, when the king reappeared bareheaded and covered with
dust and blood, but entirely unhurt. He addressed a few cheerful
words to his soldiers, and again led the charge. It was irresistible;
the enemy broke and fled in the wildest confusion hotly pursued by
the royalist cavalry, while the infantry of the League, who had so
far taken no part whatever in the battle, were seized with a panic,
threw away their arms, and sought refuge in the woods in their
rear.

Thus the battle was decided only by the cavalry, the infantry taking
no part in the fight on either side. Eight hundred of the Leaguers
either fell on the battlefield or were drowned in crossing the
river in their rear. The loss of the royalists was but one fourth
in number. Had the king pushed forward upon Paris immediately
after the battle, the city would probably have surrendered without
a blow; and the Huguenot leaders urged this course upon him. Biron
and the other Catholics, however, argued that it was better to
undertake a regular siege, and the king yielded to this advice,
although the bolder course would have been far more in accordance
with his own disposition.

He was probably influenced by a variety of motives. In the first
place his Swiss mercenaries were in a mutinous condition, and
refused to advance a single foot unless they received their arrears
of pay, and this Henry, whose chests were entirely empty, had no
means of providing. In the second place he was at the time secretly
in negotiation with the pope for his conversion, and may have feared
to give so heavy a blow to the Catholic cause as would have been
effected by the capture of Paris following closely after the victory
of Ivry. At any rate he determined upon a regular siege. Moving
forward he seized the towns of Lagny on the Maine, and Corbeil on
the Seine, thus entirely cutting off the food supply of Paris.

Lionel Vickars had borne his part in the charges of the Huguenot
cavalry, but as the company to which he belonged was in the rear
of the battalia, he had no personal encounters with the enemy.

After the advance towards Paris the duties of the cavalry consisted
entirely in scouting the country, sweeping in provisions for their
own army, and preventing supplies from entering Paris. No siege
operations were undertaken, the king relying upon famine alone to
reduce the city. Its population at the time the siege commenced was
estimated at 400,000, and the supply of provisions to be sufficient
for a month. It was calculated therefore that before the League
could bring up another army to its relief, it must fall by famine.

But no allowance had been made for the religious enthusiasm and
devotion to the cause of the League that animated the population
of Paris. Its governor, the Duke of Nemours, brother of Mayenne,
aided by the three Spanish delegates, the Cardinal Gaetano,
and by an army of priests and monks, sustained the spirits of the
population; and though the people starved by thousands, the city
resisted until towards the end of August. In that month the army
of the League, united with twelve thousand foot and three thousand
horse from the Netherlands under Parma himself, advanced to its
assistance; while Maurice of Holland, with a small body of Dutch
troops and reinforcements from England, had strengthened the army
of the king.

The numbers of the two armies were not unequal. Many of the French
nobles had rallied round Henry after his victory, and of his cavalry
four thousand were nobles and their retainers who served at their
own expense, and were eager for a battle. Parma himself had doubts
as to the result of the conflict. He could rely upon the troops he
himself had brought, but had no confidence in those of the League;
and when Henry sent him a formal challenge to a general engagement,
Parma replied that it was his custom to refuse combat when a refusal
seemed advantageous for himself, and to offer battle whenever it
suited his purpose to fight.

For seven days the two armies, each some twenty-five thousand
strong, lay within a mile or two of each other. Then the splendid
cavalry of Parma moved out in order of battle, with banners flying,
and the pennons of the lances fluttering in the wind. The king
was delighted when he saw that the enemy were at last advancing to
the fight. He put his troops at once under arms, but waited until
the plan of the enemy's battle developed itself before making his
dispositions. But while the imposing array of cavalry was attracting
the king's attention, Parma moved off with the main body of his
army, threw a division across the river on a pontoon bridge, and
attacked Lagny on both sides.

When Lagny was first occupied some of Sir Ralph Pimpernel's party
were appointed to take up their quarters there, half a company of
the English, who had come with them from Holland, were also stationed
in the town, the garrison being altogether 1200 strong. Lionel's
horse had received a bullet wound at Ivry and although it carried
him for the next day or two, it was evident that it needed rest
and attention and would be unfit to carry his rider for some time.
Lionel had no liking for the work of driving off the cattle of the
unfortunate land owners and peasants, however necessary it might
be to keep the army supplied with food, and was glad of the excuse
that his wounded horse afforded him for remaining quietly in the
town when his comrades rode out with the troop of cavalry stationed
there. It happened that the officer in command of the little body
of English infantry was taken ill with fever, and Sir Ralph Pimpernel
requested Lionel to take his place. This he was glad to do, as he
was more at home at infantry work than with cavalry. The time went
slowly, but Lionel, who had comfortable quarters in the house of
a citizen, did not find it long. The burgher's family consisted
of his wife and two daughters, and these congratulated themselves
greatly upon having an officer quartered upon them who not only
acted as a protection to them against the insolence of the rough
soldiery, but was courteous and pleasant in his manner, and tried
in every way to show that he regarded himself as a guest and not
a master.

After the first week's stay he requested that instead of having
his meals served to him in a room apart he might take them with
the family. The girls were about Lionel's age, and after the first
constraint wore off he became great friends with them; and although
at first he had difficulty in making himself understood, he readily
picked up a little French, the girls acting as his teachers.

"What do you English do here?" the eldest of them asked him when
six weeks after his arrival they were able to converse fairly in
a mixture of French and Spanish. "Why do you not leave us French
people to fight out our quarrels by ourselves?"

"I should put it the other way," Lionel laughed. "Why don't you
French people fight out your quarrels among yourselves instead of
calling in foreigners to help you? It is because the Guises and the
League have called in the Spaniards to fight on the Catholic side
that the English and Dutch have come to help the Huguenots. We are
fighting the battle of our own religion here, not the battle of
Henry of Navarre."

"I hate these wars of religion," the girl said. "Why can we not
all worship in our own way?"

"Ah, that is what we Protestants want to know, Mademoiselle Claire;
that is just what your people won't allow. Did you not massacre
the Protestants in France on the eve of St. Bartholomew? and have
not the Spaniards been for the last twenty years trying to stamp
out with fire and sword the new religion in the Low Countries? We
only want to be left alone."

"But your queen of England kills the Catholics."

"Not at all," Lionel said warmly; "that is only one of the stories
they spread to excuse their own doings. It is true that Catholics
in England have been put to death, and so have people of the sect
that call themselves Anabaptists; but this has been because they
had been engaged in plots against the queen, and not because of
their religion. The Catholics of England for the most part joined
as heartily as the Protestants in the preparations for the defence of
England in the time of the Armada. For my part, I cannot understand
why people should quarrel with each other because they worship God
in different ways."

"It is all very bad, I am sure," the girl said; "France has been
torn to pieces by these religious wars for years and years. It is
dreadful to think what they must be suffering in Paris now."

"Then why don't they open their gates to King Henry instead of
starving themselves at the orders of the legate of the pope and the
agent of Philip of Spain? I could understand if there was another
French prince whom they wanted as king instead of Henry of Navarre.
We fought for years in England as to whether we would have a king
from the house of York or the house of Lancaster, but when it comes
to choosing between a king of your own race and a king named for
you by Philip of Spain, I can't understand it."

"Never mind, Master Vickars. You know what you are fighting for,
don't you?"

"I do; I am fighting here to aid Holland. Parma is bringing all his
troops to aid the Guise here, and while they are away the Dutch will
take town after town, and will make themselves so strong that when
Parma goes back he will find the nut harder than ever to crack."

"How long will Paris hold out, think you, Master Vickars? They say
that provisions are well nigh spent."

"Judging from the way in which the Dutch towns held on for weeks
and weeks after, as it seemed, all supplies were exhausted, I should
say that if the people of Paris are as ready to suffer rather than
yield as were the Dutch burghers, they may hold on for a long time
yet. It is certain that no provisions can come to them as long as
we hold possession of this town, and so block the river."

"But if the armies of Parma and the League come they may drive you
away, Master Vickars."

"It is quite possible, mademoiselle; we do not pretend to be
invincible, but I think there will be some tough fighting first."

As the weeks went on Lionel Vickars came to be on very intimate
terms with the family. The two maidservants shared in the general
liking for the young officer. He gave no more trouble than if he
were one of the family, and on one or two occasions when disturbances
were caused by the ill conduct of the miscellaneous bands which
constituted the garrison, he brought his half company of English
soldiers at once into the house, and by his resolute attitude
prevented the marauders from entering.

When Parma's army approached Sir Ralph Pimpernel with the cavalry
joined the king, but Lionel shared in the disappointment felt by
all the infantry of the garrison of Lagny that they could take no
share in the great battle that was expected. Their excitement rose
high while the armies lay watching each other. From the position
of the town down by the river neither army was visible from its
walls, and they only learned when occasional messengers rode in
how matters were going on. One morning Lionel was awoke by a loud
knocking at his door. "What is it?" he shouted, as he sat up in
bed.

"It is I--Timothy Short, Master Vickars. The sergeant has sent me
to wake you in all haste. The Spaniards have stolen a march upon
us. They have thrown a bridge across the river somewhere in the
night, and most all their army stands between us and the king while
a division are preparing to besiege the town on the other side."
Lionel was hastily throwing on his clothes and arming himself while
the man was speaking.

"Tell the sergeant," he said, "to get the men under arms. I will
be with him in a few minutes."

When Lionel went out he found that the household was already astir.

"Go not out fasting," his host said. "Take a cup of wine and some
food before you start. You may be some time before you get an
opportunity of eating again if what they say is true."

"Thank you heartily," Lionel replied as he sat down to the table,
on which some food had already been placed; "it is always better
to fight full than fasting."

"Hark you!" the bourgeois said in his ear; "if things go badly with
you make your way here. I have a snug hiding place, and I shall take
refuge there with my family if the Spaniards capture the town. I
have heard of their doings in Holland, and that when they capture
a town they spare neither age nor sex, and slay Catholics as well
as Protestants; therefore I shall take refuge till matters have
quieted down and order is restored. I shall set to work at once
to carry my valuables there, and a goodly store of provisions. My
warehouse man will remain in charge above. He is faithful and can
be trusted, and he will tell the Spaniards that I am a good Catholic,
and lead them to believe that I fled with my family before the
Huguenots entered the town."

"Thank you greatly," Lionel replied; "should the need arise I will
take advantage of your kind offer. But it should not do so. We have
twelve hundred men here, and half that number of citizens have kept
the Spaniards at bay for months before towns no stronger than this
in Holland. We ought to be able to defend ourselves here for weeks,
and the king will assuredly come to our relief in two or three days
at the outside."

Upon Lionel sallying out he found the utmost confusion and disorder
reigning. The commandant was hurriedly assigning to the various
companies composing the garrison their places upon the walls.
Many of the soldiers were exclaiming that they had been betrayed,
and that it were best to make terms with the Spaniards at once.
The difference between the air of a quiet resolution that marked
the conduct of the people and troops at Sluys and the excitement
manifested here struck Lionel unpleasantly. The citizens all
remained in their houses, afraid lest the exultation they felt at
the prospect of deliverance would be so marked as to enrage the
soldiery. Lionel's own company was standing quietly and in good
order in the marketplace, and as soon as he received orders as to
the point that he should occupy on the walls Lionel marched them
away.

In half an hour the Spanish batteries, which had been erected during
the night, opened fire upon several points of the walls. The town
was ill provided with artillery, and the answer was feeble, and
before evening several breaches had been effected, two of the gates
blown in, and the Spaniards, advanced to the assault. Lionel and
his company, with one composed of Huguenot gentlemen and their
retainers and another of Germans defended the gate at which they were
posted with great bravery, and succeeded in repulsing the attacks
of the Spaniards time after time. The latter pressed forward in heavy
column, only to recoil broken and shattered from the archway, which
was filled high with their dead. The defenders had just succeeded
in repulsing the last of these attacks, when some soldiers ran by
shouting "All is lost, the Spaniards have entered the town at three
points!"

The German company at once disbanded and scattered. The Huguenot
noble said to Lionel: "I fear that the news is true; listen to the
shouts and cries in the town behind us. I will march with my men
and see if there is any chance of beating back the Spaniards; if
not it were best to lay down our arms and ask for quarter. Will
you try to hold this gate until I return?"

"I will do so," Lionel said; "but I have only about thirty men left,
and if the Spaniards come on again we cannot hope to repulse them."

"If I am not back in ten minutes it will be because all is lost,"
the Huguenot said; "and you had then best save yourself as you
can."

But long before the ten minutes passed crowds of fugitives ran past,
and Lionel learned that great numbers of the enemy had entered,
and that they were refusing quarter and slaying all they met.

"It is useless to stay here longer to be massacred," he said to his
men. "I should advise you to take refuge in the churches, leaving
your arms behind you as you enter. It is evident that further
resistance is useless, and would only cost us our lives. The Spaniards
are twenty to one, and it is evident that all hope of resistance
is at an end." The men were only too glad to accept the advice, and
throwing down their arms, hurried away. Lionel sheathed his sword,
and with the greatest difficulty made his way through the scene of
wild confusion to the house where he had lodged. The doors of most
of the houses were fast closed and the inhabitants were hurling
down missiles of all kinds from the upper windows upon their
late masters. The triumphant shouts of the Spaniards rose loud in
the air, mingled with despairing cries and the crack of firearms.
Lionel had several narrow escapes from the missiles thrown from the
windows and roofs, but reached the house of the merchant safely.
The door was half opened.

"Thanks be to heaven that you have come. I had well nigh given you
up, and in another minute should have closed the door. The women
are all below, but I waited until the last minute for you."

Barring the door Lionel's host led the way downstairs into a great
cellar, which served as a warehouse, and extended under the whole
house. He made his way through the boxes and bales to the darkest
corner of the great cellar. Here he pulled up a flag and showed
another narrow stair, at the bottom of which a torch was burning.
Bidding Lionel descend he followed him, lowered the flag behind him,
and then led the way along a narrow passage, at the end of which
was a door. Opening it Lionel found himself in an arched chamber.
Two torches were burning, and the merchant's wife and daughters
and the two female domestics were assembled. There was a general
exclamation of gladness as Lionel entered.

"We have been greatly alarmed," the mercer's wife said, "lest you
