he must make his own choice. I shall beg him to hand to you at once
the money which I placed in his care now a year ago. Do you hand
it over to the woman you speak of, and ask her to hide it away in
the caves till you ask for it again; these Christians are to be
trusted. I have much money besides, for Nero is lavishly generous,
and it would anger him to refuse his bounty. This money I have
placed in several hands, some in Rome, some elsewhere, so that if
forced to fly I can at any rate obtain some of my store without
having to run into danger."

"One more question, Beric. Should I ever have to take refuge among
the Christians, and like Ennia come to love their doctrines, would
you be angered if I joined their sect? If you would I will not
listen to them, but will tell them that I cannot talk or think of
these things without my husband's consent."

"You are free to do as you like, Aemilia. Since Ennia died I have
resolved upon the first opportunity to study the doctrines of these
people, for truly it must be a wonderful religion that enables
those who profess it to meet a cruel death not only without fear
but with joy. You know Ennia said we should meet again, and I think
she meant that I, too, should become a Christian. Ask the woman if
I also, as a last resource, may take refuge among them."

"I will ask her, Beric; but I am sure they will gladly receive you.
Have you not already risked your life to save a Christian?"

The other guests having now left, Norbanus joined them, and Beric
told him of the arrangements they had made in case of danger. He
warmly approved of them.

"It will be a relief to me as to you, Beric, to know that Aemilia's
safety is provided for. As for myself, fate has no terrors for me;
but for you and her it is different. She is yours now, for although
but betrothed she is virtually your wife. You have but to take her
by the hand and to declare her your wife in the presence of witnesses,
and all is done. There is, it is true, a religious ceremony in use
only among the wealthier classes, but this is rather an occasion
for pomp and feasting, and is by no means needful, especially as
you have no faith in the Roman gods. What are the rites among your
own people, Beric?"

"We simply take a woman by the hand and declare her our wife. Then
there is feasting, and the bride is carried home, and there is the
semblance of a fight, the members of her family making a show of
preventing us; but this is no part of the actual rite, which is
merely public assent on both sides. And now I must be going. Nero
will be feasting for a long time yet; but Boduoc has been on guard
for many hours and I must relieve him. Farewell, Norbanus; we have
been preparing for the worst, but I trust we shall escape misfortune.
Farewell, my Aemilia!" and kissing her tenderly Beric strode away
to the palace of Nero.

He had not seen Boduoc since early morning, and the latter, standing
on guard outside the private entrance to Nero's apartments, greeted
his arrival, "Why, Beric, I began to fear that some harm had befallen
you. I came in this morning after the bath and found you had gone
out. I returned again at six and found your chamber again empty,
but saw that you had returned during my absence; I went on guard,
and here have I been for four hours listening to all that foolish
singing and laughter inside. How Caesar, who has the world at his
command, can spend his time with actors and buffoons, is more than
I can understand. But what has kept you?"

As there was no fear of his voice being heard through the heavy
hangings, Beric, to Boduoc's intense surprise, related the events
of the day.

"So you have married a Roman girl, Beric! Well, I suspected what
would come of it when you spent half your time at the house of
Norbanus. I would rather that you had married one of our own maidens;
but as I see no chance of our return to Britain for years, if ever,
one could hardly expect you to wait for that. At any rate she is
the best of the Roman maidens I have seen. She neither dyes her
hair nor paints her face, and although she lacks stature, she is
comely, and is always bright and pleasant when I have accompanied
you there. I am inclined to feel half jealous that you have another
to love you besides myself, but I will try and not grudge her a
share of your affection."

"Well, hand me your sword, Boduoc, and betake yourself to your
bed. I will remain on guard for the next four hours, or until the
feasting is over. Nero often opens the hangings the last thing to
see if we are watchful, and he likes to see me at my post. I wish
to find him in a good temper in the morning."

The next morning, to Beric's satisfaction, Nero came into the
library early. Chiton, as was his custom, retired at once.

"I was inspired last night, Beric," the emperor said. "Listen to
these verses I composed at the table;" and he recited some stanzas
in praise of wine.

"I am no great judge of these matters, Caesar," Beric said; "but
they seem to me to be admirable indeed. How could it be otherwise,
when even the Greeks awarded you the crown for your recitations at
their contests? Yesterday was a fortunate day for me, also, Caesar,
for Norbanus betrothed his daughter to me."

The emperor's face clouded, and Beric hastened to say:

"There is no talk of marriage at present, Caesar, for marriage
would interfere with my duties to you. Therefore it is only when
you have no longer an occasion for my services that the betrothal
will be converted into marriage. My first duty is to you, and I
shall allow nothing to interfere with that."

Nero's face cleared. "That is right," he said graciously. "You might
have married better, seeing that you enjoy my favour; but perhaps
it is as well as it is. Norbanus is a worthy man and a good official,
although his ideas are old fashioned; but it is reported of him
that he thinks of nothing but his work, and mixes himself up in no
way in politics, living the life almost of a recluse. It was one of
his daughters you championed in the arena. She died soon afterwards,
I heard. Has he other children?"

"Only the maiden I am betrothed to, Caesar. He is now alone, for
his wife has long been altogether separated from him, being devoted
to gaiety and belonging to a family richer and more powerful than
his, and looking down upon her husband as a mere bookworm. He has
borne with her neglect and disobedience to his wishes for a long
time, and has shown, as it seemed to me, far too great a weakness
in exerting his authority; but his patience has at last failed,
and when yesterday, in defiance of him, she would have interfered
to prevent my betrothal to his daughter, he divorced her."

"Divorce is the fashion," Nero said carelessly. "I know his wife
Lesbia, she has frequently been present with members of her family
at my entertainments. She is a fine woman, and I wonder not that
she and the recluse her husband did not get on well together. She
will soon be consoled."

"I have mentioned it to you, Caesar, because she is a revengeful
woman, and might cause rumours unfavourable to her husband to be
reported to you. He is the most simple and single minded of men,
and his thoughts are entirely occupied, as you say, with the duties
of his office and with the learned book upon which he has long been
engaged; but although a philosopher in his habits he holds aloof
from all parties, and even in his own family never discusses
public affairs. Had it been otherwise, you may be sure that I, your
majesty's attendant and guard, should have abstained from visiting
his house."

"I know this to be the case, Beric. Naturally, when I first placed
you near my person, I was interested in knowing who were your
intimates, and caused strict inquiries to be made as to the household
of Norbanus and his associates; all that I heard was favourable to
him, and convinced me that he was in no way a dangerous person."

Nero left the room, and returned shortly bearing a casket. "Give
these jewels to your betrothed, Beric, as a present from Caesar to
the wife of his faithful guard."

Beric thanked the emperor in becoming terms, and in the afternoon
carried the jewels, which were of great value, to Aemilia.

"They are a fortune in themselves," he said; "in case of danger,
take them from the casket and conceal them in your garments. No
one could have been more cordial than Nero was this morning; but
he is fickle as the wind, and when Rufinus and others of his boon
companions obtain his ear his mood may change altogether."



CHAPTER XVIII: THE OUTBREAK


It was not long, indeed, before Beric found that hostile influences
were at work. Nero was not less friendly in his manner, but he more
than once spoke to him about Aemilia.

"I hear," he said one day, "that your betrothed is very beautiful
Beric."

"She is very fair, Caesar," Beric replied coldly.

"I know not how it is that I have not seen her at court," Nero
continued.

"Her tastes are like those of her father," Beric said. "She goes but
seldom abroad, and has long had the principal care of her father's
household."

"But you should bring her now," Nero persisted. "The wife of one of
the officials of the palace should have a place at our entertainments."

"She is not at present my wife, Caesar, she is but my betrothed; and
as you have yourself excused me from attendance at all entertainments,
it would be unseemly for her, a Roman maiden, though betrothed to
me, to appear there."

"There are plenty of other Roman maidens who appear there," Nero
said pettishly. Beric made no reply, and the subject was not again
alluded to at that time; but the emperor returned to it on other
occasions, and Beric at last was driven to refuse point blank.

"I am your majesty's guard," he said. "I watch you at night as well
as by day, and, as I have told your majesty, I cannot perform my
duties properly if I have to be present at your entertainments. I
should not permit my wife or my betrothed to be present in public
unless I were by her side. Your majesty took me for what I was, a
simple Briton, who could be relied upon as a guard, because I had
neither friends nor family in Rome, and was content to live a simple
and quiet life. I am willing to abstain from marriage in order that
I may still do my service as heretofore; but if I have to attend
entertainments, you cannot rely upon my constant vigilance. It is
for you to choose, Caesar, whether you most require vigilant guards,
who could be trusted as standing aloof from all, or the addition
of two persons to the crowds you entertain. I am sure, Caesar," he
went on as the emperor made no reply, "it is not yourself who is
now speaking to me; it is Rufinus, formerly a suitor for the hand
of the daughter of Norbanus, who has been whispering into your ear
and abusing the favour you show him. He dare not show his animosity
to me openly, for one who has conquered a lion would make but short
work of him. Your majesty, I pray you, let not the word of men like
this come between yourself and one you know to be faithful to you."

"You are right, Beric," Nero said. "I will press you no farther;
it was but a passing thought. I had heard of the beauty of your
betrothed, and though I would see if she were as fair as report
makes her; but since you do not wish it to be so, it shall not be
spoken of again."

But Beric knew enough of Nero to be aware that, like most weak
men, he was obstinate, and that Rufinus and his friends would not
allow the matter to drop. Every preparation was therefore made for
sudden flight. Aemilia was warned on no account to trust any message
she might receive purporting to be from him, and the Britons in the
palace, who were heartily sick of their monotonous duty, were told
to hold themselves in readiness for action. Beric knew that he could
depend on the slave who had been assigned to him as an attendant.
He was not the man who had at first served him, and who, as Beric
doubted not, had acted as a spy upon him. When it was found that
there was nothing to discover this man had been removed for other
work, and a slave boy of some seventeen years old had taken his
place. To him Beric had behaved with great kindness, and the lad
was deeply attached to him. He had several times taken notes and
messages to the house of Norbanus, and Beric told Aemilia that
when it became necessary to send her the ring, he should probably
intrust it to him.

A week later Boduoc was on guard at ten in the evening. In the distant
banqueting hall he could hear sounds of laughter and revelry, and
knowing the nature of these feasts he muttered angrily to himself
that he, a Briton, should be standing there while such things
were being done within. Suddenly he heard a step approaching the
hangings. They were drawn back, and one of the court attendants
said, "Caesar requires the attendance of Beric the Briton in the
banqueting hall."

"I will tell him," Boduoc said. "He will come directly." Beric was
sitting reading when Boduoc entered and gave the message.

"This means mischief, Boduoc," he said. "I have never been sent
for before to one of these foul carousals. Philo, come hither!"

The lad, who was lying on a mat by the door, rose. "Philo, take
this ring. Follow me to the door of the banqueting room, and stand
behind the hangings. If I say 'Run, Philo!' carry out the orders
that I have before given you. Speed first to the room where the
Britons sleep, and tell them to arm and come up by the private
stairs to my room instantly. They know the way. They are then to
pass on through the passage and the next room and wait behind the
hangings, when Boduoc will give them orders. Directly you have
given my message speed to the house of Norbanus, and demand in my
name to see the lady Aemilia. If she has retired to her room she
must be roused. If the slaves make difficulty, appeal to Norbanus
himself. He will fetch her down to you. Give her this ring, and
say the time has come."

"I will do it, my lord. Where am I to join you afterwards?"

"I shall take the road to the Alban Hills first; I think that if
you are speedy, you may be on the Alban road before me. Now follow
me. Boduoc, do you come as far as the hangings of the banqueting
room, and stand there with Philo. You will be able to hear what
passes within. Do not enter unless I call you. Bring my sword with
you."

Beric passed through two or three large apartments and then entered
the banqueting room. It was ablaze with lights. A dozen men and as
many women, in the scantiest costumes, lay on couches along each
side of the table. All were crowned with chaplets of flowers, and
were half covered with roses, of which showers had fallen from
above upon them. Nero lay on a couch at the end of the table; his
features were flushed with wine. Beric repressed the exclamation
of indignant disgust that rose to his lips, and walking calmly up
to Nero said coldly, "I am told that you want me, Caesar."

"I do, my fighter of lions," Nero said unsteadily. "I would see
this paragon of whom Rufinus tells me, whom you guard so jealously
from my eyes. Send and fetch her hither. She will be a worthy queen
of our revels."

"It is an honour to me to obey your majesty's commands in all matters
that regard myself," Beric said; "but in regard to my promised
wife, no! This is no place for a Roman lady; and even at the risk
of your displeasure, Caesar, I refuse to dishonour her by bringing
her into such an assembly."

"I told you he would refuse, Caesar," Rufinus, who was lying on
the couch next to Nero, laughed.

Nero was speechless with surprise and anger at Beric's calm refusal
to obey his orders. "Do I understand," he said at last, "that you
refuse to obey me?"

"I do, Caesar. It is not a lawful command, and I distinctly refuse
to obey it."

"Then, by the gods, your life is forfeit!" Nero said, rising to
his feet.

"You may thank your gods, Caesar, that I have more sense of honour
than you. Were it otherwise, I would strike you dead at my feet.
But a British chief disdains to fight an unarmed foe, and I who have
eaten your bread and taken your wages am doubly bound not to lift
my hand against you." Then he lifted his voice and cried, "Run,
Philo!"

The revellers by this time had all started to their feet. Nero,
shrinking backwards behind them, called loudly for help. Rufinus,
who had shown bravery in the wars, drew a dagger from beneath his
toga and sprang at Beric. The latter caught his uplifted wrist, and
with a sharp wrench forced him to drop the weapon; then he seized
him in his grasp. "You shall do no more mischief, Rufinus," he
said, and raising him in his arms hurled him with tremendous force
against a marble pillar, where he fell inert and lifeless, his
skull being completely beaten in by the blow.

The hall rang with the shrieks of women and the shouts of men.
There was a sound of heavy footsteps, and eight of the Praetorian
guards, with drawn swords, ran in on the other side of the chamber.
"Boduoc!" Beric shouted; and in a moment his follower stood beside
him and handed him his sword and buckler.

"Kill him!" Nero shouted frantically. "The traitor would have slain
me."

Beric and Boduoc stepped back to the door by which they had
entered, and awaited the onset of the Praetorians. For a moment
these hesitated, for Beric's figure was well known in the palace,
and not one of them but had heard of his encounter with the lion.
The emperor's shouts, however, overcame their reluctance, and
shoulder to shoulder they rushed forward to the attack. Two fell
instantly, helmet and head cloven by the swords of the Britons,
who at once took the offensive and drove the others before them,
slaying three more and putting the others to flight. But the success
was temporary, for now a great body of the guard poured into the
room.

"Step back through the doorway, Boduoc," Beric said; "their numbers
will not avail them then."

The doors were ten feet in width. This gave room to but three men
to enter at once and use their arms to advantage, and for two or
three minutes the Britons kept the Praetorians at bay, eight of
them having fallen beneath their blows; then there was a shout,
and the Roman soldiers came running in at a door at the end of the
chamber. "Fall back to the next door," Beric said; but as he spoke
there was a rush behind, and nineteen Britons ran into the room,
and uttering the war cry of the Iceni flung themselves upon the
Roman soldiers. These, taken by surprise at the sudden appearance
of these tall warriors, and ignorant of what further reinforcements
might be coming up, gave ground, and were speedily beaten back, a
score of them falling beneath the Britons' swords.

"Now retreat!" Beric cried as the room was cleared; "retreat at
full speed. Show them the way, Boduoc, by the staircase down into
the garden. Quick! there is not a moment to lose. I will guard the
rear."

They ran down the passage, through Beric's room, down a long
corridor, and then by stairs leading thence into the garden, which
was indeed a park of considerable size, with lakes, shrubberies,
and winding walks. The uproar in the palace was no longer heard by
the time they were halfway across the park; but they ran at full
speed until they reached a door in the wall. Of this Beric had
some time before obtained a key from the head gardener, and always
carried this about with him. As they stopped they looked back
towards the palace. Distant shouts could be heard, and the lights
of numbers of torches could be seen spreading out in all directions.

Beric opened the door and locked it behind him when all had passed
out. "Now," he said to his companions, "make your way down to the
road leading out to the Alban Hills. Break up and go singly, so
that you may not be noticed. It will be a good half hour before the
news of what has occurred is known beyond the palace. Do not pass
through the frequented streets, but move along the dark lanes as
much as possible. When half a mile beyond the city we will reunite."

An hour later the whole party were gathered beyond the city. All
were delighted to escape from what they considered slavery, and
the fact that they had again bucklers on their arms and swords by
their sides made them feel as if their freedom were already obtained.

"This puts one in mind of old times," Boduoc said joyously; "one
might think we were about to start on an expedition in the fens.
Well, they have taught us all somewhat more than we knew before,
and we will show them that the air of Rome has robbed us of none
of our strength. Where go we now, Beric?"

"First to the ludus of Scopus; I learned a week since that he had
taken his band out again to the Alban Hills for the hot season. I
believe that most of his men will join us, if not all. As soon as
the news is spread that we are in arms we could, if we wished it,
be joined by scores of gladiators from the other schools. There are
hundreds who would, if the standard of revolt were raised, prefer
dying fighting in the open to being slain to gratify a Roman mob."

"Ay, that there are," put in another of the band. "I have never
ceased to lament that I did not fall that day on our island in the
fens."

"Think you there will be pursuit, Beric?" another asked.

"No; the first thought of Nero will be to assemble all the
Praetorians for his protection; they will search the palace and
the park, expecting attack rather than thinking of pursuit. In the
morning, when they find that all is quiet, and that it is indeed
only us with whom there is trouble, they will doubtless send parties
of searchers over the country; but long before that we shall be a
day's march ahead. My wish is to gain the mountains. I do not want
to head a great rebellion against Rome--disaster would surely
come of it at last, and I should have only led men to their death.
A hundred men is the outside number I will take. With that number
we may live as outlaws among the mountains to the south; we could
move so rapidly that large forces could not follow us, and be
strong enough to repulse small ones. There is plenty of game among
the hills, and we should live as we did at home, chiefly by hunting."

Just as they were approaching the hills a quick step was heard
behind them, and the lad Philo ran up.

"Ah, you have overtaken us, Philo! 'tis well, lad, for your life
would have been forfeited had you stayed in Rome.

"Well," he asked, drawing him aside, "you saw the lady Aemilia.
What said she?"

"She said, 'Tell my lord that I obey, but that I pray him to let
me join him and share his dangers if it be possible; but be it
tomorrow or five years hence, he will find me waiting for him at
the place he knows of.' Norbanus was present when she spoke. I told
him what I had heard in the banqueting room, and he said 'Beric
has done rightly. Tell him that he has acted as a Roman should do,
but as Romans no longer act, caring less for their honour than do
the meanest slaves, and that I thank him for having thus defended
my daughter against indignity.' He was glad, he said, that his life
would end now, for it was a burden to him under such conditions.
He gave me this bag of gold to bring to you, saying that he should
have no farther need for it, and that, leaving in such haste, you
would not have time to furnish yourself with money. It is heavy,"
the boy said. "I should have caught you some time earlier, but
twenty or more pounds' weight makes a deal of difference in a long
run."

On arriving at the house of Scopus Beric bade the others wait
without, and stepping over the slaves lying at the entrance, he
went quietly to the sleeping chamber of the lanista.

"Who is this?" Scopus asked as he entered.

"It is I, Beric; throw your mantle on and come outside with me,
Scopus. I would speak with you alone, and do not wish that all
should know that I have been here."

"In trouble?" Scopus asked as they left the house. "Ay, lad, I
expected it, and knew that sooner or later it would come. What is
it?"

"Nero ordered me to fetch Aemilia to his foul carousal. I refused.
Rufinus, at whose instigation he acted, attacked me. I hurled him
against a pillar, and methinks he was killed, and then Nero, in alarm
for his life, called in the Praetorians. Boduoc and my countrymen
joined me, and we slew some thirty of them, and then made our
escape, and are taking to the mountains."

"And you have come to ask my gladiators to join?" Scopus said
shortly.

"No," Beric replied; "when I started I thought of so doing, but as
I walked hither I decided otherwise. It would not be fair to you.
Did I ask them some would join, I know, others might not. The loss
of their services I could make up to you; but if it were known that
we had been here, and that some of your band had joined me, Nero's
vengeance would fall on you all."

"I thank you, Beric; if some went I must go myself, for I dare not
remain, and though I wish you well, and hate the tyrant, I am well
off and comfortable, and have no desire to throw away my life."

"There is one I should like to take with me--Porus; we were good
friends when I was here, and I know that he hates this life and
longs to be free from it. He would have run away and joined the
gladiators when they rose at Praeneste had I not dissuaded him. He
could leave without the others knowing it, and in the morning you
might affect a belief that he has run away, and give notice to the
magistrate here and have him sought for. In that way there would
be no suspicion of his having joined us. I know that he is valuable
to you, being, I think, the best of your troop, but I will pay you
