together, the two little vessels sailed homeward.  But soon storms
arose, the ships were battered by wind, tossed about hither and
thither by waves, and at length separated again.  More than once
Columbus feared that his tiny vessel would be engulfed in the stormy
seas, and the results of his great enterprise never be known.  But
at length the shores of Portugal were sighted, and on Friday, the
15th of March, 1493, he landed Again at Palos, in Spain, from whence
he had set forth more than seven months before.

The people of Palos had hardly hoped to see again those who had
sailed away on so desperate an adventure.  Now, when they saw only
one of the three vessels return their joy was mingled with grief.
When, however, they learned that Columbus returned in triumph, and
that India had been reached, their joy knew no bounds.  Shops were
closed, bells were rung, and all the people in holiday attire thronged
to the harbour, and with shouts and cheers they bore Columbus in
triumph to the church, there to give thanks to God for his safe and
glorious return.  And ere the shouts had died away, a second vessel
was seen approaching.  It was the Pinta which, though parted from the
Nina, had also weathered the storms and now came safely to port.

At once on landing Columbus had sent a letter to the King and
Queen telling them of his return.  Now he received an answer; it
was addressed to Don Christopher Columbus, our Admiral of the Ocean
Sea, Viceroy and Governor of the Islands discovered in the Indies.
It bade him to come at once to court.  It told him that a new expedition
would immediately be fitted out; so with a heart overflowing with
joy and pride, Columbus set forth to Barcelona where the King and
Queen then were.

The great news of his voyage and discovery had outsped him, and
the people of Barcelona received him with every mark of respect
and honour.  As he passed through the streets, riding on a splendid
horse and surrounded by the greatest nobles of Spain, they cheered
him again and again.  They gazed in wonder also at the dark-skinned
savages, the gaily coloured parrots, and other strange things he
had brought with him from out the Sea of Darkness.

Sitting on a throne of state beneath a canopy of cloth of gold,
with the young Prince of Spain beside them , the King and Queen
received Columbus.  At his approach they rose, and standing they
welcomed back to their realm as a mighty prince he who had gone
forth a simple sailor.  And as Columbus would have knelt to kiss
their hands they raised him, and bade him be seated beside them as
an equal.  Seldom did the haughty rulers of Spain show such great
honour even to the proudest nobles in the land.

And so while King, and Queen, and courtiers listened breathlessly
Columbus told of all he had done, of all the marvels he had seen,
of the richness and fairness of the lands he had found and claimed
for Spain.  And when he had finished the King and Queen fell upon
their knees, and clasping their hands they raised eyes filled with
tears of joy to heaven, giving thanks to God for His great mercies.
The courtiers too fell upon their knees and joined their prayers
to those of the King and Queen, while over all the triumphant notes
of the Te Deum rang out.

So ended the great voyage of Columbus.  He had shown the way across
the Sea of Darkness; he had proved that all the stories of its
monsters and other dangers were false.  But even he had no idea
of the greatness of his discovery.  He never realised that he had
shown the way to a new world; he believed to the day of his death
that he had indeed found new islands, but that his greatest feat
was that of finding a new way to the Old World.  Yet now being made
a noble, he took for his coat of arms a, group of golden islands
in an azure sea, and for motto the words, "To Castile and Leon,
Columbus gave a New World."

Now began a time of pomp and splendour for Columbus.  He who had
gone forth a penniless sailor now rode abroad in gorgeous array;
often he might be seen with the Queen on one hand and John, the
young Prince of Spain, on the other.  Sometimes even the King himself
would ride with him, and seeing him so high in royal favour all the
greatest and proudest nobles of the land were eager to make much
of him.  So they feted him, flattered him, and spread banquets for
him.  But some were jealous of the great fame of Columbus, and they
made light of his discoveries.

It is told how, one day at a banquet when every one talked of these
wonderful deeds, one of the guests spoke slightingly of them. "It
is all very well," he said to Columbus, "but in a great country like
Spain, where there are such numbers of daring sailors and learned
folk besides, many another man might have done the same as you.  We
should have found the Indies even if you had not."

To this speech Columbus answered nothing, but he asked for an egg
to be brought to him.  When it was brought he placed it on the table
saying, "Sirs, I will lay a wager with any of you that you cannot
make this egg stand up without anything at all to support it."

One after the other they tried, but no one could do it.  At length
it came round to Columbus again.  And he, taking it in his hand,
struck it sharply on the table so that one end was chipped a little,
and it stood upright.

"That, my lord, is my answer, " he said, looking at the courtier
who had scoffed.  And all the company were silent.  For they saw he
was well answered.  Columbus had shown that after a deed is once done
it is simple, and every one knows how to do it.  What he had done
in sailing across the Sea of Darkness was only wonderful because
no one ,else had thought of doing it.

Portugal was now very jealous of Spain's success, and King Ferdinand
of Spain was fearful lest King John of Portugal should seize the
new islands which Columbus had discovered.  So he appealed to the
Pope to settle the matter.  And the Pope decided that all new lands
discovered west of an imaginary line drawn through the Atlantic
Ocean west of the Azores and from pole to pole should belong to
Spain.  All discoveries east of this line should belong to Portugal.
If you will look at a map of the world you will see that this gave
to Spain all the Americas with their islands (except a little bit
of Brazil) and to Portugal the whole of Africa.

But almost before this matter was settled Columbus had set forth
again on another voyage across the great ocean, now no longer the Sea
of Darkness: this time he had no difficulty in getting a company.
For every one was eager to go with him, even many of the sons of
great nobles.  This time too the passage was made without any doubts
and fears, but with joyful expectations.

Columbus had hoped great things of the little colony that he had
left behind him.  But when he cast anchor one night before the fort
his heart sank.  All was dark and silent on shore.  Yet still hoping,
he ordered two cannon to be fired as a signal to the colonists.
The cannon boomed through the still, warm darkness of the night,
and slowly the echoes died away.  But there was no answer save the
sighing of the sea, and the scream of the startled birds.  From
the fort there came no sound or any sign of life, and with sad
forebodings the Spaniards waited for the dawn.

Then it was seen that the fort was a ruin.  It had been burned and
sacked.  Torn clothing and broken vessels were strewn around, but
as the Spaniards wandered sadly among the ruins they found no trace
of their companions save eleven graves with the grass growing above
them.

At first no natives would come near the white men, for they feared
their anger.  But at length, tempted by the offer of gifts and
other friendly signs, they came.  They told how the Spaniards had
quarreled amongst themselves, how the fort had been attacked by
unfriendly Indians from another island, and how all the white men
had been slain.

Thus ended the first white colony ever planted in Western lands.
All traces of it have vanished, and upon the spot where La Navida
stood there is now a little fishing village called Petit Anse.

Columbus founded other colonies, but they succeeded no better than
the first one.  In all he made four voyages across the Atlantic,
and in the third he landed upon the coast of South America, near
the mouth of the Orinoco.  But Columbus did not know that at last
he had discovered the great double Continent of America.  He thought
that he had merely discovered another island, and he named it La
Isla Santa.  Afterwards he was so delighted at the beauty of the
land that he thought he must have found the Garden of Eden, so he
became certain that he had landed on the eastern corner of Asia.

In 1506 Columbus died.  And it is sad to think that he who, by his
great faith and great daring, led the way across the Sea of Darkness,
and gave a New World to the Old died in poverty and neglect.  The
men who had wept for joy at the news of his discovery shed no tear
over his grave.  He died "unwept, unhonoured and unsung." Years passed
before men recognised what a great man had dwelt among them: years
passed before any monument was raised to his memory.  But indeed he
had scarce need of any, for as has been well said, "The New World
is his monument." And every child of the New World must surely
honour that monument and seek never to deface it.

__________




Chapter 5 - How America Was Named





"The New World is his monument." And yet the New World does not
bear the name of Columbus.  So in this chapter I am going to tell
you how America was named.

As soon as Columbus had shown the way across the Sea of Darkness
many were eager to follow in his footsteps. "There is not a man,"
he says himself, "down to the very tailors, who does not beg to be
allowed to become a discoverer." Among the many who longed to sail
the seas there was a man named Amerigo Vespucci.

Like Columbus, Amerigo Vespucci was an Italian.  He was born in
Florence and there for nearly forty years he lived quietly, earning
his living as a clerk in the great merchant house of Medici.  But
although he was diligent at business his thoughts were not wholly
taken up with it, and in his leisure hours he loved to read books
of geography, and pore over maps and charts.

After a time business took Amerigo to Spain.  He was there when
Columbus returned from his famous first voyage, and very likely saw
him pass through the streets of Barcelona on his day of triumph.
Just when Amerigo and Columbus met we do not know.  But very soon we
find Amerigo in the service of the merchant who supplied Columbus
with food and other necessaries for his second voyage.  It has been
thought by some that Vespucci went with Columbus on this voyage,
but that is not very likely.  It was about this time, however, that
Vespucci went on his first voyage in which he explored the coast of
Venezuela or of Central America.  It is very doubtful which.  Before
going on this voyage he had been in Spain about four years, and
not having succeeded very well as a merchant he decided to give up
trading and take to a sea life.

No voyages perhaps have been more written about and fought over than
those of Amerigo Vespucci.  Some will have it that he went only two
voyages, and say he was a braggart and a vainglorious fool if he
said he went more.  Others think that he went at least four voyages
and probably six.  And most people are now agreed that these last are
right, and that he who gave his name to the great double Continent
of America was no swaggering pretender but an honest and upright
man.

In the first two voyages that he made Vespucci sailed under the
flag of Spain.  In the second two he sailed in the service of the
King of Portugal.  But after his fourth voyage he returned again to
Spain.  There he received a large salary and the rank of captain.
Later he was made Pilot Major of Spain, and was held in high honour
till his death.

Yet in all the voyages Vespucci went, whether under the flag of
Portugal or of Spain, he was never leader.  He went as astronomer,
or as pilot, while other men captained the expeditions.

It is from Amerigo's letters alone that we gather the little we
know about his voyages.  For although he says in one of his letters
that he has written a book called "The Four Voyages" it has never
been found, and perhaps was never published.  One long letter,
however, which he wrote to an old schoolfellow was so interesting
that it was published and read by many people all over Europe.  It
was, says an old English writer, "abrode in every mannes handes."

Amerigo's voyages led him chiefly to Central and South America and
he became convinced that South America was a continent.  So soon,
what with the voyages of Vespucci and the voyages of other great
men, it became at last quite certain that there was a vast continent
beyond the Atlantic ocean.  Map-makers, therefore, began to draw a
huge island, large enough to form in itself a continent, south of
the Equator.  They called it the New World, or the land of the Holy
Cross, but the Northern Continent was still represented on the maps
by a few small islands, or as a part of Asia.

Thus years passed.  Daring sailors still sailed the stormy seas
in search of new lands, and learned men read the tales of their
adventures and wrote new books of geography.

Then one day a professor who taught geography at the Monastery of
St.  Dié in Alsace published a little book on geography.  In it he
spoke of Europe, Asia and Africa, the three parts of the world as
known to the ancients.  Then he spoke of the fourth part which had
been discovered by Amerigo Vespucci, by which he meant what we now
call South America. "And," continues this professor, "I do not see
what is rightly to hinder us calling this part Amerige or America,
that is, the land of Americus after its discoverer Americus."

This is the first time the word America was ever used, and little did
this old German professor, writing in his quiet Alsatian College,
think that he was christening the great double continent of the
New World.  And as little did Amerigo think in writing his letter
to his old school fellow that he was to be looked upon as the
discoverer of the New World.

At first the new name came slowly into use and it appears for the
first time on a map made about 1514.  In this map America is shown
as a great island continent lying chiefly south of the Equator.

All the voyages which Columbus had made had been north of the
Equator.  No man yet connected the land south of the Equator with
him, and it was at first only to this south land that the name
America was given.

Thirty years and more went by.  Many voyages were made, and it
became known for certain that Columbus had not reached the shores
of India by sailing west, and that a great continent barred the
way north as well as south of the Equator.

Then a famous map-maker gave the name of America to both continents.

But many Spaniards were jealous for the fame of Columbus, and they
thought that the Northern Continent should be called Colonia or
Columbiana.  One, anxious that the part in the discovery taken by
Ferdinand and Isabella should not be forgotten, even tried to make
people call it Fer-Isabelica.

But all such efforts were in vain.  America sounded well, people
liked it, and soon every one used it.

Amerigo Vespucci himself had nothing to do with the choice, and
yet because others gave his name to the New World many hard things
have been said of him.  He has been called in scorn a "land lubber,
" a beef and biscuit contractor," and other contemptuous names.
Even one of the greatest American writers has poured scorn on him.
"Strange," he says, "that broad America must wear the name of a
thief.  Amerigo Vespucci, the pickle dealer of Seville . . . whose
highest naval rank was a boatswain's mate in an expedition that
never sailed, managed in this lying world to supplant Columbus and
baptise half the earth with his own dishonest name."

But it was the people of his day, and not Vespucci, who brought
the new name into use.  Vespucci himself had never any intention of
being a thief or of robbing Columbus of his glory.  He and Columbus
had always been friends, and little more than a year before he died
Columbus wrote a letter to his son Diego which Vespucci delivered.
In this letter Columbus says, "Amerigo Vespucci, the bearer of this
letter . . . has always been wishful to please me.  He is a very
honest man. . . .  He is very anxious to do something for me, if it
is in his power."

It was only accident which gave the name of America to the New
World, and perhaps also the ingratitude of the great leader's own
generation.

Later generations, however, have not been so unmindful of Columbus
and his deeds; Americans have not allowed his great name to be
wholly forgotten.  The district in which the capital of the United
States is situated is called Columbia.  In Canada too there is the
great province of British Columbia, and in South America the 'United
States of Colombia, besides many towns all named in honour of the
great discoverer.

__________





Chapter 6 - How The Flag of England Was Planted on the Shores of
the New World




Christopher Columbus showed the way across the Sea of Darkness;
Amerigo Vespucci gave his name to the great double continent, but
it was another Italian, John Cabot, who first landed on the Continent
of North America.

Like Columbus, Cabot was born in Genoa.  When, however, he left his
own land he did not go to Spain like Columbus, but to England.

He had been living in England for some years when the news of the
first great voyage of Columbus was brought there.  Soon every one
was talking about the wonderful discovery from the King and his
court downward.

Cabot was a trader and a daring sailor, well used to sailing on
the stormy seas.  Yet even he was awed by what Columbus had done.
To find that way never known before, and by sailing west to reach
the east "where the spices grow" seemed to him " a thing more
divine than human. "And he too longed to follow Columbus, and maybe
discover new lands.

King Henry VII was eager to claim new lands as the Kings of
Spain and Portugal were doing.  So he listened to the persuasions
of John Cabot.  And in spite of the Pope - who had divided all the
undiscovered world between the Kings of Spain and Portugal - gave
him leave to sail forth to "the seas of the east and west and north"
and to plant the banner of England upon any islands, countries or
regions belonging to heathens or infidels which he might discover.
He bade his "well-beloved John Cabot" take five ships and set forth
on the adventure at his " own proper costs and charges." For Henry
was a King "wise but not lavish," and although he wanted England
to have the glory of new discoveries he was not eager to spend his
gold on them.

But where could a poor sailor find money enough for so great an
adventure?

So a year went past, and although Cabot had the King's leave
to go he did not set out.  But he did not let the King forget.  And
at length close-fisted Henry listened to "the busy request and
supplication" of the eager sailor, and consented to fit out one
small ship.

So at five o'clock one sweet May morning a frail little vessel
called the Matthew, with a crew of but eighteen men, sailed out
from Bristol harbour.  Many people came to see the vessel sail.  For
they were nearly all Bristol men who were thus venturing forth on
the unknown deep, and their friends crowded to the harbour to wish
them godspeed.

It was a great occasion for Bristol, and indeed for all England,
for it was the first voyage of discovery with which the English
king and people had to do.  So the tiny whitesailed ship put out to
sea, followed by the prayers and wishes of those left behind.  With
tear-dimmed eyes they watched it till it faded from view.  Then they
turned homewards to pray for the return of their loved ones.

Round the coast of Ireland the vessel sped.  But at last its green
shores faded from sight and the little company of eighteen brave
men were alone upon the trackless waves.

Westward and ever westward they sailed,

"Over the hazy distance, Beyond the sunset's rim"

Week after week went by.  Six weeks and then seven, and still no
land appeared.  Those were days of anxiety and gloom.  But still the
hope of the golden west lured Cabot on, and at length one day in
June he heard the glad cry of "Land! Land!"

So on St.  John's Day, in 1497, John Cabot landed somewhere on the
coast of America.  He called the land Prima Tierra Vista or First
Land Seen, and because of the day upon which it was found he called
an island near to it St.  John's Isle.

We cannot tell exactly where Cabot east anchor: it may have been
at Cape Breton or somewhere on the coast of Labrador.  But wherever
it was that he landed he there set up a great cross and unfurled
the flag of England, claiming the land for King Henry.

When Cabot set out he was full of the ideas of Columbus.  He had hoped
to find himself on the coast of Asia and in the land of gold and
spices.  Now he knew himself mistaken.  He did not see any natives,
but he knew the land was inhabited, for he found notched trees,
snares for wild animals and other signs of habitation which he took
home.

He had found no "golden cities," he had had speech with no stately
potentate.  Yet he was not utterly disappointed.  For the country he
had found seemed to him fair and fertile, and the quantities of
fish which swarmed in the seas amazed both himself and his men.  They
had no need of lines or even of nets.  They had but to let down a
basket weighted with a stone and draw it up again to have all the
fish they wanted.

Cabot stayed but a short time in the new-found land.  He would fain
have stayed longer and explored further, but he feared lest his
provisions would give out, and so regretfully he turned homeward.

Great was the excitement in Bristol when the tiny ship came to anchor
there once more, little more than three months after it had sailed
away.  And so strange were the tales Master Cabot had to tell that
the folk of Bristol would hardly have believed him (for he was a
poor man and a foreigner) had not his crew of honest Bristol men
vouched for the truth of all he said.  Every one was delighted.  Even
thrifty King Henry was so much pleased that he gave Cabot £10.  It
seems a small enough sum for one who had found "a new isle." But
we must remember that it was worth more than £100 would be worth
today.

Cabot at any rate found it enough with which to buy a suit of
silk.  And dressed in this new splendour he walked about the streets
of Bristol followed by gaping crowds.  He was now called the Great
Admiral, and much honour was paid to him.  Every one was eager to
talk with him, eager to go with him on his next voyage: and that
even although they knew that many of the crew would be thieves and
evil-doers.  For the King had promised to give Cabot for sailors
all prisoners except those who were confined for high treason.

We know little more of John Cabot.  Later King Henry gave him a
pension of £20 a year.  It seems likely that the following year he
set out again across the broad Atlantic, taking his sons with him.
"The rest is silence."

How John Cabot ended his life, where he lies taking his rest, we
do not know.

"He sleeps somewhere in sod unknown, Without a slab, without a
stone."

We remember him chiefly because he was the first to lead Englishmen
across the Atlantic, the first to plant the flag of England upon
the Continent of North America, which, in days to come, was to be
the home of two great English speaking peoples.

__________





Chapter 7 - How The Flag of France Was Planted in Florida




As years went on many voyages of discovery and exploration were
made to the New World by both the Spaniards and the Portuguese,
but chiefly by the Spaniards.  America was the land of golden hopes,
the land of splendid adventure, and the haughty knights of Spain,
thirsting for gold and for fame, were lured thither.  They sought
the fabled seven cities of gold, they sought the fountain of eternal
youth.  Through the dark pathless forests, across the wide prairies
they flashed in glittering array, awaking the vast silences with the
clash of arms.  They came in all the pomp and splendour of warfare;
they brought also the Cross of Christ, threatening the heathen with
death if they did not bow to Him and be baptised.  And it seemed for
a time as if they, and they only, would possess the vast continent.
But expedition after expedition ended in disaster.  The Spaniards
found neither the far-famed seven cities nor the fountain of youth.
And the Redmen, instead of accepting their religion, hated them
and it with a deep hatred.

But the Spaniards were not long left in undisputed possession of
America.  The French King too desired to have new lands across the
seas, and he saw no reason why Spain and Portugal should divide
the New World between them.

"I would fain see Father Adam's will," he said, "in which he made
you the sole heirs to so vast an inheritance.  Until I do see that,
I shall seize as mine whatever my good ships may find upon the ocean. "

From France, therefore, daring men sailed forth to the New World.
And there they set up the arms of their country, claiming broad
lands for their King.

And now came the time when all Christian lands were torn asunder by
religious strife.  The Reformation had begun, and everywhere there
was discord between the people who followed the old religion and
those who followed the new.  In France those who followed the new
religion were called Huguenots.  They were often hardly used, and
were denied freedom to worship God in their own way.  Many of them
therefore longed to get away from France, and go to some new country
where they would have the freedom they desired.

So a few grave, stern men gathered together and determined to set
out for some place in the New World where they might make a home.

Then one February day in 1562 two little ships sailed away from
France.  Westward they sailed until about two and a half months
later they landed in what is now Florida.

It was May Day, the sun shone and all the world seemed gay and
green, and these Protestant adventurers thought they had never
seen so fair a land.  It was, they said, the fairest, fruitfullest
and pleasantest of all the world, "abounding in honey, venison
and wildfowl." The natives were friendly and told the newcomers by
signs that the seven golden cities were not far off.  That rejoiced
their hearts, for even those stern old Huguenots were not above
following the quest for gold.

Here then in this far-off land the Huguenots set up a stone pillar
carved with the arms of the King of France.  And kneeling round
it they gave thanks to God for having brought them to so fair a
country.  Then returning to their ships they sailed northward along
the coast, For they had not come to settle, but merely to explore,
and find out a good spot on which to found a colony.

But the land seemed so fair, the air so balmy, that they were ready
to settle there at once, and never return to France.

At length after inspecting several places the adventurers reached
a spot not far from what is now Beaufort in South Carolina.  Here
they landed, and knowing that many of the men were already eager
to remain in this beautiful country, Jean Ribaut, their leader,
resolved to found a colony.  So he called them all together, and
speaking wise and brave words to them asked who among them would
remain.

"Declare your minds freely unto me," he said, "and remember that
if you decide to remain you will for ever be famous, and be known
as the first white men who inhabited this land."

Ribaut had scarcely finished speaking when nearly all the men
replied with a shout, "We ask nothing better than to remain in this
beautiful country."

Indeed so many were anxious to remain that Ribaut had enough to
do to persuade a sufficient number to man the ships to return with
him.

In the end thirty men were chosen to remain.  At once they set about
building a fort which they called Charlesfort in honour of the boy
King, Charles IX, who was then upon the throne.

The men worked so well that in a very few days the fort was so
far finished that it was fit to live in.  Food and ammunition were
brought from the ships, and a man named Albert de la Pierria was
chosen as Governor.  Then for the last time Ribaut gathered all the
men together and took leave of those to be left behind.

"Captain Albert," he said, "I have to ask you in the presence of
all these men, to quit yourself so wisely in your charge, that I
shall be able to commend you to your King.

"And you," he said, turning to the soldiers, "I beg you to esteem
Captain Albert as if he were myself, and to yield to him that
obedience that a true soldier owes to his general and captain.  I
pray you live as brethren together without discord.  And in so doing
God will assist you, and bless your enterprises."

Then farewells were said, and Ribaut sailed away, leaving the thirty
white men alone in the wilderness.

From north to south, from east to west, in all the vast continent
there were no white men save themselves.  The little company was
made up of young nobles, sailors, merchants and artisans.  There
were no farmers or peasants among them, and when they had finished
their fort none of them thought of clearing the land and sowing
corn.  There was no need: Ribaut would soon return, they thought,
bringing with him all they required.  So they made friends with
the Indians, and roamed the forest wilds in search of gold and of
adventures, without care for the future.

But the days and weeks passed and Ribaut did not return.  For when
he arrived home he found that France was torn with civil war, and
that it was impossible to get ships fitted out to sail to America.

Soon the little colony began to feel the pangs of hunger.  Daily they
scanned the pitiless blue sea for a glimpse of Ribaut's returning
sail.  No sail appeared, and daily their supplies dwindled away.  Had
it not been for the friendly Redmen they might all have perished.
For the Indians were generous, and as long as they had food themselves
they shared it with their white friends.  But at length they could
spare no more.  Indeed they had already given the Pale-faces so much
food that they themselves, they said, would be forced to roam the
woods in search of roots and herbs to keep them from starving until
harvest was ripe.  They told the Frenchmen, however, of two rich
and powerful chiefs who held sway over land which lay to the south,
where they might obtain endless supplies of corn and vegetables.

This was indeed good news to the Frenchmen.  And guided by their
Indian friends they lost no time in setting out to beg food from
those dusky potentates.

When the Frenchmen reached the wigwams of one of these chiefs they
were received with great honour.  They found that their Redskin
friends had spoken truly.  Here there was food in abundance; and
after a great feast they returned joyfully to the fort, carrying
with them a great supply of corn and beans, and - what was still
better - a promise from the friendly chief that he would give them
more food whenever they had need of it.

Once more the colonists rejoiced in plenty.  But not for long.  For
the very night they arrived home their storehouse took fire, and
all the food which they had brought with such joy was destroyed.

Again famine stared them in the face.  In their plight they once more
appealed to the savage chief who supplied their wants as generously
as before; promising them that as long as his meal should last they
should never want.  So for the time being the colonists were saved
from starvation.

But another danger now threatened them, for quarrels arose among
the men.  Albert de Pierria who had been set over them as captain
proved to be cruel and despotic.  He oppressed the men in many ways,
hanging and imprisoning at will those who displeased him.  Soon the
men began to murmur under his tyranny.  Black looks greeted Albert
de Pierria: he answered them with blacker deeds.  At length one
day for some misdeed he banished a soldier to a lonely island, and
left him there to die of hunger.  This was more than the colonists
could well bear.  Their smouldering anger burst forth, and seizing
the tyrant they put him to death.  Then they chose one of their
number called Nicolas Barre to be their captain.

They were rid of their tyrant, and that brought peace for a time
to the little colony.  But the men had grown to hate the place.  The
land which had once seemed to them so fair now seemed no better
than a prison, and they longed to escape from it.

They had, however, no ship, and although all around them tall
trees grew no one of them knew anything of ship building.  Still, so
strong was their desire to leave the hated spot that they resolved
to build one.

They set to work with. a will.  Soon the sound of saw and hammer
awoke the silence of the forest.  High and low, noble and peasant,
all worked together, the Indians, even, lending a hand.

At length their labours were over and the rough little ship was
afloat.  It made but a sorry appearance.  The planks were rough-hewn
by the hatchet, and caulked with the moss which grew in long
streamers on the trees.  The cordage was Indian made, and the sails
were patched together from shirts and bedclothes.  Never before had
men thought to dare the ocean waves in so crazy a craft.  But the
colonists were in such eagerness to be gone that they chose rather
to risk almost certain death upon the ocean than remain longer in
their vast prison house.

So they loaded the ship with as much food as they could collect,
and saying farewell to their Indian friends, they spread their
patchwork sails, and glided out to sea drunken with joy at the
thought of returning to France.

At first the wind blew fair, and the little ship sped gaily
homeward.  Then came a calm.  The sun burned overhead, no faintest
breeze stirred the slack sails, and the ship lay as if at anchor
upon the glassy waters.  And as the ship lay motionless the slender
stock of food grew less and less.  Soon there was nothing left but
