if I question you still. Had you no suspicion that there was one reason
why this lady might have quitted Paris so hastily, and have so shrunk
from the thought of a marriage so advantageous, in a worldly point
of view, as that with M. Louvier,--namely, that she anticipated the
probability of becoming the mother of a child by the man whom she
refused to acknowledge as a husband?"

"That idea did not strike me until you asked me if she had a child.
Should your conjecture be correct, it would obviously increase her
repugnance to apply for the annulment of her illegal marriage. But if
Louise is still living and comes across me, I do not doubt that, the
motives for concealment no longer operating, she will confide to me the
truth. Since we have been talking together thus frankly, I suppose I
may fairly ask whether I do not guess correctly in supposing that this
soi-disant husband, whose name I forget,--Mac--something, perhaps,
Scotch-I think she said he was Ecossais,--is dead and has left by will
some legacy to Louise and any child she may have borne to him?"

"Not exactly so. The man, as you say, is dead; but he bequeathed no
legacy to the lady who did not hold herself married to him. But there
are those connected with him who, knowing the history, think that some
compensation is due for the wrong so unconsciously done to her, and yet
more to any issue of a marriage not meant to be irregular or illegal.
Permit me now to explain why I sought you in another guise and name than
my own. I could scarcely place in M. Lebeau the confidence which I now
unreservedly place in the Vicomte de Mauleon."

"Cela va sans dire. You believed, then, that calumny about the jewels;
you do not believe it now?"

"Now! my amazement is, that any one who had known you could believe it."

"Oh, how often, and with tears of rage in my exile--my wanderings--have
I asked that question of myself! That rage has ceased; and I have but
one feeling left for that credulous, fickle Paris, of which one day I
was the idol, the next the byword. Well, a man sometimes plays chess
more skilfully for having been long a mere bystander. He understands
better how to move, and when to sacrifice the pieces. Politics, M. Vane,
is the only exciting game left to me at my years. At yours, there is
still that of love. How time flies! we are nearing the station at which
I descend. I have kinsfolk of my mother's in these districts. They are
not Imperialists; they are said to be powerful in the department. But
before I apply to them in my own name, I think it prudent that M. Lebeau
should quietly ascertain what is their real strength, and what would be
the prospects of success if Victor de Mauleon offered himself as depute
at the next election. Wish him joy, M. Vane! If he succeed, you will
hear of him some day crowned in the Capitol, or hurled from the Tarpeian
rock."

Here the train stopped. The false Lebeau gathered up his papers,
readjusted his spectacles and his bag, descended lightly, and, pressing
Graham's hand as he paused at the door, said, "Be sure I will not forget
your address if I have anything to say. Bon voyage!"




CHAPTER VII.

Graham continued his journey to Strasbourg. On arriving there he felt
very unwell. Strong though his frame was, the anguish and self-struggle
through which he had passed since the day he had received in London
Mrs. Morley's letter, till that on which he had finally resolved on
his course of conduct at Paris, and the shock which had annihilated his
hopes in Isaura's rejection, had combined to exhaust its endurance,
and fever had already commenced when he took his place in the coupe.
If there be a thing which a man should not do when his system is
undermined, and his pulse between 90 and 100, it is to travel all night
by a railway express. Nevertheless, as the Englishman's will was yet
stronger than his frame, he would not give himself more than an hour's
rest, and again started for Berlin. Long before he got to Berlin,
the will failed him--as well as the frame. He was lifted out of the
carriage, taken to a hotel in a small German town, and six hours
afterwards he was delirious. It was fortunate for him that under such
circumstances plenty of money and Scott's circular-notes for some
hundreds were found in his pocketbook, so that he did not fail to
receive attentive nursing and skilful medical treatment. There, for
the present, I must leave him--leave him for how long? But any village
apothecary could say that fever such as his must run its course. He was
still in bed, and very dimly--and that but at times--conscious, when the
German armies were gathering round the penfold of Sedan.




CHAPTER VIII.

When the news of the disastrous day at Sedan reached Paris, the first
effect was that of timid consternation. There were a few cries of
Decheance! fewer still of Vive la Republique among the motley crowds;
but they were faint, and chiefly by ragged gamins. A small body repaired
to Trochu and offered him the sceptre, which he politely declined. A
more important and respectable body--for it comprised the majority
of the Corps Legislatif--urged Palikao to accept the temporary
dictatorship, which the War Minister declined with equal politeness. In
both these overtures it was clear that the impulse of the proposers was
towards any form of government rather than republican. The sergens de
ville were sufficient that day to put down riot. They did make a charge
on a mob, which immediately ran away.

The morning of that day the Council of Ten were summoned by
Lebeau--minus only Rameau, who was still too unwell to attend, and the
Belgian, not then at Paris; but their place was supplied by the
two travelling members, who had been absent from the meeting before
recorded. These were conspirators better known in history than those I
have before described; professional conspirators--personages who from
their youth upwards had done little else but conspire. Following the
discreet plan pursued elsewhere throughout this humble work, I give
their names other than they bore. One, a very swarthy and ill-favoured
man, between forty and fifty, I call Paul Grimm--by origin a German, but
by rearing and character French; from the hair on his head, staring up
rough and ragged as a bramblebush, to the soles of small narrow feet,
shod with dainty care, he was a personal coxcomb, and spent all he
could spare on his dress. A clever man, not ill-educated--a vehement and
effective speaker at a club. Vanity and an amorous temperament had made
him a conspirator, since he fancied he interested the ladies more in
that capacity than any other. His companion, Edgar Ferrier, would have
been a journalist, only hitherto his opinions had found no readers; the
opinions were those of Marat. He rejoiced in thinking that his hour for
glory, so long deferred, had now arrived. He was thoroughly sincere:
his father and grandfather had died in a madhouse. Both these men,
insignificant in ordinary times, were likely to become of terrible
importance in the crisis of a revolution. They both had great power with
the elements that form a Parisian mob. The instructions given to these
members of the Council by Lebeau were brief: they were summed up in the
one word, Decheance. The formidable nature of a council apparently so
meanly constituted became strikingly evident at that moment, because it
was so small in number, while each one of these could put in movement a
large section of the populace; secondly, because, unlike a revolutionary
club or a numerous association, no time was wasted in idle speeches, and
all were under the orders of one man of clear head and resolute purpose;
and thirdly, and above all, because one man supplied the treasury, and
money for an object desired was liberally given and promptly at hand.
The meeting did not last ten minutes, and about two hours afterwards
its effects were visible. From Montmartre and Belleville and Montretout
poured streams of ouvriers, with whom Armand Monnier was a chief,
and the Medecin des Pauvres an oracle. Grimm and Ferrier headed other
detachments that startled the well-dressed idlers on the Boulevards.
The stalwart figure of the Pole was seen on the Place de la Concorde,
towering amidst other refugees, amid which glided the Italian champion
of humanity. The cry of Decheance became louder. But as yet there were
only few cries of Vive la Republique!--such a cry was not on the orders
issued by Lebeau. At midnight the crowd round the hall of the Corps
Legislatif is large: cries of La Dechaeance loud--a few cries, very
feeble, of Vive la Republique!

What followed on the 4th--the marvellous audacity with which
half-a-dozen lawyers belonging to a pitiful minority in a Chamber
elected by universal suffrage walked into the Hotel de Ville and said,
"The Republic is established, and we are its Government," history has
told too recently for me to narrate. On the evening of the 5th the
Council of Ten met again: the Pole; the Italian radiant; Grimm
and Ferrier much excited and rather drunk; the Medecin des Pauvres
thoughtful; and Armand Monnier gloomy. A rumour has spread that General
Trochu, in accepting the charge imposed on him, has exacted from the
Government the solemn assurance of respect for God, and for the rights
of Family and Property. The Atheist is very indignant at the assent of
the Government to the first proposition; Monnier equal indignant at the
assent to the second and third. What has that honest ouvrier conspired
for?--what has he suffered for?--of late nearly starved for?--but to
marry another man's wife, getting rid of his own, and to legalise a
participation in the property of his employer,--and now he is no better
off than before. "There must be another revolution," he whispers to the
Atheist.

"Certainly," whispers back the Atheist; "he who desires to better this
world must destroy all belief in another." The conclave was assembled
when Lebeau entered by the private door. He took his place at the head
of the table; and, fixing on the group eyes that emitted a cold gleam
through the spectacles, thus spoke:

"Messieurs, or Citoyens, which ye will--I no longer call ye
confreres--you have disobeyed or blundered my instructions. On such an
occasion disobedience and blunder are crimes equally heinous."

Angry murmurs.

"Silence! Do not add mutiny to your other offences. My instructions were
simple and short. Aid in the abolition of the Empire. Do not aid in any
senseless cry for a Republic or any other form of government. Leave
that to the Legislature. What have you done? You swelled the crowd that
invaded the Corps Ligislatif. You, Dombinsky, not even a Frenchman, dare
to mount the President's rostrum, and brawl forth your senseless jargon.
You, Edgar Ferrier, from whom I expected better, ascend the tribune, and
invite the ruffians in the crowd to march to the prisons and release
the convicts; and all of you swell the mob at the Hotel de Ville, and
inaugurate the reign of folly by creating an oligarchy of lawyers to
resist the march of triumphal armies. Messieurs, I have done with you.
You are summoned for the last time: the Council is dissolved."

With these words Lebeau put on his hat, and turned to depart. But the
Pole, who was seated near him, sprang to his feet, exclaiming, "Traitor,
thou shalt not escape! Comrades, he wants to sell us!"

"I have a right to sell you at least, for I bought you, and a very bad
bargain I made," said Lebeau, in a tone of withering sarcasm.

"Liar!" cried the Pole, and seized Lebeau by the left hand, while with
the right he drew forth a revolver. Ferrier and Grimm, shouting, "A
bas le renegat!" would have rushed forward in support of the Pole, but
Monnier thrust himself between them and their intended victim, crying
with a voice that dominated their yell, "Back!--we are not assassins."
Before he had finished the sentence the Pole was on his knees. With a
vigour which no one could have expected from the seeming sexagenarian,
Lebeau had caught the right arm of his assailant, twisted it back so
mercilessly as almost to dislocate elbow and shoulder joint. One barrel
of the revolver discharged itself harmlessly against the opposite wall,
and the pistol itself then fell from the unnerved hand of the would-be
assassin; and what with the pain and the sudden shock, the stalwart
Dombinsky fell in the attitude of a suppliant at the feet of his
unlooked-for vanquisher.

Lebeau released his hold, possessed himself of the pistol, pointing the
barrels towards Edgar Ferrier, who stood with mouth agape and lifted arm
arrested, and said quietly: "Monsieur, have the goodness to open that
window." Ferrier mechanically obeyed. "Now, hireling," continued
Lebeau, addressing the vanquished Pole, "choose between the door and the
window."

"Go, my friend," whispered the Italian. The Pole did not utter a word;
but rising nimbly, and rubbing his arm, stalked to the door. There
he paused a moment and said, "I retire overpowered by numbers," and
vanished.

"Messieurs," resumed Lebeau, calmly, "I repeat that the Council is
dissolved. In fact its object is fulfilled more abruptly than any of us
foresaw, and by means which I at least had been too long out of Paris
to divine as possible. I now see that every aberration of reason is
possible to the Parisians. The object that united us was the fall of the
Empire. As I have always frankly told you, with that object achieved,
separation commences. Each of us has his own crotchet, which differs
from the other man's. Pursue yours as you will--I pursue mine--you will
find Jean Lebeau no more in Paris: il s'eface. Au plaisir, mais pas au
revoir."

He retreated to the masked door and disappeared.

Marc le Roux, the porter or custos of that ruinous council-hall, alarmed
at the explosion of the pistol, had hurried into the room, and now
stood unheeded by the door with mouth agape, while Lebeau thus curtly
dissolved the assembly. But when the president vanished through the
secret doorway, Le Roux also retreated. Hastily descending the stairs,
he made as quickly as his legs could carry him for the mouth of the
alley in the rear of the house, through which he knew that Lebeau must
pass. He arrived, panting and breathless, in time to catch hold of
the ex-president's arm. "Pardon, citizen," stammered he, "but do I
understand that you have sent the Council of Ten to the devil?"

"I? Certainly not, my good Paul; I dismiss them to go where they
like. If they prefer the direction you name, it is their own choice. I
declined to accompany them, and I advise you not to do so."

"But, citizen, have you considered what is to become of Madame? Is she
to be turned out of the lodge? Are my wages to stop, and Madame to be
left without a crust to put into her soup?"

"Not so bad as that; I have just paid the rent of the baraque for three
months in advance, and there is your quarter's pay, in advance also.
My kind regards to Madame, and tell her to keep your skin safe from the
schemes of these lunatics." Thrusting some pieces of gold into the hands
of the porter, Lebeau nodded his adieu, and hastened along his way.

Absorbed in his own reflections, he did not turn to look behind. But if
he had, he could not have detected the dark form of the porter, creeping
in the deep shadow of the streets with distant but watchful footsteps.




CHAPTER, IX.

The conspirators, when left by their president, dispersed in deep, not
noisy resentment. They were indeed too stunned for loud demonstration;
and belonging to different grades of life, and entertaining different
opinions, their confidence in each other seemed lost now that the chief
who had brought and kept them together was withdrawn from their union.
The Italian and the Atheist slunk away, whispering to each other. Grimm
reproached Ferrier for deserting Dombinsky and obeying Lebeau. Ferrier
accused Grimm of his German origin, and hinted at denouncing him as a
Prussian spy. Gaspard le Noy linked his arm in Monnier's, and when they
had gained the dark street without, leading into a labyrinth of desolate
lanes, the Medicin des Pauvres said to the mechanic: "You are a brave
fellow, Monnier. Lebeau owes you a good turn. But for your cry, 'We are
not assassins,' the Pole might not have been left without support. No
atmosphere is so infectious as that in which we breathe the same air
of revenge: when the violence of one man puts into action the anger or
suspicion of others, they become like a pack of hounds, which follow the
spring of the first hound, whether on the wild boar or their own master.
Even I, who am by no means hot-headed, had my hand on my case-knife when
the word 'assassin' rebuked and disarmed me."

"Nevertheless," said Monnier, gloomily, "I half repent the impulse which
made me interfere to save that man. Better he should die than live to
betray the cause we allowed him to lead."

"Nay, mon ami, speaking candidly, we must confess that he never from the
first pretended to advocate the cause for which you conspired. On the
contrary, he always said that with the fall of the Empire our union
would cease, and each become free to choose his own way towards his own
after-objects."

"Yes," answered Armand, reluctantly; "he said that to me privately, with
still greater plainness than he said it to the Council. But I answered
as plainly."

"How?"

"I told him that the man who takes the first step in a revolution, and
persuades others to go along with him, cannot in safety stand still or
retreat when the next step is to be taken. It is 'en avant' or 'a la
lanterne.' So it shall be with him. Shall a fellow-being avail himself
of the power over my mind which he derives from superior education or
experience,--break into wild fragments my life, heretofore tranquil,
orderly, happy,--make use of my opinions, which were then but harmless
desires, to serve his own purpose, which was hostile to the opinions he
roused into action,--say to me, 'Give yourself up to destroy the
first obstacle in the way of securing a form of society which your
inclinations prefer,' and then, that first obstacle destroyed, cry,
'Halt! I go with you no further; I will not help you to piece together
the life I have induced you to shatter; I will not aid you to substitute
for the society that pained you the society that would please; I leave
you, struggling, bewildered, maddened, in the midst of chaos within and
without you'? Shall a fellow-being do this, and vanish with a mocking
cry: 'Tool! I have had enough of thee; I cast thee aside as worthless
lumber'? Ah! let him beware! The tool is of iron, and can be shaped
to edge and point." The passion with which this rough eloquence was
uttered, and the fierce sinister expression that had come over a
countenance habitually open and manly, even when grave and stern,
alarmed and startled Le Noy. "Pooh, my friend!" he said, rather
falteringly, "you are too excited now to think justly. Go home and kiss
your children. Never do anything that may make them shrink from their
father. And as to Lebeau, try and forget him. He says he shall disappear
from Paris. I believe him. It is clear to me that the man is not what
he seemed to us. No man of sixty could by so easy a sleight of hand have
brought that giant Pole to his knee. If Lebeau reappear it will be
in some other form. Did you notice that in the momentary struggle his
flaxen wig got disturbed, and beneath it I saw a dark curl. I suspect
that the man is not only younger than he seemed, but of higher rank--a
conspirator against one throne, perhaps, in order to be minister under
another. There are such men."

Before Monnier, who seemed struck by these conjectures, collected his
thoughts to answer, a tall man in the dress of a sous lieutenant stopped
under a dim gas-lamp, and, catching sight of the artisan's face, seized
him by the hand, exclaiming, "Armand, mon frere! well met; strange
times, eh? Come and discuss them at the cafe de Lyon yonder over a bowl
of punch. I'll stand treat."

"Agreed, dear Charles."

"And if this monsieur is a friend of yours, perhaps he will join us."

"You are too obliging, Monsieur," answered Le Noy, not ill-pleased to
get rid of his excited companion; "but it has been a busy day with me,
and I am only fit for bed. Be abstinent of the punch, Armand. You are
feverish already. Good-night, Messieurs."

The cafe de Lyon, in vogue among the National Guard of the quartier, was
but a few yards off, and the brothers turned towards it arm in arm. "Who
is the friend?" asked Charles; "I don't remember to have seen him with
thee before."

"He belongs to the medical craft--a good patriot and a kind man--attends
the poor gratuitously. Yes, Charles, these are strange times; what dost
thou think will come of them?"

They had now entered the cafe; and Charles had ordered the punch, and
seated himself at a vacant table before he replied. "What will come of
these times? I will tell thee. National deliverance and regeneration
through the ascendency of the National Guard."

"Eh? I don't take," said Armand, bewildered.

"Probably not," answered Charles, with an air of compassionate conceit;
"thou art a dreamer, but I am a politician." He tapped his forehead
significantly. "At this custom-house, ideas are examined before they are
passed."

Armand gazed at his brother wistfully, and with a defence he rarely
manifested towards any one who disputed his own claims to superior
intelligence. Charles was a few years older than Monnier; he was of
large build; he had shaggy lowering eyebrows, a long obstinate
upper lip, the face of a man who was accustomed to lay down the law.
Inordinate self-esteem often gives that character to a physiognomy
otherwise commonplace. Charles passed for a deep thinker in his own
set, which was a very different set from Armand's--not among workmen but
small shopkeepers. He had risen in life to a grade beyond Armand's; he
had always looked to the main chance, married the widow of a hosier and
glover much older than himself, and in her right was a very respectable
tradesman, comfortably well off; a Liberal, of course, but a Liberal
bourgeois, equally against those above him and those below. Needless
to add that he had no sympathy with his brother's socialistic opinions.
Still he loved that brother as well as he could love any one except
himself. And Armand, who was very affectionate, and with whom family
ties were very strong, returned that love with ample interest; and
though so fiercely at war with the class to which Charles belonged, was
secretly proud of having a brother who was of that class. So in
England I have known the most violent antagonist of the landed
aristocracy--himself a cobbler--who interrupts a discourse on the crimes
of the aristocracy by saying, "Though I myself descend from a county
family."

In an evil day Charles Monnier, enrolled in the National Guard, had
received promotion in that patriotic corps. From that date he began to
neglect his shop, to criticise military matters, and to think that if
merit had fair play he should be a Cincinnatus or a Washington, he had
not decided which.

"Yes," resumed Charles, ladling out the punch, "thou hast wit enough
to perceive that our generals are imbeciles or traitors; that gredin
Bonaparte has sold the army for ten millions of francs to Bismarck, and
I have no doubt that Wimpffen has his share of the bargain. McMahon was
wounded conveniently, and has his own terms for it. The regular army is
nowhere. Thou wilt see--thou wilt see--they will not stop the march of
the Prussians. Trochu will be obliged to come to the National Guard.
Then we shall say, 'General, give us our terms, and go to sleep.'

"I shall be summoned to the council of war. I have my plan. I explain
it--'tis accepted--it succeeds. I am placed in supreme command--the
Prussians are chased back to their sour-krout. And I--well--I don't like
to boast, but thou'lt see--thou'lt see--what will happen."

"And thy plan, Charles--thou hast formed it already?"

"Ay, ay,--the really military genius is prompt, mon petit Armand--a
flash of the brain. Hark ye! Let the Vandals come to Paris and invest
it. Whatever their numbers on paper, I don't care a button; they can
only have a few thousands at any given point in the vast circumference
of the capital. Any fool must grant that--thou must grant it eh?"

"It seems just."

"Of course. Well, then, we proceed by sorties of 200,000 men repeated
every other day, and in twelve days the Prussians are in full flight.
The country rises on their flight--they are cut to pieces. I depose
Trochu--the National Guard elects the Saviour of France. I have a
place in my eye for thee. Thou art superb as a decorator--thou shalt be
Minister des Beaux Arts. But keep clear of the canaille. No more strikes
then--thou wilt be an employer--respect thy future order."

   [Charles Monnier seems to have indiscreetly blabbed out his "idea,"
   for it was plagiarised afterwards at a meeting of the National
   Guards in the Salle de la Bourse by Citizen Rochebrune (slain 19th
   January, 1871, in the affair of Montretout). The plan, which he
   developed nearly in the same words as Charles Monnier, was received
   with lively applause; and at the close of his speech it was proposed
   to name at once Citizen Rochebrune General of the National Guard, an
   honour which, unhappily for his country, the citizen had the modesty
   to decline.]

Armand smiled mournfully. Though of intellect which, had it been
disciplined, was far superior to his brother's, it was so estranged
from practical opinions, so warped, so heated, so flawed and cracked
in parts, that he did not see the ridicule of Charles's braggadocio.
Charles had succeeded in life, Armand had failed; and Armand believed in
the worldly wisdom of the elder born. But he was far too sincere for any
bribe to tempt him to forsake his creed and betray his opinions. And
he knew that it must be a very different revolution from that which his
brother contemplated, that could allow him to marry another man's wife,
and his "order" to confiscate other people's property.

"Don't talk of strikes, Charles. What is done is done. I was led into
heading a strike, not on my own account, for I was well paid and well
off, but for the sake of my fellow-workmen. I may regret now what I
did, for the sake of Marie and the little ones. But it is an affair
of honour, and I cannot withdraw from the cause till my order, as thou
namest my class, has its rights."

"Bah! thou wilt think better of it when thou art an employer. Thou hast
suffered enough already. Remember that I warned thee against that old
fellow in spectacles whom I met once at thy house. I told thee he would
lead thee into mischief, and then leave thee to get out of it. I saw
through him. I have a head! Va!"

"Thou wert a true prophet--he has duped me. But in moving me he has set
others in movement; and I suspect he will find he has duped himself.
Time will show."

Here the brothers were joined by some loungers belonging to the National
Guard. The talk became general, the potations large. Towards daybreak
Armand reeled home, drunk for the first time in his life. He was one
of those whom drink makes violent. Marie had been sitting up for him,
alarmed at his lengthened absence. But when she would have thrown
herself on his breast, her pale face and her passionate sobs enraged
him. He flung her aside roughly. From that night the man's nature was
changed. If, as a physiognomist has said, each man has in him a portion
of the wild beast, which is suppressed by mild civilising circumstances,
and comes uppermost when self-control is lost, the nature of many an
honest workman, humane and tender-hearted as the best of us, commenced
a change into the wild beast that raged through the civil war of the
Communists, on the day when half-a-dozen Incapables, with no more claim
to represent the people of Paris than half-a-dozen monkeys would have,
were allowed to elect themselves to supreme power, and in the very fact
of that election released all the elements of passion, and destroyed all
the bulwarks of order.




CHAPTER X.

No man perhaps had more earnestly sought and more passionately striven
for the fall of the Empire than Victor de Mauleon; and perhaps no man
was more dissatisfied and disappointed by the immediate consequences
of that fall, In first conspiring against the Empire, he had naturally
enough, in common with all the more intelligent enemies of the dynasty,
presumed that its fate would be worked out by the normal effect of civil
causes--the alienation of the educated classes, the discontent of
the artisans, the eloquence of the press and of popular meetings,
strengthened in proportion as the Emperor had been compelled to relax
the former checks upon the license of either. And De Mauleon had no less
naturally concluded that there would be time given for the preparation
of a legitimate and rational form of government to succeed that which
was destroyed. For, as has been hinted or implied, this remarkable man
was not merely an instigator of revolution through the Secret Council,
and the turbulent agencies set in movement through the lower strata of
society;--he was also in confidential communication with men eminent for
wealth, station, and political repute, from whom he obtained the funds
necessary for the darker purposes of conspiracy, into the elaboration of
which they did not inquire; and these men, though belonging like himself
to the Liberal party, were no hot-blooded democrats. Most of them
were in favour of constitutional monarchy; all of them for forms of
government very different from any republic in which socialists or
communists could find themselves uppermost. Among these politicians were
persons ambitious and able, who, in scheming for the fall of the Empire,
had been prepared to undertake the task of conducting to ends compatible
with modern civilisation the revolution they were willing to allow a mob
at Paris to commence. The opening of the war necessarily suspended
their designs. How completely the events of the 4th September mocked the
calculations of their ablest minds, and paralysed the action of their
most energetic spirits, will appear in the conversation I am about to
record. It takes place between Victor de Mauleon and the personage
to whom he had addressed the letter written on the night before the
interview with Louvier, in which Victor had announced his intention of
reappearing in Paris in his proper name and rank. I shall designate this
correspondent as vaguely as possible; let me call him the Incognito. He
may yet play so considerable a part in the history of France as a potent
representative of the political philosophy of De Tocqueville--that is,
of Liberal principles incompatible with the absolute power either of a
sovereign or a populace, and resolutely opposed to experiments on the
foundations of civilised society--that it would be unfair to himself and
his partisans if, in a work like this, a word were said that could
lead malignant conjecture to his identity with any special chief of the
opinions of which I here present him only as a type.

The Incognito, entering Victor's apartment:

"My dear friend, even if I had not received your telegram, I should have
hastened hither on the news of this astounding revolution. It is only in
Paris that such a tragedy could be followed by such a farce. You were on
the spot--a spectator. Explain it if you can."

DE MAULEON.--"I was more than a spectator; I was an actor. Hiss me--I
deserve it. When the terrible news from Sedan reached Paris, in the
midst of the general stun and bewilderment I noticed a hesitating
timidity among all those who had wares in their shops and a good coat on
their backs. They feared that to proclaim the Empire defunct would be to
install the Red Republic with all its paroxysm of impulsive rage and all
its theories of wholesale confiscation. But since it was impossible
for the object we had in view to let slip the occasion of deposing the
dynasty which stood in its way, it was necessary to lose no time
in using the revolutionary part of the populace for that purpose. I
assisted in doing so; my excuse is this--that in a time of crisis a
man of action must go straight to his immediate object, and in so doing
employ the instruments at his command. I made, however, one error in
judgment which admits no excuse: I relied on all I had heard, and all I
had observed, of the character of Trochu, and I was deceived, in common,
I believe, with all his admirers, and three parts of the educated
classes of Paris."

INCOGNITO.--"I should have been equally deceived! Trochu's conduct is a
riddle that I doubt if he himself can ever solve. He was master of the
position; he had the military force in his hands if he combined with
Palikao, which, whatever the jealousies between the two, it was his
absolute duty to do. He had a great prestige--"

DE MAULEON.--"And for the moment a still greater popularity. His ipse
dixit could have determined the wavering and confused spirits of the
population. I was prepared for his abandonment of the Emperor--even of
the Empress and the Regency. But how could I imagine that he, the man of
moderate politics, of Orleanistic leanings, the clever writer, the fine
talker, the chivalrous soldier, the religious Breton, could abandon
everything that was legal, everything that could save France against
the enemy, and Paris against civil discord; that he would connive at the
annihilation of the Senate, of the popular Assembly, of every form of
Government that could be recognised as legitimate at home or abroad,
accept service under men whose doctrines were opposed to all his
antecedents, all his professed opinions, and inaugurate a chaos under
the name of a Republic!"

INCOGNITO.--"How, indeed? How suppose that the National Assembly, just
elected by a majority of seven millions and a half, could be hurried
into a conjuring-bog, and reappear as the travesty of a Venetian
oligarchy, composed of half-a-dozen of its most unpopular members!
The sole excuse for Trochu is, that he deemed all other considerations
insignificant compared with the defence of Paris, and the united action
of the nation against the invaders. But if that were his honest desire
in siding with this monstrous usurpation of power, he did everything
by which the desire could be frustrated. Had there been any provisional
body composed of men known and esteemed, elected by the Chambers,
supported by Trochu and the troops at his back, there would have been
a rallying-point for the patriotism of the provinces; and in the wise
suspense of any constitution to succeed that Government until the enemy
were chased from the field, all partisans--Imperialists, Legitimists,
Orleanists, Republicans--would have equally adjourned their differences.
But a democratic Republic, proclaimed by a Parisian mob for a nation in
which sincere democratic Republicans are a handful, in contempt of
an Assembly chosen by the country at large; headed by men in whom the
provinces have no trust, and for whom their own representatives are
violently cashiered;--can you conceive such a combination of wet
blankets supplied by the irony of Fate for the extinction of every spark
of ardour in the population from which armies are to be gathered in
haste, at the beck of usupers they distrust and despise? Paris has
excelled itself in folly. Hungering for peace, it proclaims a Government
which has no legal power to treat for it. Shrieking out for allies among
the monarchies, it annihilates the hope of obtaining them; its sole
chance of escape from siege, famine, and bombardment, is in the
immediate and impassioned sympathy of the provinces; and it revives
all the grudges which the provinces have long sullenly felt against
the domineering pretensions of the capital, and invokes the rural
populations, which comprise the pith and sinew of armies, in the name
of men whom I verily believe they detest still more than they do the
Prussians. Victor, it is enough to make one despair of his country! All
beyond the hour seems anarchy and ruin."

"Not so!" exclaimed De Mauleon. "Everything comes to him who knows how
to wait. The Empire is destroyed; the usurpation that follows it has
no roots. It will but serve to expedite the establishment of such a
condition as we have meditated and planned--a constitution adapted to
our age and our people, not based wholly on untried experiments, taking
the best from nations that do not allow Freedom and Order to be the
sport of any popular breeze. From the American Republic we must borrow
the only safeguards against the fickleness of the universal suffrage
which, though it was madness to concede in any ancient community, once
conceded cannot be safely abolished,--viz., the salutary law that no
article of the Constitution, once settled, can be altered without the
consent of two-thirds of the legislative body. By this law we insure
permanence, and that concomitant love for institutions which is
engendered by time and custom. Secondly, the formation of a senate on
such principles as may secure to it in all times of danger a confidence
and respect which counteract in public opinion the rashness and heat of
the popular assembly. On what principles that senate should be formed,
with what functions invested, what share of the executive--especially
in foreign affairs, declarations of war, or treaties of peace--should
be accorded to it, will no doubt need the most deliberate care of the
ablest minds. But a senate I thus sketch has alone rescued America from
the rashness of counsel incident to a democratic Chamber; and it is
still more essential to France, with still more favourable elements for
its creation. From England we must borrow the great principle that has
alone saved her from revolution--that the head of the State can do
no wrong. He leads no armies, he presides over no Cabinet. All
responsibility rests with his advisers; and where we upset a dynasty,
England changes an administration. Whether the head of the State should
have the title of sovereign or president, whether he be hereditary or
elected, is a question of minor importance impossible now to determine,
but on which I heartily concur with you that hereditary monarchy is
infinitely better adapted to the habits of Frenchmen, to their love
of show and of honours--and infinitely more preservative from all the
dangers which result from constant elections to such a dignity, with
parties so heated, and pretenders to the rank so numerous--than any
principle by which a popular demagogue or a successful general is
enabled to destroy the institutions he is elected to guard. On these
fundamental doctrines for the regeneration of France I think we are
agreed. And I believe when the moment arrives to promulgate them,
through an expounder of weight like yourself, they will rapidly commend
themselves to the intellect of France. For they belong to common sense;
and in the ultimate prevalence of common-sense I have a faith which I
refuse to medievalists who would restore the right divine; and still
more to fanatical quacks, who imagine that the worship of the Deity, the
ties of family, and the rights of property are errors at variance with
the progress of society. Qui vivera, verra."

INCOGNITO.--"In the outlines of the policy you so ably enunciate I
heartily concur. But if France is, I will not say to be regenerated, but
to have fair play among the nations of Europe, I add one or two items
to the programme. France must be saved from Paris, not by subterranean
barracks and trains, the impotence of which we see to-day with a
general in command of the military force, but by conceding to France
its proportionate share of the power now monopolised by Paris. All
this system of centralisation, equally tyrannical and corrupt, must be
eradicated. Talk of examples from America, of which I know little--from
England, of which I know much,--what can we more advantageously borrow
from England than that diffusion of all her moral and social power
which forbids the congestion of blood in one vital part? Decentralise!
decentralise! decentralise! will be my incessant cry, if ever the time
comes when my cry will be heard. France can never be a genuine France
until Paris has no more influence over the destinies of France than
London has over those of England. But on this theme I could go on till
midnight. Now to the immediate point: what do you advise me to do in
this crisis, and what do you propose to do yourself?"

De Mauleon put his hand to his brow, and remained a few moments silent
and thoughtful. At last he looked up with that decided expression of
face which was not the least among his many attributes for influence
over those with whom he came into contact.

"For you, on whom so much of the future depends, my advice is
brief--have nothing to do with the present. All who join this present
mockery of a Government will share the fall that attends it--a fall from
which one or two of their body may possibly recover by casting blame on
their confreres,--you never could. But it is not for you to oppose that
Government with an enemy on its march to Paris. You are not a soldier;
military command is not in your rode. The issue of events is uncertain;
but whatever it be, the men in power cannot conduct a prosperous war nor
obtain an honourable peace. Hereafter you may be the Deus ex machina. No
personage of that rank and with that mission appears till the end of
the play: we are only in the first act. Leave Paris at once, and abstain
from all action."

INCOGNITO (dejectedly).--"I cannot deny the soundness of your advice,
though in accepting it I feel unutterably saddened. Still you, the
calmest and shrewdest observer among my friends, think there is cause
for hope, not despair. Victor, I have more than most men to make life
pleasant, but I would lay down life at this moment with you. You know me
well enough to be sure that I utter no melodramatic fiction when I
say that I love my country as a young man loves the ideal of his
dreams--with my whole mind and heart and soul! and the thought that I
cannot now aid her in the hour of her mortal trial is--is--"

The man's voice broke down, and he turned aside, veiling his face with a
hand that trembled.

DE MAULEON--"Courage--patience! All Frenchmen have the first; set them
an example they much need in the second. I, too, love my country, though
I owe to it little enough, heaven knows. I suppose love of country is
inherent in all who are not Internationalists. They profess only to love
humanity, by which, if they mean anything practical, they mean a rise in
wages."

INCOGNITO (rousing himself, and with a half smile). "Always cynical,
Victor--always belying yourself. But now that you have advised my
course, what will be your own? Accompany me, and wait for better times."

"No, noble friend; our positions are different. Yours is made--mine yet
to make. But for this war I think I could have secured a seat in the
Chamber. As I wrote you, I found that my kinsfolk were of much influence
in their department, and that my restitution to my social grade, and the
repute I had made as an Orleanist, inclined them to forget my youthful
errors and to assist my career. But the Chamber ceases to exist. My
journal I shall drop. I cannot support the Government; it is not a
moment to oppose it. My prudent course is silence."

INCOGNITO.--"But is not your journal essential to your support?"

DE MAULEON.--"Fortunately not. Its profits enabled me to lay by for the
rainy day that has come; and having reimbursed you and all friends
the sums necessary to start it, I stand clear of all debt, and, for
my slender wants, a rich man. If I continued the journal I should be
beggared; for there would be no readers to Common Sense in this interval
of lunacy. Nevertheless, during this interval, I trust to other ways for
winning a name that will open my rightful path of ambition whenever we
again have a legislature in which Common Sense can be heard."

INCOGNITO.--"But how win that name, silenced as a writer?"

DE MAULEON.--"You forget that I have fought in Algeria. In a few days
Paris will be in a state of siege; and then--and then," he added,
and very quietly dilated on the renown of a patriot or the grave of a
soldier.

"I envy you the chance of either," said the Incognito; and after a few
more brief words he departed, his hat drawn over his brows, and entering
a hired carriage which he had left at the corner of the quiet street,
was consigned to the station du --------, just in time for the next
train.




CHAPTER XI.

Victor dressed and went out. The streets were crowded. Workmen were
everywhere employed in the childish operation of removing all insignia,
and obliterating all names that showed where an Empire had existed. One
greasy citizen, mounted on a ladder, was effacing the words "Boulevard
Haussman," and substituting for Haussman, "Victor Hugo."

Suddenly De Mauleon came on a group of blouses, interspersed with
women holding babies and ragged boys holding stones, collected round a
well-dressed slender man, at whom they were hooting and gesticulating,
with menaces of doing something much worse. By an easy effort of his
strong frame the Vicomte pushed his way through the tormentors, and gave
his arm to their intended victim.

"Monsieur, allow me to walk home with you." Therewith the shrieks and
shouts and gesticulations increased. "Another impertinent! Another
traitor! Drown him! Drown them both! To the Seine! To the Seine!" A
burly fellow rushed forward, and the rest made a plunging push. The
outstretched arm of De Mauleon kept the ringleader at bay. "Mes enfans,"
cried Victor with a calm clear voice, "I am not an Imperialist. Many
of you have read the articles signed Pierre Firmin, written against the
tyrant Bonaparte when he was at the height of his power. I am Pierre
Firmin--make way for me." Probably not one in the crowd had ever read a
word written by Pierre Firmin, nor even heard of the name. But they
did not like to own ignorance; and that burly fellow did not like to
encounter that arm of iron which touched his throat. So he cried out,
"Oh! if you are the great Pierre Firmin, that alters the case. Make way
for the patriot Pierre!"

"But," shrieked a virago, thrusting her baby into De Mauleon's face,
"the other is the Imperialist, the capitalist, the vile Duplessis. At
least we will have him."

De Mauleon suddenly snatched the baby from her, and said, with
imperturbable good temper, "Exchange of prisoners. I resign the man, and
I keep the baby."

No one who does not know the humours of a Parisian mob can comprehend
the suddenness of popular change, or the magical mastery over crowds
which is effected by quiet courage and a ready joke. The group was
appeased at once. Even the virago laughed; and when De Mauleon restored
the infant to her arms, with a gold piece thrust into its tiny clasp,
she eyed the gold, and cried, "God bless you, citizen!" The two
gentlemen made their way safely now.

"M. de Mauleon," said Duplessis, "I know not how to thank you. Without
your seasonable aid I should have been in great danger of life;
and--would you believe it?--the woman who denounced and set the mob on
me was one of the objects of a charity which I weekly dispense to the
poor."

"Of course I believe that. At the Red clubs no crime is more denounced
than that of charity. It is the 'fraud against Egalite'--a vile trick
of the capitalist to save to himself the millions he ought to share with
all by giving a sou to one. Meanwhile, take my advice, M. Duplessis,
and quit Paris with your young daughter. This is no place for rich
Imperialists at present."

"I perceived that before to-day's adventure. I distrust the looks of my
very servants, and shall depart with Valerie this evening for Bretagne."

"Ah! I heard from Louvier that you propose to pay off his mortgage on
Rochebriant, and make yourself sole proprietor of my young kinsman's
property."

"I trust you only believe half what you hear. I mean to save Rochebriant
from Louvier, and consign it, free of charge, to your kinsman, as the
dot of his bride, my daughter."

"I rejoice to learn such good news for the head of my house. But Alain
himself--is he not with the prisoners of war?"

"No, thank heaven. He went forth an officer of a regiment of Parisian
Mobiles--went full of sanguine confidence; he came back with his
regiment in mournful despondency. The undiscipline of his regiment,
of the Parisian Mobiles generally, appears incredible. Their
insolent disobedience to their officers, their ribald scoffs at their
general--oh, it is sickening to speak of it! Alain distinguished himself
by repressing a mutiny and is honoured by a signal compliment from
the commander in a letter of recommendation to Palikao. But Palikao is
nobody now. Alain has already been sent into Bretagne, commissioned to
assist in organising a corps of Mobiles in his neighbourhood. Trochu,
as you know, is a Breton. Alain is confident of the good conduct of the
Bretons. What will Louvier do? He is an arch Republican; is he pleased
now he has got what he wanted?"

"I suppose he is pleased, for he is terribly frightened. Fright is one
of the great enjoyments of a Parisian. Good day. Your path to your hotel
is clear now. Remember me kindly to Alain."

De Mauleon continued his way through streets sometimes deserted,
sometimes thronged. At the commencement of the Rue de Florentin he
encountered the brothers Vandemar walking arm in arm.

"Ha, De Mauleon!" cried Enguerrand; "what is the last minute's news?"

"I can't guess. Nobody knows at Paris how soon one folly swallows up
another. Saturn here is always devouring one or other of his children."

"They say that Vinoy, after a most masterly retreat, is almost at our
gates with 80,000 men."

"And this day twelvemonth we may know what he does with them."

Here Raoul, who seemed absorbed in gloomy reflections, halted before
the hotel in which the Contessa di Rimini lodged, and with a nod to his
brother, and a polite, if not cordial salutation to Victor, entered the
porte cochere.

"Your brother seems out of spirits,--a pleasing contrast to the
uproarious mirth with which Parisians welcome the advance of calamity."

"Raoul, as you know, is deeply religious. He regards the defeat we have
sustained, and the peril that threatens us, as the beginning of a divine
chastisement, justly incurred by our sins--I mean, the sins of Paris. In
vain my father reminds him of Voltaire's story, in which the ship goes
down with a fripon on board. In order to punish the fripon, the honest
folks are drowned."

"Is your father going to remain on board the ship, and share the fate of
the other honest folks?"

"Pas si bete. He is off to Dieppe for sea-bathing. He says that Paris
has grown so dirty since the 4th September, that it is only fit for
the feet of the Unwashed. He wished my mother to accompany him; but she
replies, 'No; there are already too many wounded not to need plenty of
nurses.' She is assisting to inaugurate a society of ladies in aid of
the Soeurs de Charite. Like Raoul, she is devout, but she has not his
superstitions. Still his superstitions are the natural reaction of a
singularly earnest and pure nature from the frivolity and corruption
