aboard the sinking vessel, looking out for those who were left, playing
the man like Major Butt and many another and going down with the ship
like Captain Smith.

He was also charged with urging a speed record and with ignoring
information received with regard to icebergs.


FEELING IN ENGLAND

The belief in England was that the captain of the Carpathia had acted
under Ismay's influence in refusing to permit any account of the
disaster to be transmitted previous to the arrival of the vessel in New
York. Ismay's telegram making arrangements for the immediate deportation
of the survivors among the Titanic's crew was taken to be part of the
same scheme to delay if not to prevent their stories of the wreck from
being obtained in New York.

Another circumstance which created a damaging impression was Ismay's
failure to give the names of the surviving crew, whose distraught
families were entitled to as much consideration as those whose relatives
occupied the most expensive suites on the Titanic. The anguish endured
by the families of members of the crew was reported as indescribable,
and Southampton was literally turned into a city of weeping and tragic
pathos. The wives of two members of the crew died of shock and suspense.


CRIED FOR FOOD

Mr. Ismay's actions while on the Carpathia were also criticised as
selfish and unwarrantable.

"For God's sake get me something to eat, I'm starved. I don't care what
it costs or what it is. Bring it to me."

This was the first statement made by Mr. Ismay a few minutes after he
was landed on the Carpathia. It is vouched for by an officer of the
Carpathia who requested that his name be withheld. This officer gave
one of the most complete stories of the events that took place on the
Carpathia from the time she received the Titanic's appeal for assistance
until she landed the survivors at the Cunard Line pier.

"Ismay reached the Carpathia in about the seventh life-boat," said the
officer. "I didn't know who he was, but afterward I heard the other
members of the crew discussing his desire to get something to eat the
minute he put his foot on deck. The steward who waited on him reported
that Ismay came dashing into the dining room and said.

"'Hurry, for God's sake, and get me something to eat, I'm starved. I
don't care what it costs or what it is. Bring it to me.'"

"The steward brought Ismay a load of stuff and when he had finished
it he handed the man a two dollar bill. 'Your money is no good on this
ship,' the steward told him.

"'Take it,' insisted Ismay. 'I am well able to afford it. I will see
to it that the boys of the Carpathia are well rewarded for this night's
work.'

"This promise started the steward making inquiries as to the identity of
the man he had waited on. Then we learned that he was Ismay. I did not
see Ismay after the first few hours. He must have kept to his cabin."

REPLY TO CHARGES

Mr. Ismay's plans had been to return immediately to England, and he
had wired that the steamer Cedric be held for himself and officers and
members of the crew; but public sentiment and subpoenas of the Senate's
investigating committee prevented. In the face of the criticism aimed
against him Mr. Ismay issued a long statement in which he not only
disclaimed responsibility for the Titanic's fatal collision, but also
sought to clear himself of blame for everything that happened after the
big ship was wrecked.

He laid the responsibility for the tragedy on Captain Smith.

He expressed astonishment that his own conduct in the disaster had been
made the subject of inquiry. He denied that he gave any order to Captain
Smith. His position aboard was that of any other first cabin passenger,
he insisted, and he was never consulted by the captain. He denied
telling anyone that he wished the ship to make a speed record. He
called attention to the routine clause in the instructions to White Star
captains ordering them to think of safety at all times. He did not dine
with the captain, he said, and when the ship struck the berg, he was not
sitting with the captain in the saloon.

The managing director added that he was in his stateroom when the
collision occurred. He told of helping to send women and children away
in life-boats on the starboard side, and said there was no woman in
sight on deck when he and William E. Carter, of Bryn Mawr, Pa., entered
the collapsible boat--the last small craft left on that side of the
vessel. He asserted that he pulled an oar and denied that in sending the
three messages from the Carpathia, urging the White Star officials to
hold the Cedric for the survivors of the Titanic's officers and crew, he
had any intention to block investigation of the tragedy. Ismay asserted
that he did not know there was to be an investigation until the Cunarder
docked.

Mr. William E. Carter, of Bryn Mawr, who, with his family, was saved,
confirmed Mr. Ismay's assertions.

"Mr. Ismay's statement is absolutely correct," said Mr. Carter. "There
were no women on the deck when that boat was launched. We were the very
last to leave the deck, and we entered the life-boat because there were
no women to enter it.

"The deck was deserted when the boat was launched, and Mr. Ismay and
myself decided that we might as well enter the boat and pull away from
the wreck. If he wants me, I assume that he will write to me.

"I can say nothing, however, that he has not already said, as our
narratives are identical; the circumstances under which we were rescued
from the Titanic were similar. We left the boat together and were picked
up together, and, further than that, we were the very last to leave the
deck.

"I am ready to go to Washington to testify to the truth of Mr. Ismay's
statement, and also to give my own account at any time I may be called
upon. If Mr. Ismay writes to me, asking that I give a detailed account
of our rescue I will do so."



CHAPTER XXIII. THE FINANCIAL LOSS

TITANIC NOT FULLY INSURED--VALUABLE CARGO AND MAIL--NO CHANCE FOR
SALVAGE--LIFE INSURANCE LOSS--LOSS TO THE CARPATHIA

SO great was the interest in the tragedy and so profound the grief at
the tremendous loss of life that for a time the financial loss was
not considered. It was, however, the biggest ever suffered by marine
insurance brokers.

The value of the policy covering the vessel against all ordinary risks
was $5,000,000, but the whole of this amount was not insured, because
British and Continental markets were not big enough to swallow it.
The actual amount of insurance was $3,700,000, of which the owners
themselves held $750,000.

As to the cargo, it was insured by the shippers. The company has nothing
to do with the insurance of the cargo, which, according to the company's
manifest, was conservatively estimated at about $420,000. Cargo,
however, was a secondary matter, so far as the Titanic was concerned.
The ship was built for high-priced passengers, and what little cargo
she carried was also of the kind that demanded quick transportation.
The Titanic's freight was for the most part what is known as high-class
package freight, consisting of such articles as fine laces, ostrich
feathers, wines, liquors and fancy food commodities.


LOST MAIL MAY COST MILLIONS

Prior to the sailing of the vessel the postal authorities of Southampton
cabled the New York authorities that 3435 bags of mail matter were on
board.

"In a load of 3500 bags," said Postmaster Morgan, of New York, "it is
a safe estimate to say that 200 contained registered mail. The size of
registered mail packages varies greatly, but 1000 packages for each
mail bag should be a conservative guess. That would mean that 200,000
registered packages and letters went down with the Titanic.

"This does not mean, however, that Great Britain will be held
financially responsible for all these losses. There were probably
thousands of registered packages from the Continent, and in such cases
the countries of origin will have to reimburse the senders. Moreover, in
the case of money being sent in great quantities, it is usual to insure
the registry over and above the limit of responsibility set by the
country of origin.

"Probably if there were any shipping of securities mounting up to
thousands of dollars, it will be the insurance companies which will bear
the loss, and not the European post-offices at all."

In the case of money orders, the postmaster explained, there would be
no loss, except of time, as duplicates promptly would be shipped without
further expense.

The postmaster did not know the exact sum which the various European
countries set as the limit of their guarantee in registered mail. In
America it is $50.

Underwriters will probably have to meet heavy claims of passengers for
luggage, including jewelry. Pearls of one American woman insured in
London were valued at $240,000.


NO CHANCE FOR SALVAGE

The Titanic and her valuable cargo can never be recovered, said the
White Star Line officials.

"Sinking in mid-ocean, at the depth which prevails where the accident
occurred," said Captain James Parton, manager of the company,
"absolutely precludes any hopes of salvage."


LIFE INSURANCE LOSS

In the life insurance offices there was much figuring over the lists of
those thought to be lost aboard the Titanic. Nothing but rough estimates
of the company's losses through the wreck were given out.


LOSS TO THE CARPATHIA

The loss to the Carpathia, too, was considerable. It is, of course, the
habit of all good steamship lines to go out of their way and cheerfully
submit to financial loss when it comes to succoring the distressed
or the imperiled at sea. Therefore, the Cunard line in extending the
courtesies of the sea to the survivors of the Titanic asked for nothing
more than the mere acknowledgment of the little act of kindness. The
return of the Carpathia cost the line close to $10,000.

She was delayed on her way to the Mediterranean at least ten days and
was obliged to coal and provision again, as the extra 800 odd passengers
she was carrying reduced her large allowance for her long voyage to the
Mediterranean and the Adriatic very much.



CHAPTER XXIV. OPINIONS OF EXPERTS

CAPTAIN E. K. RODEN, LEWIS NIXON, GENERAL GREELY AND ROBERT H. KIRK
POINT OUT LESSONS TAUGHT BY TITANIC DISASTER AND NEEDED CHANGES IN
CONSTRUCTION

THE tremendous loss of life necessarily aroused a discussion as to the
cause of the disaster, and the prevailing opinion seemed to be that the
present tendency in shipbuilding was to sacrifice safety to luxury.

Captain Roden, a well-known Swedish navigator, had written an article
maintaining this theory in the Navy, a monthly service magazine, in
November, 1910. With seeming prophetic insight he had mentioned the
Titanic by name and portrayed some of the dangers to which shipbuilding
for luxury is leading.

He pointed out that the new steamships, the Olympic and Titanic, would
be the finest vessels afloat, no expense being spared to attain every
conceivable comfort for which men or women of means could possibly
ask--staterooms with private shower-baths, a swimming pool large enough
for diving, a ballroom covering an entire upper deck, a gymnasium,
elaborate cafes, a sun deck representing a flower garden, and other
luxuries.

After forcibly pointing out the provisions that should be made for the
protection of life, Captain Roden wrote in conclusion:

"If the men controlling passenger ships, from the ocean liner down to
the excursion barge, were equally disposed to equip their vessels with
the best safety appliances as they are to devise and adopt implements
of comfort and luxury, the advantage to themselves as well as to their
patrons would be plainly apparent."


VIEW OF LEWIS NIXON

Lewis Nixon, the eminent naval architect and designer of the battleship
Oregon, contributed a very interesting comment. He said in part:

"Here was a vessel presumed, and I think rightly so, to be the
perfection of the naval architect's art, yet sunk in a few hours by an
accident common to North Atlantic navigation.


THE UNSINKABLE SHIP

"An unsinkable ship is possible, but it would be of little use except
for flotation. It may be said that vessels cannot be built to withstand
such an accident.

"We might very greatly subdivide the forward compartments, where much
space is lost at best, making the forward end, while amply strong for
navigation purposes, of such construction that it would collapse
and take up some of the energy of impact; then tie this to very much
stronger sections farther aft. Many such plans will be proposed by those
who do not realize the momentum of a great vessel which will snap great
cables like ribbons, when the motion of the vessel is not perceptible to
the eye.

"The proper plan is to avoid the accident, and if an accident is
unavoidable to minimize the loss of life and property."


VIEW OF ROBERT H. KIRK

The Titanic disaster was discussed by Robert H. Kirk, who installed the
compartment doors in the ships of the United States Navy. Mr. Kirk's
opinion follows:

"The Titanic's disaster will cause endless speculation as to how similar
disasters may be avoided in the future.


BULKHEAD DOORS PROBABLY OPEN

"The Titanic had bulkheads, plenty of them, for the rules of the British
Board of Trade and of Lloyds are very specific and require enough
compartments to insure floating of the ship though several may be
flooded. She also had doors in the bulkheads, and probably plenty of
them, for she was enormous and needed easy access from one compartment
to another. It will probably never be known how _FEW_ of these doors
were closed when she struck the iceberg, but the probability is that
many were open, for in the confusion attending such a crash the crews
have a multitude of duties to perform, and closing a door with water
rushing through it is more of a task than human muscle and bravery can
accomplish.

"A Lloyds surveyor in testing one of these hand-operated doors started
two men on the main deck to close it. They worked four hours before they
had carried out his order. If all the doors on the ship had worked as
badly as this one, what would have happened in event of accident?"


MANIA FOR SPEED

General Adolphus W. Greely, U. S. A., noted American traveler and Arctic
explorer, vehemently denounced the sinking of the Titanic and the loss
of over 1600 souls as a terrible sacrifice to the American mania for
speed. He gave his opinion that the Titanic came to grief through an
attempt on the part of the steamship management to establish a new
record by the vessel on her maiden voyage.

The Titanic, General Greely declared, had absolutely no business above
Cape Race and north of Sable Island on the trip on which she went to her
doom. Choosing the northern route brought about the dire disaster, in
his mind, and it was the saving of three hours for the sake of a new
record that ended in the collision with the tragic victory for the
ghostlike monster out of the far north.

It was the opinion of General Greely, capable of judging after his many
trips in quest of the pole, that neither Captain Smith nor any of his
