interest of the moment. "You, and all others who willingly invade the
peace of these realms, must abide the issue!"

"Then God protect the innocent and defend the right!"

"Amen."

"Give way, villains!" cried Griffith, facing the party that held the
outer door; "give way, or you shall be riddled with our pikes!"

"Show them your muzzles, men!" shouted Borroughcliffe, "but pull no
trigger till they advance."

There was an instant of bustle and preparation, in which the rattling
of firearms blended with the suppressed execrations and threats of the
intended combatants; and Cecilia and Katherine had both covered their
faces to veil the horrid sight that was momentarily expected, when
Alice Dunscombe advanced, boldly, between the points of the threatening
weapons, and spoke in a voice that stayed the hands that were already
uplifted.

"Hear me, men! if men ye be, and not demons, thirsting for each other's
blood; though ye walk abroad in the semblance of Him who died that ye
might be elevated to the rank of angels! Call ye this war? Is this the
glory that is made to warm the hearts of even silly and confiding women?
Is the peace of families to be destroyed to gratify your wicked lust for
conquest, and is life to be taken in vain, in order that ye may boast
of the foul deed in your wicked revels? Fall back, then, ye British
soldiers! if ye be worthy of that name, and give passage to a woman; and
remember that the first shot that is fired will be buried in her bosom!"

The men, thus enjoined, shrank before her commanding mien, and a way was
made for her exit through that very door which Griffith had, in vain,
solicited might be cleared for himself and party. But Alice, instead
of advancing, appeared to have suddenly lost the use of those faculties
which had already effected so much. Her figure seemed rooted to the spot
where she had spoken, and her eyes were fixed in a Settled gaze, as if
dwelling on some horrid object, While she yet stood in this attitude
of unconscious helplessness, the doorway became again darkened, and the
figure of the Pilot was seen on its threshold, clad, as usual, in the
humble vestments of his profession, but heavily armed with the weapons
of naval war. For an instant, he stood a silent spectator of the scene;
and then advanced calmly, but with searching eyes, into the centre of
the apartment.




CHAPTER XXIX.

  "_Don Pedro_. Welcome, Signior: you are almost come to part almost a fray."
  _Much Ado About Nothing._


"Down with your arms, you Englishmen!" said the daring intruder; "and
you, who fight in the cause of sacred liberty, stay your hands, that no
unnecessary blood may flow. Yield yourself, proud Briton, to the power
of the Thirteen Republics!"

"Ha!" exclaimed Borroughcliffe, grasping a pistol, with an air of
great resolution, "the work thickens--I had not included this man in
my estimate of their numbers. Is he a Samson, that his single arm can
change the face of things so suddenly! Down with your own weapon, you
masquerader! or, at the report of this pistol, your body shall be made a
target for twenty bullets."

"And thine for a hundred!" returned the Pilot.--"Without there! wind
your call, fellow, and bring in our numbers. We will let this confident
gentleman feel his weakness."

He had not done speaking, before the shrill whistle of a boatswain
rose gradually on the ears of the listeners, until the sense of hearing
became painfully oppressed by the piercing sounds that rang under
the arched roof of the hall, and penetrated even to the most distant
recesses of the abbey. A tremendous rush of men followed, who drove in
before them the terrified fragment of Borroughcliffe's command, that had
held the vestibule; and the outer room became filled with a dark mass of
human bodies.

"Let them hear ye, lads!" cried their leader; "the abbey is your own!"

The roaring of a tempest was not louder than the shout that burst from
his followers, who continued their cheers, peal on peal, until the very
roof of the edifice appeared to tremble with their vibrations. Numerous
dark and shaggy heads were seen moving around the passage; some cased
in the iron-bound caps of the frigate's boarders, and others glittering
with the brazen ornaments of her marine guard. The sight of the latter
did not fail to attract the eye of Manual, who rushed among the throng,
and soon reappeared, followed by a trusty band of his own men, who took
possession of the post held by the soldiers of Borroughcliffe, while the
dialogue was continued between the leaders of the adverse parties.

Thus far Colonel Howard had yielded to his guest, with a deep reverence
for the principles of military subordination, the functions of a
commander; but, now that affairs appeared to change so materially, he
took on himself the right to question these intruders into his dwelling.

"By what authority, sir," the colonel demanded, "is it that you dare
thus to invade the castle of a subject of this realm? Do you come backed
by the commission of the lord lieutenant of the county, or has
your warrant the signature of his majesty's secretary for the home
department?"

"I bear no commission from any quarter," returned the Pilot; "I rank
only an humble follower of the friends of America; and having led these
gentlemen into danger, I have thought it my duty to see them extricated.
They are now safe; and the right to command all that hear me rests with
Mr. Griffith, who is commissioned by the Continental Congress for such
service."

When he had spoken, he fell back from the position he occupied in the
centre of the room, to one of its sides, where, leaning his body against
the wainscot, he stood a silent observer of what followed.

"It appears, then, that it is to you, degenerate son of a most worthy
father, that I must repeat my demand," continued the veteran. "By what
right is my dwelling thus rudely assailed? and why is my quiet and the
peace of those I protect so daringly violated?"

"I might answer you, Colonel Howard, by saying that it is according to
the laws of arms, or rather in retaliation for the thousand evils that
your English troops have inflicted between Maine and Georgia; but I wish
not to increase the unpleasant character of this scene, and I therefore
will tell you that our advantage shall be used with moderation. The
instant that our men can be collected, and our prisoners properly
secured, your dwelling shall be restored to your authority. We are no
freebooters, sir; and you will find it so after our departure. Captain
Manual, draw off your guard into the grounds, and make your dispositions
for a return march to our boats--let the boarders fall back, there! out
with ye! out with ye--tumble out, you boarders!"

The amicable order of the young lieutenant, which was delivered after
the stern, quick fashion of his profession, operated on the cluster of
dark figures that were grouped around the door like a charm; and as the
men whom Barnstable had led followed their shipmates into the courtyard,
the room was now left to such only as might be termed the gentlemen of
the invading party, and the family of Colonel Howard.

Barnstable had continued silent since his senior officer had assumed
the command, listening most attentively to each syllable that fell from
either side; but now that so few remained, and the time pressed, he
spoke again:

"If we are to take boat so soon, Mr. Griffith, it would be seemly that
due preparations should be made to receive the ladies, who are to honor
us with their presence; shall I take that duty on myself?"

The abrupt proposal produced a universal surprise in his hearers; though
the abashed and conscious expression of Katherine Plowden's features
sufficiently indicated that to her, at least, it was not altogether
unexpected. The long silence that succeeded the question was interrupted
by Colonel Howard.

"Ye are masters, gentlemen; help yourselves to whatever best suits your
inclinations. My dwelling, my goods, and my wards, are alike at
your disposal--or, perhaps Miss Alice here, good and kind Miss Alice
Dunscombe, may suit the taste of some among ye! Ah! Edward Griffith!
Edward Griffith! little did I ever--"

"Breathe not that name in levity again, thou scoffer, or even your
years may prove a feeble protection!" said a stern, startling voice from
behind. All eyes turned involuntarily at the unexpected sounds, and
the muscular form of the Pilot was seen resuming its attitude of repose
against the wall, though every fibre of his frame was working with
suppressed passion.

When the astonished looks of Griffith ceased to dwell on this
extraordinary exhibition of interest in his companion, they were turned
imploringly towards the fair cousins, who still occupied the distant
corner, whither fear had impelled them.

"I have said that we are not midnight marauders, Colonel Howard," he
replied: "but if any there be here, who will deign to commit themselves
to our keeping, I trust it will not be necessary to say, at this hour,
what will be their reception."

"We have not time for unnecessary compliments," cried the impatient
Barnstable; "here is Merry, who, by years and blood, is a suitable
assistant for them, in arranging their little baggage--what say you,
urchin, can you play the lady's maid on emergency?"

"Ay, sir, and better than I acted the peddler boy," cried the gay
youngster; "to have my merry cousin Kate and my good cousin Cicely for
shipmates, I could play our common grandmother! Come, coz, let us
be moving; you will have to allow a little leeway in time, for my
awkwardness."

"Stand back, young man," said Miss Howard, repulsing his familiar
attempt to take her arm; and then advancing, with a maidenly dignity,
nigher to her guardian, she continued, "I cannot know what stipulations
have been agreed to by my cousin Plowden, in the secret treaty she has
made this night with Mr. Barnstable: this for myself, Colonel Howard, I
would have you credit your brother's child when she says, that to her,
the events of the hour have not been more unexpected than to yourself."

The veteran gazed at her, for a moment, with an expression of his eye
that denoted reviving tenderness; but gloomy doubts appeared to cross
his mind again, and he shook his head, as he walked proudly away.

"Nay, then," added Cecilia, her head dropping meekly on her bosom, "I
may be discredited by my uncle, but I cannot be disgraced without some
act of my own."

She slowly raised her mild countenance again, and bending her eyes on
her lover, she continued, while a rich rush of blood passed over her
fine features:

"Edward Griffith, I will not, I cannot say how humiliating it is to
think that you can, for an instant, believe I would again forget myself
so much as to wish to desert him whom God has given me for a protector,
for one chosen by my own erring passions. And you, Andrew Merry! Learn
to respect the child of your mother's sister, if not for her own sake,
at least for that of her who watched your cradle!"

"Here appears to be some mistake." said Barnstable, who participated,
however, in no trifling degree, in the embarrassment of the abashed
boy; "but, like all other mistakes on such subjects, it can be explained
away, I suppose. Mr. Griffith, it remains for you to speak--damn it,
man," he whispered, "you are as dumb as a codfish--I am sure so fine
a woman is worth a little fair-weather talk:--you are muter than a
four-footed beast--even an ass can bray!"

"We will hasten our departure, Mr. Barnstable," said Griffith, sighing
heavily, and rousing himself, as if from a trance. "These rude sights
cannot but appall the ladies. You will please, sir, to direct the order
of our march to the shore. Captain Manual has charge of our prisoners,
who must all be secured, to answer for an equal number of our own
countrymen."

"And our countrywomen!" said Barnstable, "are they to be forgotten, in
the selfish recollection of our own security?"

"With them we have no right to interfere, unless at their request."

"By heaven! Mr. Griffith, this may smack of learning," cried the other,
"and it may plead bookish authority as its precedent; but let me tell
you, sir, it savors but little of a sailor's love."

"Is it unworthy of a seaman, and a gentleman, to permit the woman he
calls his mistress to be so, other than in name?"

"Well, then, Griff, I pity you, from my soul. I would rather have had a
sharp struggle for the happiness that I shall now obtain so easily, than
that you should be thus cruelly disappointed. But you cannot blame me,
my friend, that I avail myself of fortune's favor. Miss Plowden, your
fair hand. Colonel Howard, I return you a thousand thanks for the care
you have taken, hitherto, of this precious charge; and believe me, sir,
that I speak frankly, when I say, that, next to myself, I should choose
to entrust her with you in preference to any man on earth."

The colonel turned to the speaker, and bowed low, while he answered with
grave courtesy:

"Sir, you repay my slight services with too much gratitude. If Miss
Katherine Plowden has not become under my guardianship all that her good
father, Captain John Plowden, of the Royal Navy, could have wished a
daughter of his to be, the fault, unquestionably, is to be attributed to
my inability to instruct, and to no inherent quality in the young lady
herself. I will not say, Take her, sir, since you have her in your
possession already, and it would be out of my power to alter the
arrangement; therefore, I can only wish that you may find her as dutiful
as a wife as she has been, hitherto, as a ward and a subject."

Katherine had yielded her hand, passively, to her lover, and suffered
him to lead her more into the circle than she had before been; but now
she threw off his arm, and shaking aside the dark curls which she had
rather invited to fall in disorder around her brow, she raised her face
and looked proudly up, with an eye that sparkled with the spirit of its
mistress, and a face that grew pale with emotion at each moment, as she
proceeded:

"Gentlemen, the one may be as ready to receive as the other is to
reject; but has the daughter of John Plowden no voice in this cool
disposal of her person? If her guardian tires of her presence, other
habitations may be found, without inflicting so severe a penalty on this
gentleman as to compel him to provide for her accommodation in a vessel
which must be already straitened for room!"

She turned, and rejoined her cousin with such an air of maidenly
resentment as a young woman would be apt to discover, who found herself
the subject of matrimonial arrangement without her own feelings being
at all consulted. Barnstable, who knew but little of the windings of
the female heart, or how necessary to his mistress, notwithstanding her
previous declarations, the countenance of Cecilia, was to any decided
and open act in his favor, stood in stupid wonder at her declaration.
He could not conceive that a woman who had already ventured so much in
secret in his behalf, and who had so often avowed her weakness, should
shrink to declare it again at such a crisis, though the eyes of a
universe were on her! He looked from one of the party to the other, and
met in every face an expression of delicate reserve, except in those of
the guardian of his mistress, and of Borroughcliffe.

The colonel had given a glance of returning favor at her whom he
now conceived to be his repentant ward, while the countenance of the
entrapped captain exhibited a look of droll surprise, blended with the
expression of bitter ferocity it had manifested since the discovery of
his own mishap.

"Perhaps, sir," said Barnstable, addressing the latter, fiercely, "you
see something amusing about the person of this lady, to divert you thus
unseasonably. We tolerate no such treatment of our women in America!"

"Nor do we quarrel before ours in England," returned the soldier,
throwing back the fierce glance of the sailor with interest; "but I was
thinking of the revolutions that time can produce; nothing more, I do
assure you. It is not half an hour since I thought myself a most happy
fellow; secure in my plans for overreaching the scheme you had laid
to surprise me; and now I am as miserable a dog as wears a single
epaulette, and has no hope of seeing its fellow!"

"And in what manner, sir, can this sudden change apply to me?" asked
Katherine, with all her spirit.

"Certainly not to your perseverance in the project to assist my enemies,
madam," returned the soldier, with affected humility; "nor to your zeal
for their success, or your consummate coolness at the supper-table! But
I find it is time that I should be superannuated--I can no longer serve
my king with credit, and should take to serving my God, like all
other worn-out men of the world! My hearing is surely defective, or a
paddock-wall has a most magical effect in determining sounds!"

Katherine waited not to hear the close of this sentence, but walked to a
distant part of the room to conceal the burning blushes that covered
her countenance. The manner in which the plans of Barnstable had become
known to his foe was no longer a mystery. Her conscience also reproached
her a little with some unnecessary coquetry, as she remembered that
quite one-half of the dialogue between her lover and herself, under the
shadow of that very wall to which Borroughcliffe alluded, had been on a
subject altogether foreign to contention and tumults. As the feelings of
Barnstable were by no means so sensitive as those of his mistress, and
his thoughts much occupied with the means of attaining his object, he
did not so readily comprehend the indirect allusion of the soldier, but
turned abruptly away to Griffith, and observed with a serious air:

"I feel it my duty, Mr. Griffith, to suggest that we have standing
instructions to secure all the enemies of America, wherever they may
be found, and to remind you that the States have not hesitated to make
prisoners of females in many instances."

"Bravo!" cried Borroughcliffe; "if the ladies will not go as your
mistresses, take them as your captives!"

"'Tis well for you, sir, that you are a captive yourself, or you should
be made to answer for this speech," retorted the irritated Barnstable.
"It is a responsible command, Mr. Griffith, and must not be
disregarded."

"To your duty, Mr. Barnstable," said Griffith, again rousing from deep
abstraction; "you have your orders, sir; let them be executed promptly."

"I have also the orders of our common superior, Captain Munson, Mr.
Griffith; and I do assure you, sir, that in making out my instructions
for the Ariel--poor thing! there are no two of her timbers hanging
together--but my instructions were decidedly particular on that head."

"And my orders now supersede them."

"But am I justifiable in obeying a verbal order from an inferior, in
direct opposition to a written instruction?"

Griffith had hitherto manifested in his deportment nothing more than a
cold determination to act, but the blood now flew to every vessel in
his cheeks and forehead, and his dark eyes flashed fire, as he cried
authoritatively:

"How, sir! do you hesitate to obey?"

"By heaven, sir, I would dispute the command of the Continental Congress
itself, should they bid me so far to forget my duty to--to--"

"Add yourself, sir!--Mr. Barnstable, let this be the last of it. To your
duty, sir."

"My duty calls me here, Mr. Griffith."

"I must act, then, or be bearded by my own officers. Mr. Merry, direct
Captain Manual to send in a sergeant and a file of marines."

"Bid him come on himself!" cried Barnstable, maddened to desperation by
his disappointment; "'tis not his whole corps that can disarm me--let
them come on! Hear, there, you Ariels! rally around your captain."

"The man among them who dares to cross that threshold without my order,
dies," cried Griffith, menacing with a naked hanger the seamen who had
promptly advanced at the call of their old commander. "Yield your sword,
Mr. Barnstable, and spare yourself the disgrace of having it forced from
you by a common soldier."

"Let me see the dog who dare attempt it!" exclaimed Barnstable,
flourishing his weapon in fierce anger. Griffith had extended his own
arm in the earnestness of his feelings, and their hangers crossed each
other. The clashing of the steel operated on both like the sound of the
clarion on a war-horse, and there were sudden and rapid blows, and as
rapid parries, exchanged between the flashing weapons.

"Barnstable! Barnstable!" cried Katherine, rushing into his arms, "I
will go with you to the ends of the earth!"

Cecilia Howard did not speak; but when Griffith recovered his coolness,
he beheld her beautiful form kneeling at his feet, with her pale face
bent imploringly on his own disturbed countenance. The cry of Miss
Plowden had separated the combatants, before an opportunity for shedding
blood had been afforded; but the young men exchanged looks of keen
resentment, notwithstanding the interference of their mistresses. At
this moment Colonel Howard advanced, and raising his niece from her
humble posture, said:

"This is not a situation for a child of Harry Howard, though she knelt
in the presence, and before the throne, of her sovereign. Behold, my
dear Cecilia, the natural consequences of this rebellion! It scatters
discord in their ranks; and, by its damnable leveling principles,
destroys all distinction of rank among themselves; even these rash boys
know not where obedience is due!"

"It is due to me," said the Pilot, who now stepped forward among the
agitated group, "and it is time that I enforce it. Mr. Griffith, sheathe
your sword. And you, sir, who have defied the authority of your senior
officer, and have forgotten the obligation of your oath, submit, and
return to your duty."

Griffith started at the sounds of his calm voice, as if with sudden
recollection; and then, bowing low, he returned the weapon to its
scabbard. But Barnstable still encircled the waist of his mistress with
one arm, while with the other he brandished his hanger, and laughed with
scorn at this extraordinary assumption of authority.

"And who is this," he cried, "who dare give such an order to me!"

The eyes of the Pilot flashed with a terrible fire, while a fierce glow
seemed to be creeping over his whole frame, which actually quivered with
passion. But, suppressing this exhibition of his feelings, by a sudden
and powerful effort, he answered in an emphatic manner:

"One who has a right to order, and who _will_ be obeyed!"

The extraordinary manner of the speaker contributed as much as his
singular assertion to induce Barnstable, in his surprise, to lower the
point of his weapon, with an air that might easily have been mistaken
for submission. The Pilot fastened his glowing eyes on him, for an
instant, and then turning to the rest of the listeners, he continued
more mildly:

"It is true that we came not here as marauders, and that our wish is
to do no unnecessary acts of severity to the aged and the helpless. But
this officer of the crown, and this truant American in particular,
are fairly our prisoners; as such, they must be conducted on board our
ship."

"But the main object of our expedition?" said Griffith.

"'Tis lost," returned the Pilot, hastily--"'tis sacrificed to more
private feelings; 'tis like a hundred others, ended in disappointment,
and is forgotten, sir, forever. But the interests of the Republics must
not be neglected, Mr. Griffith.--Though we are not madly to endanger
the lives of those gallant fellows, to gain a love-smile from one young
beauty, neither are we to forget the advantages they may have obtained
for us, in order to procure one of approbation from another. This
Colonel Howard will answer well in a bargain with the minions of the
Crown, and may purchase the freedom of some worthy patriot who is
deserving of his liberty. Nay, nay, suppress that haughty look, and turn
that proud eye on any, rather than me; he goes to the frigate, sir, and
that immediately."

"Then," said Cecilia Howard, timidly approaching the spot where her
uncle stood, a disdainful witness of the dissensions among his captors;
"then will I go with him! He shall never be a resident among his enemies
alone!"

"It would be more ingenuous, and more worthy of my brother's daughter,"
said her uncle, coldly, "if she ascribed her willingness to depart to
its proper motive." Disregarding the look of deep distress with which
Cecilia received this mortifying rejection of her tender attention, the
old man on receiving this order, rushed into the room in a medley; but,
notwithstanding the surly glances, and savage characters of their dress
and equipments, they struck no blow, nor committed any act of hostility.
The ladies shrank back appalled, as this terrific little band took
possession of the hall; and even Borroughcliffe was seen to fall
back towards a door which, in some measure, covered his retreat. The
confusion of this sudden movement had not yet subsided, when sounds
of strife were heard rapidly approaching from a distant part of the
building, and presently one of the numerous doors of the apartment was
violently opened, when two of the garrison of the abbey rushed into the
hall, vigorously pressed by twice their number of seamen, seconded by
Griffith, Manual, and Merry, who were armed with such weapons of
offence as had presented themselves to their hands, at their unexpected
liberation. There was a movement on the part of the seamen who were
already in possession of the room, that threatened instant death to
the fugitives; but Barnstable beat down their pikes with his sword, and
sternly ordered them to fall back. Surprise produced the same pacific
result among the combatants; and as the soldiers hastily sought a
refuge behind their own officers, and the released captives, with their
liberators, joined the body of their friends, the quiet of the hall,
which had been so rudely interrupted, was soon restored.

"You see, sir," said Barnstable, after grasping the hands of Griffith
and Manual in a warm and cordial pressure, "that all my plans have
succeeded. Your sleeping guard are closely watched in their barracks
by one party; our officers are released and your sentinels cut off by
another; while, with a third, I hold the centre of the abbey, and am,
substantially, in possession of your own person. In consideration,
therefore, of what is due to humanity, and to the presence of these
ladies, let there be no struggle. I shall impose no difficult terms, nor
any long imprisonment."

The recruiting officer manifested a composure throughout it, and the
latter laughing, and indulging those buoyant spirits that a boy of his
years and reflection might be supposed to feel even in such a scene.
It was fortunate for her cousin that Katherine had possessed so much
forethought; for the attention of Cecilia Howard was directed much more
to the comforts of her uncle than to those which were necessary for
herself. Attended by Alice Dunscombe, the young mistress of St. Ruth
moved through the solitary apartments of the building, listening to
the mild religious consolation of her companion in silence, at times
yielding to those bursts of mortified feeling, that she could not
repress, or again as calmly giving her orders to her maids, as if the
intended movement was one of but ordinary interest. All this time the
party in the dining-hall remained stationary. The Pilot, as if satisfied
with what he had already done, sank back to his reclining attitude
against the wall, though his eyes keenly watched every movement of the
preparations, in a manner which denoted that his was the master spirit
that directed the whole. Griffith had, however, resumed, in appearance,
the command, and the busy seamen addressed themselves for orders to him
alone. In this manner an hour was consumed, when Cecilia and Katherine
appearing in succession attired in a suitable manner for their
departure, and the baggage of the whole party having been already
entrusted to a petty officer and a party of his men, Griffith gave forth
the customary order to put the whole in motion. The shrill, piercing
whistle of the boatswain once more rang among the galleries and ceilings
of the abbey, and was followed by the deep, hoarse cry of:

"Away, there, you shore-draft! away, there, you boarders! ahead, heave
ahead, sea-dogs!"

This extraordinary summons was succeeded by the roll of a drum and the
strains of a fife, from without, when the whole party moved from the
building in the order that had been previously prescribed by Captain
Manual, who acted as the marshal of the forces on the occasion.

The Pilot had conducted his surprise with so much skill and secrecy
as to have secured every individual about the abbey, whether male or
female, soldier or civilian; and as it might be dangerous to leave any
behind who could convey intelligence into the country, Griffith had
ordered that every human being found in the building should be conducted
to the cliffs; to be held in durance at least until the departure of
the last boat to the cutter, which, he was informed, lay close in to
the land, awaiting their re-embarkation. The hurry of the departure had
caused many lights to be kindled in the abbey, and the contrast between
the glare within and the gloom without attracted the wandering looks of
the captives, as they issued into the paddock. One of those indefinable
and unaccountable feelings which so often cross the human mind induced
Cecilia to pause at the great gate of the grounds, and look back at the
abbey, with a presentiment that she was to behold it for the last
time. The dark and ragged outline of the edifice was clearly delineated
against the northern sky, while the open windows and neglected doors
permitted a view of the solitude within. Twenty tapers were shedding
their useless light in the empty apartments, as if in mockery of the
deserted walls; and Cecilia turned shuddering from the sight, to press
nigher to the person of her indignant uncle, with a secret impression
that her presence would soon be more necessary than ever to his
happiness.

The low hum of voices in front, with the occasional strains of the fife,
and the stern mandates of the sea-officers, soon recalled her, however,
from these visionary thoughts to the surrounding realities, while the
whole party pursued their way with diligence to the margin of the ocean.



