knee and placing her on a chair in a corner. 'You must be a brave lass
and sit still, whatever may chance. Will you do so?'

She pursed up her rosy lips and nodded her head.

'He comes on apace, Micah,' quoth my comrade, who was still standing
by the casement. 'Is he not like some treacherous fox or other beast of
prey?'

There was indeed something in his lean, black-clothed figure and swift
furtive movements which was like some cruel and cunning animal. He stole
along under shadow of the stunted trees and withies, with bent body and
gliding gait, so that from Bridgewater it would be no easy matter for
the most keen-sighted to see him. Indeed, he was so far from the town
that he might safely have come out from his concealment and struck
across the moor, but the deep morass on either side prevented him from
leaving the road until he had passed the cottage.

As he came abreast of our ambush we both sprang out from the open door
and barred his way. I have heard the Independent minister at Emsworth
give an account of Satan's appearance, but if the worthy man had been
with us that day, he need not have drawn upon his fancy. The man's dark
face whitened into a sickly and mottled pallor, while he drew back with
a long sharp intaking of the breath and a venomous flash from his black
eyes, glancing swiftly from right to left for some means of escape. For
an instant his hand shot towards his sword-hilt, but his reason told him
that he could scarce expect to fight his way past us. Then he glanced
round, but any retreat would lead him back to the men whom he had
betrayed. So he stood sullen and stolid, with heavy, downcast face and
shifting, restless eye, the very type and symbol of treachery.

'We have waited some time for you, Master John Derrick,' said I. 'You
must now return with us to the town.'

'On what grounds do you arrest me?' he asked, in hoarse, broken tones.
'Where is your warranty? Who hath given you a commission to molest
travellers upon the King's highway?'

'I have my Colonel's commission,' I answered shortly. 'You have been
once already to Feversham's camp this morning.'

'It is a lie,' he snarled fiercely. 'I do but take a stroll to enjoy the
air.'

'It is the truth,' said Reuben. 'I saw you myself on your return. Let us
see that paper which peeps from your doublet.'

'We all know why you should set this trap for me,' Derrick cried
bitterly. 'You have set evil reports afloat against me, lest I stand in
your light with the Mayor's daughter. What are you that you should dare
to raise your eyes to her! A mere vagrant and masterless man, coming
none know whence. Why should you aspire to pluck the flower which has
grown up amongst us? What had you to do with her or with us? Answer me!'

'It is not a matter which I shall discuss, save at a more fitting time
and place,' Reuben answered quietly. 'Do you give over your sword and
come back with us. For my part, I promise to do what I can to save your
life. Should we win this night, your poor efforts can do little to harm
us. Should we lose, there may be few of us left to harm.'

'I thank you for your kindly protection,' he replied, in the same white,
cold, bitter manner, unbuckling his sword as he spoke, and walking
slowly up to my companion. 'You can take this as a gift to Mistress
Ruth,' he said, presenting the weapon in his left hand, 'and this!' he
added, plucking a knife from his belt and burying it in my poor friend's
side.

It was done in an instant--so suddenly that I had neither time to spring
between, nor to grasp his intention before the wounded man sank gasping
on the ground, and the knife tinkled upon the pathway at my feet. The
villain set up a shrill cry of triumph, and bounding back in time to
avoid the savage sword thrust which I made at him, he turned and fled
down the road at the top of his speed. He was a far lighter man than I,
and more scantily clad, yet I had, from my long wind and length of limb,
been the best runner of my district, and he soon learned by the sound of
my feet that he had no chance of shaking me off. Twice he doubled as a
hare does when the hound is upon him, and twice my sword passed within a
foot of him, for in very truth I had no more thought of mercy than if
he had been a poisonous snake who had fastened his fangs into my friend
before my eyes. I never dreamed of giving nor did he of claiming it.
At last, hearing my steps close upon him and my breathing at his
very shoulder, he sprang wildly through the reeds and dashed into the
treacherous morass. Ankle-deep, knee-deep, thigh-deep, waist-deep, we
struggled and staggered, I still gaining upon him, until I was within
arm's-reach of him, and had whirled up my sword to strike. It had been
ordained, however, my dear children, that he should die not the death of
a man, but that of the reptile which he was, for even as I closed upon
him he sank of a sudden with a gurgling sound, and the green marsh scum
met above his head. No ripple was there and no splash to mark the spot.
It was sudden and silent, as though some strange monster of the marshes
had seized him and dragged him down into the depths. As I stood with
upraised sword still gazing upon the spot, one single great bubble rose
and burst upon the surface, and then all was still once more, and the
dreary fens lay stretched before me, the very home of death and of
desolation. I know not whether he had indeed come upon some sudden pit
which had engulfed him, or whether in his despair he had cast himself
down of set purpose. I do but know that there in the great Sedgemoor
morass are buried the bones of the traitor and the spy.

I made my way as best I could through the oozy clinging mud to the
margin, and hastened back to where Reuben was lying. Bending over him
I found that the knife had pierced through the side leather which
connected his back and front plates, and that the blood was not only
pouring out of the wound, but was trickling from the corner of his
mouth. With trembling fingers I undid the straps and buckles, loosened
the armour, and pressed my kerchief to his side to staunch the flow.

'I trust that you have not slain him, Micah,' he said of a sudden,
opening his eyes.

'A higher power than ours has judged him, Reuben,' I answered.

'Poor devil! He has had much to embitter him,' he murmured, and
straightway fainted again. As I knelt over him, marking the lad's white
face and laboured breathing, and bethought me of his simple, kindly
nature and of the affection which I had done so little to deserve, I am
not ashamed to say, my dears, albeit I am a man somewhat backward in my
emotions, that my tears were mingled with his blood.

As it chanced, Decimus Saxon had found time to ascend the church tower
for the purpose of watching us through his glass and seeing how we
fared. Noting that there was something amiss, he had hurried down for
a skilled chirurgeon, whom he brought out to us under an escort of
scythesmen. I was still kneeling by my senseless friend, doing what an
ignorant man might to assist him, when the party arrived and helped me
to bear him into the cottage, out of the glare of the sun. The minutes
were as hours while the man of physic with a grave face examined and
probed the wound.

'It will scarce prove fatal,' he said at last, and I could have embraced
him for the words. 'The blade has glanced on a rib, though the lung is
slightly torn. We shall hear him back with us to the town.'

'You hear what he says,' said Saxon kindly. 'He is a man whose opinion
is of weight--

          "A skilful leach is better far,
           Than half a hundred men of war."

Cheer up, man! You are as white as though it were your blood and not his
which was drained away. Where is Derrick?'

'Drowned in the marshes,' I answered.

''Tis well! It will save us six feet of good hemp. But our position here
is somewhat exposed, since the Royal Horse might make a dash at us. Who
is this little maid who sits so white and still in the corner.'

''Tis the guardian of the house. Her granny has left her here.'

'You had better come with us. There may be rough work here ere all is
over.'

'Nay, I must wait for granny,' she answered, with the tears running down
her cheeks.

'But how if I take you to granny, little one,' said I. 'We cannot
leave you here. 'I held out my arms, and the child sprang into them and
nestled up against my bosom, sobbing as though her heart would break.
'Take me away,' she cried; 'I'se frightened.'

I soothed the little trembling thing as best I might, and bore her off
with me upon my shoulder. The scythesmen had passed the handles of their
long weapons through the sleeves of their jerkins in such a way as to
form a couch or litter, upon which poor Reuben was laid. A slight dash
of colour had come back to his cheeks in answer to some cordial given
him by the chirurgeon, and he nodded and smiled at Saxon. Thus, pacing
slowly, we returned to Bridgewater, where Reuben was carried to our
quarters, and I bore the little maid of the marshes to kind townsfolk,
who promised to restore her to her home when the troubles were over.



Chapter XXXII. Of the Onfall at Sedgemoor

However pressing our own private griefs and needs, we had little time
now to dwell upon them, for the moment was at hand which was to decide
for the time not only our own fates, but that of the Protestant cause
in England. None of us made light of the danger. Nothing less than a
miracle could preserve us from defeat, and most of us were of opinion
that the days of the miracles were past. Others, however, thought
otherwise. I believe that many of our Puritans, had they seen the
heavens open that night, and the armies of the Seraphim and the Cherubim
descending to our aid, would have looked upon it as by no means a
wonderful or unexpected occurrence.

The whole town was loud with the preaching. Every troop or company had
its own chosen orator, and sometimes more than one, who held forth
and expounded. From barrels, from waggons, from windows, and even from
housetops, they addressed the crowds beneath; nor was their eloquence
in vain. Hoarse, fierce shouts rose up from the streets, with broken
prayers and ejaculations. Men were drunk with religion as with wine.
Their faces were flushed, their speech thick, their gestures wild. Sir
Stephen and Saxon smiled at each other as they watched them, for they
knew, as old soldiers, that of all causes which make a man valiant in
deed and careless of life, this religious fit is the strongest and the
most enduring.

In the evening I found time to look in upon my wounded friend, and found
him propped up with cushions upon his couch, breathing with some pain,
but as bright and merry as ever. Our prisoner, Major Ogilvy, who had
conceived a warm affection for us, sat by his side and read aloud to him
out of an old book of plays.

'This wound hath come at an evil moment,' said Reuben impatiently.
'Is it not too much that a little prick like this should send my men
captainless into battle, after all our marching and drilling? I have
been present at the grace, and am cut off from the dinner.'

'Your company hath been joined to mine,' I answered, 'though, indeed,
the honest fellows are cast down at not having their own captain. Has
the physician been to see you?'

'He has left even now,' said Major Ogilvy. 'He pronounces our friend to
be doing right well, but hath warned me against allowing him to talk.'

'Hark to that, lad!' said I, shaking my finger at him. 'If I hear a word
from you I go. You will escape a rough waking this night, Major. What
think you of our chance?'

'I have thought little of your chance from the first,' he replied
frankly. 'Monmouth is like a ruined gamester, who is now putting his
last piece upon the board. He cannot win much, and he may lose all.'

'Nay, that is a hard saying,' said I. 'A success might set the whole of
the Midlands in arms.'

'England is not ripe for it,' the Major answered, with a shake of his
head. 'It is true that it has no fancy either for Papistry or for a
Papist King, but we know that it is but a passing evil, since the next
in succession, the Prince of Orange, is a Protestant. Why, then, should
we risk so many evils to bring that about which time and patience must,
perforce, accomplish between them? Besides, the man whom ye support has
shown that he is unworthy of confidence. Did he not in his declaration
promise to leave the choice of a monarch to the Commons? And yet, in
less than a week, he proclaimed himself at Taunton Market Cross! Who
could believe one who has so little regard for truth?'

'Treason, Major, rank treason,' I answered, laughing. 'Yet if we could
order a leader as one does a coat we might, perchance, have chosen
one of a stronger texture. We are in arms not for him, but for the old
liberties and rights of Englishmen. Have you seen Sir Gervas?'

Major Ogilvy, and even Reuben, burst out laughing. 'You will find him
in the room above,' said our prisoner. 'Never did a famous toast prepare
herself for a court ball as he is preparing for his battle. If the
King's troops take him they will assuredly think that they have the
Duke. He hath been in here to consult us as to his patches, hosen, and I
know not what beside. You had best go up to him.'

'Adieu, then, Reuben!' I said, grasping his hand in mine.

'Adieu, Micah! God shield you from harm,' said he.

'Can I speak to you aside, Major?' I whispered. 'I think,' I went on,
as he followed me into the passage, 'that you will not say that your
captivity hath been made very harsh for you. May I ask, therefore, that
you will keep an eye upon my friend should we be indeed defeated this
night? No doubt if Feversham gains the upper hand there will be bloody
work. The hale can look after themselves, but he is helpless, and will
need a friend.'

The Major pressed my hand. 'I swear to God,' he said, 'that no harm
shall befall him.'

'You have taken a load from my heart,' I answered; 'I know that I leave
him in safety. 'I can now ride to battle with an easy mind.' With a
friendly smile the soldier returned to the sick-room, whilst I ascended
the stair and entered the quarters of Sir Gervas Jerome.

He was standing before a table which was littered all over with pots,
brushes, boxes, and a score of the like trifles, which he had either
bought or borrowed for the occasion. A large hand-mirror was balanced
against the wall, with rush-lights on either side of it. In front of
this, with a most solemn and serious expression upon his pale, handsome
face, the Baronet was arranging and re-arranging a white berdash cravat.
His riding-boots were brightly polished, and the broken seam repaired.
His sword-sheath, breastplate, and trappings were clear and bright.
He wore his gayest and newest suit, and above all he had donned a most
noble and impressive full-bottomed periwig, which drooped down to his
shoulders, as white as powder could make it. From his dainty riding-hat
to his shining spur there was no speck or stain upon him--a sad set-off
to my own state, plastered as I was with a thick crust of the Sedgemoor
mud, and disordered from having ridden and worked for two days without
rest or repose.

'Split me, but you have come in good time!' he exclaimed, as I entered.
'I have even now sent down for a flask of canary. Ah, and here it
comes!' as a maid from the inn tripped upstairs with the bottle and
glasses. 'Here is a gold piece, my pretty dear, the very last that I
have in the whole world. It is the only survivor of a goodly family. Pay
mine host for the wine, little one, and keep the change for thyself, to
buy ribbons for the next holiday. Now, curse me if I can get this cravat
to fit unwrinkled!'

'There is nought amiss with it,' I answered. 'How can such trifles
occupy you at such a time?'

'Trifles!' he cried angrily. 'Trifles! Well, there, it boots not to
argue with you. Your bucolic mind would never rise to the subtle import
which may lie in such matters--the rest of mind which it is to have
them right, and the plaguey uneasiness when aught is wrong. It comes,
doubtless, from training, and it may be that I have it more than others
of my class. I feel as a cat who would lick all day to take the least
speck from her fur. Is not the patch over the eyebrow happily chosen?
Nay, you cannot even offer an opinion; I would as soon ask friend Marot,
the knight of the pistol. Fill up your glass!'

'Your company awaits you by the church,' I remarked; 'I saw them as I
passed.'

'How looked they?' he asked. 'Were they powdered and clean?'

'Nay, I had little leisure to observe. I saw that they were cutting
their matches and arranging their priming.'

'I would that they had all snaphances,' he answered, sprinkling himself
with scented water; 'the matchlocks are slow and cumbersome. Have you
had wine enough?'

'I will take no more,' I answered.

'Then mayhap the Major may care to finish it. It is not often I ask help
with a bottle, but I would keep my head cool this night. Let us go down
and see to our men.'

It was ten o'clock when we descended into the street. The hubbub of
the preachers and the shouting of the people had died away, for the
regiments had fallen into their places, and stood silent and stern,
with the faint light from the lamps and windows playing over their dark
serried ranks. A cool, clear moon shone down upon us from amidst fleecy
clouds, which drifted ever and anon across her face. Away in the north
tremulous rays of light flickered up into the heavens, coming and going
like long, quivering fingers. They were the northern lights, a sight
rarely seen in the southland counties. It is little wonder that, coming
at such a time, the fanatics should have pointed to them as signals
from another world, and should have compared them to that pillar of fire
which guided Israel through the dangers of the desert. The footpaths and
the windows were crowded with women and children, who broke into shrill
cries of fear or of wonder as the strange light waxed and waned.

'It is half after ten by St. Mary's clock,' said Saxon, as we rode up to
the regiment. 'Have we nothing to give the men?'

'There is a hogshead of Zoyland cider in the yard of yonder inn,' said
Sir Gervas. 'Here, Dawson, do you take those gold sleeve links and give
them to mine host in exchange. Broach the barrel, and let each man have
his horn full. Sink me, if they shall fight with nought but cold water
in them.'

'They will feel the need of it ere morning,' said Saxon, as a score
of pikemen hastened off to the inn. 'The marsh air is chilling to the
blood.'

'I feel cold already, and Covenant is stamping with it,' said I. 'Might
we not, if we have time upon our hands, canter our horses down the
line?'

'Of a surety,' Saxon answered gladly, 'we could not do better;' so
shaking our bridles we rode off, our horses' hoofs striking fire from
the flint-paved streets as we passed.

Behind the horse, in a long line which stretched from the Eastover gate,
across the bridge, along the High Street, up the Cornhill, and so past
the church to the Pig Cross, stood our foot, silent and grim, save when
some woman's voice from the windows called forth a deep, short answer
from the ranks. The fitful light gleamed on scythes-blade or gun-barrel,
and showed up the lines of rugged, hard set faces, some of mere children
with never a hair upon their cheeks, others of old men whose grey beards
swept down to their cross-belts, but all bearing the same stamp of a
dogged courage and a fierce self-contained resolution. Here were still
the fisher folk of the south. Here, too, were the fierce men from the
Mendips, the wild hunters from Porlock Quay and Minehead, the poachers
of Exmoor, the shaggy marshmen of Axbridge, the mountain men from the
Quantocks, the serge and wool-workers of Devonshire, the graziers of
Bampton, the red-coats from the Militia, the stout burghers of Taunton,
and then, as the very bone and sinew of all, the brave smockfrocked
peasants of the plains, who had turned up their jackets to the elbow,
and exposed their brown and corded arms, as was their wont when good
work had to be done. As I speak to you, dear children, fifty years
rolls by like a mist in the morning, and I am riding once more down
the winding street, and see again the serried ranks of my gallant
companions. Brave hearts! They showed to all time how little training it
takes to turn an Englishman into a soldier, and what manner of men are
bred in those quiet, peaceful hamlets which dot the sunny slopes of the
Somerset and Devon downs. If ever it should be that England should
be struck upon her knees, if those who fight her battles should have
deserted her, and she should find herself unarmed in the presence of her
enemy, let her take heart and remember that every village in the realm
is a barrack, and that her real standing army is the hardy courage and
simple virtue which stand ever in the breast of the humblest of her
peasants.

As we rode down the long line a buzz of greeting and welcome rose now
and again from the ranks as they recognised through the gloom Saxon's
tall, gaunt figure. The clock was on the stroke of eleven as we returned
to our own men, and at that very moment King Monmouth rode out from the
inn where he was quartered, and trotted with his staff down the High
Street. All cheering had been forbidden, but waving caps and brandished
arms spoke the ardour of his devoted followers. No bugle was to sound
the march, but as each received the word the one in its rear followed
its movements. The clatter and shuffle of hundreds of moving feet came
nearer and nearer, until the Frome men in front of us began to march,
and we found ourselves fairly started upon the last journey which many
of us were ever to take in this world.

Our road lay across the Parret, through Eastover, and so along the
winding track past the spot where Derrick met his fate, and the lonely
cottage of the little maid. At the other side of this the road becomes
a mere pathway over the plain. A dense haze lay over the moor, gathering
thickly in the hollows, and veiling both the town which we had left and
the villages which we were approaching. Now and again it would lift
for a few moments, and then I could see in the moonlight the long black
writhing line of the army, with the shimmer of steel playing over it,
and the rude white standards flapping in the night breeze. Far on the
right a great fire was blazing--some farmhouse, doubtless, which the
Tangiers devils had made spoil of. Very slow our march was, and very
careful, for the plain was, as Sir Stephen Timewell had told us, cut
across by great ditches or rhines, which could not be passed save at
some few places. These ditches were cut for the purpose of draining the
marshes, and were many feet deep of water and of mud, so that even
the horse could not cross them. The bridges were narrow, and some time
passed before the army could get over. At last, however, the two main
ones, the Black Ditch and the Langmoor Rhine, were safely traversed and
a halt was called while the foot was formed in line, for we had reason
to believe that no other force lay between the Royal camp and ourselves.
So far our enterprise had succeeded admirably. We were within half a
mile of the camp without mistake or accident, and none of the enemy's
scouts had shown sign of their presence. Clearly they held us in such
contempt that it had never occurred to them that we might open the
attack. If ever a general deserved a beating it was Feversham that
night. As he drew up upon the moor the clock of Chedzoy struck one.

'Is it not glorious?' whispered Sir Gervas, as we reined up upon the
further side of the Langmoor Rhine. 'What is there on earth to compare
with the excitement of this?'

'You speak as though it wore a cocking-match or a bull-baiting, 'I
answered, with some little coldness. 'It is a solemn and a sad occasion.
Win who will, English blood must soak the soil of England this night.'

'The more room for those who are left,' said he lightly. 'Mark over
yonder the glow of their camp-fires amidst the fog. What was it that
your seaman friend did recommend? Get the weather-gauge of them and
board--eh? Have you told that to the Colonel?'

'Nay, this is no time for quips and cranks,' I answered gravely; 'the
chances are that few of us will ever see to-morrow's sun rise.'

'I have no great curiosity to see it,' he remarked, with a laugh. 'It
will be much as yesterday's. Zounds! though I have never risen to see
one in my life, I have looked on many a hundred ere I went to bed.'

'I have told friend Reuben such few things as I should desire to be done
in case I should fall,' said I. 'It has eased my mind much to know that
I leave behind some word of farewell, and little remembrance to all whom
I have known. Is there no service of the sort which I can do for you?'

'Hum!' said he, musing. 'If I go under, you can tell Araminta--nay, let
the poor wench alone! Why should I send her messages which may plague
her! Should you be in town, little Tommy Chichester would be glad to
hear of the fun which we have had in Somerset. You will find him at the
Coca Tree every day of the week between two and four of the clock. There
is Mother Butterworth, too, whom I might commend to your notice. She
was the queen of wet-nurses, but alas! cruel time hath dried up her
business, and she hath need of some little nursing herself.'

'If I live and you should fall, I shall do what may be done for her,'
said I. 'Have you aught else to say?'

'Only that Hacker of Paul's Yard is the best for vests,' he answered.
'It is a small piece of knowledge, yet like most other knowledge it hath
been bought and paid for. One other thing! I have a trinket or two left
which might serve as a gift for the pretty Puritan maid, should our
friend lead her to the altar. Od's my life, but she will make him read
some queer books! How now, Colonel, why are we stuck out on the moor
like a row of herons among the sedges?'

'They are ordering the line for the attack,' said Saxon, who had ridden
up during our conversation. 'Donnerblitz! Who ever saw a camp so
exposed to an onfall? Oh for twelve hundred good horse--for an hour of
Wessenburg's Pandours! Would I not trample them down until their camp
was like a field of young corn after a hail-storm!'

'May not our horse advance?' I asked.

The old soldier gave a deep snort of disdain. 'If this fight is to be
won it must be by our foot,' said he; 'what can we hope for from such
cavalry? Keep your men well in hand, for we may have to bear the brunt
of the King's dragoons. A flank attack would fall upon us, for we are in
the post of honour.'

'There are troops to the right of us,' I answered, peering through the
darkness.

'Aye! the Taunton burghers and the Frome peasants. Our brigade covers
the right flank. Next us are the Mendip miners, nor could I wish for
better comrades, if their zeal do not outrun their discretion. They are
on their knees in the mud at this moment.'

'They will fight none the worse for that,' I remarked; 'but surely the
troops are advancing!'

'Aye, aye!' cried Saxon joyously, plucking out his sword, and tying
his handkerchief round the handle to strengthen his grip. 'The hour has
come! Forwards!'

Very slowly and silently we crept on through the dense fog, our feet
splashing and slipping in the sodden soil. With all the care which
we could take, the advance of so great a number of men could not be
conducted without a deep sonorous sound from the thousands of marching
feet. Ahead of us were splotches of ruddy light twinkling through the
fog which marked the Royal watch-fires. Immediately in front in a dense
column our own horse moved forwards. Of a sudden out of the darkness
there came a sharp challenge and a shout, with the discharge of a
carbine and the sound of galloping hoofs. Away down the line we heard
a ripple of shots. The first line of outposts had been reached. At the
alarm our horse charged forward with a huzza, and we followed them as
fast as our men could run. We had crossed two or three hundred yards of
moor, and could hear the blowing of the Royal bugles quite close to us,
when our horse came to a sudden halt, and our whole advance was at a
standstill.

'Sancta Maria!' cried Saxon, dashing forward with the rest of us to find
out the cause of the delay. 'We must on at any cost! A halt now will
ruin our camisado.'

'Forwards, forwards!' cried Sir Gervas and I, waving our swords.

'It is no use, gentlemen,' cried a cornet of horse, wringing his hands;
'we are undone and betrayed. There is a broad ditch without a ford in
front of us, full twenty feet across!'

'Give me room for my horse, and I shall show ye the way across!' cried
the Baronet, backing his steed. 'Now, lads, who's for a jump?'

'Nay, sir, for God's sake!' said a trooper, laying his hand upon his
bridle. 'Sergeant Sexton hath sprung in even now, and horse and man have
gone to the bottom!'

'Let us see it, then!' cried Saxon, pushing his way through the crowd
of horsemen. We followed close at his heels, until we found ourselves on
the borders of the vast trench which impeded our advance.

To this day I have never been able to make up my mind whether it was
by chance or by treachery on the part of our guides that this fosse was
overlooked until we stumbled upon it in the dark. There are some who say
that the Bussex Rhine, as it is called, is not either deep or broad,
and was, therefore, unmentioned by the moorsmen, but that the recent
constant rains had swollen it to an extent never before known. Others
say that the guides had been deceived by the fog, and taken a wrong
course, whereas, had we followed another track, we might have been able
to come upon the camp without crossing the ditch. However that may be,
it is certain that we found it stretching in front of us, broad, black,
and forbidding, full twenty feet from bank to bank, with the cap of the
ill-fated sergeant just visible in the centre as a mute warning to all
who might attempt to ford it.

'There must be a passage somewhere,' cried Saxon furiously. 'Every
moment is worth a troop of horse to them. Where is my Lord Grey? Hath
the guide met with his deserts?'

'Major Hollis hath hurled the guide into the ditch,' the young cornet
answered. 'My Lord Grey hath ridden along the bank seeking for a ford.'

I caught a pike out of a footman's hand, and probed into the black
oozy mud, standing myself up to the waist in it, and holding Covenant's
bridle in my left hand. Nowhere could I touch bottom or find any hope of
solid foothold.

'Here, fellow!' cried Saxon, seizing a trooper by the arm. 'Make for
the rear! Gallop as though the devil were behind you! Bring up a pair
of ammunition waggons, and we shall see whether we cannot bridge this
infernal puddle.'

'If a few of us could make a lodgment upon the other side we might make
it good until help came,' said Sir Gervas, as the horseman galloped off
upon his mission.

All down the rebel line a fierce low roar of disappointment and rage
showed that the whole army had met the same obstacle which hindered
our attack. On the other side of the ditch the drums beat, the bugles
screamed, and the shouts and oaths of the officers could be heard as
they marshalled their men. Glancing lights in Chedzoy, Westonzoyland,
and the other hamlets to left and right, showed how fast the alarm
was extending. Decimus Saxon rode up and down the edge of the fosse,
pattering forth foreign oaths, grinding his teeth in his fury, and
rising now and again in his stirrups to shake his gauntleted hands at
the enemy.

'For whom are ye?' shouted a hoarse voice out of the haze.

'For the King!' roared the peasants in answer.

'For which King?' cried the voice.

