worth a hundred thousand guilders."

"Indeed!"

"Yes, Monseigneur, by usurpers, by forgers."

"This is a crime, Mynheer van Systens."

"So it is, your Highness."

"And have you any proofs of their guilt?"

"No, Monseigneur, the guilty woman----"

"The guilty woman, Sir?"

"I ought to say, the woman who claims the tulip, Monseigneur, is here in
the room close by."

"And what do you think of her?"

"I think, Monseigneur, that the bait of a hundred thousand guilders may
have tempted her."

"And so she claims the tulip?"

"Yes Monseigneur."

"And what proof does she offer?"

"I was just going to question her when your Highness came in."

"Question her, Mynheer van Systens, question her. I am the first
magistrate of the country; I will hear the case and administer justice."

"I have found my King Solomon," said Van Systens, bowing, and showing
the way to the Prince.

His Highness was just going to walk ahead, but, suddenly recollecting
himself he said--

"Go before me, and call me plain Mynheer."

The two then entered the cabinet.

Rosa was still standing at the same place, leaning on the window, and
looking through the panes into the garden.

"Ah! a Frisian girl," said the Prince, as he observed Rosa's gold
brocade headdress and red petticoat.

At the noise of their footsteps she turned round, but scarcely saw the
Prince, who seated himself in the darkest corner of the apartment.

All her attention, as may be easily imagined, was fixed on that
important person who was called Van Systens, so that she had no time to
notice the humble stranger who was following the master of the house,
and who, for aught she knew, might be somebody or nobody.

The humble stranger took a book down from the shelf, and made Van
Systens a sign to commence the examination forthwith.

Van Systens, likewise at the invitation of the young man in the violet
coat, sat down in his turn, and, quite happy and proud of the importance
thus cast upon him, began,--

"My child, you promise to tell me the truth and the entire truth
concerning this tulip?"

"I promise."

"Well, then, speak before this gentleman; this gentleman is one of the
members of the Horticultural Society."

"What am I to tell you, sir," said Rosa, "beside that which I have told
you already."

"Well, then, what is it?"

"I repeat the question I have addressed to you before."

"Which?"

"That you will order Mynheer Boxtel to come here with his tulip. If I do
not recognise it as mine I will frankly tell it; but if I do recognise
it I will reclaim it, even if I go before his Highness the Stadtholder
himself, with my proofs in my hands."

"You have, then, some proofs, my child?"

"God, who knows my good right, will assist me to some."

Van Systens exchanged a look with the Prince, who, since the first words
of Rosa, seemed to try to remember her, as if it were not for the first
time that this sweet voice rang in his ears.

An officer went off to fetch Boxtel, and Van Systens in the meanwhile
continued his examination.

"And with what do you support your assertion that you are the real owner
of the black tulip?"

"With the very simple fact of my having planted and grown it in my own
chamber."

"In your chamber? Where was your chamber?"

"At Loewestein."

"You are from Loewestein?"

"I am the daughter of the jailer of the fortress."

The Prince made a little movement, as much as to say, "Well, that's it,
I remember now."

And, all the while feigning to be engaged with his book, he watched Rosa
with even more attention than he had before.

"And you are fond of flowers?" continued Mynheer van Systens.

"Yes, sir."

"Then you are an experienced florist, I dare say?"

Rosa hesitated a moment; then with a tone which came from the depth of
her heart, she said,--

"Gentlemen, I am speaking to men of honor."

There was such an expression of truth in the tone of her voice, that
Van Systens and the Prince answered simultaneously by an affirmative
movement of their heads.

"Well, then, I am not an experienced florist; I am only a poor girl, one
of the people, who, three months ago, knew neither how to read nor how
to write. No, the black tulip has not been found by myself."

"But by whom else?"

"By a poor prisoner of Loewestein."

"By a prisoner of Loewestein?" repeated the Prince.

The tone of his voice startled Rosa, who was sure she had heard it
before.

"By a prisoner of state, then," continued the Prince, "as there are none
else there."

Having said this he began to read again, at least in appearance.

"Yes," said Rosa, with a faltering voice, "yes, by a prisoner of state."

Van Systens trembled as he heard such a confession made in the presence
of such a witness.

"Continue," said William dryly, to the President of the Horticultural
Society.

"Ah, sir," said Rosa, addressing the person whom she thought to be her
real judge, "I am going to incriminate myself very seriously."

"Certainly," said Van Systens, "the prisoner of state ought to be kept
in close confinement at Loewestein."

"Alas! sir."

"And from what you tell me you took advantage of your position, as
daughter of the jailer, to communicate with a prisoner of state about
the cultivation of flowers."

"So it is, sir," Rosa murmured in dismay; "yes, I am bound to confess, I
saw him every day."

"Unfortunate girl!" exclaimed Van Systens.

The Prince, observing the fright of Rosa and the pallor of the
President, raised his head, and said, in his clear and decided tone,--

"This cannot signify anything to the members of the Horticultural
Society; they have to judge on the black tulip, and have no cognizance
to take of political offences. Go on, young woman, go on."

Van Systens, by means of an eloquent glance, offered, in the name of the
tulip, his thanks to the new member of the Horticultural Society.

Rosa, reassured by this sort of encouragement which the stranger was
giving her, related all that had happened for the last three months,
all that she had done, and all that she had suffered. She described the
cruelty of Gryphus; the destruction of the first bulb; the grief of
the prisoner; the precautions taken to insure the success of the
second bulb; the patience of the prisoner and his anxiety during their
separation; how he was about to starve himself because he had no longer
any news of his tulip; his joy when she went to see him again; and,
lastly, their despair when they found that the tulip which had come into
flower was stolen just one hour after it had opened.

All this was detailed with an accent of truth which, although producing
no change in the impassible mien of the Prince, did not fail to take
effect on Van Systens.

"But," said the Prince, "it cannot be long since you knew the prisoner."

Rosa opened her large eyes and looked at the stranger, who drew back
into the dark corner, as if he wished to escape her observation.

"Why, sir?" she asked him.

"Because it is not yet four months since the jailer Gryphus and his
daughter were removed to Loewestein."

"That is true, sir."

"Otherwise, you must have solicited the transfer of your father, in
order to be able to follow some prisoner who may have been transported
from the Hague to Loewestein."

"Sir," said Rosa, blushing.

"Finish what you have to say," said William.

"I confess I knew the prisoner at the Hague."

"Happy prisoner!" said William, smiling.

At this moment the officer who had been sent for Boxtel returned, and
announced to the Prince that the person whom he had been to fetch was
following on his heels with his tulip.




Chapter 27. The Third Bulb


Boxtel's return was scarcely announced, when he entered in person the
drawing-room of Mynheer van Systens, followed by two men, who carried in
a box their precious burden and deposited it on a table.

The Prince, on being informed, left the cabinet, passed into the
drawing-room, admired the flower, and silently resumed his seat in the
dark corner, where he had himself placed his chair.

Rosa, trembling, pale and terrified, expected to be invited in her turn
to see the tulip.

She now heard the voice of Boxtel.

"It is he!" she exclaimed.

The Prince made her a sign to go and look through the open door into the
drawing-room.

"It is my tulip," cried Rosa, "I recognise it. Oh, my poor Cornelius!"

And saying this she burst into tears.

The Prince rose from his seat, went to the door, where he stood for some
time with the full light falling upon his figure.

As Rosa's eyes now rested upon him, she felt more than ever convinced
that this was not the first time she had seen the stranger.

"Master Boxtel," said the Prince, "come in here, if you please."

Boxtel eagerly approached, and, finding himself face to face with
William of Orange, started back.

"His Highness!" he called out.

"His Highness!" Rosa repeated in dismay.

Hearing this exclamation on his left, Boxtel turned round, and perceived
Rosa.

At this sight the whole frame of the thief shook as if under the
influence of a galvanic shock.

"Ah!" muttered the Prince to himself, "he is confused."

But Boxtel, making a violent effort to control his feelings, was already
himself again.

"Master Boxtel," said William, "you seem to have discovered the secret
of growing the black tulip?"

"Yes, your Highness," answered Boxtel, in a voice which still betrayed
some confusion.

It is true his agitation might have been attributable to the emotion
which the man must have felt on suddenly recognising the Prince.

"But," continued the Stadtholder, "here is a young damsel who also
pretends to have found it."

Boxtel, with a disdainful smile, shrugged his shoulders.

William watched all his movements with evident interest and curiosity.

"Then you don't know this young girl?" said the Prince.

"No, your Highness!"

"And you, child, do you know Master Boxtel?"

"No, I don't know Master Boxtel, but I know Master Jacob."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean to say that at Loewestein the man who here calls himself Isaac
Boxtel went by the name of Master Jacob."

"What do you say to that, Master Boxtel?"

"I say that this damsel lies, your Highness."

"You deny, therefore, having ever been at Loewestein?"

Boxtel hesitated; the fixed and searching glance of the proud eye of the
Prince prevented him from lying.

"I cannot deny having been at Loewestein, your Highness, but I deny
having stolen the tulip."

"You have stolen it, and that from my room," cried Rosa, with
indignation.

"I deny it."

"Now listen to me. Do you deny having followed me into the garden, on
the day when I prepared the border where I was to plant it? Do you deny
having followed me into the garden when I pretended to plant it? Do you
deny that, on that evening, you rushed after my departure to the spot
where you hoped to find the bulb? Do you deny having dug in the ground
with your hands--but, thank God! in vain, as it was a stratagem to
discover your intentions. Say, do you deny all this?"

Boxtel did not deem it fit to answer these several charges, but, turning
to the Prince, continued,--

"I have now for twenty years grown tulips at Dort. I have even acquired
some reputation in this art; one of my hybrids is entered in the
catalogue under the name of an illustrious personage. I have dedicated
it to the King of Portugal. The truth in the matter is as I shall now
tell your Highness. This damsel knew that I had produced the black
tulip, and, in concert with a lover of hers in the fortress of
Loewestein, she formed the plan of ruining me by appropriating to
herself the prize of a hundred thousand guilders, which, with the help
