
"I speak in pity to myself," returned the brother, gently removing
Frances from the arms of her aunt. "What a time is this to leave two
such lovely females without a protector! Their abode is destroyed, and
misery will speedily deprive them of their last male friend," looking at
his father; "can I die in peace with the knowledge of the danger to
which they will be exposed?"

"You forget me," said Miss Peyton, shrinking at the idea of celebrating
nuptials at such a moment.

"No, my dear aunt, I forget you not, nor shall I, until I cease to
remember; but you forget the times and the danger. The good woman who
lives in this house has already dispatched a messenger for a man of God,
to smooth my passage to another world. Frances, if you would wish me to
die in peace, to feel a security that will allow me to turn my whole
thoughts to heaven, you will let this clergyman unite you to Dunwoodie."

Frances shook her head, but remained silent.

"I ask for no joy--no demonstration of a felicity that you will not,
cannot feel, for months to come; but obtain a right to his powerful
name--give him an undisputed title to protect you--"

Again the maid made an impressive gesture of denial.

"For the sake of that unconscious sufferer"--pointing to Sarah, "for
your sake--for my sake--my sister--"

"Peace, Henry, or you will break my heart," cried the agitated girl.
"Not for worlds would I at such a moment engage in the solemn vows that
you wish. It would render me miserable for life."

"You love him not," said Henry, reproachfully. "I cease to importune you
to do what is against your inclinations."

Frances raised one hand to conceal her countenance, as she extended the
other towards Dunwoodie, and said earnestly,--

"Now you are unjust to me--before, you were unjust to yourself."

"Promise me, then," said Wharton, musing awhile in silence, "that as
soon as the recollection of my fate is softened, you will give my friend
that hand for life, and I am satisfied."

"I do promise," said Frances, withdrawing the hand that Dunwoodie
delicately relinquished, without even presuming to press it to his lips.

"Well, then, my good aunt," continued Henry, "will you leave me for a
short time alone with my friend? I have a few melancholy commissions
with which to intrust him, and would spare you and my sister the pain of
hearing them."

"There is yet time to see Washington again," said Miss Peyton, moving
towards the door; and then, speaking with extreme dignity, she
continued, "I will go myself; surely he must listen to a woman from his
own colony!--and we are in some degree connected with his family."

"Why not apply to Mr. Harper?" said Frances, recollecting the parting
words of their guest for the first time.

"Harper!" echoed Dunwoodie, turning towards her with the swiftness of
lightning; "what of him? Do you know him?"

"It is in vain," said Henry, drawing him aside; "Frances clings to hope
with the fondness of a sister. Retire, my love, and leave me with
my friend."

But Frances read an expression in the eye of Dunwoodie that chained her
to the spot. After struggling to command her feelings, she continued,--

"He stayed with us for two days--he was with us when Henry was
arrested."

"And--and--did you know him?"

"Nay," continued Frances, catching her breath as she witnessed the
intense interest of her lover, "we knew him not; he came to us in the
night, a stranger, and remained with us during the severe storm; but he
seemed to take an interest in Henry, and promised him his friendship,"

"What!" exclaimed the youth in astonishment. "Did he know your brother?"

"Certainly; it was at his request that Henry threw aside his disguise."

"But," said Dunwoodie, turning pale with suspense, "he knew him not as
an officer of the royal army?"

"Indeed he did," cried Miss Peyton; "and he cautioned us against this
very danger."

Dunwoodie caught up the fatal paper, that still lay where it had fallen
from his own hands, and studied its characters intently. Something
seemed to bewilder his brain. He passed his hand over his forehead,
while each eye was fixed on him in dreadful suspense--all feeling afraid
to admit those hopes anew that had been so sadly destroyed.

"What said he? What promised he?" at length Dunwoodie asked, with
feverish impatience.

"He bid Henry apply to him when in danger, and promised to requite the
son for the hospitality of the father."

"Said he this, knowing him to be a British officer?"

"Most certainly; and with a view to this very danger."

"Then," cried the youth aloud, and yielding to his rapture, "then you
are safe--then will I save him; yes, Harper will never forget his word."

"But has he the power to?" said Frances. "Can he move the stubborn
purpose of Washington?"

"Can he? If he cannot," shouted the youth, "if he cannot, who can?
Greene, and Heath, and young Hamilton are nothing compared to this
Harper. But," rushing to his mistress, and pressing her hands
convulsively, "repeat to me--you say you have his promise?"

"Surely, surely, Peyton; his solemn, deliberate promise, knowing all the
circumstances."

"Rest easy," cried Dunwoodie, holding her to his bosom for a moment,
"rest easy, for Henry is safe."

He waited not to explain, but darting from the room, he left the family
in amazement. They continued in silent wonder until they heard the feet
of his charger, as he dashed from the door with the speed of an arrow.

A long time was spent after this abrupt departure of the youth, by the
anxious friends he had left, in discussing the probability of his
success. The confidence of his manner had, however, communicated to his
auditors something of his own spirit. Each felt that the prospects of
Henry were again brightening, and with their reviving hopes they
experienced a renewal of spirits, which in all but Henry himself
amounted to pleasure; with him, indeed, his state was too awful to admit
of trifling, and for a few hours he was condemned to feel how much more
intolerable was suspense than even the certainty of calamity. Not so
with Frances. She, with all the reliance of affection, reposed in
security on the assurance of Dunwoodie, without harassing herself with
doubts that she possessed not the means of satisfying; but believing her
lover able to accomplish everything that man could do, and retaining a
vivid recollection of the manner and benevolent appearance of Harper,
she abandoned herself to all the felicity of renovated hope.

The joy of Miss Peyton was more sobered, and she took frequent occasions
to reprove her niece for the exuberance of her spirits, before there was
a certainty that their expectations were to be realized. But the slight
smile that hovered around the lips of the virgin contradicted the very
sobriety of feeling that she inculcated.

"Why, dearest aunt," said Frances, playfully, in reply to one of her
frequent reprimands, "would you have me repress the pleasure that I feel
at Henry's deliverance, when you yourself have so often declared it to
be impossible that such men as ruled in our country could sacrifice an
innocent man?"

"Nay, I did believe it impossible, my child, and yet think so; but still
there is a discretion to be shown in joy as well as in sorrow."

Frances recollected the declaration of Isabella, and turned an eye
filled with tears of gratitude on her excellent aunt, as she replied,--

"True; but there are feelings that will not yield to reason. Ah! here
are those monsters, who have come to witness the death of a fellow
creature, moving around yon field, as if life was, to them, nothing but
a military show."

"It is but little more to the hireling soldier," said Henry, endeavoring
to forget his uneasiness.

"You gaze, my love, as if you thought a military show of some
importance," said Miss Peyton, observing her niece to be looking from
the window with a fixed and abstracted attention. But Frances
answered not.

From the window where she stood, the pass that they had traveled through
the Highlands was easily to be seen; and the mountain which held on its
summit the mysterious hut was directly before her. Its side was rugged
and barren; huge and apparently impassable barriers of rocks presenting
themselves through the stunted oaks, which, stripped of their foliage,
were scattered over its surface. The base of the hill was not half a
mile from the house, and the object which attracted the notice of
Frances was the figure of a man emerging from behind a rock of
remarkable formation, and as suddenly disappearing. The maneuver was
several times repeated, as if it were the intention of the fugitive (for
such by his air he seemed to be) to reconnoiter the proceedings of the
soldiery, and assure himself of the position of things on the plain.
Notwithstanding the distance, Frances instantly imbibed the opinion that
it was Birch. Perhaps this impression was partly owing to the air and
figure of the man, but in a great measure to the idea that presented
itself on formerly beholding the object at the summit of the mountain.
That they were the same figure she was confident, although this wanted
the appearance which, in the other, she had taken for the pack of the
peddler. Harvey had so connected himself with the mysterious deportment
of Harper, within her imagination, that under circumstances of less
agitation than those in which she had labored since her arrival, she
would have kept her suspicions to herself. Frances, therefore, sat
ruminating on this second appearance in silence, and endeavoring to
trace what possible connection this extraordinary man could have with
the fortunes of her own family. He had certainly saved Sarah in some
degree, from the blow that had partially alighted on her, and in no
instance had he proved himself to be hostile to their interests.

After gazing for a long time at the point where she had last seen the
figure, in the vain expectation of its reappearance, she turned to her
friends in the apartment. Miss Peyton was sitting by Sarah, who gave
some slight additional signs of observing what passed, but who still
continued insensible either to joy or grief.

"I suppose, by this time, my love, that you are well acquainted with the
maneuvers of a regiment," said Miss Peyton. "It is no bad quality in a
soldier's wife, at all events."

"I am not a wife yet," said Frances, coloring to the eyes; "and we have
little reason to wish for another wedding in our family."

"Frances!" exclaimed her brother, starting from his seat, and pacing the
floor in violent agitation. "Touch not the chord again, I entreat you.
While my fate is uncertain, I would wish to be at peace with all men."

"Then let the uncertainty cease," cried Frances, springing to the door,
"for here comes Peyton with the joyful intelligence of your release."

The words were hardly uttered, before the door opened, and the major
entered. In his air there was the appearance of neither success nor
defeat, but there was a marked display of vexation. He took the hand
that Frances, in the fullness of her heart, extended towards him, but
instantly relinquishing it, threw himself into a chair, in
evident fatigue.

"You have failed," said Wharton, with a bound of his heart, but an
appearance of composure.

"Have you seen Harper?" cried Frances, turning pale.

"I have not. I crossed the river in one boat as he must have been coming
to this side, in another. I returned without delay, and traced him for
several miles into the Highlands, by the western pass, but there I
unaccountably lost him. I have returned here to relieve your uneasiness,
but see him I will this night, and bring a respite for Henry."

"But saw you Washington?" asked Miss Peyton.

Dunwoodie gazed at her a moment in abstracted musing, and the question
was repeated. He answered gravely, and with some reserve,--

"The commander in chief had left his quarters."

"But, Peyton," cried Frances, in returning terror, "if they should not
see each other, it will be too late. Harper alone will not be
sufficient."

Her lover turned his eyes slowly on her anxious countenance, and
dwelling a moment on her features, said, still musing,--

"You say that he promised to assist Henry."

"Certainly, of his own accord and in requital for the hospitality he had
received."

Dunwoodie shook his head, and began to look grave.

"I like not that word hospitality--it has an empty sound; there must be
something more reasonable to tie Harper. I dread some mistake; repeat to
me all that passed."

Frances, in a hurried and earnest voice, complied with his request. She
related particularly the manner of his arrival at the Locusts, the
reception that he received, and the events that passed as minutely as
her memory could supply her with the means. As she alluded to the
conversation that occurred between her father and his guest, the major
smiled but remained silent. She then gave a detail of Henry's arrival,
and the events of the following day. She dwelt upon the part where
Harper had desired her brother to throw aside his disguise, and
recounted, with wonderful accuracy, his remarks upon the hazard of the
step that the youth had taken. She even remembered a remarkable
expression of his to her brother, "that he was safer from Harper's
knowledge of his person, than he would be without it." Frances
mentioned, with the warmth of youthful admiration, the benevolent
character of his deportment to herself, and gave a minute relation of
his adieus to the whole family.

Dunwoodie at first listened with grave attention; evident satisfaction
followed as she proceeded. When she spoke of herself in connection with
their guest, he smiled with pleasure, and as she concluded, he
exclaimed, with delight,--

"We are safe!--we are safe!"

But he was interrupted, as will be seen in the following chapter.




CHAPTER XXVIII


    The owlet loves the gloom of night,
        The lark salutes the day,
    The timid dove will coo at hand--
        But falcons soar away.
                                  --_Song in Duo_.

In a country settled, like these states, by a people who fled their
native land and much-loved firesides, victims of consciences and
religious zeal, none of the decencies and solemnities of a Christian
death are dispensed with, when circumstances will admit of their
exercise. The good woman of the house was a strict adherent to the forms
of the church to which she belonged; and having herself been awakened to
a sense of her depravity, by the ministry of the divine who harangued
the people of the adjoining parish, she thought it was from his
exhortations only that salvation could be meted out to the short-lived
hopes of Henry Wharton. Not that the kind-hearted matron was so ignorant
of the doctrines of the religion which she professed, as to depend,
theoretically, on mortal aid for protection; but she had, to use her own
phrase, "sat so long under the preaching of good Mr.----," that she had
unconsciously imbibed a practical reliance on his assistance, for that
which her faith should have taught her could come from the Deity alone.
With her, the consideration of death was at all times awful, and the
instant that the sentence of the prisoner was promulgated, she
dispatched Caesar, mounted on one of her husband's best horses, in quest
of her clerical monitor. This step had been taken without consulting
either Henry or his friends; and it was only when the services of Caesar
were required on some domestic emergency, that she explained the nature
of his absence. The youth heard her, at first, with an unconquerable
reluctance to admit of such a spiritual guide; but as our view of the
things of this life becomes less vivid, our prejudices and habits cease
to retain their influence; and a civil bow of thanks was finally given,
in requital for the considerate care of the well-meaning woman.

The black returned early from his expedition, and, as well as could be
gathered from his somewhat incoherent narrative, a minister of God might
be expected to arrive in the course of the day. The interruption that we
mentioned in our preceding chapter was occasioned by the entrance of the
landlady. At the intercession of Dunwoodie, orders had been given to the
sentinel who guarded the door of Henry's room, that the members of the
prisoner's family should, at all times, have free access to his
apartment. Caesar was included in this arrangement, as a matter of
convenience, by the officer in command; but strict inquiry and
examination was made into the errand of every other applicant for
admission. The major had, however, included himself among the relatives
of the British officer; and one pledge, that no rescue should be
attempted, was given in his name, for them all. A short conversation was
passing between the woman of the house and the corporal of the guard,
before the door that the sentinel had already opened in anticipation of
the decision of his noncommissioned commandant.

"Would you refuse the consolations of religion to a fellow creature
about to suffer death?" said the matron, with earnest zeal. "Would you
plunge a soul into the fiery furnace, and a minister at hand to point
out the straight and narrow path?"

"I'll tell you what, good woman," returned the corporal, gently pushing
her away; "I've no notion of my back being a highway for any man to walk
to heaven upon. A pretty figure I should make at the pickets, for
disobeying orders. Just step down and ask Lieutenant Mason, and you may
bring in a whole congregation. We have not taken the guard from the foot
soldiers, but an hour, and I shouldn't like to have it said that we know
less than the militia."

"Admit the woman," said Dunwoodie, sternly, observing, for the first
time, that one of his own corps was on post.

The corporal raised his hand to his cap, and fell back in silence; the
soldier stood to his arms, and the matron entered.

"Here is a reverend gentleman below, come to soothe the parting soul, in
the place of our own divine, who is engaged with an appointment that
could not be put aside; 'tis to bury old Mr.---"

"Show him in at once," said Henry, with feverish impatience.

"But will the sentinel let him pass? I would not wish a friend of
Mr.--to be rudely stopped on the threshold, and he a stranger."

All eyes were now turned on Dunwoodie, who, looking at his watch, spoke
a few words with Henry, in an undertone, and hastened from the
apartment, followed by Frances. The subject of their conversation was a
wish expressed by the prisoner for a clergyman of his own persuasion,
and a promise from the major, that one should be sent from Fishkill
town, through which he was about to pass, on his way to the ferry to
intercept the expected return of Harper. Mason soon made his bow at the
door, and willingly complied with the wishes of the landlady; and the
divine was invited to make his appearance accordingly.

The person who was ushered into the apartment, preceded by Caesar, and
followed by the matron, was a man beyond the middle age, or who might
rather be said to approach the downhill of life. In stature he was above
the size of ordinary men, though his excessive leanness might
contribute in deceiving as to his height; his countenance was sharp and
unbending, and every muscle seemed set in rigid compression. No joy or
relaxation appeared ever to have dwelt on features that frowned
habitually, as if in detestation of the vices of mankind. The brows were
beetling, dark, and forbidding, giving the promise of eyes of no less
repelling expression; but the organs were concealed beneath a pair of
enormous green goggles, through which they glared around with a
fierceness that denounced the coming day of wrath. All was fanaticism,
uncharitableness, and denunciation. Long, lank hair, a mixture of gray
and black, fell down his neck, and in some degree obscured the sides of
his face, and, parting on his forehead, fell in either direction in
straight and formal screens. On the top of this ungraceful exhibition
was laid impending forward, so as to overhang in some measure the whole
fabric, a large hat of three equal cocks. His coat was of a rusty black,
and his breeches and stockings were of the same color; his shoes without
luster, and half-concealed beneath huge plated buckles. He stalked into
the room, and giving a stiff nod with his head, took the chair offered
him by the black, in dignified silence. For several minutes no one broke
this ominous pause in the conversation; Henry feeling a repugnance to
his guest, that he was vainly endeavoring to conquer, and the stranger
himself drawing forth occasional sighs and groans, that threatened a
dissolution of the unequal connection between his sublimated soul and
its ungainly tenement. During this, deathlike preparation, Mr. Wharton,
with a feeling nearly allied to that of his son, led Sarah from the
apartment. His retreat was noticed by the divine, in a kind of scornful
disdain, who began to hum the air of a popular psalm tune, giving it the
full richness of the twang that distinguishes the Eastern [Footnote: By
"Eastern" is meant the states of New England, which, being originally
settled by Puritans, still retain many distinct shades of
character.] psalmody.

"Caesar," said Miss Peyton, "hand the gentleman some refreshment; he
must need it after his ride."

"My strength is not in the things of this life," said the divine,
speaking in a hollow, sepulchral voice. "Thrice have I this day held
forth in my Master's service, and fainted not; still it is prudent to
help this frail tenement of clay, for, surely, 'the laborer is worthy of
his hire.'"

Opening a pair of enormous jaws, he took a good measure of the proffered
brandy, and suffered it to glide downwards, with that sort of facility
with which man is prone to sin.

"I apprehend, then, sir, that fatigue will disable you from performing
the duties which kindness has induced you to attempt."

"Woman!" exclaimed the stranger, with energy, "when was I ever known to
shrink from a duty? But 'judge not lest ye be judged,' and fancy not
that it is given to mortal eyes to fathom the intentions of the Deity."

"Nay," returned the maiden, meekly, and slightly disgusted with his
jargon, "I pretend not to judge of either events, or the intentions of
my fellow creatures, much less of those of Omnipotence."

"'Tis well, woman,--'tis well," cried the minister, moving his head with
supercilious disdain; "humility becometh thy sex and lost condition; thy
weakness driveth thee on headlong like 'unto the bosom of destruction.'"

Surprised at this extraordinary deportment, but yielding to that habit
which urges us to speak reverently on sacred subjects, even when perhaps
we had better continue silent, Miss Peyton replied,--

"There is a Power above, that can and will sustain us all in well-doing,
if we seek its support in humility and truth."

The stranger turned a lowering look at the speaker, and then composing
himself into an air of self-abasement, he continued in the same
repelling tones,--

"It is not everyone that crieth out for mercy, that will be heard. The
ways of Providence are not to be judged by men--'Many are called, but
few chosen.' It is easier to talk of humility than to feel it. Are you
so humble, vile worm, as to wish to glorify God by your own damnation?
If not, away with you for a publican and a Pharisee!"

Such gross fanaticism was uncommon in America, and Miss Peyton began to
imbibe the impression that her guest was deranged; but remembering that
he had been sent by a well-known divine, and one of reputation, she
discarded the idea, and, with some forbearance, observed,--

"I may deceive myself, in believing that mercy is proffered to all, but
it is so soothing a doctrine, that I would not willingly be undeceived."

"Mercy is only for the elect," cried the stranger, with an unaccountable
energy; "and you are in the 'valley of the shadow of death.' Are you not
a follower of idle ceremonies, which belong to the vain church that our
tyrants would gladly establish here, along with their stamp acts and tea
laws? Answer me that, woman; and remember, that Heaven hears your
answer; are you not of that idolatrous communion?"

"I worship at the altars of my fathers," said Miss Peyton, motioning to
Henry for silence; "but bow to no other idol than my own infirmities."

"Yes, yes, I know ye, self-righteous and papal as ye are--followers of
forms, and listeners to bookish preaching; think you, woman, that holy
Paul had notes in his hand to propound the Word to the believers?"

"My presence disturbs you," said Miss Peyton, rising. "I will leave you
with my nephew, and offer those prayers in private that I did wish to
mingle with his."

So saying, she withdrew, followed by the landlady, who was not a little
shocked, and somewhat surprised, by the intemperate zeal of her new
acquaintance; for, although the good woman believed that Miss Peyton and
her whole church were on the highroad to destruction, she was by no
means accustomed to hear such offensive and open avowals of their fate.

Henry had with difficulty repressed the indignation excited by this
unprovoked attack on his meek and unresisting aunt; but as the door
closed on her retiring figure, he gave way to his feelings.

"I must confess, sir," he exclaimed with heat, "that in receiving a
minister of God, I thought I was admitting a Christian; and one who, by
feeling his own weaknesses, knew how to pity the frailties of others.
You have wounded the meek spirit of an excellent woman, and I
acknowledge but little inclination to mingle in prayer with so
intolerant a spirit."

The minister stood erect, with grave composure, following with his eyes,
in a kind of scornful pity, the retiring females, and suffered the
expostulation of the youth to be given, as if unworthy of his notice. A
third voice, however, spoke,--

"Such a denunciation would have driven many women into fits; but it has
answered the purpose well enough, as it is."

"Who's that?" cried the prisoner, in amazement, gazing around the room
in quest of the speaker.

"It is I, Captain Wharton," said Harvey Birch, removing the spectacles,
and exhibiting his piercing eyes, shining under a pair of
false eyebrows.

"Good heavens--Harvey!"

"Silence!" said the peddler, solemnly. "'Tis a name not to be mentioned,
and least of all here, within the heart of the American army." Birch
paused and gazed around him for a moment, with an emotion exceeding the
base passion of fear, and then continued in a gloomy tone, "There are a
thousand halters in that very name, and little hope would there be left
me of another escape, should I be again taken. This is a fearful venture
that I am making; but I could not sleep in quiet, and know that an
innocent man was about to die the death of a dog, when I might
save him."

"No," said Henry, with a glow of generous feeling on his cheek, "if the
risk to yourself be so heavy, retire as you came, and leave me to my
fate. Dunwoodie is making, even now, powerful exertions in my behalf;
and if he meets with Mr. Harper in the course of the night, my
liberation is certain."

"Harper!" echoed the peddler, remaining with his hands raised, in the
act of replacing the spectacles. "What do you know of Harper? And why do
you think he will do you service?"

"I have his promise; you remember our recent meeting in my father's
dwelling, and he then gave an unasked promise to assist me."

"Yes--but do you know him? That is--why do you think he has the power?
Or what reason have you for believing he will remember his word?"

"If there ever was the stamp of truth, or simple, honest benevolence, in
the countenance of man, it shone in his," said Henry. "Besides,
Dunwoodie has powerful friends in the rebel army, and it would be better
that I take the chance where I am, than thus to expose you to certain
death, if detected."

"Captain Wharton," said Birch, looking guardedly around and speaking
with impressive seriousness of manner, "if I fail you, all fail you. No
Harper nor Dunwoodie can save your life; unless you get out with me, and
that within the hour, you die to-morrow on the gallows of a murderer.
Yes, such are their laws; the man who fights, and kills, and plunders,
is honored; but he who serves his country as a spy, no matter how
faithfully, no matter how honestly, lives to be reviled, or dies like
the vilest criminal!"

"You forget, Mr. Birch," said the youth, a little indignantly, "that I
am not a treacherous, lurking spy, who deceives to betray; but innocent
of the charge imputed to me."
