hiring a poor collegian to write verses against me, the subject of which
was my own poverty, and the catastrophe of my unhappy parents; but,
besides the badness of the composition (of which they themselves were
ashamed), they did not find their account in endeavouring to reproach me
with those misfortunes which they and their relations had brought upon
me; and which consequently reflected much more dishonour on themselves
than on me, who was the innocent victim of their barbarity and avarice.

Finding this plan miscarry, they found means to irritate a young
gentleman against me, by telling him I had lampooned his mistress;
and so effectually succeeded in the quality of incendiaries that this
enraged lover determined to seize me next night as I returned to my
lodgings from a friend's house that I frequented: with this view, he
waited in the street, attended by two of his companions, to whom he had
imparted his design of carrying me down to the river, in which proposed
to have me heartily ducked, notwithstanding the severity of the weather,
it being then about the middle of December. But this stratagem did not
succeed; for, being apprised of their ambush, I got home another way,
and by the help of my landlord's apprentice, discharged a volley from
the garret window, which did great execution upon them, and next day
occasioned so much mirth at their expense that they found themselves
under a necessity of leaving the town, until the adventure should be
entirely forgotten.

My cousins (though twice baffled in their expectation) did not,
however, desist from persecuting me, who had now enraged them beyond a
possibility of forgiveness by detecting their malice and preventing its
effects: neither should I have found them more humane, had I patiently
submitted to their rancour, and borne without murmuring the rigour of
their unreasonable hate; for I have found by experience, that though
small favours may be acknowledged and slight injuries atoned, there is
no wretch so ungrateful as he whom you have most generously obliged, and
no enemy so implacable as those who have done you the greatest wrong.
These good-natured creatures, therefore, had recourse to a scheme which
conspired with a piece of bad news I soon after received, to give them
all the satisfaction they desired: this plan was to debauch the faith of
my companion and confidant, who betrayed the trust I reposed in him,
by imparting to them the particulars of my small amours, which they
published with such exaggerations that I suffered very much in the
opinion of everybody, and was utterly discarded by the dear creatures
whose names had been called in question.

While I was busy in tracing out the author of this treachery, that I
might not only be revenged on him, but also vindicate my character to my
friends, I one day perceived the looks of my landlady much altered, when
I went home to my dinner, and inquiring into the cause, she screwed up
her mouth, and fixed her eyes on the ground, told me her husband had
received a letter from Mr. Bowling, with one inclosed for me. She was
very sorry for what had happened, both for my sake and his own--people
should be more cautious of their conduct--she was always afraid his
brutal behaviour would bring him into some misfortune or other. As for
her part, she should be very ready to befriend me; but she had a small
family of her own to maintain. The world would do nothing for her if she
should come to want--charity begins at home: she wished I had been bound
to some substantial handicraft, such as a weaver or a shoemaker, rather
than loiter away my time in learning foolish nonsense, that would never
bring me in a penny but some folks are wise, and some are otherwise.

I was listening to this mysterious discourse with great amazement, when
her husband entered, and, without speaking a syllable, put both the
letters into my hand. I received them trembling, and read what follows:


'To Mr. Roger Potion 'Sir, 'This is to let you know that I have quitted
the Thunder man of war, being obliged to sheer off for killing my
captain, which I did fairly on the beach, at Cape Tiberoon, in the
Island of Hispaniola; having received his fire and returned it, which
went through his body: and I would serve the best man so that ever
stepped between stem and stern, if so be that he struck me, as Captain
Oakum did. I am (thank God) safe among the French, who are very civil,
thof I don't understand their lingo; and I hope to be restored in a
little time, for all the great friends and parliamentary interest of the
captain, for I have sent over to my landlord in Deal an account of the
whole affair, with our bearings and distances while we were engaged,
whereby I have desired him to lay it before his majesty, who (God
bless him) will not suffer an honest tar to be wronged. My love to your
spouse, and am your loving friend and servant to command, while 'Thomas
Bowling,'


'To Roderick Random

'Dear Rory, 'Don't be grieved at my misfortune, but mind your book, my
lad. I have got no money to send you, but what of that? Mr. Potion
will take care of you for the love he bears to me, and let you want for
nothing; and it shall go hard but I will see him one day repaid. No
more at present, but rests 'Your dutiful uncle 'and servant, till death,
'Thomas Bowling.'

This letter (which, with the other, was dated from Port Lonis, in
Hispaniola) I had no sooner read than the apothecary, shaking his head,
began: "I have a very great regard for Mr. Bowling that's certain; and
could be well content--but times are very hard. There's no such thing as
money to be got; I believe 'tis all vanished under ground, for my part.
Besides, I have been out of pocket already, having entertained you since
the beginning of this month, without receiving a sixpence, and God knows
if ever I shall; for I believe it will go hard with your uncle. And
more than that, I was thinking of giving you warning, for I want your
apartment for a new prentice, whom I expect from the country every hour.
So I desire you will this week provide yourself with another lodging."

The indignation which this harangue inspired gave me spirits to support
my reverse of fortune, and to tell him I despised his mean selfish
disposition so much that I would rather starve than be beholden to him
for one single meal. Upon which, out of my pocket money, I paid him to
the last farthing of what I owed, and assured him, I would not sleep
another night under his roof.

This said, I sallied out in a transport of rage and sorrow, without
knowing whither to fly for shelter, having not one friend in the world
capable of relieving me, and only three shillings in my purse. After
giving way for a few minutes to the dictates of my rage, I went and
hired a small bedroom, at the rate of one shilling and sixpence per
week, which I was obliged to pay per advance, before the landlord would
receive me: thither I removed my luggage; and next morning got up, with
a view of craving the advice and assistance of a person who had on
all occasions loaded me with caresses and made frequent offers of
friendship, while I was under no necessity of accepting them. He
received me with his wonted affability, and insisted on my breakfasting
with him, a favour which I did not think fit to refuse. But when I
communicated the occasion of my visit, he appeared so disconcerted that
I concluded him wonderfully affected with the misery of my condition and
looked upon him as a man of the most extensive sympathy and benevolence.
He did not leave me long under this mistake; for, recovering himself
from his confusion, he told me he was grieved at my misfortune, and
desired to know what had passed between my landlord, Mr. Potion, and me.
Whereupon I recounted the conversation; and, when I repeated the answer
I made to his ungenerous remonstrance with regard to my leaving his
house, this pretended friend affected a stare, and exclaimed, "Is it
possible you could behave so ill to the man who had treated you so
kindly all along?"

My surprise at hearing this was not at all affected, whatever his might
be; and I gave to understand with some warmth, that I did not imagine he
would so unreasonably espouse the cause of a scoundrel who ought to be
expelled from every social community. This heat of mine gave him all the
advantage he desired over me, and our discourse, after much altercation,
concluded in his desiring never to see me again in that place; to which
desire I yielded my consent, assuring him, that, had I been as well
acquainted with his principles formerly as I was now, he never should
have had an opportunity of making that request. And thus we parted.

On my return, I met my comrade, Squire Gawky, whom his father had
sent, some time ago, to town, for his improvement in writing, dancing,
fencing, and other modish qualifications. As I had lived with him since
his arrival on the footing of our old intimacy, I made no scruple of
informing him of the lowness of my circumstances, and asking a small
supply of money, to answer my present expense; upon which he pulled out
a handful of halfpence with a shilling or two among them, and swore that
was all he had to keep his pocket till next quarter-day he having lost
the greatest part of his allowance the night before at billiards. Though
this assertion might very well be true, I was extremely mortified at his
indifference: for he neither expressed any sympathy for my mishap nor
desire of alleviating my distress; and accordingly I left him without
uttering one word: but, when I afterwards understood that he was the
person who had formerly betrayed me to the malice of my cousins, to
whom likewise he had carried the tidings of my forlorn situation, which
afforded them great matter of triumph and exultation, I determined with
myself to call him to a severe account for which purpose I borrowed a
sword, and wrote a challenge, desiring him to meet me at a certain time
and place, that I might have an opportunity of punishing his perfidy,
at the expense of his blood. He accepted the invitation, and I betook
myself to the field, though not without feeling considerable repugnance
to the combat, which frequently attacked me in cold sweats by the
way; but the desire of revenge, the shame of retracting, and hope of
conquest, conspired to repel these unmanly symptoms of fear; and I
appeared on the plain with a good grace: there I waited an hour beyond
the time appointed, and was not ill pleased to find he had no mind to
meet me, because I should have an opportunity of exposing his cowardice,
displaying my own courage, and of beating him soundly wheresoever I
should find, without any dread of the consequence.

Elevated with these suggestions, which entirely banished all thoughts
of my deplorable condition, I went directly to Gawky's lodgings, where
I was informed of his precipitate retreat, he having set out for the
country in less than an hour after he had received my billet; and I was
vain enough to have the whole story inserted in the news, although I was
fain to sell a gold laced hat to my landlord for less than half-price,
to defray the expenses and contribute to my subsistence.






CHAPTER VII

I am entertained by Mr. Crab--a description of him--I acquire the Art
of Surgery--consult Crab's Disposition--become necessary to him--an
Accident happens--he advises me to launch out into the world--assists me
with Money--I set out for London

The fumes of my resentment being dissipated, as well as the vanity of my
success, I found myself deserted to all the horrors of extreme want, and
avoided by mankind as a creature of a different species, or rather as a
solitary being, noways comprehended within the scheme or protection of
Providence. My despair had rendered me almost quite stupified, when
I was one day told, that a gentleman desired to see me at a certain
public-house, whither immediately I repaired; and was introduced to one
Mr. Launcelot Crab, a surgeon in town, who was engaged with two more in
drinking a liquor called pop-in, composed by mixing a quartern of
brandy with a quart of small beer. Before I relate the occasion of
this message, I believe it will not be disagreeable to the reader, if I
describe the gentleman who sent for me, and mention some circumstances
of his character and conduct which may illustrate what follows, and
account for his behaviour to me.

This member of the faculty was aged fifty, about five feet high, and ten
round the belly; his face was as capacious as a full moon, and much of
the complexion of a mulberry: his nose, resembling a powder-horn, was
swelled to an enormous size, and studded all over with carbuncles; and
his little gray eyes reflected the rays in such an oblique manner that,
while he looked a person full in the face, one would have imagined
he was admiring the buckle of his shoe. He had long entertained
an implacable resentment against Potion, who, though a younger
practitioner, was better employed than he, and once had the assurance to
perform a cure, whereby he disappointed and disgraced the prognostic
of the said Crab. This quarrel which was at one time upon the point of
being made up, by the interposition and mediation of friends, had been
lately inflamed beyond a possibility of reconciliation by the respective
wives of the opponents, who, chancing to meet at a christening,
disagreed about precedence, proceeded from invectives to blows, and were
with great difficulty, by the gossips, prevented from converting the
occasion of joy into a scene of lamentation.

The difference between these rivals was in the height of rancour, when I
received the message of Crab, who received me as civilly as I could have
expected from one of his disposition; and, after desiring me to sit,
inquired into the particulars of my leaving the house of Potion; which
when I had related, he said, with a malicious grin, "There's a sneaking
dog! I always thought him a fellow without a soul, d--n me, a canting
scoundrel, who has crept into business by his hypocrisy, and kissing the
a--e of every body."--"Ay, ay," says another, "one might see with half
an eye that the rascal has no honesty in him, by his going so regularly
to church."

This sentence was confirmed by a third, who assured his companions that
Potion was never known to be disguised in liquor but once, at a meeting
of the godly, where he had distinguished himself by an extempore prayer
an hour long. After this preamble, Crab addressed himself to me in these
words: "Well, my lad, I have heard a good character of you, and I'll do
for you. You may send your things to my house when you please. I have
given orders for your reception. Zounds! What does the booby stare at?
If you have no mind to embrace my courteous offer, you may let it alone,
and be d--d." I answered with a submissive bow, that I was far from
rejecting his friendly offer, which I would immediately accept, as soon
as he should inform me on what footing I was to be entertained. "What
footing! D--n my blood," cried he, "d'ye expect to have a footman and a
couple of horses kept for you?" "No, sir," I replied, "my expectations
are not quite so sanguine. That I may be as little burthensome as
possible, I would willingly serve in your shop, by which means I
may save you the expense of a journeyman, or porter at least, for I
understand a little pharmacy, having employed some of my leisure hours
in the practice of that art, while I lived with Mr. Potion; neither am I
altogether ignorant of surgery, which I have studied with great pleasure
and application."--"Oho! you did," says Crab. "Gentlemen, here is a
complete artist! Studied surgery! What? in books, I suppose. I shall
have you disputing with me one of these days on points of my profession.
You can already account for muscular motion, I warrant, and explain the
mystery of the brain and nerves--ha! You are too learned for me, d--n
me. But let's have no more of this stuff. Can you blood and give a
clyster, spread a plaster, and prepare a potion?" Upon my answering in
the affirmative, he shock his head, telling me, he believed he should
have little good of me, for all my promises; but, however, he would
take me in for the sake of charity. I was accordingly that very night
admitted to his house, and had an apartment assigned to me in
the garret, which I was fain to put up with, notwithstanding the
mortification my pride suffered in this change of circumstances.

I was soon convinced of the real motives which induced Crab to receive
me in this manner; for, besides the gratification of his revenge, by
exposing the selfishness of his antagonist, in opposition to his own
generosity, which was all affectation, he had occasion for a young man
who understood something of the profession, to fill up the place of his
eldest apprentice, lately dead, not without violent suspicion of foul
play from his master's brutality. The knowledge of this circumstance,
together with his daily behaviour to his wife and the young apprentice,
did not at all contribute to my enjoying my new situation with ease;
however, as I did not perceive how I could bestow myself to better
advantage, I resolved to study Crab's temper with all the application,
and manage it with all the address in my power. And it was not long
before I found out a strange peculiarity of humour which governed his
behaviour towards all his dependents. I observed, when he was pleased,
he was such a niggard of his satisfaction that, if his wife or servants
betrayed the least symptom of participation, he was offended to an
insupportable degree of choler and fury, the effects of which they
seldom failed to feel. And when his indignation was roused, submission
and soothing always exasperated it beyond the bounds of reason and
humanity. I therefore pursued a contrary plan; and one day, when he
honoured me with the names of ignorant whelp and lazy ragamuffin, I
boldly replied, I was neither ignorant nor lazy, since I both understood
and performed my business as well as he could do for his soul; neither
was it just to call me ragamuffin, for I had a whole coat on my back,
and was descended from a better family than any he could boast an
alliance with.

He gave tokens of great amazement at this assurance of mine, and shook
his cane over my head, regarding me all the time with a countenance
truly diabolical. Although I was terribly startled at his menacing looks
and posture, I yet had reflection enough left to convince me I had gone
too far to retract, and that this was the critical minute which must
decide my future lot in his service; I therefore snatched up the pestle
of a mortar, and swore, if he offered to strike me without a cause, I
should see whether his skull or my weapon was hardest.

He continued silent for some time, and at last broke forth into these
ejaculations: "This is fine usage from a servant to his master--very
fine! damnation! but no matter, you shall pay for this, you dog, you
shall; I'll do your business--yes, yes, I'll teach you to lift your
hand against me." So saying, he retired, and left me under dreadful
apprehensions, which vanished entirely at our next meeting, when he
behaved with unusual complacency, and treated me with a glass of punch
after dinner.

By this conduct I got the ascendancy over him in a short time, and
became so necessary to him, in managing his business while he was
engaged at the bottle, that fortune began to wear a kinder aspect; and
I consoled myself for the disregard of my former acquaintance, with the
knowledge I daily imbibed by a close application to the duties of my
employment, in which I succeeded beyond my own expectation. I was on
very good terms with my master's wife, whose esteem I acquired and
cultivated, by representing Mrs. Potion in the most ridiculous lights
my satirical talents could invent, as well as by rendering her some
Christian offices, when she had been too familiar with the dram
bottle, to which she had oftentimes recourse for consolation, under the
affliction she suffered from a barbarous husband.

In this manner I lived, without hearing the least tidings of my uncle
for the space of two years, during which time I kept little or no
company, being neither in a humour to relish nor in a capacity to
maintain much acquaintance; for the Nabal my master allowed me no wages,
and the small perquisites of my station scarcely supplied me with the
common necessaries of life. I was no longer a pert unthinking coxcomb,
giddy with popular applause, and elevated with the extravagance of
hope: my misfortunes had taught me how little the caresses of the world,
during a man's prosperity, are to be valued by him; and how seriously
and expeditiously he ought to set about making himself independent of
them. My present appearance, therefore, was the least of my care, which
was wholly engrossed in laying up a stock of instruction that might
secure me against the caprice of fortune for the future. I became such
a sloven, and contracted such an air of austerity, that everybody
pronounced me crestfallen; and Gawky returned to town without running
any risk from my resentment, which was by this time pretty much cooled,
and restrained by prudential reasons so effectually that I never so much
as thought of obtaining satisfaction for the injuries he had done me.

When I deemed myself sufficiently master of my business I began to cast
about for an opportunity of launching into the world, in hope of
finding some provision that might make amends for the difficulties I
had undergone; but, as this could not be effected without a small sum of
money to equip me for the field, I was in the utmost perplexity how to
raise it, well knowing that Crab, for his own sake, would never put me
in a condition to leave him, when his interest was so much concerned
in my stay. But a small accident, which happened about this time,
determined him in my favour. This was no other than the pregnancy of his
maidservant, who declared her situation to me, assuring me at the same
time that I was the occasion of it.

Although I had no reason to question the truth of this imputation, I was
not ignorant of the familiarities which had passed between her master
and her, taking the advantage of which I represented to her the folly
of laying the burden at my door, when she might dispose of it to much
better purpose with Mr. Crab. She listened to my advice, and next day
acquainted him with the pretended success of their mutual endeavours.
He was far from being overjoyed at this proof of his vigour, which he
foresaw might have very troublesome consequences; not that he dreaded
any domestic grumblings and reproaches from his wife, whom he kept
in perfect subjection; but because he knew it would furnish his rival
Potion with a handle for insulting and undermining his reputation, there
being no scandal equal to that of uncleanness, in the opinion of those
who inhabit the part of the island where he lived. He therefore took a
resolution worthy of himself, which was, to persuade the girl that she
was not with child, but only afflicted with a disorder incidental
to young women, which he could easily remove: with this view (as he
pretended) he prescribed for her such medicines as he thought would
infallibly procure abortion; but in this scheme he was disappointed,
for the maid, being advertised by me of his design, and at the same time
well acquainted with her own condition, absolutely refused to follow his
directions; and threatened to publish her situation to the world if he
would not immediately take some method of providing for the important
occasion, which she expected in a few months. It was not long before I
guessed the result of his deliberation, by his addressing himself to
me one day in this manner: "I am surprised that a young fellow like you
discovers no inclination to push his fortune in the world. Before I
was of your age I was broiling on the coast of Guinea. D--e! what's to
hinder you from profiting by the war which will certainly be declared in
a short time against Spain? You may easily get on board of a king's ship
in quality of surgeon's mate, where you will certainly see a great deal
of practice, and stand a good chance of getting prize-money."

I laid hold of this declaration, which I had long wished for, and
assured him I would follow his advice with pleasure, if it were in my
power; but that it was impossible for me to embrace an opportunity of
that kind, as I had no friend to advance a little money to supply me
with what necessaries I should want, and defray the expenses of my
journey to London. He told me that few necessaries were required; and,
as for the expense of my journey, he would lend me money, sufficient
not only for that purpose, but also to maintain me comfortably in London
until I should procure a warrant for my provision on board of some ship.

I gave him a thousand thanks for his obliging offer (although I was very
well apprised of his motive, which was no other than a design to lay the
bastard to my charge after my departure), and accordingly set out in
a few weeks for London; my whole fortune consisting of one suit of
clothes, half a dozen ruffled shirts, as many plain, two pair of worsted
and a like number of threaded stockings; a case of pocket instruments, a
small edition of Horace, Wiseman's Surgery, and ten guineas in cash;
for which Crab took my bond, bearing five per cent interest; at the same
time giving me a letter to a member of parliament for our town, which he
said would do my business effectually.






CHAPTER VIII

I arrive at Newcastle--meet with my old Schoolfellow Strap--we determine
to walk together to London--set out on our Journey--put up at a solitary
Alehouse--are disturbed by a strange Adventure in the Night

There is no such convenience as a waggon in this country, and my
finances were too weak to support the expense of hiring a horse: I
determined therefore to set out with the carriers, who transport goods
from one place to another on horseback; and this scheme I accordingly
put in execution on the 1st day of September, 1739, sitting upon a
pack-saddle between two baskets, one of which contained my goods in a
knapsack. But by the time we arrived at Newcastle-upon-Tyne I was so
fatigued with the tediousness of the carriage, and benumbed with the
coldness of the weather, that I resolved to travel the rest of my
journey on foot, rather than proceed in such a disagreeable manner.

The ostler of the inn at which we put up, understanding I was bound for
London, advised me to take my passage in a collier which would be both
cheap and expeditious and withal much easier than to walk upwards of
three hundred miles through deep roads in the winter time, a journey
which he believed I had not strength enough to perform. I was almost
persuaded to take his advice, when one day, stepping into a barber's
shop to be shaved, the young man, while he lathered my face, accosted
me thus: "Sir, I presume you are a Scotchman." I answered in the
affirmative. "Pray," continued he, "from what part of Scotland?" I no
sooner told him, than he discovered great emotion, and not confining his
operation to my chin and upper lip, besmeared my whole face with great
agitation. I was so offended at this profusion that starting up, I asked
him what the d--l he meant by using me so? He begged pardon, telling me
his joy at meeting with a countryman had occasioned some confusion in
him, and craved my name. But, when I declared my name was Random, he
exclaimed in rapture, "How! Rory Random?" "The same," I replied, looking
at him with astonishment. "What!" cried he, "don't you know your old
schoolfellow, Hugh Strap?"

At that instant recollecting his face, I flew into his arms, and in
the transport of my joy, gave him back one-half of the suds he had so
lavishly bestowed on my countenance; so that we made a very ludicrous
appearance, and furnished a great deal of mirth for his master and
shopmates, who were witnesses of this scene. When our mutual caresses
were over I sat down again to be shaved, but the poor fellow's nerves
were so discomposed by this unexpected meeting that his hand could
scarcely hold the razor, with which, nevertheless, he found means to
cut me in three places in as many strokes. His master, perceiving his
disorder, bade another supply his place, and after the operation was
performed, gave Strap leave to pass the rest of the day with me.

We retired immediately to my lodgings, where, calling for some beer, I
desired to be informed of his adventures, which contained nothing more
than that his master dying before his time was out, he had come to
Newcastle about a year ago, in expectation of journeywork, along with
three young fellows of his acquaintance who worked in the keels; that he
had the good fortune of being employed by a very civil master, with whom
he intended to stay till the spring, at which time he proposed to go
to London, where he did not doubt of finding encouragement. When I
communicated to him my situation and design, he did not approve of my
taking a passage by sea, by reason of the danger of a winter voyage,
which is very hazardous along that coast, as well as the precariousness
of the wind, which might possibly detain me a great while, to the no
small detriment of my fortune; whereas, if I would venture by land, he
would bear me company, carry my baggage all the way, and if we should be
fatigued before we could perform the journey it would be no hard matter
for us to find on the road either return horses or waggons, of which we
might take the advantage for a very trifling expense.

I was so ravished at this proposal that I embraced him affectionately,
and assured him he might command my purse to the last farthing; but he
gave me to understand he had saved money sufficient to answer his own
occasions; and that he had a friend in London who would soon introduce
him into business in that capital, and possibly have it in his power to
serve me also.

Having concerted the plan and settled our affairs that night, we
departed next morning by daybreak, armed with a good cudgel each (my
companion being charged with the furniture of us both crammed into one
knapsack), and our money sewed between the linings and waistbands of
our breeches, except some loose silver for our immediate expenses on the
road, We travelled all day at a round pace, but, being ignorant of the
proper stages, were benighted at a good distance from any inn, so that
we were compelled to take up our lodging at a small hedge alehouse, that
stood on a byroad, about half-a-mile from the highway: there we found
a pedlar of our own country, in whose company we regaled ourselves with
bacon and eggs, and a glass of good ale, before a comfortable fire,
conversing all the while very sociably with the landlord and his
daughter, a hale buxom lass, who entertained us with great good humour,
and in whose affection I was vain enough to believe I had made some
progress. About eight o'clock we were all three, at our own desire,
shown into an apartment furnished with two beds, in one of which Strap
and I betook ourselves to rest, and the pedlar occupied the other,
though not before he had prayed a considerable time extempore, searched
into every corner of the room, and fastened the door on the inside with
a strong iron screw, which he carried about with him for that use.

I slept very sound till midnight when I was disturbed by a violent
motion of the bed, which shook under me with a continual tremor.
Alarmed at this phenomenon, I jogged my companion, whom, to my no small
amazement, I found drenched in sweat, and quaking through every limb; he
told me, with a low faltering voice, that we were undone; for there
was a bloody highwayman, loaded with pistols, in the next room; then,
bidding me make as little noise as possible, he directed me to a small
chink in the board partition through which I could see a thick-set
brawny fellow, with a fierce countenance, sitting at a table with our
young landlady, having a bottle of ale and a brace of pistols before
him.

I listened with great attention, and heard him say, in a terrible tone,
"D--n that son of a b--h, Smack the coachman; he has served me a fine
trick, indeed! but d--ion seize me, if I don't make him repent it! I'll
teach the scoundrel to give intelligence to others while he is under
articles with me."

Our landlady endeavoured to appease this exasperated robber, by saying
he might be mistaken in Smack, who perhaps kept no correspondence with
the other gentleman that robbed his coach; and that, if an accident
had disappointed him to-day, he might soon find opportunities enough to
atone for his lost trouble. "I'll tell thee what, my dear Bet," replied
he, "I never had, nor ever shall, while my name is Rifle, have such
a glorious booty as I missed to-day. Z--s! there was L400 in cash to
recruit men for the king's service, besides the jewels, watches, swords,
and money belonging to the passengers. Had it been my fortune to have
got clear off with so much treasure, I would have purchased a commission
in the army, and made you an officer's lady, you jade, I would." "Well,
well," cries Betty, "we must trust to Providence for that. But did
you find nothing worth taking which escaped the other gentlemen of the
road?" "Not much, faith," said the lover; "I gleaned a few things, such
as a pair of pops, silver mounted (here they are): I took them loaded
from the captain who had the charge of the money, together with a gold
watch which he had concealed in his breeches. I likewise found ten
Portugal pieces in the shoes of a quaker, whom the spirit moved to
revile me with great bitterness and devotion; but what I value myself
mostly for is, this here purchase, a gold snuffbox, my girl, with a
picture on the inside of the lid; which I untied out of the tail of a
pretty lady's smock."

Here, as the devil would have it, the pedlar snored so loud, that the
highwayman, snatching his pistols, started up, crying, "Hell and d-n-n!
I am betrayed! Who's that in the next room?" Mrs. Betty told him he need
not be uneasy: there were only three poor travellers, who, missing the
road, had taken up their lodgings in the house, and were asleep long
ago. "Travellers," says he, "spies, you b--ch! But no matter; I'll send
them all to hell in an instant!" He accordingly ran towards our door;
when his sweetheart interposing, assured him, there was only a couple
of poor young Scotchmen, who were too raw and ignorant to give him the
least cause of suspicion; and the third was a presbyterian pedlar of the
same nation, who had often lodged in the house before.

This declaration satisfied the thief, who swore he was glad there was a
pedlar, for he wanted some linen. Then, in a jovial manner, he put
about the glass, mingling his discourse to Betty with caresses and
familiarities, that spoke him very happy in his amours. During that part
of the conversation which regarded this, Strap had crept under the
bed, where he lay in the agonies of fear; so that it was with great
difficulty I persuaded him our danger was over, and prevailed on him to
awake the pedlar, and inform him of what he had seen and heard.

The itinerant merchant no sooner felt somebody shaking him by the
shoulder, than he started up, called, as loud as he could, "Thieves,
thieves! Lord have mercy upon us!" And Rifle, alarmed at this
exclamation, jumped up, cocked one of his pistols, and turned towards
the door to kill the first man that should enter; for he verily believed
himself beset: when his Dulcinea, after an immoderate fit of laughter,
persuaded him that the poor pedlar, dreaming of thieves, had only cried
out in his sleep.
