
[Sidenote:--16--] Julianus on learning the condition of affairs had the
senate make Severus an enemy and proceeded to prepare against him. [In the
suburbs he constructed a rampart, wherein he set gates, that he might take
up a position there outside and fight from that base.] The City during
these days became nothing more nor less than a camp, pitched, as it were,
in hostile territory. There was great turmoil from the various bodies of
those bivouacked and exercising,--men, horses, elephants. The mass of the
population stood in great fear of the armed men [because the latter hated
them.] Occasionally laughter would overcome us. The Pretorians did nothing
that was expected of their name and reputation, for they had learned to
live delicately. The men summoned from the fleet that lay at anchor in
Misenum did not even know how to exercise. The elephants found the towers
oppressive and so would not even carry their drivers any longer [but threw
them off also]. What caused us most amusement was his strengthening the
palace with latticed gates and strong doors. For, as it seemed likely that
the soldiers would never have slain Pertinax so easily if the building had
been securely fastened, Julianus harbored the belief that in case of
defeat he would be able to shut himself up there and survive.

Moreover, he put to death both Laetus and Marcia, so that all the
conspirators against Commodus had now perished. Later Severus gave
Narcissus also to the beasts, making the proclamation (verbatim): "This is
the man that strangled Commodus." The emperor likewise killed many boys
for purposes of enchantments, thinking that he could avert some future
calamities, if he should ascertain them in advance. And he kept sending
man after man to find Severus and assassinate him. [Vespronius Candidus, a
man of very distinguished rank but still more remarkable for his
sullenness and boorishness, came near meeting his end at the hands of the
soldiers.]

[Sidenote:--17--] The avenger had now reached Italy and without striking a
blow took possession of Ravenna. The men whom his opponent kept sending to
him to either persuade him to turn back or else block his approaches were
won over. The Pretorians, in whom Julianus reposed most confidence, were
becoming worn out by constant toil and were getting terribly alarmed at
the report of Severus's proximity. At this juncture Julianus called us
together and bade us vote for Severus to be his colleague in office.

The soldiers were led to believe by communications from Severus that, if
they would surrender the assassins of Pertinax and themselves offer no
hostile demonstration, they should receive no harm; therefore they
arrested the men who had killed Pertinax and announced this very fact to
Silius Messala, the consul. The latter assembled us in the Athenaeum,
[Footnote: Located on the Capitol, and established by Hadrian.] so called
from the fact that it was a seat of educational activity, and informed us
of the news from the soldiers. We then sentenced Julianus to death, named
Severus emperor, and bestowed heroic honors upon Pertinax. So it was that
Julianus came to be slain as he was reclining in the palace itself; he had
only time to say: "Why, what harm have I done? Whom have I killed?" He had
lived sixty years, four months, and the same number of days, out of which
he had reigned sixty-six days.

Dio, 74th Book: "Men of intelligence should neither begin a war nor seek
to evade it when it is thrust upon them. They should rather grant pardon
to him who voluntarily conducts himself properly, in spite Of any previous
transgression, [Lacuna]




DIO'S ROMAN HISTORY

Severus takes vengeance on the Pretorians who were the assassins of
Pertinax and enters the city (chapters 1, 2).

Prodigies which portended the sovereignty to Severus (chapter 3).

Funeral procession which he superintended, in honor of Pertinax (chapters
4, 5).

War of Severus Augustus against Pescennius Niger (chapters 6-9).

The storming of Byzantium (chapters 10-14).


DURATION OF TIME.

Q. Sosius Falco, C. Erucius Clarus. (A.D. 193 = a.u. 946 = First of
Severus, from the Calends of June).

I. Septimius Severus Aug. (II), D. Clodius Septimius Albinus Caes. (A.D.
194 = a.u. 947 = Second of Severus).

Scapula Tertullus, Tineius Clemens. (A.D. 195 = a.u. 948 = Third of
Severus).

C. Domitius Dexter (II), L. Valerius Messala Priscus. (A.D. 196 = a.u. 949
= Fourth of Severus).


[Sidenote:--1--] Severus upon becoming emperor in the manner described
punished with death the | Pretorians | who had contrived the fate of
Pertinax. Before reaching Rome he summoned those remaining [Pretorians],
surrounded them in a plain while they still did not know what was going
to happen to them, and having reproached them long and bitterly for
their transgression against their emperor he relieved them of their
arms, took away their horses, and expelled them from Rome. The majority
reluctantly proceeded to throw away their arms and let their horses go,
and scattered uninjured, in their tunics. One man, as his horse refused
to leave him, but kept following him and neighing, slew both the beast
and himself. To the spectators it seemed that the horse also was glad to
die.

When he had attended to this matter Severus entered Rome; he went as far
as the gates on horseback and in cavalry costume, but from that point on
changed to citizen's garb and walked. The entire army, both, infantry and
cavalry, in full armor accompanied him. The spectacle proved the most
brilliant of all that I have witnessed, for the whole city had been decked
with wreaths of blossoms and laurel and besides being adorned with richly
colored stuffs blazed with lights and burning incense. The population,
clad in white and jubilant, gave utterance to many hopeful expressions.
The soldiers were present, conspicuous by their arms, as if participating
[Footnote: Reading [Greek: pompeyontes] (Dindorf, after Bekker).] in some
festival procession, and we, too, were walking about in our best attire.
The crowd chafed in their eagerness to see him and to hear him say
something, as if his voice had been somehow changed by his good fortune,
and some of them held one another up aloft to get a look at him from a
higher position.

[Sidenote:--2--] Having entered in this style he began to make us rash
promises, such as the good emperors of old had given, to the effect that
he would not put any senator to death. He not only took oath concerning
this matter, but what was of greater import he also ordered it ratified by
public decree, and passed an ordinance that both the emperor and the
person who helped him in any such deed should be considered an
enemy,--themselves and also their children. Yet he was himself the first
to break the law and instead of keeping it caused the death of many
persons. Even Julius Solon himself, who framed this decree according to
imperial mandate, was a little later murdered. The emperor did many things
that were not to our liking. [He was blamed for making the city turbulent
by the multitude of soldiers and he oppressed the commonwealth by
excessive expenditure of funds: he was blamed most of all for placing his
hope of safety in the strength of his army and not in the good-will of his
companions.] But some found fault with him especially because, whereas it
had been the custom for the body-guard to be drawn from Italy, Spain,
Macedonia and Noricum only,--a plan which furnished men more distinguished
in appearance and of simpler habits,--he had abolished this method, [He
ruled that any vacancies should be filled from all the legions alike; this
he did with the idea that he should find them as a result more conversant
with military practices and should be setting up warfare as a kind of
prize for the excellent. As a matter of fact he incidentally ruined all
the most reliable men of military age in Italy, who turned their attention
to robbery and gladiatorial fighting in place of the service that had
previously claimed it.] and filled the city with a throng of motley
soldiers, most savage in appearance, most terrifying in their talk, and
most uncultured to associate with.

[Sidenote:--3--] The signs which led him to expect the sovereignty were
these. When he had been registered in the senate-house, it seemed to him
in a vision that a she-wolf suckled him, as was the case with Romulus. On
the occasion of his marrying Julia, Faustina, the wife of Marcus, prepared
their bedchamber in the temple of Venus opposite the palace; and once,
when he was asleep, water gushed from his hand as from a spring; and when
he was governor of Lugdunum, the whole Roman domain approached and greeted
him,--all this in dreams, I mean. At another time he was taken by some one
to a point affording a wide view; and as he gazed from it over all the
earth and all the sea he laid his fingers on them as one might on some
instrument [Footnote: Compare Plato, Republic, 399 C.] capable of all
harmonies, and they answered to his touch. Again, he thought that in the
Roman Forum a horse threw Pertinax, who was already mounted, but readily
took him on its back. These things he had already learned from dreams, but
in his waking hours he had, while a youth, ignorantly seated himself upon
the imperial chair. This accident, taken with the rest, indicated
rulership to him in advance.

[Sidenote:--4--] Upon attaining that condition he erected a heroum to
Pertinax and commanded that his name should be repeated in the course of
all prayers and of all oaths. A gold image of him was ordered brought into
the hippodrome on a car drawn by elephants and three gilded thrones for
him conveyed into the remaining theatres. His funeral, in spite of the
time elapsed since his death, took place as follows:

In the Forum Romanum a wooden platform was constructed hard by the stone
one, upon which was set a building without walls but encompassed by
columns, with elaborate ivory and gold decoration. In it a couch of
similar material was placed, surrounded by heads of land and sea
creatures, and adorned with purple coverlets interwoven with gold. Upon it
had been laid a kind of wax image of Pertinax, arrayed in triumphal
attire. A well-formed boy was scaring the flies away from it with peacock
feathers, as though it were really a person sleeping. While it was lying
there in state, Severus, we senators, and our wives approached, clad in
mourning garb. [Footnote: Reading [Greek: penthikos] (Sylburgius,
Boissevain et al)..] The ladies sat in the porticos, and we under the open
sky. After this there came forward, first, statues of all the famous
ancient Romans, then choruses of boys and men, intoning a kind of mournful
hymn to Pertinax. Next were all the subject nations, represented by bronze
images, attired in native garb. And the guilds in the City itself,--those
of the lictors and the scribes and the heralds, and all others of the
sort,--followed on. Then came images of other men who were famous for some
deed or invention or brilliant trait. Behind them were the cavalry and
infantry in armor, the race-horses, and all the funeral offerings that the
emperor and we and our wives, together with distinguished knights and
peoples and the collegia of the city, had sent. They were accompanied by
an altar, entirely gilded, the beauty of which was enhanced by ivory and
Indic jewels. [Sidenote:--5--] When these had gone by, Severus mounted the
Platform of the Beaks and read a eulogy of Pertinax. We shouted our
approval many times in the midst of his discourse, partly praising and
partly bewailing Pertinax, but our cries were loudest when he had ceased.
Finally, as the couch was about to be moved, we all together uttered our
lamentations and all shed tears. Those who carried the bier from the
platform were the high priests and the officials who were completing their
term of office, as well as any that had been appointed for the ensuing
year. These gave it to certain knights to carry. The rank and file of us
went ahead of the bier, some beating our breasts and others playing on the
flute some dirge-like air; the emperor followed behind all, and in this
order we arrived at the Campus Martius. Here there had been built a pyre,
tower-shaped and triple pointed, adorned with ivory and gold together with
certain statues. On its very summit was lodged a gilded chariot that
Pertinax had been wont to drive. Into this the funeral offerings were cast
and the bier was placed in it, and next Severus and the relatives of
Pertinax kissed the image. Our monarch ascended a tribunal, while we the
senate, except officials, took our places on the benches, that with safety
and convenience alike we might view what went on. The magistrates and the
equestrian order, arrayed in a manner becoming their station, besides the
cavalry of the army and the infantry, passed in and out performing
intricate evolutions, both traditional and newly invented. Then at length
the consuls applied fire to the mound, which being done an eagle flew up
from it. In this way was immortality secured for Pertinax [who (although
bodies of men engaged in warfare usually turn out savage and those given
to peace cowardly) excelled equally in both departments, being an enemy to
dread, yet shrewd in the arts of peace. His boldness, wherein bravery
appears, he displayed towards foreigners and rebels, but his clemency,
wherewith is mingled justice, towards friends and the orderly elements of
society. When advanced to preside over the destinies of the world, he was
never ensnared by the increase of greatness so as to show himself in some
things more subservient and in others more haughty than was fitting. He
underwent no change from the beginning to the very end, but was august
without sullenness, gentle without humiliating lowliness, prudent, yet did
no injury, just without inquisitorial qualities, a close administrator
without stinginess, highminded, but devoid of boasts.]

[Sidenote:--6--] Now Severus made a campaign against Niger. The latter was
an Italian, one of the knights, remarkable for nothing either very good or
very bad, so that one could either greatly praise or greatly censure him.
[Wherefore he had been assigned to Syria by Commodus.] He had as a
lieutenant, together with others, Aemilianus, who [by remaining neutral
and watching the course of events] was thought to surpass all the senators
of that day in understanding and in experience of affairs; for he had been
tested in many provinces. [These conditions and the fact that he was a
relative of Albinus had made him conceited.]

[Sidenote:--7--] [Niger was not in general a well-balanced man and though
he had very great abilities still fell into error. But at this time he was
more than usually elated, so that he showed how much he liked those who
called him "the new Alexander"; and when one man asked, "Who gave you
permission to do this?" he pointed to his sword and rejoined, "This did."
When the war broke out Niger had gone to Byzantium and from that point
conducted a campaign against Perinthus. He was disturbed, however, by
unfavorable omens that came to his notice. An eagle perched upon a
military shrine and remained there till captured, in spite of attempts
to scare it away. Bees made wax around the military standards and about
his images most of all. For these reasons he retired to Byzantium.]

[Sidenote: A.D. 194 (a.u. 947)] Now Aemilianus while engaged in conflict
with some of the generals of Severus near Cyzicus was defeated by them and
slain. After this, between the narrows of Nicaea and Cius, they had a
great war of various forms. Some battled in close formation on the plains;
others occupied the hill-crests and hurled stones and javelins at their
opponents from the higher ground; still others got into boats and
discharged their bows at the enemy from the lake. At first the adherents
of Severus, under the direction of Candidus, were victorious; for they
found their advantage in the higher ground from which they fought. But the
moment Niger himself appeared a pursuit in turn was instituted by Niger's
men and victory was on their side. Then Candidus caught hold of the
standard bearers and turned them to face the enemy, upbraiding the
soldiers for their flight; at this his followers were ashamed, turned
back, and once more conquered those opposed to them. Indeed, they would
have destroyed them utterly, had not the city been near and the night a
dark one.

The next event was a tremendous battle at Issus, near the
so-called Gates. In this contest Valerianus and Anullinus [Footnote: _P.
Cornelius Anullinus._] commanded the army of Severus, whereas Niger was
with his own ranks and marshaled them for war. This pass, the Cilician
"Gates", [Footnote: Compare Xenophon's _Anabasis_, I, 4, 4-5.] is so
named on account of its narrowness. On the one side rise precipitous
mountains, and on the other sheer cliffs descend to the sea. So Niger had
here made a camp on a strong hill, and he put in front heavy-armed
soldiers, next the javelin slingers and stone throwers, and behind all the
archers. His purpose was that the foremost might thrust back such as
assailed them in hand-to-hand conflict, while the others from a distance
might be able to bring their force into play over the heads of the others.
The detachment on the left and that on the right were defended by the
sea-crags and by the forest, which had no issue. This is the way in which
he arranged his army, and he stationed the beasts of burden close to it,
in order that none of them should be able to flee in case they should wish
it. Anullinus after making all this out placed in advance the heavier part
of his force and behind it his entire light-armed contingent, to the end
that the latter, though discharging their weapons from a distance might
still retard the progress of the enemy, while the solidity of the advance
guard rendered the upward passage safe for them. The cavalry he sent with
Valerianus, bidding him, so far as he could, go around the forest and
unexpectedly fall upon the troops of Niger from the rear. When they came
to close quarters, the soldiers of Sevents placed some of their shields in
front of them and held some above their heads, making a testudo, and in
this formation they approached the enemy. So the battle was a drawn one
for a long while, but eventually Niger's men got decidedly the advantage
both by their numbers and by the topography of the country. They would
have been entirely victorious, had not clouds gathered out of a clear sky
and a wind arisen from a perfect calm, while there were crashes of thunder
and sharp flashes of lightning and a violent rain beat in their faces.
This did not trouble Severus's troops because it was behind them, but
threw Niger's men into great confusion since it came right against them.
Most important of all, the opportune character of this occurrence infused
courage in the one side, which believed it was aided by Heaven, and fear
in the other, which felt that the supernatural was warring against them;
thus it made the former strong even beyond its own strength and terrified
the latter in spite of real power. Just as they were fleeing Valerianus
came in sight. Seeing him, they turned about, and after that, as Anullinus
beat them back, retreated once more. Then they wandered about, running
this way and that way, to see where they could break through.

[Sidenote:--8--] It turned out that this was the greatest slaughter to
take place during the war in question. Two myriads of Niger's followers
perished utterly. The fact was indicated also by the priest's vision.
While Severus was in Pannonia, the priest of Jupiter saw in a vision a
black man force his way into the emperor's camps and meet his death by
superior numbers. And by turning the name of Niger into Greek people
recognized that he was the one meant by the "black" person mentioned.
Directly Antioch had been captured (not long after) Niger fled from it,
making the Euphrates his objective point, for he intended to seek refuge
among the barbarians. His pursuers, however, overtook him; he was taken
and had his head struck off. This head Severus sent to Byzantium and
