impurities with which its floor and columns were polluted were cleansed.
Nothing was left untried to free it from infection. It was washed
throughout with vinegar, fumigated with the strongest scents, and
several large barrels of pitch were set fire to in the aisles."

"It shall undergo another species of purification," said Solomon Eagle,
who was present during these proceedings; "one that shall search every
nook within it--shall embrace all those columns, and pierce every crack
and crevice in those sculptured ornaments; and then, and not till then,
will it be thoroughly cleansed."

During all this time the grocer had not opened his dwelling. The wisdom
of this plan was now made fully apparent. The plague was declining fast,
and not an inmate of his house had been attacked by it. Soon after the
melancholy occurrence, he had been informed by Doctor Hodges of Amabel's
death; but the humane physician concealed from him the painful
circumstances under which it occurred. It required all Mr. Bloundel's
fortitude to support him under the shock of this intelligence, and he
did not communicate the afflicting tidings to his wife until he had
prepared her for their reception. But she bore them better than he had
anticipated; and though she mourned her daughter deeply and truly, she
appeared completely resigned to the loss. Sorrow pervaded the whole
household for some weeks; and the grocer, who never relaxed his system,
shrouded his sufferings under the appearance of additional austerity of
manner. It would have been a great consolation to him to see Leonard
Holt; but the apprentice had disappeared; and even Doctor Hodges could
give no account of him.

One night, in the middle of November, Mr. Bloundel signified to his wife
his intention of going forth, early on the following morning, to satisfy
himself that the plague was really abating. Accordingly, after he had
finished his devotions, and broken his fast, he put his design into
execution. His first act, after locking the door behind him, which he
did as a measure of precaution, was to fall on his knees and offer up
prayers to Heaven for his signal preservation. He then arose, and,
stepping into the middle of the street, gazed at the habitation which
had formed his prison and refuge for nearly six months. There it was,
with its shutters closed and barred--a secure asylum, with all alive
within it, while every other dwelling in the street was desolate.

The grocer's sensations were novel and extraordinary. His first impulse
was to enjoy his newly-recovered freedom, and to put himself into active
motion. But he checked the feeling as sinful, and proceeded along the
street at a slow pace. He did not meet a single person, until he reached
Cheapside, where he found matters completely changed. Several shops were
already opened, and there were a few carts and other vehicles tracking
their way through the broad and yet grass-grown street. It was a clear,
frosty morning, and there was a healthful feel in the bracing atmosphere
that produced an exhilarating effect on the spirits. The grocer pursued
his course through the middle of the street, carefully avoiding all
contact with such persons as he encountered, though he cordially
returned their greetings, and wandered on, scarcely knowing whither he
was going, but deeply interested in all he beheld.

The aspect of the city was indeed most curious. The houses were for the
most part unoccupied--the streets overgrown with grass--while every
object, animate and inanimate, bore some marks of the recent visitation.
Still, all looked hopeful, and the grocer could not doubt that the worst
was past. The different demeanour of the various individuals he met
struck him. Now he passed a young man whistling cheerily, who saluted
him, and said, "I have lost my sweetheart by the plague, but I shall
soon get another." The next was a grave man, who muttered, "I have lost
all," and walked pensively on. Then came others in different moods; but
all concurred in thinking that the plague was at an end; and the grocer
derived additional confirmation of the fact from meeting numerous carts
and other vehicles bringing families back to their houses from the
country.

After roaming about for several hours, and pondering on all he saw, he
found himself before the great western entrance of Saint Paul's. It
chanced to be the morning on which the pallets and bedding were brought
forth, and he watched the proceeding at a distance. All had been
removed, and he was about to depart, when he perceived a person seated
on a block of stone, not far from him, whom he instantly recognised.
"Leonard," he cried--"Leonard Holt, is it you?"

Thus addressed, and in these familiar tones, the apprentice looked up,
and Mr. Bloundel started at the change that had taken place in him.
Profound grief was written in every line of his thin and haggard
countenance; his eyes were hollow, and had the most melancholy
expression imaginable; and his flesh was wasted away from the bone. He
looked the very image of hopeless affliction.

"I am sorry to find you in this state, Leonard," said the grocer, in a
tone of deep commiseration; "but I am well aware of the cause. I myself
have suffered severely; but I deem it my duty to control my affliction."

"I _would_ control it, if it were possible, Mr. Bloundel," replied
Leonard. "But hope is dead in my breast. I shall never be happy again."

"I trust otherwise," replied the grocer, kindly. "Your trials have been
very great, and so were those of the poor creature we both of us
deplore. But she is at peace, and therefore we need not lament her."

"Alas!" exclaimed Leonard, mournfully, "I am now only anxious to rejoin
her."

"It is selfish, if not sinful, to grieve in this way," rejoined Mr.
Bloundel, somewhat sternly. "You must bear your sorrows like a man. Come
home with me. I will be a father to you. Nay, do not hesitate. I will
have no refusal."

So saying, he took Leonard's arm, and led him in the direction of
Wood-street. Nothing passed between them on the way, nor did Leonard
evince any further emotion until he entered the door of the grocer's
dwelling, when he uttered a deep groan. Mrs. Bloundel was greatly
affected at seeing him, as were the rest of the family, and abundance of
tears were shed by all, except Mr. Bloundel, who maintained his
customary stoical demeanour throughout the meeting.

Satisfied that the pestilence had not declined sufficiently to warrant
him in opening his house, the grocer determined to await the result of a
few weeks. Indeed, that very night, he had reason to think he had
defeated his plans by precipitancy. While sitting after prayers with his
family, he was seized with a sudden shivering and sickness, which he
could not doubt were the precursors of the plague. He was greatly
alarmed, but did not lose his command over himself.

"I have been most imprudent," he said, "in thus exposing myself to
infection. I have symptoms of the plague about me, and will instantly
repair to one of the upper rooms which I have laid aside as an hospital,
in case of any emergency like the present. None of you must attend me.
Leonard will fetch Doctor Hodges and a nurse. I shall then do very well.
Farewell, dear wife and children! God bless you all, and watch over you.
Remember me in your prayers." So saying, he arose and walked towards the
door. His wife and eldest son would have assisted him, but he motioned
them away.

"Let me go with you, sir," cried Leonard, who had arisen with the
others; "I will nurse you; my life is of little consequence, and I
cannot be more satisfactorily employed."

The grocer reluctantly assented, and the apprentice assisted him
upstairs, and helped to place him in bed. No plague-token could be found
about his person, but as the same alarming symptoms still continued,
Leonard administered such remedies as he thought needful, and then went
in search of Doctor Hodges.

On reaching Watling-street, he found Doctor Hodges about to retire to
rest. The worthy physician was greatly distressed by the apprentice's
account of his master's illness; but was somewhat reassured when the
symptoms were more minutely described to him. While preparing certain
medicines, and arming himself with his surgical implements, he
questioned Leonard as to the cause of his long disappearance. "Having
seen nothing of you," he said, "since the fatal night when our poor
Amabel's sorrows were ended, I began to feel very apprehensive on your
account. Where have you been?"

"You shall hear," replied Leonard, "though the relation will be like
opening my wounds afresh. On recovering from the terrible shock I had
received, I found myself stretched upon a bed in a house whither I had
been conveyed by Rainbird the watchman, who had discovered me lying in a
state of insensibility in the street. For nearly a week I continued
delirious, and should, probably, have lost my senses altogether but for
the attentions of the watchman. As soon as I was able to move, I
wandered to the lesser plague-pit, in Finsbury Fields, you will guess
with what intent. My heart seemed breaking, and I thought I should pour
forth my very soul in grief, as I gazed into that dreadful gulf, and
thought she was there interred. Still my tears were a relief. Every
evening, for a month, I went to that sad spot, and remained there till
daybreak admonished me to return to Rainbird's dwelling. At last, he was
seized by the distemper; but though I nursed him, voluntarily exposing
myself to infection, and praying to be carried off, I remained
untouched. Poor Rainbird died; and having seen his body thrown into the
pit, I set off into Berkshire, and after three days' toilsome travel on
foot, reached Ashdown Park. It was a melancholy pleasure to behold the
abode where she I had loved passed her last few days of happiness, and
where I had been near her. Her aunt, good Mrs. Buscot, though
overwhelmed by affliction at the sad tidings I brought her, received me
with the utmost kindness, and tried to console me. My sorrow, however,
was too deeply seated to be removed. Wandering over the downs, I visited
Mrs. Compton at Kingston Lisle, from whose house Amabel was carried off
by the perfidious earl. She, also, received me with kindness, and
strove, like Mrs. Buscot, to comfort me, and, like her, ineffectually.
Finding my strength declining, and persuaded that my days were drawing
to a close, I retraced my steps to London, hoping to find a final
resting-place near her I had loved."

"You are, indeed, faithful to the grave, Leonard," said the physician,
brushing away a tear; "and I never heard or read of affection stronger
than yours. Sorrow is a great purifier, and you will come out all the
better for your trial. You are yet young, and though you never can love
as you _have_ loved, a second time, your heart is not utterly seared."

"Utterly, sir," echoed Leonard, "utterly."

"You think so, now," rejoined the physician. "But you will find it
otherwise hereafter. I can tell you of one person who has suffered
almost as much from your absence as you have done for the loss of
Amabel. The Lady Isabella Argentine has made constant inquiries after
you; and though I should be the last person to try to rouse you from
your present state of despondency, by awakening hopes of alliance with
the sister of a proud noble, yet it may afford you consolation to know
that she still cherishes the warmest regard for you."

"I am grateful to her," replied Leonard, sadly, but without exhibiting
any other emotion. "She was dear to Amabel, and therefore will be ever
dear to me. I would fain know," he added, his brow suddenly contracting,
and his lip quivering, "what has become of the Earl of Rochester?"

"He has married a wealthy heiress, the fair Mistress Mallet," replied
Hodges.

"Married, and so soon!" cried Leonard. "And he has quite forgotten his
victim?"

"Apparently so," replied the doctor, with an expression of disgust.

"And it was for one who so lightly regarded her that she sacrificed
herself," groaned Leonard, his head dropping upon his breast.

"Come," cried Hodges, taking his arm, and leading him out of the room;
"we must go and look after your master."

With this, they made the best of their way to Wood-street. Arrived at
the grocer's house, they went upstairs, and Hodges immediately
pronounced Mr. Bloundel to be suffering from a slight feverish attack,
which a sudorific powder would remove. Having administered the remedy,
he descended to the lower room to allay the fears of the family. Mrs.
Bloundel received the happy tidings with tears of joy, and the doctor
remained a short time to condole with her on the loss she had sustained.
The good dame wept bitterly on hearing the whole particulars, with which
she had been hitherto unacquainted, attending her daughter's untimely
death, but she soon regained her composure. They then spoke of Leonard,
who had remained above with his master,--of his blighted hopes, and
seemingly incurable affliction.

"His is true love, indeed, doctor," sighed Mrs. Bloundel. "Pity it is
that it could not be requited."

"I know not how it is," rejoined Hodges, "and will not question the
decrees of our All-Wise Ruler, but the strongest affection seldom, if
ever, meets a return. Leonard himself was insensible to the devotion of
one, of whom I may say, without disparagement to our poor Amabel, that
she was, in my opinion, her superior in beauty."

"And does this person love him still?" inquired Mrs. Bloundel, eagerly.
"I ask, because I regard him as a son, and earnestly desire to restore
him to happiness."

"Alas!" exclaimed Hodges, "there are obstacles in the way that cannot be
removed. We must endeavour to cure him of his grief in some other way."

The conversation then dropped, and Hodges took his leave, promising to
return on the morrow, and assuring Mrs. Bloundel that she need be under
no further apprehension about her husband. And so it proved. The
powders removed all the grocer's feverish symptoms, and when Doctor
Hodges made his appearance the next day, he found him dressed, and ready
to go downstairs. Having received the physician's congratulations on his
entire recovery, Mr. Bloundel inquired from him when he thought he might
with entire safety open his shop. Hodges considered for a moment, and
then replied, "I do not see any great risk in doing so now, but I would
advise you to defer the step for a fortnight. I would, also, recommend
you to take the whole of your family for a short time into the country.
Pure air and change of scene are absolutely necessary after their long
confinement."

"Farmer Wingfield, of Kensal-Green, who sheltered us on our way down to
Ashdown Park, will, I am sure, receive you," observed Leonard.

"If so, you cannot go to a better place," rejoined the physician.

"I will think of it," returned Mr. Bloundel. And leading the way
downstairs, he was welcomed by his wife and children with the warmest
demonstrations of delight.

"My fears, you perceive, were groundless," he remarked to Mrs. Bloundel.

"Heaven be praised, they were so!" she rejoined. "But I entreat you not
to go forth again till all danger is at an end."

"Rest assured I will not," he answered. Soon after this, Doctor Hodges
took his leave, and had already reached the street-door, when he was
arrested by Patience, who inquired with much anxiety whether he knew
anything of Blaize.

"Make yourself easy about him, child," replied the doctor; "I am pretty
sure he is safe and sound. He has had the plague, certainly; but he left
the hospital at Saint Paul's cured.

"O then I _shall_ see him again," cried Patience, joyfully. "Poor dear
little fellow, it would break my heart to lose him."

"I will make inquiries about him," rejoined Hodges, "and if I can find
him, will send him home." And without waiting to receive the
kitchen-maid's thanks, he departed.

For some days the grocer continued to pursue pretty nearly the same line
of conduct that he had adopted during the height of the pestilence. But
he did not neglect to make preparations for resuming his business; and
here Leonard was of material assistance to him. They often spoke of
Amabel, and Mr. Bloundel strove, by every argument he was master of, to
remove the weight of affliction under which his apprentice laboured. He
so far succeeded that Leonard's health improved, though he still seemed
a prey to secret sorrow. Things were in this state, when one day a knock
was heard at the street-door, and the summons being answered by the
grocer's eldest son, Stephen, he returned with the intelligence that a
person was without who desired to see Patience. After some
consideration, Mr. Bloundel summoned the kitchen-maid, and told her she
might admit the stranger into the passage, and hear what he had to say.
Patience hastened with a beating heart to the door, expecting to learn
some tidings of Blaize, and opening it, admitted a man wrapped in a
large cloak and having a broad-leaved hat pulled over his brows.
Stepping into the passage, he threw aside the cloak and raised the hat,
discovering the figure and features of Pillichody.

"What brings you here, sir?" demanded Patience, in alarm, and glancing
over her shoulder to see whether any one observed them. "What do you
want?"

"I have brought you news of Blaize," returned the bully. "But how
charmingly you look. By the coral lips of Venus! your long confinement
has added to your attractions."

"Never mind my attractions, sir," rejoined Patience, impatiently. "Where
is Blaize? Why did he not come with you?"

"Alas!" replied Pillichody, shaking his head in a melancholy manner, "he
could not."

"Could not!" half screamed Patience. "Why not?"

"Do not question me," replied Pillichody, feigning to brush away a tear.
"He was my friend, and I would rather banish him from my memory. The
sight of your beauty transports me so, that, by the treasures of
Croesus! I would rather have you without a crown than the wealthiest
widow in the country."

"Don't talk nonsense to me in this way," sobbed Patience "I'm not in the
humour for it."

"Nonsense!" echoed Pillichody. "I swear to you I am in earnest. By
Cupid! I am ravished with your charms." And he would have seized her
hand, but Patience hastily withdrew it; and, provoked at his
impertinence, dealt him a sound box on the ear. As she did this, she
thought she heard a suppressed laugh near her, and looked round, but
could see no one. The sound certainly did not proceed from Pillichody,
for he looked very red and very angry.

"Do not repeat this affront, mistress," he said to her. "I can bear
anything but a blow from your sex."

"Then tell me what has become of Blaize," she cried.

"I will no longer spare your feelings," he rejoined. "He is defunct."

"Defunct!" echoed Patience, with a scream. "Oh, dear me!--I shall never
survive it--I shall die."

"Not while I am left to supply his place," cried Pillichody, catching
her in his arms.

"You!" cried Patience, contemptuously; "I would not have you for the
world. Where is he buried?"

"In the plague-pit," replied Pillichody. "I attended him during his
illness. It was his second attack of the disorder. He spoke of you."

"Did he?--dear little fellow!" she exclaimed. "Oh, what did he say?"

"'Tell her,' he cried," rejoined Pillichody, "'that my last thoughts
were of her.'"

"Oh, dear! oh, dear!" cried Patience, hysterically.

"'Tell her also,' he added," pursued Pillichody, "'that I trust she will
fulfil my last injunction.'"

"That I will," replied Patience. "Name it."

"He conjured you to marry me," replied Pillichody. "I am sure you will
not hesitate to comply with the request."

"I don't believe a word of this," cried Patience. "Blaize was a great
deal too jealous to bequeath me to another."

"Right, sweetheart, right," cried the individual in question, pushing
open the door. "This has all been done to try your fidelity. I am now
fully satisfied with your attachment; and am ready to marry you whenever
you please."

"So this was all a trick," cried Patience, pettishly; "I wish I had
known it, I would have retaliated upon you nicely. You ought to be
ashamed of yourself, Major Pillichody, to lend a helping-hand in such a
ridiculous affair."

"I did it to oblige my friend Blaize," replied Pillichody. "It was
agreed between us that if you showed any inconstancy, you were to be
mine."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Patience. "I would not advise you to repeat the
experiment, Mr. Blaize."

"I never intend to do so, my angel," replied the porter. "I esteem
myself the happiest and most fortunate of men."

"You have great reason to do so," observed Pillichody. "I do not despair
of supplanting him yet," he muttered to himself. "And now, farewell!" he
added aloud; "I am only in the way, and besides, I have no particular
desire to encounter Mr. Bloundel or his apprentice;" and winking his
solitary orb significantly at Patience, he strutted away. It was well he
took that opportunity of departing, for the lovers' raptures were
instantly afterwards interrupted by the appearance of Mr. Bloundel, who
was greatly delighted to see the porter, and gave him a hearty welcome.

"Ah, sir, I have had a narrow escape," cried Blaize, "and never more
expected to see you, or my mother, or Patience. I _have_ had the plague,
sir, and a terrible disorder it is."

"I heard or your seizure from Leonard Holt," replied Mr. Bloundel. "But
where have you been since you left the hospital at Saint Paul's?"

"In the country, sir," rejoined Blaize; "sometimes at one farm-house,
and sometimes at another. I only returned to London yesterday, and met
an old friend, whom I begged to go before me, and see that all was right
before I ventured, in."

"We have all been providentially spared," observed Mr. Bloundel, "and
you will find your mother as well as when you last quitted her. You had
better go to her."

Blaize obeyed, and was received by old Josyna with a scream of delight.
Having embraced him, and sobbed over him, she ran for a bottle of sack,
and poured its contents down his throat so hastily as nearly to choke
him. She then spread abundance of eatables before him, and after he had
eaten and drank his full, offered him as a treat a little of the plague
medicine which she had in reserve.

"No, thank you, mother," replied Blaize. "I have had enough of _that_.
But if there should be a box of rufuses amongst the store, you can bring
it, as I think a couple might do me good."

Three days after this event, the apprentice was sent forth to ascertain
the precise state of the city, as, if all proved favourable, the grocer
proposed to open his house on the following day. Leonard set out
betimes, and was speedily convinced that all danger was at an end. A
severe frost had set in, and had completely purified the air. For the
last few days there had been no deaths of the plague, and but little
mortality of any kind. Leonard traversed several of the main streets,
and some narrow thoroughfares, and found evidences of restored health
and confidence everywhere. It is true there were many houses, in which
whole families had been swept off, still left untenanted. But these were
only memorials of the past calamity, and could not be referred to any
existing danger. Before returning to Wood-street, an irresistible
impulse led him to Finsbury Fields. He passed through the postern east
of Cripplegate, and shaped his way towards the lesser plague-pit. The
sun, which had been bright all the morning, was now partially obscured;
the air had grown thick, and a little snow fell. The ground was
blackened and bound by the hard frost, and the stiffened grass felt
crisp beneath his feet. Insensible to all external circumstances, he
hurried forward, taking the most direct course, and leaping every
impediment in his path. Having crossed several fields, he at length
stood before a swollen heap of clay, round which a wooden railing was
placed. Springing over the enclosure, and uttering a wild cry that
evinced the uncontrollable anguish of his breast, he flung himself upon
the mound. He remained for some time in the deepest affliction, and was
at last roused by. a hand laid upon his shoulder, and, raising himself,
beheld Thirlby.

"I thought it must be you," said the new comer, in accents of the
deepest commiseration. "I have been visiting yonder plague-pit for the
same melancholy purpose as yourself,--to mourn over my lost child. I
have been in search of you, and have much to say to you. Will you meet
me in this place at midnight tomorrow?" Leonard signified his assent.

"I am in danger," pursued Thirlby, "for, by some means, the secret of my
existence has been made known, and the officers of justice are in
pursuit of me. I suspect that Judith Malmayns is my betrayer. You will
not fail me?"

"I will not," returned Leonard. Upon this, Thirlby hurried away, and
leaping a hedge, disappeared from view.

Leonard slowly and sorrowfully returned to Wood-street. On arriving
there, he assured his master that he might with entire safety open his
house, as he proposed, on the morrow; and Doctor Hodges, who visited the
grocer the same evening, confirmed the opinion. Early, therefore, the
next morning, Mr. Bloundel summoned his family to prayers; and after
pouring forth his supplications with peculiar fervour and solemnity, he
went, accompanied by them all, and threw open the street-door. Again,
kneeling down at the threshold, he prayed fervently, as before. He then
proceeded to remove the bars and shutters from the windows. The
transition from gloom and darkness to bright daylight was almost
overpowering. For the first time for six months, the imprisoned family
looked forth on the external world, and were dazzled and bewildered by
the sight. The grocer himself, despite his sober judgment, could
scarcely believe he had not been in a trance during the whole period.
The shop was scarcely opened before it was filled with customers, and
Leonard and Stephen were instantly employed. But the grocer would sell
nothing. To those who asked for any article he possessed, he presented
them with it, but would receive no payment.

He next dispatched Blaize to bring together all the poor he could find,
and distributed among them the remainder of his store--his casks of
flour, his salted meat, his cheeses, his biscuits, his wine--in short,
all that was left.

"This I give," he said, "as a thanksgiving to the Lord, and as a humble
testimony of gratitude for my signal deliverance."


II.

THE MIDNIGHT MEETING.

The first day of his deliverance being spent by the grocer in the
praiseworthy manner before related, he laid his head upon his pillow
with a feeling of satisfaction such as he had not for months
experienced. A very remarkable dream occurred to him that night, and its
recollection afterwards afforded him the greatest consolation. While
thinking of Amabel, and of the delight her presence would have afforded
him, slumber stole upon him, and his dreams were naturally influenced by
his previous meditations. It appeared to him that he was alone within
his house, and while visiting one of the upper rooms, which had formerly
been appropriated to his lost daughter, he noticed a small door in the
wall that had never before attracted his attention. He immediately
pushed against it, and yielding to the touch, it admitted him to an
apartment with which he seemed acquainted, though he could not recall
the time when he had seen it. It was large and gloomy, panelled with
dark and lustrous oak, and filled with rich but decayed furniture. At
the further end stood a large antique bed, hung round with tarnished
brocade curtains. The grocer shuddered at the sight, for he remembered
to have heard Doctor Hodges assert, that in such a bed, and in such a
room as this, his daughter had breathed her last. Some one appeared to
be within the bed, and rushing forward with a throbbing heart, and a
foreboding of what was to follow, he beheld the form of Amabel. Yes,
there she was, with features like those she wore on earth, but clothed
with such celestial beauty, and bearing the impress of such serene
happiness, that the grocer felt awe-struck as he gazed at her!

"Approach, my father," said the visionary form, in a voice so musical
that it thrilled through his frame--"approach, and let what you now hear
be for ever graven upon your heart. Do not lament me more, but rather
rejoice that I am removed from trouble, and in the enjoyment of supreme
felicity. Such a state you will yourself attain. You have run the good
race, and will assuredly reap your reward. Comfort my dear mother, my
brothers, my little sister, with the assurance of what I tell you, and
bid them dry their tears. I can now read the secrets of all hearts, and
know how true was Leonard Holt's love for me, and how deep and sincere
is his present sorrow. But I am not permitted to appear to him as I now
appear to you. Often have I heard him invoke me in accents of the
wildest despair, and have floated past him on the midnight breeze, but
could neither impart consolation to him nor make him sensible of my
presence, because his grief was sinful. Bid him be comforted. Bid him
put a due control upon his feelings. Bid him open his heart anew, and he
shall yet be happy, yet love again, and have his love requited.
Farewell, dear father!"

And with these words the curtains of the bed closed. The grocer
stretched out his arm to draw them aside, and in the effort awoke. He
slept no more that night, but dwelt with unutterable delight on the
words he had heard. On rising, his first object was to seek out Leonard,
and to relate his vision to him. The apprentice listened in speechless
wonder, and remained for some time lost in reflection.

"From any other person than yourself, sir," he said, at length, "I might
have doubted this singular story, but coming from you, I attach implicit
credence to it. I _will_ obey your sainted daughter's injunctions; I
_will_ struggle against the grief that overwhelms me, and will try to
hope that her words may be fulfilled."

"You will do wisely," rejoined Mr. Bloundel. "After breakfast we will
walk together to the farmhouse you spoke of at Kensal Green, and if its
owner should prove willing to receive my family for a few weeks, I will
remove them thither at once."

Leonard applauded his master's resolution, expressing his firm
conviction that Farmer Wingfield would readily accede to the proposal,
and the rest of the family having by this time assembled, they sat down
to breakfast. As soon as the meal was over, Mr. Bloundel intrusted the
care of the shop to Stephen and Blaize, and accompanied by Leonard, set
forth. On the way to the west end of the town, the grocer met one or two
of his old friends, and they welcomed each other like men risen from the
grave. Their course took them through Saint Giles's, where the plague
had raged with the greatest severity, and where many houses were still
without tenants.

"If all had acted as I have done," sighed the grocer, as he gazed at
these desolate habitations, "how many lives, under God's providence,
would have been saved!"

"In my opinion, sir," replied Leonard, "you owe your preservation as
much to your piety as to your prudence."

"I have placed my trust on high," rejoined the grocer, "and have not
been forsaken. And yet many evil doers have escaped; amongst others--"

"I know whom you mean, sir," interrupted Leonard, with some fierceness,
"but a day of retribution will arrive for him."

"No more of this," rejoined the grocer, severely. "Remember the solemn
injunction you have received."

At this moment they observed a horseman, richly attired, and followed by
a couple of attendants, riding rapidly towards them. Both instantly
recognised him. The apprentice's cheek and brow flushed with anger, and
Mr. Bloundel had much ado to control his emotion. It was the Earl of
Rochester, and on seeing them he instantly dismounted, and flinging his
bridle to one of the attendants, advanced towards them. Noticing the
fury that gleamed in Leonard's eyes, and apprehending some violence on
his part, the grocer laid his hand, upon his arm, and sternly enjoined
him to calm himself.

By this time, the earl had reached them. "Mr. Bloundel," he said, in a
tone of much emotion, and with a look that seemed to bespeak contrition.
"I heard that you had opened your house yesterday, and was about to call
upon you. I have a few words to say to you on a subject painful to both
of us, but doubly painful to me--your daughter."

"I must decline to hear them, my lord," replied the grocer, coldly; "nor
shall you ever cross my threshold again with my consent. My poor child
is now at peace. You can do her no further injury, and must settle your
own account with your Maker."

"Do not refuse me your forgiveness," implored the earl. "I will make
every reparation in my power."

"You _can_ make none," replied the grocer, repelling him; "and as to my
forgiveness, I neither refuse it nor accord it. I pray your lordship to
let me pass. The sole favour I ask of you is to come near me no more."

"I obey you," replied the earl. "Stay," he added to Leonard, who stood
by, regarding him with a look of deadly animosity. "I would give you a
piece of caution. Your life is in danger."

"I can easily guess from whom," replied the apprentice, scornfully.

"You mistake," rejoined Rochester; "you have nothing to apprehend from
me. You have promised to meet some one to-night," he added, in so low a
tone as to be inaudible to the grocer. "Do not go."

"Your lordship's warning will not deter me," rejoined the apprentice.

"As you will," rejoined Rochester, turning away. And springing upon his
horse, and striking his spurs into his side, he dashed off, while
Leonard and the grocer took the opposite direction. In less than half an
hour they reached the little village of Paddington, then consisting of a
few houses, but now one of the most populous and important parishes of
the metropolis, and speedily gained the open country. Even at this
dreary season the country had charms, which Mr. Bloundel, after his long
confinement, could fully appreciate. His eye roamed over the wide
prospect; and the leafless trees, the bare hedges, and the frost-bound
fields seemed pleasant in his sight.

He quickened his pace, and being wholly indifferent to the cold, greatly
enjoyed the exercise. Leonard pointed out to him the spots where the
fugitives from the plague had pitched their tents, and also the
pest-house near Westbourne Green, where he himself had been received
during his second attack of the distemper, and which was now altogether
abandoned.

Soon after this, they mounted the hill beyond Kensal Green, and
approached the farmhouse. Leonard descried Wingfield near one of the
barns, and hailing him, he immediately came forward. On being informed
of Mr. Bloundel's desire, he at once assented, and taking them into the
house, mentioned the matter to his dame, who was quite of the same
opinion as himself.

"The only difference between us," he said to Mr. Bloundel, "is as to the
payment you propose. Now I will take none--not a farthing. Come when you
please, bring whom you please, and stay as long as you please. But don't
offer me anything if you would not offend me. Recollect," he added, the
moisture forcing itself into his eyes, and his strong clear voice
becoming husky with emotion, "that I loved your daughter for her
resemblance to my poor child. She, too, is gone. I do this for her
sake."

Mr. Bloundel shook the worthy man warmly by the hand, but he made no
further objection, resolved in his own mind to find some other means of
requiting his hospitality. It was then agreed that the grocer should
bring his family on the following day, and remain there for a month; and
every other arrangement being made, and a hearty meal partaken of, he
cordially thanked his host, and returned with Leonard to Wood-street.

In spite of his efforts to resist the impression produced by the earl's
warning, Leonard could not banish it from his mind; and though he did
not for a moment think of abandoning his purpose, he resolved to attend
the meeting armed. He told Mr. Bloundel he should go out that night, but
did not state his object, and the grocer did not inquire it. Blaize sat
up with him, and displayed much anxiety to know whither he was going,
but, as may be supposed, his curiosity was not gratified. As the clock
struck eleven, Leonard thrust a sword into his girdle, and arming
himself furthermore with his staff, proceeded towards the door, and bade
Blaize lock it after him.

"I shall probably be back in a couple of hours," he said, as he went
forth. "You must sit up for me."

"I wonder where he is going!" thought Blaize, "From his gloomy looks,
and the weapon he has taken with him, I should judge he is about to
murder some one--perhaps the Earl of Rochester. It must be prevented."

With this view, though perhaps rather more influenced by curiosity than
any better feeling, the porter waited a few seconds to allow the
apprentice to get out of sight, and then locking the door outside, put
the key in his pocket, and followed him. The night was profoundly dark,
but he had noticed the direction taken by Leonard, and running
noiselessly along the street, soon perceived him a little in advance.
Regulating his pace by that of the apprentice, and keeping about fifty
yards behind him, he tracked his course along several streets, until he
saw him pass through the second postern in the city wall, near Moorgate.

Here he debated with himself whether to proceed further or turn back;
but at length, curiosity got the best of his fears, and he went on. A
few steps brought him into the open fields, and fancying he saw Leonard
at a little distance before him, he hurried on in that direction. But he
soon found he had been deceived by the stump of a tree, and began to
fear he must have taken the wrong course. He looked around in vain for
some object to guide him. The darkness was so profound that he could see
nothing, and he set off again at random, and not without much
self-reproach and misgiving. At last, he reached a hedge, and continued
to skirt it, until he perceived through the bushes the light of a
lantern in the adjoining field. He immediately called out, but at the
cry the light disappeared. This did not prevent him from making towards
the spot where he had seen it; but he had not proceeded far when he was
forcibly seized by some unseen person, thrown on the ground, and a drawn
sword--for he felt the point--placed at his throat.

"Utter a cry, and it is your last," cried a stern voice. "Where is he?"

"Who--who?" demanded Blaize, half dead with terror.

"He whom you appointed to meet," replied the unknown.

"I appointed to meet no one," rejoined Blaize.

"Liar!" exclaimed the other; "if you do not instantly lead me to him, I
will cut your throat."

"I will lead you wherever you please, if you will only let me get up,"
rejoined Blaize, with difficulty repressing a cry.

"By the daughters of Nox and Acheron!" exclaimed a voice which sounded
like music in the porter's ears, "I think you are mistaken in your man,
my lord. It does not sound like the apprentice's voice."

"It is _not_ the apprentice's voice, good Major Pillichody," rejoined
the porter. "It is mine, your friend--Blaize's."

"Blaize!" exclaimed Pillichody, unmasking a dark lantern, and revealing
the terror-stricken countenance of the porter; "so it is. In the devil's
name, what are you doing here?"

"The devil himself, who put it into my head to come, only knows,"
replied Blaize; "but I followed Leonard Holt."

"Which way did he take?" asked the person who had assailed him.
