trees stop scent, and the Iroquois noses are less keen than the Sioux
and the Dacotah.  God help you, monsieur, if you should ever have an
Indian war.  It is bad for us, but it would be a thousand times worse
for you."

"And why?"

"Because we have fought the Indians from the first, and we have them
always in our mind when we build.  You see how along this river every
house and every hamlet supports its neighbour?  But you, by Saint Anne
of Beaupre, it made my scalp tingle when I came on your frontiers and
saw the lonely farm-houses and little clearings out in the woods with no
help for twenty leagues around.  An Indian war is a purgatory for
Canada, but it would be a hell for the English Provinces!"

"We are good friends with the Indians," said Amos.  "We do not wish to
conquer."

"Your people have a way of conquering although they say that they do not
wish to do it," remarked Du Lhut.  "Now, with us, we bang our drums, and
wave our flags, and make a stir, but no very big thing has come of it
yet.  We have never had but two great men in Canada.  One was Monsieur
de la Salle, who was shot last year by his own men down the great river,
and the other, old Frontenac, will have to come back again if New France
is not to be turned into a desert by the Five Nations.  It would
surprise me little if by this time two years the white and gold flag
flew only over the rock of Quebec.  But I see that you look at me
impatiently, Monsieur de Catinat, and I know that you count the hours
until we are back at Sainte Marie again.  Forward, then, and may the
second part of our journey be as peaceful as the first."

For an hour or more they picked their way through the woods, following
in the steps of the old French pioneer.  It was a lovely day with hardly
a cloud in the heavens, and the sun streaming down through the thick
foliage covered the shaded sward with a delicate network of gold.
Sometimes where the woods opened they came out into the pure sunlight,
but only to pass into thick glades beyond, where a single ray, here and
there, was all that could break its way through the vast leafy covering.
It would have been beautiful, these sudden transitions from light to
shade, but with the feeling of impending danger, and of a horror ever
lurking in these shadows, the mind was tinged with awe rather than
admiration.  Silently, lightly, the four men picked their steps among
the great tree trunks.

Suddenly Du Lhut dropped upon his knees and stooped his ear to the
ground.  He rose, shook his head, and walked on with a grave face,
casting quick little glances into the shadows in every direction.

"Did you hear something?" whispered Amos.

Du Lhut put his finger to his lips, and then in an instant was down
again upon his face with his ear fixed to the ground.  He sprang up with
the look of a man who has heard what he expected to hear.

"Walk on," said he quietly, "and behave exactly as you have done all
day."

"What is it, then?"

"Indians."

"In front of us?"

"No, behind us."

"What are they doing?"

"They are following us."

"How many of them?"

"Two, I think."

The friends glanced back involuntarily over their shoulders into the
dense blackness of the forest.  At one point a single broad shaft of
light slid down between two pines and cast a golden blotch upon their
track.  Save for this one vivid spot all was sombre and silent.

"Do not look round," whispered Du Lhut sharply.  "Walk on as before."

"Are they enemies?"

"They are Iroquois."

"And pursuing us?"

"No, we are now pursuing them."

"Shall we turn, then?"

"No, they would vanish like shadows,"

"How far off are they?"

"About two hundred paces, I think."

"They cannot see us, then?"

"I think not, but I cannot be sure.  They are following our trail, I
think."

"What shall we do, then?"

"Let us make a circle and get behind them."

Turning sharp to the left he led them in a long curve through the woods,
hurrying swiftly and yet silently under the darkest shadows of the
trees.  Then he turned again, and presently halted.

"This is our own track," said he.

"Ay, and two Redskins have passed over it," cried Amos, bending down,
and pointing to marks which were entirely invisible to Ephraim Savage or
De Catinat.

"A full-grown warrior and a lad on his first warpath," said Du Lhut.
"They were moving fast, you see, for you can hardly see the heel marks
of their moccasins.  They walked one behind the other.  Now let us
follow them as they followed us, and see if we have better luck."

He sped swiftly along the trail with his musket cocked in his hand, the
others following hard upon his heels, but there was no sound, and no
sign of life from the shadowy woods in front of them.  Suddenly Du Lhut
stopped and grounded his weapon.

"They are still behind us," he said.

"Still behind us?"

"Yes.  This is the point where we branched off.  They have hesitated a
moment, as you can see by their footmarks, and then they have followed
on."

"If we go round again and quicken our pace we may overtake them."

"No, they are on their guard now.  They must know that it could only be
on their account that we went back on our tracks.  Lie here behind the
fallen log and we shall see if we can catch a glimpse of them."

A great rotten trunk, all green with mould and blotched with pink and
purple fungi, lay to one side of where they stood.  Behind this the
Frenchman crouched, and his three companions followed his example,
peering through the brushwood screen in front of them.  Still the one
broad sheet of sunshine poured down between the two pines, but all else
was as dim and as silent as a vast cathedral with pillars of wood and
roof of leaf.  Not a branch that creaked, nor a twig that snapped, nor
any sound at all save the sharp barking of a fox somewhere in the heart
of the forest.  A thrill of excitement ran through the nerves of De
Catinat.  It was like one of those games of hide-and-seek which the
court used to play, when Louis was in a sportive mood, among the oaks
and yew hedges of Versailles.  But the forfeit there was a carved fan,
or a box of bonbons, and here it was death.

Ten minutes passed and there was no sign of any living thing behind
them.

"They are over in yonder thicket," whispered Du Lhut, nodding his head
towards a dense clump of brushwood, two hundred paces away.

"Have you seen them?"

"No."

"How do you know, then?"

"I saw a squirrel come from his hole in the great white beech-tree
yonder.  He scuttled back again as if something had scared him.
From his hole he can see down into that brushwood."

"Do you think that they know that we are here?"

"They cannot see us.  But they are suspicious.  They fear a trap."

"Shall we rush for the brushwood?"

"They would pick two of us off, and be gone like shadows through the
woods.  No, we had best go on our way."

"But they will follow us."

"I hardly think that they will.  We are four and they are only two, and
they know now that we are on our guard and that we can pick up a trail
as quickly as they can themselves.  Get behind these trunks where they
cannot see us.  So!  Now stoop until you are past the belt of alder
bushes.  We must push on fast now, for where there are two Iroquois
there are likely to be two hundred not very far off."

"Thank God that I did not bring Adele!" cried De Catinat.

"Yes, monsieur, it is well for a man to make a comrade of his wife, but
not on the borders of the Iroquois country, nor of any other Indian
country either."

"You do not take your own wife with you when you travel, then?" asked
the soldier.

"Yes, but I do not let her travel from village to village.  She remains
in the wigwam."

"Then you leave her behind?"

"On the contrary, she is always there to welcome me.  By Saint Anne, I
should be heavy-hearted if I came to any village between this and the
Bluffs of the Illinois, and did not find my wife waiting to greet me."

"Then she must travel before you."

Du Lhut laughed heartily, without, however, emitting a sound.

"A fresh village, a fresh wife," said he.  "But I never have more than
one in each, for it is a shame for a Frenchman to set an evil example
when the good fathers are spending their lives so freely in preaching
virtue to them.  Ah, here is the Ajidaumo Creek, where the Indians set
the sturgeon nets.  It is still seven miles  to Poitou."

"We shall be there before nightfall, then?"

"I think that we had best wait for nightfall before we make our way in.
Since the Iroquois scouts are out as far as this, it is likely that they
lie thick round Poitou, and we may find the last step the worst unless
we have a care, the more so if these two get in front of us to warn the
others." He paused a moment with slanting head and sidelong ear.
"By Saint Anne," he muttered, "we have not shaken them off.  They are
still upon our trail!"

"You hear them?"

"Yes, they are no great way from us.  They will find that they have
followed us once too often this time.  Now, I will show you a little bit
of woodcraft which may be new to you.  Slip off your moccasins,
monsieur."

De Catinat pulled off his shoes as directed, and Du Lhut did the same.

"Put them on as if they were gloves," said the pioneer, and an instant
later Ephraim Savage and Amos had their comrades' shoes upon their
hands.

"You can sling your muskets over your back.  So!  Now down on all fours,
bending yourselves double, with your hands pressing hard upon the earth.
That is excellent.  Two men can leave the trail of four!  Now come with
me, monsieur."

He flitted from tree to tree on a line which was parallel to, but a few
yards distant from, that of their comrades.  Then suddenly he crouched
behind a bush and pulled De Catinat down beside him.

"They must pass us in a few minutes," he whispered.  "Do not fire if you
can help it."  Something gleamed in Du Lhut's hand, and his comrade,
glancing down, saw that he had drawn a keen little tomahawk from his
belt.  Again the mad wild thrill ran through the soldier's blood, as he
peered through the tangled branches and waited for whatever might come
out of the dim silent aisles of tree-boles.

And suddenly he saw something move.  It flitted like a shadow from one
trunk to the other so swiftly that De Catinat could not have told
whether it were beast or human.  And then again he saw it, and yet
again, sometimes one shadow, sometimes two shadows, silent, furtive,
like the _loup-garou_ with which his nurse had scared him in his
childhood.  Then for a few moments all was still once more, and then in
an instant there crept out from among the bushes the most
terrible-looking creature that ever walked the earth, an Iroquois chief
upon the war-trail.

He was a tall powerful man, and his bristle of scalp-locks and eagle
feathers made him look a giant in the dim light, for a good eight feet
lay between his beaded moccasin and the topmost plume of his headgear.
One side of his face was painted in soot, ochre, and vermilion to
resemble a dog, and the other half as a fowl, so that the front view was
indescribably grotesque and strange.  A belt of wampum was braced round
his loin-cloth, and a dozen scalp-locks fluttered out as he moved from
the fringe of his leggings.  His head was sunk forward, his eyes gleamed
with a sinister light, and his nostrils dilated and contracted like
those of an excited animal.  His gun was thrown forward, and he crept
along with bended knees, peering, listening, pausing, hurrying on, a
breathing image of caution.  Two paces behind him walked a lad of
fourteen, clad and armed in the same fashion, but without the painted
face and without the horrid dried trophies upon the leggings.  It was
his first campaign, and already his eyes shone and his nostrils twitched
with the same lust for murder which burned within his elder.  So they
advanced, silent, terrible, creeping out of the shadows of the wood, as
their race had come out of the shadows of history, with bodies of iron
and tiger souls.

They were just abreast of the bush when something caught the eye of the
younger warrior, some displaced twig or fluttering leaf, and he paused
with suspicion in every feature.  Another instant and he had warned his
companion, but Du Lhut sprang out and buried his little hatchet in the
skull of the older warrior.  De Catinat heard a dull crash, as when an
axe splinters its way into a rotten tree, and the man fell like a log,
laughing horribly, and kicking and striking with his powerful limbs.
The younger warrior sprang like a deer over his fallen comrade and
dashed on into the wood, but an instant later there was a gunshot among
the trees in front, followed by a faint wailing cry.

"That is his death-whoop," said Du Lhut composedly.  "It was a pity to
fire, and yet it was better than letting him go."

As he spoke the two others came back, Ephraim ramming a fresh charge
into his musket.

"Who was laughing?" asked Amos.

"It was he," said Du Lhut, nodding towards the dying warrior, who lay
with his head in a horrible puddle, and his grotesque features contorted
into a fixed smile.  "It's a custom they have when they get their
death-blow.  I've known a Seneca chief laugh for six hours on end at the
torture-stake.  Ah, he's gone!"

As he spoke the Indian gave a last spasm with his hands and feet, and
lay rigid, grinning up at the slit of blue sky above him.

"He's a great chief," said Du Lhut.  "He is Brown Moose of the Mohawks,
and the other is his second son.  We have drawn first blood, but I do
not think that it will be the last, for the Iroquois do not allow their
war-chiefs to die unavenged.  He was a mighty fighter, as you may see by
looking at his neck."

He wore a peculiar necklace which seemed to De Catinat to consist of
blackened bean pods set upon a string.  As he stooped over it he saw to
his horror that they were not bean pods, but withered human fingers.

"They are all right fore-fingers," said Du Lhut, "so everyone represents
a life.  There are forty-two in all.  Eighteen are of men whom he has
slain in battle, and the other twenty-four have been taken and
tortured."

"How do you know that?"

"Because only eighteen have their nails on.  If the prisoner of an
Iroquois be alive, he begins always by biting his nails off.  You see
that they are missing from four-and-twenty."

De Catinat shuddered.  What demons were these amongst whom an evil fate
had drifted him?  And was it possible that his Adele should fall into
the hands of such fiends?  No, no, surely the good God, for whose sake
they had suffered so much, would not permit such an infamy!  And yet as
evil a fate had come upon other women as tender as Adele--upon other men
as loving as he.  What hamlet was there in Canada which had not such
stories in their record?  A vague horror seized him as he stood there.
We know more of the future than we are willing to admit, away down in
those dim recesses of the soul where there is no reason, but only
instincts and impressions.  Now some impending terror cast its cloud
over him.  The trees around, with their great protruding limbs, were
like shadowy demons thrusting out their gaunt arms to seize him.
The sweat burst from his forehead, and he leaned heavily upon his
musket.

"By Saint Eulalie," said Du Lhut, "for an old soldier you turn very
pale, monsieur, at a little bloodshed."

"I am not well.  I should be glad of a sup from your cognac bottle."

"Here it is, comrade, and welcome!  Well, I may as well have this fine
scalp that we may have something to show for our walk."  He held the
Indian's head between his knees, and in an instant, with a sweep of his
knife, had torn off the hideous dripping trophy.

"Let us go!" cried De Catinat, turning away in disgust.

"Yes, we shall go!  But I shall also have this wampum belt marked with
the totem of the Bear.  So! And the gun too.  Look at the 'London'
printed upon the lock.  Ah, Monsieur Green, Monsieur Green, it is not
hard to see where the enemies of France get their arms."

So at last they turned away, Du Lhut bearing his spoils, leaving the red
grinning figure stretched under the silent trees.  As they passed on
they caught a glimpse of the lad lying doubled up among the bushes where
he had fallen.  The pioneer walked very swiftly until he came to a
little stream which prattled down to the big river.  Here he slipped off
his boots and leggings, and waded down it with his companions for half a
mile or so.

"They will follow our tracks when they find him," said he, "but this
will throw them off, for it is only on running water that an Iroquois
can find no trace.  And now we shall lie in this clump until nightfall,
for we are little over a mile from Port Poitou, and it is dangerous to
go forward, for the ground becomes more open."

And so they remained concealed among the alders whilst the shadows
turned from short to long, and the white drifting clouds above them were
tinged with the pink of the setting sun.  Du Lhut coiled himself into a
ball with his pipe between his teeth and dropped into a light sleep,
pricking up his ears and starting at the slightest sound from the woods
around them.  The two Americans whispered together for a long time,
Ephraim telling some long story about the cruise of the brig _Industry_,
bound to Jamestown for sugar and molasses, but at last the soothing hum
of a gentle breeze through the branches lulled them off also, and they
slept.  De Catinat alone remained awake, his nerves still in a tingle
from that strange sudden shadow which had fallen upon his soul.  What
could it mean?  Not surely that Adele was in danger?  He had heard of
such warnings, but had he not left her in safety behind cannons and
stockades?  By the next evening at latest he would see her again.  As he
lay looking up through the tangle of copper leaves at the sky beyond,
his mind drifted like the clouds above him, and he was back once more in
the jutting window in the Rue St. Martin, sitting on the broad _bancal_,
with its Spanish leather covering, with the gilt wool-bale creaking
outside, and his arm round shrinking, timid Adele, she who had compared
herself to a little mouse in an old house, and who yet had courage to
stay by his side through all this wild journey.  And then again he was
back at Versailles.  Once more he saw the brown eyes of the king, the
fair bold face of De Montespan, the serene features of De Maintenon--
once more he rode on his midnight mission, was driven by the demon
coachman, and sprang with Amos upon the scaffold to rescue the most
beautiful woman in France.  So clear it was and so vivid that it was
with a start that he came suddenly to himself, and found that the night
was creeping on in an American forest, and that Du Lhut had roused
himself and was ready for a start.

"Have you been awake?" asked the pioneer.

"Yes."

"Have you heard anything?"

"Nothing but the hooting of the owl."

"It seemed to me that in my sleep I heard a gunshot in the distance."

"In your sleep?"

"Yes, I hear as well asleep as awake and remember what I hear.  But now
you must follow me close, and we shall be in the fort soon."

"You have wonderful ears, indeed," said De Catinat, as they picked their
way through the tangled wood.  "How could you hear that these men were
following us to-day?  I could make out no sound when they were within
hand-touch of us."

"I did not hear them at first."

"You saw them?"

"No, nor that either."

"Then how could you know that they were there?"

"I heard a frightened jay flutter among the trees after we were past it.
Then ten minutes later I heard the same thing.  I knew then that there
was some one on our trail, and I listened."

"_Peste!_ you are a woodsman indeed!"

"I believe that these woods are swarming with Iroquois, although we have
had the good fortune to miss them.  So great a chief as Brown Moose
would not start on the path with a small following nor for a small
object.  They must mean mischief upon the Richelieu.  You are not sorry
now that you did not bring madame?"

"I thank God for it!"

"The woods will not be safe, I fear, until the partridge berries are out
once more.  You must stay at Sainte Marie until then, unless the
seigneur can spare men to guard you."

"I had rather stay there forever than expose my wife to such devils."

"Ay, devils they are, if ever devils walked upon earth.  You winced,
monsieur, when I took Brown Moose's scalp, but when you have seen as
much of the Indians as I have done your heart will be as hardened as
mine.  And now we are on the very borders of the clearing, and the
blockhouse lies yonder among the clump of maples.  They do not keep very
good watch, for I have been expecting during these last ten minutes to
hear the _qui vive_.  You did not come as near to Sainte Marie
unchallenged, and yet De Lannes is as old a soldier as La Noue.  We can
scarce see now, but yonder, near the river, is where he exercises his
men."

"He does so now," said Amos.  "I see a dozen of them drawn up in a line
at their drill."

"No sentinels, and all the men at drill!" cried Du Lhut in contempt.
"It is as you say, however, for I can see them myself with their ranks
open, and each as stiff and straight as a pine stump.  One would think
to see them stand so still that there was not an Indian nearer than
Orange.  We shall go across to them, and by Saint Anne, I shall tell
their commander what I think of his arrangements."

Du Lhut advanced from the bushes as he spoke, and the four men crossed
the open ground in the direction of the line of men who waited silently
for them in the dim twilight.  They were within fifty paces, and yet
none of them had raised hand or voice to challenge their approach.
There was something uncanny in the silence, and a change came over Du
Lhut's face as he peered in front of him.  He craned his head round and
looked up the river.

"My God!" he screamed.  "Look at the fort!" They had cleared the clump
