beating drums, and grown men blowing upon toy trumpets; and all were
shouting and cheering with a deafening enthusiasm. The news of the
Princess's arrival had spread like wildfire through the town. Wogan's
spirits rose at a bound. Here was a welcome very different from the
Cardinal's. Wogan rejoiced in the good sense of the citizens of Bologna
who could appreciate the great qualities of his chosen woman. Their
enthusiasm did them credit; he could have embraced them one by one.

He strove to push his way towards the door, but he would hardly have
pierced through that throng had not a man by the light of a torch
recognised him and bawled out his name. He was lifted shoulder high in a
second; he was passed from hand to hand over the heads of the people; he
was set tenderly down in the very doorway of the Pilgrim Inn, and he
found Clementina at the window of an unlighted room gazing unperceived
at the throng.

"Here's a true welcome, madam," said he, cordially, with his thoughts
away upon that bluff of hillside where the acclamations had seemed so
distant and unreal. It is possible that they seemed of small account to
Clementina now, for though they rang in ears and were visible to her
eyes, she sat quite unmoved by them.

"This is one tiny square in a little town," he continued. "But its
shouts will ring across Europe;" and she turned her head to him and said
quietly,--

"The King is still in Spain, is he not?"

Wogan's enthusiasm was quenched in alarm. Her voice had rung, for all
its quietude, with pride. What if she guessed what he for one would not
let his wildest fancy dwell upon? Wogan repeated to himself the resolve
which he had made, though with an alteration. "The King must marry the
Princess," he had said; now he said, "The Princess must marry the King."

He began hurriedly to assure her that the King had doubted his capacity
to bring the enterprise to a favourable issue, but that now he would
without doubt return. Cardinal Origo would tell her more upon that head
if she would be good enough to receive him at ten in the morning; and
while Wogan was yet speaking, a torch waved, and amongst that
close-pressed throng of faces below him in the street, one sprang to his
view with a remarkable distinctness, a face most menacing and
vindictive. It was the face of Harry Whittington. Just for a second it
shone out, angles and lines so clearly revealed that it was as though
the crowd had vanished, and that one contorted face glared alone at the
windows in a flare of hell-fire.

Clementina saw the face too, for she drew back instinctively within the
curtains of the window.

"The man at Peri," said she, in a whisper.

"Your Highness will pardon me," exclaimed Wogan, and he made a movement
towards the door. Then he stopped, hesitated for a second, and came
back. He had a question to put, as difficult perhaps as ever lips had to
frame.

"At Peri," he said in a stumbling voice, "I waked from a dream and saw
that man, bird-like and cunning, watching over the rim of the stairs. I
was dreaming that a star out of heaven stooped towards me, that a
woman's face shone out of the star's bright heart, that her lips deigned
to bend downwards to my earth. And I wonder, I wonder whether those
cunning eyes had cunning enough to interpret my dream."

And Clementina answered him simply,--

"I think it very likely that they had so much skill;" and Wogan ran down
the stairs into the street. He forced his way through the crowd to the
point where Whittington's face had shown, but his hesitation, his
question, had consumed time. Whittington had vanished. Nor did he appear
again for some while in Bologna. Wogan searched for him high and low.
Here was another difficulty added to the reluctance of his King, the
pride of his Queen. Whittington had a piece of dangerous knowledge, and
could not be found. Wogan said nothing openly of the man's treachery,
though he kept very safely the paper in which that treachery was
confessed. But he did not cease from his search. He was still engaged
upon it when he received the summons from Cardinal Origo. He hurried to
the palace, wondering what new thing had befallen, and was at once
admitted to the Cardinal. It was no bad thing, at all events, as Wogan
could judge from the Cardinal's smiling face.

"Mr. Wogan," said he, "our Holy Father the Pope wishes to testify his
approbation of your remarkable enterprise on behalf of a princess who is
his god-daughter. He bids me hand you, therefore, your patent of Roman
Senator, and request you to present yourself at the Capitol in Rome on
June 15, when you will be installed with all the ancient ceremonies."

Wogan thanked his Eminence dutifully, but laid the patent on the table.

"You hardly know what you refuse," said his Eminence. "The Holy Father
has no greater honour to bestow, and, believe me, he bestows it
charily."

"Nay, your Eminence," said Wogan, "I do not undervalue so high a
distinction. But I had three friends with me who shared every danger. I
cannot accept an honour which they do not share; for indeed they risked
more than I did. For they hold service under the King of France."

The Cardinal was pleased to compliment Wogan upon his loyalty to his
friends.

"They shall not be the losers," said he. "I think I may promise indeed
that each will have a step in rank, and I do not doubt that when the
Holy Father hears what you have said to me, I shall have three other
patents like to this;" and he locked Wogan's away in a drawer.

"And what of the King in Spain?" asked Wogan.

"I sent a messenger thither on the night of your coming," said the
Cardinal; "but it is a long journey into Spain. We must wait."

To Wogan it seemed the waiting would never end. The Cardinal had found
a little house set apart from the street with a great garden of lawns
and cedar-trees and laurels; and in that garden now fresh with spring
flowers and made private by high walls, the Princess passed her days.
Wogan saw her but seldom during this time, but each occasion sent him
back to his lodging in a fever of anxiety. She had grown silent, and her
silence alarmed him. She had lost the sparkling buoyancy of her spirits.
Mrs. Misset, who attended her, told him that she would sit for long
whiles with a red spot burning in each cheek. Wogan feared that her
pride was chafing her gentleness, that she guessed there was reluctance
in the King's delay. "But she must marry the King," he still persevered
in declaring. Her hardships, her imprisonment, her perilous escape, the
snows of Innspruck,--these were known now; and if at the last the end
for which they had been endured--Wogan broke off from his reflections to
hear the world laughing. The world would not think; it would laugh. "For
her own sake she must marry," he cried, as he paced about his rooms.
"For ours, too, for a country's sake;" and he looked northwards towards
England. But "for her own sake" was the reason uppermost in his
thoughts.

But the days passed. The three promised patents came from Rome, and
Cardinal Origo unlocked the drawer and joined Wogan's to them. He
presented all four at the same time.

"The patents carry the titles of 'Excellency,'" said he.

O'Toole beamed with delight.

"Sure," said he, "I will have a toga with the arms of the O'Tooles
embroidered on the back, to appear in at the Capitol. It is on June 15,
your Eminence. Upon my soul, I have not much time;" and he grew
thoughtful.

"A toga will hardly take a month, even with the embroidery, which I do
not greatly recommend," said the Cardinal, drily.

"I was not at the moment thinking of the toga," said O'Toole, gloomily.

"And what of the King in Spain?" asked Wogan.

"We must wait, my friend," said the Cardinal.

In a week there was brought to Wogan one morning a letter in the King's
hand. He fingered it for a little, not daring to break the seal. When he
did break it, he read a great many compliments upon his success, and
after the compliments a statement that the marriage should take place at
Montefiascone as soon as the King could depart from Spain, and after
that statement, a declaration that since her Highness's position was not
meanwhile one that suited either her dignity or the love the King had
for her, a marriage by proxy should take place at Bologna. The Chevalier
added that he had written to Cardinal Origo to make the necessary
arrangements for the ceremony, and he appointed herewith Mr. Charles
Wogan to act as his proxy, in recognition of his great services.

Wogan felt a natural distaste for the part he was to take in the
ceremony. To stand up before the Cardinal and take Clementina's hand in
his, and speak another's marriage vows and receive hers as another's
deputy,--there was a certain mockery in the situation for which he had
no liking. The memory of the cabin on the mountain-side was something
too near. But, at all events, the King was to marry the Princess, and
Wogan's distaste was swallowed up in a great relief. There would be no
laughter rippling over Europe like the wind over a field of corn. He
stood by his window in the spring sunshine with a great contentment of
spirit, and then there came a loud rapping on his door.

He caught his breath; he grew white with a sudden fear; you would have
thought it was his heart that was knocked upon. For there was another
side to the business. The King would marry the Princess; but how would
the Princess take this marriage by proxy and the King's continued
absence? She had her pride, as he knew well. The knocking was repeated.
Wogan in a voice of suspense bade his visitor enter. The visitor was one
of her Highness's new servants. "Without a doubt," thought Wogan, "she
has received a letter by the same messenger who brought me mine."

The servant handed him a note from the Princess, begging him to attend
on her at once. "She must marry the King," said Wogan to himself. He
took his hat and cane, and followed the servant into the street.




CHAPTER XXII


Wogan was guided through the streets to the mouth of a blind alley, at
the bottom of which rose a high garden wall, and over the wall the
smoking chimneys of a house among the tops of many trees freshly green,
which shivered in the breeze and shook the sunlight from their leaves.
This alley, from the first day when the Princess came to lodge in the
house, had worn to Wogan a familiar air; and this morning, as he
pondered dismally whether, after all, those laborious months since he
had ridden hopefully out of Bologna to Ohlau were to bear no fruit, he
chanced to remember why. He had passed that alley at the moment of grey
dawn, when he was starting out upon this adventure, and he had seen a
man muffled in a cloak step from its mouth and suddenly draw back as his
horse's hoofs rang in the silent street, as though to elude recognition.
Wogan wondered for a second who at that time had lived in the house; but
he was admitted through a door in the wall and led into a little room
with French windows opening on a lawn. The garden seen from here was a
wealth of white blossoms and yellow, and amongst them Clementina paced
alone, the richest and the whitest blossom of them all. She was dressed
simply in a white gown of muslin and a little three-cornered hat of
straw; but Wogan knew as he advanced towards her that it was not merely
the hat which threw the dark shadow on her face.

She took a step or two towards him and began at once without any
friendly greeting in a cold, formal voice,--

"You have received a letter this morning from his Majesty?"

"Yes, your Highness."

"Why does the King linger in Spain?"

"The expedition from Cadiz--"

"Which left harbour a week ago. Well, Mr. Wogan," she asked in biting
tones, "how does that expedition now on the high seas detain his Majesty
in Spain?"

Wogan was utterly dumfounded. He stood and gazed at her, a great trouble
in his eyes, and his wits with that expedition all at sea.

"Is your Highness sure?" he babbled.

"Oh, indeed, most sure," she replied with the hardest laugh which he had
ever heard from a woman's lips.

"I did not know," he said in dejection, and she took a step nearer to
him, and her cheeks flamed.

"Is that the truth?" she asked, her voice trembling with anger. "You did
not know?"

And Wogan understood that the real trouble with her at this moment was
not so much the King's delay in Spain as a doubt whether he himself had
played with her and spoken her false. For if he was proved untrue here,
why, he might have been untrue throughout, on the stairway at Innspruck,
on the road to Ala, in the hut on the bluff of the hills. He could see
how harshly the doubt would buffet her pride, how it would wound her to
the soul.

"It is the truth," he answered; "you will believe it. I pledge my soul
upon it. Lay your hand in mine. I will repeat it standing so. Could I
speak false with your hand close in mine?"

He held out his hand; she did not move, nor did her attitude of distrust
relent.

"Could you not?" she asked icily.

Wogan was baffled; he was angered. "Have I ever told you lies?" he asked
passionately, and she answered, "Yes," and steadily looked him in the
face.

The monosyllable quenched him like a pail of cold water. He stood
silent, perplexed, trying to remember.

"When?" he asked.

"In the berlin between Brixen and Wellishmile."

Wogan remembered that he had told her of his city of dreams. But it was
plainly not to that that she referred. He shrugged his shoulders.

"I cannot remember."

"You told me of an attack made upon a Scottish town, what time the King
was there in the year '15. He forced a passage through nine grenadiers
with loaded muskets and escaped over the roof-tops, where he played a
game of hide-and-seek among the chimneys. Ah, you remember the story
now. There was a chain, I remember, which even then as you told of it
puzzled me. He threw the chain over the head of one of those nine
grenadiers, and crossing his arms jerked it tight about the man's neck,
stifling his cry of warning. 'What chain?' I asked, and you
answered,--oh, sir, with a practised readiness,--'The chain he wore
about his neck.' Do you remember that? The chain linked your hand-locks,
Mr. Wogan. It was your own escape of which you told me. Why did you
ascribe your exploits to your King?"

"Your Highness," he said, "we know the King, we who have served him day
in and day out for years. We can say freely to each other, 'The King's
achievements, they are to come.' We were in Scotland with him, and we
know they will not fail to come. But with you it's different. You did
not know him. You asked what he had done, and I told you. You asked for
more. You said, 'Amongst his throng of adventurers, each of whom has
something to his credit, what has he, the chief adventurer?'"

"Well, sir, why not the truth in answer to the question?"

"Because the truth's unfair to him."

"And was the untruth fair to me?"

Mr. Wogan was silent.

"I think I understand," she continued bitterly; "you thought, here's a
foolish girl, aflame for knights and monsters overthrown. She cries for
deeds, not statecraft. Well, out of your many, you would toss her one,
and call it the King's. You could afford the loss, and she, please God,
would be content with it." She spoke with an extraordinary violence in a
low, trembling voice, and she would not listen to Wogan's stammered
interruption.

"Very likely, too, the rest of your words to me was of a piece. I was a
girl, and girls are to have gallant speeches given to them like so many
lollipops. Oh, but you have hurt me beyond words. I would not have
thought I could have suffered so much pain!"

That last cry wrung Wogan's heart. She turned away from him with the
tears brimming in her eyes. It was this conjecture of hers which he had
dreaded, which at all costs he must dispel.

"Do not believe it!" he exclaimed. "Think! Should I have been at so much
pains to refrain from speech, if speech was what I had intended?"

"How should I know but what that concealment was part of the gallantry,
a necessary preface to the pretty speeches?"

"Should I have urged your rescue on the King had I believed you what you
will have it that I did,--a mere witless girl to be pampered with
follies?"

"Then you admit," she cried, "you _urged_ the King."

"Should I have travelled over Europe to search for a wife and lit on
you? Should I have ridden to Ohlau and pestered your father till he
yielded? Should I have ridden across Europe to Strasbourg? Should I have
endangered my friends in the rush to Innspruck? No, no, no! From first
to last you were the chosen woman."

The vehemence and fire of sincerity with which he spoke had its effect
on her. She turned again towards him with a gleam of hopefulness in her
face, but midway in the turn she stopped.

"You spoke to me words which I have not forgotten," she said doubtfully.
"You said the King had need of me. I will be frank, hoping that you will
match my frankness. On that morning when we climbed down the gorge, and
ever since I cheered myself with that one thought. The King had need of
