himself, like a sparkling goblet of his own wine; and see the chuckling
delight of Austria, who thinks his quarrel is about to be avenged
without risk or trouble of his own. Hush! he approaches.--A most
grievous chance, most royal Austria, that these breaches in the walls of
our Zion--"

"If thou meanest this Crusade," replied the Duke, "I would it were
crumbled to pieces, and each were safe at home! I speak this in
confidence."

"But," said the Marquis of Montserrat, "to think this disunion should
be made by the hands of King Richard, for whose pleasure we have been
contented to endure so much, and to whom we have been as submissive as
slaves to a master, in hopes that he would use his valour against our
enemies, instead of exercising it upon our friends!"

"I see not that he is so much more valorous than others," said the
Archduke. "I believe, had the noble Marquis met him in the lists, he
would have had the better; for though the islander deals heavy blows
with the pole-axe, he is not so very dexterous with the lance. I should
have cared little to have met him myself on our old quarrel, had the
weal of Christendom permitted to sovereign princes to breathe themselves
in the lists; and if thou desirest it, noble Marquis, I will myself be
your godfather in this combat."

"And I also," said the Grand Master.

"Come, then, and take your nooning in our tent, noble sirs," said the
Duke, "and we'll speak of this business over some right NIERENSTEIN."

They entered together accordingly.

"What said our patron and these great folks together?" said Jonas
Schwanker to his companion, the SPRUCH-SPRECHER, who had used the
freedom to press nigh to his master when the Council was dismissed,
while the jester waited at a more respectful distance.

"Servant of Folly," said the SPRUCH-SPRECHER, "moderate thy curiosity;
it beseems not that I should tell to thee the counsels of our master."

"Man of wisdom, you mistake," answered Jonas. "We are both the constant
attendants on our patron, and it concerns us alike to know whether thou
or I--Wisdom or Folly--have the deeper interest in him."

"He told to the Marquis," answered the SPRUCH-SPRECHER, "and to the
Grand Master, that he was aweary of these wars, and would be glad he was
safe at home."

"That is a drawn cast, and counts for nothing in the game," said the
jester; "it was most wise to think thus, but great folly to tell it to
others--proceed."

"Ha, hem!" said the SPRUCH-SPRECHER; "he next said to them that Richard
was not more valorous than others, or over-dexterous in the tilt-yard."

"Woodcock of my side," said Schwanker, "this was egregious folly. What
next?"

"Nay, I am something oblivious," replied the man of wisdom--"he invited
them to a goblet of NIERENSTEIN."

"That hath a show of wisdom in it," said Jonas. "Thou mayest mark it to
thy credit in the meantime; but an he drink too much, as is most likely,
I will have it pass to mine. Anything more?"

"Nothing worth memory," answered the orator; "only he wished he had
taken the occasion to meet Richard in the lists."

"Out upon it--out upon it!" said Jonas; "this is such dotage of folly
that I am well-nigh ashamed of winning the game by it. Ne'ertheless,
fool as he is, we will follow him, most sage SPRUCH-SPRECHER, and have
our share of the wine of NIERENSTEIN."



CHAPTER XXV.

     Yet this inconstancy is such,
     As thou, too, shalt adore;
     I could not love thee, love so much,
     Loved I not honour more.
            MONTROSE'S LINES.

When King Richard returned to his tent, he commanded the Nubian to be
brought before him. He entered with his usual ceremonial reverence,
and having prostrated himself, remained standing before the King in the
attitude of a slave awaiting the orders of his master. It was perhaps
well for him that the preservation of his character required his eyes
to be fixed on the ground, since the keen glance with which Richard for
some time surveyed him in silence would, if fully encountered, have been
difficult to sustain.

"Thou canst well of woodcraft," said the King, after a pause, "and hast
started thy game and brought him to bay as ably as if Tristrem himself
had taught thee. [A universal tradition ascribed to Sir Tristrem, famous
for his love of the fair Queen Yseult, the laws concerning the practice
of woodcraft, or VENERIE, as it was called, being those that related to
the rules of the chase, which were deemed of much consequence during the
Middle Ages.] But this is not all--he must be brought down at force. I
myself would have liked to have levelled my hunting-spear at him. There
are, it seems, respects which prevent this. Thou art about to return to
the camp of the Soldan, bearing a letter, requiring of his courtesy to
appoint neutral ground for the deed of chivalry, and should it consist
with his pleasure, to concur with us in witnessing it. Now, speaking
conjecturally, we think thou mightst find in that camp some cavalier
who, for the love of truth and his own augmentation of honour, will do
battle with this same traitor of Montserrat."

The Nubian raised his eyes and fixed them on the King with a look of
eager ardour; then raised them to Heaven with such solemn gratitude that
the water soon glistened in them; then bent his head, as affirming what
Richard desired, and resumed his usual posture of submissive attention.

"It is well," said the King; "and I see thy desire to oblige me in this
matter. And herein, I must needs say, lies the excellence of such a
servant as thou, who hast not speech either to debate our purpose or to
require explanation of what we have determined. An English serving man
in thy place had given me his dogged advice to trust the combat
with some good lance of my household, who, from my brother Longsword
downwards, are all on fire to do battle in my cause; and a chattering
Frenchman had made a thousand attempts to discover wherefore I look for
a champion from the camp of the infidels. But thou, my silent agent,
canst do mine errand without questioning or comprehending it; with thee
to hear is to obey."

A bend of the body and a genuflection were the appropriate answer of the
Ethiopian to these observations.

"And now to another point," said the King, and speaking suddenly and
rapidly--"have you yet seen Edith Plantagenet?"

The mute looked up as in the act of being about to speak--nay, his lips
had begun to utter a distinct negative--when the abortive attempt died
away in the imperfect murmurs of the dumb.

"Why, lo you there!" said the King, "the very sound of the name of a
royal maiden of beauty so surpassing as that of our lovely cousin seems
to have power enough well-nigh to make the dumb speak. What miracles
then might her eye work upon such a subject! I will make the experiment,
friend slave. Thou shalt see this choice beauty of our Court, and do the
errand of the princely Soldan."

Again a joyful glance--again a genuflection--but, as he arose, the King
laid his hand heavily on his shoulder, and proceeded with stern gravity
thus: "Let me in one thing warn you, my sable envoy. Even if thou
shouldst feel that the kindly influence of her whom thou art soon to
behold should loosen the bonds of thy tongue, presently imprisoned,
as the good Soldan expresses it, within the ivory walls of its castle,
beware how thou changest thy taciturn character, or speakest a word in
her presence, even if thy powers of utterance were to be miraculously
restored. Believe me that I should have thy tongue extracted by
the roots, and its ivory palace--that is, I presume, its range of
teeth--drawn out one by one. Wherefore, be wise and silent still."

The Nubian, so soon as the King had removed his heavy grasp from his
shoulder, bent his head, and laid his hand on his lips, in token of
silent obedience.

But Richard again laid his hand on him more gently, and added, "This
behest we lay on thee as on a slave. Wert thou knight and gentleman,
we would require thine honour in pledge of thy silence, which is one
especial condition of our present trust."

The Ethiopian raised his body proudly, looked full at the King, and laid
his right hand on his heart.

Richard then summoned his chamberlain.

"Go, Neville," he said, "with this slave to the tent of our royal
consort, and say it is our pleasure that he have an audience--a private
audience--of our cousin Edith. He is charged with a commission to her.
Thou canst show him the way also, in case he requires thy guidance,
though thou mayst have observed it is wonderful how familiar he already
seems to be with the purlieus of our camp.--And thou, too, friend
Ethiop," the King continued, "what thou dost do quickly, and return
hither within the half-hour."

"I stand discovered," thought the seeming Nubian, as, with downcast
looks and folded arms, he followed the hasty stride of Neville towards
the tent of Queen Berengaria--"I stand undoubtedly discovered and
unfolded to King Richard; yet I cannot perceive that his resentment is
hot against me. If I understand his words--and surely it is impossible
to misinterpret them--he gives me a noble chance of redeeming my honour
upon the crest of this false Marquis, whose guilt I read in his craven
eye and quivering lip when the charge was made against him.--Roswal,
faithfully hast thou served thy master, and most dearly shall thy wrong
be avenged!--But what is the meaning of my present permission to look
upon her whom I had despaired ever to see again? And why, or how, can
the royal Plantagenet consent that I should see his divine kinswoman,
either as the messenger of the heathen Saladin, or as the guilty exile
whom he so lately expelled from his camp--his audacious avowal of the
affection which is his pride being the greatest enhancement of his
guilt? That Richard should consent to her receiving a letter from an
infidel lover by the hands of one of such disproportioned rank are
either of them circumstances equally incredible, and, at the same time,
inconsistent with each other. But Richard, when unmoved by his heady
passions, is liberal, generous, and truly noble; and as such I will
deal with him, and act according to his instructions, direct or implied,
seeking to know no more than may gradually unfold itself without my
officious inquiry. To him who has given me so brave an opportunity to
vindicate my tarnished honour, I owe acquiescence and obedience; and
painful as it may be, the debt shall be paid. And yet"--thus the proud
swelling of his heart further suggested--"Coeur de Lion, as he is
called, might have measured the feelings of others by his own. I urge an
address to his kinswoman! I, who never spoke word to her when I took a
royal prize from her hand--when I was accounted not the lowest in feats
of chivalry among the defenders of the Cross! I approach her when in
a base disguise, and in a servile habit--and, alas! when my actual
condition is that of a slave, with a spot of dishonour on that which was
once my shield! I do this! He little knows me. Yet I thank him for the
opportunity which may make us all better acquainted with each other."

As he arrived at this conclusion, they paused before the entrance of the
Queen's pavilion.

They were of course admitted by the guards, and Neville, leaving the
Nubian in a small apartment, or antechamber, which was but too well
remembered by him, passed into that which was used as the Queen's
presence-chamber. He communicated his royal master's pleasure in a
low and respectful tone of voice, very different from the bluntness
of Thomas de Vaux, to whom Richard was everything and the rest of the
Court, including Berengaria herself, was nothing. A burst of laughter
followed the communication of his errand.

"And what like is the Nubian slave who comes ambassador on such an
errand from the Soldan?--a negro, De Neville, is he not?" said a female
voice, easily recognized for that of Berengaria. "A negro, is he not, De
Neville, with black skin, a head curled like a ram's, a flat nose, and
blubber lips--ha, worthy Sir Henry?"

"Let not your Grace forget the shin-bones," said another voice, "bent
outwards like the edge of a Saracen scimitar."

"Rather like the bow of a Cupid, since he comes upon a lover's errand,"
said the Queen.--"Gentle Neville, thou art ever prompt to pleasure us
poor women, who have so little to pass away our idle moments. We must
see this messenger of love. Turks and Moors have I seen many, but negro
never."

"I am created to obey your Grace's commands, so you will bear me out
with my Sovereign for doing so," answered the debonair knight. "Yet,
let me assure your Grace you will see something different from what you
expect."

"So much the better--uglier yet than our imaginations can fancy, yet the
chosen love-messenger of this gallant Soldan!"

"Gracious madam," said the Lady Calista, "may I implore you would permit
the good knight to carry this messenger straight to the Lady Edith, to
whom his credentials are addressed? We have already escaped hardly for
such a frolic."

"Escaped?" repeated the Queen scornfully. "Yet thou mayest be right,
Calista, in thy caution. Let this Nubian, as thou callest him, first do
his errand to our cousin--besides, he is mute too, is he not?"

"He is, gracious madam," answered the knight.

"Royal sport have these Eastern ladies," said Berengaria, "attended by
those before whom they may say anything, yet who can report nothing.
Whereas in our camp, as the Prelate of Saint Jude's is wont to say, a
bird of the air will carry the matter."

"Because," said De Neville, "your Grace forgets that you speak within
canvas walls."

The voices sunk on this observation, and after a little whispering, the
English knight again returned to the Ethiopian, and made him a sign
to follow. He did so, and Neville conducted him to a pavilion, pitched
somewhat apart from that of the Queen, for the accommodation, it seemed,
of the Lady Edith and her attendants. One of her Coptic maidens received
the message communicated by Sir Henry Neville, and in the space of a
very few minutes the Nubian was ushered into Edith's presence, while
Neville was left on the outside of the tent. The slave who introduced
him withdrew on a signal from her mistress, and it was with humiliation,
not of the posture only but of the very inmost soul, that the
unfortunate knight, thus strangely disguised, threw himself on one
knee, with looks bent on the ground and arms folded on his bosom, like a
criminal who expects his doom. Edith was clad in the same manner as
when she received King Richard, her long, transparent dark veil hanging
around her like the shade of a summer night on a beautiful landscape,
disguising and rendering obscure the beauties which it could not hide.
She held in her hand a silver lamp, fed with some aromatic spirit, which
burned with unusual brightness.

When Edith came within a step of the kneeling and motionless slave,
she held the light towards his face, as if to peruse his features more
attentively, then turned from him, and placed her lamp so as to throw
the shadow of his face in profile upon the curtain which hung beside.
She at length spoke in a voice composed, yet deeply sorrowful,

"Is it you? It is indeed you, brave Knight of the Leopard--gallant Sir
Kenneth of Scotland; is it indeed you?--thus servilely disguised--thus
surrounded by a hundred dangers."

At hearing the tones of his lady's voice thus unexpectedly addressed
to him, and in a tone of compassion approaching to tenderness, a
corresponding reply rushed to the knight's lips, and scarce could
Richard's commands and his own promised silence prevent his answering
that the sight he saw, the sounds he just heard, were sufficient to
recompense the slavery of a life, and dangers which threatened that
life every hour. He did recollect himself, however, and a deep and
impassioned sigh was his only reply to the high-born Edith's question.

"I see--I know I have guessed right," continued Edith. "I marked you
from your first appearance near the platform on which I stood with the
Queen. I knew, too, your valiant hound. She is no true lady, and
is unworthy of the service of such a knight as thou art, from whom
disguises of dress or hue could conceal a faithful servant. Speak, then,
without fear to Edith Plantagenet. She knows how to grace in adversity
the good knight who served, honoured, and did deeds of arms in her name,
when fortune befriended him.--Still silent! Is it fear or shame that
keeps thee so! Fear should be unknown to thee; and for shame, let it
remain with those who have wronged thee."

The knight, in despair at being obliged to play the mute in an interview
so interesting, could only express his mortification by sighing deeply,
and laying his finger upon his lips. Edith stepped back, as if somewhat
displeased.

"What!" she said, "the Asiatic mute in very deed, as well as in attire?
This I looked not for. Or thou mayest scorn me, perhaps, for thus boldly
acknowledging that I have heedfully observed the homage thou hast paid
me? Hold no unworthy thoughts of Edith on that account. She knows well
the bounds which reserve and modesty prescribe to high-born maidens,
and she knows when and how far they should give place to gratitude--to
a sincere desire that it were in her power to repay services and repair
injuries arising from the devotion which a good knight bore towards her.
Why fold thy hands together, and wring them with so much passion? Can
it be," she added, shrinking back at the idea, "that their cruelty
has actually deprived thee of speech? Thou shakest thy head. Be it a
spell--be it obstinacy, I question thee no further, but leave thee to do
thine errand after thine own fashion. I also can be mute."

The disguised knight made an action as if at once lamenting his own
condition and deprecating her displeasure, while at the same time he
presented to her, wrapped, as usual, in fine silk and cloth of gold, the
letter of the Soldan. She took it, surveyed it carelessly, then laid it
aside, and bending her eyes once more on the knight, she said in a low
tone, "Not even a word to do thine errand to me?"

He pressed both his hands to his brow, as if to intimate the pain which
he felt at being unable to obey her; but she turned from him in anger.

"Begone!" she said. "I have spoken enough--too much--to one who will not
waste on me a word in reply. Begone!--and say, if I have wronged thee, I
have done penance; for if I have been the unhappy means of dragging thee
down from a station of honour, I have, in this interview, forgotten my
own worth, and lowered myself in thy eyes and in my own."

She covered her eyes with her hands, and seemed deeply agitated. Sir
Kenneth would have approached, but she waved him back.

"Stand off! thou whose soul Heaven hath suited to its new station!
Aught less dull and fearful than a slavish mute had spoken a word of
gratitude, were it but to reconcile me to my own degradation. Why pause
you?--begone!"

The disguised knight almost involuntarily looked towards the letter as
an apology for protracting his stay. She snatched it up, saying in a
tone of irony and contempt, "I had forgotten--the dutiful slave waits an
answer to his message. How's this--from the Soldan!"

She hastily ran over the contents, which were expressed both in Arabic
and French, and when she had done, she laughed in bitter anger.

"Now this passes imagination!" she said; "no jongleur can show so deft
a transmutation! His legerdemain can transform zechins and byzants into
doits and maravedis; but can his art convert a Christian knight, ever
esteemed among the bravest of the Holy Crusade, into the dust-kissing
slave of a heathen Soldan--the bearer of a paynim's insolent proposals
to a Christian maiden--nay, forgetting the laws of honourable chivalry,
as well as of religion? But it avails not talking to the willing slave
of a heathen hound. Tell your master, when his scourge shall have found
thee a tongue, that which thou hast seen me do"--so saying, she threw
the Soldan's letter on the ground, and placed her foot upon it--"and
say to him, that Edith Plantagenet scorns the homage of an unchristened
pagan."

With these words she was about to shoot from the knight, when, kneeling
at her feet in bitter agony, he ventured to lay his hand upon her robe
and oppose her departure.

"Heard'st thou not what I said, dull slave?" she said, turning short
round on him, and speaking with emphasis. "Tell the heathen Soldan, thy
master, that I scorn his suit as much as I despise the prostration of a
worthless renegade to religion and chivalry--to God and to his lady!"

So saying, she burst from him, tore her garment from his grasp, and left
the tent.

The voice of Neville, at the same time, summoned him from without.
Exhausted and stupefied by the distress he had undergone during this
interview, from which he could only have extricated himself by breach
of the engagement which he had formed with King Richard, the unfortunate
knight staggered rather than walked after the English baron, till they
reached the royal pavilion, before which a party of horsemen had just
dismounted. There were light and motion within the tent, and when
Neville entered with his disguised attendant, they found the King,
with several of his nobility, engaged in welcoming those who were newly
arrived.



CHAPTER XXVI.

     "The tears I shed must ever fall.
     I weep not for an absent swain;
     For time may happier hours recall,
     And parted lovers meet again.

     "I weep not for the silent dead.
     Their pains are past, their sorrows o'er;
     And those that loved their steps must tread,
     When death shall join to part no more."

     But worse than absence, worse than death,
     She wept her lover's sullied fame,
     And, fired with all the pride of birth,
     She wept a soldier's injured name.
            BALLAD.

The frank and bold voice of Richard was heard in joyous gratulation.

"Thomas de Vaux! stout Tom of the Gills! by the head of King Henry, thou
art welcome to me as ever was flask of wine to a jolly toper! I should
scarce have known how to order my battle-array, unless I had thy bulky
form in mine eye as a landmark to form my ranks upon. We shall have
blows anon, Thomas, if the saints be gracious to us; and had we fought
in thine absence, I would have looked to hear of thy being found hanging
upon an elder-tree."

"I should have borne my disappointment with more Christian patience,
I trust," said Thomas de Vaux, "than to have died the death of an
apostate. But I thank your Grace for my welcome, which is the more
generous, as it respects a banquet of blows, of which, saving your
pleasure, you are ever too apt to engross the larger share. But here
have I brought one to whom your Grace will, I know, give a yet warmer
welcome."

The person who now stepped forward to make obeisance to Richard was a
young man of low stature and slight form. His dress was as modest as his
figure was unimpressive; but he bore on his bonnet a gold buckle, with a
gem, the lustre of which could only be rivalled by the brilliancy of
the eye which the bonnet shaded. It was the only striking feature in his
countenance; but when once noticed, it ever made a strong impression on
the spectator. About his neck there hung in a scarf of sky-blue silk a
WREST as it was called--that is, the key with which a harp is tuned, and
which was of solid gold.

This personage would have kneeled reverently to Richard, but the Monarch
raised him in joyful haste, pressed him to his bosom warmly, and kissed
him on either side of the face.

"Blondel de Nesle!" he exclaimed joyfully--"welcome from Cyprus, my king
of minstrels!--welcome to the King of England, who rates not his own
dignity more highly than he does thine. I have been sick, man, and, by
my soul, I believe it was for lack of thee; for, were I half way to the
gate of heaven, methinks thy strains could call me back. And what news,
my gentle master, from the land of the lyre? Anything fresh from the
TROUVEURS of Provence? Anything from the minstrels of merry Normandy?
Above all, hast thou thyself been busy? But I need not ask thee--thou
