The rest--and much remains for our consideration--we will defer till
to-morrow. When they had all agreed to this, the debate of the day was
closed.

       *       *       *       *       *




INTRODUCTION TO THE THIRD BOOK,

BY THE ORIGINAL TRANSLATOR.


   Cicero here enters on the grand question of Political Justice,
     and endeavors to evince throughout the absolute verity of
     that inestimable proverb, "Honesty is the best policy," in
     all public as well as in all private affairs. St. Augustine,
     in his City of God, has given the following analysis of this
     magnificent disquisition:

   "In the third book of Cicero's Commonwealth" (says he) "the
     question of Political Justice is most earnestly discussed.
     Philus is appointed to support, as well as he can, the
     sophistical arguments of those who think that political
     government cannot be carried on without the aid of injustice
     and chicanery. He denies holding any such opinion himself;
     yet, in order to exhibit the truth more vividly through the
     force of contrast, he pleads with the utmost ingenuity the
     cause of injustice against justice; and endeavors to show, by
     plausible examples and specious dialectics, that injustice is
     as useful to a statesman as justice would be injurious. Then
     Laelius, at the general request, takes up the plea for
     justice, and maintains with all his eloquence that nothing
     could be so ruinous to states as injustice and dishonesty,
     and that without a supreme justice, no political government
     could expect a long duration. This point being sufficiently
     proved, Scipio returns to the principal discussion. He
     reproduces and enforces the short definition that he had
     given of a commonwealth--that it consisted in the welfare of
     the entire people, by which word 'people' he does not mean
     the mob, but the community, bound together by the sense of
     common rights and mutual benefits. He notices how important
     such just definitions are in all debates whatever, and draws
     this conclusion from the preceding arguments--that the
     Commonwealth is the common welfare whenever it is swayed with
     justice and wisdom, whether it be subordinated to a king, an
     aristocracy, or a democracy. But if the king be unjust, and
     so becomes a tyrant; and the aristocracy unjust, which makes
     them a faction; or the democrats unjust, and so degenerate
     into revolutionists and destructives--then not only the
     Commonwealth is corrupted, but in fact annihilated. For it
     can be no longer the common welfare when a tyrant or a
     faction abuse it; and the people itself is no longer the
     people when it becomes unjust, since it is no longer a
     community associated by a sense of right and utility,
     according to the definition."--_Aug. Civ. Dei._ 3-21.

   This book is of the utmost importance to statesmen, as it
     serves to neutralize the sophistries of Machiavelli, which
     are still repeated in many cabinets.




BOOK III.


I. * * *[331] Cicero, in the third book of his treatise On a
Commonwealth, says that nature has treated man less like a mother than
a step-dame, for she has cast him into mortal life with a body naked,
fragile, and infirm, and with a mind agitated by troubles, depressed by
fears, broken by labors, and exposed to passions. In this mind,
however, there lies hidden, and, as it were, buried, a certain divine
spark of genius and intellect.

Though man is born a frail and powerless being, nevertheless he is safe
from all animals destitute of voice; and at the same time those other
animals of greater strength, although they bravely endure the violence
of weather, cannot be safe from man. And the result is, that reason
does more for man than nature does for brutes; since, in the latter,
neither the greatness of their strength nor the firmness of their
bodies can save them from being oppressed by us, and made subject to
our power. * * *

Plato returned thanks to nature that he had been born a man.

II. * * * aiding our slowness by carriages, and when it had taught men
to utter the elementary and confused sounds of unpolished expression,
articulated and distinguished them into their proper classes, and, as
their appropriate signs, attached certain words to certain things, and
thus associated, by the most delightful bond of speech, the once
divided races of men.

And by a similar intelligence, the inflections of the voice, which
appeared infinite, are, by the discovery of a few alphabetic
characters, all designated and expressed; by which we maintain converse
with our absent friends, by which also indications of our wishes and
monuments of past events are preserved. Then came the use of numbers--a
thing necessary to human life, and at the same time immutable and
eternal; a science which first urged us to raise our views to heaven,
and not gaze without an object on the motions of the stars, and the
distribution of days and nights.

III. * * *[332] [Then appeared the sages of philosophy], whose minds
took a higher flight, and who were able to conceive and to execute
designs worthy of the gifts of the Gods. Wherefore let those men who
have left us sublime essays on the principles of living be regarded as
great men--which indeed they are--as learned men, as masters of truth
and virtue; provided that these principles of civil government, this
system of governing people, whether it be a thing discovered by men who
have lived amidst a variety of political events, or one discussed
amidst their opportunities of literary tranquillity, is remembered to
be, as indeed it is, a thing by no means to be despised, being one
which causes in first-rate minds, as we not unfrequently see, an
incredible and almost divine virtue. And when to these high faculties
of soul, received from nature and expanded by social institutions, a
politician adds learning and extensive information concerning things in
general, like those illustrious personages who conduct the dialogue in
the present treatise, none will refuse to confess the superiority of
such persons to all others; for, in fact, what can be more admirable
than the study and practice of the grand affairs of state, united to a
literary taste and a familiarity with the liberal arts? or what can we
imagine more perfect than a Scipio, a Laelius, or a Philus, who, not to
omit anything which belonged to the most perfect excellence of the
greatest men, joined to the examples of our ancestors and the
traditions of our countrymen the foreign philosophy of Socrates?

Wherefore he who had both the desire and the power to acquaint himself
thoroughly both with the customs and the learning of his ancestors
appears to me to have attained to the very highest glory and honor. But
if we cannot combine both, and are compelled to select one of these two
paths to wisdom--though to some people the tranquil life spent in the
research of literature and arts may appear to be the most happy and
delectable--yet, doubtless, the science of politics is more laudable
and illustrious, for in this political field of exertion our greatest
men have reaped their honors, like the invincible Curius,

    Whom neither gold nor iron could subdue.

IV. * * *[333] that wisdom existed still. There existed this general
difference between these two classes, that among the one the
development of the principles of nature is the subject of their study
and eloquence, and among the other national laws and institutions form
the principal topics of investigation.

In honor of our country, we may assert that she has produced within
herself a great number, I will not say of sages (since philosophy is so
jealous of this name), but of men worthy of the highest celebrity,
because by them the precepts and discoveries of the sages have been
carried out into actual practice. And, moreover, though there have
existed, and still do exist, many great and glorious empires, yet since
the noblest masterpiece of genius in the world is the establishment of
a state and commonwealth which shall be a lasting one, even if we
reckon but a single legislator for each empire, the number of these
excellent men will appear very numerous. To be convinced of this, we
have only to turn our eyes on any nation of Italy, Latium, the Sabines,
the Volscians, the Samnites, or the Etrurians, and then direct our
attention to that mighty nation of the Greeks, and then to the
Assyrians, Persians, and Carthaginians, and[334] * * *

V. * * * [Scipio and his friends having again assembled, Scipio spoke
as follows: In our last conversation, I promised to prove that honesty
is the best policy in all states and commonwealths whatsoever. But if I
am to plead in favor of strict honesty and justice in all public
affairs, no less than in private, I must request Philus, or some one
else, to take up the advocacy of the other side; the truth will then
become more manifest, from the collision of opposite arguments, as we
see every day exemplified at the Bar.]

And Philus replied: In good truth, you have allotted me a very
creditable cause when you wish me to undertake the defence of vice.

Perhaps, said Laelius, you are afraid, lest, in reproducing the ordinary
objections made to justice in politics, you should seem to express your
own sentiments; though you are universally respected as an almost
unique example of the ancient probity and good faith; nor is it unknown
how familiar you are with the lawyer-like habit of disputing on both
sides of a question, because you think that this is the best way of
getting at the truth.

And Philus said: Very well; I obey you, and wilfully, with my eyes
open, I will undertake this dirty business; because, since those who
seek for gold do not flinch at the sight of the mud, so we who are
searching for justice, which is far more precious than gold, are bound
to shrink from no annoyance. And I wish, as I am about to make use of
the antagonist arguments of a foreigner, I might also employ a foreign
language. The pleas, therefore, now to be urged by Lucius Furius Philus
are those [once employed by] the Greek Carneades, a man who was
accustomed to express whatever [served his turn].[335] * * *[336]Let it
be understood, therefore, that I by no means express my own sentiments,
but those of Carneades, in order that you may refute this philosopher,
who was wont to turn the best causes into joke, through the mere
wantonness of wit.

     VI. He was a philosopher of the Academic School; and if any
     one is ignorant of his great power, and eloquence, and
     acuteness in arguing, he may learn it from the mention made
     of him by Cicero or by Lucilius, when Neptune, discoursing on
     a very difficult subject, declares that it cannot be
     explained, not even if hell were to restore Carneades himself
     for the purpose. This philosopher, having been sent by the
     Athenians to Rome as an ambassador, discussed the subject of
     justice very amply in the hearing of Galba and Cato the
     Censor, who were the greatest orators of the day. And the
     next day he overturned all his arguments by others of a
     contrary tendency, and disparaged justice, which the day
     before he had extolled; speaking not indeed with the gravity
     of a philosopher whose wisdom ought to be steady, and whose
     opinions unchangeable, but in a kind of rhetorical exercise
     of arguing on each side--a practice which he was accustomed
     to adopt, in order to be able to refute others who were
     asserting anything. The arguments by which he disparaged
     justice are mentioned by Lucius Furius in Cicero; I suppose,
     since he was discussing the Commonwealth, in order to
     introduce a defence and panegyric of that quality without
     which he did not think a commonwealth could be administered.
     But Carneades, in order to refute Aristotle and Plato, the
     advocates of justice, collected in his first argument
     everything that was in the habit of being advanced on behalf
     of justice, in order afterward to be able to overturn it, as
     he did.

     VII. Many philosophers indeed, and especially Plato and
     Aristotle, have spoken a great deal of justice, inculcating
     that virtue, and extolling it with the highest praise, as
     giving to every one what belongs to him, as preserving equity
     in all things, and urging that while the other virtues are,
     as it were, silent and shut up, justice is the only one which
     is not absorbed in considerations of self-interest, and which
     is not secret, but finds its whole field for exercise
     out-of-doors, and is desirous of doing good and serving as
     many people as possible; as if, forsooth, justice ought to
     exist in judges only, and in men invested with a certain
     authority, and not in every one! But there is no one, not
     even a man of the lowest class, or a beggar, who is destitute
     of opportunities of displaying justice. But because these
     philosophers knew not what its essence was, or whence it
     proceeded, or what its employment was, they attributed that
     first of all virtues, which is the common good of all men, to
     a few only, and asserted that it aimed at no advantage of its
     own, but was anxious only for that of others. So it was well
     that Carneades, a man of the greatest genius and acuteness,
     refuted their assertions, and overthrew that justice which
     had no firm foundation; not because he thought justice itself
     deserving of blame, but in order to show that those its
     defenders had brought forward no trustworthy or strong
     arguments in its behalf.

     Justice looks out-of-doors, and is prominent and conspicuous
     in its whole essence.

     Which virtue, beyond all others, wholly devotes and dedicates
     itself to the advantage of others.

VIII. * * * Both to discover and maintain. While the other, Aristotle,
has filled four large volumes with a discussion on abstract justice.
For I did not expect anything grand or magnificent from Chrysippus,
who, after his usual fashion, examines everything rather by the
signification of words than the reality of things. But it was surely
worthy of those heroes of philosophy to ennoble by their genius a
virtue so eminently beneficent and liberal, which everywhere exalts the
social interests above the selfish, and teaches us to love others
rather than ourselves. It was worthy of their genius, we say, to
elevate this virtue to a divine throne, not far from that of Wisdom.
And certainly they neither wanted the will to accomplish this (for what
else could be the cause of their writing on the subject, or what could
have been their design?) nor the genius, in which they excelled all
men. But the weakness of their cause was too great for either their
intention or their eloquence to make it popular. In fact, this justice
on which we reason is a civil right, but no natural one; for if it were
natural and universal, then justice and injustice would be recognized
similarly by all men, just as the heat and cold, sweetness and
bitterness.

IX. Now, if any one, carried in that chariot of winged serpents of
which the poet Pacuvius makes mention, could take his flight over all
nations and cities, and accurately observe their proceedings, he would
see that the sense of justice and right varies in different regions. In
the first place, he would behold among the unchangeable people of
Egypt, which preserves in its archives the memory of so many ages and
events, a bull adored as a Deity, under the name of Apis, and a
multitude of other monsters, and all kinds of animals admitted by the
same nation into the number of the Gods.

In the next place, he would see in Greece, as among ourselves,
magnificent temples consecrated by images in human form, which the
Persians regarded as impious; and it is affirmed that the sole motive
of Xerxes for commanding the conflagration of the Athenian temples was
the belief that it was a superstitious sacrilege to keep confined
within narrow walls the Gods, whose proper home was the entire
universe. But afterward Philip, in his hostile projects against the
Persians, and Alexander, who carried them into execution, alleged this
plea for war, that they were desirous to avenge the temples of Greece,
which the Greeks had thought proper never to rebuild, that this
monument of the impiety of the Persians might always remain before the
eyes of their posterity.

How many--such as the inhabitants of Taurica along the Euxine Sea; as
the King of Egypt, Busiris; as the Gauls and the Carthaginians--have
thought it exceedingly pious and agreeable to the Gods to sacrifice
men! And, besides, the customs of life are so various that the Cretans
and AEtolians regard robbery as honorable. And the Lacedaemonians say
that their territory extends to all places which they can touch with a
lance. The Athenians had a custom of swearing, by a public
proclamation, that all the lands which produced olives and corn were
their own. The Gauls consider it a base employment to raise corn by
agricultural labor, and go with arms in their hands, and mow down the
harvests of neighboring peoples. But we ourselves, the most equitable
of all nations, who, in order to raise the value of our vines and
olives, do not permit the races beyond the Alps to cultivate either
vineyards or oliveyards, are said in this matter to act with prudence,
but not with justice. You see, then, that wisdom and policy are not
always the same as equity. And Lycurgus, that famous inventor of a most
admirable jurisprudence and most wholesome laws, gave the lands of the
rich to be cultivated by the common people, who were reduced to
slavery.

X. If I were to describe the diverse kinds of laws, institutions,
manners, and customs, not only as they vary in the numerous nations,
but as they vary likewise in single cities--in this one of ours, for
example--I could prove that they have had a thousand revolutions. For
instance, that eminent expositor of our laws who sits in the present
company--I mean Manilius--if you were to consult him relative to the
legacies and inheritances of women, he would tell you that the present
law is quite different from that he was accustomed to plead in his
youth, before the Voconian enactment came into force--an edict which
was passed in favor of the interests of the men, but which is evidently
full of injustice with regard to women. For why should a woman be
disabled from inheriting property? Why can a vestal virgin become an
heir, while her mother cannot? And why, admitting that it is necessary
to set some limit to the wealth of women, should Crassus's daughter, if
she be his only child, inherit thousands without offending the law,
while my daughter can only receive a small share in a bequest.[337]
* * *

XI. * * * [If this justice were natural, innate, and universal, all men
would admit the same] law and right, and the same men would not enact
different laws at different times. If a just man and a virtuous man is
bound to obey the laws, I ask, what laws do you mean? Do you intend all
the laws indifferently? But neither does virtue permit this inconstancy
in moral obligation, nor is such a variation compatible with natural
conscience. The laws are, therefore, based not on our sense of justice,
but on our fear of punishment. There is, therefore, no natural justice;
and hence it follows that men cannot be just by nature.

Are men, then, to say that variations indeed do exist in the laws, but
that men who are virtuous through natural conscience follow that which
is really justice, and not a mere semblance and disguise, and that it
is the distinguishing characteristic of the truly just and virtuous man
to render every one his due rights? Are we, then, to attribute the
first of these characteristics to animals? For not only men of moderate
abilities, but even first-rate sages and philosophers, as Pythagoras
and Empedocles, declare that all kinds of living creatures have a right
to the same justice. They declare that inexpiable penalties impend over
those who have done violence to any animal whatsoever. It is,
therefore, a crime to injure an animal, and the perpetrator of such
crime[338] * * *

     XII. For when he[339] inquired of a pirate by what right he
     dared to infest the sea with his little brigantine: "By the
     same right," he replied, "which is your warrant for
     conquering the world." * * *

Wisdom and prudence instruct us by all means to increase our power,
riches, and estates. For by what means could this same Alexander, that
illustrious general, who extended his empire over all Asia, without
violating the property of other men, have acquired such universal
dominion, enjoyed so many pleasures, such great power, and reigned
without bound or limit?

But justice commands us to have mercy upon all men, to consult the
interests of the whole human race, to give to every one his due, and
injure no sacred, public, or foreign rights, and to forbear touching
what does not belong to us. What is the result, then? If you obey the
dictates of wisdom, then wealth, power, riches, honors, provinces, and
kingdoms, from all classes, peoples, and nations, are to be aimed at.

However, as we are discussing public matters, those examples are more
illustrious which refer to what is done publicly. And since the
question between justice and policy applies equally to private and
public affairs, I think it well to speak of the wisdom of the people. I
will not, however, mention other nations, but come at once to our own
Roman people, whom Africanus, in his discourse yesterday, traced from
the cradle, and whose empire now embraces the whole world. Justice
is[340] * * *

     XIII. How far utility is at variance with justice we may
     learn from the Roman people itself, which, declaring war by
     means of the fecials, and committing injustice with all legal
     formality, always coveting and laying violent hands on the
     property of others, acquired the possession of the whole
     world.

     What is the advantage of one's own country but the
     disadvantage of another state or nation, by extending one's
     dominions by territories evidently wrested from others,
     increasing one's power, improving one's revenues, etc.?
     Therefore, whoever has obtained these advantages for his
     country--that is to say, whoever has overthrown cities,
     subdued nations, and by these means filled the treasury with
     money, taken lands, and enriched his fellow-citizens--such a
     man is extolled to the skies; is believed to be endowed with
     consummate and perfect virtue; and this mistake is fallen
     into not only by the populace and the ignorant, but by
     philosophers, who even give rules for injustice.

XIV. * * * For all those who have the right of life and death over the
people are in fact tyrants; but they prefer being called by the title
of king, which belongs to the all-good Jupiter. But when certain men,
by favor of wealth, birth, or any other means, get possession of the
entire government, it is a faction; but they choose to denominate
themselves an aristocracy. If the people gets the upper hand, and rules
everything after its capricious will, they call it liberty, but it is
in fact license. And when every man is a guard upon his neighbor, and
every class is a guard upon every other class, then because no one
trusts in his own strength, a kind of compact is formed between the
great and the little, from whence arises that mixed kind of government
which Scipio has been commending. Thus justice, according to these
facts, is not the daughter of nature or conscience, but of human
imbecility. For when it becomes necessary to choose between these three
predicaments, either to do wrong without retribution, or to do wrong
with retribution, or to do no wrong at all, it is best to do wrong with
impunity; next, neither to do wrong nor to suffer for it; but nothing
is more wretched than to struggle incessantly between the wrong we
inflict and that we receive. Therefore, he who attains to that first
end[341] * * *

     XV. This was the sum of the argument of Carneades: that men
     had established laws among themselves from considerations of
     advantage, varying them according to their different customs,
     and altering them often so as to adapt them to the times; but
     that there was no such thing as natural law; that all men and
     all other animals are led to their own advantage by the
     guidance of nature; that there is no such thing as justice,
     or, if there be, that it is extreme folly, since a man would
     injure himself while consulting the interests of others. And
     he added these arguments, that all nations who were
     flourishing and dominant, and even the Romans themselves, who
     were the masters of the whole world, if they wished to be
     just--that is to say, if they restored all that belonged to
     others--would have to return to their cottages, and to lie
     down in want and misery.

Except, perhaps, of the Arcadians and Athenians, who, I presume,
dreading that this great act of retribution might one day arrive,
pretend that they were sprung from the earth, like so many field-mice.

XVI. In reply to these statements, the following arguments are often
adduced by those who are not unskilful in discussions, and who, in this
question, have all the greater weight of authority, because, when we
inquire, Who is a good man?--understanding by that term a frank and
single-minded man--we have little need of captious casuists, quibblers,
and slanderers. For those men assert that the wise man does not seek
virtue because of the personal gratification which the practice of
justice and beneficence procures him, but rather because the life of
the good man is free from fear, care, solicitude, and peril; while, on
the other hand, the wicked always feel in their souls a certain
suspicion, and always behold before their eyes images of judgment and
punishment. Do not you think, therefore, that there is any benefit, or
that there is any advantage which can be procured by injustice,
precious enough to counterbalance the constant pressure of remorse, and
the haunting consciousness that retribution awaits the sinner, and
hangs over his devoted head.[342] * * *

XVII. [Our philosophers, therefore, put a case. Suppose, say they, two
men, one of whom is an excellent and admirable person, of high honor
and remarkable integrity; the latter is distinguished by nothing but
his vice and audacity. And suppose that their city has so mistaken
their characters as to imagine the good man to be a scandalous,
impious, and audacious criminal, and to esteem the wicked man, on the
contrary, as a pattern of probity and fidelity. On account of this
error of their fellow-citizens, the good man is arrested and tormented,
his hands are cut off, his eyes are plucked out, he is condemned,
bound, burned, exterminated, reduced to want, and to the last appears
to all men to be most deservedly the most miserable of men. On the
other hand, the flagitious wretch is exalted, worshipped, loved by all,
and honors, offices, riches, and emoluments are all conferred on him,
and he shall be reckoned by his fellow-citizens the best and worthiest
of mortals, and in the highest degree deserving of all manner of
prosperity. Yet, for all this, who is so mad as to doubt which of these
two men he would rather be?

XVIII. What happens among individuals happens also among nations. There
is no state so absurd and ridiculous as not to prefer unjust dominion
to just subordination. I need not go far for examples. During my own
consulship, when you were my fellow-counsellors, we consulted
respecting the treaty of Numantia. No one was ignorant that Quintus
Pompey had signed a treaty, and that Mancinus had done the same. The
latter, being a virtuous man, supported the proposition which I laid
before the people, after the decree of the senate. The former, on the
other side, opposed it vehemently. If modesty, probity, or faith had
been regarded, Mancinus would have carried his point; but in reason,
counsel, and prudence, Pompey surpassed him. Whether[343] * * *

XIX. If a man should have a faithless slave, or an unwholesome house,
with whose defect he alone was acquainted, and he advertised them for
sale, would he state the fact that his servant was infected with
knavery, and his house with malaria, or would he conceal these
objections from the buyer? If he stated those facts, he would be
honest, no doubt, because he would deceive nobody; but still he would
be thought a fool, because he would either get very little for his
property, or else fail to sell it at all. By concealing these defects,
on the other hand, he will be called a shrewd man--as one who has taken
care of his own interest; but he will be a rogue, notwithstanding,
because he will be deceiving his neighbors. Again, let us suppose that
one man meets another, who sells gold and silver, conceiving them to be
copper or lead; shall he hold his peace that he may make a capital
bargain, or correct the mistake, and purchase at a fair rate? He would
evidently be a fool in the world's opinion if he preferred the latter.

XX. It is justice, beyond all question, neither to commit murder nor
robbery. What, then, would your just man do, if, in a case of
shipwreck, he saw a weaker man than himself get possession of a plank?
Would he not thrust him off, get hold of the timber himself, and escape
by his exertions, especially as no human witness could be present in
the mid-sea? If he acted like a wise man of the world, he would
certainly do so, for to act in any other way would cost him his life.
If, on the other hand, he prefers death to inflicting unjustifiable
injury on his neighbor, he will be an eminently honorable and just man,
but not the less a fool, because he saved another's life at the expense
of his own. Again, if in case of a defeat and rout, when the enemy were
pressing in the rear, this just man should find a wounded comrade
mounted on a horse, shall he respect his right at the risk of being
killed himself, or shall he fling him from the horse in order to
preserve his own life from the pursuers? If he does so, he is a wise
man, but at the same time a wicked one; if he does not, he is admirably
just, but at the same time stupid.

XXI. _Scipio._ I might reply at great length to these sophistical
objections of Philus, if it were not, my Laelius, that all our friends
are no less anxious than myself to hear you take a leading part in the
present debate, especially as you promised yesterday that you would
plead at large on my side of the argument. If you cannot spare time for
this, at any rate do not desert us; we all ask it of you.

_Laelius._ This Carneades ought not to be even listened to by our young
men. I think all the while that I am hearing him that he must be a very
impure person; if he be not, as I would fain believe, his discourse is
not less pernicious.

XXII.[344] True law is right reason conformable to nature, universal,
unchangeable, eternal, whose commands urge us to duty, and whose
prohibitions restrain us from evil. Whether it enjoins or forbids, the
good respect its injunctions, and the wicked treat them with
indifference. This law cannot be contradicted by any other law, and is
not liable either to derogation or abrogation. Neither the senate nor
the people can give us any dispensation for not obeying this universal
law of justice. It needs no other expositor and interpreter than our
own conscience. It is not one thing at Rome, and another at Athens; one
thing to-day, and another to-morrow; but in all times and nations this
universal law must forever reign, eternal and imperishable. It is the
sovereign master and emperor of all beings. God himself is its author,
its promulgator, its enforcer. And he who does not obey it flies from
himself, and does violence to the very nature of man. And by so doing
he will endure the severest penalties even if he avoid the other evils
which are usually accounted punishments.

     XXIII. I am aware that in the third book of Cicero's treatise
     on the Commonwealth (unless I am mistaken) it is argued that
     no war is ever undertaken by a well-regulated commonwealth
     unless it be one either for the sake of keeping faith, or for
     safety; and what he means by a war for safety, and what
     safety he wishes us to understand, he points out in another
     passage, where he says, "But private men often escape from
     these penalties, which even the most stupid persons
     feel--want, exile, imprisonment, and stripes--by embracing
     the opportunity of a speedy death; but to states death itself
     is a penalty, though it appears to deliver individuals from
     punishment. For a state ought to be established so as to be
     eternal: therefore, there is no natural decease for a state,
     as there is for a man, in whose case death is not only
     inevitable, but often even desirable; but when a state is put
     an end to, it is destroyed, extinguished. It is in some
     degree, to compare small things with great, as if this whole
     world were to perish and fall to pieces."

     In his treatise on the Commonwealth, Cicero says those wars
     are unjust which are undertaken without reason. Again, after
     a few sentences, he adds, No war is considered just unless it
     be formally announced and declared, and unless it be to
     obtain restitution of what has been taken away.

     But our nation, by defending its allies, has now become the
     master of all the whole world.

     XXIV. Also, in that same treatise on the Commonwealth, he
     argues most strenuously and vigorously in the cause of
     justice against injustice. And since, when a little time
     before the part of injustice was upheld against justice, and
     the doctrine was urged that a republic could not prosper and
     flourish except by injustice, this was put forward as the
     strongest argument, that it was unjust for men to serve other
     men as their masters; but that unless a dominant state, such
     as a great republic, acted on this injustice, it could not
     govern its provinces; answer was made on behalf of justice,
     that it was just that it should be so, because slavery is
     advantageous to such men, and their interests are consulted
     by a right course of conduct--that is, by the license of
     doing injury being taken from the wicked--and they will fare
     better when subjugated, because when not subjugated they
     fared worse: and to confirm this reasoning, a noble instance,
     taken, as it were, from nature, was added, and it was said,
     Why, then, does God govern man, and why does the mind govern
     the body, and reason govern lust, and the other vicious parts
     of the mind?

     XXV. Hear what Tully says more plainly still in the third
     book of his treatise on the Commonwealth, when discussing the
     reasons for government. Do we not, says he, see that nature
     herself has given the power of dominion to everything that is
     best, to the extreme advantage of what is subjected to it?
     Why, then, does God govern man, and why does the mind govern
     the body, and reason govern lust and passion and the other
     vicious parts of the same mind? Listen thus far; for
     presently he adds, But still there are dissimilarities to be
     recognized in governing and in obeying. For as the mind is
