this new trade-wind does not come within less than twenty miles of the
earth's surface. We are thus preserved from the fearful destruction that
its unintermittent blasts would produce, blasts against which no tree
could stand and which would, in ten minutes, do as much damage to a city
as would the most violent earthquake. When this great wind had become
charged with the dust of Krakatoa, then, for the first, and, I may add,
for the only time, it stood revealed to human vision. Then it was seen
that this wind circled round the earth in the vicinity of the equator,
and completed its circuit in about thirteen days.


A VAST CLOUD Of DUST


"The dust manufactured by the supreme convulsion was whirled round
the earth in the mighty atmospheric current into which the volcano
discharged it. As the dust-cloud was swept along by this incomparable
hurricane it showed its presence in the most glorious manner by decking
the sun and the moon in hues of unaccustomed splendor and beauty. The
blue color in the sky under ordinary circumstances is due to particles
in the air, and when the ordinary motes of the sunbeam were reinforced
by the introduction of the myriads of motes produced by Krakatoa even
the sun itself sometimes showed a blue tint. Thus the progress of the
great dust-cloud was traced out by the extraordinary sky effects it
produced, and from the progress of the dust-cloud we inferred the
movements of the invisible air current which carried it along. Nor need
it be thought that the quantity of material projected from Krakatoa
should have been inadequate to produce effects of this world-wide
description. Imagine that the material which was blown to the winds of
heaven by the supreme convulsion of Krakatoa could be all recovered and
swept into one vast heap. Imagine that the heap were to have its bulk
measured by a vessel consisting of a cube one mile long, one mile broad
and one mile deep; it has been estimated that even this prodigious
vessel would have to be filled to the brim at least ten times before all
the products of Krakatoa had been measured."

It is not specially to the quantity of material ejected from Krakatoa
that it owes its reputation. Great as it was, it has been much
surpassed. Professor Judd says that the great eruptions of
Papapandayang, in Java, in 1772, of Skaptur Jokull, in Iceland, in 1783,
and of Tamboro, in Sumbawa, in 1815, were marked by the extrusion of
much larger quantities of material. The special feature of the Krakatoa
eruption was its extreme violence, which flung volcanic dust to a height
probably never before attained, and produced sea and air waves of an
intensity unparalleled in the records of volcanic action. Judd thinks
this was due to the situation of the crater, and the possible inflow
through fissures of a great volume of sea water to the interior lava,
the result being the sudden production of an enormous volume of steam.


EXTRAORDINARY RED SUNSETS


The red sunsets spoken of above were so extraordinary in character
that a fuller description of them seems advisable. A remarkable fact
concerning them is the great rapidity with which they were disseminated
to distant regions of the earth. They appeared around the entire
equatorial zone in a few days after the eruption, this doubtless being
due to the great rapidity with which the volcanic dust was carried by
the upper air current. They were seen at Rodriguez, 3,000 miles away, on
August 28, and within a week in every part of the torrid zone. From
this zone they spread north and south with less rapidity. Their first
appearance in Australia was on September 15th, and at the Cape of Good
Hope on the 20th. On the latter day they were observed in California and
the Southern United States. They were first seen in England on November
9th. Elsewhere in Europe and the United States they appeared from
November 20th to 30th.

The effect lasted in some instances as long as an hour and
three-quarters after sunset. In India the sun and skies assumed a
greenish hue, and there was much curiosity regarding the cause of the
"green sun." Another remarkable phenomenon of this period was the great
prevalence of rain during the succeeding winter. This probably was due
to the same cause; that is, to the fact of the air being so filled with
dust; the prevailing theory in regard to rain being that the existence
of dust in the air is necessary to its fall. The vapor of the air
concentrates into drops around such minute particles, the result being
that where dust is absent rain cannot fall.

As regards the sunsets spoken of, there are three similar instances on
record. The first of these was in the year 526, when a dry fog covered
the Roman Empire with a red haze. Nothing further is known concerning
it. The other instances were in the years 1783 and 1831. The former of
these has been traced to the great eruption of Skaptur Jokull in that
year. It lasted for several months as a pale blue haze, and occasioned
so much obscurity that the sun was only visible when twelve degrees
above the horizon, and then it had a blood-red appearance. Violent
thunderstorms were associated with it, thus assimilating it with that of
1883. Alike in 1783 and 1831 there was a pearly, phosphorescent gleam in
the atmosphere, by which small print could be read at midnight. We know
nothing regarding the meteorological conditions of 1831.

The red sunsets of 1883 were remarkable for their long persistence.
They were observed in the autumn of 1884 with almost their original
brilliancy, and they were still visible in 1885, being seen at
intervals, as if the dust was then distributed in patches, and driven
about by the winds. In fact, similar sunsets were occasionally visible
for several years afterwards. These may well have been due to the same
cause, when we consider with what extreme slowness very fine dust makes
its way through the air, and how much it may be affected by the winds.


THE RED SUNSETS DESCRIBED


One writer describes the appearance of these sunsets in the following
terms: "Immediately after sunset a patch of white light appeared ten
or fifteen degrees above the horizon, and shone for ten minutes with a
pearly lustre. Beneath it a layer of bright red rested on the horizon,
melting upward into orange, and this passed into yellow light, which
spread around the lucid spot. Next the white light grew of a rosy tint,
and soon became an intense rose hue. A vivid golden oriole yellow strip
divided it from the red fringe below and the rose red above." This
description, although exaggerated, represents the general conditions of
the phenomenon.

On October 20th, 1884, the author observed the sunset effect as follows:
"Immediately after the sun had set, a broad cone of silvery lustre
rested upon a horizon of smoky pink. After fifteen minutes the white
became rose color above and yellowish below, deepening to lemon color,
and finally into reddish tint, while the rose faded out. The whole cone
gradually sank and died away in the brownish red flush on the horizon,
more than an hour after sunset." The time of duration varied, since,
on the succeeding evening, it lasted only a half-hour. These sunset
effects, if we can justly attribute them all to the Krakatoa eruption,
were extraordinary not alone for their intensity and beauty but for
their extended duration, the influence of this remarkable volcanic
outbreak being visible for several years after the event.

Though no doubt is entertained concerning the cause of the red sunset
effects of 1783 and 1883, that of 1831 is not so readily explained,
there having been no known volcanic explosion of great intensity in that
year. But in view of the fact that volcanoes exist in unvisited parts
of the earth, some of which may have been at work unknown to scientific
man, this difficulty is not insuperable. Possibly Mounts Erebus or
Terror, the burning mountains of the Antarctic zone, may, unseen by
man, have prepared for civilized lands this grand spectacular effect of
Nature's doings.



CHAPTER XXVIII.

Mount Pelee and its Harvest of Death.


St. Pierre, the principal city of the French island of Martinique, in
the West Indies, lies for the length of about a mile along the island
coast, with high cliffs hemming it in, its houses climbing the slope,
tier upon tier. At one place where a river breaks through the cliffs,
the city creeps further up towards the mountains. As seen from the bay,
its appearance is picturesque and charming, with the soft tints of its
tiles, the grey of its walls, the clumps of verdure in its midst,
and the wall of green in the rear. Seen from its streets this beauty
disappears, and the chief attraction of the town is gone.

Back from the three miles of hills which sweep in an arc round the town,
is the noble Montagne Pelee lying several miles to the north of the
city, a mass of dark rock some four thousand feet high, with jagged
outline, and cleft with gorges and ravines, down which flow numerous
streams, gushing from the crater lake of the great volcano.

Though known to be a volcano, it was looked upon as practically extinct,
though as late as August, 1856, it had been in eruption. No lava at that
time came from its crater, but it hurled out great quantities of ashes
and mud, with strong sulphurous odor. Then it went to rest again, and
slept till 1902.

The people had long ceased to fear it. No one expected that grand old
Mount Pelee, the slumbering (so it was thought) tranquil old hill, would
ever spurt forth fire and death. This was entirely unlooked for. Mont
Pelee was regarded by the natives as a sort of protector; they had an
almost superstitious affection for it. From the outskirts of the city it
rose gradually, its sides grown thick with rich grass, and dotted here
and there with spreading shrubbery and drooping trees. There was
no pleasanter outing for an afternoon than a journey up the green,
velvet-like sides of the towering mountain and a view of the quaint,
picturesque city slumbering at its base.


A PEACEFUL SCENE


There were no rocky cliffs, no crags, no protruding boulders. The
mountain was peace itself. It seemed to promise perpetual protection.
The poetic natives relied upon it to keep back storms from the land and
frighten, with its stern brow, the tempests from the sea. They pointed
to it with profoundest pride as one of the most beautiful mountains in
the world.

Children played in its bowers and arbors; families picnicked there day
after day during the balmy weather; hundreds of tourists ascended to
the summit and looked with pleasure at the beautiful crystal lake
which sparkled and glinted in the sunshine. Mont Pelee was the place
of enjoyment of the people of St. Pierre. I can hear the placid natives
say: "Old Father Pelee is our protector--not our destroyer."

Not until two weeks before the eruption did the slumbering mountain
show signs of waking to death and disaster. On the 23d of April it first
displayed symptoms of internal disquiet. A great column of smoke began
to rise from it, and was accompanied from time to time by showers of
ashes and cinders.

Despite these signals, there was nothing until Monday, May 5th, to
indicate actual danger. On that day a stream of smoking mud and lava
burst through the top of the crater and plunged into the valley of
the River Blanche, overwhelming the Guerin sugar works and killing
twenty-three workmen and the son of the proprietor. Mr. Guerin's was
one of the largest sugar works on the island; its destruction entailed
a heavy loss. The mud which overwhelmed it followed the beds of streams
towards the north of the island.

The alarm in the city was great, but it was somewhat allayed by the
report of an expert commission appointed by the Governor, which decided
that the eruption was normal and that the city was in no peril. To
further allay the excitement, the Governor, with several scientists,
took up his residence in St. Pierre. He could not restrain the people
by force, but the moral effect of his presence and the decision of the
scientists had a similar disastrous result.


A GRAPHIC DESCRIPTION BY A SUFFERER.


The existing state of affairs during these few waiting days is so
graphically given in a letter from Mrs. Thomas T. Prentis, wife of the
United States Consul at St. Pierre, to her sister in Melrose, a suburban
city of Boston, that we quote it here:

"My Dear Sister: This morning the whole population of the city is on the
alert and every eye is directed toward Mont Pelee, an extinct volcano.
Everybody is afraid that the volcano has taken into its heart to burst
forth and destroy the whole island.

"Fifty years ago Mont Pelee burst forth with terrific force and
destroyed everything within a radius of several miles. For several days
the mountain has been bursting forth in flame and immense quantities of
lava are flowing down its sides.

"All the inhabitants are going up to see it. There is not a horse to
be had on the island, those belonging to the natives being kept in
readiness to leave at a moment's notice.

"Last Wednesday, which was April 23d, I was in my room with little
Christine, and we heard three distinct shocks. They were so great that
we supposed at first that there was some one at the door, and Christine
went and found no one there. The first report was very loud, and the
second and third were so great that dishes were thrown from the shelves
and the house was rocked.

"We can see Mont Pelee from the rear windows of our house, and although
it is fully four miles away, we can hear the roar of the fire and lava
issuing from it.

"The city is covered with ashes and clouds of smoke have been over our
heads for the last five days. The smell of sulphur is so strong that
horses on the streets stop and snort, and some of them are obliged to
give up, drop in their harness and die from suffocation. Many of the
people are obliged to wear wet handkerchiefs over their faces to protect
them from the fumes of sulphur.

"My husband assures me that there is no immediate danger, and when there
is the least particle of danger we will leave the place. There is an
American schooner, the R. F. Morse, in the harbor, and she will remain
here for at least two weeks. If the volcano becomes very bad we shall
embark at once and go out to sea. The papers in this city are asking
if we are going to experience another earthquake similar to that which
struck here some fifty years ago."


THE FATEFUL EIGHTH OF MAY


The writer of this letter and her husband, Consul Prentis, trusted Mont
Pelee too long. They perished, with all the inhabitants of the city, in
a deadly flood of fire and ashes that descended on the devoted place
on the fateful morning of Thursday, May 8th. Only for the few who were
rescued from the ships in the harbor there would be scarcely a living
soul to tell that dread story of ruin and death. The most graphic
accounts are those given by rescued officers of the Roraima, one of the
fleet of the Quebec Steamship Co., trading with the West Indies. This
vessel had left the Island of Dominica for Martinique at midnight of
Wednesday, and reached St. Pierre about 7 o'clock Thursday morning. The
greatest difficulty was experienced in getting into port, the air being
thick with falling ashes and the darkness intense. The ship had to
grope its way to the anchorage. Appalling sounds were issuing from the
mountain behind the town, which was shrouded in darkness. The ashes were
falling thickly on the steamer's deck, where the passengers and others
were gazing at the town, some being engaged in photographing the scene.

The best way in which we can describe a scene of which few lived to tell
the story, is to give the narratives of a number of the survivors.
From their several stories a coherent idea of the terrible scene can
be formed. From the various accounts given of the terrible explosion
by officers of the Roraima, we select as a first example the following
description by Assistant Purser Thompson:


A TALE OF SUDDEN RUIN


"I saw St. Pierre destroyed. It was blotted out by one great flash of
fire. Nearly 40,000 persons were all killed at once. Out of eighteen
vessels lying in the roads only one, the British steamship Roddam,
escaped, and she, I hear, lost more than half on board. It was a dying
crew that took her out.

"Our boat, the Roraima, of the Quebec Line, arrived at St. Pierre early
Thursday morning. For hours before we entered the roadstead we could see
flames and smoke rising from Mont Pelee. No one on board had any idea
of danger. Captain G. T. Muggah was on the bridge, and all hands got on
deck to see the show.

"The spectacle was magnificent. As we approached St. Pierre we could
distinguish the rolling and leaping of the red flames that belched from
the mountain in huge volumes and gushed high in to the sky. Enormous
clouds of black smoke hung over the volcano.

"When we anchored at St. Pierre I noticed the cable steamship Grappler,
the Roddam, three or four American schooners and a number of Italian and
Norwegian barks. The flames were then spurting straight up in the air,
now and then waving to one side or the other for a moment and again
leaping suddenly higher up.

"There was a constant muffled roar. It was like the biggest oil refinery
in the world burning up on the mountain top. There was a tremendous
explosion about 7.45 o'clock, soon after we got in. The mountain was
blown to pieces. There was no warning. The side of the volcano was
ripped out, and there was hurled straight toward us a solid wall of
flame. It sounded like thousands of cannon.

"The wave of fire was on us and over us like a lightning flash. It was
like a hurricane of fire. I saw it strike the cable steamship Grappler
broadside on and capsize her. From end to end she burst into flames and
then sank. The fire rolled in mass straight down upon St. Pierre and the
shipping. The town vanished before our eyes and the air grew stifling
hot, and we were in the thick of it.

"Wherever the mass of fire struck the sea the water boiled and sent
up vast clouds of steam. The sea was torn into huge whirlpools that
careened toward the open sea.

"One of these horrible hot whirlpools swung under the Roraima and pulled
her down on her beam ends with the suction. She careened way over to
port, and then the fire hurricane from the volcano smashed her, and over
she went on the opposite side. The fire wave swept off the masts and
smokestack as if they were cut with a knife.


HEAT CAUSED EXPLOSIONS


"Captain Muggah was the only one on deck not killed outright. He was
caught by the fire wave and terribly burned. He yelled to get up the
anchor, but, before two fathoms were heaved in the Roraima was almost
upset by the boiling whirlpool, and the fire wave had thrown her down on
her beam ends to starboard. Captain Muggah was overcome by the flames.
He fell unconscious from the bridge and toppled overboard.

"The blast of fire from the volcano lasted only a few minutes. It
shriveled and set fire to everything it touched. Thousands of casks of
rum were stored in St. Pierre, and these were exploded by the terrific
heat. The burning rum ran in streams down every street and out to the
sea. This blazing rum set fire to the Roraima several times. Before the
volcano burst the landings of St. Pierre were crowded with people. After
the explosion not one living being was seen on land. Only twenty-five of
those on the Roraima out of sixty-eight were left after the first flash.

"The French cruiser Suchet came in and took us off at 2 P. M. She
remained nearby, helping all she could, until 5 o'clock, then went to
Fort de France with all the people she had rescued. At that time it
looked as if the entire north end of the island was on fire."

C. C. Evans, of Montreal, and John G. Morris, of New York, who were
among those rescued, say the vessel arrived at 6 o'clock. As eight bells
were struck a frightful explosion was heard up the mountain. A cloud of
fire, toppling and roaring, swept with lightning speed down the mountain
side and over the town and bay. The Roraima was nearly sunk, and caught
fire at once.

"I can never forget the horrid, fiery, choking whirlwind which enveloped
me," said Mr. Evans. "Mr. Morris and I rushed below. We are not very
badly burned, not so bad as most of them. When the fire came we were
going to our posts (we are engineers) to weigh anchor and get out. When
we came up we found the ship afire aft, and fought it forward until 3
o'clock, when the Suchet came to our rescue. We were then building a
raft."

"Ben" Benson, the carpenter of the Roraima, said: "I was on deck,
amidships, when I heard an explosion. The captain ordered me to up
anchor. I got to the windlass, but when the fire came I went into the
forecastle and got my 'duds.' When I came out I talked with Captain
Muggah, Mr. Scott, the first officer and others. They had been on the
bridge. The captain was horribly burned. He had inhaled flames and
wanted to jump into the sea. I tried to make him take a life-preserver.
The captain, who was undressed, jumped overboard and hung on to a line
for a while. Then he disappeared."


THE COOPER'S STORY.


James Taylor, a cooper employed on the Roraima, gives the following
account of his experience of the disaster:

"Hearing a tremendous report and seeing the ashes falling thicker, I
dived into a room, dragging with me Samuel Thomas, a gangway man and
fellow countryman, shutting the door tightly. Shortly after I heard a
voice, which I recognized as that of the chief mate, Mr. Scott. Opening
the door with great caution, I drew him in. The nose of Thomas was
burned by the intense heat.

"We three and Thompson, the assistant purser, out of sixty-eight souls
on board, were the only persons who escaped practically uninjured. The
heat being unbearable, I emerged in a few moments, and the scene that
presented itself to my eyes baffles description. All around on the deck
were the dead and dying covered with boiling mud. There they lay, men,
women and little children, and the appeals of the latter for water were
heart-rending. When water was given them they could not swallow it,
owing to their throats being filled with ashes or burnt with the heated
air.

"The ship was burning aft, and I jumped overboard, the sea being
intensely hot. I was at once swept seaward by a tidal wave, but, the sea
receding a considerable distance, the return wave washed me against an
upturned sloop to which I clung. I was joined by a man so dreadfully
burned and disfigured as to be unrecognizable. Afterwards I found he was
the captain of the Roraima, Captain Muggah. He was in dreadful agony,
begging piteously to be put on board his ship.

"Picking up some wreckage which contained bedding and a tool chest, I,
with the help of five others who had joined me on the wreck, constructed
a rude raft, on which we placed the captain. Then, seeing an upturned
boat, I asked one of the five, a native of Martinique, to swim and fetch
it. Instead of returning to us, he picked up two of his countrymen and
went away in the direction of Fort de France. Seeing the Roddam, which
arrived in port shortly after we anchored, making for the Roraima, I
said good-bye to the captain and swam back to the Roraima.

"The Roddam, however, burst into flames and put to sea. I reached the
Roraima at about half-past 2, and was afterwards taken off by a boat
from the French warship Suchet. Twenty-four others with myself were
taken on to Fort de France. Three of these died before reaching port. A
number of others have since died."

Samuel Thomas, the gangway man, whose life was saved by the forethought
of Taylor, says that the scene on the burning ship was awful. The groans
and cries of the dying, for whom nothing could be done, were horrible.
He describes a woman as being burned to death with a living babe in her
arms. He says that it seemed as if the whole world was afire.
