  Her wing'd with ardor, Menelaus yoked.
  Antilochus, arising fourth, his steeds
  Bright-maned prepared, son of the valiant King
  Of Pylus, Nestor Neleiades.
  Of Pylian breed were they, and thus his sire,                  385
  With kind intent approaching to his side,
  Advised him, of himself not uninform'd.[12]
    Antilochus! Thou art, I know, beloved
  By Jove and Neptune both, from whom, though young
  Thou hast received knowledge of every art                      390
  Equestrian, and hast little need to learn.
  Thou know'st already how to trim the goal
  With nicest skill, yet wondrous slow of foot
  Thy coursers are, whence evil may ensue.
  But though their steeds be swifter, I account                  395
  Thee wise, at least, as they. Now is the time
  For counsel, furnish now thy mind with all
  Precaution, that the prize escape thee not.
  The feller of huge trees by skill prevails
  More than by strength; by skill the pilot guides               400
  His flying bark rock'd by tempestuous winds,
  And more by skill than speed the race is won.
  But he who in his chariot and his steeds
  Trusts only, wanders here and wanders there
  Unsteady, while his coursers loosely rein'd                    405
  Roam wide the field; not so the charioteer
  Of sound intelligence; he though he drive
  Inferior steeds, looks ever to the goal
  Which close he clips, not ignorant to check
  His coursers at the first but with tight rein                  410
  Ruling his own, and watching those before.
  Now mark; I will describe so plain the goal
  That thou shalt know it surely. A dry stump
  Extant above the ground an ell in height
  Stands yonder; either oak it is, or pine                       415
  More likely, which the weather least impairs.
  Two stones, both white, flank it on either hand.
  The way is narrow there, but smooth the course
  On both sides. It is either, as I think,
  A monument of one long since deceased,                         420
  Or was, perchance, in ancient days design'd,
  As now by Peleus' mighty son, a goal.
  That mark in view, thy steeds and chariot push
  Near to it as thou may'st; then, in thy seat
  Inclining gently to the left, prick smart                      425
  Thy right-hand horse challenging him aloud,
  And give him rein; but let thy left-hand horse
  Bear on the goal so closely, that the nave
  And felly[13] of thy wheel may seem to meet.
  Yet fear to strike the stone, lest foul disgrace               430
  Of broken chariot and of crippled steeds
  Ensue, and thou become the public jest.
  My boy beloved! use caution; for if once
  Thou turn the goal at speed, no man thenceforth
  Shall reach, or if he reach, shall pass thee by,               435
  Although Arion in thy rear he drove
  Adrastus' rapid horse of race divine,
  Or those, Troy's boast, bred by Laomedon.
    So Nestor spake, inculcating with care
  On his son's mind these lessons in the art,                    440
  And to his place retiring, sat again.
  Meriones his coursers glossy-maned
  Made ready last. Then to his chariot-seat
  Each mounted, and the lots were thrown; himself
  Achilles shook them. First, forth leap'd the lot               445
  Of Nestor's son Antilochus, after whom
  The King Eumelus took his destined place.
  The third was Menelaus spear-renown'd;
  Meriones the fourth; and last of all,
  Bravest of all, heroic Diomede                                 450
  The son of Tydeus took his lot to drive.
  So ranged they stood; Achilles show'd the goal
  Far on the champain, nigh to which he placed
  The godlike Phoenix servant of his sire,
  To mark the race and make a true report.                       455
    All raised the lash at once, and with the reins
  At once all smote their steeds, urging them on
  Vociferous; they, sudden, left the fleet
  Far, far behind them, scouring swift the plain.
  Dark, like a stormy cloud, uprose the dust                     460
  Their chests beneath, and scatter'd in the wind
  Their manes all floated; now the chariots swept
  The low declivity unseen, and now
  Emerging started into view; erect
  The drivers stood; emulous, every heart                        465
  Beat double; each encouraged loud his steeds;
  They, flying, fill'd with dust the darken'd air.
  But when returning to the hoary deep
  They ran their last career, then each display'd
  Brightest his charioteership, and the race                     470
  Lay stretch'd, at once, into its utmost speed.
  Then, soon the mares of Pheretiades[14]
  Pass'd all, but Diomede behind him came,
  Borne by his unemasculated steeds
  Of Trojan pedigree; they not remote,                           475
  But close pursued him; and at every pace
  Seem'd entering both; the chariot at their head,
  For blowing warm into Eumelus' neck
  Behind, and on his shoulders broad, they went,
  And their chins rested on him as they flew.                    480
  Then had Tydides pass'd him, or had made
  Decision dubious, but Apollo struck,
  Resentful,[15] from his hand the glittering scourge.
  Fast roll'd the tears indignant down his cheeks,
  For he beheld the mares with double speed,                     485
  Flying, and of the spur deprived, his own
  Retarded steeds continual thrown behind.
  But not unnoticed by Minerva pass'd
  The art by Phoebus practised to impede
  The son of Tydeus, whom with winged haste                      490
  Following, she gave to him his scourge again,
  And with new force his lagging steeds inspired.
  Eumelus, next, the angry Goddess, swift
  Pursuing, snapt his yoke; wide flew the mares
  Asunder, and the pole fell to the ground.                      495
  Himself, roll'd from his seat, fast by the wheel
  With lacerated elbows, nostrils, mouth,
  And batter'd brows lay prone; sorrow his eyes
  Deluged, and disappointment chok'd his voice.
  Then, far outstripping all, Tydides push'd                     500
  His steeds beyond, which Pallas fill'd with power
  That she might make the glorious prize his own.
  Him follow'd Menelaus amber-hair'd,
  The son of Atreus, and his father's steeds
  Encouraging, thus spake Antilochus.                            505
    Away--now stretch ye forward to the goal.
  I bid you not to an unequal strife
  With those of Diomede, for Pallas them
  Quickens that he may conquer, and the Chief
  So far advanced makes competition vain.                        510
  But reach the son of Atreus, fly to reach
  His steeds, incontinent; ah, be not shamed
  For ever, foil'd by AEthe, by a mare!
  Why fall ye thus behind, my noblest steeds?
  I tell you both, and ye shall prove me true,                   515
  No favor shall ye find at Nestor's hands,
  My valiant sire, but he will thrust his spear
  Right through you, should we lose, for sloth of yours,
  Or by your negligence, the nobler prize.
  Haste then--pursue him--reach the royal Chief--                520
  And how to pass him in yon narrow way
  Shall be my care, and not my care in vain.
    He ended; they, awhile, awed by his voice,
  With more exertion ran, and Nestor's son
  Now saw the hollow strait mark'd by his sire.                  525
  It was a chasm abrupt, where winter-floods,
  Wearing the soil, had gullied deep the way.
  Thither Atrides, anxious to avoid
  A clash of chariots drove, and thither drove
  Also, but somewhat devious from his track,                     530
  Antilochus. Then Menelaus fear'd,
  And with loud voice the son of Nestor hail'd.
    Antilochus, at what a madman's rate
  Drivest thou! stop--check thy steeds--the way is here
  Too strait, but widening soon, will give thee scope            535
  To pass me by; beware, lest chariot close
  To chariot driven, thou maim thyself and me.
    He said; but still more rapid and the scourge
  Plying continual, as he had not heard,
  Antilochus came on. Far as the quoit                           540
  By some broad-shoulder'd youth for trial hurl'd
  Of manhood flies, so far Antilochus
  Shot forward; but the coursers fell behind
  Of Atreus' son, who now abated much
  By choice his driving, lest the steeds of both                 545
  Jostling, should overturn with sudden shock
  Both chariots, and themselves in dust be roll'd,
  Through hot ambition of the foremost prize.
  Him then the hero golden-hair'd reproved.
    Antilochus! the man lives not on earth                       550
  Like thee for love of mischief. Go, extoll'd
  For wisdom falsely by the sons of Greece.
  Yet, trust me, not without an oath, the prize
  Thus foully sought shall even now be thine.
    He said, and to his coursers call'd aloud.                   555
  Ah be not tardy; stand not sorrow-check'd;
  Their feet will fail them sooner far than yours,
  For years have pass'd since they had youth to boast.
    So he; and springing at his voice, his steeds
  Regain'd apace the vantage lost. Meantime                      560
  The Grecians, in full circus seated, mark'd
  The steeds; they flying, fill'd with dust the air.
  Then, ere the rest, Idomeneus discern'd
  The foremost pair; for, on a rising ground
  Exalted, he without the circus sat,                            565
  And hearing, though remote, the driver's voice
  Chiding his steeds, knew it, and knew beside
  The leader horse distinguish'd by his hue,
  Chestnut throughout, save that his forehead bore
  A splendid blazon white, round as the moon.                    570
    He stood erect, and to the Greeks he cried.
  Friends! Chiefs and senators of Argos' host!
  Discern I sole the steeds, or also ye?
  The horses, foremost now, to me appear
  Other than erst, and I descry at hand                          575
  A different charioteer; the mares of late
  Victorious, somewhere distant in the race
  Are hurt; I plainly saw them at the first
  Turning the goal, but see them now no more;
  And yet with eyes inquisitive I range                          580
  From side to side the whole broad plain of Troy.
  Either the charioteer hath slipp'd the reins,
  Or rounded not successfully the goal
  Through want of guidance. Thrown, as it should seem,
  Forth from his seat, he hath his chariot maim'd,               585
  And his ungovern'd steeds have roam'd away.
  Arise and look ye forth yourselves, for I
  With doubtful ken behold him; yet the man
  Seems, in my view, AEtolian by descent,
  A Chief of prime renown in Argos' host,                        590
  The hero Tydeus' son, brave Diomede,
    But Ajax Oiliades the swift
  Him sharp reproved. Why art thou always given
  To prate, Idomeneus? thou seest the mares,
  Remote indeed, but posting to the goal.                        595
  Thou art not youngest of the Argives here
  So much, nor from beneath thy brows look forth
  Quick-sighted more than ours, thine eyes abroad.
  Yet still thou pratest, although silence more
  Should suit thee, among wiser far than thou.                   600
  The mares which led, lead still, and he who drives
  Eumelus is, the same who drove before.
    To whom the Cretan Chief, angry, replied.
  Ajax! whom none in wrangling can excel
  Or rudeness, though in all beside thou fall                    605
  Below the Argives, being boorish-rough,
  Come now--a tripod let us wager each,
  Or caldron, and let Agamemnon judge
  Whose horses lead, that, losing, thou may'st learn.
    He said; then sudden from his seat upsprang                  610
  Swift Ajax Oiliades, prepared
  For harsh retort, nor had the contest ceased
  Between them, but had grown from ill to worse,
  Had not himself, Achilles, interposed.
    Ajax--Idomeneus--abstain ye both                             615
  From bitter speech offensive, and such terms
  As ill become you. Ye would feel, yourselves,
  Resentment, should another act as ye.
  Survey the course, peaceable, from your seats;
  The charioteers, by competition wing'd,                        620
  Will soon themselves arrive, then shall ye know
  Distinctly, both who follows and who leads.
    He scarce had said, when nigh at hand appear'd
  Tydides, lashing, as he came, his steeds
  Continual; they with hoofs uplifted high                       625
  Their yet remaining ground shorten'd apace,
  Sprinkling with dusty drops at every stroke
  Their charioteer, while close upon their heels
  Radiant with tin and gold the chariot ran,
  Scarce tracking light the dust, so swift they flew.            630
  He stood in the mid-circus; there the sweat
  Rain'd under them from neck and chest profuse,
  And Diomede from his resplendent seat
  Leaping, reclined his scourge against the yoke.
  Nor was his friend brave Sthenelus remiss,                     635
  But, seizing with alacrity the prize,
  Consign'd the tripod and the virgin, first,
  To his own band in charge; then, loosed the steeds.
  Next came, by stratagem, not speed advanced
  To that distinction, Nestor's son, whom yet                    640
  The hero Menelaus close pursued
  Near as the wheel runs to a courser's heels,
  Drawing his master at full speed; his tail
  With its extremest hairs the felly sweeps
  That close attends him o'er the spacious plain,                645
  So near had Menelaus now approach'd
  Antilochus; for though at first he fell
  A full quoit's cast behind, he soon retrieved
  That loss, with such increasing speed the mare
  Bright-maned of Agamemnon, AEthe, ran;                          650
  She, had the course few paces more to both
  Afforded, should have clearly shot beyond
  Antilochus, nor dubious left the prize.
  But noble Menelaus threw behind
  Meriones, companion in the field,                              655
  Of King Idomeneus, a lance's flight,
  For slowest were his steeds, and he, to rule
  The chariot in the race, least skill'd of all.
  Last came Eumelus drawing to the goal,
  Himself, his splendid chariot, and his mares                   660
  Driving before him. Peleus' rapid son
  Beheld him with compassion, and, amid
  The Argives, in wing'd accents thus he spake.
    Here comes the most expert, driving his steeds
  Before him. Just it were that he received                      665
  The second prize; Tydides claims the first.
    He said, and all applauded the award.
  Then had Achilles to Eumelus given
  The mare (for such the pleasure seem'd of all)
  Had not the son of mighty Nestor risen,                        670
  Antilochus, who pleaded thus his right.
    Achilles! acting as thou hast proposed,
  Thou shalt offend me much, for thou shalt take
  The prize from me, because the Gods, his steeds
  And chariot-yoke disabling, render'd vain                      675
  His efforts, and no failure of his own.
  It was his duty to have sought the Gods
  In prayer, then had he not, following on foot
  His coursers, hindmost of us all arrived.
  But if thou pity him, and deem it good,                        680
  Thou hast much gold, much brass, and many sheep
  In thy pavilion; thou hast maidens fair,
  And coursers also. Of thy proper stores
  Hereafter give to him a richer prize
  Than this, or give it now, so shall the Greeks                 685
  Applaud thee; but this mare yield I to none;
  Stand forth the Grecian who desires to win
  That recompense, and let him fight with me.
    He ended, and Achilles, godlike Chief,
  Smiled on him, gratulating his success,                        690
  Whom much he loved; then, ardent, thus replied.
    Antilochus! if thou wouldst wish me give
  Eumelus of my own, even so I will.
  I will present to him my corslet bright
  Won from Asteropaeus, edged around                              695
  With glittering tin; a precious gift, and rare.
    So saying, he bade Automedon his friend
  Produce it from the tent; he at his word
  Departing, to Achilles brought the spoil,
  Which at his hands Eumelus glad received.                      700
  Then, stung with grief, and with resentment fired
  Immeasurable, Menelaus rose
  To charge Antilochus. His herald gave
  The sceptre to his hand, and (silence bidden
  To all) the godlike hero thus began.                           705
    Antilochus! oh heretofore discreet!
  What hast thou done? Thou hast dishonor'd foul
  My skill, and wrong'd my coursers, throwing thine,
  Although inferior far, by fraud before them.
  Ye Chiefs and Senators of Argos' host!                         710
  Impartial judge between us, lest, of these,
  Some say hereafter, Menelaus bore
  Antilochus by falsehood down, and led
  The mare away, because, although his steeds
  Were worse, his arm was mightier, and prevail'd.               715
  Yet hold--myself will judge, and will to all
  Contentment give, for I will judge aright.
  Hither, Antilochus, illustrious youth!
  And, as the law prescribes, standing before
  Thy steeds and chariot, holding too the scourge                720
  With which thou drovest, lay hand on both thy steeds,
  And swear by Neptune, circler of the earth,
  That neither wilfully, nor yet by fraud
  Thou didst impede my chariot in its course.
    Then prudent, thus Antilochus replied.                       725
  Oh royal Menelaus! patient bear
  The fault of one thy junior far, in years
  Alike unequal and in worth to thee.
  Thou know'st how rash is youth, and how propense
  To pass the bounds by decency prescribed,                      730
  Quick, but not wise. Lay, then, thy wrath aside;
  The mare now given me I will myself
  Deliver to thee, and if thou require
  A larger recompense, will rather yield
  A larger much than from thy favor fall                         735
  Deservedly for ever, mighty Prince!
  And sin so heinously against the Gods.
    So saying, the son of valiant Nestor led
  The mare, himself, to Menelaus' hand,
  Who with heart-freshening joy the prize received.              740
  As on the ears of growing corn the dews
  Fall grateful, while the spiry grain erect
  Bristles the fields, so, Menelaus, felt
  Thy inmost soul a soothing pleasure sweet!
  Then answer thus the hero quick return'd.                      745
    Antilochus! exasperate though I were,
  Now, such no longer, I relinquish glad
  All strife with thee, for that at other times
  Thou never inconsiderate wast or light,
  Although by youthful heat misled to-day.                       750
  Yet safer is it not to over-reach
  Superiors, for no other Grecian here
  Had my extreme displeasure calm'd so soon;
  But thou hast suffer'd much, and much hast toil'd,
  As thy good father and thy brother have,                       755
  On my behalf; I, therefore, yield, subdued
  By thy entreaties, and the mare, though mine,
  Will also give thee, that these Grecians all
  May know me neither proud nor hard to appease.
    So saying, the mare he to Noemon gave,                       760
  Friend of Antilochus, and, well-content,
  The polish'd caldron for _his_ prize received.
  The fourth awarded lot (for he had fourth
  Arrived) Meriones asserted next,
  The golden talents; but the phial still                        765
  Left unappropriated Achilles bore
  Across the circus in his hand, a gift
  To ancient Nestor, whom he thus bespake.
    Thou also, oh my father! this accept,
  Which in remembrance of the funeral rites                      770
  Of my Patroclus, keep, for him thou seest
  Among the Greeks no more. Receive a prize,
  Thine by gratuity; for thou shalt wield
  The cestus, wrestle, at the spear contend,
  Or in the foot-race (fallen as thou art                        775
  Into the wane of life) never again.
    He said, and placed it in his hands. He, glad,
  Receiving it, in accents wing'd replied.
    True, oh my son! is all which thou hast spoken.
  These limbs, these hands, young friend! (their vigor lost)     780
  No longer, darted from the shoulder, spring
  At once to battle. Ah that I could grow
  Young yet again, could feel again such force
  Athletic, as when in Buprasium erst
  The Epeans with sepulchral pomp entomb'd                       785
  King Amarynceus, where his sons ordain'd
  Funereal games in honor of their sire!
  Epean none or even Pylian there
  Could cope with me, or yet AEtolian bold.
  Boxing, I vanquish'd Clytomedes, son                           790
  Of Enops; wrestling, the Pleuronian Chief
  Ancaeus; in the foot-race Iphiclus,
  Though a fleet runner; and I over-pitch'd
  Phyleus and Polydorus at the spear.
  The sons of Actor[16] in the chariot-race                      795
  Alone surpass'd me, being two for one,
  And jealous both lest I should also win
  That prize, for to the victor charioteer
  They had assign'd the noblest prize of all.
  They were twin-brothers, and one ruled the steeds,             800
  The steeds one ruled,[17] the other lash'd them on.
  Such once was I; but now, these sports I leave
  To younger; me submission most befits
  To withering age, who then outshone the best.
  But go. The funeral of thy friend with games                   805
  Proceed to celebrate; I accept thy gift
  With pleasure; and my heart is also glad
  That thou art mindful evermore of one
  Who loves thee, and such honor in the sight
  Yield'st me of all the Greeks, as is my due.                   810
  May the Gods bless thee for it more and more!
    He spake, and Peleus' son, when he had heard
  At large his commendation from the lips
  Of Nestor, through the assembled Greeks return'd.
  He next proposed, not lightly to be won,                       815
  The boxer's prize. He tether'd down a mule,
  Untamed and hard to tame, but strong to toil,
  And in her prime of vigor, in the midst;
  A goblet to the vanquish'd he assign'd,
  Then stood erect and to the Greeks exclaim'd.                  820
    Atridae! and ye Argives brazen-greaved!
  I call for two bold combatants expert
  To wage fierce strife for these, with lifted fists
  Smiting each other. He, who by the aid
  Of Phoebus shall o'ertome, and whom the Greeks                 825
  Shall all pronounce victorious, leads the mule
  Hence to his tent; the vanquish'd takes the cup.
    He spake, and at his word a Greek arose
  Big, bold, and skillful in the boxer's art,
  Epeues, son of Panopeus; his hand                               830
  He on the mule imposed, and thus he said.
    Approach the man ambitious of the cup!
  For no Achaian here shall with his fist
  Me foiling, win the mule. I boast myself
  To all superior. May it not suffice                            835
  That I to no pre-eminence pretend
  In battle? To attain to foremost praise
  Alike in every art is not for one.
  But this I promise, and will well perform--
  My blows shall lay him open, split him, crush                  840
  His bones to splinters, and let all his friends,
  Attendant on him, wait to bear him hence,
  Vanquish'd by my superior force in fight.
    He ended, and his speech found no reply.
  One godlike Chief alone, Euryalus,                             845
  Son of the King Mecisteus, who, himself,
  Sprang from Talaion, opposite arose.
  He, on the death of Oedipus, at Thebes
  Contending in the games held at his tomb,
  Had overcome the whole Cadmean race.                           850
  Him Diomede spear-famed for fight prepared,
  Giving him all encouragement, for much
  He wish'd him victory. First then he threw[18]
  His cincture to him; next, he gave him thongs[19]
  Cut from the hide of a wild buffalo.                           855
  Both girt around, into the midst they moved.
  Then, lifting high their brawny arms, and fists
  Mingling with fists, to furious fight they fell;
  Dire was the crash of jaws, and the sweat stream'd
  From every limb. Epeues fierce advanced,                        860
  And while Euryalus with cautious eye
  Watch'd his advantage, pash'd him on the cheek
  He stood no longer, but, his shapely limbs,
  Unequal to his weight, sinking, he fell.
  As by the rising north-wind driven ashore                      865
  A huge fish flounces on the weedy beach,
  Which soon the sable flood covers again,
  So, beaten down, he bounded. But Epeues,
  Heroic chief, upraised him by his hand,
  And his own comrades from the circus forth                     870
  Led him, step dragging after step, the blood
  Ejecting grumous, and at every pace
  Rolling his head languid from side to side.
  They placed him all unconscious on his seat
  In his own band, then fetch'd his prize, the cup.              875
    Still other prizes, then, Achilles placed
  In view of all, the sturdy wrestler's meed.
  A large hearth-tripod, valued by the Greeks
  At twice six beeves, should pay the victor's toil;
  But for the vanquish'd, in the midst he set                    880
  A damsel in variety expert
  Of arts domestic, valued at four beeves.
  He rose erect, and to the Greeks he cried.
    Arise ye, now, who shall this prize dispute.
  So spake the son of Peleus; then arose                         885
  Huge Telamonian Ajax, and upstood
  Ulysses also, in all wiles adept.
  Both girt around, into the midst they moved.
  With vigorous gripe each lock'd the other fast,
  Like rafters, standing, of some mansion built                  890
  By a prime artist proof against all winds.
  Their backs, tugg'd vehemently, creak'd,[20] the sweat
  Trickled, and on their flanks and shoulders, red
  The whelks arose; they bearing still in mind
  The tripod, ceased not struggling for the prize.               895
  Nor could Ulysses from his station move
  And cast down Ajax, nor could Ajax him
  Unsettle, fixt so firm Ulysses stood.
  But when, long time expectant, all the Greeks
  Grew weary, then, huge Ajax him bespake.                       900
    Laertes' noble son, for wiles renown'd!
  Lift, or be lifted, and let Jove decide.
    He said, and heaved Ulysses. Then, his wiles
  Forgat not he, but on the ham behind
  Chopp'd him; the limbs of Ajax at the stroke                   905
  Disabled sank; he fell supine, and bore
  Ulysses close adhering to his chest
  Down with him. Wonder riveted all eyes.
  Then brave Ulysses from the ground awhile
  Him lifted in his turn, but ere he stood,                      910
  Inserting his own knee the knees between[21]
  Of Ajax, threw him. To the earth they fell
  Both, and with dust defiled lay side by side.
  And now, arising to a third essay,
  They should have wrestled yet again, had not                   915
  Achilles, interfering, them restrain'd.
    Strive not together more; cease to exhaust
  Each other's force; ye both have earn'd the prize
  Depart alike requited, and give place
  To other Grecians who shall next contend.                      920
    He spake; they glad complied, and wiping off
  The dust, put on their tunics. Then again
  Achilles other prizes yet proposed,
  The rapid runner's meed. First, he produced
  A silver goblet of six measures; earth                         925
  Own'd not its like for elegance of form.
  Skilful Sidonian artists had around
  Embellish'd it,[22] and o'er the sable deep
  Phoenician merchants into Lemnos' port
  Had borne it, and the boon to Thoas[23] given;                 930
  But Jason's son, Euneues, in exchange
  For Priam's son Lycaon, to the hand
  Had pass'd it of Patroclus famed in arms.
  Achilles this, in honor of his friend,
  Set forth, the swiftest runner's recompense.                   935
  The second should a fatted ox receive
  Of largest size, and he assign'd of gold
  A just half-talent to the worst and last.
  He stood erect, and to the Greeks he cried.
    Now stand ye forth who shall this prize dispute.             940
  He said, and at his word instant arose
  Swift Ajax Oiliades; upsprang
  The shrewd Ulysses next, and after him
  Brave Nestor's son Antilochus, with whom
  None vied in speed of all the youths of Greece.                945
  They stood prepared. Achilles show'd the goal.
  At once all started. Oiliades
  Led swift the course, and closely at his heels
  Ulysses ran. Near as some cinctured maid
  Industrious holds the distaff to her breast,                   950
  While to and fro with practised finger neat
  She tends the flax drawing it to a thread,
  So near Ulysses follow'd him, and press'd
  His footsteps, ere the dust fill'd them again,
  Pouring his breath into his neck behind,                       955
  And never slackening pace. His ardent thirst
  Of victory with universal shouts
  All seconded, and, eager, bade him on.
  And now the contest shortening to a close,
  Ulysses his request silent and brief                           960
  To azure-eyed Minerva thus preferr'd.
    Oh Goddess hear, prosper me in the race!
  Such was his prayer, with which Minerva pleased,
  Freshen'd his limbs, and made him light to run.
  And now, when in one moment they should both                   965
  Have darted on the prize, then Ajax' foot
  Sliding, he fell; for where the dung of beeves
  Slain by Achilles for his friend, had spread
  The soil, there[24] Pallas tripp'd him. Ordure foul
  His mouth, and ordure foul his nostrils fill'd.                970
  Then brave Ulysses, first arriving, seized
  The cup, and Ajax took his prize, the ox.
  He grasp'd his horn, and sputtering as he stood
  The ordure forth, the Argives thus bespake.
    Ah--Pallas tripp'd my footsteps; she attends                 975
  Ulysses ever with a mother's care.
    Loud laugh'd the Grecians. Then, the remnant prize
  Antilochus receiving, smiled and said.
    Ye need not, fellow-warriors, to be taught
  That now, as ever, the immortal Gods                           980
  Honor on seniority bestow.
  Ajax is elder, yet not much, than I.
  But Laertiades was born in times
  Long past, a chief coeval with our sires,
  Not young, but vigorous; and of the Greeks,                    985
  Achilles may alone with him contend.
    So saying, the merit of superior speed
  To Peleus' son he gave, who thus replied.
    Antilochus! thy praise of me shall prove
  Nor vain nor unproductive to thyself,                          990
  For the half-talent doubled shall be thine.
    He spake, and, doubling it, the talent placed
  Whole in his hand. He glad the gift received.
  Achilles, then Sarpedon's arms produced,
  Stripp'd from him by Patroclus, his long spear,                995
  Helmet and shield, which in the midst he placed.
  He stood erect, and to the Greeks he cried.
    I call for two brave warriors arm'd to prove
  Each other's skill with weapons keen, this prize
  Disputing, next, in presence of us all.                       1000
  Who first shall through his armor reach the skin
  Of his antagonist, and shall draw his blood,
  To him this silver-studded falchion bright
  I give; the blade is Thracian, and of late
  Asteropaeus wore it, whom I slew.                              1005
  These other arms shall be their common meed,
  And I will banquet both within my tent.
    He said, then Telamonian Ajax huge
  Arose, and opposite the son arose
  Of warlike Tydeus, Diomede the brave.                         1010
  Apart from all the people each put on
  His arms, then moved into the middle space,
  Lowering terrific, and on fire to fight.
  The host look'd on amazed. Approaching each
  The other, thrice they sprang to the assault,                 1015
  And thrice struck hand to hand. Ajax the shield
  Pierced of his adversary, but the flesh
  Attain'd not, baffled by his mail within.
  Then Tydeus' son, sheer o'er the ample disk
  Of Ajax, thrust a lance home to his neck,                     1020
  And the Achaians for the life appall'd
  Of Ajax, bade them, ceasing, share the prize.
  But the huge falchion with its sheath and belt--
  Achilles them on Diomede bestow'd.
    The hero, next, an iron clod produced                       1025
  Rough from the forge, and wont to task the might
  Of King Eetion; but, when him he slew,
  Pelides, glorious chief, with other spoils
  From Thebes convey'd it in his fleet to Troy.
  He stood erect, and to the Greeks he cried.                   1030
    Come forth who also shall this prize dispute!
  How far soe'er remote the winner's fields,
  This lump shall serve his wants five circling years;
  His shepherd shall not, or his plower, need
  In quest of iron seek the distant town,                       1035
  But hence he shall himself their wants supply.[25]
  Then Polypoetes brave in fight arose,
  Arose Leonteus also, godlike chief,
  With Ajax son of Telamon. Each took
  His station, and Epeues seized the clod.                       1040
  He swung, he cast it, and the Grecians laugh'd.
  Leonteus, branch of Mars, quoited it next.
  Huge Telamonian Ajax with strong arm
  Dismiss'd it third, and overpitch'd them both.
  But when brave Polypoetes seized the mass                     1045
  Far as the vigorous herdsman flings his staff
  That twirling flies his numerous beeves between,[26]
  So far his cast outmeasured all beside,
  And the host shouted. Then the friends arose
  Of Polypoetes valiant chief, and bore                         1050
  His ponderous acquisition to the ships.
    The archers' prize Achilles next proposed,
  Ten double and ten single axes, form'd
  Of steel convertible to arrow-points.
  He fix'd, far distant on the sands, the mast                  1055
  Of a brave bark cerulean-prow'd, to which
  With small cord fasten'd by the foot he tied
  A timorous dove, their mark at which to aim.
  [27]Who strikes the dove, he conquers, and shall bear
  These double axes all into his tent.                          1060
  But who the cord alone, missing the bird,
  Successful less, he wins the single blades.
    The might of royal Teucer then arose,
  And, fellow-warrior of the King of Crete,
  Valiant Meriones. A brazen casque                             1065
  Received the lots; they shook them, and the lot
  Fell first to Teucer. He, at once, a shaft
  Sent smartly forth, but vow'd not to the King[28]
  A hecatomb, all firstlings of the flock.
  He therefore (for Apollo greater praise                       1070
  Denied him) miss'd the dove, but struck the cord
  That tied her, at small distance from the knot,
  And with his arrow sever'd it. Upsprang
  The bird into the air, and to the ground
  Depending fell the cord. Shouts rent the skies.               1075
  Then, all in haste, Meriones the bow
  Caught from his hand holding a shaft the while
  Already aim'd, and to Apollo vow'd
  A hecatomb, all firstlings of the flock.
  He eyed the dove aloft, under a cloud,                        1080
  And, while she wheel'd around, struck her beneath
  The pinion; through her and beyond her pass'd
  The arrow, and, returning, pierced the soil
  Fast by the foot of brave Meriones.
  She, perching on the mast again, her head                     1085
  Reclined, and hung her wide-unfolded wing,
  But, soon expiring, dropp'd and fell remote.
  Amazement seized the people. To his tent
  Meriones the ten best axes bore,
  And Teucer the inferior ten to his.[29]                       1090
    Then, last, Achilles in the circus placed
  A ponderous spear and caldron yet unfired,
  Emboss'd with flowers around, its worth an ox.
  Upstood the spear-expert; Atrides first,
  Wide-ruling Agamemnon, King of men,                           1095
  And next, brave fellow-warrior of the King
  Of Crete, Meriones; when thus his speech
  Achilles to the royal chief address'd.
    Atrides! (for we know thy skill and force
  Matchless! that none can hurl the spear as thou)              1100
  This prize is thine, order it to thy ship;
  And if it please thee, as I would it might,
  Let brave Meriones the spear receive.
    He said; nor Agamemnon not complied,
  But to Meriones the brazen spear                              1105
  Presenting, to Talthybius gave in charge
  The caldron, next, his own illustrious prize.




                              THE ILIAD.

                              BOOK XIV.




                 ARGUMENT OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH BOOK.


Priam, by command of Jupiter, and under conduct of Mercury, seeks
Achilles in his tent, who admonished previously by Thetis, consents to
accept ransom for the body of Hector. Hector is mourned, and the
manner of his funeral, circumstantially described, concludes the poem.




                              BOOK XXIV.


  The games all closed, the people went dispersed
  Each to his ship; they, mindful of repast,
  And to enjoy repose; but other thoughts
  Achilles' mind employ'd: he still deplored
  With tears his loved Patroclus, nor the force                    5
  Felt of all-conquering sleep, but turn'd and turn'd
  Restless from side to side, mourning the loss
  Of such a friend, so manly, and so brave.
  Their fellowship in toil; their hardships oft
  Sustain'd in fight laborious, or o'ercome                       10
  With difficulty on the perilous deep--
  Remembrance busily retracing themes
  Like these, drew down his cheeks continual tears.
  Now on his side he lay, now lay supine,
  Now prone, then starting from his couch he roam'd               15
  Forlorn the beach, nor did the rising morn
  On seas and shores escape his watchful eye,
  But joining to his chariot his swift steeds,
  He fasten'd Hector to be dragg'd behind.
  Around the tomb of Menoetiades                                  20
  Him thrice he dragg'd; then rested in his tent,
  Leaving him at his length stretch'd in the dust.
  Meantime Apollo with compassion touch'd
  Even of the lifeless Hector, from all taint
  Saved him, and with the golden aegis broad                       25
  Covering, preserved him, although dragg'd, untorn.
    While he, indulging thus his wrath, disgraced
  Brave Hector, the immortals at that sight
  With pity moved, exhorted Mercury
  The watchful Argicide, to steal him thence.                     30
  That counsel pleased the rest, but neither pleased
  Juno, nor Neptune, nor the blue-eyed maid.
  They still, as at the first, held fast their hate
