looking out, beheld the Philadelphia in flames, and the little ketch
bearing Decatur and his men fading rapidly away through the darkness
toward the harbor mouth. Six months later, they watched the American
assault upon the harbor, but their hearts fell when the American
squadron finally gave up the attempt and withdrew. It was not until the
following year that peace was made, and Bainbridge and his men released,
after a captivity of nineteen months. Never since that time has the
United States paid tribute to any nation.

When the second war with England began, President Madison and his
advisers thought it foolhardy to attempt to oppose Great Britain on the
ocean, for she had the strongest fleet of any nation in the world, and
so decided to confine the war entirely to land. It was Bainbridge who
brought about a change of this unwise policy by impassioned pleading, to
the everlasting glory of the American navy. Hull resigned the
Constitution to him, after his victory over the Guerriere--it was really
for fear that Bainbridge would get command of the ship that Hull had
sailed from Boston without orders--and Bainbridge sailed for the South
Atlantic, and captured the British frigate Java, after a terrific fight,
in which he was himself seriously wounded. This was his last fight,
though the years which followed saw him in many important commands. For
sheer romance and adventure, his career has seldom been excelled.

Another hero of the war of 1812, whose name is associated with a deed of
imperishable gallantry, was James Lawrence. He had entered the navy as
midshipman in 1798, at the age of eighteen, and served in the war
against Tripoli, first under Hull and then under Decatur, and
accompanied the latter on the expedition which destroyed the
Philadelphia. But the deed by which he is best remembered is his fight
with the British frigate Shannon. In the spring of 1813, he was assigned
to the command of the frigate Chesapeake, a vessel hated by the whole
navy because of the bad luck which seemed to pursue her. Lawrence
accepted the command reluctantly, and proceeded to Boston, where she was
lying, to prepare her for a voyage.

A crew was secured with great difficulty, most of them being foreigners,
and his officers were all young and inexperienced. What the crew and
officers alike needed was a practice cruise to put them in shape to meet
the enemy, and Lawrence knew this better than anybody, but when the
British frigate Shannon appeared outside the harbor with a challenge for
a battle, Lawrence, feeling that to refuse would be dishonorable,
hoisted anchor and sailed out to meet her.

The Shannon was one of the finest frigates in the English navy, manned
by an experienced crew, and commanded by Philip Broke, one of the best
officers serving under the Union Jack. The ships ranged up together and
broadsides were delivered with terrible effect. Lawrence was wounded in
the leg, but kept the deck. Then the ships fouled, and Lawrence called
for boarders, but his crew, frightened at the desperate nature of the
conflict, did not respond, and a moment later he fell, shot through the
body. As he was borne below, he kept shouting, "Don't give up the ship!
Fight her till she strikes or sinks! Don't give up the ship!" his voice
growing weaker and weaker as his life ebbed away.

The battle was soon over, after that, for the British boarded, the
Chesapeake's foreign crew threw down their arms, and the triumphant
enemy hauled down the Chesapeake's flag. A few days later, the two ships
sailed into the harbor of Halifax, Lawrence's body, wrapped in his
ship's flag, lying in state on the quarter-deck. He was buried with
military honors, first at Halifax, and then at New York, where Hull,
Stewart and Bainbridge were among those who carried the pall. His cry,
"Don't give up the ship!" was to be the motto of another battle, far to
the west, where Great Britain experienced the greatest defeat of the
war.

Before describing it, however, let us speak briefly of four other
valiant men, whose deeds redounded to the honor of their country--Edward
Preble, Charles Stewart, Johnston Blakeley, and Thomas Macdonough. It
was said of Preble that he had the worst temper and the best heart in
the world. At sixteen years of age he ran away to sea, and two years
later, he actually saw a sea-serpent, a hundred and fifty feet in length
and as big around as a barrel, and got close enough to fire at it. He
saw service in the Revolution, and in 1803, was appointed to command the
expedition against the Barbary corsairs, of which we have already
spoken, and which resulted in bringing those pirates to their knees.
The trials of that expedition ruined his health, and he survived it but
a few years.

To Charles Stewart belongs the remarkable exploit of engaging and
capturing two British ships at the same time. Enlisting in 1798, he was
with Preble at Tripoli, and was given command of the Constitution, after
Bainbridge's successful cruise in her, and started out in search of
adventure on December 17, 1814. Two months later, off the Madeira
Islands he sighted two British ships-of-war and at once gave chase. He
overhauled them at nightfall, and, running between them, gave them
broadside after broadside, until both struck their colors. They were the
Cyane and the Levant. Stewart got back to New York the middle of May to
find out that peace had been declared over a month before his encounter
with the British ships.

He was received with enthusiasm, and "Old Ironsides" got the reputation
of being invincible. Her career had, indeed, been remarkable. She had
done splendid work before Tripoli, escaped twice from British squadrons
and seven times run the blockade through strong British fleets; she had
captured three frigates and a sloop-of-war, besides many merchantmen,
and had taken more than eleven hundred prisoners. From all of these
engagements she had emerged practically unscathed, and in none of them
had she lost more than nine men. Stewart was the last survivor of the
great captains of 1812, living until 1869, having been carried on the
navy list for seventy-one years.

Johnston Blakeley was a South Carolinian, and won renown by a remarkable
cruise in the Wasp. The Wasp was a stout and speedy sloop, carrying
twenty-two guns and a crew of one hundred and seventy men, and in 1814
she sailed from the United States, and headed for the English Channel,
to carry the war into the enemy's country, after the fashion of Paul
Jones. The Channel, of course, was traversed constantly by English
fleets and squadrons and single ships-of-war, and here the Wasp sailed
up and down, capturing and destroying merchantmen, and, by the skill and
vigilance of her crew and commander, escaping an encounter with any
frigate or ship-of-the-line.

But one June morning, while chasing two merchantmen, she sighted the
British brig Reindeer, and at once prepared for action. The Reindeer
accepted the challenge, and after some broadsides had been exchanged,
the ships fouled and the British boarded. A desperate struggle followed,
in which the English commander was killed. Then the boarders were driven
back, and the Americans boarded in their turn, and in a minute had the
Reindeer in their possession. Her colors were hauled down, she was set
afire, and the Wasp continued her cruise.

Late one September afternoon, British ships of war appeared all around
her, and selecting one which seemed isolated from the others, Captain
Blakeley decided to try to run alongside and sink her after nightfall.
She was the eighteen-gun brig Avon, a bigger ship than the Wasp, but
Blakeley ran alongside, discharged his broadsides, and soon had the
Avon in a sinking condition. She struck her flag, but before Blakeley
could secure his prize, two other British ships came up and he was
forced to flee.

Soon afterwards, he encountered a convoy of ships bearing arms and
munitions to Wellington's army, under the care of a great three-decker.
Blakeley sailed boldly in, and, evading the three-decker's movements,
actually cut out and captured one of the transports and made his escape.
Then she sailed for home, and that was the last ever heard of the Wasp.
She never again appeared, and her fate has never been determined. But
when she sank, if sink she did, there went to the bottom one of the
gallantest ships and bravest captains in the American navy.

All of the battles which we have thus far described were fought on salt
water, but two great victories were won on inland waters, and of one of
these Thomas Macdonough was the hero. He had entered the navy in 1800,
at the age of seventeen, served before Tripoli, and accompanied Decatur
on the expedition which burned the Philadelphia. At the outbreak of the
second war with England, he was sent to Lake Champlain, and set about
the building of a fleet to repel the expected British invasion from
Canada. The British were also busy at the other end of the lake, and on
September 9, 1814, Macdonough sailed his fleet of fourteen boats, ten of
which were small gunboats, and the largest of which, the Saratoga, was
merely a corvette, into Plattsburg Bay, and anchored there.

The abdication of Napoleon had enabled England to turn her undivided
attention to America, and one great force was sent against New Orleans,
while another was concentrated in Canada, for the purpose of invading
New York by way of Lake Champlain. On this latter enterprise, a force of
twelve thousand regulars started from Montreal early in August, while
the British naval force on the lake was augmented to nineteen vessels.
On September 11, this fleet got under way, and, certain of victory,
sailed into Plattsburg Bay and attacked Macdonough. A terrific battle
followed, in which the Saratoga had every gun on one side disabled and
had to wear around under fire in order to use those on the other side.
But three hours later, every British flag had been struck, and the land
force, seeing their navy defeated, retreated hastily to Canada. So
riddled were both squadrons that in neither of them did a mast remain
upon which sail could be made.

But the greatest victory of the war, the one which had the most
important and far-reaching consequences, had been won a year before, far
to the west, on the blue waters of Lake Erie, by Oliver Hazard Perry, at
that time only twenty-eight years of age. Perry came of a seafaring
stock, for his father was a captain in the navy, and the boy's first
voyage was made with him in 1799. At the outbreak of the war of 1812, he
was in command of a division of gunboats at Newport, but finding that,
owing to the British blockade, there was little chance of his seeing
active service in that position, he asked to be sent to the Great
Lakes, whose possession we were preparing to dispute with England.

The importance of this mission can hardly be overestimated. By the
capture of Detroit, earlier in the war, the English had obtained
undisputed control of Lake Erie, and were in position to carry out their
plan of extending the Dominion of Canada along the Ohio and Mississippi
rivers down to the Gulf, and so shutting in the United States upon the
West. To Perry was assigned the task of stopping this project, and of
regaining control of the lake.

He arrived at Lake Erie in the spring of 1813, and proceeded at once to
build the fleet which was to sail under the Stars and Stripes. He showed
the utmost skill and energy in doing this, and by the middle of July, in
spite of many difficulties, had nine vessels ready to meet the
enemy--two brigs and two gunboats which he had built, and five small
boats which were brought up from the Niagara river. On the third of
August, he sailed out to meet the British, his ships being manned by a
motley crew of "blacks, soldiers, and boys."

The flagship had been named the Lawrence, after the heroic commander of
the Chesapeake. Luckily the English were not ready for battle, and Perry
had a month in which to drill his men before the enemy sailed out to
meet him. At last, on the morning of Saturday, September 10, 1813, the
British fleet was seen approaching, and Perry formed his ships in line
of battle.

The British squadron consisted of six vessels, mounting 63 guns, and
manned by 502 men. The American ships mounted 54 guns, with 490 men.
Although of smaller total weight than the American guns, the British
guns were longer and would carry farther, and so were much more
effective. The British crews, too, were better disciplined, a large
number of the men being from the royal navy, and the squadron was
commanded by Robert Heriot, a man of much experience, who had fought
under Nelson at Trafalgar.

The American shore was lined with an anxious crowd, who appreciated the
great issues which hung upon the battle. Perry, calling his men aft,
produced a blue banner bearing in white letters the last words of the
man after whom the Lawrence was named: "Don't give up the ship!"

"Shall I hoist it, boys?" he asked.

"Aye, aye, sir!" they shouted, and the bunting was run up to the
main-royal masthead. Then a hush fell upon the water as the two fleets
drew together. A few minutes before noon the engagement began, Perry
heading straight for the flagship of the enemy, and drawing the fire of
practically the whole British squadron by running ahead of the other
ships, which, owing to the light breeze, could not get within range. For
two hours, he fought against these hopeless odds, and almost without
support, until his ship was reduced to a wreck and only one of her guns
could be worked, while of her crew of 103, only twenty were left on
their feet. Every nook and corner of the brig was occupied by some
wounded and dying wretch seeking vainly to find shelter from the British
fire. Even the cockpit, where the wounded were carried for treatment,
was not safe, for some of the men were killed while under the surgeon's
hands. No fewer than six cannon balls passed through the cockpit, while
two went through the magazine, which, by some miracle, did not explode.
The ship was so disabled, at last, that it drifted out of action, and
Perry, taking his pennant and the blue flag bearing the words "Don't
give up the ship!" under his arm, got into a boat with four seamen, and
started for the Niagara, his other brig.

The British saw the little boat dancing over the waves, and after a
moment of dazed astonishment at a manoeuvre unheard of in naval warfare
and daring almost to madness, concentrated their fire on it. One cannon
ball penetrated the boat, but Perry, stripping off his coat, stuffed it
into the hole and so kept the boat afloat until the Niagara was reached.
Clambering on board, Perry ran up his flags, reformed his line, closed
with the enemy, raked them, engaged them at close quarters, where their
long guns gave them no advantage, and conducted an onslaught so terrific
that, twenty minutes later, the entire British squadron had hauled down
their flags.

Perry at once rowed back to the Lawrence, and upon her splintered and
bloodstained deck, received the surrender of the British officers. Then,
using his cap for a desk, he wrote with a pencil on the back of an old
letter the famous message announcing the victory: "We have met the enemy
and they are ours--two ships, two brigs, two schooners and one sloop."
More than that was ours, for the victory, and the prompt advance of
General Harrison which followed it, compelled the British to evacuate
Detroit and Michigan, and to abandon forever the attempt to annex the
West to Canada. Half a century later, when the great Erie canal was
opened, the guns of Perry's fleet, placed at ten-mile intervals along
its banks, announced the departure of the first fleet of boats from
Buffalo, carrying the news to New York City, a distance of 360 miles, in
an hour and twenty minutes.

Perry lived only six years longer, dying while still a young man, in the
saddest possible manner. In June, 1819, he was given command of a
squadron designed to protect American trade in South American waters,
and while ascending the Orinoco, contracted the yellow fever, and died a
few days later. He was buried at Trinidad, but some years afterwards, a
ship-of-war brought him home, and he sleeps at Newport, Rhode Island,
near the spot where he was born.

So ends the story of that group of naval commanders, who dealt so
surprising and terrific a blow at the tradition of English supremacy on
the ocean.

       *       *       *       *       *

The brother of the victor of Lake Erie, Matthew Calbraith Perry, must
also be mentioned here, for his was a unique achievement--the peaceful
conquest of a great Eastern empire. Born in 1794, and educated in the
best traditions of the navy, he was selected to command the expedition
which, in 1853, was ordered to visit Japan, that strange nation of the
Orient which, up to that time, had kept her ports closed to foreign
commerce. Perry's conduct of this delicate mission was notable in the
extreme, and its result was the signing of a treaty between Japan and
the United States which has long been regarded as one of the greatest
diplomatic triumphs of the age.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the spring of 1861, a captain of the United States navy was living at
Norfolk, Va., his home, the home of his wife's family, and the home of
his closest friends. Excitement ran high, for it was as yet an open
question whether or not the great state of Virginia would join her
sisters farther south and renounce her allegiance to the Union. It was a
time of searching of hearts, and this man of sixty years was brought
face to face with the bitterest moment of his life. He must choose
between his country and his state; between his flag and the love and
respect of his relatives and friends.

In the end, the flag won. It was the flag he had taken his boyish oath
to honor; on more than one occasion, he had seen the haughtiest colors
on the ocean bow with respect before it; he had seen men, writhing in
the agony of death, expend their last breath to defend it. It had
wrapped itself about his heart, and meant more to him than home or
friends or kindred. So the flag won.

On the seventeenth day of April, 1861, Virginia seceded from the Union.
The day following, our gray-haired captain, expressing the opinion that
secession was not the will of the majority of the people, but that the
state had been dragooned out of the Union by a coterie of politicians,
was told that he could no longer live in Norfolk.

"Very well," he answered, "I can live somewhere else."

He went home and told his wife that the time had come when she must
choose whether she would remain with her own kinsfolk or follow him. Her
choice was made on the instant, and within two hours, David Glasgow
Farragut, his wife and their only son, were on a steamer headed for the
North. A few days later, he offered his services to the Union.

Before going forward with him upon his great career, let us cast a
glance over his boyhood--such a boyhood as falls to the lot of not one
in a million. Born in 1801, of a father who had served in the Revolution
and who was afterwards to become a friend and companion of Andrew
Jackson, his childhood was passed amid the dangers and alarms of the
Tennessee frontier. In 1808 occurred the incident which paved the way
for his entrance into the navy. While fishing on Lake Pontchartrain, his
father fell in with a boat in which was lying an old man prostrated by
the heat of the sun. Farragut took him at once to his own home, where he
was tenderly cared for, but he died a few days later. The sufferer was
David Porter, father of Captain Porter of the Essex, at that time in
charge of the naval station at New Orleans.

Captain Porter was informed of the accident to his father, and hastened
to the home of the Farraguts. He felt deeply their kindness, and as some
slight return, offered to adopt one of the Farragut children, take him
North with him, and do what he could for his advancement. Young David
promptly said that he would go, the arrangements were concluded, and the
boy of seven accompanied his new protector to Washington. He spent two
years at school there, and then, on December 17, 1810, at the age of
nine, received an appointment as midshipman in the United States navy.
Two years later, he accompanied Porter in the Essex on that memorable
trip around Cape Horn.

Porter took so many prizes in the South Pacific that his supply of older
officers ran out, and twelve-year old David Farragut was appointed
prize-master of one of them, with orders to take her to Valparaiso. When
Farragut gave his first order, her skipper, a hot-tempered old sea-dog,
flew into a rage, and declaring that he had "no idea of trusting himself
with a blamed nutshell," rushed below for his pistols. The
twelve-year-old commander shouted after him that, if he came on deck
