friendly to me. I owe much to the lessons Anthony Cole has taught
me. I have no knowledge of their secrets, but I cannot see why I
may not speak a friendly word with them; even my uncle does that."

"Ay, but he goes not to their house--and his name is not Trevlyn."

"But what of that? the Trevlyns are now a stanch family, in favour
with the King and his counsellors."

"Ay, but the name is not forgotten in many quarters as belonging to
a race of persecuting Papists. It takes long for old memories to
die out. Thou hadst better take heed, Cuthbert. A whisper against
thee would soon spread and take root. I prithee meddle not in such
matters, lest some ill befall thee!"

Cuthbert thanked honest Jacob for his goodwill and for his warning,
but he could not see that it was needed. He was but an obscure
youth, of no note in the world. He had no dealings with any of
those plots of which men were whispering, and he could not see how
any act of his could raise suspicion of any sort against him. He
was growing intensely curious about the seething fire beneath the
outer crust of quietness and security. If some great plot were
hatching, if some great upheaval were at hand, why might not he
scent out something beforehand? Why might not he discover what was
baffling the sagacity of others? He had no wish to be a spy or an
informer; he had too much generous sympathy with the oppressed for
that. But he was intensely curious about it all, and he felt as
though his youth and obscurity would be his best protection if he
chose to make some investigations on his own account.

The old eager thirst for knowledge was coming upon him. The old
love of adventure, which had run him into many perils already, had
not been quenched by his recent experiences. Success had crowned
his labours in the forest; why should that success desert him now?
And then the thought came to him that he might by chance discover
something which might be of use to his own kinsmen. He knew that
Sir Richard Trevlyn and his son Philip--Petronella's lover--were in
London. Might it not be possible that they had better be elsewhere
at such a time? Jacob's words about the Trevlyns might perchance be
true. He had heard his uncle say the same before. If any possible
peril should be menacing them, how gladly would he find it out and
warn them in time! It began to appear to the youth in the light of
a duty to pursue his investigation, and it was just such a task as
best appealed to his ardent and fiery temperament.

But he scarce knew what the first step had better be; so he gave up
the day following to seeking out Lord Culverhouse, and learning
from him what was the feeling in high quarters.

Culverhouse greeted him warmly, and at once begged him to ride out
with him into the pleasant regions where the parks now stand, which
were then much larger, and only just taking any semblance of park,
being more like fields with rides running across them. Each
succeeding king did something for the improvement of this region,
though the open ground became considerably diminished as stately
buildings grew up around it.

"Cuthbert," said the Viscount, when they had left the busy streets
and were practically alone and out of earshot of any chance passers
by, "dost thou know that the matter of our secret wedding is now
known?"

"I heard so from Mistress Kate, who has been sent away from home in
disgrace, but is bearing her captivity cheerfully, with my sister
for her companion."

Culverhouse was eager to hear everything Cuthbert could tell him,
and was delighted that his lady love was happy in her honourable
captivity. When he had asked every question he could think of, he
went on with his own side of the story.

"There was a fine coil when Sir Richard brought the news, and I was
rated more soundly than I have been since I was a little lad and
lost my father's best falcon through letting it loose when the
falconer was not by to whistle it back. There has been a mighty
talking and arguing as to whether such wedlock as ours be lawful,
and no man seems rightly to know. That we must be wed again in more
orderly fashion all agree, if we are to live together as man and
wife; but none will dare to say that we may break the pledge we
gave each to the other that day. My father talked at first of
moving some high court to set us free; but my mother shook her head
and said that vows so solemnly spoken before God and in His name
might never rightly be annulled by man. She was grieved and as
angered as she knows how to be at our hot-headed rashness, and
spoke to me words which hurt me more than my father's ratings. Yet
she holds steadfastly to this--that we are betrothed too firmly to
be parted; and what she holds she can generally make my father
hold, for he thinks much of her piety and true discernment."

"So that thou art out of thy trouble for the nonce?"

Culverhouse laughed and shrugged his shoulders.

"I say not that, for they tell us it will be many years ere we can
hope to be wed again in due form; and waiting is weary work."

"And why should you wait?"

Culverhouse laughed again.

"That is soon answered. My father has always told me that I must
wed a lady of wealth if I am to wed young. Our estates are
encumbered. We have more state to keep up than we well know how to
manage. We have had troubles and losses even as the Trevlyns have.
I have known this well. I cannot complain of my father.
Nevertheless I chose my Kate without any dowry before all the world
beside, and I am prepared to abide by my choice. But we shall have
to wait; we shall have to possess our souls in patience. They all
tell us that; and I gainsay them not. I am young. I have friends in
high places. I will win a name for myself, and a fortune too, ere
my head be gray. Alas for the old days of chivalry, when men might
ride forth to fame and glory, and win both that and wealth in a few
short years! Those bright days are gone for ever. Still methinks I
will conquer fate yet!"

Culverhouse looked as though fitted indeed for some career of
chivalrous daring. He and Cuthbert would gladly have ridden forth
together upon some knightly quest; but the days for such things had
gone by, as both recognized with a sigh. Still there was brightness
in Cuthbert's eyes as he said:

"Mistress Kate will spend her Christmas at the Cross Way House, and
I trow that others of the Trevlyns will do the like. If thou wilt
be one of the party there upon that day, I doubt not that there
will be a welcome for thee; and perchance thou wilt find then that
thy nuptials need not be so long postponed. A golden key may be
found which will unlock many doors."

Culverhouse looked quickly and eagerly at his companion, but could
ask no more even had he wished, as they were at that moment joined
by two friends of his, young men about the Court, who at once began
to talk of the approaching opening of Parliament and the grand show
that would accompany the act.

The King's love for fine dress, fine pageants, and fine shows, of
which he was the sun and centre (in his own opinion at least), was
well known by this time. These young sprigs of the nobility amused
themselves by making game freely of his Majesty behind his back,
ridiculing his vanity, mimicking his ungainly action, especially
upon horseback (though he considered himself a most finished and
accomplished rider), and describing to Culverhouse the fine new
robes he had ordered for the occasion, and which were to surpass in
grandeur anything he had ever worn before.

"Folks talked of the vanity of our good Queen Bess, and called her
mighty extravagant; but beshrew me if she were half as vain or
extravagant as our noble King Jamie! It is a marvel he cannot see
how ten-fold uglier he makes his ugly person by trapping himself
out in all such frippery and gorgeous apparel."

So the young men chatted on in lightsome fashion, and Cuthbert, who
listened to every word, could not gather that the smallest
uneasiness had penetrated the minds of those who moved in these
high places. Culverhouse talked with equal gaiety and security.
Certainly he had no suspicion of coming ill. The mutterings of
discontent the seething of the troubled waters, the undefined
apprehensions of many of the classes of the people, were apparently
unknown and unheeded here. All was sunshine and brightness in the
region of palaces. But if these youths had entertained any secret
misgivings, they would have discussed them freely together.

Culverhouse kept Cuthbert to dinner, and he was kindly received by
the Earl's family. Lady Andover even remembered to ask after
Cherry, and won Cuthbert's heart by so doing. She questioned him in
private about the marriage in the church porch, of which he had
been witness, and plainly all he told her only went to strengthen
her conviction that the matter had gone too far to admit of any
drawing back without some breach of faith that was akin to
sacrilege.

After the meal, which seemed stately and long to Cuthbert,
Culverhouse asked him would he like to see the Houses of
Parliament, where the King would shortly meet his Lords and
Commons. Cuthbert eagerly assented, and the two youths spent some
time in wandering about the stately buildings, to which Culverhouse
could obtain easy admittance; the Viscount explaining to his
companion where the King sat and where his immediate counsellors,
to all of which Cuthbert listened with marked attention.

There were several attendants and ushers within the building, and
Culverhouse told him that orders had been given to keep strict
watch over the building both by night and day.

"The King is not like our good Queen--Heaven rest her soul!" said
the Viscount, laughing. "He does not trust his people. He is always
in fear of some mischance either through accident or design. Well
may the great Shakespeare have said: 'Uneasy lies the head that
wears a crown!' Albeit the King would do better to have a little
more courage."

This was the first word Cuthbert had heard of any uneasiness in
high quarters, and he asked with some eagerness:

"Meanest thou that the King fears some evil to himself at this
time?"

"No; I have heard naught of that. The country seems unwontedly
quiet. It is the fear which never leaves him--the fear that makes
him wear a doublet so thickly quilted that it would suffice to turn
the sharpest blade, even as a suit of chain mail. He is always
dreading assassination. That is why he wills such close watch to be
kept, lest haply any evil-disposed person might find hiding within
the walls and spring upon him unawares. Methinks it is an unkingly
fear, but there it be, and he carries it ever with him. The Queen
had none such--nor had she need; and as thou knowest, when once an
assassin did approach her when she was alone in her garden, the
glance of her eye kept him cowed and at bay till her gentlemen
could hasten to her side. She was a Queen in very truth! I would we
had more of her like!"

Culverhouse spoke out aloud, careless of being overheard, for he
was but speaking the thoughts of the whole nation. Cuthbert echoed
his wish with all sincerity; and still looking round and about him
with keen interest, went through a certain mental calculation which
caused him at last to ask:

"And what buildings lie around or beneath this?"

"I know not exactly how that may be. There is a house close beside
this where methinks I have heard that Master Thomas Percy dwells,
the steward to my Lord of Northumberland. I know not what lies
beneath; it may be some sort of cellar.

"Dost thou know, fellow, whether there be cellars beneath this
place?"

Culverhouse spoke to a man-at-arms who appeared to be on duty
there, and who had for some moments been regarding Cuthbert with
close scrutiny, and had now drawn slowly near them. Cuthbert was
vaguely aware that the man's face was in some way familiar to him,
but he had no recollection where he had seen him before.

"Master Thomas Percy has rented the cellar beneath, where his coals
be stored," answered the man carelessly; and Cuthbert, who had
asked the question rather haphazard and without exactly knowing
why, moved away to examine a piece of fine carving close at hand.

Whilst he was doing this he knew that the man-at-arms asked
Culverhouse a question, to which the latter gave ready reply, and
he heard the name of Trevlyn pass his lips. At the moment he heeded
this little, but the remembrance came back to him later.

As he passed out he noted that the man still continued to gaze
after him, as though wishful to read his face by heart. He was
standing beside a companion warder then, pointing out, as it
seemed, the visitor to the other fellow. Was it only fancy, or did
Cuthbert really hear the name of Father Urban pass in a whisper
between them? Puzzled, and even a shade uneasy, he followed
Culverhouse to the outer door, A flash of memory seemed then to
recall to him the faces of these two men. Had he not seen them
keeping watch at the wharf for Father Urban that day so long ago?
He was almost certain it had been so. But what of that? How could
they possibly connect him with the fugitive priest?

It would soon be dusk now, so the comrades said adieu to each other
and went their several ways. Cuthbert had come as far as the Strand
by boat, and had only to drop down and find it there; but somehow
he felt more disposed to linger about these solemn old buildings,
and try to piece together the things he had seen and heard.

Hardly knowing what he was doing, he wandered round the great pile
till he came to the narrow entry he had once traversed, leading up
from the river to the door of the house where he had seen Catesby
and his companions at their mysterious toil. The house looked dark
as night now. Not a single gleam penetrated the gloom. Already the
last of the twilight had faded into night, but no ray of any kind
shone from any of the casements.

Cuthbert stood looking thoughtfully up at the house, hardly knowing
why he did so, his fancy running riot in his excited brain and
conjuring up all manner of fantastic visions, when suddenly and
silently the door opened. A gleam of light from behind showed in
relief the figure of a tall man muffled in a cloak, a soft felt hat
being drawn over the brow and effectually concealing the features;
but one glance sufficed to convince Cuthbert that this cloaked and
muffled individual was none other than the same tall dark man who
had produced the holy water blessed by the Pope and had had it
sprinkled around the spot where those mysterious men were at work
in Percy's house. Filled with a burning curiosity that rendered him
impervious to the thought of personal risk, Cuthbert first shrank
into a dark recess, and then with hushed and noiseless footfall
followed the tall figure in its walk.

The cloaked man walked quietly, but without any appearance of fear.
He skirted round the great block of buildings of which the Houses
of Parliament were composed, until he reached a door in the rear of
that building, within a deep arch sunk a little way below the level
of the ground, and this door he opened, but closed it after him,
and locked it on the inside.

Unable to follow further, Cuthbert put his ear to the keyhole, and
heard distinctly the sound of footsteps descending stone stairs
till the sound changed to the unbarring of a lower door, and then
all was silence.

Cuthbert looked keenly around him, and soon made out that these
steps must certainly lead down to the cellar beneath the Parliament
Houses of which he had recently heard. That other cellar he had
visited so many months before was close at hand--close to these
great buildings; and this tall dark man seemed to have some
mysterious connection with both.

What could it all mean? what did it mean? Cuthbert felt as though
he were on the eve of some strange discovery, but what that
discovery could be he could not guess.

He was aroused from his reverie by the sound of approaching
footfalls along the roadway, and he hastily stood upright and
walked onwards to meet the advancing pedestrian. The man carried a
light which he flashed in Cuthbert's face, and the youth saw that
it was one of the men-at-arms on guard over these buildings.

"What are you doing here?" asked the man civilly, though in
slightly peremptory fashion.

"I did not know that this road was anything but public," answered
Cuthbert, with careless boldness. "I have walked in London streets
before now, no man interfering with me."

"Have a care how and where you walk at night," returned the man,
passing by without further comment. "There be many perils abroad in
the streets--more than perchance you wot of."

Cuthbert thanked him for the hint, and went on his way. He would
have liked well enough to linger till the tall man emerged again,
but he saw that to do so would only excite suspicion.

Although it was quite dark by this time, it was not really late;
for it was the last day of October save one, and masses of heavy
cloud obscured the sky. Now and again a ray of moonlight glinted
through these ragged masses, but for the rest it was profoundly
dark in the narrow streets, and only a little lighter on the open
river.

The tide was running in fast, with a strong cold easterly wind.
Cuthbert saw that it would be hard work to row against it.

"Better wait for the ebb; it will not be long in coming now," he
said to himself as he noted the height of the tide; and stepping
into his boat, he pulled idly out into midstream, as being a safer
place of waiting than the dark wharf, to find himself drifting up
with the strong current, which he did not care to try to stem.

"Beware of the dark-flowing river!" spoke a voice within him;
"beware of the black cellar!"

He started, for it almost seemed as though some one had spoken the
words in his ear, and a little thrill of fear ran through him. But
all was silent save for the wash of the current as it bore him
rapidly onwards, and he knew that the voice was one in his own
head.

Upwards and upwards he drifted; was it by his own will, or not? He
did not himself know, he could not have said. He only knew that a
spell seemed upon him, that an intense desire had seized him to
look once again upon that lonely house beside the river bank. He
had no wish to try to obtain entrance there. He felt that he was
treading the dark mazes of some unhallowed plot. But this very
suspicion only increased his burning curiosity; and surely there
could no harm come of one look at that dark and lonely place.

No volition of his own was needed to carry him onwards; wind and
tide did all that. He had merely to keep his place and steer his
little bark up the wide river. He saw against the sky the great
pile of Westminster. He had drifted almost across the river by that
time. He was seated in the bow of the boat, just dipping an oar
from time to time as it slipped along beneath the trees. And now
the moon shone out for a few minutes clear and bright. It did not
shine upon his own craft, gliding so stealthily beneath the bare
trees that fringed the wall of the very house he had come to see;
but it did gleam upon another wherry out in midstream, rowed by a
strong man wrapped in a cloak, and directed straight for the same
spot. Cuthbert started, and caught hold of a bough of a weeping
willow, bringing his boat to a standstill in a place where the
shadow was blackest. He had no wish to be found in this strange
position. He would remain hidden until this other boat had landed
at the steps. He would be hidden well where he was. He had better
be perfectly silent, and so remain.

A sound of voices above his head warned him that he was not the
only watcher, and for a moment he feared that, silent as had been
his movements, his presence had been discovered. But some one spoke
in anxious accents, and in that voice he recognized the clear and
mellow tones of Robert Catesby. He was speaking in a low voice to
some companion.

"If he comes not within a short while, I shall hold that all is
lost. I fear me we did wrong to send him. That letter--that
letter--that luckless letter! who can have been the writer?"

"Tresham, I fear me without doubt, albeit he denied it with such
steadfast boldness. Would to heaven that fickle hound had never
been admitted to our counsels! That was thy doing, Catesby."

"Ay, and terribly do I repent me of it, Winter. I upbraid myself as
bitterly as any can upbraid me for the folly. But hark--listen! I
hear the plash of oars. See, there is a boat! It is he--it is
Fawkes! I know him by his height and his strong action. Heaven be
praised! All cannot yet be lost! Move upwards yet a few paces, and
we will speak to him here alone before we take him within doors to
the others.

"Guido Fawkes! Good Guy, is that verily thou?"

"Verily and in truth, my masters. Has the time seemed long?"

"Terribly long. How foundest thou all?"

"All well--all as I left it weeks ago. There has been no soul
within. Gunpowder, faggots, iron bars, and stones--all are as
before; and above, the coal and faggots carefully concealing all.
Why this anxiety and fear, Catesby? it was not wont to be so with
thee."

"No; but I have something of terrible import to reveal to thee,
good Guy. And first I must ask thy pardon for thus exposing thee to
peril as this day I did. I sent thee on this mission of inspection;
but I ought first to have told thee that we are in fear and
trembling lest we have been betrayed!"

"Betrayed!" echoed Fawkes with a fierce oath, "and by whom?"

"That we know not. But some days since, my Lord Mounteagle received
a mysterious warning bidding him absent himself from this meeting
of Parliament, for that a blow should then be struck, no man seeing
who dealt it. Wherefore we fear--"

"Mounteagle!" cried Fawkes, interrupting fiercely; "then the
traitor is yon false hound Tresham!"

"So we all thought till we charged him with it, and had he blenched
or shrunk our daggers should have been buried in his heart!"
answered Winter in low, fierce accents; "but he swore he knew
naught of it, and that with so bold a front and so open an air that
for very doubt of his guilt we could not smite him. There may be
other traitors in the camp. There was that lad thou, or thy fool of
a servant, Catesby, once brought amongst us. I liked it not then.
He should not have been let go without solemn oath taken on pain of
death. Trevlyn, methinks, was the name. I hear he has been seen in
London again of late. Why does he haunt us? what does he suspect?"

"Tush! thou art dreaming. Trevlyn! why, that is a good name, and
the lad knows nothing, and is, moreover, stanch.

"Guido, thou hast not said that thou dost pardon us for sending
thee on so perilous an errand this day."

"Thou needst not repent, Catesby. I should have adventured myself
the same had I known all. I have sworn myself to this task, and I
go not back to mine own country till all be accomplished."



Chapter 23: Peril For Trevlyn.


Cuthbert stood at the door of the narrow house in Budge Row,
seeking speech of the wise woman.

It was a blustering night--the first night in November. The wind
howled and shrieked round the corners of the streets; the rain
pattered down and splashed the garments of the few pedestrians who
had braved the storm. It was but seven of the clock, yet Budge Row
was dark and quiet as though midnight had settled down upon the
city. Scarce any gleams of light filtered through the cracks in the
shutters, and only the sound of a distant watchman's cry broke the
silence of the night.

Cuthbert had once before sought this house, but had knocked in vain
for admittance. Either the wise woman was from home, or else she
had no intention of receiving visitors. Since then his mind had
been engrossed by other matters, and he had not thought again of
Joanna's charge concerning Esther. But recent mysterious
occurrences had made him desirous not only of telling her his own
tale, but of seeking information from her; and here he stood in the
wind and rain making request for admittance.

Softly and silently the door swung open at last, and he saw before
him the dark passage he had traversed a year before with Cherry,
the dim light from above just guiding his steps as he moved. The
same juggleries were repeated as on that occasion. The outer door
swung back and bolted itself behind him. The invisible light
wavered and flickered and showed him his way. The black cat
appeared ready to dispute his entrance into the room till he had
dropped his coin into the box; and when he entered the dim place
where the wise woman ensconced herself, he saw her as before,
seated behind the lamp which shed its light upon him, but left her
face in deep shadow. All was precisely as it had been upon a former
occasion--all but his reception by the wise woman herself.

That, however, was altogether different; for the moment she saw who
her visitor was, she rose suddenly from her chair and exclaimed in
excited tones:

"Cuthbert Trevlyn, why hast thou not come hither sooner?"

"I did, but could not find thee."

She made an impatient exclamation.

"And thou wert content not to find me, and came not again and yet
again! Foolish boy! Did not Joanna warn thee to seek me out and
tell me all? I know well that she did. She is loyal and true. And
so, boy, the lost treasure is found, and is safe beneath the roof
of that house which shelters the honoured heads of the Wyverns?"

"Yes, it is all there."

The old woman flung up her arms with a gesture of triumph.

"I knew it: I knew it I knew that the prophecy would fulfil itself,
for all Miriam's spite and Long Robin's greed. Boy, thou hast done
well, thou hast done very well. But thou hast been more bold than
secret. Thou art suspected. Miriam has been here. She is raging
like a lioness robbed of her whelps. She loved yon fierce man who
called himself Long Robin, yet was neither husband of hers, still
less her son, with a love more wild and fierce than thou wilt ever
understand. She vows that she will be revenged. She vows that the
Trevlyns shall yet smart. She suspects not thee alone, but all who
bear the name. Boy, boy, why didst thou not seek me earlier?"

Cuthbert made no response. He was looking in amaze at this old
woman, who had now come forth from her nook behind the table, and
was speaking to him without any assumption of prophetic power, but
as one anxious human creature to another. He saw in her a strange
likeness to old Miriam, and to the dark gipsy queen; but he
marvelled at the excitement she evinced, and the eager intensity of
her gaze. It was so different from her aspect when last he had seen
her, so much more natural and full of human concern and anxiety.

"I have looked for thee day by day. I said in my heart, surely thou
wouldst come quickly. And now, in lieu of seeking safety and
counsel, thou hast been running blindly into those very perils of
which I warned thee long ago. As if it were not enough to have
Tyrrel and all his crew, with old Miriam at their back, resolved to
hunt thee down and wrest the treasure from thee!"
