allied left. At this point were the Dutch and Hanoverian troops.
Marlborough now dispatched Eugene to take command of the British on
the right, directed Count Lottum to move from the centre with
twenty battalions to reinforce that side of the fight, and went
himself to restore the battle on the left.

Eugene, with his British troops, were gradually but steadily, in
spite of their obstinate resistance, being driven back, when
Lottum's reinforcements arrived, and with these Eugene advanced at
once, and drove back the enemy. As these were in disorder, General
Natzmer, at the head of the Prussian cuirassiers, charged them and
drove them back, until he himself was fallen upon by the French
horse guards in reserve, while the infantry's fire from the
hedgerows mowed down the cuirassiers. So dreadful was the fire that
half the Prussian cavalry were slain, and the rest escaped with
difficulty, hotly pursued by the French household troops.

An even more desperate conflict was all this time raging on the
left. Here Marlborough placed himself at the head of the Dutch and
Hanoverian battalions, and led them back against the French, who
were advancing with shouts of victory, and desperate struggles
ensued. Alison in his history says:

"The ground on which the hostile lines met was so broken, that the
battle in that quarter turned almost into a series of partial
conflicts and even personal encounters. Every bridge, every ditch,
every wood, every hamlet, every enclosure, was obstinately
contested, and so incessant was the roll of musketry, and so
intermingled did the hostile lines become, that the field, seen
from a distance, appeared an unbroken line of flame. A warmer fire,
a more desperate series of combats, was never witnessed in modern
warfare. It was in great part conducted hand to hand, like the
battles of antiquity, of which Livy and Homer have left such
graphic descriptions. The cavalry could not act, from the multitude
of hedges and copses which intersected the theatre of conflict.
Breast to breast, knee to knee, bayonet to bayonet, they maintained
the fight on both sides with the most desperate resolution. If the
resistance, however, was obstinate, the attack was no less
vigorous, and at length the enthusiastic ardour of the French
yielded to the steady valour of the Germans. Gradually they were
driven back, literally at the bayonet's point; and at length,
resisting at every point, they yielded all the ground they had won
at the commencement of the action. So, gradually they were pushed
back as far as the village of Diepenbech, where so stubborn a stand
was made that the allies could no longer advance."

Overkirk had now got the rear of the army across the river, and the
duke, seeing that the Hill of Oycke, which flanked the enemy's
position, was unoccupied by them, directed the veteran general with
his twenty Dutch and Danish battalions to advance and occupy it.
Arrived there, he swung round the left of his line, and so pressed
the French right, which was advanced beyond their outer bounds into
the little plain of Diepenbech. The duke commanded Overkirk to
press round still further to his left by the passes of Mullem and
the mill of Royeghem, by which the French sustained their
communication with the force still on the plateau beyond the
Norken; and Prince Eugene to further extend his right so as to
encompass the mass of French crowded in the plain of Diepenbech.

The night was falling now, and the progress of the allies on either
flank could be seen by the flashes of fire. Vendome, seeing the
immense danger in which his right and centre were placed,
endeavoured to bring up his left, hitherto intact; but the
increasing darkness, the thick enclosures, and the determined
resistance of Eugene's troops, prevented him from carrying out his
intention. So far were the British wings extended round the plain
of Diepenbech, that they completely enclosed it, and Eugene's and
Overkirk's men meeting fought fiercely, each believing the other to
be French. The mistake was discovered, and to prevent any further
mishap of this kind in the darkness, the whole army was ordered to
halt where it was and wait till morning. Had the daylight lasted
two hours longer, the whole of the French army would have been
slain or taken prisoners; as it was, the greater portion made their
way through the intervals of the allied army around them, and fled
to Ghent. Nevertheless, they lost 6,000 killed and wounded, and
9,000 prisoners, while many thousands of the fugitives made for the
French frontier. Thus the total loss to Vendome exceeded 20,000
men, while the allies lost in all 5000.

When morning broke, Marlborough dispatched forty squadrons of horse
in pursuit of the fugitives towards Ghent, sent off Count Lottum
with thirty battalions and fifty squadrons to carry the strong
lines which the enemy had constructed between Ypres and Warneton,
and employed the rest of his force in collecting and tending the
wounded of both armies.

A few days later the two armies, that of Eugene and that of the
Duke of Berwick, which had been marching with all speed parallel to
each other, came up and joined those of Marlborough and Vendome
respectively. The Duke of Berwick's corps was the more powerful,
numbering thirty-four battalions and fifty-five squadrons, and this
raised the Duke de Vendome's army to over 110,000, and placed him
again fairly on an equality with the allies. Marlborough, having by
his masterly movement forced Vendome to fight with his face to
Paris, and in his retreat to retire still farther from the
frontier, now had France open to him, and his counsel was that the
whole army should at once march for Paris, disregarding the
fortresses just as Wellington and Blucher did after Waterloo.

He was however, overruled, even Eugene considering such an attempt
to be altogether too dangerous, with Vendome's army, 110,000
strong, in the rear; and it must be admitted it would certainly
have been a march altogether without a parallel.

Finding that his colleagues would not consent to so daring and
adventurous a march, Marlborough determined to enter France, and
lay siege to the immensely strong fortress of Lille. This was in
itself a tremendous undertaking, for the fortifications of the town
were considered the most formidable ever designed by Vauban. The
citadel within the town was still stronger, and the garrison of
15,000 picked troops were commanded by Marshal Boufflers, one of
the most skillful generals in the French army. To lay siege to such
a fortress as this, while Vendome, with this army of 110,000 men,
lay ready to advance to its assistance, was an undertaking of the
greatest magnitude.

In most cases the proper course to have taken would have been to
advance against and defeat Vendome before undertaking the siege of
Lille; but the French general had entrenched his position with such
skill that he could not be attacked; while he had, moreover, the
advantage, that if the allies stood between him and France, he
stood between them and their base, commanded the Scheldt and the
canals from Holland, and was therefore in position to interfere
greatly with the onerous operation of bringing up stores for the
British army, and with the passage to the front of the immense
siege train requisite for an operation of such magnitude as was now
about to be undertaken, and for whose transport alone 16,000 horses
were required.



Chapter 23: The Siege of Lille.

The British cavalry suffered less severely at Oudenarde than did
those of the other allied nationalities, as they were during the
greater portion of the day held in reserve; and neither Rupert nor
any of his special friends in the regiment were wounded. He was,
however, greatly grieved at the death of Sir John Loveday, who was
killed by a cannonball at the commencement of the action. Two of
the captains in the 5th were also killed, and this gave Rupert
another step. He could have had his captain's rank long before, had
he accepted the Duke's offer, several times repeated, of a post on
his staff. He preferred, however, the life with his regiment, and
in this his promotion was, of course, regular, instead of going up
by favour, as was, and still is, the case on the staff.

The train for the siege of Lille was brought up by canal from
Holland to Brussels; and although the French knew that a large
accumulation of military stores was taking place there, they could
not believe that Marlborough meditated so gigantic an undertaking
as the siege of Lille, and believed that he was intending to lay
siege to Mons.

Berwick, with his army, which had since his arrival on the scene of
action been lying at Douai, now advanced to Montagne; and Vendome
detached 18,000 men from his army, lying between Ghent and Bruges,
to Malle, to intercept any convoy that might move out from
Brussels.

Marlborough's measures were, however, well taken. Eugene, with
twenty-five battalions and thirty squadrons, moved parallel to the
convoy, which was fifteen miles in length; while the Prince of
Wurtemburg, General Wood, the Prince of Orange, each with a large
force, were so placed as to check any movement of the enemy.

The gigantic convoy left Brussels on the 6th of August, and reached
the camp near Lille on the 15th, without the loss of a single
wagon. Prince Eugene, with 53 battalions and 90 squadrons, in all
40,000 men, undertook the siege; while Marlborough, with the main
army of 60,000 men, took post at Heldun, where he alike prevented
Berwick and Vendome from effecting a junction, and covered the
passage of convoys from Brussels, Ath, and Oudenarde. No less than
eighty-one convoys, with food, stores, etc., passed safely along;
and the arrangements for their safety were so perfect that they
excited the lively admiration both of friends and foes.

Feuguieres, the French annalist, asks, "How was it possible to
believe that it was in the power of the enemy to convey to Lille
all that was necessary for the siege and supplies of the army, to
conduct there all the artillery and implements essential for such
an undertaking; and that these immense burdens should be
transported by land over a line of twenty-three leagues, under the
eyes of an army of 80,000 men, lying on the flank of a prodigious
convoy, which extended over five leagues of road? Nevertheless, all
that was done without a shot being fired or a chariot unharnessed.
Posterity will scarcely believe it. Nevertheless, it was the simple
truth."

To facilitate his operations, Marlborough threw six bridges across
the Scheldt, and 10,000 pioneers were collected to commence the
lines which were to surround the city. The lines were projected not
only to shut in the city, but to protect the besiegers from attacks
by a relieving army. Never since Caesar besieged Alesia had works
upon so gigantic a scale been constructed. They were fifteen miles
in circumference, and the ditch was fifteen feet wide and nine
deep.

On the 23rd of August, the lines of circumvallation being now
nearly finished, Eugene opened his trenches and began operations
against the city, the parts selected for attack being the gates of
Saint Martin and of the Madelaine. These points were upon the same
side of the city, but were separated from each other by the river
Dyle, which flows through the town.

On the morning of the 24th the cannonade opened, Prince Eugene
himself firing the first gun on the right, the Prince of Orange
that on the left attack. The troops worked with the greatest
energy, and the next day forty-four guns poured their fire into the
advanced works round the chapel of the Madelaine, which stood
outside the walls. The same night the chapel was carried by
assault; but the next night, while a tremendous cannonade was going
on, 400 French issued quietly from their works, fell upon the 200
Dutch who held the chapel, killed or drove them out, blew up the
chapel, which served as an advanced post for the besiegers, and
retired before reinforcements could arrive.

Marshal Vendome now determined to unite with the Duke of Berwick,
and to raise the siege, and by making a long and circuitous march,
to avoid Marlborough's force. This was accomplished; the two armies
united, and advanced to relieve Lille.

Marlborough, who foresaw the line by which they would approach,
drew up his army in order of battle, with his right resting on the
Dyle at Noyelles, and his left on the Margne at Peronne. Two hours
after he had taken up his position, the French army, 110,000
strong, the most imposing France had ever put in the field,
appeared before him.

The Duke of Marlborough had been strengthened by 10,000 men dispatched
to him by Prince Eugene from the besieging army, but he had only
70,000 men to oppose to the French. And yet, notwithstanding their
great superiority of numbers, the enemy did not venture to attack, and
for a fortnight the armies remained facing each other, without a blow
being struck on either side.

The French were, in fact, paralyzed by the jealousy of the two
great generals commanding them, each of whom opposed the other's
proposals; and nothing could be decided until the king sent
Monsieur Chamillard, the French minister of war, to examine the
spot, and give instructions for an attack.

The six days, however, which elapsed between the appearance of the
French army in front of Marlborough and the arrival of Monsieur
Chamillard in camp, had given Marlborough time so to entrench his
position, that upon reconnoitring it Chamillard, Vendome, Berwick,
and the other generals, were unanimous in their opinion that it was
too strong to be attacked. The great army therefore again retired,
and taking up its post between Brussels and Lille, completely
interrupted the arrival of further convoys or stores to the British
camp.

The siege meantime had been pressed hotly. From the 27th of August
to the 7th of September 120 cannon and eighty mortars thundered
continuously; and on the evening of the 7th two breaches were
effected in the side of the bastions of the outworks that were to
be assaulted.

Fourteen thousand men prepared to storm the outworks. The French
allowed them to get, with but slight resistance, into the covered
way, where a terrific fire was poured upon them. 800 were shot down
in a few minutes, and two mines were exploded under them. The
fighting was desperate; but the assailants managed to retain
possession of two points in the outwork, a success most dearly
purchased with a loss of 2000 killed, and as many wounded.

It was not until the 20th that a fresh attempt to carry the place
by storm was made. At this time Marlborough's position was becoming
critical. The fortress held out bravely. The consumption of
ammunition was so enormous, that his supplies were almost
exhausted, and a great army lay directly upon his line of
communication. It became a matter of necessity that the place
should be taken. Immense efforts were made to secure the success of
the assault. Enormous quantities of fascines were made for filling
up the ditch, and 5000 British troops were sent by Marlborough from
his army to lead the assault.

Rupert Holliday, with many other officers, accompanied this body as
a volunteer. The troops were drawn up as the afternoon grew late,
and just as it became dark they advanced to the assault.

The besieged in the outworks assaulted were supported by the fire
of the cannon and musketry of the ramparts behind, from which, so
soon as the dense masses of the stormers advanced, a stream of
flame issued. So tremendous was the carnage, that three times the
troops recoiled before the storm of balls.

On the fourth occasion Eugene himself led them to the assault, on
either side of him were the Princes of Orange and Hesse, and a
number of officers.

"Remember Hochstadt, Ramilies, and Oudenarde!" the prince shouted;
but scarcely had he spoken when he was struck to the ground by a
bullet, which struck and glanced over the left eye.

Then the troops dashed forward, and forced their way into the
outwork. The French fought with magnificent resolution; and were
from time to time reinforced by parties from the city.

For two hours the fight raged. With bayonets and clubbed muskets,
hand to hand, the troops fought. No one flinched or gave way;
indeed it was safer to be in the front line than behind; for in
front friends and foes were so mixed together, that the French on
the ramparts were unable to fire, but had to direct their aim at
the masses behind.

At last the allies gained ground. Gradually, foot by foot, the
French were thrust back; and Rupert, who had been fighting
desperately in the front line of the stormers' party, directed his
efforts to a part where a French officer still held his ground,
nobly backed by his men. The piled up dead in front of them showed
how strenuous had been the resistance to the advancing wave of the
allies.

Rupert gradually reached the spot, and had no difficulty in placing
himself vis-a-vis to the French officer; for so terrible was his
skill, that others willingly turned aside to attack less dangerous
opponents. In a moment the swords crossed!

The light was a strange one, flickering and yet constant, with the
thousands of firearms, which kept up an unceasing roar. The swords
clashed and ground together, and after a pass or two both men drew
back. A bright flash from a musket not a yard away threw a bright
though momentary light on their faces.

"Monsieur Dessin!" Rupert exclaimed, in delight.

"What! Is it possible?" the Frenchman exclaimed. "Rupert Holliday!"

At the moment there was a tremendous rush of the British. The
French were borne back, and hurled over the edge of the outwork;
and before Rupert could avert the blow, the butt end of a musket
fell with great force upon his late opponent's head.

Rupert leapt forward, and lifting him in his arms, made his way
with him to the rear; for with that last rush the fight was over,
and the allies had established themselves in the left demi-bastion
of the outwork--an important advantage, but one which had cost them
5000 killed and wounded, of whom 3000 belonged to the English
force, whom Marlborough had sent. The fact that more than half of
them were hors-de-combat showed how fiercely they had fought.

Owing to the wound of Prince Eugene, the Duke of Marlborough had to
direct the operations of the siege as well as to command the army
in the field. On the 23rd he followed up the advantage gained on
the 20th, by a fresh attack in two columns, each 5000 strong, and
headed by 500 English troops. After being three times repulsed,
these succeeded in maintaining a lodgment in another outwork;
losing, however, 1000 men in the attack, the greater part being
destroyed by the explosion of a mine.

Both besiegers and besieged were now becoming straitened for
ammunition, for the consumption had been immense. The French
generals succeeded in passing a supply into the fortress in a very
daring manner.

On the night of the 28th, 2500 horsemen set out from Douai, under
the command of the Chevalier de Luxembourg, each having forty
pounds of powder in his valise. They arrived at the gate of the
walls of circumvallation, when the Dutch sentry cried out:

"Who comes there?"

"Open quickly!" the leader answered in the same language; "I am
closely pursued by the French."

The sentry opened the gate, and the horsemen began to pass in.
Eighteen hundred had passed without suspicion being excited, when
one of the officers, seeing that his men were not keeping close up,
gave the command in French:

"Close up! close up!"

The captain of the guard caught the words, and suspecting
something, ordered the party to halt; and then, as they still rode
in, ordered the guard to fire. The discharge set fire to three of
the powder bags, and the explosion spreading from one to another,
sixty men and horses were killed. The portion of the troops still
outside the gate fled, but the 800 who had passed in rode forward
through the allied camp and entered the town in safety, with 70,000
pounds of powder!

Another deed of gallantry, equal to anything ever told in fiction,
was performed by a Captain Dubois of the French army. It was a
matter of the highest importance for the French generals to learn
the exact state of things at Lille. Captain Dubois volunteered to
enter the fortress by water. He accordingly left the French camp,
and swimming through seven canals, entered the Dyle near the place
where it entered the besiegers' lines. He then dived, and aided by
the current, swam under water for an incredibly long distance, so
as entirely to elude the observation of the sentinels. He arrived
in safety in the town, exhausted with his great exertions.

After having had dry clothes put on him, and having taken some
refreshment, he was conducted round the walls by Marshal Boufflers,
who showed him all the defensive works, and explained to him the
whole circumstances of the position. The next night he again set
out by the Dyle, carrying dispatches in an envelope of wax in his
mouth, and after diving as before through the dangerous places, and
running innumerable risks of detection, he arrived in safety in the
French camp.

But it was not the French alone who had run short of ammunition.
Marlborough had also been greatly straitened, and there being now
no possibility of getting through convoys from Brussels, he
persuaded the home government to direct a considerable expedition,
which had been collected for the purpose of exciting an alarm on
the coast of Normandy, and was now on board ship in the Downs, to
be sent to Ostend. It arrived there, to the number of fourteen
battalions and an abundant supply of ammunition, on the 23rd of
September; and Marlborough detached 15,000 men from his army to
