"Hang you!" said Amyas. "If I had been a Spaniard and a priest like
yourself, I should have burnt you alive."

"Hang me?" shrieked the wretched old Balaam; and burst into abject howls
for mercy.

"Take the dark monk, Yeo, and hang him too. Lucy Passmore, do you know
that fellow also?"

"No, sir," said Lucy.

"Lucky for you, Fray Gerundio," said Will Cary; while the good friar
hid his face in his hands, and burst into tears. Lucky it was for
him, indeed; for he had been a pitying spectator of the tragedy. "Ah!"
thought he, "if life in this mad and sinful world be a reward, perhaps
this escape is vouchsafed to me for having pleaded the cause of the poor
Indian!"

But the bishop shrieked on.

"Oh! not yet. An hour, only an hour! I am not fit to die."

"That is no concern of mine," said Amyas. "I only know that you are not
fit to live."

"Let us at least make our peace with God," said the dark monk.

"Hound! if your saints can really smuggle you up the back-stairs
to heaven, they will do it without five minutes' more coaxing and
flattering."

Fray Gerundio and the condemned man alike stopped their ears at the
blasphemy.

"Oh, Fray Gerundio!" screamed the bishop, "pray for me. I have treated
you like a beast. Oh, Fray, Fray!"

"Oh, my lord! my lord!" said the good man, as with tears streaming
down his face he followed his shrieking and struggling diocesan up the
stairs, "who am I? Ask no pardon of me. Ask pardon of God for all your
sins against the poor innocent savages, when you saw your harmless sheep
butchered year after year, and yet never lifted up your voice to save
the flock which God had committed to you. Oh, confess that, my lord!
confess it ere it be too late!"

"I will confess all about the Indians, and the gold, and Tita too, Fray;
peccavi, peccavi--only five minutes, senors, five little minutes' grace,
while I confess to the good Fray!"--and he grovelled on the deck.

"I will have no such mummery where I command," said Amyas, sternly. "I
will be no accomplice in cheating Satan of his due."

"If you will confess," said Brimblecombe, whose heart was melting fast,
"confess to the Lord, and He will forgive you. Even at the last moment
mercy is open. Is it not, Fray Gerundio?"

"It is, senor; it is, my lord," said Gerundio; but the bishop only
clasped his hands over his head.

"Then I am undone! All my money is stolen! Not a farthing left to buy
masses for my poor soul! And no absolution, no viaticum, nor anything! I
die like a dog and am damned!"

"Clear away that running rigging!" said Amyas, while the dark Dominican
stood perfectly collected, with something of a smile of pity at
the miserable bishop. A man accustomed to cruelty, and firm in his
fanaticism, he was as ready to endure suffering as to inflict it;
repeating to himself the necessary prayers, he called Fray Gerundio to
witness that he died, however unworthy, a martyr, in charity with all
men, and in the communion of the Holy Catholic Church; and then, as
he fitted the cord to his own neck, gave Fray Gerundio various petty
commissions about his sister and her children, and a little vineyard far
away upon the sunny slopes of Castile; and so died, with a "Domine, in
manus tuas," like a valiant man of Spain.

Amyas stood long in solemn silence, watching the two corpses dangling
above his head. At last he drew a long breath, as if a load was taken
off his heart.

Suddenly he looked round to his men, who were watching eagerly to know
what he would have done next.

"Hearken to me, my masters all, and may God hearken too, and do so to
me, and more also, if, as long as I have eyes to see a Spaniard, and
hands to hew him down, I do any other thing than hunt down that accursed
nation day and night, and avenge all the innocent blood which has been
shed by them since the day in which King Ferdinand drove out the Moors!"

"Amen!" said Salvation Yeo. "I need not to swear that oath, for I have
sworn it long ago, and kept it. Will your honor have us kill the rest of
the idolaters?"

"God forbid!" said Cary. "You would not do that, Amyas?"

"No; we will spare them. God has shown us a great mercy this day, and we
must be merciful in it. We will land them at Cabo Velo. But henceforth
till I die no quarter to a Spaniard."

"Amen!" said Yeo.

Amyas's whole countenance had changed in the last half-hour. He seemed
to have grown years older. His brow was wrinkled, his lip compressed,
his eyes full of a terrible stony calm, as of one who had formed a great
and dreadful purpose, and yet for that very reason could afford to be
quiet under the burden of it, even cheerful; and when he returned to the
cabin he bowed courteously to the commandant, begged pardon of him
for having played the host so ill, and entreated him to finish his
breakfast.

"But, senor--is it possible? Is his holiness dead?"

"He is hanged and dead, senor. I would have hanged, could I have caught
them, every living thing which was present at my brother's death, even
to the very flies upon the wall. No more words, senor; your conscience
tells you that I am just."

"Senor," said the commandant--"one word--I trust there are no
listeners--none of my crew, I mean; but I must exculpate myself in your
eyes."

"Walk out, then, into the gallery with me."

"To tell you the truth, senor--I trust in Heaven no one overhears.--You
are just. This Inquisition is the curse of us, the weight which is
crushing out the very life of Spain. No man dares speak. No man dares
trust his neighbor, no, not his child, or the wife of his bosom. It
avails nothing to be a good Catholic, as I trust I am," and he crossed
himself, "when any villain whom you may offend, any unnatural son or
wife who wishes to be rid of you, has but to hint heresy against you,
and you vanish into the Holy Office--and then God have mercy on you,
for man has none. Noble ladies of my family, sir, have vanished
thither, carried off by night, we know not why; we dare not ask why. To
expostulate, even to inquire, would have been to share their fate. There
is one now, senor--Heaven alone knows whether she is alive or dead!--It
was nine years since, and we have never heard; and we shall never hear."

And the commandant's face worked frightfully.

"She was my sister, senor!"

"Heavens! sir, and have you not avenged her?"

"On churchmen, senor, and I a Catholic? To be burned at the stake in
this life, and after that to all eternity beside? Even a Spaniard
dare not face that. Beside, sir, the mob like this Inquisition, and an
Auto-da-fe is even better sport to them than a bull-fight. They would be
the first to tear a man in pieces who dare touch an Inquisitor. Sir,
may all the saints in heaven obtain me forgiveness for my blasphemy, but
when I saw you just now fearing those churchmen no more than you feared
me, I longed, sinner that I am, to be a heretic like you."

"It will not take long to make a brave and wise gentleman who has
suffered such things as you have, a heretic, as you call it--a free
Christian man, as we call it."

"Tempt me not, sir!" said the poor man, crossing himself fervently. "Let
us say no more. Obedience is my duty; and for the rest the Church must
decide, according to her infallible authority--for I am a good Catholic,
senor, the best of Catholics, though a great sinner.--I trust no one has
overheard us!"

Amyas left him with a smile of pity, and went to look for Lucy Passmore,
whom the sailors were nursing and feeding, while Ayacanora watched them
with a puzzled face.

"I will talk to you when you are better, Lucy," said he, taking her
hand. "Now you must eat and drink, and forget all among us lads of
Devon."

"Oh, dear blessed sir, and you will send Sir John to pray with me? For
I turned, sir, I turned: but I could not help it--I could not abear the
torments: but she bore them, sweet angel--and more than I did. Oh, dear
me!"

"Lucy, I am not fit now to hear more. You shall tell me all to-morrow;"
and he turned away.

"Why do you take her hand?" said Ayacanora, half-scornfully. "She is
old, and ugly, and dirty."

"She is an Englishwoman, child, and a martyr, poor thing; and I would
nurse her as I would my own mother."

"Why don't you make me an Englishwoman, and a martyr? I could learn how
to do anything that that old hag could do!"

"Instead of calling her names, go and tend her; that would be much
fitter work for a woman than fighting among men."

Ayacanora darted from him, thrust the sailors aside, and took possession
of Lucy Passmore.

"Where shall I put her?" asked she of Amyas, without looking up.

"In the best cabin; and let her be served like a queen, lads."

"No one shall touch her but me;" and taking up the withered frame in her
arms, as if it were a doll, Ayacanora walked off with her in triumph,
telling the men to go and mind the ship.

"The girl is mad," said one.

"Mad or not, she has an eye to our captain," said another.

"And where's the man that would behave to the poor wild thing as he
does?"

"Sir Francis Drake would, from whom he got his lesson. Do you mind his
putting the negro lass ashore after he found out about--"

"Hush! Bygones be bygones, and those that did it are in their graves
long ago. But it was too hard of him on the poor thing."

"If he had not got rid of her, there would have been more throats than
one cut about the lass, that's all I know," said another; "and so there
would have been about this one before now, if the captain wasn't a born
angel out of heaven, and the lieutenant no less."

"Well, I suppose we may get a whet by now. I wonder if these Dons have
any beer aboard."

"Naught but grape vinegar, which fools call wine, I'll warrant."

"There was better than vinegar on the table in there just now."

"Ah," said one grumbler of true English breed, "but that's not for poor
fellows like we."

"Don't lie, Tom Evans; you never were given that way yet, and I don't
think the trade will suit a good fellow like you."

The whole party stared; for the speaker of these words was none other
than Amyas himself, who had rejoined them, a bottle in each hand.

"No, Tom Evans. It has been share and share alike for three years,
and bravely you have all held up, and share alike it shall be now, and
here's the handsel of it. We'll serve out the good wine fairly all round
as long as it lasts, and then take to the bad: but mind you don't get
drunk, my sons, for we are much too short of hands to have any stout
fellows lying about the scuppers."

But what was the story of the intendant's being murdered? Brimblecombe
had seen him run into a neighboring cabin; and when the door of it
was opened, there was the culprit, but dead and cold, with a deep
knife-wound in his side. Who could have done the deed? It must have been
Tita, whom Brimblecombe had seen loose, and trying to free her lover.

The ship was searched from stem to stern: but no Tita. The mystery was
never explained. That she had leapt overboard, and tried to swim ashore,
none doubted: but whether she had reached it, who could tell? One thing
was strange; that not only had she carried off no treasure with her,
but that the gold ornaments which she had worn the night before, lay
together in a heap on the table, close by the murdered man. Had she
wished to rid herself of everything which had belonged to her tyrants?

The commandant heard the whole story thoughtfully.

"Wretched man!" said he, "and he has a wife and children in Seville."

"A wife and children?" said Amyas; "and I heard him promise marriage to
the Indian girl."

That was the only hint which gave a reason for his death. What if,
in the terror of discovery and capture, the scoundrel had dropped any
self-condemning words about his marriage, any prayer for those whom he
had left behind, and the Indian had overheard them? It might be so; at
least sin had brought its own punishment.

And so that wild night and day subsided. The prisoners were kindly used
enough; for the Englishman, free from any petty love of tormenting,
knows no mean between killing a foe outright, and treating him as a
brother; and when, two days afterwards, they were sent ashore in the
canoes off Cabo Velo, captives and captors shook hands all round; and
Amyas, after returning the commandant his sword, and presenting him with
a case of the bishop's wine, bowed him courteously over the side.

"I trust that you will pay us another visit, valiant senor capitan,"
said the Spaniard, bowing and smiling.

"I should most gladly accept your invitation, illustrious senor
commandant; but as I have vowed henceforth, whenever I shall meet a
Spaniard, neither to give nor take quarter, I trust that our paths to
glory may lie in different directions."

The commandant shrugged his shoulders; the ship was put again before the
wind, and as the shores of the Main faded lower and dimmer behind her,
a mighty cheer broke from all on board; and for once the cry from every
mouth was Eastward-ho!

Scrap by scrap, as weakness and confusion of intellect permitted her,
Lucy Passmore told her story. It was a simple one after all, and Amyas
might almost have guessed it for himself. Rose had not yielded to the
Spaniard without a struggle. He had visited her two or three times at
Lucy's house (how he found out Lucy's existence she herself could never
tell, unless from the Jesuits) before she agreed to go with him. He had
gained Lucy to his side by huge promises of Indian gold; and, in fine,
they had gone to Lundy, where the lovers were married by a priest, who
was none other, Lucy would swear, than the shorter and stouter of the
two who had carried off her husband and his boat--in a word, Father
Parsons.

Amyas gnashed his teeth at the thought that he had had Parsons in his
power at Brenttor down, and let him go. It was a fresh proof to him that
Heaven's vengeance was upon him for letting one of its enemies escape.
Though what good to Rose or Frank the hanging of Parsons would have
been, I, for my part, cannot see.

But when had Eustace been at Lundy? Lucy could throw no light on that
matter. It was evidently some by-thread in the huge spider's web of
Jesuit intrigue, which was, perhaps, not worth knowing after all.

They sailed from Lundy in a Portugal ship, were at Lisbon a few days
(during which Rose and Lucy remained on board), and then away for the
West Indies; while all went merry as a marriage bell. "Sir, he would
have kissed the dust off her dear feet, till that evil eye of Mr.
Eustace's came, no one knew how or whence." And, from that time, all
went wrong. Eustace got power over Don Guzman, whether by threatening
that the marriage should be dissolved, whether by working on his
superstitious scruples about leaving his wife still a heretic, or
whether (and this last Lucy much suspected) by insinuations that her
heart was still at home in England, and that she was longing for Amyas
and his ship to come and take her home again; the house soon became a
den of misery, and Eustace the presiding evil genius. Don Guzman had
even commanded him to leave it--and he went; but, somehow, within a week
he was there again, in greater favor than ever. Then came preparations
to meet the English, and high words about it between Don Guzman and
Rose; till a few days before Amyas's arrival, the Don had dashed out
of the house in a fury, saying openly that she preferred these Lutheran
dogs to him, and that he would have their hearts' blood first, and hers
after.

The rest was soon told. Amyas knew but too much of it already. The very
morning after he had gone up to the villa, Lucy and her mistress were
taken (they knew not by whom) down to the quay, in the name of the Holy
Office, and shipped off to Cartagena.

There they were examined, and confronted on a charge of witchcraft,
which the wretched Lucy could not well deny. She was tortured to
make her inculpate Rose; and what she said, or did not say, under the
torture, the poor wretch could never tell. She recanted, and became a
Romanist; Rose remained firm. Three weeks afterwards, they were brought
out to an Auto-da-fe; and there, for the first time, Lucy saw Frank
walking, dressed in a San Benito, in that ghastly procession. Lucy was
adjudged to receive publicly two hundred stripes, and to be sent to
"The Holy House" at Seville to perpetual prison. Frank and Rose, with
a renegade Jew, and a negro who had been convicted of practising "Obi,"
were sentenced to death as impenitent, and delivered over to the
secular arm, with prayers that there might be no shedding of blood. In
compliance with which request, the Jew and the negro were burnt at one
stake, Frank and Rose at another. She thought they did not feel it more
than twenty minutes. They were both very bold and steadfast, and held
each other's hand (that she would swear to) to the very last.

And so ended Lucy Passmore's story. And if Amyas Leigh, after he had
heard it, vowed afresh to give no quarter to Spaniards wherever he
should find them, who can wonder, even if they blame?



CHAPTER XXVII

HOW SALVATION YEO FOUND HIS LITTLE MAID AGAIN

     "All precious things, discover'd late,
        To them who seek them issue forth;
     For love in sequel works with fate,
        And draws the veil from hidden worth."

                         The Sleeping Beauty.

And so Ayacanora took up her abode in Lucy's cabin, as a regularly
accredited member of the crew.

But a most troublesome member; for now began in her that perilous crisis
which seems to endanger the bodies and souls of all savages and savage
tribes, when they first mingle with the white man; that crisis which,
a few years afterwards, began to hasten the extermination of the North
American tribes; and had it not been for the admirable good sense and
constancy of Amyas, Ayacanora might have ended even more miserably than
did the far-famed Pocahontas, daughter of the Virginian king; who, after
having been received at Court by the old pedant James the First,
with the honors of a sister sovereign, and having become the reputed
ancestress of more than one ancient Virginian family, ended her days in
wretchedness in some Wapping garret.

For the mind of the savage, crushed by the sight of the white man's
superior skill, and wealth, and wisdom, loses at first its self-respect;
while his body, pampered with easily obtained luxuries, instead
of having to win the necessaries of life by heavy toil, loses its
self-helpfulness; and with self-respect and self-help vanish all the
savage virtues, few and flimsy as they are, and the downward road toward
begging and stealing, sottishness and idleness, is easy, if not sure.

And down that road, it really seemed at first, that poor Ayacanora was
walking fast. For the warrior-prophetess of the Omaguas soon became, to
all appearance, nothing but a very naughty child; and the Diana of the
Meta, after she had satisfied her simple wonder at the great floating
house by rambling from deck to deck, and peeping into every cupboard
and cranny, manifested a great propensity to steal and hide (she was too
proud or too shy to ask for) every trumpery which smit her fancy; and
when Amyas forbade her to take anything without leave, threatened
to drown herself, and went off and sulked all day in her cabin.
Nevertheless, she obeyed him, except in the matter of sweet things.
Perhaps she craved naturally for the vegetable food of her native
forests; at all events the bishop's stores of fruit and sweetmeats
diminished rapidly; and what was worse, so did the sweet Spanish wine
which Amyas had set apart for poor Lucy's daily cordial. Whereon another
severe lecture, in which Amyas told her how mean it was to rob poor
sick Lucy; whereat she, as usual, threatened to drown herself; and was
running upon deck to do it, when Amyas caught her and forgave her. On
which a violent fit of crying, and great penitence and promises; and
a week after, Amyas found that she had cheated Satan and her own
conscience by tormenting the Portuguese steward into giving her some
other wine instead: but luckily for her, she found Amyas's warnings
about wine making her mad so far fulfilled, that she did several foolish
things one evening, and had a bad headache next morning; so the murder
was out, and Amyas ordered the steward up for a sound flogging; but
Ayacanora, honorably enough, not only begged him off, but offered to be
whipped instead of him, confessing that the poor fellow spoke truly when
he swore that she had threatened to kill him, and that he had given her
the wine in bodily fear for his life.

However, her own headache and Amyas's cold looks were lesson enough, and
after another attempt to drown herself, the wilful beauty settled down
for awhile; and what was better, could hardly be persuaded, thenceforth
to her dying day, to touch fermented liquors.

But, in the meanwhile, poor Amyas had many a brains-beating as to how
he was to tame a lady who, on the least provocation, took refuge in
suicide. Punish her he dared not, even if he had the heart. And as for
putting her ashore, he had an instinct, and surely not a superstitious
one, that her strange affection for the English was not unsent by
Heaven, and that God had committed her into his charge, and that He
would require an account at his hands of the soul of that fair lost
lamb.

So, almost at his wits' end, he prayed to God, good simple fellow, and
that many a time, to show him what he should do with her before she
killed either herself, or what was just as likely, one of the crew; and
it seemed best to him to make Parson Jack teach her the rudiments of
Christianity, that she might be baptized in due time when they got home
to England.

But here arose a fresh trouble--for she roundly refused to learn of
Jack, or of any one but Amyas himself; while he had many a good reason
for refusing the office of schoolmaster; so, for a week or two more,
Ayacanora remained untaught, save in the English tongue, which she
picked up with marvellous rapidity.

And next, as if troubles would never end, she took a violent dislike,
not only to John Brimblecombe, whose gait and voice she openly mimicked
for the edification of the men; but also to Will Cary, whom she never
allowed to speak to her or approach her. Perhaps she was jealous of his
intimacy with Amyas; or perhaps, with the subtle instinct of a woman,
she knew that he was the only other man on board who might dare to make
love to her (though Will, to do him justice, was as guiltless of any
such intention as Amyas himself). But when she was remonstrated with,
her only answer was that Cary was a cacique as well as Amyas, and that
there ought not to be two caciques; and one day she actually proposed to
Amyas to kill his supposed rival, and take the ship all to himself;
and sulked for several days at hearing Amyas, amid shouts of laughter,
retail her precious advice to its intended victim.

Moreover, the negroes came in for their share, being regarded all along
by her with an unspeakable repugnance, which showed itself at first in
hiding from them whenever she could, and, afterwards, in throwing at
them everything she could lay hands on, till the poor Quashies, in
danger of their lives, complained to Amyas, and got rest for awhile.

Over the rest of the sailors she lorded it like a very princess, calling
them from their work to run on her errands and make toys for her,
enforcing her commands now and then by a shrewd box on the ears; while
the good fellows, especially old Yeo, like true sailors, petted her,
obeyed her, even jested with her, much as they might have done with a
tame leopard, whose claws might be unsheathed and about their ears at
any moment. But she amused them, and amused Amyas too. They must of
course have a pet; and what prettier one could they have? And as for
Amyas, the constant interest of her presence, even the constant
anxiety of her wilfulness, kept his mind busy, and drove out many a sad
foreboding about that meeting with his mother, and the tragedy which
he had to tell her, which would otherwise, so heavily did they weigh on
him, have crushed his spirit with melancholy, and made all his worldly
success and marvellous deliverance worthless in his eyes.

At last the matter, as most things luckily do, came to a climax; and it
came in this way.

The ship had been slipping along now for many a day, slowly but steadily
before a favorable breeze. She had passed the ring of the West India
islands, and was now crawling, safe from all pursuit, through the vast
weed-beds of the Sargasso Sea. There, for the first time, it was thought
safe to relax the discipline which had been hitherto kept up, and to
"rummage" (as was the word in those days) their noble prize. What they
found, of gold and silver, jewels, and merchandise, will interest no
readers. Suffice it to say, that there was enough there, with the other
treasure, to make Amyas rich for life, after all claims of Cary's and
the crew, not forgetting Mr. Salterne's third, as owner of the ship,
had been paid off. But in the captain's cabin were found two chests, one
full of gorgeous Mexican feather dresses, and the other of Spanish and
East Indian finery, which, having come by way of Havana and Cartagena,
was going on, it seemed, to some senora or other at the Caracas. Which
two chests were, at Cary's proposal, voted amid the acclamations of
the crew to Ayacanora, as her due and fit share of the pillage, in
consideration of her Amazonian prowess and valuable services.

So the poor child took greedy possession of the trumpery, had them
carried into Lucy's cabin, and there knelt gloating over them many an
hour. The Mexican work she chose to despise as savage; but the Spanish
dresses were a treasure; and for two or three days she appeared on the
quarter-deck, sunning herself like a peacock before the eyes of Amyas in
Seville mantillas, Madrid hats, Indian brocade farthingales, and I know
not how many other gewgaws, and dare not say how put on.

The crew tittered: Amyas felt much more inclined to cry. There is
nothing so pathetic as a child's vanity, saving a grown person aping a
child's vanity; and saving, too, a child's agony of disappointment when
it finds that it has been laughed at instead of being admired. Amyas
would have spoken, but he was afraid: however, the evil brought its own
cure. The pageant went on, as its actor thought, most successfully
for three days or so; but at last the dupe, unable to contain herself
longer, appealed to Amyas,--"Ayacanora quite English girl now; is she
not?"--heard a titter behind her, looked round, saw a dozen honest
faces in broad grin, comprehended all in a moment, darted down the
companion-ladder, and vanished.

Amyas, fully expecting her to jump overboard, followed as fast as he
could. But she had locked herself in with Lucy, and he could hear her
violent sobs, and Lucy's faint voice entreating to know what was the
matter.

In vain he knocked. She refused to come out all day, and at even they
were forced to break the door open, to prevent Lucy being starved.

There sat Ayacanora, her finery half torn off, and scattered about the
floor in spite, crying still as if her heart would break; while poor
Lucy cried too, half from fright and hunger, and half for company.

Amyas tried to comfort the poor child, assured her that the men should
never laugh at her again; "But then," added he, "you must not be
so--so--" What to say he hardly knew.

"So what?" asked she, crying more bitterly than ever.

"So like a wild girl, Ayacanora."

Her hands dropped on her knees: a strong spasm ran through her
throat and bosom, and she fell on her knees before him, and looked up
imploringly in his face.

"Yes; wild girl--poor, bad wild girl. . . . But I will be English girl
now!"

"Fine clothes will never make you English, my child," said Amyas.

"No! not English clothes--English heart! Good heart, like yours! Yes, I
will be good, and Sir John shall teach me!"

"There's my good maid," said Amyas. "Sir John shall begin and teach you
to-morrow."

"No! Now! now! Ayacanora cannot wait. She will drown herself if she is
bad another day! Come, now!"

And she made him fetch Brimblecombe, heard the honest fellow patiently
for an hour or more, and told Lucy that very night all that he had said.
And from that day, whenever Jack went in to read and pray with the
poor sufferer, Ayacanora, instead of escaping on deck as before, stood
patiently trying to make it all out, and knelt when he knelt, and tried
to pray too--that she might have an English heart; and doubtless her
prayers, dumb as they were, were not unheard.

So went on a few days more, hopefully enough, without any outbreak, till
one morning, just after they had passed the Sargasso-beds. The ship
was taking care of herself; the men were all on deck under the awning,
tinkering, and cobbling, and chatting; Brimblecombe was catechising his
fair pupil in the cabin; Amyas and Cary, cigar in mouth, were chatting
about all heaven and earth, and, above all, of the best way of getting
up a fresh adventure against the Spaniards as soon as they returned;
while Amyas was pouring out to Will that dark hatred of the whole
nation, that dark purpose of revenge for his brother and for Rose, which
had settled down like a murky cloud into every cranny of his heart and
mind. Suddenly there was a noise below; a scuffle and a shout,
which made them both leap to their feet; and up on deck rushed Jack
Brimblecombe, holding his head on with both his hands.

"Save me! save me from that she-fiend! She is possessed with a legion!
She has broken my nose--torn out half my hair!--and I'm sure I have none
to spare! Here she comes! Stand by me, gentlemen both! Satanas, I defy
thee!" And Jack ensconced himself behind the pair, as Ayacanora whirled
upon deck like a very Maenad, and, seeing Amyas, stopped short.

"If you had defied Satan down below there," said Cary, with a laugh, "I
suspect he wouldn't have broken out on you so boldly, Master Jack."

"I am innocent--innocent as the babe unborn! Oh! Mr. Cary! this is too
bad of you, sir!" quoth Jack indignantly, while Amyas asked what was the
matter.

"He looked at me," said she, sturdily.

"Well, a cat may look at a king."

"But he sha'n't look at Ayacanora. Nobody shall but you, or I'll kill
him!"

In vain Jack protested his innocence of having even looked at her. The
fancy (and I verily believe it was nothing more) had taken possession of
her. She refused to return below to her lesson. Jack went off grumbling,
minus his hair, and wore a black eye for a week after.

"At all events," quoth Cary, re-lighting his cigar, "it's a fault on the
right side."

"God give me grace, or it may be one on the wrong side for me."

"He will, old heart-of-oak!" said Cary, laying his arm around Amyas's
neck, to the evident disgust of Ayacanora, who went off to the side,
got a fishing-line, and began amusing herself therewith, while the ship
slipped on quietly and silently as ever, save when Ayacanora laughed and
clapped her hands at the flying-fish scudding from the bonitos. At last,
tired of doing nothing, she went forward to the poop-rail to listen to
John Squire the armorer, who sat tinkering a headpiece, and humming a
song, mutato nomine, concerning his native place--

     "Oh, Bideford is a pleasant place, it shines where it stands,
     And the more I look upon it, the more my heart it warms;
     For there are fair young lasses, in rows upon the quay,
     To welcome gallant mariners, when they come home from say."

"'Tis Sunderland, John Squire, to the song, and not Bidevor," said his
mate.

"Well, Bidevor's so good as Sunderland any day, for all there's
no say-coals there blacking a place about; and makes just so good
harmonies, Tommy Hamblyn--

     "Oh, if I was a herring, to swim the ocean o'er,
     Or if I was a say-dove, to fly unto the shoor,
     To fly unto my true love, a waiting at the door,
     To wed her with a goold ring, and plough the main no moor."

Here Yeo broke in--

"Aren't you ashamed, John Squire, to your years, singing such carnal
vanities, after all the providences you have seen? Let the songs of Zion
be in your mouth, man, if you must needs keep a caterwauling all day
like that."

"You sing 'em yourself then, gunner."

"Well," says Yeo, "and why not?" And out he pulled his psalm-book, and
began a scrap of the grand old psalm--

     "Such as in ships and brittle barks
        Into the seas descend,
     Their merchandise through fearful floods
        To compass and to end;
     There men are forced to behold
        The Lord's works what they be;
     And in the dreadful deep the same,
        Most marvellous they see."

"Humph!" said John Squire. "Very good and godly: but still I du like
a merry catch now and then, I du. Wouldn't you let a body sing
'Rumbelow'--even when he's heaving of the anchor?"

"Well, I don't know," said Yeo; "but the Lord's people had better
praise the Lord then too, and pray for a good voyage, instead of howling
about--

       "A randy, dandy, dandy O,
        A whet of ale and brandy O,
     With a rumbelow and a Westward-ho!
        And heave, my mariners all, O!"

"Is that fit talk for immortal souls? How does that child's-trade sound
beside the Psalms, John Squire?"

Now it befell that Salvation Yeo, for the very purpose of holding up to
ridicule that time-honored melody, had put into it the true nasal twang,
and rung it out as merrily as he had done perhaps twelve years before,
when he got up John Oxenham's anchor in Plymouth Sound. And it befell
also that Ayacanora, as she stood by Amyas's side, watching the men, and
trying to make out their chat, heard it, and started; and then, half to
herself, took up the strain, and sang it over again, word for word, in
the very same tune and tone.

Salvation Yeo started in his turn, and turned deadly pale.

"Who sung that?" he asked quickly.

"The little maid here. She's coming on nicely in her English," said
Amyas.

"The little maid?" said Yeo, turning paler still. "Why do you go about
to scare an old servant, by talking of little maids, Captain Amyas?
Well," he said aloud to himself, "as I am a sinful saint, if I hadn't
seen where the voice came from, I could have sworn it was her; just as
we taught her to sing it by the river there, I and William Penberthy of
Marazion, my good comrade. The Lord have mercy on me!"

All were silent as the grave whenever Yeo made any allusion to that lost
child. Ayacanora only, pleased with Amyas's commendation, went humming
on to herself--

     "And heave, my mariners all, O!"

Yeo started up from the gun where he sat.

"I can't abear it! As I live, I can't! You, Indian maiden, where did you
learn to sing that there?"

Ayacanora looked up at him, half frightened by his vehemence, then at
Amyas, to see if she had been doing anything wrong; and then turned
saucily away, looked over the side, and hummed on.

"Ask her, for mercy's sake--ask her, Captain Leigh!"

"My child," said Amyas, speaking in Indian, "how is it you sing that so
much better than any other English? Did you ever hear it before?"

Ayacanora looked up at him puzzled, and shook her head; and then--

"If you tell Indian to Ayacanora, she dumb. She must be English girl
now, like poor Lucy."

"Well then," said Amyas, "do you recollect, Ayacanora--do you
recollect--what shall I say? anything that happened when you were a
little girl?"

She paused awhile; and then moving her hands overhead--

"Trees--great trees like the Magdalena--always nothing but trees--wild
and bad everything. Ayacanora won't talk about that."

"Do you mind anything that grew on those trees?" asked Yeo, eagerly.

She laughed. "Silly! Flowers and fruit, and nuts--grow on all trees, and
monkey-cups too. Ayacanora climbed up after them--when she was wild. I
won't tell any more."

"But who taught you to call them monkey-cups?" asked Yeo, trembling with
excitement.

"Monkey's drink; mono drink."

"Mono?" said Yeo, foiled on one cast, and now trying another. "How did
you know the beasts were called monos?"

"She might have heard it coming down with us," said Cary, who had joined
the group.

"Ay, monos," said she, in a self-justifying tone. "Faces like little
men, and tails. And one very dirty black one, with a beard, say Amen in
a tree to all the other monkeys, just like Sir John on Sunday."

This allusion to Brimblecombe and the preaching apes upset all but old
Yeo.

"But don't you recollect any Christians?--white people?"

She was silent.

"Don't you mind a white lady?"

"Um?"

"A woman, a very pretty woman, with hair like his?" pointing to Amyas.

"No."

"What do you mind, then, beside those Indians?" added Yeo, in despair.

She turned her back on him peevishly, as if tired with the efforts of
her memory.

"Do try to remember," said Amyas; and she set to work again at once.

"Ayacanora mind great monkeys--black, oh, so high," and she held up her
hand above her head, and made a violent gesture of disgust.

"Monkeys? what, with tails?"

"No, like man. Ah! yes--just like Cooky there--dirty Cooky!"

And that hapless son of Ham, who happened to be just crossing the
main-deck, heard a marlingspike, which by ill luck was lying at hand,
flying past his ears.

"Ayacanora, if you heave any more things at Cooky, I must have you
whipped," said Amyas, without, of course, any such intention.

"I'll kill you, then," answered she, in the most matter-of-fact tone.

"She must mean negurs," said Yeo; "I wonder where she saw them, now.
What if it were they Cimaroons?"

"But why should any one who had seen whites forget them, and yet
remember negroes?" asked Cary.

"Let us try again. Do you mind no great monkeys but those black ones?"
asked Amyas.

"Yes," she said, after a while,--"devil."

"Devil?" asked all three, who, of course, were by no means free from the
belief that the fiend did actually appear to the Indian conjurors, such
as had brought up the girl.

"Ay, him Sir John tell about on Sundays."

"Save and help us!" said Yeo; "and what was he like unto?"

She made various signs to intimate that he had a monkey's face, and
a gray beard like Yeo's. So far so good: but now came a series of
manipulations about her pretty little neck, which set all their fancies
at fault.

"I know," said Cary, at last, bursting into a great laugh. "Sir Urian
had a ruff on, as I live! Trunk-hose too, my fair dame? Stop--I'll make
sure. Was his neck like the senor commandant's, the Spaniard?"

Ayacanora clapped her hands at finding herself understood, and the
questioning went on.

"The 'devil' appeared like a monkey, with a gray beard, in a
ruff;--humph!--"

"Ay!" said she in good enough Spanish, "Mono de Panama; viejo diablo de
Panama."

Yeo threw up his hands with a shriek--"Oh Lord of all mercies! Those
were the last words of Mr. John Oxenham! Ay--and the devil is surely
none other than the devil Don Francisco Xararte! Oh dear! oh dear! oh
dear! my sweet young lady! my pretty little maid! and don't you know me?
Don't you know Salvation Yeo, that carried you over the mountains,
and used to climb for the monkey-cups for you, my dear young lady? And
William Penberthy too, that used to get you flowers; and your poor dear
father, that was just like Mr. Cary there, only he had a black beard,
and black curls, and swore terribly in his speech, like a Spaniard, my
dear young lady?"

And the honest fellow, falling on his knees, covered Ayacanora's hands
with kisses; while all the crew, fancying him gone suddenly mad, crowded
aft.

"Steady, men, and don't vex him!" said Amyas. "He thinks that he has
found his little maid at last."

"And so do I, Amyas, as I live," said Cary.

"Steady, steady, my masters all! If this turn out a wrong scent after
all, his wits will crack. Mr. Yeo, can't you think of any other token?"

Yeo stamped impatiently. "What need then? it's her, I tell ye, and
that's enough! What a beauty she's grown! Oh dear! where were my eyes
all this time, to behold her, and not to see her! 'Tis her very mortal
self, it is! And don't you mind me, my dear, now? Don't you mind
Salvation Yeo, that taught you to sing 'Heave my mariners all, O!'
a-sitting on a log by the boat upon the sand, and there was a sight of
red lilies grew on it in the moss, dear, now, wasn't there? and we made
posies of them to put in your hair, now?"--And the poor old man ran on
in a supplicating, suggestive tone, as if he could persuade the girl
into becoming the person whom he sought.

Ayacanora had watched him, first angry, then amused, then attentive, and
at last with the most intense earnestness. Suddenly she grew crimson,
and snatching her hands from the old man's, hid her face in them, and
stood.

"Do you remember anything of all this, my child?" asked Amyas, gently.

She lifted up her eyes suddenly to his, with a look of imploring agony,
as if beseeching him to spare her. The death of a whole old life,
the birth of a whole new life, was struggling in that beautiful face,
choking in that magnificent throat, as she threw back her small head,
and drew in her breath, and dashed her locks back from her temples, as
if seeking for fresh air. She shuddered, reeled, then fell weeping on
the bosom, not of Salvation Yeo, but of Amyas Leigh.

He stood still a minute or two, bearing that fair burden, ere he could
recollect himself. Then,--

"Ayacanora, you are not yet mistress of yourself, my child. You were
better to go down, and see after poor Lucy, and we will talk about it
all to-morrow."

She gathered herself up instantly, and with eyes fixed on the deck slid
through the group, and disappeared below.

"Ah!" said Yeo, with a tone of exquisite sadness; "the young to the
young! Over land and sea, in the forests and in the galleys, in battle
and prison, I have sought her! And now!--"

"My good friend," said Amyas, "neither are you master of yourself yet.
When she comes round again, whom will she love and thank but you?"

"You, sir! She owes all to you; and so do I. Let me go below, sir. My
old wits are shaky. Bless you, sir, and thank you for ever and ever!"

And Yeo grasped Amyas's hand, and went down to his cabin, from which he
did not reappear for many hours.

From that day Ayacanora was a new creature. The thought that she was
an Englishwoman; that she, the wild Indian, was really one of the
great white people whom she had learned to worship, carried in it some
regenerating change: she regained all her former stateliness, and with
it a self-restraint, a temperance, a softness which she had never shown
before. Her dislike to Cary and Jack vanished. Modest and distant as
ever, she now took delight in learning from them about England and
English people; and her knowledge of our customs gained much from the
somewhat fantastic behaviour which Amyas thought good, for reasons
of his own, to assume toward her. He assigned her a handsome cabin to
herself, always addressed her as madam, and told Cary, Brimblecombe, and
the whole crew that as she was a lady and a Christian, he expected them
to behave to her as such. So there was as much bowing and scraping
on the poop as if it had been a prince's court: and Ayacanora, though
sorely puzzled and chagrined at Amyas's new solemnity, contrived to
imitate it pretty well (taking for granted that it was the right thing);
and having tolerable masters in the art of manners (for both Amyas and
Cary were thoroughly well-bred men), profited much in all things, except
in intimacy with Amyas, who had, cunning fellow, hit on this parade of
good manners, as a fresh means of increasing the distance between him
