Rome many decrees in his honor were passed and the celebration of his
triumph proved a most brilliant event. He had in his procession all
the booty which he had captured, and he had also Bithys, the son of
Cotys, besides Perseus and his wife and three children altogether in
the garb of captives. Fearing that Heaven might wax envious of the
Romans on account of their excess of good fortune he prayed, as
Camillus had done before, that no ill to the State might result from
it all but rather to him if it should be unavoidable: and, indeed, he
lost two sons, one a little before the celebration and the other
during the triumphal festival itself. [Sidenote: FRAG. 66] HE WAS NOT
ONLY GOOD AT GENERALSHIP, BUT HE LOOKED DOWN UPON MONEY. OF THIS THE
FOLLOWING IS A PROOF. THOUGH HE HAD AT THAT TIME ENTERED FOR A SECOND
TERM UPON THE CONSULSHIP AND HAD GAINED POSSESSION OF UNTOLD SPOILS,
HE CONTINUED TO LIVE IN SO GREAT INDIGENCE THAT WHEN HE DIED THE DOWRY
WAS WITH DIFFICULTY PAID BACK TO HIS WIFE.

Of the captives Bithys was returned to his father without ransom, but
Perseus with his children and attendants was settled in Alba. There he
endured so long as he still hoped to recover his sovereignty, but when
he despaired of doing so he despatched himself. His son Philip and his
daughter also died shortly after: only the youngest son survived for a
time and served in the capacity of under-secretary to the magistrates
of Alba. Thus Perseus, who boasted of tracing his descent through
twenty kings and often had Philip and still oftener Alexander in his
mouth, lost his kingdom, became a captive, and marched in the
procession of triumph wearing chains as well as his diadem.

[Sidenote: FRAG. 67^1] THE RHODIANS, WHO IN THEIR EARLIER DEALINGS
WITH THE ROMANS DISPLAYED SELF-ESTEEM, NOW BEGGED THE LATTER NOT TO
BEAR ILL-WILL TOWARD THEM: [Sidenote: FRAG. 67^2] AND WHEREAS THEY HAD
PREVIOUSLY REFUSED TO ACCEPT THE TITLE OF ROMAN ALLIES, THEY WERE NOW
ESPECIALLY ANXIOUS TO SECURE IT; and they obtained the object of their
eagerness, but only after long delay. The Romans harbored resentment
against the Cretans, too, but in response to a number of embassies on
the part of this nation they eventually relaxed their anger. Their
behavior was similar [Sidenote: FRAG. 68] IN THE CASE OF PRUSIAS AND
EUMENES. THE FORMER CAME PERSONALLY TO THE CITY AND ENTERED THE
SENATE-HOUSE, COVERED THE THRESHOLD WITH KISSES, AND WORSHIPPED THE
SENATORS; THUS HE OBTAINED PITY and was held guiltless: Eumenes
through Attalus his brother secured himself against any continuation
of malice on their part.

At this time, too, the affairs of Cappadocia were settled in the
following manner. The monarch of that country, Ariarathes, had a
legitimate son Ariarathes. But since for a long time before she had
this son his wife had failed to conceive, she had adopted a child whom
she called Orophernes. When the true son was later born the position
of the other was detected and he was banished. Naturally after the
death of Ariarathes he headed an uprising against his brother. Eumenes
allied himself with Ariarathes, and Demetrius the king of Syria with
Orophernes. Ariarathes after sustaining a defeat found an asylum with
the Romans and was appointed by them to share the kingdom with
Orophernes. But the fact that Ariarathes had been termed "friend and
ally" by the Romans enabled him subsequently to make the entire domain
his own. Attalus soon succeeded Eumenes (who died) and drove
Orophernes and Demetrius out of Cappadocia altogether.

IX, 25.--Ptolemy, ruler of Egypt, passed away leaving two sons and one
daughter. When the brothers began to quarrel with each other about the
supreme office, Antiochus the son of Antiochus the Great sheltered the
younger, who had been driven out, in order that under the pretext of
defending him he might interfere in Egyptian politics. In a campaign
directed against Egypt he conquered the greater part of the country
and spent some time in besieging Alexandria. As the unsubdued sought
refuge with the Romans, Popilius was sent to Antiochus and bade him
keep his hands off Egypt; for the brothers, comprehending the designs
of Antiochus, had become reconciled. When the latter was for putting
off his reply, Popilius drew a circle about him with his staff and
demanded that he deliberate and answer standing where he was.
Antiochus then in fear raised the siege. The Ptolemies (such was the
name of both princes) on being relieved of foreign dread fell into
renewed disputing. Then they were reconciled again by the Romans on
the condition that the elder should have Egypt and Cyprus, and the
other one the country about Cyrene, which was likewise part of Egypt
at that time. The younger one was vexed at having the inferior portion
and came to Rome where he secured from the government a grant of
Cyprus in addition. Then the elder once more effected an arrangement
with the younger son by giving him some cities in exchange for Cyprus
and being rated to contribute money and grain.

[Sidenote: B.C. 164 (_a.u._ 590)] Antiochus subsequently died, leaving
the kingdom to a child of the same name whom the Romans confirmed in
possession of it and sent three men (with sufficient show of reason,
for he was a minor) to act as his guardians. They on finding elephants
and triremes contrary to the compact ordered the elephants all to be
slain and administered everything else in the interest of Rome.
Therefore Lysias, who had been entrusted with the surveillance of the
king, incited the populace to cast out the Romans and also kill
Gaius[39] Octavius. When these plans had been carried out Lysias
straightway despatched envoys to Rome to offer a defence for what had
been done. Demetrius the son of Seleucus son of Antiochus, who was
staying in Rome as a hostage at the time of his father's death and had
been deprived of the kingdom by his uncle Antiochus, asked for his
ancestral domain when he learned of the death of Antiochus, but the
Romans would neither help him to get it nor permit him to set out from
Rome. In spite of his dissatisfaction he remained quiet. But when the
affair of Lysias came up, he no longer delayed but escaped by flight
and sent a message to the senate from Lycia saying that his objective
was not his _cousin_ Antiochus (the children of brothers were so
termed by the ancients) but Lysias, and his purpose was to avenge
Octavius. Hastening to Tripolis in Syria he won over this town also,
pretending that he had been sent out by the Romans to take charge of
the kingdom. No one at this time had any idea of his secret flight,
and so after conquering Apamea and gathering a body of troops he
marched to Antioch. There he destroyed Lysias and the boy, who came to
meet him in the guise of friends (through fear of the Romans they had
offered no opposition), [Sidenote: B.C. 162 (_a.u._ 592)] and he
recovered the kingdom, whereupon he forwarded to Rome a crown and the
assassins of Octavius. The citizens, being enraged at him, would
accept neither the one nor the other.

[Footnote 39: This name is erroneously written by Zonaras for Gnaeus.
(Cp. Polybius 28, 3, 2; 31, 12 (also 13, 19, and 20); 32, 4 to 7.)]

Next the Romans made a campaign against the Dalmatians. This race
consists of Illyrians who dwell along the Ionian Gulf, some of whom
the Greeks used to call Taulantii, and part of them are close to
Dyrrachium. The cause of the war was that they had been abusing some
of their neighbors who were in a league of friendship with the Romans,
and when the Romans joined an embassy in their behalf the Dalmatians
returned an answer that was not respectful, and even arrested and
killed the envoys of the other nations. [Sidenote: B.C. 155 (_a.u._
599)] Scipio Nasica subdued this race in a campaign against them. He
captured their towns and several times sold the captives.--Other
events, too, took place in those days,--not, however, of a kind to
deserve mention or historical record.


_(BOOK 21, BOISSEVAIN.)_

[Sidenote: B.C. 153 (_a.u._ 601)] IX, 26.--The rattling of dice in the
box of Circumstance now announced the final cast in the struggle with
Carthage,--the third of the series. The Carthaginians could not endure
their subordinate position, but contrary to the treaty were setting
their fleet in readiness and making alliances as measures of
preparation for war with the Nomads: [Sidenote: B.C. 152 (_a.u._ 602)]
and the Romans, having settled other questions to their own
satisfaction, did not remain at rest, but by the mouth of Scipio
Nasica their commissioner they charged their rivals with this breach
of faith and ordered them to disband their armament. The Carthaginians
found fault with Masinissa and on account of the war with him declined
to obey the command. The Romans then arranged terms for them with
Masinissa and prevailed upon him to retire from some territory in
their favor. [Sidenote: B.C. 150 (_a.u._ 604)] Since they showed
themselves no more tractable than before, the Romans waited a bit, and
as soon as information was received that the Carthaginians had been
worsted in a great battle by Masinissa they voted for war against
them. The Carthaginians, who were feeling the effects of their defeat,
became frightened on learning this and sent envoys to Rome to secure
an alliance; for other neighboring tribes were also beginning to
attack them. They feigned a readiness to yield to the Romans on all
points, and their very intention of not remaining true to their
agreements rendered them all the more ready to promise anything.

[Sidenote: B.C. 149 (_a.u._ 605)] When the senate called a meeting to
consider the matter, Scipio Nasica advised receiving the Carthaginian
embassy and making a truce with them, but Marcus Cato declared that no
truce ought to be arranged nor the decree of war rescinded. The
senators accepted the supplication of the envoys, promised to grant
them a truce, and asked for hostages as an earnest of these
conditions. These hostages were sent to Sicily and Lucius Marcius and
Marcus Manilius went there, took charge of them, and sent them on to
Rome. They themselves made haste to occupy Africa. After encamping
they summoned the magistrates of Carthage to appear before them. When
these officials arrived they did not unmask all their demands at once,
for they feared that if the Carthaginians understood them in season
they would plunge into war with resources unimpaired. So first they
asked for and received grain, next the triremes, and after that the
engines; and then they demanded the arms besides. They secured the
entire visible supply (but the Carthaginians had a great deal of other
equipment safely hidden) and at length ordered them to raze their city
and to build in its place an unwalled town inland, eighty stades
distant from the sea. At that the Carthaginians were dissolved in
tears, acknowledged that they were trapped, and bewailed their fate,
begging the consuls not to compel them to act as the assassins of
their country. They soon found that they could accomplish nothing and
had to face the repeated command either to execute the order or to
cast the die of war. Many of the people then remained there on the
Roman side, tacitly admitting their success: the remainder withdrew,
and after killing some of their rulers for not having chosen war in
the first place and after murdering such Romans as were discovered
within the fortification they turned their attention to war. Under
these circumstances they liberated all the slaves, restored the
exiles, chose Hasdrubal once more as leader, and made ready arms,
engines, and triremes. With war at their doors and the danger of
slavery confronting them they prepared in the briefest possible time
everything that they needed. They spared nothing, but melted down the
statues for the sake of the bronze in them and used the hair of their
women for ropes. The consuls at first, thinking them unarmed, expected
to overcome them speedily and merely prepared ladders, with which they
expected to scale the wall at once. As the assault showed their
enemies to be armed and they saw that they possessed means for a
siege, the Romans, before approaching close to the city again, devoted
themselves to the manufacture of engines. The construction of these
machines was fraught with danger, since Hasdrubal set ambuscades for
those who were gathering the wood and annoyed them considerably, but
in time they were able to assail the town. Now Manilius in his assault
from the land side could not injure the Carthaginians at all, but
Marcius, while delivering an attack from marshy ground on the side
where the sea was, managed to shake down a part of the wall, though he
could not get inside. The Carthaginians repulsed those who attempted
to force their way in, and at night issued through the ruins to slay
numerous men and burn up a very large number of engines. Hasdrubal and
the cavalry, however, did not allow them to scatter over any
considerable territory and Masinissa lent them no aid. He had not been
invited at the opening of the war, and, though he had promised
Hasdrubal that he would fight now, they gave him no opportunity of
doing so.

IX, 27.--The consuls in view of the outcome of their attempts and
because their fleet had been damaged by its stay in the lake raised
the siege. Marcius endeavored to achieve some advantage by sea or at
least to injure the coast districts, but not accomplishing anything he
sailed for home, then turned back and subdued AEgimurus: and Manilius
started for the interior, but upon sustaining injuries at the hands of
Himilco, commander of the Carthaginian cavalry, whom they called also
Phameas, he returned to Carthage. There, while the outside forces of
Hasdrubal troubled him, the people in the city harassed him by
excursions both night and day. In fact, the Carthaginians came to
despise him and advanced as far as the Roman camp, but being for the
most part unarmed they lost a number of men and shut themselves up in
their fortifications again. Manilius was particularly anxious to get
into close quarters with Hasdrubal, thinking that, if he could
vanquish him, he should find it easier to wage war upon the remainder.
His wish to get into close quarters with him was eventually realized.
He followed Hasdrubal to a small fort whither the latter was retiring,
and before he knew it got into a narrow passage over rough ground and
there suffered a tremendous reverse. He would have been utterly
destroyed, had he not found a most valuable helper in the person of
Scipio the descendant of Africanus, [Sidenote: FRAG. 69] WHO EXCELLED
IN APPREHENDING AND DEVISING BEFOREHAND THE MOST ADVANTAGEOUS
MOVEMENTS, BUT EXCELLED ALSO IN EXECUTING THEM. IN BODILY FRAME HE WAS
STRONG; HE WAS AMIABLE, TOO, AND MODERATE; AND FOR THESE REASONS HE
ESCAPED ENVY. HE CHOSE TO MAKE HIMSELF LIKE TO HIS INFERIORS, NOT
BETTER THAN HIS EQUALS (he served as military tribune), AND WEAKER
THAN GREATER MEN. Manilius both reported what Scipio had done and sent
a letter to the people of Rome concealing nothing, but including among
other matters an account of the proceedings of Masinissa and Phameas.
These were as follows.

Masinissa on his death-bed was at a loss to know how he should dispose
of his kingdom, his dilemma being due to the number of his sons and
the variety of their family ties on their mothers' side. Therefore he
sent for Scipio to advise him, and the consul let Scipio go. But the
demise of Masinissa occurred before Scipio arrived, and he gave his
ring to his son Micipsa and delivered and committed all the other
interests pertaining to his kingdom to Scipio, so soon as the latter
should arrive. Scipio being aware of the preferences of Masinissa's
sons assigned the kingdom to no one of them singly; but whereas there
were three most distinguished, the eldest Micipsa, the youngest
Gulussa, and intermediate in age Mastanabal, he appointed these to
have charge of affairs, though separately. To the eldest, who was
versed in business and fond of wealth, he entrusted the fiscal
administration, to the second son, who possessed the critical faculty,
he granted the right to decide disputes, and to Gulussa, who chanced
to be of a warlike temperament, he delivered the troops. They had also
numerous brothers on whom he bestowed certain cities and districts. He
took Gulussa along with him and introduced him to the consul.

Now at the beginning of spring they made a campaign against the allies
of the Carthaginians and brought many of them to terms forcibly while
inducing many others to capitulate. Scipio was especially active in
the work. [Sidenote: FRAG. 70] WHEN PHAMEAS, DESPAIRING OF
CARTHAGINIAN SUCCESS, went over to the Romans and held a conference
with Scipio, then they all set out against Hasdrubal. For several days
they assailed his fortress, but as necessaries failed them they
retired in good order. During the siege Phameas had attacked them and
made a show of fighting, and in the progress of the action he had
deserted together with some of the cavalry. Then Manilius went to
Utica and remained quiet, while Scipio took Phameas back to Rome,
where he himself received commendation and Phameas was honored to the
extent of being allowed to sit with the senate in the senate-house.

IX, 28.--It was at this time, too, that the episode occurred in which
Prusias figured. The latter being old and of an irritable disposition
became possessed by a fear that the Bithynians would expel him from
his kingdom, choosing in his stead his son Nicomedes. So on some
pretext he sent his son to Rome, with orders to make that his home.
But since he plotted against the younger man even during the sojourn
in Rome and labored to kill him, some Bithynians made visits to Rome,
took Nicomedes away secretly and conveyed him to Bithynia, and after
slaying the old man designated him king. This act vexed the Romans,
but did not incense them to the point of war.

A certain Andriscus, who was a native of Atramyttium and resembled
Perseus in appearance, caused a wide area of Macedonia to revolt by
pretending to be his son and calling himself Philip. First he went to
Macedonia and tried to upheave the country, but as no one would yield
him allegiance he took his way to Demetrius in Syria to obtain from
him the aid which relationship might afford. Demetrius arrested him
and sent him to Rome, where he met with general contempt, both because
he stood convicted of not being the son of Perseus and because he had
no other qualities that were worthy of attention. On being released he
gathered a band of revolutionists, drew after him a number of cities,
and finally, assuming the kingly garb and mustering an army, he
reached Thrace. There he added to his army numbers of the independent
lands as well as numbers of princes who disliked the Romans, invaded
Macedonia (which he occupied), and setting out for Thessaly made not a
little of that territory his own.

The Romans at first scorned Andriscus and then they sent Scipio Nasica
to effect some peaceful settlement in those parts. On reaching Greece
and ascertaining what had occurred he despatched a letter to the
Romans explaining the case; then after collecting troops from allies
there he gave attention to the business in hand and advanced as far
as Macedonia. The people of Rome when informed of the doings of
Andriscus sent an army and Publius Juventius, a praetor. Juventius had
just reached the vicinity of Macedonia, when Andriscus gave battle,
killed the praetor, and would have annihilated his entire force but for
its withdrawal by night. Next he invaded Thessaly, damaged a very
great extent of it, and ranged Thracian interests on his side.
Consequently the people of Rome once more despatched a praetor, Quintus
Caecilius Metellus, with a strong body of troops: he proceeded to
Macedonia and enjoyed the assistance of the fleet of Attalus. The
fleet inspired Andriscus with some alarm for the coast districts so
that he did not venture to advance farther but moved up to a point
slightly beyond Pydna. There he had the best of it in a cavalry
encounter but out of fear of the infantry turned back. His elation was
such that he divided his army into two sections, and with one remained
on the watch where he was, while he sent the other to ravage Thessaly.
Metellus in derision of the forces confronting him joined battle, and
by overpowering those with whom he first came into conflict he got
control of the remainder with greater ease; for they made terms with
him readily, inasmuch as they had erred. Andriscus fled to Thrace and
after assembling a body of fighters gave battle to Metellus as the
latter was advancing on his track. His vanguard, however, was routed
first; then his contingent of allies was scattered; and Andriscus
himself was betrayed by Byzes, a Thracian prince, and executed.
