tribute to the man who dared to die for the truth. Away in the West a
figure was looming up, a gaunt, homely figure, born in and nurtured in
hardship, but endowed as no other man of his age was endowed, with the
ability to guide his country through the awful ordeal to come. He
perceived the right, and he boldly declared it. "If it is decreed that I
should go down because of this speech, then let me go down linked to the
truth--let me die in the advocacy of what is just and right," said
Abraham Lincoln to the friends who disapproved his celebrated declaration
that the government could not endure half slave, half free. "In the right
to eat the bread without the leave of anybody else, which his own hand
earns, he (the negro) is my equal, and the equal of Judge Douglas, and
the equal of every living man"--was another sterling utterance which
struck home to the North.

While Lincoln was pleading the cause of human rights, and asserting that
the Declaration of Independence was meant for black as well as white,
members of President Buchanan's cabinet, holding in their grasp the reins
of National Government, were plotting the nation's overthrow. Even down
to the very moment that John B. Floyd left the War Office, and when South
Carolina was already in rebellion, this plotting was continued. As late
as the beginning of January, 1861, an attempt was made under an order
from Floyd to remove one hundred and fifty cannon from the Allegheny
Arsenal, at Pittsburg, to the South, to be used against the Union. "Our
people are a unit that not a gun shall be shipped South," said the
_Dispatch_ of that city, and without violence, without the shedding of a
drop of blood or the drawing of a weapon against national authority, the
citizens obtained the reversal of the order, and the guns, some of which
were already under convoy to the wharf, were returned to the arsenal. The
"Rebellion Records," published by the government, should not begin with
1861. They should go back to the time when the plot originated to strip
the national arsenals for the benefit of the nation's enemies, to disarm
the Union that it might fall a prey to secession. This was the treason
which should never be forgotten. The men who fought bravely and openly in
the field for the Confederate cause can be respected for their sincerity
and honored for their valor; but not so with the men who before the war
violated their trust as guardians and armor bearers of the Union to
betray the nation to its conspiring foes.

                        *          *          *

The conditions at the beginning of the war were much more favorable to
the South than a mere comparison of population would indicate. The loyal
States had a population of 23,000,000; the seceded States 8,000,000, of
whom about one-half were slaves. These slaves counted, however, for about
as much effective strength as if they had been whites, for the soil had
to be cultivated, the armies fed, fortifications built and other
necessary services performed, and the negroes, while all who were bright
enough to understand the situation wished for the success of the Union,
worked for their masters faithfully, as a rule, until the approach of the
national armies gave an opportunity to escape. Besides, the negroes in
attendance on the Confederate troops performed many duties to which on
the Northern side soldiers were assigned, and in this way the blacks were
useful in even a strictly military sense. In short, the negroes did
everything for the Confederacy but fight for it, and this, too, although
they loved the blue uniform, and gave loyal assistance to the Union
troops whenever occasion offered. The Southern forces, it should also be
remembered, were on their own ground. They knew every thicket and road
and stream; they had the sympathy of the white, as well as the service of
the black inhabitants. They were led by a brilliant group of commanders
whom Jefferson Davis, when Secretary of War, had brought together
probably with this object in view, and they were thoroughly armed and
equipped at the expense of the very government against which they were
contending. It is needless to say that no better soldiers ever bore rifle
or sabre than the men of the Southern Confederacy. They were, like most
of their northern antagonists, Americans of the same blood as those who
carried the redoubts at Yorktown and stormed the hill of Chapultepec, and
their courage in the Civil War fully maintained the prestige gained in
battle against alien foes. In intelligence, or at least in education,
however, the rank and file of the Confederate armies were inferior to the
native Americans in the Union armies. The Confederate troops captured at
Vicksburg were no doubt equal to the average, and of the 27,000 men then
made prisoners and paroled two-thirds made their marks, not being able to
write their names. This is not so surprising when it is remembered that
there was no common school system in the South before the war, and that
the "twenty-negro law," exempting the owner of twenty negroes from
conscription, excused from military service the class which had an
opportunity to be educated, and which also had most at stake in the
contest.

Before the close of the war, however, all exemptions in the Confederacy
were virtually swept away, and the government enlisted every one able to
bear a musket, from the boy hardly in his teens to the old man tottering
to the grave. Those not able to go to the front did duty in the rear, and
the whole male population, excepting cripples and children, was in the
ranks, or the civil service. If any escaped the net of conscription they
were likely to be caught in the round-up made every now and then after
the fashion of the old English press-gang, when all who happened to be in
sight were gathered in, and sent to the army, unless they clearly proved
a title to freedom. In one of these round-ups, says Jones, in his "Diary
of a Rebel War Clerk"--the Postmaster-General of the Confederacy, John H.
Reagan, was carried along with the rest, and detained for some time
before released. Thus the prophecy of Houston was strikingly fulfilled.
Of course, the refugees and deserters, of whom there were a very large
number in the swamps and woods of the South, are excepted from the
statement that the whole population was in arms for the Confederate
cause.

                        *          *          *

In the beginning of the war the North was at a disadvantage. Mr. Lincoln
found the little army of the United States scattered and disorganized,
the navy sent to distant quarters of the globe, the treasury bankrupt and
the public service demoralized. Floyd and his fellow-conspirators had
done their work thoroughly. It did not take long for the people of the
North to rally to the defence of the government, and for an army to be
formed capable not only of defending the loyal States, but of striking a
blow at the Confederacy. With the National credit restored, an abundance
of currency provided for national needs, and the public departments
cleared of Southern sympathizers, the North entered upon a conflict which
could have but one ending should the North remain steadfast.

The weakness of the South, from a military standpoint, was in the fact
that men lost could not be replaced. The North could replenish its
depleted armies; the South could not. With men therefore of the same race
and equal in soldierly qualities arrayed against each other, one side
within measurable distance of exhaustion and the other with inexhaustible
human resources to draw upon, the war became an easy sum in arithmetic,
provided the stronger party should not cry "enough" before the weaker had
reached the exhaustion point. The battles on comparatively equal terms
were fought, therefore, in the early part of the war, the decisive
battles in 1863, and the closing struggle between the gasping Confederacy
and the Union stronger than ever, in the last fifteen months of the
conflict.

In the North, notwithstanding the immense armies put in the field, there
never was a time except in brief periods of riot and disorder, when the
usual bustle of humanity was absent from the cities and towns. Commerce
and industry went on with accustomed activity. While Southern cities
looked like garrisoned graveyards the North had never worn a busier or
more prosperous appearance. With such a large population there should
have been no reason for conscription, but when conscription was deemed
requisite, there ought to have been no exemption on the ground of wealth.
Every able-bodied drafted man ought to have been obliged to serve,
without the privilege of a substitute, and no money payment should have
secured release from service. The obligation to defend the country rests
upon all, but if there is any distinction, the rich man has more interest
in protecting the government which shields him and his possessions from
danger than the poor man. European nations make no exemption on account
of wealth or position, and the American Republic certainly should not
have given such an example.

The people of the North, however, with comparatively few but very
troublesome exceptions, gave earnest and enthusiastic support to the
National Government. Committees were formed everywhere to aid the armies
in the field, to provide for the wounded and the sick and to assist the
families of absent soldiers. In the darkest days of the struggle the
people never lost faith in the ultimate triumph of the Union. While
statesmen and editors professing to be superior to their fellows in
knowledge and foresight saw only the gloomy side and predicted the defeat
and downfall of the Republic, the popular heart was true and confident
and courageous. Upon the people's arms Lincoln could always lean in times
of severest trial and anxiety, assured of comfort, support and strength.

                        *          *          *

The unfriendliness of Great Britain and France was a most serious and
ever-present danger to the United States throughout the whole period of
the war, and was prolific of injury to American interests. From the
first Great Britain showed a conscious unfriendly purpose. That
government privately proposed to France, even before Queen Victoria's
proclamation recognizing the insurgents as belligerents, to open direct
negotiations with the South, and the British Legation at Washington was
used for secret communications with the Confederate President. When the
Confederate agents, James M. Mason and John Slidell and their secretaries,
were taken from the British mail-steamer Trent by Captain Wilkes, of the
American warship San Jacinto, the course of the British Cabinet indicated
an unfriendliness so extreme as to approach a desire for war. Peremptory
instructions were sent to Lord Lyons, the British Minister at Washington,
to demand the release of the men arrested, and to leave Washington if the
demand was not complied with in seven days. Vessels of war were fitted
out by the British, and troops pressed forward to Canada. The official
statement of the American Minister at London that the act had not been
authorized by the American Government was kept from the British people,
and public opinion was encouraged to drift into a state of hostility
toward the United States. The surrender of Mason and Slidell removed all
excuse for war, much to the disgust, doubtless, of the ruling class in
Great Britain. Leading English statesmen made public speeches favoring
the Confederacy. Lord Russell, himself, the Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, stated in the House of Lords that the subjugation of the
South by the North "would prove a calamity to the United States and to
the world." The Alabama and other privateers went forth from British
ports to prey on American commerce, and the builder of the Alabama was
cheered in the House of Commons when he boasted of what he had done. Even
Mr. Gladstone--before Vicksburg and Gettysburg--declared that "the
restoration of the American Union by force is unattainable."

Napoleon the Third--that crow in the eagle's nest--was cordially with
Great Britain in all efforts to injure the American Union. He had long
cherished the design to establish a vassal empire in Mexico, and in our
Civil War he saw his opportunity. A Southern Confederacy would form a
grand barrier between a Franco-Mexican dominion and the United States,
and while the French emperor treated the government at Washington with
diplomatic courtesy, he never ceased to exert his influence in favor of
the South, so far as he could, without an actual rupture. Napoleon was
ready and anxious to recognize the Confederacy, and he only waited for
the South to win victories that would give him an excuse for action. "His
course toward us," says Bigelow, "from the beginning to the end of the
plot was deliberately and systematically treacherous, and his ministers
allowed themselves to be made his pliant instruments."[1] General Grant
declared at City Point, in 1864, that as soon as we had disposed of the
Confederates we must begin with the Imperialists, and after Appomattox he
expressed the opinion that the French intervention in Mexico was so
closely allied to the rebellion as to be a part of it.

      [1] France and the Confederate Navy.

Neither England nor France interfered directly in behalf of the South.
Louis Napoleon waited for England to act, and the British Cabinet felt
that the British masses would not justify a war in defence of slavery.
The American Government, while it met with firm and dignified protest
Great Britain's disregard of international obligations, was careful to
abstain from giving any excuse for British hostility. "One war at a
time," said Abraham Lincoln, in deciding to surrender Mason and Slidell.
But Americans kept careful account of every item of outrage on the part
of England, and in due time the bill was presented--and paid. And in due
time also Napoleon was told to go out of Mexico--and he went.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

The Confederate Government Organized--Fort Sumter--President Lincoln
Calls for 75000 Men--Command of the Union Forces offered to Robert E.
Lee--Lee Joins the Confederacy--Missouri Saved to the Union--Battle of
Bull Run--Union Successes in the West--General Grant Captures Fort
Donelson--"I Have No Terms but Unconditional Surrender"--The Monitor and
Merrimac Fight--Its World-Wide Effect--Grant Victorious at Shiloh--Union
Naval Victory Near Memphis--That City Captured--General McClellan's
Tactics--He Retreats from Victory at Malvern Hill--Second Bull Run
Defeat--Great Battle of Antietam--Lee Repulsed, but Not Pursued--
McClellan Superseded by Burnside--Union Defeat at Frederickburg--
Union Victories in the West--Bragg Defeated by Rosecrans at Stone River
--The Emancipation Proclamation.


The new Confederate Government was organized at Montgomery, Ala.,
February 4, 1861, by delegates from South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida,
Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana and Texas. Jefferson Davis, of Mississippi,
was elected President and Alexander H. Stephens, of Georgia,
Vice-President. The border States, which would be the battlefield of war,
still hoped for peace, and hesitated to yield to the importunities of
those who had already crossed the Rubicon. In Charleston harbor, the
American flag floated over a little fortress called Sumter, so named
after the "South Carolina Gamecock" of the Revolution, and commanded by
Major Robert Anderson. In the gray of the morning on April 12, the
Confederate batteries opened fire on the fort. For nearly two days the
Stars and Stripes waved defiantly amid the storm of shot and shell. Then
further resistance being useless and hopeless, the brave garrison
evacuated the fort, carrying away the flag which they had so resolutely
defended. Two days later President Lincoln called for 75,000 men to put
down armed resistance to national authority. The North sprang to arms,
and from East and West regiments started on their way to Washington. The
governors of Arkansas, Tennessee, Kentucky, North Carolina, Virginia and
Missouri declined to obey the call of the President, and the secession of
all these States from the Union followed, except Kentucky and Missouri.
On April 17, the Virginia Convention passed the Ordinance of Secession.
President Lincoln had desired to give the command of the troops to be
called into the field to Colonel Robert E. Lee, of the First United
States Cavalry, but that officer declined to accept the offer, resigned
his commission, and joined the Confederacy. It should be needless to say
that the qualities displayed by Lee, at the head of the Army of Northern
Virginia, amply justified President Lincoln's measure of his capacity.
The seat of the Confederate Government was removed from Montgomery to
Richmond, and the latter city was thenceforward the headquarters of the
rebellion.

Of the other border States Maryland remained in the Union, and Kentucky,
after an attempt to maintain an impossible neutrality, yielded to the
influence of mountain air, and espoused the cause of freedom. Missouri's
disloyal government sought to drag the State into secession, but Francis
Preston Blair, a lawyer of St. Louis, and Captain Nathaniel Lyon,
commandant of the United States Arsenal in that city, took vigorous
action against the rebel sympathizers, and saved the State to the Union.
The German element in Missouri was so loyal to the old flag that
"Unionist" and "Dutchman" were synonymous terms in that region during the
war. Captain Lyon, promoted to brigadier-general, was defeated and killed
at the battle of Wilson Creek. It is believed that he resolved to win the
battle or die. Of such stuff were the men who rescued the Southwest.

The battle of Bull Run, when General Joseph E. Johnston, commanding the
Confederates, defeated General McDowell with serious loss, and sent the
Union army in disorderly retreat toward Washington, taught the Northern
people that the war was not a parade, and that the overthrow of the
Confederacy would tax all the energies of the loyal States. Fortunately,
General George H. Thomas won an important victory for the Union at Mill
Spring, Kentucky, in January, 1862, and the capture of Fort Henry and
Fort Donelson, in the following month, by General Ulysses S. Grant, aided
by Commodore Foote and his gunboats, tended to efface the depression
caused by defeat in Virginia. General Grant's reply to the Confederate
General Buckner, when the latter wished to make terms for the surrender
of Fort Donelson, was on every tongue in the North. "I have no terms but
unconditional surrender. I propose to move immediately upon your works,"
was a message that spoke the man. Nearly sixteen thousand prisoners were
captured. They belonged mostly to the working classes of Missouri,
Tennessee and Arkansas.

                        *          *          *

John Ericsson's Monitor, in March, 1862, sent a thrill of relief and joy
through the North by its wonderful victory over the Merrimac. The
Confederates cut down a United States frigate at the Norfolk navy yard,
and transformed it into an ironclad ram, with a powerful beak. This
monster they sent against the Union fleet of wooden warships in Hampton
Roads. Broadsides had no effect on the Merrimac. The floating fortress
attacked the Cumberland, ramming that vessel, and breaking a great hole
in its side. The Cumberland sank with all on board. The Congress was
driven aground and compelled to surrender. Then the monster rested for
the night, intending to continue its mission of destruction on the
morrow. It seemed that not only the Union fleet, but the ports and
commerce of the North would be at the mercy of this novel and terrible
engine of destruction. The telegraph carried the news everywhere, and in
dread and anxiety the people awaited the fate of another day. When
morning came at Hampton Roads a small nondescript vessel, looking like an
oval raft with a turret, interposed between the Merrimac and its prey. It
was the Monitor, the invention of Captain John Ericsson, and it had
arrived during the night of March 8. The Monitor had been constructed at
Greenpoint, Long Island, and was towed to Hampton Roads by steamers. Her
turret was a revolving, bomb-proof fort, in which were mounted two
11-inch Dahlgren guns. As the turret revolved the great guns kept up a
steady discharge, battering the sides of the Merrimac. The latter hurled
enormous masses of iron on the Monitor, but made no impression whatever
on the little craft, and the duel continued until the Merrimac gave up
the fight, and ran back to shelter at Norfolk. Ericsson's praise was on
every tongue. The great Swedish engineer whose sanity had been questioned
when he submitted his ideas to the Navy Department, not only saved the
Union navy from destruction, and Northern harbors from devastation, but
he also revolutionized naval warfare.

                        *          *          *

Their first line broken in the Southwest, and now compelled to fight
within secession territory, the Confederates made a stand along a second
line from Memphis to Chattanooga, their forces being massed at Corinth.
In the great battle of Shiloh (April 6 and 7) 100,000 men were engaged;
the National loss in killed, wounded and prisoners was about 15,000, and
that of the Confederates over 10,000. The latter fought more desperately
than on any previous field, and for a time they had the advantage. The
