
Looking about, they went down by the stairs leading to the
courtyard and walked carelessly across. Taking care to avoid
mingling with the excited groups and, at the same time, keeping as
far from the torches burning in the courtyard as possible, they
passed through the gate--which was standing open without a
guard--and followed the zigzag road, with towers placed at its
corners, each mounting two guns so as to sweep the approach.

There were two high walls on either hand, loopholed for musketry;
and Abdool said that there was a platform, wide enough for two men
to pass, along the whole length of it. The road terminated in a
heavy gate, some forty yards above that through the outer wall. A
bastion covered it so that, were the lower gate carried, an enemy
would not be able to bring guns to bear against it. This gate stood
open and, passing through it and behind the bastion, they came at
once upon the low, stone-built huts where the majority of the
garrison lived, in time of peace.

Several torches were burning here, and round each of these were
groups of men, talking excitedly. Leaving Harry behind one of the
huts, Abdool strolled up for a few minutes, to listen to the
conversation, and then rejoined his master.

"What are they saying, Abdool?"

"They are saying, sir, that it was wrong of Holkar to attack the
city, before he had defeated the English. It has cost many lives.
But when the English are defeated he will be able, without doubt,
to capture the city; which probably would open its gates to him,
seeing that no assistance could come to them."

"No one doubts, then, that Holkar will defeat us?"

"Not in the least," Abdool replied. "They say that he has two
hundred cannon. These will mow down the English. Then the cavalry
will charge, and there will be an end of the matter."

"They seem to have forgotten all about Laswaree," Harry said. "But
we had better be going. Where is the way up to the wall?"

"Close by, sahib."

They ascended the steps. As far as could be seen the wall was
entirely deserted, and they made their way cautiously until close
to the gate. Harry then stopped, and Abdool went on with noiseless
tread. He soon returned.

"It is as I thought: no sentries are yet posted."

"But that tower over the gate, Abdool, is a great deal too high for
us to descend by that rope that you have got."

"Yes, sahib. We go out by an entrance on to a bastion, flanking the
gate. The rope will be long enough there or, at any rate, there
will be but a very short drop."

They entered the tower through the door communicating with the
wall. Abdool led the way.

"Keep close to me, sahib. I went down here this morning, and can
find my way in the dark. I did not think that there was much chance
of our coming this way, but it was better to find out all about
it."

Moving slowly and cautiously, they came to a flight of steps. They
descended some twenty feet, and found themselves at an open portal,
leading on to the flanking bastion. The rope was soon fixed.

"I will go first, sahib, and will let you know how far you will
have to drop; for the wall looks, to me, higher than it was at the
point where I intended to descend."

[Illustration: Abdool at once slipped down.]

It was tied round the neck of a gun, and Abdool at once slipped
down. There was a pause, then a slight dull sound, and the rope
hung loose.

"The knot at the end is ten feet from the ground," Abdool said, in
a low tone.

"That is near enough," Harry replied, and then he swung himself
over.

When he came to the last knot, he lowered himself to the full
length of his arms and let go. The fall was not much more than a
yard; and Abdool stood close by, ready to catch him, should he miss
his foothold on alighting.

They at once started, at a rapid pace, down the hill. They had
nearly reached the plain when the deep note of a horn was heard.

"That is the alarm!" Harry exclaimed. "They have found out that I
have gone."

"They will soon be after us, but there is no fear of their catching
us," Abdool said, as they broke into a trot. "No one will know, at
first, what has happened. Everyone will run to his post; then they
will have to search the fort, and all the ground between it and the
lower wall. All that will take time. It may be an hour before
horsemen start.

"I did not think that they would miss you till tomorrow morning."

"I suppose the rajah sent up for me, to amuse himself by
threatening me. He would hardly venture to do more, until he is
sure that Holkar has defeated us. However, as you say, there is
very little chance of their catching us."

As soon as they were down on the plain, Harry went on:

"We had better strike north, for an hour or two. They are sure to
ride across the plain in the direction of Delhi, thinking we shall
make straight for the city."

"That will be best, sahib."

Fortunately the rain had ceased, and the sky was cloudless, so that
they were able to direct their course by the stars. For two hours
they kept due north, and then turned west. It was a long journey
from the point where they turned. Harry calculated that it would be
nearly fifty miles. The fort was some fifteen miles northeast of
Sekerah, and they were now farther away from Delhi than they had
been when they started. He felt the advantage of the light native
dress, and the sandals that Abdool had given him instead of his
boots.

When they came across cultivated ground they walked; but a great
portion of the country was a sandy waste; with the ruins of
villages and temples that had, in the palmy days of the empire,
stood there. Across this they went at a trot, for the sand was
generally compact enough to sustain their weight.

"We shall hardly get there before day breaks, sahib," Abdool
remarked.

"No; but that is of little consequence. Probably, by this time,
Holkar will have marched away--either to give battle or, what is
more likely, to recruit; and for many miles round Delhi the country
will be rejoicing, at having been spared the ruin that would have
befallen it, had he taken the city. So I have no fear that we shall
be hindered on the way; for though they may wonder at my
appearance--for the dye has now almost worn off, and anyone can see
that I am a white--they will be all the more willing to render us
any assistance.

"There is no fear of the rajah's horsemen keeping up the pursuit,
beyond halfway between Sekerah and the city; for they must know
that all the zemindars and people round it are in our favour, and
that they might be attacked, when beyond the limits of the rajah's
jagheer."

When morning broke they could see, in the distance, the minarets of
Delhi.

"They must be ten miles away, Abdool, and I will enter the next
house we come to. I fancy, from our position, we must be close to
the residence of the zemindar who, at once, brought in a force of
fifty men to aid in the defence of the town. There we are sure of
hospitable treatment and, indeed, I sorely need rest and food. I
have eaten nothing since yesterday morning and, counting the
distance we made to the north after leaving the fort, we must have
walked nearly fifty miles."

Half a mile farther they saw a house, and made straight for it.

"Is Shuja Khan within?" Harry asked an armed retainer standing at
the entrance.

The soldier recognized Harry--having seen him when he called upon
his master--and replied:

"He returned last night, my lord."

"Will you tell him that Captain Lindsay, who was treacherously
captured by the Rajah of Sekerah, has just escaped, and is on his
way to the city; and that he asks for his hospitality?"

"Enter, my lord," the man said, salaaming deeply. "Our master will,
I am sure, gladly receive you."

He showed Harry into a large room where, a few minutes later, the
zemindar joined him.

"Peace be with you, sahib! I am rejoiced to see you in safety; for
I heard, at Delhi, that you had not returned, and there were fears
that ill had befallen you and your escort."

"My escort were killed, and I myself carried a prisoner to the
rajah's hill fort; and I have owed my escape to the faithfulness of
my servant, who got away when the others were massacred and,
disguising himself, got into the fort and contrived my escape."

"All honour be to him!" the zemindar said. "Then you have walked
all night?"

"Yes; we went ten miles to the north first, knowing that we should
be pursued; for we heard the alarm given, just after we started. We
have walked fifty miles and, when I say that I have eaten nothing
since yesterday morning, you may be sure that we are sorely in need
of refreshment."

"It shall be got ready, at once, sahib; and, while it is being
prepared, you can take a bath and a change of garments."

"I need the bath almost as much as I need a feed," Harry laughed.
"I have just been looking into the glass, and I see that I am
well-nigh as dark as when I came to you, nine or ten days ago."

His host led him to a room containing a bath, which was soon filled
by the servants, one of whom brought in a handsome suit of the
zemindar's clothes. It was more than half an hour before he went
down again. As soon as he entered the room, a servant brought in a
meal; consisting of slices of meat on a skewer, and a pillau of
chicken.

The zemindar sat by while he ate his meal, and Harry gave him a
short account of the manner in which he had effected his escape.
The former, in turn, related the events of the siege; adding that
spies had brought in the news, late in the afternoon, that Holkar
would march away in the morning, as he had heard that the English
army was but two days distant.

"Was he going to meet the English, or to retire towards Malwar?"

"That I cannot say, sahib, for the spies could not tell us.
Doubtless he and his army are much dispirited, at their failure to
take the city. But the general opinion of the townspeople was that
he would give battle, be victorious, and would return and continue
the siege."

"I have no fear of his being victorious. He knows, in the battles
of Assaye and Poona, how Scindia was utterly routed; and how, at
Laswaree and Delhi, the Mahrattas were scattered; and I do not
think that he will venture upon giving battle. But if he does, I
have no fear, whatever, of the result. It was more than his whole
army could do to break up Monson's force, although composed
entirely of native infantry, until it was near Agra. This time
there will be British infantry and cavalry, and the Mahrattas will
never stand against their charge."

Harry had already enquired about Abdool, and found that he had also
had a meal, and was now asleep.

"Now, sahib," Shuja said, "it were best that you should rest, for a
time. There will be nought doing in Delhi today and, after the heat
of the day is over, we can supply you with horses and an escort."

Harry accepted the invitation, for he was stiff and sore from his
exertions. The man showed him to a room that had been prepared for
him, and he was soon fast asleep. He did not awake until the sun
was getting low. He at once went downstairs.

"The horses are ready," the zemindar said, "but I pray you to take
a meal, before mounting. It is ready, and will be served directly."

Harry, who had been too tired to do justice to his food in the
morning, was by no means sorry to take another meal. As he rose to
go, he thanked the zemindar most heartily for his kindness.

"It is an honour that you have bestowed upon me," the zemindar
said, courteously. "You and your brave countrymen are fighting to
free us from the oppression of the Mahrattas, and any one of your
race would meet with a hearty welcome here."

The horses were now brought round. The one intended for Harry was a
very handsome animal, richly caparisoned.

"It is a fine horse, indeed," he said, as he was about to mount.

"The horse is yours, sahib," Shuja Khan said. "He is of good breed,
and will carry you far and fast. I shall esteem it a great honour
that you should ride him.

"Do not thank me, I pray you. 'Tis but a little thing to do, for
one of our brave defenders; of whose deeds one of your officers was
telling me, when he was deploring your loss."

"I thank you most heartily, Khan; and, after the manner in which
you have given it, I cannot refuse so handsome a present. I shall
be proud to ride such an animal; and you may be sure that, as I do
so, I shall often think of him who presented it to me; and shall
assuredly mention, to Colonel Ochterlony, the very great kindness
with which you have received me."

As he rode off, followed by an escort of four of the zemindar's
retainers, he saw with satisfaction that Abdool was also attired in
clean white garments.

"You have done well, I hope, Abdool?"

"I have been well treated, indeed, sahib, and the zemindar's head
man told me that I was to consider the horse on which I ride my
own. He will carry me well, for he is a stout and serviceable
animal. I was wondering what we should do for horses; for there are
but few in the city, as most of those owning them sent them away,
with their valuables, on hearing of Holkar's approach."

"The zemindar is a generous man, indeed. He has, as you heard,
presented me with the horse that I am riding. It is certainly a
splendid animal and, though my own was a good one, this is far
better. In fact, I have seen no handsomer horse, anywhere.

"I wish you had as good a one, Abdool, and then we need not fear
being overtaken, though half the Mahratta army were in pursuit."

They entered the city by the northern gate, and saw nothing of the
enemy, who were encamped on the other side of the city. Harry was
most warmly received by Colonel Ochterlony.

"I have been in much anxiety about you," he said. "That you had
been detained was certain; but I hoped that that petty rajah would
not have ventured to harm you, for he would be sure that, sooner or
later, we should have a heavy reckoning with him."

"I fancy, sir, that he was waiting for news from here. He was
convinced that Holkar would take the city, and defeat Lord Lake.
Had he done so, I have no doubt that he would either have sent me
prisoner to him, or would have despatched me and forwarded only my
head. As I felt certain that things would not turn out as he
stated, I had no great fear for my life; but I thought that I might
have been kept a prisoner for a very long time, for Lord Lake would
have his hands full in other directions."

"Then he released you on the news that Holkar had failed to capture
the city?"

"No, sir; I got away owing to the fidelity of my orderly who, after
riding off himself, when the two troopers with me were attacked and
killed, entered a hill fort where I was confined, took service
there, and contrived my escape. I shall hand in a report with the
details, for your perusal, when things have quietened down a bit.
My man has rendered me other valuable services, and I should be
greatly pleased if, in consideration of the fidelity and daring
that he has shown, you would think fit to recommend him for
promotion as a native officer. He belongs to the 3rd Bombay
Cavalry."

"I should certainly have pleasure in doing so, Captain Lindsay. I
shall, of course, be drawing up a list of the zemindars and others
who have rendered service, and recommending them for reward to the
Government. If you will give me the particulars as to the man's
name and services I will include him in the list. He has been with
you some time, has he not?"

"Yes, sir, for upwards of six years. He accompanied me from
Calcutta to Nagpore, when I went on a mission to the rajah, whom it
was desirable to keep neutral until the war in Mysore was brought
to an end. He was at Assaye, and journeyed in disguise across the
country with me, to carry the news of that victory to General Lake.
He took part with me in the cavalry charge at Laswaree, and in the
retreat of Colonel Monson's column."

"That is quite good enough," Colonel Ochterlony said. "But I should
think that it would be the shortest and best way for you to
recommend him direct to Lord Lake, who would be able to put him in
orders at once. At the same time, I will send to Calcutta a
recommendation that some special reward should be granted to him.
There will be a large number of forfeitures of the estates of those
who have sided with Scindia and Holkar. I make no doubt that, on my
strong recommendation, he will obtain a grant of the revenue of a
village or two. Such a grant would do good by showing that
instances of fidelity, even in the case of a private soldier, do
not go unnoticed or unrewarded. We expect the general's arrival
here in a couple of days."

"I shall be very glad, sir, if only because my uniform is coming on
with his baggage. At present, with my white face and this showy
native dress, I feel that I am stared at by everyone I meet. The
uniform that Captain Ewart lent me I had to leave behind, when I
made my escape."

"It will not inconvenience him, poor fellow," the colonel said,
"for he was almost cut in two, by a cannon shot, as the enemy
advanced to the last assault."

When the general arrived within three miles of the city, Harry rode
out to his camp and, having first obtained his uniform, went in to
report himself.

"So you got through safely, Captain Lindsay? I supposed that you
had, when the news reached us that Delhi was defending itself
stoutly for, had they not had some days warning, they could hardly
have held out for an hour."

"This is Colonel Burns's report of the military operations of the
siege, sir; and this is a letter from the Resident; and this is my
own report, of my doings since I left you at Agra."

"Thank you, Captain Lindsay. I shall have a communication to send
to Colonel Ochterlony this afternoon, and should be obliged if you
will carry it for me."

Harry bowed and left; and then joined the officers of the staff,
who were just sitting down to lunch, and were all glad to see him
again.

"So you managed to get through Holkar's lines, Lindsay?"

"Oh, yes! I met with no difficulty, and only fell in once with any
of his troops. I spent an evening with their officer, and after
that rode through without interruption. There was really no danger,
and I do not think Holkar, himself, could have suspected me of
being a British officer."

"And now, about the siege. You may imagine that we were all very
anxious about it; for though, of course, we should soon have
retaken the place, there would have been a general plunder and
massacre by that brute Holkar."

"You must wait for particulars until you get there," Harry said,
"for I know nothing about it whatever, except what I have heard."

"And how is that?"

"I was, at the time, a prisoner in the hands of the petty Rajah of
Sekerah. He promised to send in three hundred men. The day before
Holkar arrived, I was sent to urge him to despatch them instantly
to aid in the defence. He was evidently impressed with the idea
that Holkar was going to retake the place without any difficulty,
and would afterwards annihilate our army; so, thinking that was the
winning side, he arrested me, and sent me off to a hill fort,
fifteen miles away, and murdered my two troopers."

"And how did you get away?"

Harry gave an account of the manner in which Abdool had managed his
escape.

"Such a fellow as that is a jewel."

"He is indeed, Major; and I would not part with him for any money.
He came round with me from Bombay to Calcutta, six years ago, and
has ridden with me ever since. He fought most gallantly, in the
Malay Peninsula and at many other places. In my report, to the
general, of my last adventure I have mentioned his services with me
in my various journeys, and have strongly recommended his
promotion."

"He well deserves it," the major said. "He has, like you, carried
his life in his hand for, if he had been detected, undoubtedly he
would have shared your fate."



Chapter 18: An Awkward Position.


Three hours later, Harry was sent for by the general.

"I have read your report, Captain Lindsay, and thoroughly concur
with you that the very meritorious conduct of the soldier of the
3rd Bombay Cavalry, who has so long been attached to your service,
should be rewarded. I cannot, of course, promote him in his own
regiment. He will therefore appear in orders, tomorrow, as
appointed havildar in the 5th Bengal Cavalry, which is at present
under my command; with a statement that, having now completed ten
years' service in the Bombay army, and having for six years of it
been serving chiefly in this presidency, and having distinguished
himself by his fidelity and courage, he has now been specially
singled out for this promotion; and will be henceforth in charge of
an escort of twenty men, of his new regiment, attached to the
general's staff.

"As to yourself, sir, I have, in a despatch that will be sent off
this evening, strongly recommended you to the Governor General for
promotion to the rank of major. You were, I see by our army list,
promoted to the rank of captain, seven years ago, before being sent
to Calcutta; and, considering the distinguished and dangerous
services that you have rendered, I wonder that you have not
received another step. That is, however, accounted for by the fact
that you have now, for some time, been away from Calcutta with
General Wellesley and myself. I am sure that my recommendation will
at once be complied with."

"I am very grateful for your kindness, sir."

"You owe it to your own merits, and not to any kindness on my
part," Lord Lake said. "You have an altogether exceptional record
and, even in the comparatively short time that you have been with
me, have performed most valuable services. Colonel Monson reports
most highly of your conduct during his retreat; and the mission
that you undertook, at my request, to Colonel Ochterlony was a most
dangerous one and, in itself, sufficient to ensure your promotion.
There are many zealous officers in the service; but few, indeed, so
qualified, by their acquaintance with the native languages, as to
undertake the missions with which you have been entrusted, and have
so successfully carried out."

Harry took the despatches and at once mounted his horse; which
Abdool had brought round, as soon as his master was summoned to the
general's tent. After he had left the camp, he called Abdool up to
his side. The latter was still in his native dress.

"Abdool, I shall have to look out for another cook and body
servant; unless, indeed, I have another trooper told off to me."

Abdool looked at Harry in astonishment.

"How is that, my lord? Are you dissatisfied with me?"

Harry laughed.

"Not in any way, Abdool; upon the contrary. But your name will
appear in orders, tomorrow, as promoted to the rank of havildar, in
the 5th Bengal Cavalry, as a recognition of your faithful services.

"It is a great honour," Abdool said, "especially as I have not
served as a soubahdar; but I would far rather stay with you. You
have been a father to me, and I pray you to let me remain as I am."

"You are to remain with me, Abdool. If you had had to leave me I
should, myself, have told the general that I was sure you would
rather not do so; and that, when you left me, I should myself show
my gratitude for your good services; but of his own accord he has
arranged this. You are not to join your new regiment, but are to
command twenty sowars of the 5th, which are to be attached to those
