mine error now, and--oh, lady, what mean you? where should that light be,
save in the writings of wise and holy men?'

'Methinks,' said Esclairmonde, 'that the light is there, even as the
light is also before the eyes of the true knight; but it is not only
there.'

'Where is it then?' said Malcolm.  'In helmet or in cowl, I am the sworn
champion of the Light of the World.'

'The Light,' said Esclairmonde, looking upwards, 'the true Light of the
World is the Blessed Saviour, the Heavenly Wisdom of God; and His
champions find Him and serve Him in camp, cloister, or school, or
wherever He has marked their path, so as they seek not their own profit
or glory, and lay not up their treasure for themselves on earth.'

'Then surely,' said Malcolm, 'the hoards of deep study within the mind
are treasures beyond the earth.'

'Your schoolmen speak of spirit, mind, and body,' said Esclairmonde--'at
least so I, an ignorant woman, have been told.  Should not the true Light
for eternity lighten the spirit rather than the mind?'

Malcolm pondered and said: 'I thought I had found the right path at
last!'

'Nay--never, never did I say otherwise,' cried Esclairmonde.  'To seek
God's Light in good men's words, and pursue it, must be a blessed task.
Every task must be blessed to which He leads.  And when you are
enlightened with that light, you will hold it up to others.  When you
have found the treasure, you will scatter it here, and so lay it up
above.'

Esclairmonde's words were almost a riddle to Malcolm, but his reverence
for her made him lay them up deeply, as he watched her kneeling at the
Mass, her upturned face beaming with an angelic expression.

His mind was much calmed by this meeting.  It had had an absolutely
contrary effect to what King James had expected, by spiritualizing his
love, and increasing that reverence which cast out its earthliness.  That
first throb which had been so keen at meeting, and knowing her not for
him, had passed away in the refining of that distant worship he had paid
her in those days of innocence.

Lady Montagu was quite satisfied with him now.  He was the Malcolm of her
first acquaintance, only without his foolish diffidence, and with a
weight and earnestness that made him a man and not a boy; and she
cordially invited him to bring his sister with him, and rest, on the way
southward.  He agreed most thankfully, since this would be the only
opportunity of showing Esclairmonde and Lilias one to the other, as well
as one of his own few chances of seeing Esclairmonde.

Once they must meet, that their promises might be restored the one to the
other; but as the betrothal remained the lady's security, this could not
be done till she became pledged at St. Katharine's.  When the opportunity
came, she was to send Malcolm a messenger, and he would come to her at
once.  Until then he promised that he would not leave Great Britain.

On Monday the cousins proceeded, coming after a time to the route by
which Malcolm had ridden three years before, and where he was now at home
in comparison with Patrick.  How redolent it was with recollections of
King Harry, in all his gaiety and grace, ere the shock of his brother's
death had fallen on him!  At Thirsk, Malcolm told of the prowess and the
knighthood of honest Trenton and Kitson, to somewhat incredulous ears.
The two squires had been held as clownish fellows, and the sentiment of
the country was that Mistress Agnes was well quit of them, and the rough
guardianship by which they had kept off all other suitors.  As mine host
concluded, ''Tis a fine thing to go to the wars.'

Hearing that Kitson's mother lived not a mile out of his way, Malcolm
rode to the fine old moated grange, where he found her sitting at her
spinning, presiding over a great plentiful household, while her second
son, a much shrewder-looking man than Sir Christopher, managed the farm.

The travellers were welcomed with eager hospitality so soon as it was
understood that they brought tidings of 'our Kit'; and Malcolm's story
was listened to with tears of joy by the old lady, while the brother
could not get over his amazement at hearing that Trenton and Kitson had
become a proverb in the camp for oneness in friendship.

'Made it up with Will Trenton!  And never fought it out!  I'd never know
our Kit again after that!'

His steady bravery, his knighthood, and the King's praise, his having
assisted in saving Lord Glenuskie's life against such odds, did not seem
to strike Wilfred Kitson half as much as the friendship with Trenton, and
Malcolm did not think the regret was very great at the two knights having
given up their intention of returning.  'Our Kit's' place seemed to have
closed up behind him; Wilfred seemed to be too much master to be ready to
give up to the elder brother; and even the mother had learnt to do
without him.  'I'll warrant,' quoth she, 'that now he is a knight and got
used to fine French ways, he'll think nothing good enow for him.  And if
he brought Will Trenton with him, I'd not sit at the board with the
fellow.--But ye'll ride over, Wilfred, and take care the minx Agnes knows
what she's lost.  Ay, and if you knew of a safe hand, Sir, when the
shearing is over I'd send the lad a purse of nobles to keep up his
knighthood in the camp, forsooth.'

'Certes,' said Malcolm, as after a salt-fish dinner he mounted again, 'if
honest Kitson knew, he would scarce turn back from the camp, where he is
somebody.  Shall we find ourselves as little wanted when we get home,
Patie?'

Patrick drew himself up with a happy face of secret assurance.  Nothing
could make Lilias forsake him, he well knew.

At Durham they found their good friend Father Akefield, erst Prior of
Coldingham, but who had been violently dispossessed by the House of
Albany in favour of their candidate, Drax, about a year before, and was
thankful to have been allowed with a few English monks to retire across
the Border to the mother Abbey at Durham.

The good father could hardly believe his eyes when he beheld Malcolm, now
a comely and personable young gentleman, less handsome and graceful
indeed than many, but with all his painful personal peculiarities gone,
with none of the scared, imploring look, but with a grave thoughtful
earnestness about his face, as though all that once was timid and
wandering was now fixed and steadfast.

Father Akefield could tell nothing of Lilias since his own expulsion, but
as the Prioress of St. Abbs was herself a Drummond, and no one durst
interfere with her, he had no alarms for her safety.  But he advised the
two gentlemen to go straight to St. Abbs, without showing themselves at
Coldingham, lest Prior Drax, being in the Albany interest, should make
any demur at giving her up to the care of the brother, who still wanted
some months of his twenty-first year.

Accordingly they pushed on, and in due time slept at Berwick, receiving
civilities from the English governor that chafed Patrick's blood, which
became inflammable as soon as he neared the Border; and rising early the
next morning, they passed the gates, and were on Scottish ground once
more, their hearts bounding at the sense that it was their own land, and
would soon be no more a land of misrule.  With their knowledge of King
James and his intentions, well might they have unlimited hopes for the
country over which he was about to reign.

They turned aside from Coldingham, and made for the sea, and at length
the promontory of St. Abbs Head rose before them; they passed through the
outer buildings intended as shelter for the attendants of ladies coming
to the nunnery, and knocked at the gateway.

A wicket in the door was opened, and the portress looked out through a
grating.

'_Benedicite_, good Sister,' said Malcolm.  'Prithee tell the Mother
Abbess that Malcolm Stewart of Glenuskie is here from the King, and
craves to speak with her and the Lady Lilias.'

'Lord Malcolm!  Lady Lilias!  St. Ebba's good mercy!' shrieked the
affrighted portress.  They heard her rushing headlong across the court,
and looked on one another in consternation.

Patrick betook himself to knocking as if he would beat down the door, and
Malcolm leant against it with a foreboding that took away his
breath--dreading the moment when it should be opened.

The portress and her keys returned again, and parleyed a moment.  'You
are the Lord Malcolm in very deed--in the flesh?'

'Wherefore not?' demanded Malcolm.

'Nay, but we heard ye were slain, my lord,' explained the
portress--letting him in, however, and leading them across the court, to
where the Mother Abbess, Annabel Drummond, awaited them in the parlour.

'Alas, Sirs, what grievous error has this been?' was her exclamation;
while Malcolm, scarcely waiting for salutation, demanded, 'Where is my
sister?'

'How?  In St. Hilda's keeping at Whitby, whither the King sent for her,'
said the Abbess.

'The King!' cried Malcolm, 'we come from the King!  Oh, what treachery
has been here?'

'And you, Lord Malcolm--and you, my kinsman, Sir Patrick of the Braes,
how do I see you here?  We had heard you both were dead.'

'You heard a lying tale then, good Mother,' said Patrick, gruffly, 'no
doubt devised for the misery of the--of my--'  He could not finish the
sentence, and Malcolm entreated the Abbess to tell the whole.

It appeared that about a year previously the chaplain of the monastery
had learnt at Coldingham that Sir John Swinton of Swinton had sent home
tidings that Patrick Drummond had been thrown from his horse and left
behind in a village which the English had harried, and as he could not
move, he was sure to have been either burnt or hung.  This conclusion was
natural, and argued no malice in the reporter; and while poor Lilias was
still in her first agony of grief, Prior Drax sent over intelligence
derived from the Duke of Albany himself that Malcolm Stewart of Glenuskie
had been stabbed in the forest of Vincennes.  This report Malcolm himself
accounted for.  He had heard a Scots tongue among his foes, though
national feeling had made him utterly silent on that head to the Duke of
Bedford, and he guessed it to belong to a certain M'Kay, whose clan
regarded themselves as at feud with the Stewarts, and of whom he had
heard as living a wild _routier_ life.  He had probably been hired by
Ghisbert for the attack, and had returned home and spread the report of
its success.

Some few weeks later, the Abbess Annabel continued, there had arrived two
monks from Coldingham, with an escort, declaring themselves to have
received orders from King James to transport the Lady Lilias to the
nunnery at Whitby, where the Abbess had promised to receive her, till he
could determine her fate.

The forlorn and desolate Lilias, believing herself to stand alone in the
world, was very loth to quit her shelter and her friends at St. Abbs; but
the Abbess, doubting her own ability to protect her from the rapacious
grasp of Walter Stewart, now that she had, as she believed, become an
heiress, and glad to avert from her house the persecution that such
protection would bring upon it, had gratefully heard of this act of
consideration on the King's part, and expedited her departure.  The two
monks, Simon Bell and Ringan Johnstone, had not returned to the
monastery, but had been thought to be in the parent house at Durham; but
Malcolm, who knew Brother Simon by sight, was clear that he had not seen
him there.

All this had taken place a year ago, and there could be no doubt that
some treachery had been exercised.  Nothing had since been heard of
Lilias; none of Malcolm's letters had reached St. Abbs, having doubtless
been suppressed by the Prior of Coldingham; and all that was certain was
that Walter Stewart, to whom their first suspicions directed themselves,
had not publicly avouched any marriage with Lilias or claimed the
Glenuskie estates, or the King, who had of late been in close
correspondence with Scotland, must have heard of it.  And it was also
hardly possible that the Regent Murdoch and his sons, though they might
for a few weeks have been misled by M'Kay's report, should not have soon
become aware of Malcolm's existence.

Unless, then, Walter had married her 'on the first brash,' as Patrick
called it, he might not have thought her a prize worth the winning; but
the whole aspect of affairs had become most alarming, and Malcolm turned
pale as death at the thought that his sister might be suffering
retribution for the sin he had contemplated.

The danger was terrible!  He could not imagine Lilias to have the moral
grandeur and force of Esclairmonde.  Moreover, she supposed her lover
dead, and had not the same motive for guarding her troth.  Forlorn and
despairing, she might have yielded, and Walter Stewart was, Malcolm
verily believed, worse to deal with than even Boemond.  As the whole
danger and uncertainty came over him, his senses seemed to reel; he leant
back in his seat, and heard as in the midst of a dream his sister's sobs
and groans, Patrick's fierce and furious exclamations, and the Abbess's
attempts at consoling him.  Dizzy with horror at the scene he realized,
Lilias's cries and shrieks of entreaty were ringing in his ear, when
suddenly a sweet full low voice seemed to come through them, 'I am bound
ever to pray for you and your sister.'  Mingled with the cry came ever
the sweet soft Litany cadences--'For all that are desolate and oppressed:
we beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.' Gradually the cries seemed to be
swallowed up, both voices blended in _Kyrie eleison_ and then in the
_Gloria_, and at that moment he became aware of Patrick crying, 'I will
seek her in every castle in Scotland.'

'Stay, Patrick,' he said, rising, though forced to hold by his chair;
'that must be my part.'

'You--why, the laddie is white as a sheet!  He well-nigh swooned at the
tidings.  You seek her, forsooth!' and Patrick laughed bitterly.

'Yes, Patie,' said Malcolm, 'for this I am strong.  It is my duty and not
yours, and God will strengthen me for it.'

Patrick burst out at this: 'Neither man nor devil shall tell me it is not
mine!'

'You are the King's prisoner still,' said Malcolm, rising to energy; 'you
are bound to return to him.  The tidings must be taken to him at once.'

'A groom could do that.'

'Neither so swiftly nor surely as you.  Moreover, your word of honour
binds you not to wander at your own pleasure.'

'My honour binds me not to trust you--wee Malcolm--to wander into the
wolf's cage alone.'

'I am not the silly feckless callant I once was, Patie,' answered
Malcolm.  'There are many places where my student's serge gown will take
me safely, where your corslet and lance would never find entrance.  No
one will know me again as I am now: will they, holy Mother?'

'Assuredly not,' said the Abbess.

'A student is too mean a prey to be meddled with,' proceeded Malcolm,
'and is sure of hospitality in castle or convent.  I can try at
Coldingham to find out whither the two monks are gone, and then follow up
the track.'

Patrick stormed at the plan, and was most unwilling it should be adopted.
He at least must follow, and keep watch over his young cousin, or it
would be a mere throwing the helve after the hatchet--a betrayal of his
trust.

But a little reflection convinced him that thus to follow would only
bring suspicion on Malcolm and defeat his plans; and that it were better
to obtain some certain information ere the King should come home, and
have to interfere with a high hand; and Malcolm's arguments about his
obligations as a captive, too, had their effect.  He perceived his own
incapacity to act; and in his despair at nothing being done consented to
risk Malcolm in the search, while he himself should proceed to the King,
only ascertaining on the way that Lilias was not at Whitby.  And so, in
grief and anxiety, the cousins parted, and Malcolm alone durst speak a
word of hope.




CHAPTER XVII: THE BEGGING SCHOLAR


'The poor scholar,' now only existing in Ireland and Brittany--nay, we
believe extinct there since the schoolmaster has become not abroad, but
at home, in Government colleges--was to be found throughout the
commonwealth of Europe in the Middle Ages.  Young lads, in whom convent
schools had developed a thirst for learning, could only gratify it by
making their way to some university, where between begging, singing,
teaching, receiving doles, earning rewards in encounters of wit and
learning, doing menial services and using all manner of shifts, they
contrived to live a hard life, half savage on the one side, highly
intellectual upon the other.  They would suck the marrow of one
university, and then migrate to another; and the rank they had gained in
the first was available in the second, so that it was no means uncommon
for them to bring away degrees from half the universities in Europe, all
of which formed one general system--all were like islands of one country,
whose common language was queer Latin, and whose terms, manners, and
customs were alike in all main points.

Scotland contributed many of her sons to this curious race of vagabond
students, when she herself was without any university to satisfy the
cravings of her thoughtful and intellectual people.  'No country without
a Scot or a flea' was an uncomplimentary proverb due to the numerous
young clerks, equally fierce for frays and for lectures, who flocked to
the seats of learning on the Continent, and sometimes became naturalized
there, sometimes came home again, to fight their way to the higher
benefices of the Church, or to become councillors of state.

It was true that Malcolm was an Oxford scholar, or rather bachelor, and
that Oxford and Cambridge were almost the only universities where Scots
were not--their place being taken by multitudinous Irish; yet not only
were all universities alike in essentials, but he had seen and heard
enough of that at Paris to be able to personate a clerk from thence.

It was no small plunge for one hitherto watched, tended, and guarded as
Malcolm had been, to set forth entirely alone; but as he had approached
manhood, and strengthened in body, his spirit had gained much in courage,
and the anxiety about his sister swallowed up all other considerations.
Even while he entreated the prayers of the Abbess, he felt quite sure
that he had those of Esclairmonde; and when he had hunted out of his
mails the plain bachelor's rabbit-skin hood and black gown--which,
perhaps, was a little too fine in texture for the poor wanderer--and
fastened on his back, with a leathern thong, a package containing a few
books and a change of linen, his pale and intellectual face made him look
so entirely the young clerk, that Patrick hardly believed it was Malcolm.

And when the roads parted, and Drummond and his escort had to turn
towards Berwick, while Malcolm took the path to the monastery, it was the
younger who was the stronger and more resolute of the two; for Patrick
could neither reconcile himself to peril the boy, who had always been his
anxious trust, nor to return to the King without him; and yet no one who
loved Lilias could withhold him from his quest.

Malcolm did not immediately speed to the monastery on taking leave of
Patrick.  He stood first to watch the armour flashes gradually die away,
and the little troop grow smaller to his eye, across the brown moor, till
they were entirely out of sight, and he himself left alone.  Then he
knelt by a bush of gorse, told his beads, and earnestly entreated
direction and aid for himself, and protection for his sister; and when
the sun grew so low as to make it time for a wanderer to seek harbour, he
stained and daggled his gown in the mire and water of a peat-moss, so as
to destroy its Oxford gloss, took a book in his hand, and walked towards
the monastery, reciting Latin verses in the sing-song tone then
universally followed.

As he came among the fields, he saw that the peasants, and lay brethren
who had been working among them, were returning, some from sowing, others
from herding the cattle, which they drove before them to the byre within
the protecting wall of the monastery.

A monk--with a weather-beaten face and athletic figure, much like a
farmer's of the present day--overtook him, and hailed him with
'_Benedicite_, you there and welcome to your clerkship!  Are you coming
for supper and bed in the convent?'

Malcolm knew good-natured Brother Nicolas, and kept his hood well over
his face after the first salutation; though he felt confident that Lord
Malcolm could hardly be recognized in the begging scholar, as he made
reply, '_Salve, reverende frater.  Venio de Lutetia Parisiorum_.' {1}
