
"Passage! passage!" cried the companions of Menneville, at first
terrified, but soon recovering, when they found they had only to do with
two men. But those two men were hundred-armed giants; the swords flew
about in their hands like the burning glaive of the archangel. They
pierce with its point, strike with the flat, cut with the edge; every
stroke brings down a man. "For the king!" cried D'Artagnan, to every man
he struck at, that is to say, to every man that fell. This cry became
the charging word for the musketeers, who, guided by it, joined
D'Artagnan. During this time the archers, recovering from the panic they
had undergone, charge the aggressors in the rear, and regular as mill
strokes, overturn or knock down all that opposed them. The crowd, which
sees swords gleaming, and drops of blood flying in the air--the crowd
falls back and crushes itself. At length cries for mercy and of despair
resound; that is, the farewell of the vanquished. The two condemned are
again in the hands of the archers. D'Artagnan approaches them, seeing
them pale and sinking: "Console yourselves, poor men," said he, "you
will not undergo the frightful torture with which these wretches
threatened you. The king has condemned you to be hung: you shall only be
hung. Go on, hang them, and it will be over."

There is no longer anything going on at the Image-de-Notre-Dame. The
fire has been extinguished with two tuns of wine in default of water.
The conspirators have fled by the garden. The archers are dragging the
culprits to the gibbets. From this moment the affair did not occupy much
time. The executioner, heedless about operating according to the rules
of the art, made such haste that he dispatched the condemned in a couple
of minutes. In the meantime the people gathered around D'Artagnan,--they
felicitated, they cheered him. He wiped his brow, streaming with sweat,
and his sword, streaming with blood. He shrugged his shoulders at seeing
Menneville writhing at his feet in the last convulsions. And, while
Raoul turned away his eyes in compassion, he pointed to the musketeers
the gibbets laden with their melancholy fruit. "Poor devils!" said he,
"I hope they died blessing me, for I saved them with great difficulty."
These words caught the ear of Menneville at the moment when he himself
was breathing his last sigh. A dark, ironical smile flitted across his
lips; he wished to reply, but the effort hastened the snapping of the
chord of life--he expired.

"Oh! all this is very frightful!" murmured Raoul: "let us begone,
monsieur le chevalier."

"You are not wounded?" asked D'Artagnan.

"Not at all; thank you."

"That's well! Thou art a brave fellow, mordioux! The head of the father,
and the arm of Porthos. Ah! if he had been here, good Porthos, you would
have seen something worth looking at." Then as if by way of
remembrance--

"But where the devil can that brave Porthos be?" murmured D'Artagnan.

"Come, chevalier, pray come away," urged Raoul.

"One minute, my friend; let me take my thirty-seven and a half pistols,
and I am at your service. The house is a good property," added
D'Artagnan, as he entered the Image-de-Notre-Dame, "but decidedly, even
if it were less profitable, I should prefer its being in another
quarter."




Chapter LXIII. How M. d'Eymeris's Diamond passed into the Hands of M.
d'Artagnan.


Whilst this violent, noisy, and bloody scene was passing on the Greve,
several men, barricaded behind the gate of communication with the
garden, replaced their swords in their sheaths, assisted one among them
to mount a ready saddled horse which was waiting in the garden, and like
a flock of startled birds, fled in all directions, some climbing the
walls, others rushing out at the gates with all the fury of a panic. He
who mounted the horse, and gave him the spur so sharply that the animal
was near leaping the wall, this cavalier, we say, crossed the Place
Baudoyer, passed like lightening before the crowd in the streets, riding
against, running over and knocking down all that came in his way, and,
ten minutes after, arrived at the gates of the superintendent, more out
of breath than his horse. The Abbe Fouquet, at the clatter of hoofs on
the pavement, appeared at a window of the court, and before even the
cavalier had set foot to the ground, "Well! Danicamp?" cried he, leaning
half out of the window.

"Well, it is all over," replied the cavalier.

"All over!" cried the abbe. "Then they are saved?"

"No, monsieur," replied the cavalier, "they are hung."

"Hung!" repeated the abbe, turning pale. A lateral door suddenly opened,
and Fouquet appeared in the chamber, pale, distracted, with lips half
opened, breathing a cry of grief and anger. He stopped upon the
threshold to listen to what was addressed from the court to the window.

"Miserable wretches!" said the abbe, "you did not fight, then?"

"Like lions."

"Say like cowards."

"Monsieur!"

"A hundred men accustomed to war, sword in hand, are worth ten thousand
archers in a surprise. Where is Menneville, that boaster, that braggart,
who was to come back either dead or a conqueror?"

"Well, monsieur, he kept his word. He is dead!"

"Dead! Who killed him?"

"A demon disguised as a man, a giant armed with ten flaming swords--a
madman, who at one blow extinguished the fire, put down the riot, and
caused a hundred musketeers to rise up out of the pavement of the
Greve."

Fouquet raised his brow, streaming with sweat, murmuring, "Oh! Lyodot
and D'Eymeris! dead! dead! dead! and I dishonored."

The abbe turned round, and perceiving his brother, despairing and livid,
"Come, come," said he, "it is a blow of fate, monsieur; we must not
lament thus. Our attempt has failed because God--"

"Be silent, abbe! be silent!" cried Fouquet; "your excuses are
blasphemies. Order that man up here, and let him relate the details of
this terrible event."

"But, brother--"

"Obey, monsieur!"

The abbe made a sign, and in half a minute the man's step was heard upon
the stairs. At the same time Gourville appeared behind Fouquet, like the
guardian angel of the superintendent, pressing one finger on his lips to
enjoin observation even amidst the bursts of his grief. The minister
resumed all the serenity that human strength left at the disposal of a
heart half broken with sorrow. Danicamp appeared. "Make your report,"
said Gourville.

"Monsieur," replied the messenger, "we received orders to carry off the
prisoners, and to cry 'Vive Colbert!' whilst carrying them off."

"To burn them alive, was it not, abbe?" interrupted Gourville.

"Yes, yes, the order was given to Menneville. Menneville knew what was
to be done, and Menneville is dead."

This news appeared rather to reassure Gourville than to sadden him.

"Yes, certainly to burn them alive," said the abbe, eagerly.

"Granted, monsieur, granted," said the man, looking into the eyes and
the faces of the two interlocutors, to ascertain what there was
profitable or disadvantageous to himself in telling the truth.

"Now, proceed," said Gourville.

"The prisoners," cried Danicamp, "were brought to the Greve, and the
people, in a fury, insisted upon their being burnt instead of being
hung."

"And the people were right," said the abbe. "Go on."

"But," resumed the man, "at the moment the archers were broken, at the
moment the fire was set to one of the houses of the Place destined to
serve as a funeral-pile for the guilty, this fury, this demon, this
giant of whom I told you, and who, we had been informed, was the
proprietor of the house in question, aided by a young man who
accompanied him, threw out of the window those who kept the fire, called
to his assistance the musketeers who were in the crowd, leaped himself
from the window of the first story into the Place, and plied his sword
so desperately that the victory was restored to the archers, the
prisoners were retaken, and Menneville killed. When once recaptured, the
condemned were executed in three minutes." Fouquet, in spite of his
self-command, could not prevent a deep groan escaping him.

"And this man, the proprietor of the house, what is his name?" said the
abbe.

"I cannot tell you, not having even been able to get sight of him; my
post had been appointed in the garden, and I remained at my post: only
the affair was related to me as I repeat it. I was ordered, when once
the affair was at an end, to come at best speed and announce to you the
manner in which it finished. According to this order, I set out, full
gallop, and here I am."

"Very well, monsieur, we have nothing else to ask of you," said the
abbe, more and more dejected, in proportion as the moment approached for
finding himself alone with his brother.

"Have you been paid?" asked Gourville.

"Partly, monsieur," replied Danicamp.

"Here are twenty pistols. Begone, monsieur, and never forget to defend,
as this time has been done, the true interests of the king."

"Yes, monsieur," said the man, bowing and pocketing the money. After
which he went out. Scarcely had the door closed after him when Fouquet,
who had remained motionless, advanced with a rapid step and stood
between the abbe and Gourville. Both of them at the same time opened
their mouths to speak to him. "No excuses," said he, "no recriminations
against anybody. If I had not been a false friend I should not have
confided to any one the care of delivering Lyodot and D'Eymeris. I alone
am guilty; to me alone are reproaches and remorse due. Leave me, abbe."

"And yet, monsieur, you will not prevent me," replied the latter, "from
endeavoring to find out the miserable fellow who has intervened to the
advantage of M. Colbert in this so well-arranged affair; for, if it is
good policy to love our friends dearly, I do not believe that is bad
which consists in obstinately pursuing our enemies."

"A truce to policy, abbe; begone, I beg of you, and do not let me hear
any more of you till I send for you; what we most need is circumspection
and silence. You have a terrible example before you, gentlemen: no
reprisals, I forbid them."

"There are no orders," grumbled the abbe, "which will prevent me from
avenging a family affront upon the guilty person."

"And I," cried Fouquet, in that imperative tone to which one feels there
is nothing to reply, "if you entertain one thought, one single thought,
which is not the absolute expression of my will, I will have you cast
into the Bastile two hours after that thought has manifested itself.
Regulate your conduct accordingly, abbe."

The abbe colored and bowed. Fouquet made a sign to Gourville to follow
him, and was already directing his steps towards his cabinet, when the
usher announced with a loud voice: "Monsieur le Chevalier d'Artagnan."

"Who is he?" said Fouquet, negligently, to Gourville.

"An ex-lieutenant of his majesty's musketeers," replied Gourville, in
the same tone. Fouquet did not even take the trouble to reflect, and
resumed his walk. "I beg your pardon, monseigneur!" said Gourville, "but
I have remembered; this brave man has quitted the king's service, and
probably comes to receive an installment of some pension or other."

"Devil take him!" said Fouquet, "why does he choose his opportunity so
ill?"

"Permit me then, monseigneur, to announce your refusal to him; for he is
one of my acquaintance, and is a man whom, in our present circumstances,
it would be better to have as a friend than an enemy."

"Answer him as you please," said Fouquet.

"Eh! good Lord!" said the abbe, still full of malice, like an
egotistical man; "tell him there is no money, particularly for
musketeers."

But scarcely had the abbe uttered this imprudent speech, when the partly
open door was thrown back, and D'Artagnan appeared.

"Eh! Monsieur Fouquet," said he, "I was well aware there was no money
for musketeers here. Therefore I did not come to obtain any, but to have
it refused. That being done, receive my thanks. I give you good-day, and
will go and seek it at M. Colbert's." And he went out, making an easy
bow.

"Gourville," said Fouquet, "run after that man and bring him back."
Gourville obeyed, and overtook D'Artagnan on the stairs.

D'Artagnan, hearing steps behind him, turned round and perceived
Gourville. "Mordioux! my dear monsieur," said he, "there are sad lessons
which you gentlemen of finance teach us; I come to M. Fouquet to receive
a sum accorded by his majesty, and I am received like a mendicant who
comes to ask charity, or a thief who comes to steal a piece of plate."

"But you pronounced the name of M. Colbert, my dear M. d'Artagnan; you
said you were going to M. Colbert's?"

"I certainly am going there, were it only to ask satisfaction of the
people who try to burn houses, crying 'Vive Colbert!'"

Gourville pricked up his ears. "Oh, oh!" said he, "you allude to what
has just happened at the Greve?"

"Yes, certainly."

"And in what did that which has taken place concern you?"

"What! do you ask me whether it concerns me or does not concern me, if
M. Colbert pleases to make a funeral-pile of my house?"

"So, ho, your house--was it your house they wanted to burn?"

"Pardieu! was it!"

"Is the cabaret of the Image-de-Notre-Dame yours, then?"

"It has been this week."

"Well, then, are you the brave captain, are you the valiant blade who
dispersed those who wished to burn the condemned?"

"My dear Monsieur Gourville, put yourself in my place. I was an agent of
the public force and a landlord, too. As a captain, it is my duty to
have the orders of the king accomplished. As a proprietor, it is to my
interest my house should not be burnt. I have at the same time attended
to the laws of interest and duty in replacing Messieurs Lyodot and
D'Eymeris in the hands of the archers."

"Then it was you who threw the man out of the window?"

"It was I, myself," replied D'Artagnan, modestly.

"And you who killed Menneville?"

"I had that misfortune," said D'Artagnan, bowing like a man who is being
congratulated.

"It was you, then, in short, who caused the two condemned persons to be
hung?"

"Instead of being burnt, yes, monsieur, and I am proud of it. I saved
the poor devils from horrible tortures. Understand, my dear Monsieur de
Gourville, that they wanted to burn them alive. It exceeds imagination!"

"Go, my dear Monsieur d'Artagnan, go," said Gourville, anxious to spare
Fouquet the sight of the man who had just caused him such profound
grief.

"No," said Fouquet, who had heard all from the door of the ante-chamber;
"not so; on the contrary, Monsieur d'Artagnan, come in."

D'Artagnan wiped from the hilt of his sword a last bloody trace, which
had escaped his notice, and returned. He then found himself face to face
with these three men, whose countenances wore very different
expressions. With the abbe it was anger, with Gourville stupor, with
Fouquet it was dejection.

"I beg your pardon, monsieur le ministre," said D'Artagnan, "but my time
is short; I have to go to the office of the intendant, to have an
explanation with Monsieur Colbert, and to receive my quarter's pension."

"But, monsieur," said Fouquet, "there is money here." D'Artagnan looked
at the superintendent with astonishment. "You have been answered
inconsiderately, monsieur, I know, because I heard it," said the
minister; "a man of your merit ought to be known by everybody."
D'Artagnan bowed. "Have you an order?" added Fouquet.

"Yes, monsieur."

"Give it me, I will pay you myself; come with me." He made a sign to
Gourville and the abbe, who remained in the chamber where they were. He
led D'Artagnan into his cabinet. As soon as the door was shut,--"how
much is due to you, monsieur?"

"Why, something like five thousand livres, monseigneur."

"For arrears of pay?"

"For a quarter's pay."

"A quarter consisting of five thousand livres!" said Fouquet, fixing
upon the musketeer a searching look. "Does the king, then, give you
twenty thousand livres a year?"

"Yes, monseigneur, twenty thousand livres a year. Do you think it is too
much?"

"I?" cried Fouquet, and he smiled bitterly. "If I had any knowledge of
mankind, if I were--instead of being a frivolous, inconsequent, and vain
spirit--of a prudent and reflective spirit; if, in a word, I had, as
certain persons have known how, regulated my life, you would not receive
twenty thousand livres a year, but a hundred thousand, and you would
belong not to the king but to me."

D'Artagnan colored slightly. There is sometimes in the manner in which a
eulogium is given, in the voice, in the affectionate tone, a poison so
sweet, that the strongest mind is intoxicated by it. The superintendent
terminated his speech by opening a drawer, and taking from it four
rouleaux, which he placed before D'Artagnan. The Gascon opened one.
"Gold!" said he.

"It will be less burdensome, monsieur."

"But, then, monsieur, these make twenty thousand livres."

"No doubt they do."

"But only five are due to me."

"I wish to spare you the trouble of coming four times to my office."

"You overwhelm me, monsieur."

"I do only what I ought to do, monsieur le chevalier; and I hope you
will not bear me any malice on account of the rude reception my brother
gave you. He is of a sour, capricious disposition."

"Monsieur," said D'Artagnan, "believe me, nothing would grieve me more
than an excuse from you."

"Therefore I will make no more, and will content myself with asking you
a favor."

"Oh, monsieur."

Fouquet drew from his finger a ring worth about three thousand pistoles.
"Monsieur," said he, "this stone was given me by a friend of my
childhood, by a man to whom you have rendered a great service."

"A service--I?" said the musketeer; "I have rendered a service to one of
your friends?"

"You cannot have forgotten it, monsieur, for it dates this very day."

"And that friend's name was--"

"M. d'Eymeris."

"One of the condemned?"

"Yes, one of the victims. Well! Monsieur d'Artagnan, in return for the
service you have rendered him, I beg you to accept this diamond. Do so
for my sake."

"Monsieur! you--"

"Accept it, I say. To-day is with me a day of mourning; hereafter you
will, perhaps, learn why; to-day I have lost one friend; well, I will
try to get another."

"But, Monsieur Fouquet--"

"Adieu! Monsieur d'Artagnan, adieu!" cried Fouquet, with much emotion;
"or rather, au revoir." And the minister quitted the cabinet, leaving in
the hands of the musketeer the ring and the twenty thousand livres.

"Oh!" said D'Artagnan, after a moment's dark reflection. "How on earth
am I to understand what this means? Mordioux! I can understand this
much, only: he is a gallant man! I will go and explain matters to M.
Colbert." And he went out.




Chapter LXIV. Difference D'Artagnan finds between the Intendant and the
Superintendent.


M Colbert resided in the Rue Neuve des Petits-Champs, in a house which
had belonged to Beautru. D'Artagnan's legs cleared the distance in a
short quarter of an hour. When he arrived at the residence of the new
favorite, the court was full of archers and police, who came to
congratulate him, or to excuse themselves, according to whether he
should choose to praise or blame. The sentiment of flattery is
instinctive with people of abject condition; they have the sense of it,
as the wild animal has that of hearing and smell. These people, or their
leader, understood that there was a pleasure to offer to M. Colbert, in
rendering him an account of the fashion in which his name had been
pronounced during the rash enterprise of the morning. D'Artagnan made
his appearance just as the chief of the watch was giving his report. He
stood close to the door, behind the archers. That officer took Colbert
on one side, in spite of his resistance and the contradiction of his
bushy eyebrows. "In case," said he, "you really desired, monsieur, that
the people should do justice on the two traitors, it would have been
wise to warn us of it; for, indeed, monsieur, in spite of our regret at
displeasing you, or thwarting your views, we had our orders to execute."

"Triple fool!" replied Colbert, furiously shaking his hair, thick and
black as a mane; "what are you telling me? What! that I could have had
an idea of a riot! Are you mad or drunk?"

"But, monsieur, they cried 'Vive Colbert!'" replied the trembling watch.

"A handful of conspirators--"

"No, no; a mass of people."

"Ah! indeed," said Colbert, expanding. "A mass of people cried 'Vive
Colbert!' Are you certain of what you say, monsieur?"

"We had nothing to do but open our ears, or rather to close them, so
terrible were the cries."

"And this was from the people, the real people?"

"Certainly, monsieur; only these real people beat us."

"Oh! very well," continued Colbert, thoughtfully. "Then you suppose it
was the people alone who wished to burn the condemned?"

"Oh! yes, monsieur."

"That is quite another thing. You strongly resisted, then?"

"We had three of our men crushed to death, monsieur!"

"But you killed nobody yourselves?"

"Monsieur, a few of the rioters were left upon the square, and one among
them who was not a common man."

"Who was he?"

"A certain Menneville, upon whom the police have a long time had an
eye."

"Menneville!" cried Colbert, "what, he who killed Rue de la Huchette, a
worthy man who wanted a fat fowl?"

"Yes, monsieur; the same."

"And did this Menneville also cry, 'Vive Colbert'?"

"Louder than all the rest; like a madman."

Colbert's brow grew dark and wrinkled. A kind of ambitious glory which
had lighted his face was extinguished, like the light of glow-worms we
crush beneath the grass. "Then you say," resumed the deceived intendant,
"that the initiative came from the people? Menneville was my enemy; I
would have had him hung, and he knew it well. Menneville belonged to the
Abbe Fouquet--the affair originated with Fouquet; does not everybody
know that the condemned were his friends from childhood?"

"That is true," thought D'Artagnan, "and thus are all my doubts cleared
up. I repeat it, Monsieur Fouquet may be called what they please, but he
is a very gentlemanly man."

"And," continued Colbert, "are you quite sure Menneville is dead?"

D'Artagnan thought the time was come for him to make his appearance.
"Perfectly, monsieur;" replied he, advancing suddenly.

"Oh! is that you, monsieur?" said Colbert.

"In person," replied the musketeer with his deliberate tone; "it appears
that you had in Menneville a pretty enemy."

"It was not I, monsieur, who had an enemy," replied Colbert; "it was the
king."

"Double brute!" thought D'Artagnan, "to think to play the great man and
the hypocrite with me. Well," continued he to Colbert, "I am very happy
to have rendered so good a service to the king; will you take upon you
to tell his majesty, monsieur l'intendant?"

"What commission is this you give me, and what do you charge me to tell
his majesty, monsieur? Be precise, if you please," said Colbert, in a
sharp voice, tuned beforehand to hostility.

"I give you no commission," replied D'Artagnan, with that calmness which
never abandons the banterer; "I thought it would be easy for you to
announce to his majesty that it was I who, being there by chance, did
justice upon Menneville and restored order to things."

Colbert opened his eyes and interrogated the chief of the watch with a
look--"Ah! it is very true," said the latter, "that this gentleman saved
us."

"Why did you not tell me, monsieur, that you came to relate me this?"
said Colbert with envy; "everything is explained, and more favorably for
you than for anybody else."

"You are in error, monsieur l'intendant, I did not at all come for the
purpose of relating that to you."

"It is an exploit, nevertheless."

"Oh!" said the musketeer carelessly, "constant habit blunts the mind."

"To what do I owe the honor of your visit, then?"

"Simply to this: the king ordered me to come to you."

"Ah!" said Colbert, recovering himself when he saw D'Artagnan draw a
paper from his pocket; "it is to demand some money of me?"

"Precisely, monsieur."

"Have the goodness to wait, if you please, monsieur, till I have
dispatched the report of the watch."

D'Artagnan turned upon his heel, insolently enough, and finding himself
face to face with Colbert, after his first turn, he bowed to him as a
harlequin would have done; then, after a second evolution, he directed
his steps towards the door in quick time. Colbert was struck with this
pointed rudeness, to which he was not accustomed. In general, men of the
sword, when they came to his office, had such a want of money, that
though their feet seemed to take root in the marble, they hardly lost
their patience. Was D'Artagnan going straight to the king? Would he go
and describe his rough reception, or recount his exploit? This was a
matter for grave consideration. At all events, the moment was badly
chosen to send D'Artagnan away, whether he came from the king, or on his
own account. The musketeer had rendered too great a service, and that
too recently, for it to be already forgotten. Therefore Colbert thought
it would be better to shake off his arrogance and call D'Artagnan back.
"Ho! Monsieur d'Artagnan," cried Colbert, "what! are you leaving me
thus?"

D'Artagnan turned round: "Why not?" said he, quietly, "we have no more
to say to each other, have we?"

"You have, at least, money to receive, as you have an order?"

"Who, I? Oh! not at all, my dear Monsieur Colbert."

"But, monsieur, you have an order. And, in the same manner as you give a
sword-thrust, when you are required, I, on my part, pay when an order is
presented to me. Present yours."

"It is useless, my dear Monsieur Colbert," said D'Artagnan, who inwardly
enjoyed this confusion in the ideas of Colbert; "my order is paid."

"Paid, by whom?"

"By monsieur le surintendant."

Colbert grew pale.

"Explain yourself," said he, in a stifled voice--"if you are paid why do
you show me that paper?"

"In consequence of the word of order of which you spoke to me so
ingeniously just now, dear M. Colbert; the king told me to take a
quarter of the pension he is pleased to make me."

"Of me?" said Colbert.

"Not exactly. The king said to me: 'Go to M. Fouquet; the superintendent
will, perhaps, have no money, then you will go and draw it of M.
Colbert.'"

The countenance of M. Colbert brightened for a moment; but it was with
his unfortunate physiognomy as with a stormy sky, sometimes radiant,
sometimes dark as night, according as the lightening gleams or the cloud
passes. "Eh! and was there any money in the superintendent's coffers?"
asked he.

"Why, yes, he could not be badly off for money," replied D'Artagnan--"it
may be believed, since M. Fouquet, instead of paying me a quarter or
five thousand livres--"

"A quarter or five thousand livres!" cried Colbert, struck, as Fouquet
had been, with the generosity of the sum for a soldier's pension, "why,
that would be a pension of twenty thousand livres?"

"Exactly, M. Colbert. Peste! you reckon like old Pythagoras; yes, twenty
thousand livres."

"Ten times the appointment of an intendant of the finances. I beg to
offer you my compliments," said Colbert, with a vicious smile.

"Oh!" said D'Artagnan, "the king apologized for giving me so little; but
he promised to make it more hereafter, when he should be rich; but I
must be gone, having much to do--"

"So, then, notwithstanding the expectation of the king, the
superintendent paid you, did he?"

"In the same manner, as, in opposition to the king's expectation, you
refused to pay me."

"I did not refuse, monsieur, I only begged you to wait. And you say that
M. Fouquet paid you your five thousand livres?"

"Yes, as you might have done; but he did even better than that, M.
Colbert."

"And what did he do?"

"He politely counted me down the sum-total, saying, that for the king,
his coffers were always full."

"The sum-total! M. Fouquet has given you twenty thousand livres instead
of five thousand?"

"Yes, monsieur."

"And what for?"

"In order to spare me three visits to the money-chest of the
superintendent, so that I have the twenty thousand livres in my pocket
in good new coin. You see, then, that I am able to go away without
standing in need of you, having come here only for form's sake." And
D'Artagnan slapped his hand upon his pocket, with a laugh which
disclosed to Colbert thirty-two magnificent teeth, as white as teeth of
twenty-five years old, and which seemed to say in their language: "Serve
up to us thirty-two little Colberts, and we will chew them willingly."
The serpent is as brave as the lion, the hawk as courageous as the
eagle, that cannot be contested. It can only be said of animals that are
decidedly cowardly, and are so called, that they will be brave only when
they have to defend themselves. Colbert was not frightened at the
thirty-two teeth of D'Artagnan. He recovered, and suddenly,--"Monsieur,"
said he, "monsieur le surintendant has done what he had no right to do."

"What do you mean by that?" replied D'Artagnan.

"I mean that your note--will you let me see your note, if you please?"

"Very willingly; here it is."

Colbert seized the paper with an eagerness which the musketeer did not
remark without uneasiness, and particularly without a certain degree of
regret at having trusted him with it. "Well, monsieur, the royal order
says thus:--'At sight, I command that there be paid to M. d'Artagnan the
sum of five thousand livres, forming a quarter of the pension I have
made him.'"

"So, in fact, it is written," said D'Artagnan, affecting calmness.

"Very well; the king only owed you five thousand livres; why has more
been given to you?"

"Because there was more; and M. Fouquet was willing to give me more;
that does not concern anybody."

"It is natural," said Colbert with a proud ease, "that you should be
ignorant of the usages of state-finance; but, monsieur, when you have a
thousand livres to pay, what do you do?"

"I never have a thousand livres to pay," replied D'Artagnan.

"Once more," said Colbert, irritated--"once more, if you had any sum to
pay, would you not pay what you ought?"

"That only proves one thing," said D'Artagnan; "and that is, that you
have your own particular customs in finance, and M. Fouquet has his
own."

"Mine, monsieur, are the correct ones."

"I do not say that they are not."

"And you have accepted what was not due to you."

D'Artagnan's eyes flashed. "What is not due to me yet, you meant to say,
M. Colbert; for if I have received what was not due to me at all, I
should have committed a theft."

Colbert made no reply to this subtlety. "You then owe fifteen thousand
livres to the public chest," said he, carried away by his jealous ardor.

"Then you must give me credit for them," replied D'Artagnan, with his
imperceptible irony.

"Not at all, monsieur."

"Well! what will you do, then? You will not take my rouleaux from me,
will you?"

"You must return them to my chest."

"I! Oh! Monsieur Colbert, don't reckon upon that."

"The king wants his money, monsieur."

"And I, monsieur, I want the king's money."

"That may be so; but you must return this."

"Not a sou. I have always understood that in matters of comptabilite, as
you call it, a good cashier never gives back or takes back."

"Then, monsieur, we shall see what the king will say about it. I will
show him this note, which proves that M. Fouquet not only pays what he
does not owe, but that he does not even take care of vouchers for the
sums that he has paid."

"Ah! now I understand why you have taken that paper, M. Colbert!"

Colbert did not perceive all that there was of a threatening character
in his name pronounced in a certain manner. "You shall see hereafter
what use I will make of it," said he, holding up the paper in his
fingers.

"Oh!" said D'Artagnan, snatching the paper from him with a rapid
movement; "I understand perfectly well, M. Colbert; I have no occasion
to wait for that." And he crumpled up the paper he had so cleverly
seized.

"Monsieur, monsieur!" cried Colbert, "this is violence!"

"Nonsense! You must not be particular about a soldier's manners!"
replied D'Artagnan. "I kiss your hands, my dear M. Colbert." And he went
out, laughing in the face of the future minister.

"That man, now," muttered he, "was about to grow quite friendly; it is a
great pity I was obliged to cut his company so soon."




Chapter LXV. Philosophy of the Heart and Mind.


For a man who had seen so many much more dangerous ones, the position of
D'Artagnan with respect to M. Colbert was only comic. D'Artagnan,
therefore, did not deny himself the satisfaction of laughing at the
expense of monsieur l'intendant, from the Rue des Petits-Champs to the
Rue des Lombards. It was a great while since D'Artagnan had laughed so
long together. He was still laughing when Planchet appeared, laughing
likewise, at the door of his house; for Planchet, since the return of
his patron, since the entrance of the English guineas, passed the
greater part of his life in doing what D'Artagnan had only done from the
Rue Neuve des Petits-Champs to the Rue des Lombards.

"You are home, then, my dear master?" said Planchet.

"No, my friend," replied the musketeer; "I am off, and that quickly. I
will sup with you, go to bed, sleep five hours, and at break of day leap
into my saddle. Has my horse had an extra feed?"

"Eh! my dear master," replied Planchet, "you know very well that your
horse is the jewel of the family; that my lads are caressing it all day,
and cramming it with sugar, nuts, and biscuits. You ask me if he has had
an extra feed of oats; you should ask if he has not had enough to burst
him."

"Very well, Planchet, that is all right. Now, then, I pass to what
concerns me--my supper?"

"Ready. A smoking roast joint, white wine, crayfish, and fresh-gathered
cherries. All ready, my master."

"You are a capital fellow, Planchet; come on, then, let us sup, and I
will go to bed."

During supper D'Artagnan observed that Planchet kept rubbing his
forehead, as if to facilitate the issue of some idea closely pent within
his brain. He looked with an air of kindness at this worthy companion of
former adventures and misadventures, and, clinking glass against glass,
"Come, Planchet," said he, "let us see what it is that gives you so much
trouble to bring forth. Mordioux! Speak freely, and quickly."

"Well, this is it," replied Planchet: "you appear to me to be going on
some expedition or another."

"I don't say that I am not."

"Then you have some new idea?"

"That is possible, too, Planchet."

"Then there will be fresh capital to be ventured? I will lay down fifty
thousand livres upon the idea you are about to carry out." And so
saying, Planchet rubbed his hands one against the other with a rapidity
evincing great delight.

"Planchet," said D'Artagnan, "there is but one misfortune in it."

"And what is that?"

"That the idea is not mine. I can risk nothing upon it."

These words drew a deep sigh from the heart of Planchet. That Avarice is
an ardent counselor; she carries away her man, as Satan did Jesus, to
the mountain, and when once she has shown to an unfortunate all the
kingdoms of the earth, she is able to repose herself, knowing full well
that she has left her companion, Envy, to gnaw at his heart. Planchet
had tasted of riches easily acquired, and was never afterwards likely to
stop in his desires; but, as he had a good heart in spite of his
covetousness, as he adored D'Artagnan, he could not refrain from making
him a thousand recommendations, each more affectionate than the others.
He would not have been sorry, nevertheless, to have caught a little hint
