Fragment #1--Pseudo-Herodotus, Life of Homer: Sitting there in the
tanner's yard, Homer recited his poetry to them, the "Expedition of
Amphiarus to Thebes" and the "Hymns to the Gods" composed by him.




THE TAKING OF OECHALIA (fragments)

Fragment #1--Eustathius, 330. 41: An account has there been given of
Eurytus and his daughter Iole, for whose sake Heracles sacked Oechalia.
Homer also seems to have written on this subject, as that historian
shows who relates that Creophylus of Samos once had Homer for his guest
and for a reward received the attribution of the poem which they call
the "Taking of Oechalia". Some, however, assert the opposite; that
Creophylus wrote the poem, and that Homer lent his name in return for
his entertainment. And so Callimachus writes: 'I am the work of that
Samian who once received divine Homer in his house. I sing of Eurytus
and all his woes and of golden-haired Ioleia, and am reputed one of
Homer's works. Dear Heaven! how great an honour this for Creophylus!'


Fragment #2--Cramer, Anec. Oxon. i. 327: 'Ragged garments, even those
which now you see.' This verse ("Odyssey" xiv. 343) we shall also find
in the "Taking of Oechalia".


Fragment #3--Scholaist on Sophocles Trach., 266: There is a disagreement
as to the number of the sons of Eurytus. For Hesiod says Eurytus and
Antioche had as many as four sons; but Creophylus says two.


Fragment #4--Scholiast on Euripides Medea, 273: Didymus contrasts the
following account given by Creophylus, which is as follows: while Medea
was living in Corinth, she poisoned Creon, who was ruler of the city
at that time, and because she feared his friends and kinsfolk, fled to
Athens. However, since her sons were too young to go along with her, she
left them at the altar of Hera Acraea, thinking that their father would
see to their safety. But the relatives of Creon killed them and spread
the story that Medea had killed her own children as well as Creon.




THE PHOCAIS (fragments)

Fragment #1--Pseudo-Herodotus, Life of Homer: While living with
Thestorides, Homer composed the "Lesser Iliad" and the "Phocais"; though
the Phocaeans say that he composed the latter among them.




THE MARGITES (fragments)

Fragment #1--Suidas, s.v.: Pigres. A Carian of Halicarnassus and brother
of Artemisia, wife of Mausolus, who distinguished herself in war...
[3401] He also wrote the "Margites" attributed to Homer and the "Battle
of the Frogs and Mice".


Fragment #2--Atilius Fortunatianus, p. 286, Keil: 'There came to
Colophon an old man and divine singer, a servant of the Muses and of
far-shooting Apollo. In his dear hands he held a sweet-toned lyre.'


Fragment #3--Plato, Alcib. ii. p. 147 A: 'He knew many things but knew
all badly...'

Aristotle, Nic. Eth. vi. 7, 1141: 'The gods had taught him neither to
dig nor to plough, nor any other skill; he failed in every craft.'


Fragment #4--Scholiast on Aeschines in Ctes., sec. 160: He refers to
Margites, a man who, though well grown up, did not know whether it was
his father or his mother who gave him birth, and would not lie with his
wife, saying that he was afraid she might give a bad account of him to
her mother.


Fragment #5--Zenobius, v. 68: 'The fox knows many a wile; but the
hedge-hog's one trick [3402] can beat them all.' [3403]




THE CERCOPES (fragments)

Fragment #1--Suidas, s.v.: Cercopes. These were two brothers living upon
the earth who practised every kind of knavery. They were called Cercopes
[3501] because of their cunning doings: one of them was named Passalus
and the other Acmon. Their mother, a daughter of Memnon, seeing their
tricks, told them to keep clear of Black-bottom, that is, of Heracles.
These Cercopes were sons of Theia and Ocean, and are said to have been
turned to stone for trying to deceive Zeus.

'Liars and cheats, skilled in deeds irremediable, accomplished
knaves. Far over the world they roamed deceiving men as they wandered
continually.'




THE BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE (303 lines)

(ll. 1-8) Here I begin: and first I pray the choir of the Muses to
come down from Helicon into my heart to aid the lay which I have newly
written in tablets upon my knee. Fain would I sound in all men's ears
that awful strife, that clamorous deed of war, and tell how the Mice
proved their valour on the Frogs and rivalled the exploits of the
Giants, those earth-born men, as the tale was told among mortals. Thus
did the war begin.

(ll. 9-12) One day a thirsty Mouse who had escaped the ferret, dangerous
foe, set his soft muzzle to the lake's brink and revelled in the sweet
water. There a loud-voiced pond-larker spied him: and uttered such words
as these.

(ll. 13-23) 'Stranger, who are you? Whence come you to this shore, and
who is he who begot you? Tell me all this truly and let me not find you
lying. For if I find you worthy to be my friend, I will take you to my
house and give you many noble gifts such as men give to their guests.
I am the king Puff-jaw, and am honoured in all the pond, being ruler
of the Frogs continually. The father that brought me up was Mud-man who
mated with Waterlady by the banks of Eridanus. I see, indeed, that you
are well-looking and stouter than the ordinary, a sceptred king and a
warrior in fight; but, come, make haste and tell me your descent.'

(ll. 24-55) Then Crumb-snatcher answered him and said: 'Why do you ask
my race, which is well-known amongst all, both men and gods and the
birds of heaven? Crumb-snatcher am I called, and I am the son of
Bread-nibbler--he was my stout-hearted father--and my mother was
Quern-licker, the daughter of Ham-gnawer the king: she bare me in the
mouse-hole and nourished me with food, figs and nuts and dainties of
all kinds. But how are you to make me your friend, who am altogether
different in nature? For you get your living in the water, but I am used
to each such foods as men have: I never miss the thrice-kneaded loaf
in its neat, round basket, or the thin-wrapped cake full of sesame and
cheese, or the slice of ham, or liver vested in white fat, or cheese
just curdled from sweet milk, or delicious honey-cake which even the
blessed gods long for, or any of all those cates which cooks make for
the feasts of mortal men, larding their pots and pans with spices of all
kinds. In battle I have never flinched from the cruel onset, but plunged
straight into the fray and fought among the foremost. I fear not man
though he has a big body, but run along his bed and bite the tip of
his toe and nibble at his heel; and the man feels no hurt and his sweet
sleep is not broken by my biting. But there are two things I fear above
all else the whole world over, the hawk and the ferret--for these bring
great grief on me--and the piteous trap wherein is treacherous death.
Most of all I fear the ferret of the keener sort which follows you still
even when you dive down your hole. [3601] I gnaw no radishes and cabbages
and pumpkins, nor feed on green leeks and parsley; for these are food
for you who live in the lake.'

(ll. 56-64) Then Puff-jaw answered him with a smile: 'Stranger you boast
too much of belly-matters: we too have many marvels to be seen both in
the lake and on the shore. For the Son of Chronos has given us Frogs the
power to lead a double life, dwelling at will in two separate elements;
and so we both leap on land and plunge beneath the water. If you would
learn of all these things, 'tis easy done: just mount upon my back and
hold me tight lest you be lost, and so you shall come rejoicing to my
house.'

(ll. 65-81) So said he, and offered his back. And the Mouse mounted at
once, putting his paws upon the other's sleek neck and vaulting nimbly.
Now at first, while he still saw the land near by, he was pleased, and
was delighted with Puff-jaw's swimming; but when dark waves began to
wash over him, he wept loudly and blamed his unlucky change of mind: he
tore his fur and tucked his paws in against his belly, while within him
his heart quaked by reason of the strangeness: and he longed to get to
land, groaning terribly through the stress of chilling fear. He put out
his tail upon the water and worked it like a steering oar, and prayed
to heaven that he might get to land. But when the dark waves washed over
him he cried aloud and said: 'Not in such wise did the bull bear on his
back the beloved load, when he brought Europa across the sea to Crete,
as this Frog carries me over the water to his house, raising his yellow
back in the pale water.'

(ll. 82-92) Then suddenly a water-snake appeared, a horrid sight for
both alike, and held his neck upright above the water. And when he saw
it, Puff-jaw dived at once, and never thought how helpless a friend he
would leave perishing; but down to the bottom of the lake he went, and
escaped black death. But the Mouse, so deserted, at once fell on his
back, in the water. He wrung his paws and squeaked in agony of death:
many times he sank beneath the water and many times he rose up again
kicking. But he could not escape his doom, for his wet fur weighed him
down heavily. Then at the last, as he was dying, he uttered these words.

(ll. 93-98) 'Ah, Puff-jaw, you shall not go unpunished for this
treachery! You threw me, a castaway, off your body as from a rock.
Vile coward! On land you would not have been the better man, boxing, or
wrestling, or running; but now you have tricked me and cast me in the
water. Heaven has an avenging eye, and surely the host of Mice will
punish you and not let you escape.'

(ll. 99-109) With these words he breathed out his soul upon the water.
But Lick-platter as he sat upon the soft bank saw him die and, raising
a dreadful cry, ran and told the Mice. And when they heard of his fate,
all the Mice were seized with fierce anger, and bade their
heralds summon the people to assemble towards dawn at the house of
Bread-nibbler, the father of hapless Crumb-snatcher who lay outstretched
on the water face up, a lifeless corpse, and no longer near the bank,
poor wretch, but floating in the midst of the deep. And when the Mice
came in haste at dawn, Bread-nibbler stood up first, enraged at his
son's death, and thus he spoke.

(ll. 110-121) 'Friends, even if I alone had suffered great wrong from
the Frogs, assuredly this is a first essay at mischief for you all. And
now I am pitiable, for I have lost three sons. First the abhorred ferret
seized and killed one of them, catching him outside the hole; then
ruthless men dragged another to his doom when by unheard-of arts they
had contrived a wooden snare, a destroyer of Mice, which they call a
trap. There was a third whom I and his dear mother loved well, and him
Puff-jaw has carried out into the deep and drowned. Come, then, and let
us arm ourselves and go out against them when we have arrayed ourselves
in rich-wrought arms.'

(ll. 122-131) With such words he persuaded them all to gird themselves.
And Ares who has charge of war equipped them. First they fastened on
greaves and covered their shins with green bean-pods broken into two
parts which they had gnawed out, standing over them all night. Their
breast plates were of skin stretched on reeds, skilfully made from a
ferret they had flayed. For shields each had the centre-piece of a lamp,
and their spears were long needles all of bronze, the work of Ares, and
the helmets upon their temples were pea-nut shells.

(ll. 132-138) So the Mice armed themselves. But when the Frogs were
aware of it, they rose up out of the water and coming together to one
place gathered a council of grievous war. And while they were asking
whence the quarrel arose, and what the cause of this anger, a
herald drew near bearing a wand in his paws, Pot-visitor the son
of great-hearted Cheese-carver. He brought the grim message of war,
speaking thus:

(ll. 139-143) 'Frogs, the Mice have sent me with their threats against
you, and bid you arm yourselves for war and battle; for they have seen
Crumb-snatcher in the water whom your king Puff-jaw slew. Fight, then,
as many of you as are warriors among the Frogs.'

(ll. 144-146) With these words he explained the matter. So when this
blameless speech came to their ears, the proud Frogs were disturbed in
their hearts and began to blame Puff-jaw. But he rose up and said:

(ll. 147-159) 'Friends, I killed no Mouse, nor did I see one perishing.
Surely he was drowned while playing by the lake and imitating the
swimming of the Frogs, and now these wretches blame me who am guiltless.
Come then; let us take counsel how we may utterly destroy the wily Mice.
Moreover, I will tell you what I think to be the best. Let us all gird
on our armour and take our stand on the very brink of the lake, where
the ground breaks down sheer: then when they come out and charge upon
us, let each seize by the crest the Mouse who attacks him, and cast them
with their helmets into the lake; for so we shall drown these dry-hobs
[3602] in the water, and merrily set up here a trophy of victory over the
slaughtered Mice.'

(ll. 160-167) By this speech he persuaded them to arm themselves.

They covered their shins with leaves of mallows, and had breastplates
made of fine green beet-leaves, and cabbage-leaves, skilfully fashioned,
for shields. Each one was equipped with a long, pointed rush for a
spear, and smooth snail-shells to cover their heads. Then they stood
in close-locked ranks upon the high bank, waving their spears, and were
filled, each of them, with courage.

(ll. 168-173) Now Zeus called the gods to starry heaven and showed them
the martial throng and the stout warriors so many and so great, all
bearing long spears; for they were as the host of the Centaurs and the
Giants. Then he asked with a sly smile; 'Who of the deathless gods will
help the Frogs and who the Mice?'

And he said to Athena;

(ll. 174-176) 'My daughter, will you go aid the Mice? For they all
frolic about your temple continually, delighting in the fat of sacrifice
and in all kinds of food.'

(ll. 177-196) So then said the son of Cronos. But Athena answered him:
'I would never go to help the Mice when they are hard pressed, for they
have done me much mischief, spoiling my garlands and my lamps too,
to get the oil. And this thing that they have done vexes my heart
exceedingly: they have eaten holes in my sacred robe, which I wove
painfully spinning a fine woof on a fine warp, and made it full of
holes. And now the money-lender is at me and charges me interest which
is a bitter thing for immortals. For I borrowed to do my weaving, and
have nothing with which to repay. Yet even so I will not help the Frogs;
for they also are not considerable: once, when I was returning early
from war, I was very tired, and though I wanted to sleep, they would not
let me even doze a little for their outcry; and so I lay sleepless with
a headache until cock-crow. No, gods, let us refrain from helping these
hosts, or one of us may get wounded with a sharp spear; for they fight
hand to hand, even if a god comes against them. Let us rather all amuse
ourselves watching the fight from heaven.'

(ll. 197-198) So said Athena. And the other gods agreed with her, and
all went in a body to one place.

(ll. 199-201) Then gnats with great trumpets sounded the fell note
of war, and Zeus the son of Cronos thundered from heaven, a sign of
grievous battle.

(ll. 202-223) First Loud-croaker wounded Lickman in the belly, right
through the midriff. Down fell he on his face and soiled his soft fur
in the dust: he fell with a thud and his armour clashed about him. Next
Troglodyte shot at the son of Mudman, and drove the strong spear deep
into his breast; so he fell, and black death seized him and his spirit
flitted forth from his mouth. Then Beety struck Pot-visitor to the heart
and killed him, and Bread-nibbler hit Loud-crier in the belly, so that
he fell on his face and his spirit flitted forth from his limbs. Now
when Pond-larker saw Loud-crier perishing, he struck in quickly and
wounded Troglodyte in his soft neck with a rock like a mill-stone, so
that darkness veiled his eyes. Thereat Ocimides was seized with grief,
and struck out with his sharp reed and did not draw his spear back to
him again, but felled his enemy there and then. And Lickman shot at him
with a bright spear and hit him unerringly in the midriff. And as he
marked Cabbage-eater running away, he fell on the steep bank, yet even
so did not cease fighting but smote that other so that he fell and
did not rise again; and the lake was dyed with red blood as he lay
outstretched along the shore, pierced through the guts and shining
flanks. Also he slew Cheese-eater on the very brink....

((LACUNA))

(ll. 224-251) But Reedy took to flight when he saw Ham-nibbler,
and fled, plunging into the lake and throwing away his shield. Then
blameless Pot-visitor killed Brewer and Water-larked killed the lord
Ham-nibbler, striking him on the head with a pebble, so that his brains
flowed out at his nostrils and the earth was bespattered with blood.
Faultless Muck-coucher sprang upon Lick-platter and killed him with his
spear and brought darkness upon his eyes: and Leeky saw it, and dragged
Lick-platter by the foot, though he was dead, and choked him in the
lake. But Crumb-snatcher was fighting to avenge his dead comrades, and
hit Leeky before he reached the land; and he fell forward at the blow
and his soul went down to Hades. And seeing this, the Cabbage-climber
took a clod of mud and hurled it at the Mouse, plastering all his
forehead and nearly blinding him. Thereat Crumb-snatcher was enraged and
caught up in his strong hand a huge stone that lay upon the ground, a
heavy burden for the soil: with that he hit Cabbage-climber below the
knee and splintered his whole right shin, hurling him on his back in the
dust. But Croakperson kept him off, and rushing at the Mouse in turn,
hit him in the middle of the belly and drove the whole reed-spear into
him, and as he drew the spear back to him with his strong hand, all his
foe's bowels gushed out upon the ground. And when Troglodyte saw the
deed, as he was limping away from the fight on the river bank, he shrank
back sorely moved, and leaped into a trench to escape sheer death. Then
Bread-nibbler hit Puff-jaw on the toes--he came up at the last from the
lake and was greatly distressed....

((LACUNA))
