Badgers, and the state became known as the Badger State.

Besides Texas, another great territory was added to the States at
this time, and another boundary dispute between British America
and the United States was settled.

For many years both Britain and the United States had claimed the
Oregon Territory.  The Americans claimed it by right of Captain
Gray's discovery of the Columbia River, and also by right of the
exploration of Lewis and Clark.  The British claimed it by right of
the discoveries of Sir Alexander Mackenzie, and also on the ground
that it had been occupied by Hudson's Bay Company.

Three times attempts had been made to settle the boundary, but each
time the attempts had failed.  At length the two countries agreed
to occupy it jointly.  This arrangement was to come to an end by
either country giving a year's notice.

President Polk's appetite for land was huge.  He wanted the whole of
Oregon for the United States.  So in 1846 the joint agreement came
to an end, and new efforts for final settlement began.

Many others were as eager as the President to have the whole
of Oregon, and "Fifty-four Forty or Fight" became a battle-cry.
Fifty-four Forty was the imaginary line or parallel of latitude on
the north of the disputed territory.  So that the cry "Fifty-four
Forty or Fight" meant that these hotspurs demanded the whole of
Oregon or war with Great Britain.

On the other hand some people thought a ridiculous fuss was being
made over an utterly useless piece of land.

"What do we want with it?" they said. "What are we to do with it?
How could a bit of land five thousand miles away ever become part
of the United States? It is absurd!"

Steam, said someone, would make it possible.  Railways would bring
Oregon near to the seat of government.

"Steam!" cried the objectors. "Railways across the Rocky Mountains!
Rubbish!"

The British on their side did not want the whole of Oregon, but
they wanted the land as far south as the Columbia River.

However in the end both sides gave way a little.  It was agreed to
halve the country, and the parallel 49 was taken as the boundary.
Thus another large territory was added to the States and the northern
frontiers peacefully settled from east to west.

But Polk's land hunger was not yet satisfied.  He had half of Oregon,
he had the whole of Texas, but he wanted more.  He waned California,
but California belonged to Mexico.  He tried to buy it from Mexico,
but Mexico would not sell it.  Polk, however, was determined to have
it.  So determined was he that he made up his mind to fight for it,
if there was no other way of getting it.

It was easy to find an excuse for war.  The boundaries of Texas were
very uncertain, and a tract of land lying east of the Rio Grande
River was claimed by both Texas and by Mexico.  IN 1846 Polk sent
an army to take possession of this land.

General Zachary Taylor was in command of this expedition.  And when
he arrived near the mouth of the Rio Grande and began to build a
fort the Mexicans were very angry.  They sent him a message ordering
him to be gone in twenty-four hours.

Of course Taylor refused to go, and he began to blockade the river,
so as to stop trade with Mexico.

The Mexicans then made ready to fight, and next morning they attacked
and captured a scouting party of Americans.

When the news reached Washington there was great excitement.
"Mexico has passed the boundary of the United States," declared the
President, "has invaded our territory, and shed American blood on
American soil."

"War exists," he said, "notwithstanding all our efforts to avoid
it, exists by the act of Mexico herself."

Some of the people, however, did not believe that Mexico was wholly
to blame for beginning the war.  And a young Congressman named Abraham
Lincoln asked the President to state the exact spot on American
territory where American blood had been spilled.  This was called
the "Spot resolution."

But in spite of any protest that was made war was declared, and
volunteers came pouring in from every side.

The war lasted for a year and a half, and from the first the
Mexicans had the worst of it.  Throughout the whole war they never
won a battle.  Besides General Taylor's army the Mexicans soon had
two more to fight.  In the north General Kearney marched into New
Mexico and took possession of it in the name of the United States.
Then he marched into California and claimed that also.  In the
south the Commander-in-Chief, General Scott, landed at Vera Cruz.
And after taking the town he marched triumphantly on, conquering
everything on his way till he reached Mexico City, and the war was
practically at an end.

It was not, however, until February of the following year that the
treaty of peace was signed in Mexico and not till the 4th of July
was it proclaimed in Washington.  By it a great tract of land was
given to the United States, stretching from the borders of Texas
to the shores of the Pacific and from the present northern border
of Mexico to Oregon.

__________





Chapter 77 - Polk - The Finding of Gold





In return for the great tract of land ceded to the United States
Mexico received 15 million dollars.  But the Mexicans little knew
what a golden land they were parting with, and what a bad bargain
they were making.  Nine days before the treaty was signed gold was
found in California.  But news traveled slowly in those days, and
the treaty was signed before the Mexicans knew of the great discovery.

Some time before this a Swiss named Sutter had settled in the Sacramento
Valley.  He had prospered greatly, and had become a regular little
potentate, ruling the whole district round.

He had thousands of horses and cattle, and hundreds of men worked
for him, both white men and Indians.  Now he wanted to build a saw
mill and a man named Marshall, a settler from the East, undertook
to build it for him.

Marshall was a moody, queer tempered man.  But he was a good workman.
So about fifty miles from Sutter's fort the saw mill was begun.  Now
one day while Marshall was walking beside the mill stream inspecting
the work he saw something yellow and shining among the loose earth
and gravel which was being carried down by the stream.  At first
he thought little about it, but as again and again he saw these
shining grains he at length thought that they might be gold and
picked some up.

Next morning he again went to inspect the mill stream and there
he found a piece of the shining stuff bigger than any he had found
the day before.  Marshall picked up the piece, and when he felt it
heavy in his hand he began to feel a little excited.

Could it really be gold? he asked himself.  Marshall did not know
much about gold, but he knew that it was heavy, and that it was
fairly soft.  So he bit and hammered it with stones, and finding
that it was easily beaten out he at last decided that it was indeed
gold.

So he mounted his horse and rode off to Sutter to tell him of
his wonderful discovery.  It was a pouring wet day in January, and
when Marshall reached the fort he was soaked through.  But he took
no thought of that, and marching right into Sutter's office with
something of an air of mystery asked for a private talk.

Sutter wondered what had brought Marshall back from the mill, and
he wondered still more at the mysterious air.

Soon he understood.  For Marshall took out a little bag, and emptying
what it held into his hand, held it out to Sutter.

"I believe this is gold," he said.

"It certainly looks like it," said Sutter in surprise.

Then Marshall told how he had found it in the mill stream, and that
he believed there were tons of it.

Sutter was a very great man in the countryside, and he had things
which no one else dreamed of having.  Among these was an Encyclopedia.
So he looked up the article on gold and read it carefully.  And then
the two men tried all the tests they had at command, and at last
came to the conclusion that the shining grains which Marshall had
found were certainly gold.

Sutter would have been glad to keep the secret for a little time,
at least until his mill was finished.  But such a secret could not
be kept.  Soon every one round knew of the great discovery.  The
sawmill was left unfinished, the workmen went off to dig for gold,
and everyone else followed their example.

The towns were deserted, shops and offices were shut up, houses
were left half built, fields were left unploughed, horses and cattle
roamed about uncared for.  High and low, rich and poor, lawyers,
doctors, labourers, threw down their tools or their pens, turned
the key in the door, and departed for the gold fields.

Some went by sea, and those who could not get passage in ships hired
any small craft which they could find.  They put to sea in the most
rotten or frail little boats, willing to brave any danger if only
they might at length reach the land of gold.

Others went by land, some rode on horseback or drove in a wagon,
others went on foot all the way, carrying with them nothing but a
spade or shovel.

It was a mad rush for wealth.  Every one as soon as he heard the
wonderful news was seized with the gold fever.  When ships came into
port the sailors heard the news, and they deserted wholesale, and
the ships were left to rock at anchor without a soul on board.
Prisoners broke prison and fled to the gold fields.  Warders followed,
not to take them but to remain and dig.  Newspapers could not be
issued, because the printers had all run off; every industry was
neglected except the making of spades and picks.  And the price of
these rose and rose till they could not be had for less than ten
dollars apiece, and it is said that even fifty dollars was offered
for one.

But in some places upon the gold fields picks and shovels were not
needed, for all the men had to do was to pick at the seams with
their pocket knives to get enough gold to make them rich.

At first it was only from California, Oregon and the Western
settlements that men rushed to the gold fields.  For although
the telegraph had been discovered a short time before this there
were neither telegraphs nor railroads in the West.  But soon, in
a wonderfully short time too, the news spread.  It spread to the
Eastern States, then to Europe, and from all over the world the
rush came.

Every ship that would float put to sea.  Many instead of going
their usual routes sailed for California, the whale fisheries were
neglected and the whalers took to mining.  The fleets of all the
world seemed to make for the shores of America.

Across the Continent, too long trains of lumbering wagons drawn
by oxen slowly wound.  They were tented over and were so huge that
whole families lived in them, and they were given the name of prairie
schooners.  All day long they crawled along and as dusk fell they
gathered into groups.  Fires were lit, tents pitched for the night.
Then early next morning the travelers would be astir again, and so
day after day through lonely uninhabited wildernesses the caravans
moved on.

In one unending stream great tented wagons, carts, carriages, horsemen
or even walkers moved along, all going in the same direction, to
the golden land of the West.

Many were the dangers these adventurous travelers had to brave.
There were dangers from hostile Indians, and from wild animals,
from lack of food and water, and above all from sickness.  Cholera
broke out in these slow-moving trains, and many a man who had set
out gaily found a grave by the wayside, and never reached the land
of his golden hopes.

The road too was strewn with broken down wagons, and the bones
of oxen and horses, and many had to finish their weary journey on
foot.

But in spite of all mischances hundreds and thousands reached the
gold fields, and all over the Sacramento Valley, or wherever gold
was found, little towns sprang up.

These were towns of wooden shanties and canvas tents.  And whenever
the gold gave out, or news came of some richer mine, the diggers
would forsake the little town, and rush off somewhere else.  And
no sign of life would be left in the once busy valley save the
weather-worn huts and the upturned earth.  Some men made fortunes
almost in a day, many returned home well off.  But by far the
greater number returned poorer than they came, and with their health
shattered by the hardships of the life.  Many more never returned
at all, but found a nameless grave among the lonely valleys.

Others made fortunes again and again, and lost them as quickly as
they made them.  For though at first the men who went to the gold
fields were for the most part young, and strong, and honest, the
greed of gain soon brought all the riff-raff of the towns.  Many
men joined the throng who had no intention of working, and who but
came to lure the gold away from those who had found it.

So gambling saloons, and drinking saloons, sprang up everywhere, and
many a man left them poorer if not wiser.  Murders became frequent,
but men thought little about them.  Every man went armed, and if he
could not protect himself it was his own fault.

Theft was looked upon as a far worse sin.  For everybody lived in
frail wooden juts or open tents.  They had no means of locking up
their gold, and thought nothing of leaving it lying about quite
unprotected.  But when criminals and lowdown ruffians began to come
things were changed; until at last many were afraid to have it known
that they possessed gold lest they should be murdered for it.

Among the many who did not make fortunes out of the finding of gold
were Marshall and Sutter.  Neither of them was lucky as a miner and
both of them died in poverty.

__________





Chapter 78 - Taylor - Union or Disunion




Polk had no chance of being re-elected as President.  For many
people looked upon the war with Mexico as a great wrong, and as a
stain upon the flag.  So even although it had given to the United
States California, and all its untold wealth, Polk was not forgiven
for having brought the war about.  And while the people were rushing
from all corners of the globe to California, a new President was
inaugurated.

This new President was no other than General Zachary Taylor, who
had become famous during the Mexican war, for people did not blame
him for the war.  He had only obeyed orders as a soldier must and
every one admired his bravery and skill.

He was a rough old soldier, and his men called him Old Rough
and Ready.  And when he first heard that people wanted to make him
President, like Jackson, that other rough old soldier before him,
he simply laughed at the idea.

"I am not vain enough to think that I am fit to be President," he
said. "I would gladly see some other citizen more worthy chosen
for that high office."

Old Rough and Ready was a soldier, and nothing but a soldier.
He knew nothing at all about politics, and had never even voted.
However when people insisted that he should be President, he began
rather to like the idea, and at length consented to be a candidate,
and was elected.

Because of the discovery of gold, thousands and thousands of people
flocked to California.  And although many returned to their homes
again, many also remained in California, and made their homes
in the new-found sunny land.  So it came about that California was
peopled faster than any other part of America, and in 1849, less
than two years after the discovery of gold, it asked to be admitted
to the Union as a state.

But before it was admitted a fierce battle had to be fought, for
the Californians wanted the state to be admitted as a free state.
Now part of California lay south of the Missouri Compromise Line,
so the Southerners were angry, and declared that California must
be divided into two, and that the Southern part must come into the
Union as a slave state.

The Southerners felt that they had a right to be angry.  For they
had helped to bring on the Mexican War for the purpose of getting
more territory south of the Missouri Compromise Line, so that they
should be sure of slave states to balance the free states of the
north.  They had won the land, and now victory would be turned to
defeat if the new states were admitted as free states.

So they threatened, as they had threatened before, to break away
from the Union if they were not listened to.

No sooner was Taylor inaugurated than he had to turn his attention
to this great matter.  The Southerners were determined to use all
their power to get their way, and Senator John Caldwell Calhoun, an
old man, who for years had been a champion of slavery, determined
to speak once more for the cause.

Calhoun was so old and ill that he could hardly walk, and he tottered
into the Senate Chamber leaning on the arms of two friends.  He was
far too feeble to read his speech.  So, pale and deathlike, he sat
in his chair while a friend read it for him.

"The South must have a share in the new territory," he said. "If
you of the North will not do this, then let our Southern States
separate and depart in peace."

This was the great statesman's last word to his country.  Three weeks
later he lay dead.  He was the greatest of Southern politicians.
He really believed that slavery was a good thing, and that life in
the South would be impossible without it.  And loving his country
deeply, he could not bear to think of its ruin.

"The South! the poor South! he murmured, as he lay dying. "God
knows what will become of her."

The next great speech was made by Daniel Webster.  Twenty years had
come and gone since he made his first great speech for Union.  Now
thousands turned to him, begging him to reconcile the North and
South.  And on the day he made his speech, the Senate Chamber was
packed from floor to ceiling.

"I speak today," he said, "not as a Massachusetts man, nor as a
Northern man, but as an American, having no locality but America.
I speak today for the preservation of the Union.  Hear me for my
cause."

But to the men burning with zeal against slavery his speech seemed
lukewarm. "The law of Nature," he said, "settles forever that slavery
cannot exist in California." It was a useless taunt and reproach to
the slave holders to forbid slavery where slavery could not exist.
He blamed the North for having fallen short in its duty to the
South, and declared that the South had just cause for complaint.

Many applauded this speech, but to others it was like a blow in
the face.

"Webster," cried one, "is a fallen star! Lucifer descending from
heaven!"

A third great speech was made four days later by William H.  Seward.
He spoke whole-heartedly for union.

"Slavery must vanish from the Union," he said, "but it would
vanish peacefully." He brushed aside as impossible the thought that
any state should break away from the Union. "I shall vote for the
admission of California directly," he said, "without conditions,
without qualifications, and without compromise."

The Washington Monument

But still the debate went on.  Summer came and on the 4th of July
1850, there was a great ceremony for the laying of the foundation
stone of the Washington Monument.

The President was present and sat for hours in the blazing sun.
Then feeling very tired he went home and drank iced milk and ate
some cherries.  That night he became very ill, and a few days later
he died.

"I have tried to do my duty," he said.  Then the brave and honest
old soldier laid down his heavy burden and was at rest.

Once again a sad procession left the White House, and wound slowly
through the streets lined with soldiers.  Behind the funeral car
was led the President's old war horse which he would never mount
again.  The people wept to see it, and the whole nation mourned for
the brave old soldier who had tried to do his duty.

__________





Chapter 79 - Fillmore - The Underground Railroad




The Vice-President, Millard Fillmore, now became President.  He was
the son of very poor parents; he had picked up an education how he
could, and he was nineteen before he saw a history, or a map of his
own country.  But he was determined to become a lawyer.  And after
a hard struggle he succeeded.  Then from step to step he rose, till
he had now reached the highest office in the land.

Under the new President the debate over California still went on.
But at length the matter was settled, and California was admitted
as a free state.  This was on the 9th of September, 1850, but the
news did not reach California until October.  For months the people
had been waiting for an answer to their petition.  And as the days
went past they grew more and more impatient.  But at last one morning
San Francisco was filled with excitement for the Oregon was seen
coming into harbour gaily decorated with flags.

With shouts of joy the people ran down to the wharf for they knew
the Oregon would never come in with flags flying in such a way if
she were not bringing good news.

And when they heard the news they laughed, and cried, and kissed
each other in joy.  Cannon were fired and bells rung, shops were
shut, and every one went holidaying.

Messengers too were sent in every direction.  Stage coaches with
six-horse teams ran races to be the first to bring the news to
outlying towns and villages.  As the coaches dashed through villages
men on them shouted the news, and the villagers would shout and
laugh in return.

Then, leaping on their horses, they would ride off to tell some
neighbour.  So throughout the land the news was carried.

By the admission of California to the Union as a free state the
non-slave states were greatly strengthened.  But in some degree to
make up for this, a very strict law about the arrest of runaway
slaves was passed.  This was called the Fugitive Slave Law and it
was bad and cruel.  For, by it, if a negro were caught even by some
one who had no right to him, he had no chance of freedom.  A negro
was not allowed to speak for himself, and he was not allowed the
benefit of a jury.  Also any person who helped a slave to run away,
or protected him when he had run away, might be fined.

The North hated the Bill but it was passed.  Many people, however,
made up their minds not to obey it.  For conscience told them that
slavery was wrong and conscience was a "higher Law." So when men
came to the free states to catch runaway slaves they were received
with anger, and everything was done to hinder them in their man-catching
work.  The Underground Railroad, too, became more active than ever.

This Underground Railroad was not a railroad, and it was not
underground.  It was simply a chain of houses about twenty miles or
so apart where escaped slaves might be sure of a kindly welcome.
The railroad was managed by men who felt pity for the slaves and
helped them to escape.  It went in direct roads across the States
to Canada.  The escaping slaves moved so secretly from one house to
another that it almost seemed as if they must have gone underground.
So the system came to be called the Underground Railroad, and the
friendly houses were the stations.

Once a runaway slave reached one of these friendly houses or
stations he would be hidden in the attic or cellar or some safe
place.  There he would be fed and cared for until night came again.
Then the password would be given to him, and directions how to
reach the next underground station.  And, with the pole star for
his guide, he would set out.

Arriving at the house in the dusk of early morning, before any one
was astir he would knock softly at the door.

"Who's there?" would be asked.

Then the runaway would give the password in answer.  Perhaps it
would be "William Penn," or "a friend of friends," or sometimes
the signal would be the hoot of an owl.  And hearing it the master
of the underground station would rise and let the "passenger" in.

Sometimes the slavers would come alone, sometimes in twos and threes
or even more.  As many as seventeen were hidden one day at one of
the stations.

Thousands of slaves were in this way helped to escape every year.
It was a dangerous employment for the station-masters, and many
were found out and fined.  They paid the fines, they did not care
for that; and went on helping the poor slaves.

Most of the people connected with the underground railroad were
white, but some were coloured.  One of the most daring of these was
Harriet Tubman.  She helped so many of her countrymen to escape that
they called her "Moses" because she had led them out of the land
of bondage.  She was nearly white, but had been a slave herself.  And
having escaped from that fearful bondage she now spent her life in
trying to free others.

Again and again, in spite of the danger in being caught, she
ventured into the Southern States to bring back a band of runaway
slaves.  And she was so clever and so full of resource that she
always brought them safely away.  More than once when she saw she
was being tracked, she put herself and her little company into
a train, taking tickets for them southwards.  For she knew that no
one would suspect them to be runaway slaves if they were traveling
south.  Then, when their track was covered, and danger of pursuit
over, they all turned north again.

Harriet was both brave and clever, and when the Civil War broke
out, she served as a scout for the Northern Army, earning the praise
of those who employed her.  She lived to be very old, and died not
many years ago, happy to know that all her countrymen were free.

But although many slaves tried to run away, all slaves were not
unhappy.  When they had a kind master they were well taken care of,
and lived in far greater comfort that if they had been free.  In the
more northerly of the slave states, such as Virginia, the slaves
were generally household servants, and were treated in the most
affectionate manner.  It was farther south in the cotton growing
districts, where slaves worked in gangs under the whip of the
overseer who was often brutal, that the real misery was.

But even with the kindest of masters a slave could never feel safe.
For that master might die or lose his money, and have to sell his
slaves.  Then husband and wife, parents and children might be sold
to different masters, and never see each other again.  The one would
never know whether the other was happy or miserable, alive or dead.
Or they might be sold down South to work in the rice swamps or the
cotton fields.  It was this that the happy, careless slave from the
North most dreaded.

It was just at this time when the Fugitive Slave Law was being
enforced, and the Underground Railroad was working nightly that
"Uncle Tom's Cabin" was written and published.  You all know the
story of poor old Tom, of funny, naughty Topsy and all the other
interesting people of the book.  We look upon it now as merely a
story-book.  But it was much more than that.  It was a great sermon
and did more to make people hate slavery than any other book ever
written.

It was read by hundreds and thousands of people, and soon the fame
of it spread to every country in Europe, and it was translated
into at least twenty languages.  And even today when the work it
was meant to do is done, hundreds of boys and girls still laugh at
Topsy and feel very choky indeed over the fate of poor old Uncle
Tom.

__________





Chapter 80 - Pierce - The Story of "Bleeding Kansas"




In 1853 Fillmore's term of office came to an end and Franklin Pierce
became President.  He was only forty-eight, and was the youngest
President who had been elected so far.

He was the son of a soldier who had fought in the Mexican War.  But
by profession he was a lawyer and not a soldier.

During the administration of Pierce another territory was added
to the United States.  This was a strip of land which now forms the
south of New Mexico and Arizona.  It was bought from Mexico in 1854
and, as James Gadsden arranged the treaty with the President of
Mexico, it was called the Gadsden Purchase.  With this purchase the
territory of the United States as we know it today was completed.
Only seventy years had passed since the Peace of Paris.  But in
these seventy years the country had made mighty strides and had
been doubled and trebled.  Instead of being merely a strip of land
east of the Mississippi it now stretched from ocean to ocean.

The chief interest in this administration was still the slavery
question.  It had not been settled as some people thought it had
been.  But it slept, at least, until suddenly a senator names Douglas
awoke it again by bringing in a bill to do away with the Missouri
Compromise Line.

There was still a great deal of territory of the Louisiana Purchase
waiting to be carved into states.  Now said Douglas, "why make all
this fuss about slavery or no slavery every time a new state wants
to be admitted? Do away with this Missouri Compromise, and when there
are enough people in a territory to allow of its being admitted as
a state, let these people themselves decide whether they wish it
to be a free state or a slave state."

The bill which Douglas brought in thus to do away with the Missouri
Compromise was known as the Kansas-Nebraska Bill, as Douglas
suggested calling the great unorganised territory Nebraska in the
north and Kansas in the South.

Douglas was a Northern man, but he wanted to please the Southerners,
and get them to vote for him as President.  So he brought in this
bill.  It met the fierce opposition from the North, but it passed.
The President alone had power to stop it.  But he did not use his
power.

Douglas had brought in the bill to make himself popular.  But he
made a great mistake.  All over the North he was hated and cursed
because of it.  In town after town he was hanged in effigy, and
then burned with every mark of scorn.  He was reviled as a Judas,
and some women living in a little Northern village sent him thirty
pieces of silver.

In spite of this bill the Northerners were determined that slavery
should not be extended.  So even before the President had signed
it men were hurring westward into Kansas.  Claims were staked out,
trees were felled, and huts built as if by magic.  Settlers streamed
in by hundreds every day.  Some came of themselves, others were sent
by societies got up to help settlers, and by the end of the year,
two or three towns were founded.

But the slave holders were just as determined to make Kansas a slave
state.  So from Missouri, which was a slave state and bordered upon
the Kansas Territory, thousands of slave owners came over the border
and settled in Kansas.

They too found several towns, and there began a fierce struggle
for the upper hand.

March 30th, 1855 was appointed by the Governor for the election of
a council and House of Representatives for the Territory.

The "Free Staters" were already to vote in force.  But the election
was a farce.  For when the day came, five thousand Missourians marched
across the border.  They were a wild, sunburned, picturesque mob.
They had guns on their shoulders, revolvers stuck in their belts
and bowie knives in their big top boots.

They took possession of the polling booths, and if the judges would
not do as they wished, they were turned out.

"Do you live in Kansas?" asked a Judge

"Yes, I do," replied the Missourian, without a moment's hesitation.

"Does your family live in Kansas?" asked the judge, who knew the
man was not speaking the truth.

"It is none of your business," replied the Missourian. "If you don't
keep your impertinence to yourself, I'll knock your head from your
