"Wherefore, Swallow, seeing that for some days you are but a Kaffir
woman, and this is their dress, of which none think harm? Nay, you must,
for remember that if you show doubt or shame, you will betray yourself."

Then with a groan Suzanne yielded, and crouching upon the floor like a
native, awaited the return of Sihamba. Presently she came, followed by
Zinti, who was in good case, though somewhat thin, for Zinti was clever
and provident, and, foreseeing what would come, he had hidden water for
himself among the rocks.

"Zinti," said Sihamba, "I would speak with you of secret matters."

"Speak on, lady," he answered--here his eyes fell upon Suzanne crouched
on the ground in the full light of the lamp--"but there is a stranger
present."

"This is no stranger, Zinti," said Sihamba, "but one whom you know
well."

"Indeed, lady, I know her not. Should I forget one so beautiful? And
yet--and yet--" and he rubbed his eyes and stared, gasping, "it cannot
be."

"Yes, it is, Zinti. There sits the lady Swallow and none other."

Now although there was little mirth left in him, Zinti burst out
laughing till the tears ran from his eyes, and Sihamba struck him with
her hands, calling him "Fool," and commanding him to be silent.

"Wow!" he said, "this is wonderful. This is magic indeed. She who was
white as snow has become black as coal, and yes, she looks best black.
Oh! this is magic indeed."

At his words Suzanne sprang up looking as though she were about to weep,
and Sihamba stopped his lips with fierce words and blows, though he took
small heed of either, but stood staring.

"Zinti," Sihamba said, "you have done me many services, but to-day you
must do me the greatest of all. This morning at the daylight the lady
Swallow will pass with the multitude down the cleft yonder and none will
know her in that disguise. You must go with her, but not too near her,
and cross the plain, meeting her by the saw-edged rock which stands
yonder at the mouth of the gorge in the Quathlamba mountains. Then you
must lead her as fast as you can travel to that camp of the Boers which
is near the Tugela River, where she will be safe. Do you understand?"

"I understand, lady. But what of yourself?"

"It is my plan to hide on the mountain," Sihamba answered quickly, "in
a secret place I know of, seeing that it is impossible that I should
escape because my stature would betray me. I will join you at the Boer
camp later; or, failing that, you can return in a while--say on the
first night of the new moon--to search for me. But talk no more, for we
have still much to do. Yes, we who have made a white woman black, must
make a black woman white. Follow me, both of you," and giving Zinti a
jar of pigment and the long goat-skin cloak, which Suzanne wore for an
outer garment, she left the hut, carrying in her hand strips of ox-hide
tanned white.

Avoiding the groups of thirst-tormented people who sat or wandered about
in the coolness of the night, they passed through the gates of the
kraal unheeded, and walking quickly across the wide stretch of tableland
reached the eastern edge of the cliff. Now upon the very verge of this
cliff rose a sharp pinnacle of rock fifty feet or more into the air, and
upon the top of this pinnacle was that stone shaped like a great chair,
in which Suzanne sat day by day, poised like an eagle over the dizzy
gulf of space, for the slopes of the mountain swelled five hundred feet
beneath, watching for the help that never came. Not far from the base of
this point Sihamba began to search in the starlight till she found
what she wanted, the body of a young woman who had crept here to die of
thirst, and whose death and the place of it had been reported to her.

Now she took the jar of white clay, and, aided by Zinti, set about her
ghastly task, daubing the stuff thickly upon the cold features and the
neck and arms and feet. Soon it was done, for such work needed little
care, but then began their true toil since the corpse must be carried up
the sharp point of rock, and that by no easy path. Had not Zinti been so
strong it could never have been done; still, with the aid of Suzanne and
Sihamba herself, at last it was finished.

Up that steep place they toiled, the three of them, dragging the dead
body from knob to knob of rock, well knowing that one false step in the
gloom would send them to be broken to pieces hundreds of feet beneath.
At length they reached the little platform where there was scarcely room
for all of them to stand with their burden, and climbing on to the stone
which was called the Chair, Zinti drew the dead woman into the seat of
it.

Then as Sihamba bade him he wrapped her in Suzanne's long white cape of
goat-skin, putting the hood of it upon her head, after which he made the
corpse fast in a sitting posture, lashing it round the neck and middle
to the back of the stone with the white tanned rimpis in such fashion
that it could not fall or even slip.

"So," said Sihamba grimly, "there sits the bridge upon whom Swart Piet
can feast his eyes while you seek safety across the mountains. Now back
to the town, for from this height I can already see light glimmering in
the east."

Accordingly they returned to the hut and entered it, leaving Zinti
without, none noting them since by now the multitudes were thronging
the narrow way. Here Sihamba lit the lamp, and by its light once more
examined Suzanne carefully, retouching the dye in this place and in
that, till she was sure that no gleam of white showed through it.

"It is good," she said at length; "unless you betray yourself, your skin
will not betray you. And now, lady Swallow, the hour has come for us
to part, and I rejoice to think that some of the debt I owe you I have
repaid. Long ago I told you that very far away I should live to save you
as you saved me, and I am sure that I have saved you; there is no doubt
of it in my heart. Yes, yes, Swallow, I see you most happy in the love
of husband and of children, thinking of all these things as a far-off
evil dream, as of a dream that never will return. What more do I desire?
What more have I to ask?

"I say that I have repaid to you part of the debt I owe, but all of it
I can never repay, for, Swallow, you have given me love which elsewhere
has been denied to me. Others have parents and brothers and sisters and
husbands to love them; I have none of these. I have only you who are to
me father and mother and sister and lover.

"How then can I repay you who have taught this cold heart of mine to
love, and have deigned to love me in return? Oh! and the love will not
die; no, no, it will live on when all else is dead, for although I am
but a Kaffir doctoress, at times light shines upon my heart, and in that
light I see many new things. Yes, yes, I see that this life of ours is
but a road, a weary road across the winter veldt, and this death but the
black gate of a garden of flowers----"

"Oh! why do you speak thus?" broke in Suzanne. "Is this then our last
farewell, and does your wisdom tell you that we part to meet no more?"

"I know not, Swallow," answered Sihamba hastily, "but if it should be
so I care nothing, for I am sure that through all your days you will not
forget me, and that when your days are done I shall meet you at the
foot of the death-bed. Nay, you must not weep. Now go swiftly, for it is
time, and even in your husband's love be mindful always that a woman
can love also; yes, though she be but a dwarfed Kaffir doctoress.
Swallow--Sister Swallow, fare you well," and, throwing herself upon
her breast, Sihamba kissed her again and again. Then, with a strange
strength, she thrust her from the hut, calling to Zinti to take charge
of her and do as she had bidden him, adding that if he failed in this
task she would blast his body and haunt his spirit.



Thus parted Sihamba, the Kaffir witch-doctoress, and my daughter
Suzanne, whom she kept safe for nearly three years, and saved at last at
the cost of her own life. Yes, thus they parted, and for always in the
flesh, since it was not fated that they should meet again in this world,
and whether it has been permitted to Sihamba--being a Kaffir, and no
Christian--to enter a better one is more than I can say. In her case,
however, I hope that she has found some hole to creep through, for
although she was a black witch-doctoress, according to her knowledge she
was a good woman and a brave one, as the reader will say also before he
comes to the end of this story.



Outside the hut Zinti took Suzanne by the arm and led her through the
mazes of the town to the open ground that lay between it and the mouth
of the steep cleft which ran down to the slopes of the mountain.

All this space was crowded with people, for as yet they could not enter
the cleft, which nowhere was more than ten feet wide, because it was
filled with cattle, some alive and some dead, that, drawn by the smell
of water beneath, had gathered as near to it as the stone walls which
blocked the pass would allow.

Suzanne and Zinti mingled with this crowd of fugitives, taking a
position almost in the midst of it, for they did not wish to pass out
either among the first or the last. There they waited a while,
none noting them, for in their great agony of thirst all thought of
themselves and not of their neighbours. Indeed, husbands deserted their
sick wives and mothers their children, which were too heavy to carry;
yes, they deserted them to be trampled by the feet of men and the hoofs
of cattle.

Now, the eastern sky grew grey, and though the sun had not yet risen the
light was such that a man could see the veins upon the back of his hand
and the white moons on his finger-nails. Presently, as though moved by
one impulse, thousands of voices uttered a hoarse cry of "It is dawn!
Open, open!"

But it would seem that the wall still stood, for the cattle remained
packed in so dense a mass that a man could have walked upon their backs,
as, indeed, some tried to do.

At last the sun rose, or rather its rays shot upwards across the eastern
skies like a fan of fire. Suzanne turned her head and watched till
presently the arrows of light struck upon the tall chair rock which was
the highest point of all the mountain. Yes, there in the chair sat the
white figure and by its side stood what seemed to be a black child. It
was Sihamba. Far below other eyes were watching also, the eyes of Swart
Piet, for he would not let the people go until he knew that Suzanne and
Sihamba stayed behind. But now he saw them, Suzanne in her accustomed
place, and at her side Sihamba.

"Pull down the walls," he shouted to his men, for he was eager to clear
the pass of cattle and Kaffirs that he might go up it, and they obeyed
him. Before they were more than half down the oxen, pushing and leaping
forward madly, cleared what was left of them and, open-mouthed, their
lolling tongues hanging from their dry jaws, rushed downward to the
water, goring or trampling to death some of those who worked at the
wall.

"The schanzes are down," screamed the people, seeing the long line of
cattle move, and immediately they began to press forward also.

At Suzanne's side was a young woman so weak with thirst that she could
scarcely walk, and on her back a year-old boy, insensible but living,
for a red froth bubbled from his lips. A man thrust this woman to one
side and she fell; it was that aged councillor who on the yesterday had
brought news of the surrender to Sihamba. She tried to struggle to her
feet but others trampled upon her.

"Sister, sister!" she cried, catching Suzanne by the hide blanket which
she wore, "I am dead, but oh! save my child."

"Let it be," whispered Zinti, but Suzanne could not deny those piteous
eyes, and as she passed she snatched up the boy and the sling in which
he was carried by the dying woman, setting the band of it beneath her
own breast. So she went forward, bearing him upon her hip, nor did that
act of mercy lack its reward, for as shall be seen it was her salvation.
Also the child lived, and to this day is a faithful servant in our
house, though now his beard is white.

Down the narrow way surged the crowd, scrambling over rocks and dead
cattle and crushed women and children, till at the last Suzanne
drew near its opening, where stood Swart Piet and some twenty of his
followers, watching the multitude pass out.

"Lady," whispered Zinti into her ear, "now I fall behind, for Bull-Head
may know me. If I win through I will rejoin you on the plain, or by the
saw-edged rock; if I do not, throw away that child, and follow the road
of which I have told you, you can scarcely mistake it. Go on, showing
no fear, and--stay, let that blanket hang open in front, it is not the
custom of these women to wear their garments wrapped so closely."

Suzanne groaned, but she obeyed.



CHAPTER XXXII

THE PASS OF THE QUATHLAMBA

Like wild beasts escaping from a pen, that red-eyed, gasping mob rushed
and staggered to the edge of the water, and, plunging their heads into
it with hoarse grunts and cries, drank and drank and drank. Indeed,
several lost their lives there, for some filled themselves so full that
their vitals were ruptured, and some were thrust into the river by the
cattle or those pressing behind them, to be carried away by the swift
stream.

Just at the mouth of the pass Suzanne, laden with the child, was pushed
down by those who followed, and doubtless would have been trampled to
death, had not one of Swart Piet's men, desiring to clear the way, or,
perhaps, moved to pity at her plight, dragged her to her feet again. But
when he had done this he did not let her go, but held her, staring at
her beauty with greedy eyes.

"Here is a rock-rabbit whom I shall keep for a wife," he cried. "I would
rather take her than twenty fat oxen."

Now Suzanne's heart nearly stood still with terror.

"Water, water," she moaned; "let me drink, I pray you."

"Do not fear, I will take you to drink, my pretty," went on the man,
still staring at her.

Then, losing command of herself, Suzanne screamed and struggled, and
the sound of her cries reached the ears of Swart Piet, who was standing
close at hand.

"What is this?" he asked of the man.

"Nothing, Bull-Head, except that I have taken a woman whom I wish for a
wife because she is so fair."

Van Vooren let his eyes rest upon her, but dreamily, for all his
thoughts were given to her who sat aloft five hundred feet above his
head, and, feeling their glance, Suzanne's blood froze in her veins.

"Yes, she is fair," he answered, "but she is a married woman, and I will
have no Umpondwana brats among my people. Let her go, and take a girl
if you will." For Van Vooren did not wish that the few men who remained
with him should cumber themselves just then with women and children,
since they were needed to look after the cattle.

"Maid or wife, I choose this one and no other," said the man sulkily.

Then Black Piet, whose sullen temper could not brook to be crossed,
broke into a blaze of rage.

"Do you dare to disobey me?" he shouted with an awful Kaffir oath. "Let
her go, dog, or I will kill you."

At this the man, who knew his master, loosed hold of Suzanne, who ran
away, though it was not until she reached the water that she noticed a
white ring round her arm, where his grip had rubbed the paint off the
skin beneath. Strangely enough Van Vooren saw the ring, and at that
distance mistook it for an ivory ornament such as Kaffir women often
wear above the elbow. Still more strangely its white colour made him
think again of the white woman who sat aloft yonder, and he turned his
face upwards, forgetting all about the black girl with the child.

Thrusting herself through the crowd, Suzanne ran on for a while till she
was clear of the worst of it, then terrified though she was, she could
resist the temptation of the water no longer, for her mouth and throat
felt dry and rough. Climbing down to the edge of the river she drank
greedily under the shelter of a rock, and when she had satisfied some
of her thirst, she poured water into the mouth of the child, dipping
its shrunken little body into the stream, whereon it seemed to increase
before her eyes like a dry sponge that is left out in the rain.

While she tended the child thus, and just as it began to find its senses
and to wail feebly, she chanced to look up, and to her terror saw that
man from whom she had escaped walking along the bank looking for her.
Happy was it for Suzanne that the rock under which she was crouched hid
her, for the man stood for thirty seconds or more within two paces, so
that she was obliged to plunge the body of the boy under water to stifle
its crying.

Then, as it happened, the Kaffir caught sight of another woman and
infant, more than a hundred yards away, and ran off towards them.
Thereon Suzanne, replacing the half-choked child upon her back, climbed
the bank, hiding the white mark upon her arm beneath the blanket, and
taking such shelter as she could behind stones or cattle, or knots of
people who, their thirst appeased, were hastening to escape, she slipped
across the shoulder of the slope.

Now she was out of sight of Swart Piet and his men, and for the first
time for many a day began to breathe freely. For a while she crept
on round the flank of the mountain, then at the best of her speed she
struck across the plain straight for the saw-edged rock ten miles away,
which marked the entrance to the pass over the Quathlamba range.

From time to time Suzanne looked behind her, but none followed her, nor,
search as she would, could she discover any trace of Zinti, who, she
began to fear, must have come to some harm. One thing she could see,
however--the whitened corpse set on high in the chair of rock, and by
the side of it a black dot that she knew to be Sihamba. Twice she turned
round and gazed at it, but the second time the dot had become almost
imperceptible, although it still was there. Long and earnestly she
looked, sending her farewell through space to that true friend and
deliverer whose eyes, as she knew well, watched her flight and whose
heart went with her.

Then she travelled on sadly, wondering what was that plan of escape of
which Sihamba had spoken, and why it was that she stood there by the
corpse and did not put it into practice, wondering also when they should
meet again and where. A third time she turned, and now the dead woman
on the rock was but as a tiny point of white, and now it had altogether
vanished away.

After this Suzanne halted no more, but pressed on steadily towards the
saw-edged spur, which she reached about twelve o'clock, for the grass
was so tall, the untrodden veldt so rough, and the sun so hot that, weak
as she felt with grief and the effects of thirst, and laden with a heavy
child, her progress was very slow. At length, however, she stood gasping
in its shadow, gazing dismayed at the huge range of mountains before her
and the steep rough cliffs up which she must climb.

"Never shall I cross them without foot and weighted with this child, so
the end of it will be that I must die after all," thought Suzanne as she
sank down by the banks of a little rivulet, resting her swollen feet in
its cool stream, for then, and indeed for weeks after, it seemed to
her that she could never have enough of the taste and smell and feel of
