foresee that my passion might suffer greatly by the presence of this
lady, who, in all probability, would revenge herself upon me, for having
formerly disgraced her, by spreading reports to my prejudice. I was
therefore alarmed at these symptoms of the Squire's admiration; and for
some time did not know what reply to make, when he asked my opinion of
her beauty; at length I came to a determination, and told him that her
name was Melinda, that she had a fortune of ten thousand pounds, and was
said to be under promise of marriage to a certain lord, who deferred his
nuptials a few mouths until he should be of age. I thought this piece
of intelligence, which I had myself invented, would have hindered him
effectually from entertaining any further thoughts of her; but I was
egregiously mistaken. The foxhunter had too much self-sufficiency to
despair of success against any competitor on earth. He therefore made
light of her engagement, saying, with a smile of self-approbation,
"Mayhap she will change her mind; what signifies his being a lord? I
think myself as good a man as e'er a lord in Christendom, and I'll see
if a commoner worth three thousand a year won't serve her turn." This
determination startled me not a little; I knew he would soon discover
the contrary of what I advanced; and as I believed he would find her ear
open to his addresses, did not doubt of meeting with every obstacle in
my amour that her malice could invent, and her influence execute. This
reflection increased my chagrin--my vexation was evident. Narcissa
insisted on going home immediately: and, as I led her to the door,
her noble admirer, with a look full of languishment, directed to her
a profound bow, which stung me to the soul. Before she went into the
chair, she asked, with an appearance of concern, what was the
matter with me? and I could pronounce no more than "By heaven, I am
distracted!"






CHAPTER LVIII

Tortured with Jealousy, I go Home, and abuse Strap--receive a Message
from Narcissa, in Consequence of which I hasten to her Apartment, where
her endearing Assurances banish all my Doubts and Apprehensions--in my
Retreat discover Somebody in the Dark, whom, suspecting to be a Spy, I
resolve to kill, but, to my great Surprise, am convinced of his being
no other than Strap--Melinda slanders me--I become acquainted with
Lord Quiverwit, who endeavours to sound me with regard to Narcissa--the
Squire is introduced to his Lordship, and grows cold towards me--I learn
from my Confidante, that this Nobleman professes honourable Love to my
Mistress, who continues faithful to me, notwithstanding the scandalous
Reports she had heard to my Prejudice--I am mortified with an Assurance
that her whole Fortune depends upon the Pleasure of her Brother--Mr.
Freeman condoles me on the Decline of my Character, which I vindicate so
much to his satisfaction, that he undertakes to combat Fame on my behalf

Having uttered this exclamation, at which she sighed, I went home in the
condition of a frantic Bedlamite: and, finding the fire in my apartment
almost extinguished, vented my fury upon poor Strap, whose ear I pinched
with such violence, that he roared hideously with pain; and, when
I quitted my hold, looked so foolishly aghast, that no unconcerned
spectator could have seen him without being seized with an immoderate
fit of laughter. It is true, I was soon sensible of the injury I had
done, and asked pardon for the outrage I had committed; upon which my
faithful valet, shaking his head, said, "I forgive you, and may
God forgive you!" But he could not help shedding some tears at my
unkindness. I felt unspeakable remorse for what I had done, cursed my
own ingratitude, and considered his tears as a reproach that my soul, in
its present disturbance, could not bear. It set all my passions into a
ferment: I swore horrible oaths without meaning or application. I foamed
at the mouth, kicked the chairs about the room, and played abundance of
mad pranks that frightened my friend almost out of his senses. At length
my transport subsided, I became melancholy, and wept insensibly.

During this state of dejection, I was surprised with the appearance of
Miss Williams, whom Strap, blubbering all the while, had conducted into
the chamber without giving me previous notice of her approach. She was
extremely affected with my condition, which she had learned from him,
begged me to moderate my passion, suspend my conjectures, and follow her
to Narcissa, who desired to see me forthwith. That dear name operated
upon me like a charm! I started up, and, without opening my lips, was
conducted into her apartment through the garden, which we entered by a
private door. I found the adorable creature in tears; I was melted at
the sight--we continued silent for some time--my heart was too full to
speak--her snowy bosom heaved with fond resentment; at last she sobbing
cried, "What have I done to disoblige you?" My heart was pierced with
the tender question. I drew near with the utmost reverence of affection.
I fell upon my knees before her, and, kissing her hand, exclaimed, "Oh!
thou art all goodness and perfection! I am undone by want of merit; I am
unworthy to possess thy charms, which heaven bath destined for the arms
of some more favourite being." She guessed the cause of my disquiet,
upbraided me gently for my suspicion, and gave me such flattering
assurances of her eternal fidelity, that all my doubts and fears forsook
me, and peace and satisfaction reigned within my breast.

At midnight I left the fair nymph to her repose, and, being let out by
Miss Williams at the garden gate by which I entered, began to explore my
way homeward in the dark, when I heard at my back a noise like that of
a baboon when he mews and chatters. I turned instantly, and, perceiving
something black, concluded I was discovered by some spy, employed
to watch for that purpose; aroused at this conjecture, by which the
reputation of the virtuous Narcissa appeared in jeopardy, I drew my
sword, and would have sacrificed him to her fame, had not the voice
of Strap restrained my arm, it was with great difficulty he could
pronounce, "D--d--d-do! mum--um--um--murder me if you please." Such an
effect had the cold upon his jaws, that his teeth rattled like a pair
of castanets. Pleased to be thus undeceived, I laughed at his
consternation, and asked what brought him thither? Upon which he gave me
to understand, that his concern for me had induced him to follow me
to that place, where the same reason had detained him till now, and he
frankly owned, that, in spite of the esteem he had for Miss Williams he
began to be very uneasy about me, considering the disposition in which
I went abroad; and, if I had stayed much longer, would certainly have
alarmed the neighbourhood in my behalf. The knowledge of this
his intention confounded me. I represented to him the mischievous
consequences that would have attended such a rash action, and,
cautioning him severely against any such design for the future,
concluded my admonition with an assurance, that, in case he should ever
act so madly, I would, without hesitation, put him to death. "Have a
little patience!" cried he, in a lamentable tone; "your displeasure will
do the business, without your committing murder." I was touched with
this reproach; and, as soon as we got home, made it my business to
appease him, by explaining the cause of that transport during which I
had used him so unworthily.

Next day when I went into the Long Room, I observed several whispers
circulate all of a sudden, and did not doubt that Melinda had been busy
with my character; but I consoled myself with the love of Narcissa, upon
which I rested with the most perfect confidence; and going up to the
rowly-powly table, won a few pieces from my suspected rival, who, with
an easy politeness, entered into conversation with me, and, desiring
my company to the coffee-house, treated me with tea and chocolate. I
remembered Strutwell, and guarded against his insinuating behaviour;
nor was my suspicion wrong placed; he artfully turned the discourse upon
Narcissa, and endeavoured by hinting at an intrigue he pretended to be
engaged in elsewhere, to learn what connection there was between her
and me. But all his finesse was ineffectual, I was convinced of his
dissimulation, and gave such general answers to his inquiries, that he
was forced to drop the subject, and talk of something else.

While we conversed in this manner, the savage came in with another
gentleman, who introduced him to his lordship, and he was received with
such peculiar marks of distinction, that I was persuaded the courtier
intended to use him in some shape or other; and from thence I drew an
unlucky omen. But I had more cause to be dismayed the following day,
when I saw the squire in company with Melinda and her mother, who
honoured me with several disdainful glances; and when I afterwards threw
myself in his way, instead of the cordial shake of the hand, he returned
my salute with a cold repetition of "Servant, servant!" which he
pronounced with such indifference or rather contempt, that if he had not
been Narcissa's brother, I should have affronted him in public.

These occurrences disturbed me not a little; I foresaw the brooding
storm, and armed myself with resolution for the occasion; but Narcissa,
being at stake, I was far from being resigned. I could have renounced
every other comfort of life with some degree of fortitude, but the
prospect of losing her disabled all my philosophy, and tortured my soul
into madness.

Miss Williams found me, next morning, full of anxious tumult, which
did not abate when she told me that my Lord Quiverwit, having professed
honourable intentions, had been introduced to my lovely mistress by her
brother, who had, at the same time, from the information of Melinda,
spoken of me as an Irish fortune-hunter, without either birth or estate;
who supported myself in the appearance of a gentleman by sharping and
other infamous practices; and who was of such an obscure origin, that I
did not even know my own extraction. Though I expected all this malice,
I could not hear it with temper, especially as truth was so blended
with falsehood in the assertion, that it would be almost impossible to
separate the one from the other in my vindication. But I said nothing on
this head, being impatient to know how Narcissa had been affected
with the discovery. That generous creature, far from believing these
imprecations, was no sooner withdrawn with her confidante, than she
inveighed with great warmth against the malevolence of the world,
to which only she ascribed the whole of what had been said to my
disadvantage, and, calling every circumstance of my behaviour to her
into review before her, found everything so polite, honourable, and
disinterested, that she could not harbour the least doubt of my being
the gentleman I assumed. "I have indeed," said she, "purposely forborne
to ask the particulars of his life, lest the recapitulation of some
misfortunes, which he has undergone, should give him pain; and, as to
the article of his fortune, I own myself equally afraid of inquiring
into it, and of discovering the state of my own, lest we should find
ourselves both unhappy in the explanation; for, alas! my provision
is conditional, and depends entirely on my marrying with my brother's
consent."

I was thunderstruck with this intelligence, the light forsook my
eyes, the colour vanished from my cheeks, and I remained in a state
of universal trepidation! My female friend, perceiving my disorder,
encouraged me with assurances of Narcissa's constancy, and the hope of
some accident favourable to our love; and, as a further consolation,
gave me to understand, that she had acquainted my mistress with the
outlines of my life: and that, although she was no stranger to the
present low state of my finances, her love and esteem were rather
increased than diminished by the knowledge of my circumstances. I was
greatly comforted by this assurance, which saved me a world of confusion
and anxiety; for I must have imparted my situation one day to Narcissa,
and this task I could not have performed without shame and disorder.

As I did not doubt that by this time the scandalous aspersions of
Melinda were diffused all over the town, I resolved to collect my whole
strength of assurance, to browbeat the efforts of her malice, and to
publish her adventure with the frenchified barber by way of reprisal. In
the meantime, having promised to be at the garden-gate about midnight,
Miss Williams took her leave, bidding me repose myself entirely on
the affection of my dear Narcissa, which was as perfect as inviolable.
Before I went abroad, I was visited by Freeman, who came on purpose
to inform me of the infamous stories that were raised at my expense. I
heard them with great temper, and in my turn disclosed everything that
had happened between Melinda and me; and among other circumstances
entertained him with the story of the barber, letting him know what
share his friend Banter had in that affair. He was convinced of the
injury my reputation had suffered; and, no longer doubting the fountain
from whence this deluge of slander had flowed upon me, undertook to
undeceive the town in my behalf, and roll the stream back upon its
source; but in the meantime, cautioned me from appearing in public,
while the prepossession was so strong against me, lest I should meet
with some affront that might have bad consequences.






CHAPTER LIX

I receive an extraordinary Message at the Door of the Long Room, which,
however, enter, and affront the Squire, who threatens to take the Law
of me--Rebuke Melinda for her Malice--she weeps with Vexation--Lord
Quiverwit is severe upon me--I retort his Sarcasm--am received with
the utmost Tenderness by Narcissa, who desires to hear the Story of
my Life--we vow eternal Constancy to other--I retire--am waked by a
Messenger, who brings a Challenge from Quiverwit, whom I meet, engage,
and vanquish

I thanked him for his advice, which, however, my pride and resentment
would not permit me to follow; for he no sooner left me, in order to
do justice to my character among his friends and acquaintance, than I
sallied out, and went directly to the Long Room. I was met at the door
by a servant, who presented a billet to me without a subscription,
importing that my presence was disagreeable to the company, and desiring
I would take the hint without further disturbance, and bestow myself
elsewhere for the future. This peremptory message filled me with
indignation. I followed the fellow who delivered it, and, seizing him
by the collar in presence of all the company, threatened to put him
instantly to death, if he did not discover the scoundrel who had charged
him with such an impudent commission, that I might punish him as he
deserved. The messenger, affrighted at my menaces and furious looks,
fell upon his knees, and told me, that the gentleman who ordered him to
deliver the letter was no other than Narcissa's brother, who, at that
time, stood at the other end of the room, talking to Melinda. I went up
to him immediately, and in the hearing of his inamorata, accosted him
in these words; "Lookee, squire, were it not for one consideration that
protects you from my resentment, I would cane you where you stand, for
having had the presumption to send me this scurrilous intimation;" which
I tore to pieces and threw in his face: at the same time darting an
angry regard at his mistress, I told her, I was sorry she had put it out
of my power to compliment her upon her invention, but at the expense of
her good nature and veracity. Her admirer, whose courage never rose,
but in proportion to the wine he had swallowed, instead of resenting my
address in what is called an honourable way, threatened to prosecute me
for an assault, and took witnesses accordingly: while she, piqued at
his pusillanimous behaviour, and enraged at the sarcasm I had uttered
against her, endeavoured to make her quarrel a public cause, and wept
aloud with spite and vexation.

The tears of a lady could not fail of attracting the notice and concern
of the spectators to whom she complained of my rudeness with great
bitterness, saying, if she were a man, I durst not use her so. The
greatest part of the gentlemen, already prejudiced against me, were
offended at the liberty I had taken, as appeared from their looks;
though none of them signified their disgust any other way except my Lord
Quiverwit, who ventured to say, with a sneer, that I was in the right
to establish my own character, of which he had now no longer any doubt.
Nettled at this severe equivocation, which raised a laugh at my expense,
I replied with some warmth, "I am proud of having in that particular got
the start of your lordship." He made no answer to my repartee, but
with a contemptuous smile walked off, leaving me in a very disagreeable
situation. In vain did I make up to several people of my acquaintance,
whose conversation, I hoped, would banish my confusion; everybody
shunned me like a person infected, and I should not have been able
to bear my disgrace, had not the idea of the ever faithful and fond
Narcissa come to my relief. I quitted the scene of my mortification,
and, sauntering about the town, happened to wake from my contemplation,
when I found myself just opposite to a toy-shop, which I entered, and
purchased a ring set with a ruby in the form of a heart, surrounded by
diamond sparks, for which I paid ten guineas, intending it for a present
to the charmer of my soul.

I was introduced, at the hour appointed, to this divine creature, who,
notwithstanding what she had heard to my disadvantage, received me with
the utmost confidence and tenderness; and, having been informed of the
general sketches of my life by Miss Williams, expressed a desire,
of knowing the particular circumstances, which I related with great
candour, omitting, however, some things which I concluded altogether
improper for her ear, and which the reader's reflection will easily
suggest. As my story was little else than a recital of misfortunes, the
tear of sympathy ceased not to trickle from her enchanting eyes during
the whole of the narration, which, when I had finished, she recompensed
me for my trouble with the most endearing protestations of eternal love.
She bewailed her restricted condition, as it was the means of retarding
my happiness; told me that Lord Quiverwit, by her brother's permission,
had been to drink tea with her that very afternoon, and actually
proposed marriage; and, seeing me extremely affected with this piece of
information, offered to give me a convincing proof of her affection, by
espousing me in private, and leaving the rest to fate. I was penetrated
with this instance of her regard, but, that I might not be outdone in
generosity, resisted the bewitching temptation in consideration of her
honour and interest; at the same time I presented my ring as a pledge
of my inviolable attachment, and, on my knees, implored Heaven to shower
its curses on my head, if ever my heart should entertain one thought
unworthy of the passion I then avowed. She received my token, gave me in
return her picture in miniature, exquisitely drawn and set in gold; and,
in the same posture, called Heaven to witness and to judge her flame.
Our vows being thus reciprocally breathed, a confidence of hope ensued,
and our mutual fondness becoming as intimate as innocence would allow,
I grew insensible of the progress of time, and it was morning before I
could tear myself from this darling of my soul! My good angel foresaw
what would happen, and permitted me to indulge myself on this occasion,
in consideration of the fatal absence I was doomed to suffer.

I went to bed immediately on my return to my lodging, and, having slept
about two hours, was waked by Strap, who in great confusion told me
there was a footman below with a letter, which he would deliver to
nobody but myself. Alarmed at this piece of news, I desired my friend to
show him into my chamber, and received the following letter, which, he
said, required an immediate answer:


"Sir,--

"When any man injures my honour, let the difference of rank between us
be ever so great, I am contented to wave the privilege of my quality,
and to seek reparation from him on equal terms. The insolence of your
reply to me yesterday, in the Long Room, I might have overlooked, had
not your presumptive emulation in a much more interesting affair, and
which I made this morning, concurred in persuading me to chastise your
audacity with my sword. If you therefore have spirit enough to support
the character you assume, you will not fail to follow the bearer
immediately to a convenient place, where you shall be met by

"Quiverwit."

Whether I was enervated by the love and favour of Narcissa, or awed by
the superior station of my antagonist, I know not, but I never had less
inclination to fight than at this time. However, finding there was a
necessity for vindicating the reputation of my mistress, as well as for
asserting my own honour, I forthwith rose, and, dressing in a hurry,
put on my sword, bade Strap attend me, and set out with my conductor,
cursing my bad fortune all the way, for having been observed in my
return from my angel; for so I interpreted his lordship's discovery.
When I came within sight of my rival, his lacquey told me he had orders
to stop; upon which I commanded Strap to halt also, while I walked
forward; resolving, if possible, to come to an explanation with my
challenger, before we should come to battle. Nor was an opportunity
wanting; for I no sooner approached than he asked, with a stern
countenance, what business I had in Mr. Topehall's garden so early in
the morning? "I don't know, my lord," said I, "how to answer a question
put to me with such magisterial haughtiness. If your lordship will
please to expostulate calmly, you will have no cause to repent of your
condescension; otherwise I am not to be intimated into any confession."
"There is no room for denial," answered he; "I saw you come out with my
own eyes." "Did any other see me?" said I. "I neither know nor care,"
said he; "I want no other evidence than that of my own senses." Pleased
to hear that the suspicion was confined to him alone, I endeavoured to
appease his jealousy, by owning an intrigue with the waiting maid: but
he had too much discernment to be so easily imposed upon, and told me
there was only one way to convince him of the truth of what I alleged,
which was no other than renouncing all claim to Narcissa upon oath,
and promising, upon honour, never to speak to her for the future.
Exasperated at this proposal, I unsheathed my sword, saying, "Heavens!
what title have you, or any man on earth, to impose such terms on me?"
He did the same, and making towards me with a contracted brow, said
I was a villain, and had dishonoured Narcissa. "He's a villain," I
replied, in a transport of fury, "who brands me with that imputation!
She is a thousand times more chaste than the mother that bore you; and I
will assert her honour with my heart's blood!" So saying, I rushed upon
him with more eagerness than address, and, endeavouring to get within
his point, received a wound in my neck, which redoubled my rage. He
excelled me in temper as well as in skill, by which means he parried my
thrusts with great calmness, until I had almost exhausted my spirits;
and, when he perceived me beginning to flag, attacked me fiercely in
his turn. Finding himself, however, better opposed than he expected, he
resolved to follow his lounge, and close with me; accordingly, his sword
entered my waistcoat, on the side of the breast bone, and, running up
between my shirt and skin, appeared over my left shoulder. I imagined
that his weapon had perforated my lungs, and of consequence that the
wound was mortal; therefore, determined not to die unrevenged, I seized
his shell, which was close to my breast, before he could disentangle his
point, and, keeping it fast with my left hand, shortened my own sword
with my right, intending to run him through the heart; but he received
the thrust in the left arm, which penetrated up to the shoulder blade.
Disappointed at this expectation, and afraid still that death would
frustrate my revenge, I grappled with him, and, being much the stronger,
threw him upon the ground, where I wrested his sword out of his hand,
and, so great was my confusion, that instead of turning the point upon
him, struck out three of his foreteeth with the hilt. In the meantime,
our servants, seeing us fall, ran up to separate and assist us; but
before their approach I was upon my feet, and had discovered that my
supposed mortal wound was only a slight scratch. The knowledge of my
own safety disarmed me of a good deal of my resentment, and I began
to inquire with some concern into the situation of my antagonist, who
remained on the ground bleeding plentifully at his mouth and arm. I
helped his footman to raise him, and, having bound up his wound with
my handkerchief, assured it was not dangerous; I likewise restored his
sword, and offered to support him to his house. He thanked me with an
air of sullen dignity: and whispering that I should hear from him soon,
went away, leaning on his servant's shoulder.

I was surprised at this promise, which I construed into a threat, and
resolved, if ever he should call me out again, to use whatever advantage
fortune might give me over him in another manner. In the meantime I had
leisure to take notice of Strap, who seemed quite stupified with horror:
I comforted him with an assurance, that I had received no damage, and
explained the nature of this affair as we walked homeward. By the time
I had got into my apartment, I found the wound in my neck stiff and
uneasy, and a good deal of clotted blood ran down upon my shirt; upon
which I pulled off my coat and waistcoat, and unbuttoned my collar, that
I might dress it with more ease. My friend no sooner perceived my
shirt quite dyed with blood, than, imagining I had got at least twenty
thousand wounds, he cried, "O Jesus!" and fell flat on the floor. I
stopped the bleeding with a little dry lint, and, applying a plaster
over it, cleaned myself from the gore, shifted, and dressed, while
he lay senseless at my feet, so that when he recovered, and saw me
perfectly well, he could scarce believe his own eyes. Now that the
danger was passed, I was very well pleased with what had happened,
hoping that it would soon become known, and consequently dignify my
character not a little in this place. I was also proud of having shown
myself, in some shape, worthy of the love of Narcissa, who, I was
persuaded, would not think the worse of me for what I had done.






CHAPTER LX

I am visited by Freeman, with whom I appear in Public, and am
caressed--am sent for by Lord Quiverwit, whose Presence I quit
flung--Narcissa is carried off by her Brother--I intend to pursue
him, and am dissuaded by my Friend--engage in Play, and lose all my
Money--set out for London--try my Fortune at the Gaming Table without
success--receive a letter from Narcissa--bilk my Tailor

While I entertained myself with these reflections, the news of the duel,
being communicated by some unknown channel, spread all over the town. I
was visited by Freeman, who testified his surprise at finding me; for it
was told, that Lord Quiverwit being dead of his wounds, I had absconded,
in order to avoid the cognizance of the law. I asked, if people guessed
the occasion of the quarrel; and, understanding it was attributed to
his lordship's resentment of my reply in the Long Room, confirmed that
conjecture, glad to find Narcissa unsuspected. My friend, after I had
assured him that my antagonist was in no danger, wished me joy of the
event, than which, he said, nothing could happen more opportunely to
support the idea he had given of my character to his friends, among whom
he had been very assiduous in my behalf.

On the strength of this assurance, I went with him to the coffee-house,
where I was saluted by a great many of those very persons who had
shunned me the preceding day; and I found everybody making merry with
the story of Melinda's French gallant. While I remained in this place, I
received a message from Lord Quiverwit, desiring, if I were not engaged,
to see me at his house.

Thither I immediately repaired, and was conducted to an apartment where
I was received by his lordship in bed. When we were left by ourselves,
he thanked me in very polite terms for having used the advantage fortune
had given me over him with such moderation, and asked pardon for any
offence his resentment might have prompted him to commit. "I would
willingly," said he, "make you my friend; but, as it is impossible for
me to divest myself of my passion for Narcissa, I am too well convinced
of your sentiments, to think we shall ever agree on that subject. I took
the liberty, therefore, of sending for you, in order to own candidly,
that I cannot help opposing your success with that young lady; though,
at the same time I promise to regulate my opposition by the dictates of
justice and honour. This, however, I think proper to advertise you of,
that she has no independent fortune; and, if you should even succeed in
your addresses, you will have the mortification to see her reduced to
indigence, unless you have wherewithal to support her--and I am credibly
informed of your incapacity that way--nay, I will confess, that, urged
by this consideration, I have actually sent notice to her brother of the
progress I suspect you have made in her affection, and desired him
to take his precautions accordingly." Alarmed and provoked at this
information, I told his lordship, that I did not see how he could
reconcile that piece of conduct with his profession of open dealing, and
flung away from him in a passion.

As I walked homeward, in hope of hearing from my mistress as usual
by means of Miss Williams, I was surprised with the waving of a
handkerchief from the window of a coach-and-six that passed by me at
full speed: and upon further observation, I saw a servant on horseback
riding after it, who, I knew by his livery, belonged to the squire.
Thunderstruck with this discovery, the knowledge of my misfortune rushed
all at once upon my reflection! I guessed immediately that the signal
was made by the dear hand of Narcissa, who, being hurried away in
consequence of Lord Quiverwit's message to her brother, had no other
method of relating her distress, and imploring my assistance. Frantic
with this conjecture, I ran to my lodgings, snatched my pistols, and
ordered Strap to get post-horses, with such incoherence of speech and
disorder, that the poor valet, terrified with the suspicion of another
duel, instead of providing what I desired, went forthwith to Freeman,
who, being informed of my behaviour, came straight to my apartment, and
conjured me so pathetically to make him acquainted with the cause of my
uneasiness, that I could not refuse telling him my happiness was fled
with Narcissa, and that I must retrieve her or perish. He represented
the madness of such an undertaking, and endeavoured to divert me from
it with great strength of friendship and reason. But all his arguments
would have been ineffectual, had he not put me in mind of the dependence
I ought to have on the love of Narcissa, and the attachment of her maid,
who could not fail of finding opportunities to advertise me of their
situation; and at the same time demonstrated the injury my charmer's
reputation must suffer from my precipitate retreat. I was convinced and
composed by these considerations: I appeared in public with an air of
tranquillity, was well received by the best company in town, and,
my misfortune taking air, condoled accordingly: while I had the
satisfaction of seeing Melinda so universally discountenanced that she
was fain to return to London, in order to avoid the scoffs and censure
of the ladies at Bath. But, though the hope of hearing from the darling
of my soul supported my spirits a little while, I began to be very
uneasy, when, at the end of several weeks I found that expectation
disappointed. In short, melancholy and despondence took possession of my
soul; and, repining at that providence which, by acting the stepmother
towards me, kept me from the fruition of my wishes, I determined, in a
fit of despair, to risk all I had at the gaming table, with a view of
acquiring a fortune sufficient to render me independent for life; or of
plunging myself into such a state of misery, as would effectually crush
every ambitious hope that now tortured my imagination.

Actuated by this fatal resolution, I engaged in play, and, after
some turns of fortune found myself, at the end of three days, worth a
thousand pounds; but it was not my intention to stop there, for which
cause I kept Strap ignorant of my success, and continued my career until
I was reduced to five guineas, which I would have hazarded also, had
I not been ashamed to fall from a bet of two hundred pounds to such a
petty sum.

Having thus executed my scheme, I went home, amazed to find myself so
much at ease, and informed my friend Strap of my mischance with such
calmness, that he, imagining I joked, affected to receive the tidings
with great equanimity. But both he and I found ourselves mistaken very
soon. I had misinterpreted my own stupidity into deliberate resignation,
and he had reason to believe me in earnest when he saw me next morning
agitated with the most violent despair, which he endeavoured to
alleviate with all the consolation in his power.

In one of my lucid intervals, however, I charged him to take a place in
the stage coach for London; and, in the meantime, paid my debts in Bath,
which amounted to thirty shillings only. Without taking leave of my
friends, I embarked, Strap having the good fortune to find a return
horse, and arrived in town, without having met with anything remarkable
on the road. While we crossed Bagshot Heath, I was seized with a sort
of inclination to retrieve my fortune, by laying passengers under
contribution in some such place. My thoughts were so circumstanced
at this time, that I should have digested the crime of robbery, so
righteously had I concerted my plan, and ventured my life in the
execution, had I not been deterred by reflecting upon the infamy that
attends detection.

The apartment I formerly lived in being unengaged, I took possession
of it, and next day went in quest of Banter, who received me with open
arms, in expectation of having his bond discharged to his liking: but
when he understood what had happened, his countenance changed of a
sudden, and he told me, with a dryness of displeasure peculiar to
himself, that, if he were in my place, he would put it out of fortune's
power to play him such another trick, and be avenged of his own
indiscretion at once. When I desired him to explain his meaning, he
pointed to his neck, raised himself on his tiptoes, and was going away
without any further ceremony, when I put him in mind of my indigence,
and demanded the five guineas I had formerly lent him. "Five guineas?"
cried he; "zounds! had you acted with common prudence, you might have
had twenty thousand in your pocket by this time. I depended upon five
hundred from you, as much as if I had had notes for it in the bank; and
by all the rules of equity, you are indebted to me for that sum." I was
neither pleased nor convinced by this computation, and insisted on my
right with such determined obstinacy, that he was fain to alter his ton,
and appease my clamour by assuring me, that he was not master of five
shillings. Society in distress generally promotes good understanding
among people; from being a dun I descended to be a client, and asked
his advice about repairing my losses. He counselled me to have recourse
again to the gaming table, where I succeeded so well before, and put
myself in a condition by selling my watch. I followed his directions,
and, having accommodated him with a few pieces, went to the place, where
I lost every shilling.
