and to keep him informed of Countess d'Isorella's movements.  Wilfrid
noticed the withdrawing fire of the look.  "By heaven!  she doubts me
still," he ejaculated inwardly.

These half-comic little people have their place in the history of higher
natures and darker destinies.  Wilfrid met Pericles, from whom he heard
that Vittoria, with her husband's consent, had pledged herself to sing
publicly.  "It is for ze Lombard widows," Pericles apologized on her
behalf; "but, do you see, I onnly want a beginning.  She thaerst for ze
stage; and it is, after marriage, a good sign.  Oh! you shall hear, my
friend; marriage have done her no hurt--ze contrary!  You shall hear
Hymen--Cupids--not a cold machine; it is an organ alaif!  She has privily
sung to her Pericles, and ser, and if I wake not very late on Judgement.
Day, I shall zen hear--but why should I talk poetry to you, to make you
laugh?  I have a divin' passion for zat woman.  Do I not give her to a
husband, and say, Be happy! onnly sing!  Be kissed! be hugged! onnly give
Pericles your voice.  By Saint Alexandre! it is to say to ze heavens,
Move on your way, so long as you drop rain on us r--you smile--you look
kind."

Pericles accompanied him into a caffe, the picture of an enamoured happy
man.  He waived aside contemptuously all mention of Vittoria's having
enemies.  She had them when, as a virgin, she had no sense.  As a woman,
she had none, for she now had sense.  Had she not brought her husband to
be sensible, so that they moved together in Milanese society, instead of
stupidly fighting at Rome? so that what he could not take to himself--the
marvellous voice--he let bless the multitude!  "She is the Beethoven of
singers," Pericles concluded.  Wilfrid thought so on the night when she
sang to succour the Lombard widows.  It was at a concert, richly
thronged; ostentatiously thronged with Austrian uniforms.  He fancied
that he could not bear to look on her.  He left the house thinking that
to hear her and see her and feel that she was one upon the earth, made
life less of a burden.

This evening was rendered remarkable by a man's calling out, "You are a
traitress!" while Vittoria stood before the seats.  She became pale, and
her eyelids closed.  No thinness was subsequently heard in her voice.
The man was caught as he strove to burst through the crowd at the
entrance-door, and proved to be a petty bookseller of Milan, by name
Sarpo, known as an orderly citizen.  When taken he was inflamed with
liquor.  Next day the man was handed from the civil to the military
authorities, he having confessed to the existence of a plot in the city.
Pericles came fuming to Wilfrid's quarters.  Wilfrid gathered from him
that Sarpo's general confession had been retracted: it was too foolish to
snare the credulity of Austrian officials.  Sarpo stated that he had
fabricated the story of a plot, in order to escape the persecutions of
a terrible man, and find safety in prison lodgings vender Government.
The short confinement for a civic offence was not his idea of safety;
he desired to be sheltered by Austrian soldiers and a fortress, and said
that his torments were insupportable while Barto Rizzo was at large.
This infamous Republican had latterly been living in his house, eating
his bread, and threatening death to him unless he obeyed every command.
Sarpo had undertaken his last mission for the purpose of supplying his
lack of resolution to release himself from his horrible servitude by any
other means; not from personal animosity toward the Countess Alessandra
Ammiani, known as la Vittoria.  When seized, fear had urged him to
escape.  Such was his second story.  The points seemed irreconcilable
to those who were not in the habit of taking human nature into their
calculations of a possible course of conduct; even Wilfrid, though he was
aware that Barto Rizzo hated Vittoria inveterately, imagined Sarpo's
first lie to have necessarily fathered a second.  But the second story
was true: and the something like lover's wrath with which the outrage to
Vittoria fired Pericles, prompted him to act on it as truth.  He told
Wilfrid that he should summon Barto Rizzo to his presence.  As the
Government was unable to exhibit so much power, Wilfrid looked sarcastic;
whereupon Pericles threw up his chin crying: "Oh! you shall know my
resources.  Now, my friend, one bit of paper, and a messenger, and zen
home to my house, to Tokay and cigarettes, and wait to see."  He remarked
after pencilling a few lines, "Countess d'Isorella is her enemy? hein!"

"Why, you wouldn't listen to me when I told you," said Wilfrid.

"No," Pericles replied while writing and humming over his pencil; "my ear
is a pelican-pouch, my friend; it--and Irma is her enemy also?--it takes
and keeps, but does not swallow till it wants.  I shall hear you, and I
shall hear my Sandra Vittoria, and I shall not know you have spoken, when
by-and-by I tinkle, tinkle, a bell of my brain, and your word walks in,--
'quite well?'--'very well!  '--sit down'--'if it is ze same to you, I
prefer to stand'--'good; zen I examine you.'  My motto:--'Time opens ze
gates: my system: 'it is your doctor of regiment's system when your
twelve, fifteen, forty recruits strip to him:--'Ah! you, my man, have
varicose vein: no soldier in our regiment, you!'  So on.  Perhaps I am
not intelligible; but, hear zis.  I speak not often of my money; but I
say--it is in your ear--a man of millions, he is a king!"  The Greek
jumped up and folded a couple of notes.  "I will not have her disturbed.
Let her sing now and awhile to Pericles and his public: and to ze
Londoners, wiz your permission, Count Ammiani, one saison.  I ask no
more, and I am satisfied, and I endow your oldest child, signor Conte--it
is said!  For its mama was a good girl, a brave girl; she troubled
Pericles, because he is an intellect; but he forgives when he sees
sincerity--rare zing!  Sincerity and genius: it may be zey are as man and
wife in a bosom.  He forgives; it is not onnly voice he craves, but a
soul, and Sandra, your countess, she has a soul--I am not a Turk.  I say,
it is a woman in whom a girl I did see a soul!  A woman when she is
married, she is part of ze man; but a soul, it is for ever alone, apart,
confounded wiz nobody!  For it I followed Sandra, your countess.  It was
a sublime devotion of a dog.  Her voice tsrilled, her soul possessed me,
Your countess is my Sandra still.  I shall be pleased if child-bearing
trouble her not more zan a very little; but, enfin! she is married, and
you and I, my friend Wilfrid, we must accept ze decree, and say, no harm
to her out of ze way of nature, by Saint Nicolas! or any what saint you
choose for your invocation.  Come along.  And speed my letters by one of
your militaires at once off.  Are Pericles' millions gold of bad mint?
If so, he is an incapable.  He presumes it is not so.  Come along; we
will drink to her in essence of Tokay.  You shall witness two scenes.
Away!"

Wilfrid was barely to be roused from his fit of brooding into which
Pericles had thrown him.  He sent the letters, and begged to be left to
sleep.  The image of Vittoria seen through this man's mind was new, and
brought a new round of torments.  "The devil take you," he cried when
Pericles plucked at his arm, "I've sent the letters; isn't that enough?"
He was bitterly jealous of the Greek's philosophic review of the
conditions of Vittoria's marriage; for when he had come away from the
concert, not a thought of her being a wife had clouded his resignation
to the fact.  He went with Pericles, nevertheless, and was compelled to
acknowledge the kindling powers of the essence of Tokay.  "Where do you
get this stuff?"  he asked several times.  Pericles chattered of England,
and Hagar's 'Addio,' and 'Camilla.'  What cabinet operas would he not
give!  What entertainments!  Could an emperor offer such festivities to
his subjects?  Was a Field Review equal to Vittoria's voice?  He stung
Wilfrid's ears by insisting on the mellowed depth, the soft human warmth,
which marriage had lent to the voice.  At a late hour his valet announced
Countess d'Isorella.  "Did I not say so?"  cried Pericles, and corrected
himself: "No, I did not say so; it was a surprise to you, my friend.  You
shall see; you shall hear.  Now you shall see what a friend Pericles can
be when a person satisfy him."  He pushed Wilfrid into his dressing-room,
and immediately received the countess with an outburst of brutal
invectives--pulling her up and down the ranked regiment of her misdeeds,
as it were.  She tried dignity, tried anger, she affected amazement, she
petitioned for the heads of his accusations, and, as nothing stopped him,
she turned to go.  Pericles laughed when she had left the room.  Irma di
Karski was announced the next minute, and Countess d'Isorella re-appeared
beside her.  Irma had a similar greeting.  "I am lost," she exclaimed.
"Yes, you are lost," said Pericles; "a word from me, and the back of the
public is humped at you--ha! contessa, you touched Mdlle. Irma's hand?
She is to be on her guard, and never to think she is lost till down she
goes?  You are a more experienced woman!  I tell you I will have no
nonsense.  I am Countess Alessandra Ammiani's friend.  You two, you
women, are her enemies.  I will ruin you both.  You would prevent her
singing in public places--you, Countess d'Isorella, because you do not
forgive her marriage to Count Ammiani; you, Irma, to spite her for her
voice.  You would hiss her out of hearing, you two miserable creatures.
Not another soldo for you!  Not one! and to-morrow, countess, I will see
my lawyer.  Irma, begone, and shriek to your wardrobe!"

"Countess d'Isorella, I have the extreme honour."

Wilfrid marvelled to hear this titled and lovely woman speaking almost
in tones of humility in reply to such outrageous insolence.  She craved
a private interview.  Irma was temporarily expelled, and then Violetta
stooped to ask what the Greek's reason for his behaviour could be.  She
admitted that it was in his power to ruin her, as far as money went.
"Perhaps a little farther," said Pericles; "say two steps.  If one is on
a precipice, two steps count for something."  But, what had she done?
Pericles refused to declare it.  This set her guessing with a charming
naivete.  Pericles called Irma back to assist her in the task, and
quitted them that they might consult together and hit upon the right
thing.  His object was to send his valet for Luigi Saracco.  He had seen
that no truth could be extracted from these women, save forcibly.
Unaware that he had gone out, Wilfrid listened long enough to hear Irma
say, between sobs: "Oh! I shall throw myself upon his mercy.  Oh,
Countess d'Isorella, why did you lead me to think of vengeance!  I am
lost!  He knows everything.  Oh, what is it to me whether she lives with
her husband!  Let them go on plotting.  I am not the Government.  I am
sure I don't much dislike her.  Yes, I hate her, but why should I hurt
myself?  She will wear those jewels on her forehead; she will wear that
necklace with the big amethysts, and pretend she's humble because she
doesn't carry earrings, when her ears have never been pierced!  I am
lost!  Yes, you may say, lookup!  I am only a poor singer, and he can
ruin me.  Oh!  Countess d'Isorella, oh!  what a fearful punishment.  If
Countess Anna should betray Count Ammiani to-night, nothing, nothing,
will save me.  I will confess.  Let us both be beforehand with her--or
you, it does not matter for a noble lady."

"Hush!" said Violetta.  "What dreadful fool is this I sit with?  You may
have done what you think of doing already."

She walked to the staircase door, and to that of the suite.  An
honourable sentiment, conjoined to the knowledge that he had heard
sufficient, induced Wilfrid to pass on into the sleeping apartment a
moment or so before Violetta took this precaution.  The potent liquor of
Pericles had deprived him of consecutive ideas; he sat nursing a thunder
in his head, imagining it to be profound thought, till Pericles flung the
door open.  Violetta and Irma had departed.  "Behold!  I have it; ze
address of your rogue Barto Rizzo," said Pericles, in the manner of one
whose triumph is absolutely due to his own shrewdness.  "Are two women a
match for me?  Now, my friend, you shall see.  Barto Rizzo is too clever
for zis government, which cannot catch him.  I catch him, and I teach him
he may touch politics--it is not for him to touch Art.  What! to hound
men to interrupt her while she sings in public places?  What next!  But
I knew my Countess d'Isorella could help me, and so I sent for her to
confront Irma, and dare to say she knew not Barto's dwelling--and why?
I will tell you a secret.  A long-flattered woman, my friend, she has
had, you will think, enough of it; no! she is like avarice.  If it is
worship of swine, she cannot refuse it.  Barto Rizzo worships her; so it
is a deduction--she knows his abode--I act upon that, and I arrive at my
end.  I now send him to ze devil."

Barto Rizzo, after having evaded the polizia of the city during a three
months' steady chase, was effectually captured on the doorstep of
Vittoria's house in the Corso Francesco, by gendarmes whom Pericles had
set on his track.  A day later Vittoria was stabbed at about the same
hour, on the same spot.  A woman dealt the blow.  Vittoria was returning
from an afternoon drive with Laura Piaveni and the children.  She saw a
woman seated on the steps as beggarwomen sit, face in lap.  Anxious to
shield her from the lacquey, she sent the two little ones up to her with
small bits of money.  But, as the woman would not lift her head, she and
Laura prepared to pass her, Laura coming last.  The blow, like all such
unexpected incidents, had the effect of lightning on those present; the
woman might have escaped, but after she had struck she sat down impassive
as a cat by the hearth, with a round-eyed stare.

The news that Vittoria had been assassinated traversed the city.  Carlo
was in Turin, Merthyr in Rome.  Pericles was one of the first who reached
the house; he was coming out when Wilfrid and the Duchess of Graatli
drove up; and he accused the Countess d'Isorella flatly of having
instigated the murder.  He was frantic.  They supposed that she must have
succumbed to the wound.  The duchess sent for Laura.  There was a press
of carriages and soft-humming people in the street; many women and men
sobbing.  Wilfrid had to wait an hour for the duchess, who brought
comfort when she came.  Her first words were reassuring.  "Ah!"  she
said, "did I not do well to make you drive here with me instead of with
Lena?  Those eyes of yours would be unpardonable to her.  Yes, indeed;
though a corpse were lying in this house; but Countess Alessandra is
safe.  I have seen her.  I have held her hand."

Wilfrid kissed the duchess's hand passionately.

What she had said of Lena was true: Lena could only be generous upon the
after-thought; and when the duchess drove Wilfrid back to her, he had to
submit to hear scorn: and indignation against all Italians, who were
denounced as cut-throats, and worse and worse and worse, males and
females alike.  This way grounded on her sympathy for Vittoria.  But
Wilfrid now felt toward the Italians through his remembrance of that
devoted soul's love of them, and with one direct look he bade his
betrothed good-bye, and they parted.

It was in the early days of March that Merthyr, then among the
Republicans of Rome, heard from Laura Piaveni.  Two letters reached him,
one telling of the attempted assassination, and a second explaining
circumstances connected with it.  The first summoned him to Milan; the
other left it to his option to make the journey.  He started, carrying
kind messages from the Chief to Vittoria, and from Luciano Ramara the
offer of a renewal of old friendship to Count Ammiani.  His political
object was to persuade the Lombard youth to turn their whole strength
upon Rome.  The desire of his heart was again to see her, who had been so
nearly lost to all eyes for ever.

Laura's first letter stated brief facts.  "She was stabbed this
afternoon, at half-past two, on the steps of her house, by a woman called
the wife of Barto Rizzo.  She caught her hands up under her throat when
she saw the dagger.  Her right arm was penetrated just above the wrist,
and half-an-inch in the left breast, close to the centre bone.  She
behaved firmly.  The assassin only struck once.  No visible danger; but
you should come, if you have no serious work."

"Happily," ran the subsequent letter, of two days' later date, "the
assassin was a woman, and one effort exhausts a woman; she struck only
once, and became idiotic.  Sandra has no fever.  She had her wits ready
--where were mine?--when she received the wound.  While I had her in my
arms, she gave orders that the woman should be driven out of the city in
her carriage.  The Greek, her mad musical adorer, accuses Countess
d'Isorella.  Carlo has seen this person--returns convinced of her
innocence.  That is not an accepted proof; but we have one.  It seems
that Rizzo (Sandra was secret about it and about one or two other things)
sent to her commanding her to appoint an hour detestable style!  I can
see it now; I fear these conspiracies no longer:--she did appoint an
hour; and was awaiting him when the gendarmes sprang on the man at her
door.

"He had evaded them several weeks, so we are to fancy that his wife
charged Countess Alessandra with the betrayal.  This appears a reasonable
and simple way of accounting for the deed.  So I only partly give credit
to it.  But it may be true.

"The wound has not produced a shock to her system--very, very
fortunately.  On the whole, a better thing could not have happened.
Should I be more explicit?  Yes, to you; for you are not of those who see
too much in what is barely said.  The wound, then, my dear good friend,
has healed another wound, of which I knew nothing.  Bergamasc and
Brescian friends of her husband's, have imagined that she interrupted or
diverted his studies.  He also discovered that she had an opinion of her
own, and sometimes he consulted it; but alas! they are lovers, and he
knew not when love listened, or she when love spoke; and there was grave
business to be done meanwhile.  Can you kindly allow that the case was
open to a little confusion?  I know that you will.  He had to hear many
violent reproaches from his fellow-students.  These have ceased.  I send
this letter on the chance of the first being lost on the road; and it
will supplement the first pleasantly to you in any event.  She lies here
in the room where I write, propped on high pillows, the right arm bound
up, and says: 'Tell Merthyr I prayed to be in Rome with my husband, and
him, and the Chief.  Tell him I love my friend.  Tell him I think he
deserves to be in Rome.  Tell him--'  Enter Countess Ammiani to reprove
her for endangering the hopes of the house by fatiguing herself.  Sandra
sends a blush at me, and I smile, and the countess kisses her.  I send
you a literal transcript of one short scene, so that you may feel at home
with us.

"There is a place called Venice, and there is a place called Rome, and
both places are pretty places and famous places; and there is a thing
called the fashion; and these pretty places and famous places set the
fashion: and there is a place called Milan, and a place called Bergamo,
and a place called Brescia, and they all want to follow the fashion, for
they are giddy-pated baggages.  What is the fashion, mama?  The fashion,
my dear, is &c.  &c.  &c.:--Extract of lecture to my little daughter,
Amalia, who says she forgets you; but Giacomo sends his manly love.  Oh,
good God! should I have blood in my lips when I kissed him, if I knew
that he was old enough to go out with a sword in his hand a week hence?
I seem every day to be growing more and more all mother.  This month in
front of us is full of thunder.  Addio!"

When Merthyr stood in sight of Milan an army was issuing from the gates.




CHAPTER XLI

THE INTERVIEW

Merthyr saw Laura first.  He thought that Vittoria must be lying on her
couch: but Laura simply figured her arm in a sling, and signified, more
than said, that Vittoria was well and taking the air.  She then begged
hungrily for news of Rome, and again of Rome, and sat with her hands
clasped in her lap to listen.  She mentioned Venice in a short breath of
praise, as if her spirit could not repose there.  Rome, its hospitals,
its municipal arrangements, the names of the triumvirs, the prospects of
the city, the edicts, the aspects of the streets, the popularity of the
Government, the number of volunteers ranked under the magical Republic--
of these things Merthyr talked, at her continual instigation, till,
stopping abruptly, he asked her if she wished to divert him from any
painful subject.  "No, no!" she cried, "it's only that I want to feel an
anchor.  We are all adrift.  Sandra is in perfect health.  Our bodies,
dear Merthyr, are enjoying the perfection of comfort.  Nothing is done
here except to keep us from boiling over."

"Why does not Count Ammiani come to Rome?"  said Merthyr.

"Why are we not all in Rome?  Yes, why!  why!  We should make a carnival
of our own if we were."

"She would have escaped that horrible knife," Merthyr sighed.

"Yes, she would have escaped that horrible knife.  But see the difference
between Milan and Rome, my friend!  It was a blessed knife here.  It has
given her husband back to her; it has destroyed the intrigues against
her.  It seems to have been sent--I was kneeling in the cathedral this
morning, and had the very image crossing my eyes--from the saints of
heaven to cut the black knot.  Perhaps it may be the means of sending us
to Rome."

Laura paused, and, looking at him, said, "It is so utterly impossible for
us women to comprehend love without folly in a man; the trait by which we
recognize it!  Merthyr, you dear Englishman, you shall know everything.
Do we not think a tisane a weak washy drink, when we are strong?  But we
