"In three days you will be mine, if I do not hear from Milan? within
five, if I do?" he said.

Vittoria gave him the whole beauty of her face a divine minute, and
bowed it assenting. Carlo then led her to his mother, before whom he
embraced her for the comfort of his mother's heart. They decided that
there should be no whisper of the marriage until the couple were one.
Vittoria obtained the countess's permission to write for Merthyr to
attend her at the altar. She had seen Weisspriess fall in combat, and
she had perfect faith in her lover's right hand.




CHAPTER XXXIX

ANNA OF LENKENSTEIN

Captain Weisspriess replied to Carlo Ammiani promptly, naming Camerlata
by Como, as the place where he would meet him.

He stated at the end of some temperate formal lines, that he had given
Count Ammiani the preference over half-a-dozen competitors for the
honour of measuring swords with him; but that his adversary must not
expect him to be always ready to instruct the young gentlemen of the
Lombardo-Venetian province in the arts of fence; and therefore he begged
to observe, that his encounter with Count Ammiani would be the last
occasion upon which he should hold himself bound to accept a challenge
from Count Ammiani's countrymen.

It was quite possible, the captain said, drawing a familiar illustration
from the gaming-table, to break the stoutest Bank in the world by a
perpetual multiplication of your bets, and he was modest enough to
remember that he was but one man against some thousands, to contend with
all of whom would be exhausting.

Consequently the captain desired Count Ammiani to proclaim to his
countrymen that the series of challenges must terminate; and he
requested him to advertize the same in a Milanese, a Turin, and a
Neapolitan journal.

"I am not a butcher," he concluded. "The task you inflict upon me is
scarcely bearable. Call it by what name you will, it is having ten shots
to one, which was generally considered an equivalent to murder. My sword
is due to you, Count Ammiani; and, as I know you to be an honourable
nobleman, I would rather you were fighting in Venice, though your cause
is hopeless, than standing up to match yourself against me. Let me add,
that I deeply respect the lady who is engaged to be united to you, and
would not willingly cross steel either with her lover or her husband. I
shall be at Camerlata at the time appointed. If I do not find you there,
I shall understand that you have done me the honour to take my humble
advice, and have gone where your courage may at least appear to have
done better service. I shall sheathe my sword and say no more about it."

All of this, save the concluding paragraph, was written under the eyes
of Countess Anna of Lenkenstein.

He carried it to his quarters, where he appended the as he deemed
it--conciliatory passage: after which he handed it to Beppo, in a square
of the barracks, with a buon'mano that Beppo received bowing, and
tossed to an old decorated regimental dog of many wounds and a veteran's
gravity. For this offence a Styrian grenadier seized him by the
shoulders, lifting him off his feet and swinging him easily, while the
dog arose from his contemplation of the coin and swayed an expectant
tail. The Styrian had dashed Beppo to earth before Weisspriess could
interpose, and the dog had got him by the throat. In the struggle Beppo
tore off the dog's medal for distinguished conduct on the field of
battle. He restored it as soon as he was free, and won unanimous
plaudits from officers and soldiers for his kindly thoughtfulness and
the pretty manner with which he dropped on one knee, and assuaged the
growls, and attached the medal to the old dog's neck. Weisspriess walked
away. Beppo then challenged his Styrian to fight. The case was laid
before a couple of sergeants, who shook their heads on hearing his
condition to be that of a serving-man, the Styrian was ready to waive
considerations of superiority; but the "judge" pronounced their veto. A
soldier in the Imperial Royal service, though he was merely a private in
the ranks, could not accept a challenge from civilians below the rank
of notary, secretary, hotel- or inn-keeper, and suchlike: servants and
tradesmen he must seek to punish in some other way; and they also had
their appeal to his commanding officer. So went the decision of the
military tribunal, until the Styrian, having contrived to make Beppo
understand, by the agency of a single Italian verb, that he wanted a
blow, Beppo spun about and delivered a stinging smack on the Styrian's
cheek; which altered the view of the case, for, under peculiar
circumstances--supposing that he did not choose to cut him down--a
soldier might condescend to challenge his civilian inferiors: "in
our regiment," said the sergeants, meaning that they had relaxed the
stringency of their laws.

Beppo met his Styrian outside the city walls, and laid him flat. He
declined to fight a second; but it was represented to him, by the aid
of an interpreter, that the officers of the garrison were subjected to
successive challenges, and that the first trial of his skill might have
been nothing finer than luck; and besides, his adversary had a right
to call a champion. "We all do it," the soldiers assured him. "Now your
blood's up you're ready for a dozen of us;" which was less true of
a constitution that was quicker in expending its heat. He stood out
against a young fellow almost as limber as himself, much taller, and
longer in the reach, by whom he was quickly disabled with cuts on thigh
and head. Seeing this easy victory over him, the soldiers, previously
quite civil, cursed him for having got the better of their fallen
comrade, and went off discussing how he had done the trick, leaving him
to lie there. A peasant carried him to a small suburban inn, where
he remained several days oppressed horribly by a sense that he had
forgotten something. When he recollected what it was, he entrusted the
captain's letter to his landlady;--a good woman, but she chanced to
have a scamp of a husband, who snatched it from her and took it to his
market. Beppo supposed the letter to be on its Way to Pallauza, when it
was in General Schoneck's official desk; and soon after the breath of a
scandalous rumour began to circulate.

Captain Weisspriess had gone down to Camerlata, accompanied by a Colonel
Volpo, of an Austro-Italian regiment, and by Lieutenant Jenna. At
Camerlata a spectacled officer, Major Nagen, joined them. Weisspriess
was the less pleased with his company on hearing that he had come to
witness the meeting, in obedience to an express command of a person
who was interested in it. Jenna was the captain's friend: Volpo was
seconding him for the purpose of getting Count Ammiani to listen to
reason from the mouth of a countryman. There could be no doubt in the
captain's mind that this Major Nagen was Countess Anna's spy as well
as his rival, and he tried to be rid of him; but in addition to
the shortness of sight which was Nagen's plea for pushing his thin
transparent nose into every corner, he enjoyed at will an intermittent
deafness, and could hear anything without knowing of it. Brother
officers said of Major Nagen that he was occasionally equally senseless
in the nose, which had been tweaked without disturbing the repose of his
features. He waited half-an-hour on the ground after the appointed time,
and then hurried to Milan. Weisspriess waited an hour. Satisfied that
Count Ammiani was not coming, he exacted from Volpo and from Jenna their
word of honour as Austrian officers that they would forbear-to cast any
slur on the courage of his adversary, and would be so discreet on the
subject as to imply that the duel was a drawn affair. They pledged
themselves accordingly. "There's Nagen, it's true," said Weisspriess,
as a man will say and feel that he has done his best to prevent a thing
inevitable.

Milan, and some of the journals of Milan, soon had Carlo Ammiani's name
up for challenging Weisspriess and failing to keep his appointment. It
grew to be discussed as a tremendous event. The captain received fifteen
challenges within two days; among these a second one from Luciano
Romara, whom he was beginning to have a strong desire to encounter. He
repressed it, as quondam drunkards fight off the whisper of their lips
for liquor. "No more blood," was his constant inward cry. He wanted
peace; but as he also wanted Countess Anna of Lenkenstein and her
estates, it may possibly be remarked of him that what he wanted he did
not want to pay for.

At this period Wilfrid had resumed the Austrian uniform as a common
soldier in the ranks of the Kinsky regiment. General Schoneck had
obtained the privilege for him from the Marshal, General Pierson
refusing to lift a finger on his behalf. Nevertheless the uncle was not
sorry to hear the tale of his nephew's exploits during the campaign, or
of the eccentric intrepidity of the white umbrella; and both to please
him, and to intercede for Wilfrid, the tatter's old comrades recited
his deeds as a part of the treasured familiar history of the army in its
late arduous struggle.

General Pierson was chiefly anxious to know whether Countess Lena would
be willing to give her hand to Wilfrid in the event of his restoration
to his antecedent position in the army. He found her extremely excited
about Carlo Ammiani, her old playmate, and once her dear friend. She
would not speak of Wilfrid at all. To appease the chivalrous little
woman, General Pierson hinted that his nephew, being under the
protection of General Schoneck, might get some intelligence from
that officer. Lena pretended to reject the notion of her coming into
communication with Wilfrid for any earthly purpose. She said to herself,
however, that her object was pre-eminently unselfish; and as the General
pointedly refused to serve her in a matter that concerned an Italian
nobleman, she sent directions to Wilfrid to go before General Schoeneck
the moment he was off duty, and ask his assistance, in her name, to
elucidate the mystery of Count Ammiani's behaviour. The answer was a
transmission of Captain Weisspriess's letter to Carlo. Lena caused
the fact of this letter having missed its way to be circulated in the
journals, and then she carried it triumphantly to her sister, saying:

"There! I knew these reports were abase calumny."

"Reports, to what effect?" said Anna.

"That Carlo Ammiani had slunk from a combat with your duellist."

"Oh! I knew that myself," Anna remarked.

"You were the loudest in proclaiming it."

"Because I intend to ruin him."

"Carlo Ammiani? What has he done to you?"

Anna's eyes had fallen on the additional lines of the letter which she
had not dictated. She frowned and exclaimed:

"What is this? Does the man play me false? Read those lines, Lena, and
tell me, does the man mean to fight in earnest who can dare to write
them? He advises Ammiani to go to Venice. It's treason, if it is not
cowardice. And see here--he has the audacity to say that he deeply
respects the lady Ammiani is going to marry. Is Ammiani going to marry
her? I think not."

Anna dashed the letter to the floor.

"But I will make use of what's within my reach," she said, picking it
up.

"Carlo Ammiani will marry her, I presume," said Lena.

"Not before he has met Captain Weisspriess, who, by the way, has
obtained his majority. And, Lena, my dear, write to inform him that we
wish to offer him our congratulations. He will be a General officer in
good time."

"Perhaps you forget that Count Ammiani is a perfect swordsman, Anna."

"Weisspriess remembers it for me, perhaps;--is that your idea, Lena?"

"He might do so profitably. You have thrown him on two swords."

"Merely to provoke the third. He is invincible. If he were not, where
would his use be?"

"Oh, how I loathe revenge!" cried Lena.

"You cannot love!" her sister retorted. "That woman calling herself
Vittoria Campa shall suffer. She has injured and defied me. How was it
that she behaved to us at Meran? She is mixed up with assassins; she is
insolent--a dark-minded slut; and she catches stupid men. My brother, my
country, and this weak Weisspriess, as I saw him lying in the Ultenthal,
cry out against her. I have no sleep. I am not revengeful. Say it, say
it, all of you! but I am not. I am not unforgiving. I worship justice,
and a black deed haunts me. Let the wicked be contrite and washed in
tears, and I think I can pardon them. But I will have them on their
knees. I hate that woman Vittoria more than I hate Angelo Guidascarpi.
Look, Lena. If both were begging for life to me, I would send him to the
gallows and her to her bedchamber; and all because I worship justice,
and believe it to be the weapon of the good and pious. You have a baby's
heart; so has Karl. He declines to second Weisspriess; he will have
nothing to do with duelling; he would behold his sisters mocked in the
streets and pass on. He talks of Paul's death like a priest. Priests
are worthy men; a great resource! Give me a priests lap when I need it.
Shall I be condemned to go to the priest and leave that woman singing?
If I did, I might well say the world's a snare, a sham, a pitfall, a
horror! It's what I don't think in any degree. It's what you think,
though. Yes, whenever you are vexed you think it. So do the priests, and
so do all who will not exert themselves to chastise. I, on the contrary,
know that the world is not made up of nonsense. Write to Weisspriess
immediately; I must have him here in an hour."

Weisspriess, on visiting the ladies to receive their congratulations,
was unprepared for the sight of his letter to Carlo Ammiani, which Anna
thrust before him after he had saluted her, bidding him read it aloud.
He perused it in silence. He was beginning to be afraid of his mistress.

"I called you Austria once, for you were always ready," Anna said, and
withdrew from him, that the sung of her words might take effect.

"God knows, I have endeavoured to earn the title in my humble way,"
Weisspriess appealed to Lena.

"Yes, Major Weisspriess, you have," she said. "Be Austria still, and
forbear toward these people as much as you can. To beat them is enough,
in my mind. I am rejoiced that you have not met Count Ammiani, for if
you had, two friends of mine, equally dear and equally skilful, would
have held their lives at one another's mercy."

"Equally!" said Weisspriess, and pulled out the length of his moustache.

"Equally courageous," Lena corrected herself. "I never distrusted Count
Ammiani's courage, nor could distrust yours."

"Equally dear!" Weisspriess tried to direct a concentrated gaze on her.

Lena evaded an answer by speaking of the rumour of Count Ammiani's
marriage.

Weisspriess was thinking with all the sagacious penetration of the
military mind, that perhaps this sister was trying to tell him that she
would be willing to usurp the piece of the other in his affections; and
if so, why should she not?

"I may cherish the idea that I am dear to you, Countess Lena?"

"When you are formally betrothed to my sister, you will know you are
very dear to me, Major Weisspriess."

"But," said he, perceiving his error, "how many persons am I to call out
before she will consent to a formal betrothal?"

Lena was half smiling at the little tentative bit of sentiment she had
so easily turned aside. Her advice to him was to refuse to fight, seeing
that he had done sufficient for glory and his good name.

He mentioned Major Nagen as a rival.

Upon this she said: "Hear me one minute. I was in my sister's bed-room
on the first night when she knew of your lying wounded in the Ultenthal.
She told you just now that she called you Austria. She adores our
Austria in you. The thought that you had been vanquished seemed like our
Austria vanquished, and she is so strong for Austria that it is really
out of her power to fancy you as defeated without suspecting foul play.
So when she makes you fight, she thinks you safe. Many are to go down
because you have gone down. Do you not see? And now, Major Weisspriess,
I need not expose my sister to you any more, I hope, or depreciate Major
Nagen for your satisfaction."

Weisspriess had no other interview with Anna for several days. She
shunned him openly. Her carriage moved off when he advanced to meet her
at the parade, or review of arms; and she did not scruple to speak in
public with Major Nagen, in the manner of those who have begun to speak
together in private. The offender received his punishment gracefully,
as men will who have been taught that it flatters them. He refused every
challenge. From Carlo Ammiani there came not a word.

It would have been a deadly lull to any fiery temperament engaged in
plotting to destroy a victim, but Anna had the patience of hatred--that
absolute malignity which can measure its exultation rather by the
gathering of its power to harm than by striking. She could lay it aside,
or sink it to the bottom of her emotions, at will, when circumstances
appeared against it. And she could do this without fretful regrets,
without looking to the future. The spirit of her hatred extracted its
own nourishment from things, like an organized creature. When foiled
she became passive, and she enjoyed--forced herself compliantly to
enjoy--her redoubled energy of hatred voluptuously, if ever a turn in
events made wreck of her scheming. She hated Vittoria for many reasons,
all of them vague within her bosom because the source of them was
indefinite and lay in the fact of her having come into collision with an
opposing nature, whose rivalry was no visible rivalry, whose triumph
was an ignorance of scorn--a woman who attracted all men, who scattered
injuries with insolent artlessness, who never appealed to forgiveness,
and was a low-born woman daring to be proud. By repute Anna was
implacable, but she had, and knew she had, the capacity for magnanimity
of a certain kind; and her knowledge of the existence of this
unsuspected fund within her justified in some degree her reckless
efforts to pull her enemy down on her knees. It seemed doubly right that
she should force Vittoria to penitence, as being good for the woman, and
an end that exonerated her own private sins committed to effect it.

Yet she did not look clearly forward to the day of Vittoria's imploring
for mercy. She had too many vexations to endure: she was an insufficient
schemer, and was too frequently thwarted to enjoy that ulterior
prospect. Her only servile instruments were Major Nagen, and Irma, who
came to her from the Villa Ricciardi, hot to do her rival any deadly
injury; but though willing to attempt much, these were apparently able
to perform little more than the menial work of vengeance. Major Nagen
wrote in the name of Weisspriess to Count Ammiani, appointing a second
meeting at Como, and stating that he would be at the villa of the
Duchess of Graatli there. Weisspriess was unsuspectingly taken down to
the place by Anna and Lena. There was a gathering of such guests as the
duchess alone among her countrywomen could assemble, under the patronage
of the conciliatory Government, and the duchess projected to give a
series of brilliant entertainments in the saloons of the Union, as
she named her house-roof. Count Serabiglione arrived, as did numerous
Moderates and priest-party men, Milanese garrison officers and others.
Laura Piaveni travelled with Countess d'Isorella and the happy Adela
Sedley, from Lago Maggiore.

Laura came, as she cruelly told her friend, for the purpose of making
Victoria's excuses to the duchess. "Why can she not come herself?"
Amalia persisted in asking, and began to be afflicted with womanly
curiosity. Laura would do nothing but shrug and smile, and repeat
her message. A little after sunset, when the saloons were lighted,
Weisspriess, sitting by his Countess Anna's side, had a slip of paper
placed in his hands by one of the domestics. He quitted his post
frowning with astonishment, and muttered once, "My appointment!" Laura
noticed that Anna's heavy eyelids lifted to shoot an expressive glance
at Violetta d'Isorella. She said: "Can that have been anything hostile,
do you suppose?" and glanced slyly at her friend.

"No, no," said Amalia; "the misunderstanding is explained, and Major
Weisspriess is just as ready as Count Ammiani to listen to reason.
Besides, Count Ammiani is not so unfriendly but that if he came so near
he would come up to me, surely."

Laura brought Amalia's observation to bear upon Anna and Violetta by
turning pointedly from one to the other as she said: "As for reason,
perhaps you have chosen the word. If Count Ammiani attended an
appointment this time, he would be unreasonable."

A startled "Why?"--leaped from Anna's lips. She reddened at her
impulsive clumsiness.

Laura raised her shoulders slightly: "Do you not know?" The expression
of her face reproved Violetta, as for remissness in transmitting secret
intelligence. "You can answer why, countess," she addressed the
latter, eager to exercise her native love of conflict with this
doubtfully-faithful countrywoman;--the Austrian could feel that she had
beaten her on the essential point, and afford to give her any number of
dialectical victories.

"I really cannot answer why," Violetta said; "unless Count Ammiani is,
as I venture to hope, better employed."

"But the answer is charming and perfect," said Laura.

"Enigmatical answers are declared to be so when they come from us
women," the duchess remarked; "but then, I fancy, women must not be the
hearers, or they will confess that they are just as much bewildered and
irritated as I am. Do speak out, my dearest. How is he better employed?"

Laura passed her eyes around the group of ladies. "If any hero of yours
had won the woman he loves, he would be right in thinking it folly to be
bound by the invitation to fight, or feast, or what you will, within a
space of three months or so; do you not agree with me?"

The different emotions on many visages made the scene curious.

"Count Ammiani has married her!" exclaimed the duchess.

"My old friend Carlo is really married!" said Lena.

Anna stared at Violetta.

The duchess, recovering from her wonder, confirmed the news by saying
that she now knew why M. Powys had left Milan in haste, three or four
days previously, as she was aware that the bride had always wished him
to be present at the ceremony of her marriage.

"Signora, may I ask you, were you present?" Violetta addressed Laura.

"I will answer most honestly that I was not," said Laura.

"The marriage was a secret one; perhaps?"

"Even for friends, you see."

"Necessarily, no doubt," Lena said, with an idea of easing her sister's
stupefaction by a sarcasm foreign to her sentiments.

Adela Sedley, later in exactly comprehending what had been spoken,
glanced about for some one who would not be unsympathetic to her
exclamation, and suddenly beheld her brother entering the room with
Weisspriess. "Wilfrid! Wilfrid! do you know she is married?"

"So they tell me," Wilfrid replied, while making his bow to the duchess.
He was much broken in appearance, but wore his usual collected manner.
Who had told him of the marriage? A person downstairs, he said; not
Count Ammiani; not signor Balderini; no one whom he saw present, no one
whom he knew.

"A very mysterious person," said the duchess.

"Then it's true after all," cried Laura. "I did but guess it." She
assured Violetta that she had only guessed it.

"Does Major Weisspriess know it to be true?" The question came from
Anna.

Weisspriess coolly verified it, on the faith of a common servant's
communication.

The ladies could see that some fresh piece of mystery lay between him
and Wilfrid.

"With whom have you had an interview, and what have you heard?" asked
Lena, vexed by Wilfrid's pallid cheeks.

Both men stammered and protested, out of conceit, and were as foolish as
men are when pushed to play at mutual concealment.

The duchess's chasseur, Jacob Baumwalder Feckelwitz, stepped up to his
mistress and whispered discreetly. She gazed straight at Laura. After
hesitation she shook her head, and the chasseur retired. Amalia then
came to the rescue of the unhappy military wits that were standing a
cross-fire of sturdy interrogation.

"Do you not perceive what it is?" she said to Anna. "Major Weisspriess
meets Private Pierson at the door of my house, and forgets that he is
well-born and my guest. I may be revolutionary, but I declare that in
plain clothes Private Pierson is the equal of Major Weisspriess. If
bravery made men equals, who would be Herr Pierson's superior? Ire has
done me the honour, at a sacrifice of his pride, I am sure, to come here
and meet his sister, and rejoice me with his society. Major Weisspriess,
if I understand the case correctly, you are greatly to blame."

"I beg to assert," Weisspriess was saying as the duchess turned her
shoulder on him.

"There is really no foundation," Wilfrid began, with similar simplicity.

"What will sharpen the wits of these soldiers!" the duchess murmured
dolefully to Laura.

"But Major Weisspriess was called out of his room by a message--was that
from Private Pierson?" said Anna.

"Assuredly; I should presume so," the duchess answered for them.

"Ay; undoubtedly," Weisspriess supported her.

"Then," Laura smiled encouragement to Wilfrid, "you know nothing of
Count Ammiani's marriage after all?"

Wilfrid launched his reply on a sharp repression of his breath, "Nothing
whatever."

"And the common servant's communication was not made to you?" Anna
interrogated Weisspriess.

"I simply followed in the track of Pierson," said that officer, masking
his retreat from the position with a duck of his head and a smile, tooth
on lip.

"How could you ever suppose, child, that a common servant would be
sent to deliver such tidings? and to Major Weisspriess!" the duchess
interposed.

This broke up the Court of inquiry.

Weisspriess shortly after took his leave, on the plea that he wished to
prove his friendliness by accompanying Private Pierson, who had to be on
duty early next day in Milan. Amalia had seen him breaking from Anna
in extreme irritation, and he had only to pledge his word that he was
really bound for Milan to satisfy her. "I believe you to be at heart
humane," she said meaningly.

"Duchess, you may be sure that I would not kill an enemy save on the
point of my sword," he answered her.

"You are a gallant man," said Amalia, and pride was in her face as she
looked on him.

She willingly consented to Wilfrid's sudden departure, as it was evident
that some shot had hit him hard.

On turning to Laura, the duchess beheld an aspect of such shrewd disgust
that she was provoked to exclaim: "What on earth is the matter now?"

Laura would favour her with no explanation until they were alone in the
duchess's boudoir, when she said that to call Weisspriess a gallant man
was an instance of unblushing adulation of brutal strength: "Gallant for
slaying a boy? Gallant because he has force of wrist?"

"Yes; gallant;--an honour to his countrymen: and an example to some of
yours," Amalia rejoined.

"See," cried Laura, "to what a degeneracy your excess of national
sentiment reduces you!"

While she was flowing on, the duchess leaned a hand across her shoulder,
and smiling kindly, said she would not allow her to utter words that she
would have to eat. "You saw my chasseur step up to me this evening, my
Laura? Well, not to torment you, he wished to sound an alarm cry after
Angelo Guidascarpi. I believe my conjecture is correct, that Angelo
Guidascarpi was seen by Major Weisspriess below, and allowed to pass
free. Have you no remark to make?"

"None," said Laura.

"You cannot admit that he behaved like a gallant man?" Laura sighed
deeply. "Perhaps it was well for you to encourage him!"

The mystery of Angelo's interview with Weisspriess was cleared the
next night, when in the midst of a ball-room's din, Aennchen, Amalia's
favourite maid, brought a letter to Laura from Countess Ammiani. These
were the contents:

"DEAREST SIGNORA,

"You now learn a new and blessed thing. God make the marriage fruitful!
I have daughter as well as son. Our Carlo still hesitated, for hearing
of the disgraceful rumours in Milan, he fancied a duty lay there for him
to do. Another menace came to my daughter from the madman Barto Rizzo.
God can use madmen to bring about the heavenly designs. We decided that
Carlo's name should cover her. My son was like a man who has awakened
up. M. Powys was our good genius. He told her that he had promised you
to bring it about. He, and Angelo, and myself, were the witnesses. So
much before heaven! I crossed the lake with them to Stress. I was her
tirewoman, with Giacinta, to whom I will give a husband for the tears of
joy she dropped upon the bed. Blessed be it! I placed my daughter in my
Carlo's arms. Both kissed their mother at parting.

"This is something fixed. I had great fears during the war. You do not
yet know what it is to have a sonless son in peril. Terror and remorse
haunted me for having sent the last Ammiani out to those fields,
unattached to posterity.

"An envelope from Milan arrived on the morning of his nuptials. It was
intercepted by me. The German made a second appointment at Como. Angelo
undertook to assist me in saving my son's honour. So my Carlo had
nothing to disturb his day. Pray with me, Laura Piaveni, that the day
and the night of it may prove fresh springs of a river that shall pass
our name through the happier mornings of Italy! I commend you to God, my
dear, and am your friend,

                  "MARCCELLINA, COUNTESS AMMIANI.

"P.S. Countess Alessandra will be my daughter's name."

The letter was read and re-read before the sweeter burden it contained
would allow Laura to understand that Countess Ammiani had violated a
seal and kept a second hostile appointment hidden from her son.

"Amalia, you detest me," she said, when they had left the guests for a
short space, and the duchess had perused the letter, "but acknowledge
Angelo Guidascarpi's devotion. He came here in the midst of you Germans,
at the risk of his life, to offer battle for his cousin."

The duchess, however, had much more to say for the magnanimity of Major
Weisspriess, who, if he saw him, had spared him; she compelled Laura to
confess that Weisspriess must have behaved with some nobleness, which
Laura did, humming and I 'brumming,' and hinting at the experience he
had gained of Angelo's skill. Her naughtiness provoked first, and then
affected Amalia; in this mood the duchess had the habit of putting on a
grand air of pitying sadness. Laura knew it well, and never could make
head against it. She wavered, as a stray floating thing detached from an
eddy whirls and passes on the flood. Close on Amalia's bosom she sobbed
out: "Yes; you Austrians have good qualities some: many! but you choose
to think us mean because we can't readily admit them when we are under
your heels. Just see me; what a crumb feeds me! I am crying with delight
at a marriage!"

The duchess clasped her fondly.

"It's not often one gets you so humble, my Laura."

"I am crying with delight at a marriage! Amalia, look at me: you would
suppose it a mighty triumph. A marriage! two little lovers lying cheek
to cheek! and me blessing heaven for its goodness! and there may be dead
men unburied still on the accursed Custozza hill-top!"

Amalia let her weep. The soft affection which the duchess bore to her
was informed with a slight touch of envy of a complexion that could be
torn with tears one minute, and the next be fit to show in public.
No other thing made her regard her friend as a southern--that is, a
foreign-woman.

"Be patient," Laura said.

"Cry; you need not be restrained," said Amalia.

"You sighed."

"No!"

"A sort of sigh. My fit's over. Carlo's marriage is too surprising and
delicious. I shall be laughing presently. I hinted at his marriage--I
thought it among the list of possible things, no more--to see if that
crystal pool, called Violetta d'Isorella, could be discoloured by
stirring. Did you watch her face? I don't know what she wanted with
Carlo, for she's cold as poison--a female trifler; one of those women
whom I, and I have a chaste body, despise as worse than wantons; but
she certainly did not want him to be married. It seems like a
victory--though we're beaten. You have beaten us, my dear!"

"My darling! it is your husband kisses you," said Amalia, kissing
Laura's forehead from a full heart.




CHAPTER XL

THROUGH THE WINTER

Weisspriess and Wilfrid made their way toward Milan together, silently
smoking, after one attempt at conversation, which touched on Vittoria's
marriage; but when they reached Monza the officer slapped his degraded
brother in arms upon the shoulder, and asked him whether he had any
inclination to crave permission to serve in Hungary. For his own part,
Weisspriess said that he should quit Italy at once; he had here to
skewer the poor devils, one or two weekly, or to play the mightily
generous; in short, to do things unsoldierly; and he was desirous of
getting away from the country. General Schoneck was at Monza, and might
arrange the matter for them both. Promotion was to be looked for in
Hungary; the application would please the General; one battle would
restore the lieutenant's star to Wilfrid's collar. Wilfrid, who had been
offended by his companion's previous brooding silence, nodded briefly,
and they stopped at Monza, where they saw General Schoneck in the
morning, and Wilfrid being by extraordinary favour in civilian's dress
during his leave of absence, they were jointly invited to the General's
table at noon, though not to meet any other officer. General Schoneck
agreed with Weisspriess that Hungary would be a better field for
Wilfrid; said he would do his utmost to serve them in the manner they
wished, and dismissed them after the second cigar. They strolled about
the city, glad for reasons of their own to be out of Milan as long as
the leave permitted. At night, when they were passing a palace in one
of the dark streets, a feather, accompanied by a sharp sibilation from
above, dropped on Wilfrid's face. Weisspriess held the feather up, and
judged by its length that it was an eagle's, and therefore belonging to
the Hungarian Hussar regiment stationed in Milan. "The bird's aloft," he
remarked. His voice aroused a noise of feet that was instantly still.
He sent a glance at the doorways, where he thought he discerned men.
Fetching a whistle in with his breath, he unsheathed his sword, and
seeing that Wilfrid had no weapon, he pushed him to a gate of the
palace-court that had just cautiously turned a hinge. Wilfrid found his
hand taken by a woman's hand inside. The gate closed behind him. He was
led up to an apartment where, by the light of a darkly-veiled lamp,
he beheld a young Hungarian officer and a lady clinging to his neck,
praying him not to go forth. Her Italian speech revealed how matters
stood in this house. The officer accosted Wilfrid: "But you are not one
of us!" He repeated it to the lady: "You see, the man is not one of us!"

She assured him that she had seen the uniform when she dropped the
feather, and wept protesting it.

"Louis, Louis! why did you come to-night! why did I make you come! You
will be slain. I had my warning, but I was mad."

The officer hushed her with a quick squeeze of her inter-twisted
fingers.

"Are you the man to take a sword and be at my back, sir?" he said;
and resumed in a manner less contemptuous toward the civil costume: "I
request it for the sole purpose of quieting this lady's fears."

Wilfrid explained who and what he was. On hearing that he was General
Pierson's nephew the officer laughed cheerfully, and lifted the veil
from the lamp, by which Wilfrid knew him to be Colonel Prince Radocky,
a most gallant and the handsomest cavalier in the Imperial service.
Radocky laughed again when he was told of Weisspriess keeping guard
below.

"Aha! we are three, and can fight like a pyramid."

He flourished his hand above the lady's head, and called for a sword.
