faire lefrais de la conversation. She had just returned from the north,
and informed Edward how nearly her regiment had cut the petticoat
people into ribands at Falkirk, 'only somehow there was one of those
nasty, awkward marshes, that they are never without in Scotland, I
think, and so our poor dear little regiment suffered something, as my
Nosebag says, in that unsatisfactory affair. You, sir, have served in
the dragoons?' Waverley was taken so much at unawares that he
acquiesced.

'O, I knew it at once; I saw you were military from your air, and I was
sure you could be none of the foot-wobblers, as my Nosebag calls them.
What regiment, pray?' Here was a delightful question. Waverley,
however, justly concluded that this good lady had the whole army-list
by heart; and, to avoid detection by adhering to truth, answered,
'Gardiner's dragoons, ma'am; but I have retired some time.'

'O aye, those as won the race at the battle of Preston, as my Nosebag
says. Pray, sir, were you there?'

'I was so unfortunate, madam,' he replied, 'as to witness that
engagement.'

'And that was a misfortune that few of Gardiner's stood to witness, I
believe, sir--ha! ha! ha! I beg your pardon; but a soldier's wife loves
a joke.'

'Devil confound you,' thought Waverley: 'what infernal luck has penned
me up with this inquisitive hag!'

Fortunately the good lady did not stick long to one subject. 'We are
coming to Ferrybridge now,' she said, 'where there was a party of OURS
left to support the beadles, and constables, and justices, and these
sort of creatures that are examining papers and stopping rebels, and
all that.' They were hardly in the inn before she dragged Waverley to
the window, exclaiming, 'Yonder comes Corporal Bridoon, of our poor
dear troop; he's coming with the constable man. Bridoon's one of my
lambs, as Nosebag calls 'ern. Come, Mr.--a--a--pray, what's your name,
sir?'

'Butler, ma'am,' said Waverley, resolved rather to make free with the
name of a former fellow-officer than run the risk of detection by
inventing one not to be found in the regiment.

'O, you got a troop lately, when that shabby fellow, Waverley, went
over to the rebels? Lord, I wish our old cross Captain Crump would go
over to the rebels, that Nosebag might get the troop! Lord, what can
Bridoon be standing swinging on the bridge for? I'll be hanged if he
a'nt hazy, as Nosebag says. Come, sir, as you and I belong to the
service, we'll go put the rascal in mind of his duty.'

Waverley, with feelings more easily conceived than described, saw
himself obliged to follow this doughty female commander. The gallant
trooper was as like a lamb as a drunk corporal of dragoons, about six
feet high, with very broad shoulders, and very thin legs, not to
mention a great scar across his nose, could well be. Mrs. Nosebag
addressed him with something which, if not an oath, sounded very like
one, and commanded him to attend to his duty. 'You be d--d for a ----,'
commenced the gallant cavalier; but, looking up in order to suit the
action to the words, and also to enforce the epithet which he meditated
with an adjective applicable to the party, he recognised the speaker,
made his military salaam, and altered his tone. 'Lord love your
handsome face, Madam Nosebag, is it you? Why, if a poor fellow does
happen to fire a slug of a morning, I am sure you were never the lady
to bring him to harm.'

'Well, you rascallion, go, mind your duty; this gentleman and I belong
to the service; but be sure you look after that shy cock in the
slouched hat that sits in the corner of the coach. I believe he's one
of the rebels in disguise.'

'D--n her gooseberry wig,' said the corporal, when she was out of
hearing, 'that gimlet-eyed jade--mother adjutant, as we call her--is a
greater plague to the regiment than provost-marshal, sergeant-major,
and old Hubble-de-Shuff, the colonel, into the bargain. Come, Master
Constable, let's see if this shy cock, as she calls him (who, by the
way, was a Quaker from Leeds, with whom Mrs. Nosebag had had some tart
argument on the legality of bearing arms), will stand godfather to a
sup of brandy, for your Yorkshire ale is cold on my stomach.'

The vivacity of this good lady, as it helped Edward out of this scrape,
was like to have drawn him into one or two others. In every town where
they stopped she wished to examine the corps de garde, if there was
one, and once very narrowly missed introducing Waverley to a
recruiting-sergeant of his own regiment. Then she Captain'd and
Butler'd him till he was almost mad with vexation and anxiety; and
never was he more rejoiced in his life at the termination of a journey
than when the arrival of the coach in London freed him from the
attentions of Madam Nosebag.





CHAPTER LXII

WHAT'S TO BE DONE NEXT?


Itwas twilight when they arrived in town; and having shaken off his
companions, and walked through a good many streets to avoid the
possibility of being traced by them, Edward took a hackney-coach and
drove to Colonel Talbot's house, in one of the principal squares at the
west end of the town. That gentleman, by the death of relations, had
succeeded since his marriage to a large fortune, possessed considerable
political interest, and lived in what is called great style.

When Waverley knocked at his door he found it at first difficult to
procure admittance, but at length was shown into an apartment where the
Colonel was at table. Lady Emily, whose very beautiful features were
still pallid from indisposition, sate opposite to him. The instant he
heard Waverley's voice, he started up and embraced him. 'Frank Stanley,
my dear boy, how d'ye do? Emily, my love, this is young Stanley.'

The blood started to the lady's cheek as she gave Waverley a reception
in which courtesy was mingled with kindness, while her trembling hand
and faltering voice showed how much she was startled and discomposed.
Dinner was hastily replaced, and while Waverley was engaged in
refreshing himself, the Colonel proceeded--'I wonder you have come
here, Frank; the Doctors tell me the air of London is very bad for your
complaints. You should not have risked it. But I am delighted to see
you, and so is Emily, though I fear we must not reckon upon your
staying long.'

'Some particular business brought me up,' muttered Waverley.

'I supposed so, but I shan't allow you to stay long. Spontoon' (to an
elderly military-looking servant out of livery),'take away these
things, and answer the bell yourself, if I ring. Don't let any of the
other fellows disturb us. My nephew and I have business to talk of.'

When the servants had retired, 'In the name of God, Waverley, what has
brought you here? It may be as much as your life is worth.'

'Dear Mr. Waverley,' said Lady Emily, 'to whom I owe so much more than
acknowledgments can ever pay, how could you be so rash?'

'My father--my uncle--this paragraph,'--he handed the paper to Colonel
Talbot.

'I wish to Heaven these scoundrels were condemned to be squeezed to
death in their own presses,' said Talbot. 'I am told there are not less
than a dozen of their papers now published in town, and no wonder that
they are obliged to invent lies to find sale for their journals. It is
true, however, my dear Edward, that you have lost your father; but as
to this flourish of his unpleasant situation having grated upon his
spirits and hurt his health--the truth is--for though it is harsh to
say so now, yet it will relieve your mind from the idea of weighty
responsibility--the truth then is, that Mr. Richard Waverley, through
this whole business, showed great want of sensibility, both to your
situation and that of your uncle; and the last time I saw him, he told
me, with great glee, that, as I was so good as to take charge of your
interests, he had thought it best to patch up a separate negotiation
for himself, and make his peace with government through some channels
which former connexions left still open to him.'

'And my uncle, my dear uncle?'

'Is in no danger whatever. It is true (looking at the date of the
paper) there was a foolish report some time ago to the purport here
quoted, but it is entirely false. Sir Everard is gone down to
Waverley-Honour, freed from all uneasiness, unless upon your own
account. But you are in peril yourself; your name is in every
proclamation; warrants are out to apprehend you. How and when did you
come here?'

Edward told his story at length, suppressing his quarrel with Fergus;
for, being himself partial to Highlanders, he did not wish to give any
advantage to the Colonel's national prejudice against them.

'Are you sure it was your friend Glen's foot-boy you saw dead in
Clifton Moor?'

'Quite positive.'

'Then that little limb of the devil has cheated the gallows, for
cut-throat was written in his face; though (turning to Lady Emily) it
was a very handsome face too. But for you, Edward, I wish you would go
down again to Cumberland, or rather I wish you had never stirred from
thence, for there is an embargo in all the seaports, and a strict
search for the adherents of the Pretender; and the tongue of that
confounded woman will wag in her head like the clack of a mill, till
somehow or other she will detect Captain Butler to be a feigned
personage.'

'Do you know anything,' asked Waverley, 'of my fellow-traveller?'

'Her husband was my sergeant-major for six years; she was a buxom
widow, with a little money; he married her, was steady, and got on by
being a good drill. I must send Spontoon to see what she is about; he
will find her out among the old regimental connections. To-morrow you
must be indisposed, and keep your room from fatigue. Lady Emily is to
be your nurse, and Spontoon and I your attendants. You bear the name of
a near relation of mine, whom none of my present people ever saw,
except Spontoon, so there will be no immediate danger. So pray feel
your head ache and your eyes grow heavy as soon as possible, that you
may be put upon the sick-list; and, Emily, do you order an apartment
for Frank Stanley, with all the attentions which an invalid may
require.'

In the morning the Colonel visited his guest. 'Now,' said he, 'I have
some good news for you. Your reputation as a gentleman and officer is
effectually cleared of neglect of duty and accession to the mutiny in
Gardiner's regiment. I have had a correspondence on this subject with a
very zealous friend of yours, your Scottish parson, Morton; his first
letter was addressed to Sir Everard; but I relieved the good Baronet of
the trouble of answering it. You must know, that your free-booting
acquaintance, Donald of the Cave, has at length fallen into the hands
of the Philistines. He was driving off the cattle of a certain
proprietor, called Killan--something or other--'

'Killancureit?'

'The same. Now the gentleman being, it seems, a great farmer, and
having a special value for his breed of cattle, being, moreover, rather
of a timid disposition, had got a party of soldiers to protect his
property. So Donald ran his head unawares into the lion's mouth, and
was defeated and made prisoner. Being ordered for execution, his
conscience was assailed on the one hand by a Catholic priest, on the
other by your friend Morton. He repulsed the Catholic chiefly on
account of the doctrine of extreme unction, which this economical
gentleman considered as an excessive waste of oil. So his conversion
from a state of impenitence fell to Mr. Morton's share, who, I daresay,
acquitted himself excellently, though I suppose Donald made but a queer
kind of Christian after all. He confessed, however, before a
magistrate, one Major Melville, who seems to have been a correct,
friendly sort of person, his full intrigue with Houghton, explaining
particularly how it was carried on, and fully acquitting you of the
least accession to it. He also mentioned his rescuing you from the
hands of the volunteer officer, and sending you, by orders of the
Pret--Chevalier, I mean--as a prisoner to Doune, from whence he
understood you were carried prisoner to Edinburgh. These are
particulars which cannot but tell in your favour. He hinted that he had
been employed to deliver and protect you, and rewarded for doing so;
but he would not confess by whom, alleging that, though he would not
have minded breaking any ordinary oath to satisfy the curiosity of Mr.
Morton, to whose pious admonitions he owed so much, yet, in the present
case he had been sworn to silence upon the edge of his dirk, [Footnote:
See Note 14.] which, it seems, constituted, in his opinion, an
inviolable obligation.'

'And what is become of him?'

'Oh, he was hanged at Stirling after the rebels raised the siege, with
his lieutenant and four plaids besides; he having the advantage of a
gallows more lofty than his friends.'

'Well, I have little cause either to regret or rejoice at his death;
and yet he has done me both good and harm to a very considerable
extent.'

'His confession, at least, will serve you materially, since it wipes
from your character all those suspicions which gave the accusation
against you a complexion of a nature different from that with which so
many unfortunate gentlemen, now or lately in arms against the
government, may be justly charged. Their treason--I must give it its
name, though you participate in its guilt--is an action arising from
mistaken virtue, and therefore cannot be classed as a disgrace, though
it be doubtless highly criminal. Where the guilty are so numerous,
clemency must be extended to far the greater number; and I have little
doubt of procuring a remission for you, providing we can keep you out
of the claws of justice till she has selected and gorged upon her
victims; for in this, as in other cases, it will be according to the
vulgar proverb, "First come, first served." Besides, government are
desirous at present to intimidate the English Jacobites, among whom
they can find few examples for punishment. This is a vindictive and
timid feeling which will soon wear off, for of all nations the English
are least blood-thirsty by nature. But it exists at present, and you
must therefore be kept out of the way in the mean-time.'

Now entered Spontoon with an anxious countenance. By his regimental
acquaintances he had traced out Madam Nosebag, and found her full of
ire, fuss, and fidget at discovery of an impostor who had travelled
from the north with her under the assumed name of Captain Butler of
Gardiner's dragoons. She was going to lodge an information on the
subject, to have him sought for as an emissary of the Pretender; but
Spontoon (an old soldier), while he pretended to approve, contrived to
make her delay her intention. No time, however, was to be lost: the
accuracy of this good dame's description might probably lead to the
discovery that Waverley was the pretended Captain Butler, an
identification fraught with danger to Edward, perhaps to his uncle, and
even to Colonel Talbot. Which way to direct his course was now,
therefore, the question.

'To Scotland,' said Waverley.

'To Scotland?' said the Colonel; 'with what purpose? not to engage
again with the rebels, I hope?'

'No; I considered my campaign ended when, after all my efforts, I could
not rejoin them; and now, by all accounts, they are gone to make a
winter campaign in the Highlands, where such adherents as I am would
rather be burdensome than useful. Indeed, it seems likely that they
only prolong the war to place the Chevalier's person out of danger, and
then to make some terms for themselves. To burden them with my presence
would merely add another party, whom they would not give up and could
not defend. I understand they left almost all their English adherents
in garrison at Carlisle, for that very reason. And on a more general
view, Colonel, to confess the truth, though it may lower me in your
opinion, I am heartly tired of the trade of war, and am, as Fletcher's
Humorous Lieutenant says, "even as weary of this fighting-'"

'Fighting! pooh, what have you seen but a skirmish or two? Ah! if you
saw war on the grand scale--sixty or a hundred thousand men in the
field on each side!'

'I am not at all curious, Colonel. "Enough," says our homely proverb,
"is as good as a feast." The plumed troops and the big war used to
enchant me in poetry, but the night marches, vigils, couches under the
wintry sky, and such accompaniments of the glorious trade, are not at
all to my taste in practice; then for dry blows, I had MY fill of
fighting at Clifton, where I escaped by a hair's-breadth half a dozen
times; and you, I should think--' He stopped.

'Had enough of it at Preston? you mean to say,' answered the Colonel,
laughing; 'but 'tis my vocation, Hal.'

'It is not mine, though,' said Waverley; 'and having honourably got rid
of the sword, which I drew only as a volunteer, I am quite satisfied
with my military experience, and shall be in no hurry to take it up
again.'

'I am very glad you are of that mind; but then what would you do in the
north?'

'In the first place, there are some seaports on the eastern coast of
Scotland still in the hands of the Chevalier's friends; should I gain
any of them, I can easily embark for the Continent.'

'Good, your second reason?'

'Why, to speak the very truth, there is a person in Scotland upon whom
I now find my happiness depends more than I was always aware, and about
whose situation I am very anxious.'

'Then Emily was right, and there is a love affair in the case after
all? And which of these two pretty Scotchwomen, whom you insisted upon
my admiring, is the distinguished fair? not Miss Glen--I hope.'

'No.'

'Ah, pass for the other; simplicity may be improved, but pride and
conceit never. Well, I don't discourage you; I think it will please Sir
Everard, from what he said when I jested with him about it; only I hope
that intolerable papa, with his brogue, and his snuff, and his Latin,
and his insufferable long stories about the Duke of Berwick, will find
it necessary hereafter to be an inhabitant of foreign parts. But as to
the daughter, though I think you might find as fitting a match in
England, yet if your heart be really set upon this Scotch rosebud, why
the Baronet has a great opinion of her father and of his family, and he
wishes much to see you married and settled, both for your own sake and
for that of the three ermines passant, which may otherwise pass away
altogether. But I will bring you his mind fully upon the subject, since
you are debarred correspondence for the present, for I think you will
not be long in Scotland before me.'

'Indeed! and what can induce you to think of returning to Scotland? No
relenting longings towards the land of mountains and floods, I am
afraid.'

'None, on my word; but Emily's health is now, thank God, reestablished,
and, to tell you the truth, I have little hopes of concluding the
business which I have at present most at heart until I can have a
personal interview with his Royal Highness the Commander-in-Chief; for,
as Fluellen says, "the duke doth love me well, and I thank heaven I
have deserved some love at his hands." I am now going out for an hour
or two to arrange matters for your departure; your liberty extends to
the next room, Lady Emily's parlour, where you will find her when you
are disposed for music, reading, or conversation. We have taken
measures to exclude all servants but Spontoon, who is as true as steel.'

In about two hours Colonel Talbot returned, and found his young friend
conversing with his lady; she pleased with his manners and information,
and he delighted at being restored, though but for a moment, to the
society of his own rank, from which he had been for some time excluded.

'And now,' said the Colonel, 'hear my arrangements, for there is little
time to lose. This youngster, Edward Waverley, alias Williams, alias
Captain Butler, must continue to pass by his fourth ALIAS of Francis
Stanley, my nephew; he shall set out to-morrow for the North, and the
chariot shall take him the first two stages. Spontoon shall then attend
him; and they shall ride post as far as Huntingdon; and the presence of
Spontoon, well known on the road as my servant, will check all
disposition to inquiry. At Huntingdon you will meet the real Frank
Stanley. He is studying at Cambridge; but, a little while ago, doubtful
if Emily's health would permit me to go down to the North myself, I
procured him a passport from the secretary of state's office to go in
my stead. As he went chiefly to look after you, his journey is now
unnecessary. He knows your story; you will dine together at Huntingdon;
and perhaps your wise heads may hit upon some plan for removing or
diminishing the danger of your farther progress north-ward. And now
(taking out a morocco case), let me put you in funds for the campaign.'

'I am ashamed, my dear Colonel--'

'Nay,' said Colonel Talbot, 'you should command my purse in any event;
but this money is your own. Your father, considering the chance of your
being attainted, left me his trustee for your advantage. So that you
are worth above L15,000, besides Brere-Wood Lodge--a very independent
person, I promise you. There are bills here for L200; any larger sum
you may have, or credit abroad, as soon as your motions require it.'

The first use which occurred to Waverley of his newly acquired wealth
was to write to honest Farmer Jopson, requesting his acceptance of a
silver tankard on the part of his friend Williams, who had not
forgotten the night of the eighteenth December last. He begged him at
the same time carefully to preserve for him his Highland garb and
accoutrements, particularly the arms, curious in themselves, and to
which the friendship of the donors gave additional value. Lady Emily
undertook to find some suitable token of remembrance likely to flatter
the vanity and please the taste of Mrs. Williams; and the Colonel, who
was a kind of farmer, promised to send the Ullswater patriarch an
excellent team of horses for cart and plough.

One happy day Waverley spent in London; and, travelling in the manner
projected, he met with Frank Stanley at Huntingdon. The two young men
were acquainted in a minute.

'I can read my uncle's riddle,' said Stanley;'the cautious old soldier
did not care to hint to me that I might hand over to you this passport,
which I have no occasion for; but if it should afterwards come out as
the rattle-pated trick of a young Cantab, cela ne tire a rien. You are
therefore to be Francis Stanley, with this passport.' This proposal
appeared in effect to alleviate a great part of the difficulties which
Edward must otherwise have encountered at every turn; and accordingly
he scrupled not to avail himself of it, the more especially as he had
discarded all political purposes from his present journey, and could
not be accused of furthering machinations against the government while
travelling under protection of the secretary's passport.

The day passed merrily away. The young student was inquisitive about
Waverley's campaigns, and the manners of the Highlands, and Edward was
obliged to satisfy his curiosity by whistling a pibroch, dancing a
strathspey, and singing a Highland song. The next morning Stanley rode
a stage northward with his new friend, and parted from him with great
reluctance, upon the remonstrances of Spontoon, who, accustomed to
submit to discipline, was rigid in enforcing it.





CHAPTER LXIII

DESOLATION


Waverley riding post, as was the usual fashion of the period, without
any adventure save one or two queries, which the talisman of his
passport sufficiently answered, reached the borders of Scotland. Here
he heard the tidings of the decisive battle of Culloden. It was no more
than he had long expected, though the success at Falkirk had thrown a
faint and setting gleam over the arms of the Chevalier. Yet it came
upon him like a shock, by which he was for a time altogether unmanned.
The generous, the courteous, the noble-minded adventurer was then a
fugitive, with a price upon his head; his adherents, so brave, so
enthusiastic, so faithful, were dead, imprisoned, or exiled. Where,
now, was the exalted and high-souled Fergus, if, indeed, he had
survived the night at Clifton? Where the pure-hearted and primitive
Baron of Bradwardine, whose foibles seemed foils to set off the
disinterestedness of his disposition, the genuine goodness of his
heart, and his unshaken courage? Those who clung for support to these
fallen columns, Rose and Flora, where were they to be sought, and in
what distress must not the loss of their natural protectors have
involved them? Of Flora he thought with the regard of a brother for a
sister; of Rose with a sensation yet more deep and tender. It might be
still his fate to supply the want of those guardians they had lost.
Agitated by these thoughts he precipitated his journey.

When he arrived in Edinburgh, where his inquiries must necessarily
commence, he felt the full difficulty of his situation. Many
inhabitants of that city had seen and known him as Edward Waverley;
how, then, could he avail himself of a passport as Francis Stanley? He
resolved, therefore, to avoid all company, and to move northward as
soon as possible. He was, however, obliged to wait a day or two in
expectation of a letter from Colonel Talbot, and he was also to leave
his own address, under his feigned character, at a place agreed upon.
With this latter purpose he sallied out in the dusk through the
well-known streets, carefully shunning observation, but in vain: one of
the first persons whom he met at once recognised him. It was Mrs.
Flockhart, Fergus Mac-Ivor's good-humoured landlady.

'Gude guide us, Mr. Waverley, is this you? na, ye needna be feared for
me. I wad betray nae gentleman in your circumstances. Eh, lack-a-day!
lack-a-day! here's a change o' markets; how merry Colonel MacIvor and
you used to be in our house!' And the good-natured widow shed a few
natural tears. As there was no resisting her claim of acquaintance,
Waverley acknowledged it with a good grace, as well as the danger of
his own situation. 'As it's near the darkening, sir, wad ye just step
in by to our house and tak a dish o' tea? and I am sure if ye like to
sleep in the little room, I wad tak care ye are no disturbed, and
naebody wad ken ye; for Kate and Matty, the limmers, gaed aff wi' twa
o' Hawley's dragoons, and I hae twa new queans instead o' them.'

Waverley accepted her invitation, and engaged her lodging for a night
or two, satisfied he should be safer in the house of this simple
creature than anywhere else. When he entered the parlour his heart
swelled to see Fergus's bonnet, with the white cockade, hanging beside
the little mirror.

'Ay,' said Mrs. Flockhart, sighing, as she observed the direction of
his eyes, 'the puir Colonel bought a new ane just the day before they
marched, and I winna let them tak that ane doun, but just to brush it
ilka day mysell; and whiles I look at it till I just think I hear him
cry to Callum to bring him his bonnet, as he used to do when he was
ganging out. It's unco silly--the neighbours ca' me a Jacobite, but
they may say their say--I am sure it's no for that--but he was as
kind-hearted a gentleman as ever lived, and as weel-fa'rd too. Oh, d'ye
ken, sir, when he is to suffer?'

'Suffer! Good heaven! Why, where is he?'

'Eh, Lord's sake! d'ye no ken? The poor Hieland body, Dugald Mahony,
cam here a while syne, wi' ane o' his arms cuttit off, and a sair clour
in the head--ye'll mind Dugald, he carried aye an axe on his
shouther--and he cam here just begging, as I may say, for something to
eat. Aweel, he tauld us the Chief, as they ca'd him (but I aye ca' him
the Colonel), and Ensign Maccombich, that ye mind weel, were ta'en
somewhere beside the English border, when it was sae dark that his folk
never missed him till it was ower late, and they were like to gang
clean daft. And he said that little Callum Beg (he was a bauld
mischievous callant that) and your honour were killed that same night
in the tuilzie, and mony mae braw men. But he grat when he spak o' the
Colonel, ye never saw the like. And now the word gangs the Colonel is
to be tried, and to suffer wi' them that were ta'en at Carlisle.'

'And his sister?'

'Ay, that they ca'd the Lady Flora--weel, she's away up to Carlisle to
him, and lives wi' some grand Papist lady thereabouts to be near him.'

'And,' said Edward,'the other young lady?'

'Whilk other? I ken only of ae sister the Colonel had.'

'I mean Miss Bradwardine,' said Edward.

'Ou, ay; the laird's daughter' said his landlady. 'She was a very bonny
lassie, poor thing, but far shyer than Lady Flora.'

'Where is she, for God's sake?'

'Ou, wha kens where ony o' them is now? puir things, they're sair ta'en
doun for their white cockades and their white roses; but she gaed north
to her father's in Perthshire, when the government troops cam back to
Edinbro'. There was some prettymen amang them, and ane Major Whacker
was quartered on me, a very ceevil gentleman,--but O, Mr. Waverley, he
was naething sae weel fa'rd as the puir Colonel.'

'Do you know what is become of Miss Bradwardine's father?'

'The auld laird? na, naebody kens that. But they say he fought very
hard in that bluidy battle at Inverness; and Deacon Clank, the
whit-iron smith, says that the government folk are sair agane him for
having been out twice; and troth he might hae ta'en warning, but
there's nae Me like an auld fule. The puir Colonel was only out ance.'

Such conversation contained almost all the good-natured widow knew of
the fate of her late lodgers and acquaintances; but it was enough to
determine Edward, at all hazards, to proceed instantly to Tully-Veolan,
where he concluded he should see, or at least hear, something of Rose.
He therefore left a letter for Colonel Talbot at the place agreed upon,
signed by his assumed name, and giving for his address the post-town
next to the Baron's residence.

From Edinburgh to Perth he took post-horses, resolving to make the rest
of his journey on foot; a mode of travelling to which he was partial,
and which had the advantage of permitting a deviation from the road
when he saw parties of military at a distance. His campaign had
considerably strengthened his constitution and improved his habits of
enduring fatigue. His baggage he sent before him as opportunity
occurred.

As he advanced northward, the traces of war became visible. Broken
carriages, dead horses, unroofed cottages, trees felled for palisades,
and bridges destroyed or only partially repaired--all indicated the
movements of hostile armies. In those places where the gentry were
attached to the Stuart cause, their houses seemed dismantled or
deserted, the usual course of what may be called ornamental labour was
totally interrupted, and the inhabitants were seen gliding about, with
fear, sorrow, and dejection on their faces.

It was evening when he approached the village of Tully-Veolan, with
feelings and sentiments--how different from those which attended his
first entrance! Then, life was so new to him that a dull or
disagreeable day was one of the greatest misfortunes which his
imagination anticipated, and it seemed to him that his time ought only
to be consecrated to elegant or amusing study, and relieved by social
or youthful frolic. Now, how changed! how saddened, yet how elevated
was his character, within the course of a very few months! Danger and
misfortune are rapid, though severe teachers. 'A sadder and a wiser
man,' he felt in internal confidence and mental dignity a compensation
for the gay dreams which in his case experience had so rapidly
dissolved.

As he approached the village he saw, with surprise and anxiety, that a
party of soldiers were quartered near it, and, what was worse, that
they seemed stationary there. This he conjectured from a few tents
which he beheld glimmering upon what was called the Common Moor. To
avoid the risk of being stopped and questioned in a place where he was
so likely to be recognised, he made a large circuit, altogether
avoiding the hamlet, and approaching the upper gate of the avenue by a
by-path well known to him. A single glance announced that great changes
had taken place. One half of the gate, entirely destroyed and split up
for firewood, lay in piles, ready to be taken away; the other swung
uselessly about upon its loosened hinges. The battlements above the
gate were broken and thrown down, and the carved bears, which were said
to have done sentinel's duty upon the top for centuries, now, hurled
from their posts, lay among the rubbish. The avenue was cruelly wasted.
Several large trees were felled and left lying across the path; and the
cattle of the villagers, and the more rude hoofs of dragoon horses, had
poached into black mud the verdant turf which Waverley had so much
admired.

Upon entering the court-yard, Edward saw the fears realised which these
circumstances had excited. The place had been sacked by the King's
troops, who, in wanton mischief, had even attempted to burn it; and
though the thickness of the walls had resisted the fire, unless to a
partial extent, the stables and out-houses were totally consumed. The
towers and pinnacles of the main building were scorched and blackened;
the pavement of the court broken and shattered, the doors torn down
entirely, or hanging by a single hinge, the windows dashed in and
demolished, and the court strewed with articles of furniture broken
into fragments. The accessaries of ancient distinction, to which the
Baron, in the pride of his heart, had attached so much importance and
veneration, were treated with peculiar contumely. The fountain was
demolished, and the spring which had supplied it now flooded the
court-yard. The stone basin seemed to be destined for a drinking-trough
for cattle, from the manner in which it was arranged upon the ground.
The whole tribe of bears, large and small, had experienced as little
favour as those at the head of the avenue, and one or two of the family
pictures, which seemed to have served as targets for the soldiers, lay
on the ground in tatters. With an aching heart, as may well be
imagined, Edward viewed this wreck of a mansion so respected. But his
anxiety to learn the fate of the proprietors, and his fears as to what
that fate might be, increased with every step. When he entered upon the
terrace new scenes of desolation were visible. The balustrade was
broken down, the walls destroyed, the borders overgrown with weeds, and
the fruit-trees cut down or grubbed up. In one compartment of this
old-fashioned garden were two immense horse-chestnut trees, of whose
size the Baron was particularly vain; too lazy, perhaps, to cut them
down, the spoilers, with malevolent ingenuity, had mined them and
placed a quantity of gunpowder in the cavity. One had been shivered to
pieces by the explosion, and the fragments lay scattered around,
encumbering the ground it had so long shadowed. The other mine had been
more partial in its effect. About one-fourth of the trunk of the tree
was torn from the mass, which, mutilated and defaced on the one side,
still spread on the other its ample and undiminished boughs. [Footnote:
A pair of chestnut trees, destroyed, the one entirely and the other in
part, by such a mischievous and wanton act of revenge, grew at
Invergarry Castle, the fastness of MacDonald of Glengarry.]

Amid these general marks of ravage, there were some which more
particularly addressed the feelings of Waverley. Viewing the front of
the building thus wasted and defaced, his eyes naturally sought the
little balcony which more properly belonged to Rose's apartment, her
troisieme, or rather cinquieme, etage. It was easily discovered, for
beneath it lay the stage-flowers and shrubs with which it was her pride
to decorate it, and which had been hurled from the bartizan; several of
her books were mingled with broken flower-pots and other remnants.
Among these Waverley distinguished one of his own, a small copy of
Ariosto, and gathered it as a treasure, though wasted by the wind and
rain.

While, plunged in the sad reflections which the scene excited, he was
looking around for some one who might explain the fate of the
inhabitants, he heard a voice from the interior of the building
singing, in well-remembered accents, an old Scottish song:--

    They came upon us in the night,
    And brake my bower and slew my knight;
    My servants a' for life did flee,
    And left us in extremitie.

    They slew my knight, to me sae dear;
    They slew my knight, and drave his gear;
    The moon may set, the sun may rise,
    But a deadly sleep has closed his eyes.

[Footnote: The first three couplets are from an old ballad, called the
Border Widow's Lament.]

'Alas,' thought Edward, 'is it thou? Poor helpless being, art thou
alone left, to gibber and moan, and fill with thy wild and unconnected
scraps of minstrelsy the halls that protected thee?' He then called,
first low, and then louder, 'Davie--Davie Gellatley!'

The poor simpleton showed himself from among the ruins of a sort of
greenhouse, that once terminated what was called the terrace-walk, but
at first sight of a stranger retreated, as if in terror. Waverley,
remembering his habits, began to whistle a tune to which he was
partial, which Davie had expressed great pleasure in listening to, and
had picked up from him by the ear. Our hero's minstrelsy no more
equalled that of Blondel than poor Davie resembled Coeur de Lion; but
the melody had the same effect of producing recognition. Davie again
stole from his lurking-place, but timidly, while Waverley, afraid of
frightening him, stood making the most encouraging signals he could
devise. 'It's his ghaist,' muttered Davie; yet, coming nearer, he
seemed to acknowledge his living acquaintance. The poor fool himself
appeared the ghost of what he had been. The peculiar dress in which he
had been attired in better days showed only miserable rags of its
whimsical finery, the lack of which was oddly supplied by the remnants
of tapestried hangings, window-curtains, and shreds of pictures with
which he had bedizened his tatters. His face, too, had lost its vacant
and careless air, and the poor creature looked hollow-eyed, meagre,
half-starved, and nervous to a pitiable degree. After long hesitation,
he at length approached Waverley with some confidence, stared him sadly
in the face, and said, 'A' dead and gane--a' dead and gane.'

'Who are dead?' said Waverley, forgetting the incapacity of Davie to
hold any connected discourse.

'Baron, and Bailie, and Saunders Saunderson, and Lady Rose that sang
sae sweet--a' dead and gane--dead and gane;

    But follow, follow me,
    While glowworms light the lea,
    I'll show ye where the dead should be--
      Each in his shroud,
      While winds pipe loud,
      And the red moon peeps dim through the cloud.
    Follow, follow me;
    Brave should he be
    That treads by night the dead man's lea.'

With these words, chanted in a wild and earnest tone, he made a sign to
Waverley to follow him, and walked rapidly towards the bottom of the
garden, tracing the bank of the stream which, it may be remembered, was
its eastern boundary. Edward, over whom an involuntary shuddering stole
at the import of his words, followed him in some hope of an
explanation. As the house was evidently deserted, he could not expect
to find among the ruins any more rational informer.

Davie, walking very fast, soon reached the extremity of the garden, and
scrambled over the ruins of the wall that once had divided it from the
wooded glen in which the old tower of Tully-Veolan was situated. He
then jumped down into the bed of the stream, and, followed by Waverley,
proceeded at a great pace, climbing over some fragments of rock and
turning with difficulty round others. They passed beneath the ruins of
the castle; Waverley followed, keeping up with his guide with
difficulty, for the twilight began to fall. Following the descent of
the stream a little lower, he totally lost him, but a twinkling light
which he now discovered among the tangled copse-wood and bushes seemed
a surer guide. He soon pursued a very uncouth path; and by its guidance
at length reached the door of a wretched hut. A fierce barking of dogs
was at first heard, but it stilled at his approach. A voice sounded
from within, and he held it most prudent to listen before he advanced.

'Wha hast thou brought here, thou unsonsy villain, thou?' said an old
woman, apparently in great indignation. He heard Davie Gellatley in
answer whistle a part of the tune by which he had recalled himself to
the simpleton's memory, and had now no hesitation to knock at the door.
There was a dead silence instantly within, except the deep growling of
the dogs; and he next heard the mistress of the hut approach the door,
not probably for the sake of undoing a latch, but of fastening a bolt.
