following morning before her absence was discovered.

Malcolm tried his best to distract Thekla's thoughts from her parents,
and from the strange situation in which she was placed, and chatted to
her of the events of the war since he had last seen her, of the route
which he intended to adopt, and the prospects of peace. In two hours'
time the girl, unaccustomed to exercise, acknowledged that she was
tired; she therefore took her place in the wagon.

Malcolm covered her up with straw and threw some sacks lightly over
her, and then continued his journey. He travelled all night, and in the
morning stopped at a wayside inn, where his arrival at that hour excited
no surprise, as the peasants often travelled at night, because there was
then less chance of their carts being seized and requisitioned by the
troops. He only stopped a short time to water and feed the oxen, and
to purchase some black bread and cheese. This he did, not because he
required it, for he had an ample supply of provisions in the cart far
more suited for Thekla's appetite than the peasant's fare, but to act
in the usual manner, and so avoid any comment. Thekla was still asleep
under the covering, which completely concealed her. Malcolm journeyed on
until two miles further he came to a wood, then, drawing aside from the
road, he unyoked the oxen and allowed them to lie down, for they had
already made a long journey. Then he woke Thekla, who leaped up gaily
on finding that it was broad daylight. Breakfast was eaten, and after a
four hours' halt they resumed their way, Thekla taking her place in
the wagon again, and being carefully covered up in such a manner that
a passerby would not suspect that anyone was lying under the straw
and sacks at one end of the wagon. Just at midday Malcolm heard the
trampling of horses behind him and saw a party of cavalry coming along
at full gallop. The leader drew rein when he overtook the wagon.

"Have you seen anything," he asked Malcolm, "of two seeming craftsmen, a
man and a boy, journeying along the road?"

Malcolm shook his head. "I have seen no one on foot since I started an
hour since."

Without a word the soldiers went on. They had no reason, indeed,
for believing that those for whom they were in search had taken that
particular road. As soon as Thekla's disappearance had been discovered
by the waiting woman she had hurried to the governor, and with much
perturbation and many tears informed him that the young countess was
missing, and that her couch had not been slept on. The governor had at
once hurried to the spot. The count and countess resolutely refused to
state what had become of their daughter.

The sentries had all been strictly questioned, and it was found that the
mender of clocks had, when he left, been accompanied by an apprentice
whom the sentry previously on duty asserted had not entered with him.
The woman was then closely questioned; she asserted stoutly that she
knew nothing whatever of the affair. The count had commissioned her to
obtain a craftsman to set the clock in order, and she had bethought her
of a young man whose acquaintance she had made some time previously, and
who had informed her in the course of conversation that he had come
from Nuremberg, and was a clockmaker by trade, and was at present out of
work. She had met him, she said, on several occasions, and as he was a
pleasant youth and comely, when he had spoken to her of marriage she
had not been averse, now it was plain he had deceived her; and here she
began to cry bitterly and loudly.

Her story seemed probable enough, for any friend of the count who
had intended to carry off his daughter would naturally have begun by
ingratiating himself with her attendant. She was, however, placed in
confinement for a time. The count and countess were at once removed
to the fortress. Orders were given that the town should be searched
thoroughly, and any person answering to the description which the
governor was able to give of the supposed clockmaker should be arrested,
while parties of horse were despatched along all the roads with orders
to arrest and bring to Prague any craftsman or other person accompanied
by a young boy whom they might overtake by the way. Several innocent
peasants with their sons were pounced upon on the roads and hauled to
Prague; but no news was obtained of the real fugitives, who quietly
pursued their way undisturbed further by the active search which was
being made for them. The anger of the emperor when he heard of the
escape of the prize he had destined for one of his favourite officers
was extreme. He ordered the count to be treated with the greatest
rigour, and declared all his estates and those of his wife forfeited,
the latter part of the sentence being at present inoperative, her
estates being in a part of the country far beyond the range of the
Imperialist troops. The waiting maid was after some weeks' detention
released, as there was no evidence whatever of her complicity in the
affair.

Malcolm continued his journey quietly towards the frontier of Bavaria;
but, on arriving at a small town within a few miles of Pilsen, he
learned that Wallenstein had fallen back with his army to that place.
Much alarmed at the news he determined to turn off by a cross road and
endeavour to avoid the Imperialists. He had not, however, left the place
before a party of Imperialist horse rode in.

Malcolm was at once stopped, and was told that he must accompany the
troops to Pilsen, as they had orders to requisition all carts for the
supply of provisions for the army. Malcolm knew that it was of no use to
remonstrate, but, with many loud grumblings at his hard lot, he moved to
the marketplace, where he remained until all the wagons in the place and
in the surrounding country had been collected.

Loud and bitter were the curses which the peasants uttered at finding
themselves taken from their homes and compelled to perform service for
which the pay, if received at all, would be scanty in the extreme. There
was, however, no help for it; and when all were collected they started
in a long procession guarded by the cavalry for Pilsen. On arriving
there they were ordered to take up their station with the great train of
wagons collected for the supply of the army.

Thekla had from her hiding place heard the conversation, and was
greatly alarmed at finding that they were again in the power of the
Imperialists. No one, however, approached the wagon, and it was not
until darkness had set in that she heard Malcolm's voice whispering to
her to arise quietly.

"We must leave the wagon; it will be impossible for you to remain
concealed here longer, for tomorrow I may be sent out to bring in
supplies. For the present we must remain in Pilsen. The whole country
will be scoured by the troops, and it will not be safe to traverse the
roads. Here in Pilsen no one will think of looking for us.

"Wallenstein's headquarters are the last place where we should be
suspected of hiding, and you may be sure that, however close the search
may be elsewhere, the governor of Prague will not have thought of
informing Wallenstein of an affair so foreign to the business of war as
the escape from the emperor's clutches of a young lady. I have donned my
craftsman dress again, and we will boldly seek for lodgings."

They soon entered the town, which was crowded with troops, searching
about in the poorer quarters.

Malcolm presently found a woman who agreed to let him two rooms. He
accounted for his need for the second room by saying that his young
brother was ill and needed perfect rest and quiet, and that the filing
and hammering which was necessary in his craft prevented the lad from
sleeping. As Malcolm agreed at once to the terms she asked for the
rooms, the woman accepted his statement without doubt. They were soon
lodged in two attics at the top of the house, furnished only with a
table, two chairs, and a truckle bed in each; but Malcolm was well
contented with the shelter he had found.

Seeing that it would be extremely difficult at present to journey
further, he determined to remain some little time in the town, thinking
that he might be able to carry out the instructions which he had
received from Colonel Munro, and to obtain information as to the plans
of Wallenstein and the feelings of the army.

"You will have to remain a prisoner here, Thekla, I am afraid, almost
as strictly as at Prague, for it would not do to risk the discovery that
you are a girl by your appearing in the streets in daylight, and after
dark the streets of the town, occupied by Wallenstein's soldiers, are no
place for any peaceful persons.

"I may as well be here as at Nuremberg," Thekla said, "and as I shall
have you with me instead of being with strangers, the longer we stay
here the better."

The next morning Malcolm sallied out into the town to see if he could
find employment. There was, however, but one clockmaker in Pilsen,
and the war had so injured his trade that he had discharged all his
journeymen, for clocks were still comparatively rare luxuries, and were
only to be seen in the houses of nobles and rich citizens. Knowing that
Wallenstein was devoted to luxury and magnificence, always taking with
him, except when making the most rapid marches, a long train of baggage
and furniture, Malcolm thought it possible that he might obtain some
employment in his apartments. He accordingly went boldly to the castle
where the duke had established himself, and, asking for his steward,
stated that he was a clockmaker from the workshop of the celebrated
horologist, Master Jans Boerhoff, and could repair any clocks or watches
that might be out of order.

"Then you are the very man we need," the steward said. "My master, the
duke, is curious in such matters, and ever carries with him some half
dozen clocks with his other furniture; and, use what care I will in
packing them, the shaking of the wagons is constantly putting them
out of repair. It was but this morning the duke told me to bring a
craftsman, if one capable of the work could be found in the town, and
to get the clocks put in order, for it displeases him if they do not all
keep the time to the same minute. Follow me."

He led the way into the private apartments of the duke. These were
magnificently furnished, the walls being covered with rich velvet
hangings. Thick carpets brought from the East covered the floors.
Indeed, in point of luxury and magnificence, Wallenstein kept up a state
far surpassing that of his Imperial master.

There were several clocks standing on tables and on brackets, for
Wallenstein, although in most respects of a clear and commanding
intellect, was a slave to superstition. He was always accompanied by an
astrologer, who read for him the course of events from the movements of
the stars, who indicated the lucky and unlucky days, and the hours at
which it was not propitious to transact important business. Hence it
was that he placed so great an importance on the exact observance of the
hour by his numerous time pieces.

"Here are some of the clocks," the steward said, indicating them. "Of
course you cannot work here, and they are too heavy to be removed,
besides being too costly to intrust out of my charge, I will have a room
prepared in the castle where you can work. Come again at noon with your
tools, and all shall be in readiness."

At the hour appointed Malcolm again presented himself.

"The duke has given personal instructions," he said, "that a closet
close by shall be fitted up for you, in order that he himself if he
chooses may see you at work."

Malcolm was conducted to a small room near at hand. Here one of the
clocks which had stopped had been placed on the table, and he at once
set to work. He soon discovered that one of the wheels had been shaken
from its place by the jolting of the wagons, and that the clock could be
set going by a few minutes work. As, however, his object was to prolong
his visit to the castle as long as possible, he set to work and took it
entirely to pieces. Two hours later the door opened and a tall handsome
man of commanding presence entered. Malcolm rose and bowed respectfully,
feeling that he was in the presence of the great general.

"You come from Nuremberg," Wallenstein said, "as I am told, and have
learned your craft in the workshop of Master Jans Boerhoff, who is well
known as being the greatest master of his craft."

Malcolm bowed silently.

"It is strange," Wallenstein muttered to himself, "that this young man's
destiny should be connected with mine; and yet the astrologer said that
he who should present himself at the castle nearest to the stroke of
nine this morning would be a factor in my future, and, as my steward
tells me, the clock sounded nine as this young man addressed him." He
then asked Malcolm several questions as to the work upon which he was
engaged, and then said abruptly: "Dost know the day and hour on which
you were born?"

Malcolm was somewhat surprised at the question, for he had not heard the
muttered words of Wallenstein, but he at once replied that he had heard
that he was born at the stroke of midnight on the last day in the year.

The duke said no more, but left the closet and proceeded at once to an
apartment near his own bed chamber, which, although he had arrived but
a few hours previously, had already been fitted up for the use of his
astrologer. The walls were hidden by a plain hanging of scarlet cloth;
a large telescope stood at the window, a chart of the heavens was spread
out on the table, and piles of books stood beside it. On the ceiling the
signs of the zodiac had been painted, and some mystical circles had been
marked out on the floor. A tall spare old man with a long white beard
was seated at the table. He rose when Wallenstein entered.

"I cannot but think," the duke said, "that your calculations must for
once have been mistaken, and that there must have been an error in the
hour, for I see not how the destiny of this craftsman, who seems to be a
simple lad, can in any way be connected with mine."

"I have made the calculation three times, your grace," the old man
replied, "and am sure there is no error."

"He was born," Wallenstein said, "at midnight on December 31st, 1613.
Work out his nativity, and see what stars were in the ascendant, and
whether there are any affinities between us."

"I will do so at once," the astrologer said; "by tonight I shall be able
to give your grace the information you require."

"Tonight," the duke said, "we will go over your calculations together
as to our great enterprise. It is all important that there should be no
mistake. I have for a whole year remained inactive because you told
me that the time had not yet come, and now that you say the propitious
moment is approaching would fain be sure that no error has been
committed. All seems well, the troops are devoted to me, and will
fight against whomsoever I bid them. By lavish gifts and favours I have
attached all my generals firmly to me, and soon this ungrateful emperor
shall feel how rash and foolish he has been to insult the man to whom
alone he owes it that he was not long ago a fugitive and an exile, with
the Swedes victorious masters of his capital and kingdom.

"Have not I alone saved him? Did not I at my own cost raise an army and
stand between him and the victorious Gustavus? Have not I alone of all
his generals checked the triumphant progress of the invaders? And yet
he evades all his promises, he procrastinates and falters. Not one step
does he take to give me the sovereignty of Bohemia which he so solemnly
promised me, and seems to think that it is honour and reward enough for
me to have spent my treasure and blood in his service. But my turn is at
hand, and when the hand which saved his throne shall cast him from it
he will learn how rash he has been to have deceived and slighted me.
And you say that the stars last night all pointed to a favourable
conjunction, and that the time for striking the great blow is at hand?"

"Nothing could be better," the astrologer said; "Jupiter, your own
planet, and Mars are in the ascendant. Saturn is still too near them to
encourage instant action, but he will shortly remove to another house
and then your time will have come."

"So be it," Wallenstein said, "and the sooner the better. Now I will
leave you to your studies, and will ride out to inspect the troops, and
to see that they have all that they need, for they must be kept in the
best of humours at present."



CHAPTER XXII THE CONSPIRACY


The next day Wallenstein again entered Malcolm's workroom and said
abruptly to him: "What deeds of bravery have you performed?"

Malcolm looked astonished.

"In an idle moment," the duke said, "having an interest in nativities
and seeing that you were born between two years, I asked my astrologer
to work out the calculations. He tells me that it was fated that you
should perform deeds of notable bravery while still young. It seemed
the horoscope of a soldier rather than of a craftsman, and so I told the
sage; but he will have it that he has made no mistake."

Malcolm hesitated for a moment; the blind faith which the otherwise
intelligent and capable general placed in the science of astrology was
well known to the world. Should he deny that he had accomplished any
feats, the duke, believing implicitly the statement which his astrologer
had made him, would suspect that he was not what he seemed; he therefore
replied modestly, "I have done no deeds worthy relating to your
excellency, but I once swam across a swollen river to direct some
travellers who would otherwise have perished, and my neighbours were
good enough to say that none in those parts save myself would have
attempted such a feat."

"Ah!" the duke exclaimed in a tone of satisfaction, "as usual the stars
have spoken correctly. Doubtless as great courage is required to swim a
river in flood as to charge into the ranks of the enemy."

So saying Wallenstein left the room, filled with a desire to attach to
himself the young man whom his adviser had assured him was in some
way connected with his destiny. Wallenstein a day or two later offered
Malcolm to take him into his permanent service, saying that he was
frequently plagued by the stoppages of his clocks, and desired to have
a craftsman capable of attending to them on his establishment. He even
told the young man that he might expect promotion altogether beyond his
present station.

Malcolm could not refuse so flattering an offer, and was at once
installed as a member of Wallenstein's household, declining however the
use of the apartment which the steward offered him, saying that he had a
sick brother lodging with him in the town. Mingling with the soldiers in
the evenings Malcolm learned that there were rumours that negotiations
for peace were going on with Saxony and Sweden. This was indeed the
case, but Wallenstein was negotiating on his own behalf, and not on that
of the emperor. So far but little had come of these negotiations, for
Oxenstiern had the strongest doubts of Wallenstein's sincerity, and
believed that he was only trying to gain time and delay operations
by pretended proposals for peace. He could not believe that the great
Imperialist general, the right hand of the emperor, had any real
intention of turning against his master. Towards the end of January
there was some excitement in Pilsen owing to the arrival there of all
the generals of the Imperialist army save only Gallas, Coloredo, and
Altringer.

Malcolm was sure that such a gathering could only have been summoned
by Wallenstein upon some matter of the most vital importance, and he
determined at all hazards to learn what was taking place, in order that
he might enlighten Oxenstiern as to the real sentiments of the duke.
Learning that the principal chamber in the castle had been cleared, and
that a meeting of the officers would take place there in the evening, he
told Thekla when he went home to his meal at midday that she must not be
surprised if he did not return until a late hour. He continued his work
until nearly six o'clock, the time at which the meeting was to begin,
and then extinguishing his light, he made his way through the passages
of the castle until he reached the council chamber, meeting with no
interruption from the domestics, who were by this time familiar with his
person, and who regarded him as one rising in favour with their master.
He waited in the vicinity of the chamber until he saw an opportunity for
entering unobserved, then he stole into the room and secreted himself
behind the arras beneath a table standing against the wall, and where,
being in shadow, the bulge in the hanging would not attract attention.

In a few minutes he heard heavy steps with the clanking of swords and
jingling of spurs, and knew that the council was beginning to assemble.
The hum of conversation rose louder and louder for a quarter of an
