and remember how on his dying bed thy father told thee that, for every
drachm of pleasure purchased on earth by wrong-doing, the dying bed will
be burdened by a talent's weight of remorse. Fearful misery is coming
on Egypt for Nitetis' sake. Cambyses is preparing to make war on us. He
will sweep down on Egypt like a scorching wind from the desert. Much,
which I have staked my nightly sleep and the very marrow of my existence
to bring into existence, will be annihilated. Still I have not lived in
vain. For forty years I have been the careful father and benefactor of a
great nation. Children and children's children will speak of Amasis as
a great, wise and humane king; they will read my name on the great works
which I have built in Sais and Thebes, and will praise the greatness
of my power. Neither shall I be condemned by Osiris and the forty-two
judges of the nether world; the goddess of truth, who holds the
balances, will find that my good deeds outweigh my bad."--Here the king
sighed deeply and remained silent for some time. Then, looking tenderly
at his wife, he said: "Ladice, thou hast been a faithful, virtuous wife
to me. For this I thank thee, and ask thy forgiveness for much. We have
often misunderstood one another. Indeed it was easier for me to accustom
myself to the Greek modes of thought, than for a Greek to understand our
Egyptian ideas. Thou know'st my love of Greek art,--thou know'st how
I enjoyed the society of thy friend Pythagoras, who was thoroughly
initiated in all that we believe and know, and adopted much from us.
He comprehended the deep wisdom which lies in the doctrines that I
reverence most, and he took care not to speak lightly of truths which
our priests are perhaps too careful to hide from the people; for though
the many bow down before that which they cannot understand, they would
be raised and upheld by those very truths, if explained to them. To a
Greek mind our worship of animals presents the greatest difficulty, but
to my own the worship of the Creator in his creatures seems more just
and more worthy of a human being, than the worship of his likeness in
stone. The Greek deities are moreover subject to every human infirmity;
indeed I should have made my queen very unhappy by living in the same
manner as her great god Zeus."

At these words the king smiled, and then went on: "And what has given
rise to this? The Hellenic love of beauty in form, which, in the eye of
a Greek, is superior to every thing else. He cannot separate the body
from the soul, because he holds it to be the most glorious of formed
things, and indeed, believes that a beautiful spirit must necessarily
inhabit a beautiful body. Their gods, therefore, are only elevated human
beings, but we adore an unseen power working in nature and in ourselves.
The animal takes its place between ourselves and nature; its actions
are guided, not, like our own, by the letter, but by the eternal laws
of nature, which owe their origin to the Deity, while the letter is a
device of man's own mind. And then, too, where amongst ourselves do
we find so earnest a longing and endeavor to gain freedom, the highest
good, as among the animals? Where such a regular and well-balanced life
from generation to generation, without instruction or precept?"

Here the king's voice failed. He was obliged to pause for a few moments,
and then continued: "I know that my end is near; therefore enough of
these matters. My son and successor, hear my last wishes and act upon
them; they are the result of experience. But alas! how often have I
seen, that rules of life given by one man to another are useless. Every
man must earn his own experience. His own losses make him prudent, his
own learning wise. Thou, my son, art coming to the throne at a mature
age; thou hast had time and opportunity to judge between right and
wrong, to note what is beneficial and what hurtful, to see and compare
many things. I give thee, therefore, only a few wholesome counsels, and
only fear that though I offer them with my right hand, thou wilt accept
them with the left.

"First, however, I must say that, notwithstanding my blindness, my
indifference to what has been going on during the past months has been
only apparent. I left you to your own devices with a good intention.
Rhodopis told me once one of her teacher AEsop's fables: 'A traveller,
meeting a man on his road, asked him how long it would be before he
reached the nearest town.' 'Go on, go on,' cried the other. 'But I want
to know first when I shall get to the town.' 'Go on, only go on,' was
the answer. The traveller left him with angry words and abuse; but he
had not gone many steps when the man called after him: 'You will be
there in an hour. I could not answer your question until I had seen your
pace.'

"I bore this fable in my mind for my son's sake, and watched in silence
at what pace he was ruling his people. Now I have discovered what I wish
to know, and this is my advice: Examine into everything your self. It
is the duty of every man, but especially of a king, to acquaint himself
intimately with all that concerns the weal or woe of his people. You, my
son, are in the habit of using the eyes and ears of other men instead of
going to the fountain-head yourself. I am sure that your advisers, the
priests, only desire what is good; but... Neithotep, I must beg you to
leave us alone for a few moments."

When the priest was gone the king exclaimed "They wish for what is
good, but good only for themselves. But we are not kings of priests and
aristocrats only, we are kings of a nation! Do not listen to the advice
of this proud caste alone, but read every petition yourself, and, by
appointing Nomarchs devoted to the king and beloved by the people, make
yourself acquainted with the needs and wishes of the Egyptian nation.
It is not difficult to govern well, if you are aware of the state of
feeling in your land. Choose fit men to fill the offices of state. I
have taken care that the kingdom shall be properly divided. The laws are
good, and have proved themselves so; hold fast by these laws, and trust
no one who sets himself above them; for law is invariably wiser than the
individual man, and its transgressor deserves his punishment. The people
understand this well, and are ready to sacrifice themselves for us, when
they see that we are ready to give up our own will to the law. You do
not care for the people. I know their voice is often rude and rough, but
it utters wholesome truths, and no one needs to hear truth more than a
king. The Pharaoh who chooses priests and courtiers for his advisers,
will hear plenty of flattering words, while he who tries to fulfil the
wishes of the nation will have much to suffer from those around him; but
the latter will feel peace in his own heart, and be praised in the ages
to come. I have often erred, yet the Egyptians will weep for me, as one
who knew their needs and considered their welfare like a father. A king
who really knows his duties, finds it an easy and beautiful task to win
the love of the people--an unthankful one to gain the applause of the
great--almost an impossibility to content both.

"Do not forget,--I say it again,--that kings and priests exist for the
people, and not the people for their kings and priests. Honor religion
for its own sake and as the most important means of securing the
obedience of the governed to their governors; but at the same time
show its promulgators that you look on them, not as receptacles, but as
servants, of the Deity. Hold fast, as the law commands, by what is old;
but never shut the gates of your kingdom against what is new, if better.
Bad men break at once with the old traditions; fools only care for what
is new and fresh; the narrowminded and the selfish privileged class
cling indiscriminately to all that is old, and pronounce progress to be
a sin; but the wise endeavor to retain all that has approved itself in
the past, to remove all that has become defective, and to adopt whatever
is good, from whatever source it may have sprung. Act thus, my son.
The priests will try to keep you back--the Greeks to urge you forward.
Choose one party or the other, but beware of indecision--of yielding to
the one to-day, to the other to-morrow. Between two stools a man
falls to the ground. Let the one party be your friends, the other your
enemies; by trying to please both, you will have both opposed to you.
Human beings hate the man who shows kindness to their enemies. In the
last few months, during which you have ruled independently, both parties
have been offended by your miserable indecision. The man who runs
backwards and forwards like a child, makes no progress, and is soon
weary. I have till now--till I felt that death was near--always
encouraged the Greeks and opposed the priests. In the active business of
life, the clever, brave Greeks seemed to me especially serviceable; at
death, I want men who can make me out a pass into the nether regions.
The gods forgive me for not being able to resist words that sound so
like a joke, even in my last hour! They created me and must take me as
I am. I rubbed my hands for joy when I became king; with thee, my son,
coming to the throne is a graver matter.--Now call Neithotep back; I
have still something to say to you both."

The king gave his hand to the high-priest as he entered, saving: "I
leave you, Neithotep, without ill-will, though my opinion that you have
been a better priest than a servant to your king, remains unaltered.
Psamtik will probably prove a more obedient follower than I have been,
but one thing I wish to impress earnestly on you both: Do not dismiss
the Greek mercenaries until the war with the Persians is over, and has
ended we will hope--in victory for Egypt. My former predictions are not
worth anything now; when death draws near, we get depressed, and things
begin to look a little black. Without the auxiliary troops we shall be
hopelessly lost, but with them victory is not impossible. Be clever;
show the Ionians that they are fighting on the Nile for the freedom of
their own country--that Cambyses, if victorious, will not be contented
with Egypt alone, while his defeat may bring freedom to their own
enslaved countrymen in Ionia. I know you agree with me, Neithotep, for
in your heart you mean well to Egypt.--Now read me the prayers. I feel
exhausted; my end must be very near. If I could only forget that poor
Nitetis! had she the right to curse us? May the judges of the dead-may
Osiris--have mercy on our souls! Sit down by me, Ladice; lay thy hand on
my burning forehead. And Psamtik, in presence of these witnesses, swear
to honor and respect thy step-mother, as if thou wert her own child. My
poor wife! Come and seek me soon before the throne of Osiris. A widow
and childless, what hast thou to do with this world? We brought up
Nitetis as our own daughter, and yet we are so heavily punished for her
sake. But her curse rests on us--and only on us;--not on thee, Psamtik,
nor on thy children. Bring my grandson. Was that a tear? Perhaps; well,
the little things to which one has accustomed one's self are generally
the hardest to give up."

        ......................

Rhodopis entertained a fresh guest that evening; Kallias, the son of
Phoenippus, the same who first appeared in our tale as the bearer of
news from the Olympic games.

The lively, cheerful Athenian had just come back from his native
country, and, as an old and tried friend, was not only received by
Rhodopis, but made acquainted with the secret of Sappho's marriage.

Knakias, her old slave, had, it is true, taken in the flag which was
the sign of reception, two days ago; but he knew that Kallias was always
welcome to his mistress, and therefore admitted him just as readily as
he refused every one else.

The Athenian had plenty to tell, and when Rhodopis was called away
on business, he took his favorite Sappho into the garden, joking and
teasing her gaily as they looked out for her lover's coming. But Bartja
did not come, and Sappho began to be so anxious that Kallias called
old Melitta, whose longing looks in the direction of Naukratis were, if
possible, more anxious even than those of her mistress, and told her to
fetch a musical instrument which he had brought with him.

It was a rather large lute, made of gold and ivory, and as he handed
it to Sappho, he said, with a smile: "The inventor of this glorious
instrument, the divine Anakreon, had it made expressly for me, at my
own wish. He calls it a Barbiton, and brings wonderful tones from its
chords--tones that must echo on even into the land of shadows. I have
told this poet, who offers his life as one great sacrifice to the Muses,
Eros and Dionysus, a great deal about you, and he made me promise to
bring you this song, which he wrote on purpose for you, as a gift from
himself.

"Now, what do you say to this song? But by Hercules, child, how pale you
are! Have the verses affected you so much, or are you frightened at this
likeness of your own longing heart? Calm yourself, girl. Who knows what
may have happened to your lover?"

"Nothing has happened,--nothing," cried a gay, manly voice, and in a few
seconds Sappho was in the arms of him she loved.

Kallias looked on quietly, smiling at the wonderful beauty of these two
young lovers.

"But now," said the prince, after Sappho had made him acquainted with
Kallias, "I must go at once to your grandmother. We dare not wait four
days for our wedding. It must be to-day! There is danger in every hour
of delay. Is Theopompus here?"

"I think he must be," said Sappho. "I know of nothing else, that could
keep my grandmother so long in the house. But tell me, what is this
about our marriage? It seems to me..."

"Let us go in first, love. I fancy a thunder-storm must be coming on.
The sky is so dark, and it's so intolerably sultry."

"As you like, only make haste, unless you mean me to die of impatience.
There is not the slightest reason to be afraid of a storm. Since I was
a child there has not been either lightning or thunder in Egypt at this
time of year."

"Then you will see something new to-day," said Kallias, laughing; for a
large drop of rain has just fallen on my bald head, "the Nile-swallows
were flying close to the water as I came here, and you see there is a
cloud coming over the moon already. Come in quickly, or you will get
wet. Ho, slave, see that a black lamb is offered to the gods of the
lower world."

They found Theopompus sitting in Rhodopis' own apartment, as Sappho had
supposed. He had finished telling her the story of Zopyrus' arrest, and
of the journey which Bartja and his friends had taken on his behalf.

Their anxiety on the matter was beginning to be so serious, that
Bartja's unexpected appearance was a great relief. His words flew as he
repeated the events of the last few hours, and begged Theopompus to
look out at once for a ship in sailing order, to convey himself and his
friends from Egypt.

"That suits famously," exclaimed Kallias. "My own trireme brought me
from Naukratis to-day; it is lying now, fully equipped for sea, in the
port, and is quite at your service. I have only to send orders to
the steersman to keep the crew together and everything in sailing
order.--You are under no obligations to me; on the contrary it is I
who have to thank you for the honor you will confer on me. Ho,
Knakias!--tell my slave Philomelus, he's waiting in the hall,--to take a
boat to the port, and order my steersman Nausarchus to keep the ship in
readiness for starting. Give him this seal; it empowers him to do all
that is necessary."

"And my slaves?" said Bartja.

"Knakias can tell my old steward to take them to Kallias' ship,"
answered Theopompus.

"And when they see this," said Bartja, giving the old servant his ring,
"they will obey without a question."

Knakias went away with many a deep obeisance, and the prince went on:
"Now, my mother, I have a great petition to ask of you."

"I guess what it is," said Rhodopis, with a smile. "You wish your
marriage to be hastened, and I see that I dare not oppose your wish."

"If I'm not mistaken," said Kallias, "we have a remarkable case here.
Two people are in great peril, and find that very peril a matter of
rejoicing."

"Perhaps you are right there," said Bartja, pressing Sappho's hand
unperceived. And then, turning to Rhodopis again, he begged her to delay
no longer in trusting her dearest treasure to his care,--a treasure
whose worth he knew so well.

Rhodopis rose, she laid her right hand on Sappho's head and her left on
Bartja's, and said: "There is a myth which tells of a blue lake in the
land of roses; its waves are sometimes calm and gentle, but at others
they rise into a stormy flood; the taste of its waters is partly sweet
as honey, partly bitter as gall. Ye will learn the meaning of this
legend in the marriage-land of roses. Ye will pass calm and stormy-sweet
and bitter hours there. So long as thou wert a child, Sappho, thy life
passed on like a cloudless spring morning, but when thou becam'st a
maiden, and hadst learnt to love, thine heart was opened to admit pain;
and during the long months of separation pain was a frequent guest
there. This guest will seek admission as long as life lasts. Bartja, it
will be your duty to keep this intruder away from Sappho, as far as it
lies in your power. I know the world. I could perceive,--even before
Croesus told me of your generous nature,--that you were worthy of my
Sappho. This justified me in allowing you to eat the quince with her;
this induces me now to entrust to you, without fear, what I have always
looked upon as a sacred pledge committed to my keeping. Look upon
her too only as a loan. Nothing is more dangerous to love, than a
comfortable assurance of exclusive possession--I have been blamed for
allowing such an inexperienced child to go forth into your distant
country, where custom is so unfavorable to women; but I know what love
is;--I know that a girl who loves, knows no home but the heart of her
husband;--the woman whose heart has been touched by Eros no misfortune
but that of separation from him whom she has chosen. And besides, I
would ask you, Kallias and Theopompus, is the position of your own wives
so superior to that of the Persian women? Are not the women of Ionia and
Attica forced to pass their lives in their own apartments, thankful
if they are allowed to cross the street accompanied by suspicious and
distrustful slaves? As to the custom which prevails in Persia of taking
many wives, I have no fear either for Bartja or Sappho. He will be more
faithful to his wife than are many Greeks, for he will find in her what
you are obliged to seek, on the one hand in marriage, on the other in
the houses of the cultivated Hetaere:--in the former, housewives and
mothers, in the latter, animated and enlivening intellectual society.
Take her, my son. I give her to you as an old warrior gives his sword,
his best possession, to his stalwart son:--he gives it gladly and with
confidence. Whithersoever she may go she will always remain a Greek, and
it comforts me to think that in her new home she will bring honor to
the Greek name and friends to our nation, Child, I thank thee for those
tears. I can command my own, but fate has made me pay an immeasurable
price for the power of doing so. The gods have heard your oath, my noble
Bartja. Never forget it, but take her as your own, your friend, your
wife. Take her away as soon as your friends return; it is not the
will of the gods that the Hymenaeus should be sung at Sappho's nuptial
rites."

As she said these words she laid Sappho's hand in Bartja's, embraced her
with passionate tenderness, and breathed a light kiss on the forehead of
the young Persian. Then turning to her Greek friends, who stood by, much
affected:

"That was a quiet nuptial ceremony," she said; "no songs, no
torch-light! May their union be so much the happier. Melitta, bring the
bride's marriage-ornaments, the bracelets and necklaces which lie in the
bronze casket on my dressing-table, that our darling may give her hand
to her lord attired as beseems a future princess."

"Yes, and do not linger on the way," cried Kallias, whose old
cheerfulness had now returned. "Neither can we allow the niece of the
greatest of Hymen's poets to be married without the sound of song and
music. The young husband's house is, to be sure, too far off for our
purpose, so we will suppose that the andronitis is his dwelling.

   [The Hymenaeus was the wedding-song, so called because of its
   refrain "Hymen O! Hymenae' O!" The god of marriage, Hymen, took
   his origin and name from the hymn, was afterwards decked out richly
   with myths, and finally, according to Catullus, received a seat on
   Mount Helikon with the Muses.]

   [A Greek bride was beautifully adorned for her marriage, and her
   bridesmaids received holiday garments. Homer, Odyss. VI. 27.
   Besides which, after the bath, which both bride and bridegroom were
   obliged to take, she was anointed with sweet-smelling essences.
   Thucyd. II. 15. Xenoph. Symp. II. 3.]

"We will conduct the maiden thither by the centre door, and there we
will enjoy a merry wedding-feast by the family hearth. Here, slavegirls,
come and form yourselves into two choruses. Half of your number take
the part of the youths; the other half that of the maidens, and sing us
Sappho's Hymenaeus. I will be the torch-bearer; that dignity is mine by
right. You must know, Bartja, that my family has an hereditary right
to carry the torches at the Eleusinian mysteries and we are therefore
called Daduchi or torch-bearers. Ho, slave! see that the door of the
andronitis is hung with flowers, and tell your comrades to meet us with
a shower of sweetmeats as we enter. That's right, Melitta; why, how did
you manage to get those lovely violet and myrtle marriage-crowns made so
quickly? The rain is streaming through the opening above. You see, Hymen
has persuaded Zeus to help him; so that not a single marriage-rite shall
be omitted. You could not take the bath, which ancient custom prescribes
for the bride and bridegroom on the morning of their wedding-day, so
you have only to stand here a moment and take the rain of Zeus as an
equivalent for the waters of the sacred spring. Now, girls, begin your
song. Let the maidens bewail the rosy days of childhood, and the youths
praise the lot of those who marry young."

Five well-practised treble voices now began to sing the chorus of
virgins in a sad and plaintive tone.

Suddenly the song was hushed, for a flash of lightning had shone down
through the aperture beneath which Kallias had stationed the bride
and bridegroom, followed by a loud peal of thunder. "See!" cried the
Daduchus, raising his hand to heaven, "Zeus himself has taken the
nuptial-torch, and sings the Hymenaeus for his favorites."

At dawn the next morning, Sappho and Bartja left the house and went
into the garden. After the violent storm which had raged all night, the
garden was looking as fresh and cheerful in the morning light as the
faces of the newly-married pair.

Bartja's anxiety for his friends, whom he had almost forgotten in the
excitement of his marriage, had roused them so early.

The garden had been laid out on an artificial hill, which overlooked
the inundated plain. Blue and white lotus-blossoms floated on the smooth
surface of the water, and vast numbers of water-birds hovered along the
shores or over the flood. Flocks of white, herons appeared on the
banks, their plumage gleaming like glaciers on distant mountain peaks;
a solitary eagle circled upward on its broad pinions through the
pure morning air, turtle-doves nestled in the tops of the palm-trees;
pelicans and ducks fluttered screaming away, whenever a gay sail
appeared. The air had been cooled by the storm, a fresh north-wind was
blowing, and, notwithstanding the early hour, there were a number of
boats sailing over the deluged fields before the breeze. The songs of
the rowers, the plashing strokes of their oars and the cries of the
birds, all contributed to enliven the watery landscape of the Nile
valley, which, though varied in color, was somewhat monotonous.

Bartja and Sappho stood leaning on each other by the low wall which ran
round Rhodopis' garden, exchanging tender words and watching the scene
below, till at last Bartja's quick eye caught sight of a boat making
straight for the house and coming on fast by the help of the breeze and
powerful rowers.

A few minutes later the boat put in to shore and Zopyrus with his
deliverers stood before them.

Darius's plan had succeeded perfectly, thanks to the storm, which, by
its violence and the unusual time of its appearance, had scared
the Egyptians; but still there was no time to be lost, as it might
reasonably be supposed that the men of Sais would pursue their fugitive
with all the means at their command.

Sappho, therefore, had to take a short farewell of her grandmother, all
the more tender, however, for its shortness,--and then, led by Rartja
and followed by old Melitta, who was to accompany her to Persia, she
went on board Syloson's boat. After an hour's sail they reached a
beautifully-built and fast-sailing vessel, the Hygieia, which belonged
to Kallias.

He was waiting for them on board his trireme. The leave-taking between
himself and his young friends was especially affectionate. Bartja hung
a heavy and costly gold chain round the neck of the old man in token
of his gratitude, while Syloson, in remembrance of the dangers they had
shared together, threw his purple cloak over Darius' shoulders. It was
a master-specimen of Tynan dye, and had taken the latter's fancy. Darius
accepted the gift with pleasure, and said, as he took leave: "You must
never forget that I am indebted to you, my Greek friend, and as soon as
possible give me an opportunity of doing you service in return."

"You ought to come to me first, though," exclaimed Zopyrus, embracing
his deliverer. "I am perfectly ready to share my last gold piece with
you; or what is more, if it would do you a service, to sit a whole week
in that infernal hole from which you saved me. Ah! they're weighing
anchor. Farewell, you brave Greek. Remember me to the flower-sisters,
especially to the pretty, little Stephanion, and tell her her
long-legged lover won't be able to plague her again for some time to
come at least. And then, one more thing; take this purse of gold for the
wife and children of that impertinent fellow, whom I struck too hard in
the heat of the fray."

The anchors fell rattling on to the deck, the wind filled the sails,
the Trieraules--[Flute-player to a trireme]--took his flute and set the
measure of the monotonous Keleusma or rowing-song, which echoed again
from the hold of the vessel. The beak of the ship bearing the statue of
Hygieia, carved in wood, began to move. Bartja and Sappho stood at the
helm and gazed towards Naukratis, until the shores of the Nile vanished
and the green waves of the Hellenic sea splashed their foam over the
deck of the trireme.




CHAPTER XII.

Our young bride and bridegroom had not travelled farther than Ephesus,
when the news reached them that Amasis was dead. From Ephesus they
went to Babylon, and thence to Pasargadae, which Kassandane, Atossa and
Croesus had made their temporary residence. Kassandane was to accompany
the army to Egypt, and wished, now that Nebenchari had restored her
sight, to see the monument which had lately been built to her great
husband's memory after Croesus' design, before leaving for so long a
journey. She rejoiced in finding it worthy of the great Cyrus, and spent
hours every day in the beautiful gardens which had been laid out round
the mausoleum.

It consisted of a gigantic sarcophagus made of solid marble blocks,
and resting like a house on a substructure composed of six high marble
steps. The interior was fitted up like a room, and contained, beside the
golden coffin in which were preserved such few remains of Cyrus as had
been spared by the dogs, vultures, and elements, a silver bed and a
table of the same metal, on which were golden drinking-cups and numerous
garments ornamented with the rarest and most costly jewels.

The building was forty feet high. The shady paradises--[Persian
pleasure-gardens]--and colonnades by which it was surrounded had
been planned by Croesus, and in the midst of the sacred grove was a
dwelling-house for the Magi appointed to watch over the tomb.

The palace of Cyrus could be seen in the distance--a palace in which he
had appointed that the future kings of Persia should pass at least
some months of every year. It was a splendid building in the style of
a fortress, and so inaccessibly placed that it had been fixed on as the
royal treasure-house.

Here, in the fresh mountain air of a place dedicated to the memory of
the husband she had loved so much, Kassandane felt well and at peace;
she was glad too to see that Atossa was recovering the old cheerfulness,
which she had so sadly lost since the death of Nitetis and the departure
of Darius. Sappho soon became the friend of her new mother and sister,
and all three felt very loath to leave the lovely Pasargadm.

Darius and Zopyrus had remained with the army which was assembling in
the plains of the Euphrates, and Bartja too had to return thither before
the march began.

Cambyses went out to meet his family on their return; he was much
impressed with Sappho's great beauty, but she confessed to her husband
that his brother only inspired her with fear.

The king had altered very much in the last few months. His formerly pale
and almost noble features were reddened and disfigured by the quantities
of wine he was in the habit of drinking. In his dark eyes there was the
old fire still, but dimmed and polluted. His hair and beard, formerly so
luxuriant, and black as the raven's wing, hung down grey and disordered
over his face and chin, and the proud smile which used so to improve his
features had given way to an expression of contemptuous annoyance and
harsh severity.

Sometimes he laughed,--loudly, immoderately and coarsely; but this was
only when intoxicated, a condition which had long ceased to be unusual
with him.

He continued to retain an aversion to his wives; so much so that the
royal harem was to be left behind in Susa, though all his court took
their favorite wives and concubines with them on the campaign. Still no
one could complain that the king was ever guilty of injustice; indeed he
insisted more eagerly now than before on the rigid execution of the
law; and wherever he detected an abuse his punishments were cruel and
inexorable. Hearing that a judge, named Sisamnes, had been bribed
to pronounce an unjust sentence, he condemned the wretched man to
be flayed, ordered the seat of justice to be covered with his skin,
appointed the son to the father's vacant place and compelled him to
occupy this fearful seat.--[Herodot. V. 25.]--Cambyses was untiring as
commander of the forces, and superintended the drilling of the troops
assembled near Babylon with the greatest rigor and circumspection.

The hosts were to march after the festival of the New Year, which
Cambyses celebrated this time with immense expense and profusion. The
ceremony over, he betook himself to the army. Bartja was there. He came
up to his brother, beaming with joy, kissed the hem of his robe, and
told him in a tone of triumph that he hoped to become a father. The king
trembled as he heard the words, vouchsafed his brother no answer, drank
himself into unconsciousness that evening, and the next morning called
the soothsayers, Magi and Chaldaeans together, in order to submit a
question to them. "Shall I be committing a sin against the gods, if I
take my sister to wife and thus verify the promise of the dream, which
ye formerly interpreted to mean that Atossa should bear a future king to
this realm?"

The Magi consulted a short time together. Then Oropastes cast himself at
the king's feet and said, "We do not believe, O King, that this marriage
would be a sin against the gods; inasmuch as, first: it is a custom
among the Persians to marry with their own kin; and secondly, though it
be not written in the law that the pure man may marry his sister, it
is written that the king may do what seemeth good in his own eyes. That
which pleaseth thee is therefore always lawful."

Cambyses sent the Magi away with rich gifts, gave Oropastes full
powers as regent of the kingdom in his absence, and soon after told
his horrified mother that, as soon as the conquest of Egypt and the
punishment of the son of Amasis should have been achieved, he intended
to marry his sister Atossa.

At length the immense host, numbering more than 800,000 fighting men,
departed in separate divisions, and reached the Syrian desert in
two months. Here they were met by the Arabian tribes whom Phanes had
propitiated--the Amalekites and Geshurites--bringing camels and horses
laden with water for the host.

At Accho, in the land of the Canaanites, the fleets of the Syrians,
Phoenicians and Ionians belonging to Persia, and the auxiliary ships
from Cyprus and Samos, won by the efforts of Phanes, were assembled.
The case of the Samian fleet was a remarkable one. Polykrates saw in
Cambyses' proposal a favorable opportunity of getting rid of all
the citizens who were discontented with his government, manned forty
triremes with eight thousand malcontent Samians, and sent them to
the Persians with the request that not one might be allowed to return
home.--[Herod. III. 44.]

As soon as Phanes heard this he warned the doomed men, who at once,
instead of sailing to join the Persian forces, returned to Samos and
attempted to overthrow Polykrates. They were defeated, however, on land,
and escaped to Sparta to ask help against the tyrant.

A full month before the time of the inundation, the Persian and Egyptian
armies were standing face to face near Pelusium on the north-east coast
of the Delta.

Phanes' arrangements had proved excellent. The Arabian tribes had kept
faith so well that the journey through the desert, which would usually
have cost thousands of lives, had been attended with very little loss,
and the time of year had been so well chosen that the Persian troops
reached Egypt by dry roads and without inconvenience.

The king met his Greek friend with every mark of distinction, and
returned a friendly nod when Phanes said: "I hear that you have been
less cheerful than usual since the death of your beautiful bride. A
woman's grief passes in stormy and violent complaint, but the sterner
character of a man cannot so soon be comforted. I know what you feel,
for I have lost my dearest too. Let us both praise the gods for granting
us the best remedy for our grief--war and revenge." Phanes accompanied
the king to an inspection of the troops and to the evening revel. It was
marvellous to see the influence he exercised over this fierce spirit,
and how calm--nay even cheerful--Cambyses became, when the Athenian was
near.

The Egyptian army was by no means contemptible, even when compared with
the immense Persian hosts. Its position was covered on the right by the
walls of Pelusium, a frontier fortress designed by the Egyptian kings as
a defence against incursions from the east. The Persians were assured by
deserters that the Egyptian army numbered altogether nearly six hundred
thousand men. Beside a great number of chariots of war, thirty thousand
Karian and Ionian mercenaries, and the corps of the Mazai, two
hundred and fifty thousand Kalasirians, one hundred and sixty thousand
Hermotybians, twenty thousand horsemen, and auxiliary troops, amounting
to more than fifty thousand, were assembled under Psamtik's banner;
amongst these last the Libyan Maschawascha were remarkable for their
military deeds, and the Ethiopians for their numerical superiority.

The infantry were divided into regiments and companies, under different
standards, and variously equipped.

   [In these and the descriptions immediately following, we have drawn
   our information, either from the drawings made from Egyptian
   monuments in Champollion, Wilkinson, Rosellini and Lepsius, or from
   the monuments themselves. There is a dagger in the Berlin Museum,
   the blade of which is of bronze, the hilt of ivory and the sheath of
   leather. Large swords are only to be seen in the hands of the
   foreign auxiliaries, but the native Egyptians are armed with small
   ones, like daggers. The largest one of which we have any knowledge
   is in the possession of Herr E. Brugsch at Cairo. It is more than
   two feet long.]

The heavy-armed soldiers carried large shields, lances, and daggers; the
swordsmen and those who fought with battle-axes had smaller shields and
light clubs; beside these, there were slingers, but the main body of the
army was composed of archers, whose bows unbent were nearly the height
of a man. The only clothing of the horse-soldiers was the apron, and
their weapon a light club in the form of a mace or battle-axe. Those
warriors, on the contrary, who fought in chariots belonged to the
highest rank of the military caste, spent large sums on the decoration
of their two-wheeled chariots and the harness of their magnificent
horses, and went to battle in their most costly ornaments. They were
armed with bows and lances, and a charioteer stood beside each, so that
their undivided attention could be bestowed upon the battle.

The Persian foot was not much more numerous than the Egyptian, but they
had six times the number of horse-soldiers.

As soon as the armies stood face to face, Cambyses caused the great
Pelusian plain to be cleared of trees and brushwood, and had the
sand-hills removed which were to be found here and there, in order to
give his cavalry and scythe-chariots a fair field of action. Phanes'
knowledge of the country was of great use. He had drawn up a plan of
action with great military skill, and succeeded in gaining not only
Cambyses' approval, but that of the old general Megabyzus and the best
tacticians among the Achaemenidae. His local knowledge was especially
valuable on account of the marshes which intersected the Pelusian plain,
and might, unless carefully avoided, have proved fatal to the Persian
enterprise. At the close of the council of war Phanes begged to be heard
once more: "Now, at length," he said, "I am at liberty to satisfy your
curiosity in reference to the closed waggons full of animals, which I
have had transported hither. They contain five thousand cats! Yes, you
may laugh, but I tell you these creatures will be more serviceable to us
than a hundred thousand of our best soldiers. Many of you are aware that
the Egyptians have a superstition which leads them rather to die than
kill a cat, I, myself, nearly paid for such a murder once with my life.
Remembering this, I have been making a diligent search for cats during
my late journey; in Cyprus, where there are splendid specimens, in Samos
and in Crete. All I could get I ordered to be caught, and now propose
that they be distributed among those troops who will be opposed to the
native Egyptian soldiers. Every man must be told to fasten one firmly
to his shield and hold it out as he advances towards the enemy. I will
wager that there's not one real Egyptian, who would not rather fly from
the battle-field than take aim at one of these sacred animals."

