not; and when at length the physician called her by her name, when she
turned from the curtain and once more looked out, instead of the sublime
image of the god she saw in the niche a shapeless log of wood, a hideous
mass against which several ladders were propped, while the ground was
heaped and strewed with scraps of ivory, fragments of gold-plate, and
chips of marble. Constantine had disappeared; the ladders and the plinth
of the statue were covered with a swarm of soldiers and monks who were
finishing the work of destruction. As soon as the young officer had
struck the first blow, and the god had submitted in abject impotence,
they had rushed upon him and saved their captain the trouble of ending
the task he had begun.

The great idol was desecrated. Serapis was no more--the heaven of the
heathen had lost its king. The worshippers of the deposed god, sullen,
furious, and bitterly disabused, made their way out of the temple and
looked up at the serene blue sky, the unclouded sunshine, for some
symptoms of an avenging tempest; but in vain.

Theophilus had also quitted the scene with the Comes, leaving the
work of devastation in the competent hands of the monks. He knew his
skin-clad adherents well; and he knew that within a very few days not
an idol, not a picture, not a token would remain intact to preserve the
memory of the old gods; a thousand slaves charged to sweep the Serapeum
from the face of the earth would have given his impatience twenty times
as long to wait. The Comes went off at once to the Hippodrome, preceded
by hundreds who had hurried off to tell the assembled multitude that
Alexandria had lost her god.

Constantine, however, had not left the temple; he had withdrawn into one
of the aisles and seated himself on the steps, where he remained, sunk
in thought and gazing at the ground. He was a soldier and took service
and discipline in earnest. What he had done he had been forced to
do; but no one could guess how hard it had been to him to fulfil this
terrible duty. His own act was abominable in his eyes, and yet he would
have done it again to-morrow, if it had again been required of him
under similar circumstances. He bewailed the beautiful statue as a lost
treasure of art; but he felt that it was indispensable that it should
perish out of the world. And at the same time he thought of Gorgo,
wondering how she--who had only the day before pledged herself to him,
whom he loved with fervent passion, to whom, as he well knew, his faith
was something monstrous in its contempt for beauty--would bear to learn
that he, her lover, was the man who, like some coarse barbarian, had
defaced this noble work and ruined this vision of beauty, no less dear
to him than it was to her. Still, as he sat brooding and searching the
very depths of his soul, he could not help feeling that he had certainly
acted rightly and would do the same again, even at the risk of losing
her. To him Gorgo, was the noblest of God's creatures, and how could he
have borne to go through life at her side with a stain on his honor? But
he did not conceal from himself the fact that his deed had opened a
wide gulf between them; and it was with deep pathos that his thoughts
recurred to the antique conception of tragedy--of fate which pursues
its innocent victims as though they were guilty. This day perhaps would
witness the sunset of his life's joy, would drive him forth once more to
war--to fight, and do nothing but fight, till death should meet him on
the battle-field. And as he sat there his eyes grew dim and heavy and
his head fell on his heaving breast.

Suddenly he felt a light touch on his shoulder, and turning round, he
saw Gorgo standing with her hand outstretched; he started to his feet,
seized it with eager passion and looking sadly into the young girl's
eyes said, with deep emotion:

"I would I might hold this hand forever--but you will leave me, you will
turn from me when I tell you of the deed that mine has done."

"I know it," she said firmly. "And it was a hard task even for you--a
painful duty--was it not?"

"Terrible! horrible!" he exclaimed with a shudder, as he recalled the
feelings of that momentous instant. She looked sympathetically into his
eyes.

"And you did it," she cried, "because you felt that you must and will
be wholly what you profess to be? It is right--the only right; I feel it
so. I will try to imitate you, and rise above the half-heartedness
which is the bane of existence, and which makes the firm path of life a
trembling, swaying bridge. I am yours, wholly yours; I have none other
gods but yours, and for love of you I will learn to love your God--for
you have often and often called him a God of Love."

"And He is a God of Love!" cried Constantine, "and you will know him and
confess him even without teaching; for our Saviour lives in every heart
that is filled with love. Oh! Gorgo, I have destroyed that beautiful
idol, but I will let you see that even a Christian can duly value and
cherish beauty in his home and in his heart."

"I am sure of it," she exclaimed joyfully. "The world goes on its way
and does not quake, in spite of the fall of Serapis; but I feel as
though in my inmost soul a world had perished and a new one was created,
nobler and purer, and perhaps even more lovely than the old one!"

He pressed her hand to his lips; she signed to him to follow her and led
the way to her father's couch. Porphyrius was sitting up, supported in
the physician's arms; his eyes were open, and as they entered he greeted
them with a faint smile.




CHAPTER XXV.

The spacious Hippodrome was filled with some thousands of spectators. At
first many rows of seats had been left vacant, though usually on the
eve of the great races, the people would set out soon after midnight
and every place would be filled long before the games began; indeed the
upper tiers of the tribune, which were built of wood and were free to
all comers, with standing-room behind, were commonly so crowded early in
the morning that the crush ended in a free fight.

On this occasion, the storm of the previous night, the anxiety caused
by the conflict round the Serapeum, and the prevalent panic as to
the approaching end of the world, kept great numbers away from their
favorite diversion; but when the sky recovered its radiant blue, and
when it became known that the statue of Serapis had escaped uninjured
in the siege of his sanctuary--when Cynegius, the Imperial legate, and
Evagrius, the city-prefect, had entered the theatre with much
pomp, followed by several senators and ladies and gentlemen of
rank-Christians, Heathen, and Jews--the most timid took courage; the
games had been postponed for an hour, and before the first team was led
into the arched shed whence the chariots started, the seats, though less
densely packed than usual, were amply filled.

The number of chariots entered for competition was by no means smaller
than on former occasions, for the heathen had strained every nerve to
show their fellow-citizens of different creeds, and especially Caesar's
representative, that, in spite of persecution and in defiance of
Imperial edicts, they were still a power worthy of consideration. The
Christians, on their part, did their utmost to outdo the idolaters on
the same ground where, not long since, they had held quite the second
place.

The Bishop's epigram: That Christianity had ceased to be the religion of
the poor, was amply confirmed; the greater proportion of the places for
senators, officials and rich citizens were occupied by its adherents,
and the men and women who professed the Faith were by no means behind
their heathen peers in magnificence of dress and jewels.

The horses, too, entered by the Christians could not fail to please
the connoisseur, as they punctually made their appearance behind the
starting-place, though he might have felt more confidence--and not
without reason--in the heathen steeds, and more particularly in their
drivers, each of whom had won on an average nine races out of ten.

The horses in the quadriga with which Marcus, the son of Mary, made his
appearance in the arena had never before been driven in the Hippodrome.
Demetrius, the owner's brother, had bred and trained them--four
magnificent black Arabs--and they excited much interest among the
knowing judges who were wont to collect and lounge about the 'oppidum',
as it was called, behind the 'carceres'--[The covered sheds or stalls
in which the horses were brought to wait for the start.]--to inspect the
racers, predict the winner, offer counsel to the drivers, and make
bets. These perfect creatures were perhaps as fine as the famous team
of golden bays belonging to Iphicrates, which so often had proved
victorious; but the agitatores, or drivers, attracted even more interest
than the horses. Marcus, though he knew how to handle the reins--he
had already been seen in experimental races--could hardly hold his
own against Hippias, the handsome young heathen, who, like most of the
drivers in the arena, was an agitator by profession. A story was told
of his having driven over a bridge which was not quite as wide as the
outside edges of his chariot-wheels; and there were many witnesses
to the feat he had performed of writing his mistress' name with his
chariot-tracks in the sand of the Hippodrome.

The betting was freest and the wagers highest on Hippias and the team
belonging to Iphicrates. Some few backed Marcus and his Arabs, but for
smaller sums; and when they compared the tall but narrow-shouldered
figure of the young Christian with the heroic breadth of Hippias' frame,
and his delicate features, dreamy blue eyes and downy black moustache
with the powerful Hermes-head of his rival, they were anxious about
their money. If his brother now, the farmer Demetrius--who was standing
by the horses' heads--or some well-known agitator had held the reins, it
would have been a pleasure and a profit to back such horses. Marcus had
been abroad, too, and men shrugged their shoulders over that, for it was
not till the last few days that he had been seen exercising his horses
in the Hippodrome.

Time was going on, and the Imperial envoy, who had been elected to
preside as judge, at length took his place; Demetrius whispered a few
last words of advice to his brother and went back into the arena. He had
secured a good place on the stone podium and on the shady side, though
there were several seats vacant among those belonging to his family; but
he did not care to occupy one of these, preferring to keep out of the
way of his step-mother, who had made her appearance with a senator and
his wife to whom she was related. He had not seen her for two days; his
promise to Karnis that he would try to find Dada, had kept him fully
occupied, and he had done his best in all earnest to discover the girl.

The honest indignation with which this young creature had refused his
splendid offers, in spite of the modest circumstances of her life, had
roused his respect, and he had felt it an insult to himself and to his
brother when Gorgo had spoken of her with contempt. For his part, he had
never met with any one more fascinating; he could not cease dreaming of
her, and the thought that she might be swallowed up in the foul mire of
a great city made him miserable. His brother had the first claim on
her and he would not dispute it; while he had sought her unweariedly
in every resort of the young and gay--nay even in Canopus--he had only
meant to place her in safety, as a treasure which runs a risk of being
lost to the family, though, when at last its possession is secured,
it becomes the property of the member who can prove the best right
of ownership. But all his efforts had been in vain; and it was in an
unhappy mood that he went at last to the Hippodrome. There the bitter
hostility and party-feeling which he had everywhere observed during his
present visit to his native city, were not less conspicuous than they
had been in the streets. The competing chariots usually arrived at
the amphitheatre in grand procession, but this had not been thought
advisable in the prevailing excitement; they had driven into the oppidum
singly and without any display; and the images of the gods, which in
former days had always been placed on the spina before the games began,
had long since fallen into disuse.

   [The spina was the division down the middle of the arena. At each
   end of it were placed the metae or goals, at a distance from it of
   about 13 feet. The spina was originally constructed of wood,
   subsequently it was of stone, and its height was generally about 29
   feet. The spina in the Circus of Caracalla was more than 900 feet
   long.]

All this was vexatious to Demetrius, and when he had taken his seat
it was in no pleasant temper that he looked round at the ranks of
spectators.

His step-mother was sitting on the stuffed bench covered with lion-skins
which was reserved for the family. Her tunic and skirt displayed the
color blue of the Christian charioteer, being made of bright blue and
silver brocade of a beautiful pattern in which the cross, the fish, and
the olive-branch were elegantly combined. Her black hair was closely and
simply smoothed over her temples and she wore no garland, but a string
of large grey pearls, from which hung a chaplet of sapphires and opals,
lying on her forehead. A veil fell over the back of her head and she sat
gazing into her lap as if she were absorbed in prayer; her hands were
folded and held a cross. This placid and demure attitude she deemed
becoming to a Christian matron and widow. Everyone might see that she
had not come for worldly pleasure, but merely to be present at a triumph
of her fellow-Christians--and especially her son--over the idolaters.
Everything about her bore witness to the Faith, even the pattern on her
dress and the shape of her ornaments; down to the embroidery on her silk
gloves, in which a cross and an anchor were so designed as to form a
Greek X, the initial letter of the name of Christ. Her ambition was to
appear simple and superior to all worldly vanities; still, all she wore
must be rich and costly, for she was here to do honor to her creed. She
would have regarded it as a heathen abomination to wear wreaths of fresh
and fragrant flowers, though for the money which that string of pearls
had cost she might have decked the circus with garlands from end to end,
or have fed a hundred poor for a twelvemonth. It seems so much easier to
cheat the omniscient Creator of the Universe than our fellow-fools!

So Dame Maria sat there in sour and virtuous dignity, looking like
the Virgin Mary as painters and sculptors were at that time wont to
represent her; and her farmer-son shuddered whenever his eye fell on
his step-mother. It did him good, by contrast, to hear a hearty peal of
laughter that came up from the lowest ranks of the podium. When he had
discovered the spot from whence it proceeded he could hardly believe his
eyes, for there sat the long-sought Dada, between an old man and a
young woman, laughing as though something had just occurred to amuse her
extremely. Demetrius stretched his limbs with a feeling of relief and
satisfaction; then he rose, and seeing his city agent seated just behind
the girl, he begged him to change places with him, as he thought it
advisable not to lose sight of the game now it was caught; the old
man was very ready to oblige him and went up to the other seat with a
meaning smile.

For the first time since she could recollect anything Dada had spent
a sleepless night. Whether the wind and thunder would have sufficed to
keep her awake who can tell; but the thoughts that had whirled through
her brain had been varied and exciting enough to rob her of sleep. Her
own people who were fighting for Serapis--how were they faring; and
Agne--what had become of her? Then her mind turned to the church, and
the worthy old priest's sermon; to the races that she was to see--and
the face and figure of the handsome young Christian rose vividly and
irresistibly before her fancy. Of course--of course, she wished his
horses to win; but it was strange enough that she, Karnis' niece, should
be on the side of the Christians. Stranger still that she had entirely
ceased to believe in all the abuse which, from her earliest childhood,
she had heard heaped on the followers of the crucified Jew. It could
only be that Karnis had never been able to forgive them for having
ruined his theatre at Tauromenium, and so, perhaps, had never known them
thoroughly.

She had enjoyed many a happy hour at the festivals of the old gods; and
they were no doubt beautiful and festive divinities, or terrible when
they were wroth; still, in the depths of her soul there had for some
time lurked a vague, sweet longing which found no fulfilment in any
heathen temple. She knew no name for it and would have found it hard to
describe, but in the church, listening to the prayers and hymns and the
old deacon's discourse, it had for the first time been stilled; she had
felt then and there that, helpless and simple as she was, and even if
she were to remain parted from her foster parents, she need never feel
abandoned, but could rest and hope in a supreme, loving, and helpful
power. And indeed she needed such a protector; she was so easily
beguiled. Stephanion, a flute-player she had known in Rome, had wheedled
everything she had a fancy for out of poor Dada, and when she had
got into any mischief laid it all on Dada's shoulders. There must be
something particularly helpless about her, for everyone, as a matter of
course, took her in hand and treated her like a child, or said things
that made her angry.

In the Hippodrome, however, she forgot everything in the present
pleasure, and was happy enough in finding herself in the lowest row
of places, in the comfortable seats on the shady side, belonging to
Posidonius, the wealthy Magian. This was quite different from her
experience in Rome, where once, in the Circus Maximus, she had stood in
the second tier of the wooden gallery and had been squeezed and pushed,
while no one had taken any notice of her and she had only seen the races
from a distance, looking down on the heads of the men and horses. Herse
never would take her a second time, for, as they came out, they had been
followed and spoken to by men, young and old; and after that her aunt
had fancied she never could be safe, scenting danger at every turn, and
would not allow her ever again to go out alone in the city.

This was altogether a much finer place, for here she was parted from
the race-course only by a narrow watercourse which, as it happened, was
bridged over just in front of her; the horses would pass close to her;
and besides, it was pleasant to be seen and to feel conscious of a
thousand flattering glances centered on herself.

Even the great Cynegius, Caesar's envoy and deputy, who had often
noticed her on board ship, turned again and again to look at her. He was
carried in on a golden litter by ten huge negroes, preceded by twelve
lictors bearing fasces wreathed with laurel; and he took his seat, robed
in purple and embroidery, on a magnificent throne in the middle of the
tribune above the starting sheds; however, Dada troubled herself no more
about the overdressed old man.

Her eyes were everywhere, and she made Medius or his daughter name
everybody and explain everything. Demetrius was delighted with her eager
enjoyment; presently, nudging the singer, she whispered to him with much
satisfaction:

"Look how the people down below are craning their necks to look at us!
My dress is so very pretty--I wonder where your friend Posidonius gets
these lovely roses. There are above a hundred buds in this garland
across my shoulders and down to my girdle, I counted them in the litter
as I came along. It is a pity they should die so soon; I shall dry the
leaves and make scent of them."

Demetrius could not resist the temptation; he leaned forward and said
over her shoulder: "There are hardly enough for that."

At this unexpected address Dada looked round, and she blushed as she
recognized Marcus' brother; he, however, hastened to assure her that he
deeply regretted his audacious proposals of two days since, and the girl
laughed, and said that he had come off worst, and that she might have
sent him away a little more civilly perhaps; but the truth was she
had been out of temper to begin with--any one would be cross that was
treated as Dame Herse had treated her: hiding her shoes and leaving
her a prisoner on the deck of a barge in the middle of a lake! Then
she introduced him to Medius, and finally enquired about Marcus and his
horses, and whether he had any chance of winning the race.

The countryman answered all her questions; and when, presently, a
flower-girl came along the ranks of seats, selling wreaths of blue and
red flowers and ribbands, Demetrius bought two lovely olive-wreaths to
fling to the winner--his brother he hoped. Medius and his daughter wore
red knots--the color of the Heathen, and Dada, following their example,
had a similar bow on her shoulder; now, however, she accepted a blue
ribband that Demetrius bought for her and pinned it in the place of
the red one as being the color of Marcus, to the old singer's great
annoyance. Demetrius laughed loudly in his deep bass tones, declaring
that his brother was already most anxious to win, and that, when he saw
her with these ribbands he would strain every nerve, in gratitude
for her partisanship. He could assure her that Marcus thought of her
constantly.

"I am glad of that," she said simply; and she added that it was the same
with her, for she had been thinking all night of Marcus and his horses.
Medius could not help remarking that Karnis and Herse would take it very
ill that she should display the Christian color to-day of all days; to
which she only replied that she was sorry for that, but that she
liked blue better than red. The answer was so abrupt and short that it
startled Demetrius, who had hitherto seen Dada gentle and pliant; and
it struck him at once how deep an aversion the girl felt for her present
protectors.

There was music, as usual, in the towers at either end of the row
of carceres; but it was less stirring and cheerful than of yore, for
flutes, and several of the heathen airs had been prohibited. Formerly,
too, the Hippodrome had been a place where lovers could meet and where
many a love-affair had been brought to a happy climax; but to-day none
of the daughters of the more respectable families were allowed to quit
the women's apartments in their own homes, for danger was in the air;
the course of events in the Serapeum had kept many of the younger men
from witnessing the races, and some mysterious influence seemed to weigh
upon the gaiety and mirth of which the Hippodrome on a gala day was
usually the headquarters.
