When she had signed her name she was full of content, her face was
transfigured with the joy she foresaw for others, and she thought not
of her own gain, though it was great--even the riches of that divine
self-culture, that comes only through self-sacrifice. She calculated
her letter would reach Cornelia about the end of September, and she
thought how pleasantly the hope it brought, would brighten her life.
And without permitting Hyde to suspect any change in his love affair,
she very often led the conversation to Cornelia, and to the
circumstances of her life. Hyde was always willing to talk on this
subject, and thus she learned so much about Arenta, and Madame Jacobus,
and Rem Van Ariens, that the people became her familiars. Arenta
particularly interested her, and she spoke and thought continually of
the gay little Dutch girl among the human tigers of Paris. And the
thought of her ended ever in a silent prayer for her safety. "I must
ask some strong angel to go and help her," she said to Hyde, "a city
full of blood, must be a city full of evil spirits, and she will need
the wings of angels round her--like a pavilion--so when she comes into
my mind I say 'angels of deliverance go to her.' And I think she must
be in a great strait now, or I should not feel so constrained to pray
for her."

"And you believe such prayer avails for deliverance, Annie?"

"I am sure it avails. When we invoke earnestly and sincerely the help
of any higher and stronger intelligence than ourselves, the angels are
with us. They come when the heart calls them; for they are appointed to
be ministers unto those who shall inherit eternal life." And Hyde
listened silently, yet the words fell into his deepest consciousness,
and after many years brought him strength and consolation when he
needed it. Thus it is, that a good woman is a priestess standing by the
altar of the heart, thus it is, that the very noblest education any man
ever gets is what some woman--mother, wife, sister, friend--gives him.

Certainly the letter sent to Cornelia sped on its way all the more
rapidly and joyfully for the good wishes and unselfish prayers
accompanying it. The very ship might have known it was the bearer of
good tidings; for if there had been one of the mighty angels whose
charge is on the great deep at the helm of the Good Intent she could
not have gone more swiftly and surely to her haven. One morning, nearly
a week in advance of Annie's calculation, the wonderful letter was put
into Cornelia's hand. She was passing through the hall on her way to
her room, when Balthazar brought in the mail, and she took the little
white messenger without any feeling but one of curiosity concerning it.
The handwriting was strange, it was an English letter, what could it
mean?

Let any one who has loved and been parted from the beloved by some
misunderstanding, try to realize what it meant to Cornelia. She read it
through in an indescribable hurry and emotion, and then in the most
natural and womanly way, began to cry. No one could have loved her the
less for that sincere overflow of emotions she could not separate or
define, and which indeed she never tried to understand. It was only one
wonderful thought she could entertain--IT WAS NOT THE FAULT OF JORIS.
This was the assurance that turned her joyful tears into gladder
smiles, and that made her step light as a bird on the wing, as she ran
down the stairs to find her mother; for her happiness was not perfect
till she shared it with the heart that had borne her sorrow, and
carried her grief through many weary months, with her.

Oh, how glad were these two women! They were almost too glad to speak.
Sitting still was impossible to Cornelia, but as she stepped swiftly
to-and-fro across the parlour floor, she stopped frequently at her
mother's chair and kissed her. She kissed Annie's letter just as
frequently. It was such a gracious, noble letter. It was such a delight
to know that friendship so unselfish was waiting for her. It was
altogether such a marvellous thing that had come to her, that she could
not behave as a superior woman ought to have done. But then she was not
a superior woman, she was only lovable and loving, and therefore
restless and inconsequent.

In the first hours of her recovered gladness she did not even remember
Rem's great fault, nor yet her own carelessness. These things were only
accidentals, not worthy to be taken into account while the great sweet
hope that had come to her, flooded like a springtide every nook and
corner of her heart. In such a mood how easy it was to answer Annie's
letter. She recollected every word she had written to Hyde that fateful
day, and she wrote them again with a tenfold joy. She told Annie every
particular, and she forgot to say a word of reproach concerning the
dishonourable retention of her letter by Rem. "It is altogether my own
fault," she confessed.

Even when this letter was on its way to Annie she was under such
excitement that her whole body appeared to think and to feel; her
beautiful hair had an unusual freedom, as if some happy wind blew it
into exquisite unrestraint; her eyes shone like stars; her garments
fluttered; her steps were like dancing; and every now and then, a bar
or two of love music warbled in her throat. And oh with what joy the
mother watched the return of happiness to her dear child! With her own
milk she had fed her. In her own bosom she had carried and tended her.
Night and day for nearly twenty years, like a bird, she had feverishly,
prayfully, tenderly hovered over her; so there was great joy in the
Doctor's home and though he would say little, his heart grew lighter in
his wife's and daughter's cheerfulness; for the women in any house make
the moral and mental atmosphere of that house just as decidedly, as the
sunshine or rain affect the natural atmosphere outside of it.

Now it is very noticeable that when unusual events begin to happen in
any life, there is a succession of such events, and not unfrequently
they arrive in similar ways. At any rate about ten days after the
receipt of Annie's letter, Cornelia was almost equally amazed by the
receipt of another letter. It came one day about noon, and a slave of
Van Ariens brought it--a piece of paper twisted carelessly but
containing these few pregnant words:

Cornelia, dear, come to me. Bring me something to wear. I have just
arrived, saved by the skin of my teeth, and I have not a decent garment
of any kind to put on. ARENTA.

A thunderbolt from a clear sky could hardly have caused such surprise,
but Cornelia did not wait to talk about the wonder. She loaded a maid
with clothing of every description, and ran across the street to her
friend. Arerita saw her coming, and met her with a cry of joy, and as
Van Ariens was sick and trembling with the sight of his daughter, and
the tale of her sufferings, Cornelia persuaded him to go to sleep, and
leave Arenta to her care. Poor Arenta, she was ill with the privations
she had suffered, she was half-starved, and nearly without clothing,
but she did not complain much until she had been fed, and bathed, and
"dressed" as she said "like a New York woman ought to be."

"You know what trunks and trunks full of beautiful things I took away
with me, Cornelia," she complained; "Well I have not a rag left. I have
nothing left at all."

"Your husband, Arenta?"

"He was guillotined."

"Oh, my dear Arenta!"

"Guillotined. I told him to be quiet. I begged him to go over to Marat,
but no! his nobility obliged him to stand by his order and his king. So
for them, he died. Poor Athanase! He expected me to follow him, but I
could not make up my mind to the knife. Oh how terrible it was!" Then
she began to sob bitterly, and Cornelia let her talk of her sufferings
until she fell into a sleep--a sleep easy to see, still haunted by the
furies and terrors through which she had passed.

For a week Cornelia remained with her friend, and Madame Jacobus joined
them as often as possible, and gradually the half-distraught woman
recovered something of her natural spirits and resolution. In this week
she talked out all her frightful experiences in the great prison of La
Force, and was completely overwhelmed at their remembrance. But the
trouble which has been removed, soon grows far off; and Arenta quickly
took her place in her home, and resumed her old life. Of course with
many differences. She could not be the same Arenta, she had outlived
many of her illusions. She took but little interest for a while in the
life around her; her thoughts and conversation were still in Paris, and
this was evident from the fact, that during the whole week of
Cornelia's stay with her, she never once named Cornelia's love, or
life, or prospects. Rem she did talk about, but chiefly because he was
going to marry an English girl, an intention she angrily deplored.

"I am sure," she said, "Rem might have learned a lesson from my sad
fortune. What does he want to marry a foreigner for? He ought to have
prevented me from doing so, instead of following my foolish example."

"No one could have prevented you, Arenta. You would not listen even to
your father."

"Oh indeed, it was my fate. We must all submit to fate. Why did you
refuse Rem?"

"He was not my fate, Arenta."

"Well then, neither is George Hyde your fate. Aunt Jacobus has told me
some things about him. She says he is to marry his cousin. You ought to
marry Rem."

As she said these words Van Ariens, accompanied by Joris Van Heemskirk
entered the room, and Cornelia was glad to escape. She knew that Arenta
would again relate all her experiences, and she disliked to mingle them
with her renewed dreams of love and her lover.

"She will talk and talk," said Cornelia to her mother, "and then there
will be tea and chocolate and more talk, and I have heard all I wish to
hear about that dreadful city, and the demons who walk in blood."

"Arenta has made a great sensation, Cornelia," answered Mrs. Moran.
"She has received half the town. Gertrude Kippon stole quietly home and
has hardly been seen, or heard tell of."

"But mother, Arenta has far more genius than Gertrude. She has made of
her misfortunes a great drama, and wherever you go, it is of the
Marquise de Tounnerre people are talking. Senator Van Heemskirk came in
with her father as I left."

"I hope he treated you more civilly than madame did."

"He was delightful. I courtesied to him, and he lifted my hand and
kissed it, and said, 'I grew lovelier every day,' and I kissed his
cheek and said, 'I wished always to be lovely in his sight.' Then I
came home, because I would not, just yet, speak of George to him."

"Arenta would hardly have given you any opportunity. I wonder at what
hour she will release Joris Van Heemskirk!"

"It will be later than it ought to be."

Indeed it was so late that Madame Van Heemskirk had locked up her house
for the night, and was troubled at her husband's delay--even a little
cross:

"An old man like you, Joris," she said in a tone of vexation--"sitting
till nine o'clock with the last runaway from Paris; a cold you have
already, and all for a girl that threw her senses behind her, to marry
a Frenchman."

"Much she has suffered, Lysbet."

"Much she ought to suffer. And I believe not in Arenta Van Ariens'
suffering. In some way, by hook or crook, by word or deed, she would
out of any trouble work her way."

"I will sit a little by the fire, Lysbet. Sit down by me. My mind is
full of her story."

"That is it. And sleep you will not, and tomorrow sick you will be; and
anxious and tired I shall be; and who for? The Marquise de Tounnerre!
Well then, Joris, in thy old age it is late for thee to bow down to the
Marquise de Tounnerre!"

"To God Almighty only I bow down, Lysbet, and as for titles what care
of them has Jons Van Heemskirk? Think you, when God calls me He will
say 'Councillor' or 'Senator'? No, He will say 'Jons Van Heemskirk!'
and I shall answer to that name. But you know well, Lysbet, this bloody
trial of liberty in Paris touches all the world beside."

"Forgive me, Joris! A shame it is to be cross with thee, nor am I cross
even with that poor Arenta. A child, a very child she is."

"But bitter fears and suffering she has come through. Her husband was
guillotined last May, and from her home she was taken--no time to write
to a friend--no time to save anything she had, except a string of
pearls, which round her waist for many weeks, she had worn. From prison
to prison she was sent, until at last she was ordered before the
Revolutionary Tribunal. From that tribunal to the guillotine is only a
step, and she would surely have taken it but for--"

"Minister Morris?"

"No. Twenty miles outside the city, Minister Morris now lives; and no
time was there to send him word of her strait. Hungry and sick upon the
floor of her prison she was sitting, when her name was called, for bead
after bead of her pearl necklace had gone to her jailor, only for a
little black bread and a cup of milk twice a day; and this morning for
twenty-four hours she had been without food or milk."

[Illustration: "ARENTA BEFORE THE REVOLUTIONARY TRIBUNAL"]

"The poor little one! What did she do?"

"This is what she did, and blame her I will not. When in that terrible
iron armchair before those bloody judges, she says she forgot then to
be afraid. She looked at Fouquier-Tinville the public prosecutor, and
at the fifteen jurymen, and flinched not. She had no dress to help her
beauty, but she declares she never felt more beautiful, and well I can
believe it. They asked her name, and my Lysbet, think of this child's
answer! 'I am called Arenta JEFFERSON de Tounnerre,' she said; and at
the name of 'Jefferson' there were exclamations, and one of the jurymen
rose to his feet and asked excitedly, 'What is it you mean? Jefferson!
The great Jefferson! The great Thomas Jefferson! The great American who
loves France and Liberty?' 'It is the same,' she answered, and then she
sat silent, asking no favour, so wise was she, and Fouquier-Tinville
looked at the President and said--'among my friends I count this great
American!' and a juryman added, 'when I was very poor and hungry he fed
and helped me,' and he bowed to Arenta as he spoke. And after that
Fouquier-Tinville asked who would certify to her claim, and she
answered boldly, 'Minister Morris.' When questioned further she
answered, 'I adore Liberty, I believe in France, I married a Frenchman,
for Thomas Jefferson told me I was coming to a great nation and might
trust both its government and its generosity.' They asked her then if
she had been used kindly in prison, and she told them her jailor had
been to her very unkind, and that he had taken from her the pearl
necklace which was her wedding gift, and if you can believe Arenta,
they were all extremely polite to her, and gave her at once the papers
which permitted her to leave France. The next day a little money she
got from Minister Morris, but a very hard passage she had home. And
listen now, her jailor was guillotined before she left, and she
declares it was the necklace--very unfortunate beads they were, and
Madame Jacobus said when she heard of their fate, 'let them go! With
blood and death they came, it is fit they should go as they came!'
Arenta thinks as soon as Fouquier-Tinville heard of them, he doomed the
man, for she saw in his eyes that he meant to have them for himself.
Well, then, she is also sure that they will take Fouquier-Tinville to
the guillotine."

"After all, it was a lie she told, Joris."

"That is so, but I think her life was worth a few words. And Thomas
Jefferson says she was ten thousand times welcome to the protection his
name gave her. I thank my God I have never had such temptation. I will
say one thing though, Lysbet, that if coming home some night, a thief
should say to me 'your money I must have' and if in my pocket I had
some false money, as well as true money, the false money I would give
the thief and think no shame to do it. Overly righteous we must not be,
Lysbet."

"I am astonished also. I thought Arenta would cry out and that only."

"What a man or a woman will do and suffer, and how they will do and
suffer, no one knows till comes some great occasion. When the water is
ice, who could believe that it would boil, unless they had seen ice
become boiling water? All the human heart wants, is the chance."

"As men and women have in Paris to live, I wonder me, that they can
wish to live at all! Welcome to them must be death."

"So wrong are you, Lysbet. Trouble and hardship make us love life. A
