



CHAPTER XXXVI.

HOW THE EARL WAS WON.


It was not quite at first that the countess could explain to her son
how she now wished that Owen Fitzgerald might become her son-in-law.
She had been so steadfast in her opposition to Owen when the earl
had last spoken of the matter, and had said so much of the wickedly
dissipated life which Owen was leading, that she feared to shock the
boy. But by degrees she brought the matter round, speaking of Owen's
great good fortune, pointing out how much better he was suited for
riches than for poverty, insisting warmly on all his good qualities
and high feelings, and then saying at last, as it were without
thought, "Poor Clara! She has been unfortunate, for at one time she
loved Owen Fitzgerald much better than she will ever love his cousin
Herbert."

"Do you think so, mother?"

"I am sure of it. The truth is, Patrick, you do not understand your
sister; and indeed it is hard to do so. I have also always had an
inward fear that she had now engaged herself to a man whom she did
not love. Of course as things were then it was impossible that she
should marry Owen; and I was glad to break her off from that feeling.
But she never loved Herbert Fitzgerald."

"Why, she is determined to have him, even now."

"Ah, yes! That is where you do not understand her. Now, at this
special moment, her heart is touched by his misfortune, and she
thinks herself bound by her engagement to sacrifice herself with him.
But that is not love. She has never loved any one but Owen,--and who
can wonder at it? for he is a man made for a woman to love."

The earl said nothing for a while, but sat balancing himself on the
back legs of his chair. And then, as though a new idea had struck
him, he exclaimed, "If I thought that, mother, I would find out what
Owen thinks of it himself."

"Poor Owen!" said the countess. "There is no doubt as to what he
thinks;" and then she left the room, not wishing to carry the
conversation any further.

Two days after this, and without any further hint from his mother,
he betook himself along the banks of the river to Hap House. In his
course thither he never let his horse put a foot upon the road, but
kept low down upon the water meadows, leaping over all the fences,
as he had so often done with the man whom he was now going to see.
It was here, among these banks, that he had received his earliest
lessons in horsemanship, and they had all been given by Owen
Fitzgerald. It had been a thousand pities, he had thought, that Owen
had been so poor as to make it necessary for them all to discourage
that love affair with Clara. He would have been so delighted to
welcome Owen as his brother-in-law. And as he strode along over the
ground, and landed himself knowingly over the crabbed fences, he
began to think how much pleasanter the country would be for him if he
had a downright good fellow and crack sportsman as his fast friend at
Castle Richmond. Sir Owen Fitzgerald of Castle Richmond! He would be
the man to whom he would be delighted to give his sister Clara.

And then he hopped in from one of Owen's fields into a small paddock
at the back of Owen's house, and seeing one of the stable-boys about
the place, asked him if his master was at home.

"Shure an' he's here thin, yer honour;" and Lord Desmond could hear
the boy whispering, "It's the young lord hisself." In a moment Owen
Fitzgerald was standing by his horse's side. It was the first time
that Owen had seen one of the family since the news had been spread
abroad concerning his right to the inheritance of Castle Richmond.

"Desmond," said he, taking the lad's hand with one of his, and
putting the other on the animal's neck, "this is very good of you. I
am delighted to see you. I had heard that you were in the country."

"Yes; I have been home for this week past. But things are all so at
sixes and sevens among us all that a fellow can't go and do just what
he would like."

Owen well understood what he meant. "Indeed they are at sixes and
sevens; you may well say that. But get off your horse, old fellow,
and come into the house. Why, what a lather of heat the mare's in."

"Isn't she? it's quite dreadful. That chap of ours has no more idea
of condition than I have of--of--of--of an archbishop. I've just
trotted along the fields, and put her over a ditch or two, and you
see the state she's in. It's a beastly shame."

"I know of old what your trottings are, Desmond; and what a ditch
or two means. You've been at every bank between this and Banteer as
though you were going for a steeplechase plate."

"Upon my honour, Owen--"

"Look here, Patsey. Walk that mare up and down here, between this
gate and that post, till the big sweat has all dried on her; and then
stick to her with a whisp of straw till she's as soft as silk. Do you
hear?"

Patsey said that he did hear; and then Owen, throwing his arm over
the earl's shoulder, walked slowly towards the house.

"I can't tell you how glad I am to see you, old boy," said Owen,
pressing his young friend with something almost like an embrace. "You
will hardly believe how long it is since I have seen a face that I
cared to look at."

"Haven't you?" said the young lord, wondering. He knew that
Fitzgerald had now become heir to a very large fortune, or rather the
possessor of that fortune, and he could not understand why a man who
had been so popular while he was poor should be deserted now that he
was rich.

"No, indeed, have I not. Things are all at sixes and sevens as you
say. Let me see. Donnellan was here when you last saw me; and I was
soon tired of him when things became serious."

"I don't wonder you were tired of him."

"But, Desmond, how's your mother?"

"Oh, she's very well. These are bad times for poor people like us,
you know."

"And your sister?"

"She's pretty well too, thank you." And then there was a pause.
"You've had a great change in your fortune since I saw you, have you
not?" said the earl, after a minute or two. And there it occurred to
him for the first time, that, having refused his sister to this man
when he was poor, he had now come to offer her to him when he was
rich. "Not that that was the reason," he said to himself. "But it was
impossible then, and now it would be so pleasant."

"It is a sad history, is it not?" said Owen.

"Very sad," said the earl, remembering, however, that he had ridden
over there with his heart full of joy,--of joy occasioned by that
very catastrophe which now, following his friend's words like a
parrot, he declared to be so very sad.

And now they were in the dining-room in which Owen usually lived, and
were both standing on the rug, as two men always do stand when they
first get into a room together. And it was clear to see that neither
of them knew how to break at once into the sort of loving, genial
talk which each was longing to have with the other. It is so easy to
speak when one has little or nothing to say; but often so difficult
when there is much that must be said: and the same paradox is equally
true of writing.

Then Owen walked away to the window, looking out among the shrubs
into which Aby Mollett had been precipitated, as though he could
collect his thoughts there; and in a moment or two the earl followed
him, and looked out also among the shrubs. "They killed a fox exactly
there the other day; didn't they?" asked the earl, indicating the
spot by a nod of his head.

"Yes, they did." And then there was another pause. "I'll tell you
what it is, Desmond," Owen said at last, going back to the rug and
speaking with an effort. "As the people say, 'a sight of you is good
for sore eyes.' There is a positive joy to me in seeing you. It is
like a cup of cold water when a man is thirsty. But I cannot put the
drink to my lips till I know on what terms we are to meet. When last
we saw each other, we were speaking of your sister; and now that we
meet again, we must again speak of her. Desmond, all my thoughts
are of her; I dream of her at night, and find myself talking to her
spirit when I wake in the morning. I have much else that I ought to
think of; but I go about thinking of nothing but of her. I am told
that she is engaged to my cousin Herbert. Nay, she has told me so
herself, and I know that it is so. But if she becomes his wife--any
man's wife but mine--I cannot live in this country."

He had not said one word of that state of things in his life's
history of which the country side was so full. He had spoken of
Herbert, but he had not alluded to Herbert's fall. He had spoken of
such hope as he still might have with reference to Clara Desmond;
but he did not make the slightest reference to that change in his
fortunes--in his fortunes, and in those of his rival--which might
have so strong a bias on those hopes, and which ought so to have
in the minds of all worldly, prudent people. It was to speak of
this specially that Lord Desmond had come thither; and then, if
opportunity should offer, to lead away the subject to that other one;
but now Owen had begun at the wrong end. If called upon to speak
about his sister at once, what could the brother say, except that she
was engaged to Herbert Fitzgerald?

"Tell me this, Desmond, whom does your sister love?" said Owen,
speaking almost fiercely in his earnestness. "I know so much of you,
at any rate, that whatever may be your feelings you will not lie to
me,"--thereby communicating to the young lord an accusation, which he
very well understood, against the truth of the countess, his mother.

"When I have spoken to her about this she declares that she is
engaged to Herbert Fitzgerald."

"Engaged to him! yes, I know that; I do not doubt that. It has been
dinned into my ears now for the last six months till it is impossible
to doubt it. And she will marry him too, if no one interferes to
prevent it. I do not doubt that either. But, Desmond, that is not the
question that I have asked. She did love me; and then she was ordered
by her mother to abandon that love, and to give her heart to another.
That in words she has been obedient, I know well; but what I doubt is
this,--that she has in truth been able so to chuck her heart about
like a shuttlecock. I can only say that I am not able to do it."

How was the earl to answer him? The very line of argument which
Owen's mind was taking was exactly that which the young lord himself
desired to promote. He too was desirous that Clara should go back to
her first love. He himself thought strongly that Owen was a man more
fitted than Herbert for the worshipful adoration of such a girl as
his sister Clara. But then he, Desmond, had opposed the match while
Owen was poor, and how was he to frame words by which he might
encourage it now that Owen was rich?

"I have been so little with her, that I hardly know," he said. "But,
Owen--"

"Well?"

"It is so difficult for me to talk to you about all this."

"Is it?"

"Why, yes. You know that I have always liked you--always. No chap was
ever such a friend to me as you have been;" and he squeezed Owen's
arm with strong boyish love.

"I know all about it," said Owen.

"Well; then all that happened about Clara. I was young then, you
know,"--he was now sixteen--"and had not thought anything about it.
The idea of you and Clara falling in love had never occurred to me.
Boys are so blind, you know. But when it did happen--you remember
that day, old fellow, when you and I met down at the gate?"

"Remember it!" said Owen. He would remember it, as he thought, when
half an eternity should have passed over his head.

"And I told you then what I thought. I don't think I am a particular
fellow myself about money and rank and that sort of thing. I am as
poor as a church mouse, and so I shall always remain; and for myself
I don't care about it. But for one's sister, Owen--you never had a
sister, had you?"

"Never," said Owen, hardly thinking of the question.

"One is obliged to think of such things for her. We should all go to
rack and ruin, the whole family of us, box and dice,--as indeed we
have pretty well already--if some of us did not begin to look about
us. I don't suppose I shall ever marry and have a family. I couldn't
afford it, you know. And in that case Clara's son would be Earl of
Desmond; or if I died she would be Countess of Desmond in her own
right." And the young lord looked the personification of family
prudence.

"I know all that," said Owen; "but you do not suppose that I was
thinking of it?"

"What; as regards yourself. No; I am sure you never did. But, looking
to all that, it would never have done for her to marry a man as
poor as you were. It is not a comfortable thing to be a very poor
nobleman, I can tell you."

Owen again remained silent. He wanted to talk the earl over into
favouring his views, but he wanted to do so as Owen of Hap House, not
as Owen of Castle Richmond. He perceived at once from the tone of
the boy's voice, and even from his words, that there was no longer
anything to be feared from the brother's opposition; and perceiving
this, he thought that the mother's opposition might now perhaps also
be removed. But it was quite manifest that this had come from what
was supposed to be his altered position. "A man as poor as you were,"
Lord Desmond had said, urging that though now the marriage might be
well enough, in those former days it would have been madness. The
line of argument was very clear; but as Owen was as poor as ever, and
intended to remain so, there was nothing in it to comfort him.

"I cannot say that I, myself, have so much worldly wisdom as you
have," said he at last, with something like a sneer.

"Ah, that is just what I knew you would say. You think that I am
coming to you now, and offering to make up matters between you and
Clara because you are rich!"

"But can you make up matters between me and Clara?" said Owen,
eagerly.

"Well, I do not know. The countess seems to think it might be so."

And then again Owen was silent, walking about the room with his hands
behind his back. Then after all the one thing of this world which
his eye regarded as desirable was within his reach. He had then been
right in supposing that that face which had once looked up to his so
full of love had been a true reflex of the girl's heart,--that it
had indicated to him love which was not changeable. It was true that
Clara, having accepted a suitor at her mother's order, might now be
allowed to come back to him! As he thought of this, he wondered at
the endurance and obedience of a woman's heart which could thus give
up all that it held as sacred at the instance of another. But even
this, though it was but little flattering to Clara, by no means
lessened the transport which he felt. He had had that pride in
himself, that he had never ceased to believe that she loved him.
Full of that thought, of which he had not dared to speak, he had
gone about, gloomily miserable since the news of her engagement with
Herbert had reached him, and now he learned, as he thought with
certainty, that his belief had been well grounded. Through all that
had passed Clara Desmond did love him still!

But as to this overture of reconciliation that was now made to him;
how was he to accept it or reject it? It was made to him because he
was believed to be Sir Owen Fitzgerald of Castle Richmond, a baronet
of twelve thousand a year, instead of a poor squire, whose wife
would have to look narrowly to the kitchen, in order that food in
sufficiency might be forthcoming for the parlour. That he would
become Sir Owen he thought probable; but that he would be Sir Owen of
Hap House and not of Castle Richmond he had firmly resolved. He had
thought of this for long hours and hours together, and felt that he
could never again be happy were he to put his foot into that house
as its owner. Every tenant would scorn him, every servant would hate
him, every neighbour would condemn him; but this would be as nothing
to his hatred of himself, to his own scorn and his own condemnation.
And yet how great was the temptation to him now! If he would consent
to call himself master of Castle Richmond, Clara's hand might still
be his.

So he thought; but those who know Clara Desmond better than he did
will know how false were his hopes. She was hardly the girl to have
gone back to a lover when he was rich, whom she had rejected when he
was poor.

"Desmond," said he, "come here and sit down;" and both sat leaning on
the table together, with their arms touching. "I understand it all
now I think; and remember this, my boy, that whomever I may blame,
I do not blame you; that you are true and honest I am sure; and,
indeed, there is only one person whom I do blame." He did not say
that this one person was the countess, but the earl knew just as well
as though he had been told.

"I understand all this now," he repeated, "and before we go any
further, I must tell you one thing; I shall never be owner of Castle
Richmond."

"Why, I thought it was all settled!" said the earl, looking up with
surprise.

"Nothing at all is settled. To every bargain there must be two
parties, and I have never yet become a party to the bargain which
shall make me owner of Castle Richmond."

"But is it not yours of right?"

"I do not know what you call right."

"Right of inheritance," said the earl, who, having succeeded to his
own rank by the strength of the same right enduring through many
ages, looked upon it as the one substantial palladium of the country.

"Look here, old fellow, and I'll tell you my views about this. Sir
Thomas Fitzgerald, when he married that poor lady who is still
staying at Castle Richmond, did so in the face of the world with the
full assurance that he made her his legal wife. Whether such a case
as this ever occurred before I don't know, but I am sure of this that
in the eye of God she is his widow. Herbert Fitzgerald was brought up
as the heir to all that estate, and I cannot see that he can fairly
be robbed of that right because another man has been a villain.
The title he cannot have, I suppose, because the law won't give it
him; but the property can be made over to him, and as far as I am
concerned it shall be made over. No earthly consideration shall
induce me to put my hand upon it, for in doing so I should look upon
myself as a thief and a scoundrel."

"And you mean then that Herbert will have it all, just the same as it
was before?"

"Just the same as regards the estate."

"Then why has he gone away?"

"I cannot answer for him. I can only tell you what I shall do. I dare
say it may take months before it is all settled. But now, Desmond,
you know how I stand; I am Owen Fitzgerald of Hap House, now as I
have ever been, that and nothing more,--for as to the handle to my
name it is not worth talking about."

They were still sitting at the table, and now they both sat silent,
not looking at each other, but with their eyes fixed on the wood.
Owen had in his hand a pen, which he had taken from the mantelpiece,
and unconsciously began to trace signs on the polished surface
before him. The earl sat with his forehead leaning on his two hands,
thinking what he was to say next. He felt that he himself loved the
man better than ever; but when his mother should come to hear all
this, what would she say?

"You know it all now, my boy," said Owen, looking up at last; and as
he did so there was an expression about his face to which the young
earl thought that he had never seen the like. There was a gleam in
his eye which, though not of joy, was so bright; and a smile round
his mouth which was so sweet, though full of sadness! "How can she
not love him?" said he to himself, thinking of his sister. "And now,
Desmond, go back to your mother and tell her all. She has sent you
here."

"No, she did not send me," said the boy, stoutly,--almost angrily;
"she does not even know that I have come."

"Go back then to your sister."

"Nor does she know it."

"Nevertheless, go back to them, and tell them both what I have told
you; and tell them this also, that I, Owen Fitzgerald of Hap House,
still love her better than all that the world else can give me;
indeed, there is nothing else that I do love,--except you, Desmond.
But tell them also that I am Owen of Hap House still--that and
nothing more."

"Owen," said the lad, looking up at him; and Fitzgerald as he glanced
into the boy's face could see that there was that arising within his
breast which almost prevented him from speaking.

"And look, Desmond," continued Fitzgerald; "do not think that I shall
blame you because you turn from me, or call you mercenary. Do you
do what you think right. What you said just now of your sister's--,
well, of the possibility of our marriage, you said under the idea
that I was a rich man. You now find that I am a poor man; and you may
consider that the words were never spoken."

"Owen!" said the boy again; and now that which was before rising in
his breast had risen to his brow and cheeks, and was telling its tale
plainly in his eyes. And then he rose from his chair, turning away
his face, and walking towards the window; but before he had gone two
steps he turned again, and throwing himself on Fitzgerald's breast,
he burst out into a passion of tears.

"Come, old fellow, what is this? This will never do," said Owen. But
his own eyes were full of tears also, and he too was nearly past
speaking.

"I know you will think--I am a boy and a--fool," said the earl,
through his sobs, as soon as he could speak; "but I can't--help it."

"I think you are the dearest, finest, best fellow that ever lived,"
said Fitzgerald, pressing him with his arm.

"And I'll tell you what, Owen, you should have her to-morrow if it
were in my power, for, by heaven! there is not another man so worthy
of a girl in all the world; and I'll tell her so; and I don't care
what the countess says. And, Owen, come what come may, you shall
always have my word;" and then he stood apart, and rubbing his eyes
with his arm tried to look like a man who was giving this pledge from
his judgment, not from his impulse.

"It all depends on this, Desmond; whom does she love? See her alone,
Desmond, and talk softly to her, and find out that." This he said
thoughtfully, for in his mind "love should still be lord of all."

"By heavens! if I were her, I know whom I should love," said the
brother.

"I would not have her as a gift if she did not love me," said Owen,
proudly; "but if she do, I have a right to claim her as my own."

And then they parted, and the earl rode back home with a quieter pace
than that which had brought him there, and in a different mood. He
had pledged himself now to Owen,--not to Owen of Castle Richmond, but
to Owen of Hap House--and he intended to redeem his pledge if it were
possible. He had been so conquered by the nobleness of his friend,
that he had forgotten his solicitude for his family and his sister.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

A TALE OF A TURBOT.


It would have been Owen Fitzgerald's desire to disclaim the
inheritance which chance had put in his way in absolute silence, had
such a course been possible to him. And, indeed, not being very well
conversant with matters of business, he had thought for a while that
this might be done--or at any rate something not far different from
this. To those who had hitherto spoken to him upon the subject, to
Mr. Prendergast, Mr. Somers, and his cousin, he had disclaimed the
inheritance, and that he had thought would have sufficed. That Sir
Thomas should die so quickly after the discovery had not of course
been expected by anybody; and much, therefore, had not been thought
at the moment of these disclaimers;--neither at the moment, nor
indeed afterwards, when Sir Thomas did die.

Even Mr. Somers was prepared to admit that as the game had been
given up,--as his branch of the Fitzgeralds, acting under the advice
of their friend and lawyer, admitted that the property must go
from them--even he, much as he contested within his own breast the
propriety of Mr. Prendergast's decisions, was fain to admit now that
it was Owen's business to walk in upon the property. Any words which
he may have spoken on the impulse of the moment were empty words.
When a man becomes heir to twelve thousand a year, he does not give
it up in a freak of benevolence. And, therefore, when Sir Thomas had
been dead some four or five weeks, and when Herbert had gone away
from the scene which was no longer one of interest to him, it was
necessary that something should be done.

During the last two or three days of his life Sir Thomas had executed
a new will, in which he admitted that his son was not the heir to his
estates, and so disposed of such moneys as it was in his power to
leave as he would have done had Herbert been a younger son. Early in
his life he himself had added something to the property, some two or
three hundred a year, and this, also, he left of course to his own
family. Such having been done, there would have been no opposition
made to Owen had he immediately claimed the inheritance; but as he
made no claim, and took no step whatever,--as he appeared neither by
himself, nor by letter, nor by lawyer, nor by agent,--as no rumour
ever got about as to what he intended to do, Mr. Somers found it
necessary to write to him. This he did on the day of Herbert's
departure, merely asking him, perhaps with scant courtesy, who was
his man of business, in order that he, Mr. Somers, as agent to the
late proprietor, might confer with him. With but scant courtesy,--for
Mr. Somers had made one visit to Hap House since the news had been
known, with some intention of ingratiating himself with the future
heir; but his tenders had not been graciously received. Mr. Somers
was a proud man, and though his position in life depended on the
income he received from the Castle Richmond estate, he would not make
any further overture. So his letter was somewhat of the shortest, and
merely contained the request above named.

Owen's reply was sharp, immediate, and equally short, and was carried
back by the messenger from Castle Richmond who had brought the
letter, to which it was an answer. It was as follows:--


   Hap House, Thursday morning, two o'clock.

(There was no other date; and Owen probably was unaware that his
letter being written at two P.M. was not written on Thursday
morning.)

   Dear Sir,

   I have got no lawyer, and no man of business; nor do I
   mean to employ any if I can help it. I intend to make no
   claim to Mr. Herbert Fitzgerald's property of Castle
   Richmond; and if it be necessary that I should sign any
   legal document making over to him any claim that I may
   have, I am prepared to do so at any moment. As he has got
   a lawyer, he can get this arranged, and I suppose Mr.
   Prendergast had better do it.

   I am, dear sir,
   Your faithful servant,

   OWEN FITZGERALD of Hap House.


And with those four or five lines he thought it would be practicable
for him to close the whole affair.

This happened on the day of Herbert's departure, and on the day
preceding Lord Desmond's visit to Hap House; so that on the occasion
of that visit, Owen looked upon the deed as fully done. He had put
it quite beyond his own power to recede now, even had he so wished.
And then came the tidings to him,--true tidings as he thought,--that
Clara was still within his reach if only he were master of Castle
Richmond. That this view of his position did for a moment shake him I
will not deny; but it was only for a moment: and then it was that he
had looked up at Clara's brother, and bade him go back to his mother
and sister, and tell them that Owen of Hap House was Owen of Hap
House still;--that and nothing more. Clara Desmond might be bought at
a price which would be too costly even for such a prize as her. It
was well for him that he so resolved, for at no price could she have
been bought.

Mr. Somers, when he received that letter, was much inclined to doubt
whether or no it might not be well to take Owen at his word. After
all, what just right had he to the estate? According to the eternal
and unalterable laws of right and wrong ought it not to belong to
Herbert Fitzgerald? Mr. Somers allowed his wish on this occasion
to be father to many thoughts much at variance from that line of
thinking which was customary to him as a man of business. In his
ordinary moods, law with him was law, and a legal claim a legal
claim. Had he been all his life agent to the Hap House property
instead of to that of Castle Richmond, a thought so romantic would
never have entered his head. He would have scouted a man as nearly a
maniac who should suggest to him that his client ought to surrender
an undoubted inheritance of twelve thousand a year on a point of
feeling. He would have rejected it as a proposed crime, and talked
much of the indefeasible rights of the coming heirs of the new heir.
He would have been as firm as a rock, and as trenchant as a sword in
defence of his patron's claims. But now, having in his hands that
short, pithy letter from Owen Fitzgerald, he could not but look at
the matter in a more Christian light. After all was not justice,
immutable justice, better than law? And would not the property be
enough for both of them? Might not law and justice make a compromise?
Let Owen be the baronet, and take a slice of four or five thousand,
and add that to Hap House; and then if these things were well
arranged, might not Mr. Somers still be agent to them both?

Meditating all this in his newly tuned romantic frame of mind Mr.
Somers sat down and wrote a long letter to Mr. Prendergast, enclosing
the short letter from Owen, and saying all that he, as a man of
business with a new dash of romance, could say on such a subject.
This letter, not having slept on the road as Herbert did in Dublin,
and having been conveyed with that lightning rapidity for which the
British Post-office has ever been remarkable--and especially that
portion of it which has reference to the sister island,--was in Mr.
Prendergast's pocket when Herbert dined with him. That letter, and
another to which we shall have to refer more specially. But so much
at variance were Mr. Prendergast's ideas from those entertained by
Mr. Somers, that he would not even speak to Herbert on the subject.
Perhaps, also, that other more important letter, which, if we live,
we shall read at length, might also have had some effect in keeping
him silent.

But in truth Mr. Somers' mind, and that of Mr. Prendergast, did not
work in harmony on this subject. Judging of the two men together by
their usual deeds and ascertained character, we may say that there
was much more romance about Mr. Prendergast than there was about
Mr. Somers. But then it was a general romance, and not one with
an individual object. Or perhaps we may say, without injury to
Mr. Somers, that it was a true feeling, and not a false one. Mr.
Prendergast, also, was much more anxious for the welfare of Herbert
Fitzgerald than that of his cousin; but then he could feel on behalf
of the man for whom he was interested that it did not behove him to
take a present of an estate from the hands of the true owner.

For more than a week Mr. Somers waited, but got no reply to his
letter, and heard nothing from Mr. Prendergast; and during this time
he was really puzzled as to what he should do. As regarded himself,
he did not know at what moment his income might end, or how long
he and his family might be allowed to inhabit the house which he
now held: and then he could take no steps as to the tenants; could
neither receive money nor pay it away, and was altogether at his
wits' ends. Lady Fitzgerald looked to him for counsel in everything,
and he did not know how to counsel her. Arrangements were to be made
for an auction in the house as soon as she should be able to move;
but would it not be a thousand pities to sell all the furniture if
there was a prospect of the family returning? And so he waited for
Mr. Prendergast's letter with an uneasy heart and vexation of spirit.

But still he attended the relief committees, and worked at the
soup-kitchens attached to the estate, as though he were still the
agent to Castle Richmond; and still debated warmly with Father
Barney on one side, and Mr. Townsend on the other, on that vexatious
question of out-door relief. And now the famine was in full swing;
and, strange to say, men had ceased to be uncomfortable about
it;--such men, that is, as Mr. Somers and Mr. Townsend. The cutting
off of maimed limbs, and wrenching out from their sockets of smashed
bones, is by no means shocking to the skilled practitioner. And dying
paupers, with "the drag" in their face--that certain sign of coming
death of which I have spoken--no longer struck men to the heart. Like
the skilled surgeon, they worked hard enough at what good they could
do, and worked the better in that they could treat the cases without
express compassion for the individuals that met their eyes. In
administering relief one may rob five unseen sufferers of what would
keep them in life if one is moved to bestow all that is comfortable
on one sufferer that is seen. Was it wise to spend money in
alleviating the last hours of those whose doom was already spoken,
which money, if duly used, might save the lives of others not yet
so far gone in misery? And so in one sense those who were the best
in the county, who worked the hardest for the poor and spent their
time most completely among them, became the hardest of heart, and
most obdurate in their denials. It was strange to see devoted women
neglecting the wants of the dying, so that they might husband their
strength and time and means for the wants of those who might still be
kept among the living.

At this time there came over to the parish of Drumbarrow a young
English clergyman who might be said to be in many respects the very
opposite to Mr. Townsend. Two men could hardly be found in the
same profession more opposite in their ideas, lives, purposes, and
pursuits;--with this similarity, however, that each was a sincere,
and on the whole an honest man. The Rev. Mr. Carter was much the
junior, being at that time under thirty. He had now visited Ireland
with the sole object of working among the poor, and distributing
according to his own judgment certain funds which had been collected
for this purpose in England.

And indeed there did often exist in England at this time a
misapprehension as to Irish wants, which led to some misuses of the
funds which England so liberally sent. It came at that time to be
the duty of a certain public officer to inquire into a charge made
against a seemingly respectable man in the far west of Ireland,
purporting that he had appropriated to his own use a sum of twelve
pounds sent to him for the relief of the poor of his parish. It had
been sent by three English maiden ladies to the relieving officer
of the parish of Kilcoutymorrow, and had come to his hands, he then
filling that position. He, so the charge said,--and unfortunately
said so with only too much truth,--had put the twelve pounds into
his own private pocket. The officer's duty in the matter took him to
the chairman of the Relief Committee, a stanch old Roman Catholic
gentleman nearly eighty years of age, with a hoary head and white
beard, and a Milesian name that had come down to him through
centuries of Catholic ancestors;--a man urbane in his manner, of the
old school, an Irishman such as one does meet still here and there
through the country, but now not often--one who above all things was
true to the old religion.

Then the officer of the government told his story to the old Irish
gentleman--with many words, for there were all manner of small
collateral proofs, to all of which the old Irish gentleman listened
with a courtesy and patience which were admirable. And when the
officer of the government had done, the old Irish gentleman thus
replied:--

"My neighbour Hobbs,"--such was the culprit's name--"has undoubtedly
done this thing. He has certainly spent upon his own uses the
generous offering made to our poor parish by those noble-minded
ladies, the three Miss Walkers. But he has acted with perfect honesty
in the matter."

"What!" said the government officer, "robbing the poor, and at such a
time as this!"

"No robbery at all, dear sir," said the good old Irish gentleman,
with the blandest of all possible smiles; "the excellent Miss
Walkers sent their money for the Protestant poor of the parish of
Kilcoutymorrow, and Mr. Hobbs is the only Protestant within it." And
from the twinkle in the old man's eye, it was clear to see that his
triumph consisted in this,--that not only he had but one Protestant
in the parish, but that that Protestant should have learned so little
from his religion.

But this is an episode. And nowadays no episodes are allowed.

And now Mr. Carter had come over to see that if possible certain
English funds were distributed according to the wishes of the
generous English hearts by whom they had been sent. For as some
English, such as the three Miss Walkers, feared on the one hand that
the Babylonish woman so rampant in Ireland might swallow up their
money for Babylonish purposes; so, on the other hand, did others
dread that the too stanch Protestantism of the church militant in
that country might expend the funds collected for undoubted bodily
wants in administering to the supposed wants of the soul. No such
faults did, in truth, at that time prevail. The indomitable force of
the famine had absolutely knocked down all that; but there had been
things done in Ireland, before the famine came upon them, which gave
reasonable suspicion for such fears.

Mr. Townsend among others had been very active in soliciting aid
from England, and hence had arisen a correspondence between him and
Mr. Carter; and now Mr. Carter had arrived at Drumbarrow with a
respectable sum to his credit at the provincial bank, and an intense
desire to make himself useful in this time of sore need. Mr. Carter
was a tall, thin, austere-looking man; one, seemingly, who had
macerated himself inwardly and outwardly by hard living. He had a
high, narrow forehead, a sparse amount of animal development, thin
lips, and a piercing, sharp, gray eye. He was a man, too, of few
words, and would have been altogether harsh in his appearance had
