as ensued, received his homage with coldness, and began to talk to him
with an air of serious dignity, very different from the usual indecorous
levity of his behaviour. "Master Heriot," he said, "if we aright
remember, we opignorated in your hands certain jewels of the Crown, for
a certain sum of money--Did we, or did we not?"

"My most gracious Sovereign," said Heriot, "indisputably your Majesty
was pleased to do so."

"The property of which jewels and _cimelia_ remained with us," continued
the king, in the same solemn tone, "subject only to your claim of
advance thereupon; which advance being repaid, gives us right to
repossession of the thing opignorated, or pledged, or laid in wad.
Voetius, Vinnius, Groenwigeneus, Pagenstecherus,--all who have treated
_de Contractu Opignerationis, consentiunt in eundem_,--gree on the same
point. The Roman law, the English common law, and the municipal law
of our ain ancient kingdom of Scotland, though they split in mair
particulars than I could desire, unite as strictly in this as the three
strands of a twisted rope."

"May it please your Majesty," replied Heriot, "it requires not so many
learned authorities to prove to any honest man, that his interest in a
pledge is determined when the money lent is restored."

"Weel, sir, I proffer restoration of the sum lent, and I demand to be
repossessed of the jewels pledged with you. I gave ye a hint, brief
while since, that this would be essential to my service, for, as
approaching events are like to call us into public, it would seem
strange if we did not appear with those ornaments, which are heirlooms
of the Crown, and the absence whereof is like to place us in contempt
and suspicion with our liege subjects."

Master George Heriot seemed much moved by this address of his Sovereign,
and replied with emotion, "I call Heaven to witness, that I am totally
harmless in this matter, and that I would willingly lose the sum
advanced, so that I could restore those jewels, the absence of which
your Majesty so justly laments. Had the jewels remained with me, the
account of them would be easily rendered; but your Majesty will do me
the justice to remember, that, by your express order, I transferred them
to another person, who advanced a large sum, just about the time of my
departure for Paris. The money was pressingly wanted, and no other means
to come by it occurred to me. I told your Majesty, when I brought the
needful supply, that the man from whom the monies were obtained, was
of no good repute; and your most princely answer was, smelling to the
gold--_Non olet_, it smells not of the means that have gotten it."

"Weel, man," said the king, "but what needs a' this din? If ye gave my
jewels in pledge to such a one, suld ye not, as a liege subject, have
taken care that the redemption was in our power? And are we to suffer
the loss of our _cimelia_ by your neglect, besides being exposed to the
scorn and censure of our lieges, and of the foreign ambassadors?"

"My lord and liege king," said Heriot, "God knows, if my bearing blame
or shame in this matter would keep it from your Majesty, it were my duty
to endure both, as a servant grateful for many benefits; but when
your Majesty considers the violent death of the man himself, the
disappearance of his daughter, and of his wealth, I trust you will
remember that I warned your Majesty, in humble duty, of the possibility
of such casualties, and prayed you not to urge me to deal with him on
your behalf."

"But you brought me nae better means," said the king--"Geordie, ye
brought me nae better means. I was like a deserted man; what could I do
but grip to the first siller that offered, as a drowning man grasps to
the willow-wand that comes readiest?--And now, man, what for have ye not
brought back the jewels? they are surely above ground, if ye wad make
strict search."

"All strict search has been made, may it please your Majesty," replied
the citizen; "hue and cry has been sent out everywhere, and it has been
found impossible to recover them."

"Difficult, ye mean, Geordie, not impossible," replied the king; "for
that whilk is impossible, is either naturally so, _exempli gratia_, to
make two into three; or morally so, as to make what is truth falsehood;
but what is only difficult may come to pass, with assistance of wisdom
and patience; as, for example, Jingling Geordie, look here!" And he
displayed the recovered treasure to the eyes of the astonished jeweller,
exclaiming, with great triumph, "What say ye to that, Jingler?--By my
sceptre and crown, the man stares as if he took his native prince for a
warlock! us that are the very _malleus maleficarum_, the contunding
and contriturating hammer of all witches, sorcerers, magicians, and the
like; he thinks we are taking a touch of the black art outsells!--But
gang thy way, honest Geordie; thou art a good plain man, but nane of the
seven sages of Greece; gang thy way, and mind the soothfast word which
you spoke, small time syne, that there is one in this land that comes
near to Solomon, King of Israel, in all his gifts, except in his love to
strange women, forby the daughter of Pharaoh."

If Heriot was surprised at seeing the jewels so unexpectedly produced
at the moment the king was upbraiding him for the loss of them, this
allusion to the reflection which had escaped him while conversing with
Lord Glenvarloch, altogether completed his astonishment; and the king
was so delighted with the superiority which it gave him at the moment,
that he rubbed his hands, chuckled, and finally, his sense of dignity
giving way to the full feeling of triumph, he threw himself into his
easy-chair, and laughed with unconstrained violence till he lost his
breath, and the tears ran plentifully down his cheeks as he strove
to recover it. Meanwhile, the royal cachinnation was echoed out by a
discordant and portentous laugh from behind the arras, like that of one
who, little accustomed to give way to such emotions, feels himself
at some particular impulse unable either to control or to modify his
obstreperous mirth. Heriot turned his head with new surprise towards the
place, from which sounds so unfitting the presence of a monarch seemed
to burst with such emphatic clamour.

The king, too, somewhat sensible of the indecorum, rose up, wiped his
eyes, and calling,--"Todlowrie, come out o' your den," he produced from
behind the arras the length of Richie Moniplies, still laughing with as
unrestrained mirth as ever did gossip at a country christening. "Whisht,
man, whisht, man," said the king; "ye needna nicher that gait, like a
cusser at a caup o' corn, e'en though it was a pleasing jest, and our
ain framing. And yet to see Jingling Geordie, that bauds himself so
much the wiser than other folk--to see him, ha! ha! ha!--in the vein of
Euclio apud Plautum, distressing himself to recover what was lying at
his elbow--'Peril, interii, occidi--quo curram? quo non curram?--Tene,
tene--quem? quis? nescio--nihil video."

"Ah! Geordie, your een are sharp enough to look after gowd and silver,
gems, rubies, and the like of that, and yet ye kenna how to come by them
when they are lost.--Ay, ay--look at them, man--look at them--they are
a' right and tight, sound and round, not a doublet crept in amongst
them."

George Heriot, when his first surprise was over, was too old a courtier
to interrupt the king's imaginary triumph, although he darted a look
of some displeasure at honest Richie, who still continued on what is
usually termed the broad grin. He quietly examined the stones, and
finding them all perfect, he honestly and sincerely congratulated his
Majesty on the recovery of a treasure which could not have been lost
without some dishonour to the crown; and asked to whom he himself was to
pay the sums for which they had been pledged, observing, that he had the
money by him in readiness.

"Ye are in a deevil of a hurry, when there is paying in the case,
Geordie," said the king.--"What's a' the haste, man? The jewels were
restored by an honest, kindly countryman of ours. There he stands, and
wha kens if he wants the money on the nail, or if he might not be as
weel pleased wi' a bit rescript on our treasury some six months hence?
Ye ken that our Exchequer is even at a low ebb just now, and ye cry pay,
pay, pay, as if we had all the mines of Ophir."

"Please your Majesty," said Heriot, "if this man has the real right to
these monies, it is doubtless at his will to grant forbearance, if he
will. But when I remember the guise in which I first saw him, with a
tattered cloak and a broken head, I can hardly conceive it.--Are not you
Richie Moniplies, with the king's favour?"

"Even sae, Master Heriot--of the ancient and honourable house of Castle
Collop, near to the West Port of Edinburgh," answered Richie.

"Why, please your Majesty, he is a poor serving-man," said Heriot. "This
money can never be honestly at his disposal."

"What for no?" said the king. "Wad ye have naebody spraickle up the brae
but yoursell, Geordie? Your ain cloak was thin enough when ye cam here,
though ye have lined it gay and weel. And for serving-men, there has
mony a red-shank cam over the Tweed wi' his master's wallet on his
shoulders, that now rustles it wi' his six followers behind him. There
stands the man himsell; speer at him, Geordie."

"His may not be the best authority in the case," answered the cautious
citizen.

"Tut, tut, man," said the king, "ye are over scrupulous. The knave
deer-stealers have an apt phrase, _Non est inquirendum unde venit_
VENISON. He that brings the gudes hath surely a right to dispose of
the gear.--Hark ye, friend, speak the truth and shame the deil. Have
ye plenary powers to dispose on the redemption-money as to delay of
payments, or the like, ay or no?"

"Full power, an it like your gracious Majesty," answered Richie
Moniplies; "and I am maist willing to subscrive to whatsoever may in ony
wise accommodate your Majesty anent the redemption-money, trusting your
Majesty's grace will be kind to me in one sma' favour."

"Ey, man," said the king, "come ye to me there? I thought ye wad e'en
be like the rest of them.--One would think our subjects' lives and goods
were all our ain, and holden of us at our free will; but when we stand
in need of ony matter of siller from them, which chances more frequently
than we would it did, deil a boddle is to be had, save on the auld terms
of giff-gaff. It is just niffer for niffer.--Aweel, neighbour, what
is it that ye want--some monopoly, I reckon? Or it may be a grant
of kirk-lands and teinds, or a knighthood, or the like? Ye maun be
reasonable, unless ye propose to advance more money for our present
occasions."

"My liege," answered Richie Moniplies, "the owner of these monies places
them at your Majesty's command, free of all pledge or usage as long as
it is your royal pleasure, providing your Majesty will condescend to
show some favour to the noble Lord Glenvarloch, presently prisoner in
your royal Tower of London."

"How, man--how,--man--how, man!" exclaimed the king, reddening and
stammering, but with emotions more noble than those by which he was
sometimes agitated--"What is that you dare to say to us?--Sell our
justice!--sell our mercy!--and we a crowned king, sworn to do justice
to our subjects in the gate, and responsible for our stewardship to
Him that is over all kings?"--Here he reverently looked up, touched his
bonnet, and continued, with some sharpness,--"We dare not traffic in
such commodities, sir; and, but that ye are a poor ignorant creature,
that have done us this day some not unpleasant service, we wad have a
red iron driven through your tongue, _in terrorem_ of others.--Awa with
him, Geordie,--pay him, plack and bawbee, out of our monies in your
hands, and let them care that come ahint."

Richie, who had counted with the utmost certainty upon the success
of this master-stroke of policy, was like an architect whose whole
scaffolding at once gives way under him. He caught, however, at what
he thought might break his fall. "Not only the sum for which the jewels
were pledged," he said, "but the double of it, if required, should be
placed at his Majesty's command, and even without hope or condition of
repayment, if only--"

But the king did not allow him to complete the sentence, crying out with
greater vehemence than before, as if he dreaded the stability of his own
good resolutions,--"Awa wi' him--swith awa wi' him! It is time he
were gane, if he doubles his bode that gate. And, for your life, letna
Steenie, or ony of them, hear a word from his mouth; for wha kens what
trouble that might bring me into! _Ne inducas in tentationem_--_Vade
retro, Sathanas!--Amen_."

In obedience to the royal mandate, George Heriot hurried the abashed
petitioner out of the presence and out of the Palace; and, when they
were in the Palace-yard, the citizen, remembering with some resentment
the airs of equality which Richie had assumed towards him in the
commencement of the scene which had just taken place, could not forbear
to retaliate, by congratulating him with an ironical smile on his favour
at Court, and his improved grace in presenting a supplication.

"Never fash your beard about that, Master George Heriot," said Richie,
totally undismayed; "but tell me when and where I am to sifflicate
you for eight hundred pounds sterling, for which these jewels stood
engaged?"

"The instant that you bring with you the real owner of the money,"
replied Heriot; "whom it is important that I should see on more accounts
than one."

"Then will I back to his Majesty," said Richie Moniplies, stoutly, "and
get either the money or the pledge back again. I am fully commissionate
to act in that matter."

"It may be so, Richie," said the citizen, "and perchance it may _not_
be so neither, for your tales are not all gospel; and, therefore, be
assured I will see that it _is_ so, ere I pay you that large sum of
money. I shall give you an acknowledgment for it, and I will keep it
prestable at a moment's warning. But, my good Richard Moniplies, of
Castle Collop, near the West Port of Edinburgh, in the meantime I am
bound to return to his Majesty on matters of weight." So speaking, and
mounting the stair to re-enter the Palace, he added, by way of summing
up the whole,--"George Heriot is over old a cock to be caught with
chaff."

Richie stood petrified when he beheld him re-enter the Palace, and found
himself, as he supposed, left in the lurch.--"Now, plague on ye," he
muttered, "for a cunning auld skinflint! that, because ye are an honest
man yoursell, forsooth, must needs deal with all the world as if they
were knaves. But deil be in me if ye beat me yet!--Gude guide us!
yonder comes Laurie Linklater next, and he will be on me about the
sifflication.--I winna stand him, by Saint Andrew!"

So saying, and changing the haughty stride with which he had that
morning entered the precincts of the Palace, into a skulking shamble, he
retreated for his wherry, which was in attendance, with speed which, to
use the approved phrase on such occasions, greatly resembled a flight.




CHAPTER XXXII


_Benedict_. This looks not like a nuptial. _Much Ado About Nothing._

Master George Heriot had no sooner returned to the king's apartment,
than James inquired of Maxwell if the Earl of Huntinglen was in
attendance, and, receiving an answer in the affirmative, desired that he
should be admitted. The old Scottish Lord having made his reverence
in the usual manner, the king extended his hand to be kissed, and then
began to address him in a tone of great sympathy.

"We told your lordship in our secret epistle of this morning, written
with our ain hand, in testimony we have neither pretermitted nor
forgotten your faithful service, that we had that to communicate to you
that would require both patience and fortitude to endure, and therefore
exhorted you to peruse some of the most pithy passages of Seneca, and of
Boethius _de Consolatione_, that the back may be, as we say, fitted for
the burden--This we commend to you from our ain experience.

     'Non ignara mail, miseris succurrere disco,'

sayeth Dido, and I might say in my own person, _non ignarus_; but
to change the gender would affect the prosody, whereof our southern
subjects are tenacious. So, my Lord of Huntinglen, I trust you have
acted by our advice, and studied patience before ye need it--_venienti
occurrite morbo_--mix the medicament when the disease is coming on."

"May it please your Majesty," answered Lord Huntinglen, "I am more of an
old soldier than a scholar--and if my own rough nature will not bear
me out in any calamity, I hope I shall have grace to try a text of
Scripture to boot."

"Ay, man, are you there with your bears?" said the king; "The Bible,
man," (touching his cap,) "is indeed _principium et fons_--but it is
pity your lordship cannot peruse it in the original. For although we did
ourselves promote that work of translation,--since ye may read, at the
beginning of every Bible, that when some palpable clouds of darkness
were thought like to have overshadowed the land, after the setting of
that bright occidental star, Queen Elizabeth; yet our appearance, like
that of the sun in his strength, instantly dispelled these surmised
mists,--I say, that although, as therein mentioned, we countenanced
the preaching of the gospel, and especially the translation of the
Scriptures out of the original sacred tongues; yet nevertheless, we
ourselves confess to have found a comfort in consulting them in the
original Hebrew, whilk we do not perceive even in the Latin version of
the Septuagint, much less in the English traduction."

"Please your Majesty," said Lord Huntinglen, "if your Majesty delays
communicating the bad news with which your honoured letter threatens me,
until I am capable to read Hebrew like your Majesty, I fear I shall
die in ignorance of the misfortune which hath befallen, or is about to
befall, my house."

"You will learn it but too soon, my lord," replied the king. "I grieve
to say it, but your son Dalgarno, whom I thought a very saint, as he was
so much with Steenie and Baby Charles, hath turned out a very villain."

"Villain!" repeated Lord Huntinglen; and though he instantly checked
himself, and added, "but it is your Majesty speaks the word," the effect
of his first tone made the king step back as if he had received a blow.
He also recovered himself again, and said in the pettish way which
usually indicated his displeasure--"Yes, my lord, it was we that said
it--_non surdo canis_--we are not deaf--we pray you not to raise your
voice in speech with us--there is the bonny memorial--read, and judge
for yourself."

The king then thrust into the old nobleman's hand a paper, containing
the story of the Lady Hermione, with the evidence by which it was
supported, detailed so briefly and clearly, that the infamy of Lord
Dalgarno, the lover by whom she had been so shamefully deceived, seemed
undeniable. But a father yields not up so easily the cause of his son.

"May it please your Majesty," he said, "why was this tale not sooner
told? This woman hath been here for years--wherefore was the claim on my
son not made the instant she touched English ground?"

"Tell him how that came about, Geordie," said the king, dressing Heriot.

"I grieve to distress my Lord Huntinglen," said Heriot; "but I must speak
the truth. For a long time the Lady Hermione could not brook the idea
of making her situation public; and when her mind became changed in
that particular, it was necessary to recover the evidence of the false
marriage, and letters and papers connected with it, which, when she
came to Paris, and just before I saw her, she had deposited with a
correspondent of her father in that city. He became afterwards bankrupt,
and in consequence of that misfortune the lady's papers passed into
other hands, and it was only a few days since I traced and recovered
them. Without these documents of evidence, it would have been imprudent
for her to have preferred her complaint, favoured as Lord Dalgarno is by
powerful friends."

"Ye are saucy to say sae," said the king; "I ken what ye mean weel
eneugh--ye think Steenie wad hae putten the weight of his foot into
the scales of justice, and garr'd them whomle the bucket--ye forget,
Geordie, wha it is whose hand uphaulds them. And ye do poor Steenie the
mair wrang, for he confessed it ance before us and our privy council,
that Dalgarno would have put the quean aff on him, the puir simple
bairn, making him trow that she was a light-o'-love; in whilk mind he
remained assured even when he parted from her, albeit Steenie might hae
weel thought ane of thae cattle wadna hae resisted the like of him."

"The Lady Hermione," said George Heriot, "has always done the utmost
justice to the conduct of the duke, who, although strongly possessed
with prejudice against her character, yet scorned to avail himself
of her distress, and on the contrary supplied her with the means of
extricating herself from her difficulties."

"It was e'en like himsell--blessings on his bonny face!" said the king;
"and I believed this lady's tale the mair readily, my Lord Huntinglen,
that she spake nae ill of Steenie--and to make a lang tale short, my
lord, it is the opinion of our council and ourself, as weel as of Baby
Charles and Steenie, that your son maun amend his wrong by wedding this
lady, or undergo such disgrace and discountenance as we can bestow."

The person to whom he spoke was incapable of answering him. He stood
before the king motionless, and glaring with eyes of which even the lids
seemed immovable, as if suddenly converted into an ancient statue of the
times of chivalry, so instantly had his hard features and strong limbs
been arrested into rigidity by the blow he had received--And in a second
afterwards, like the same statue when the lightning breaks upon it,
he sunk at once to the ground with a heavy groan. The king was in the
utmost alarm, called upon Heriot and Maxwell for help, and, presence
of mind not being his _forte_, ran to and fro in his cabinet,
exclaiming--"My ancient and beloved servant--who saved our anointed
self! _vae atque dolor!_ My Lord of Huntinglen, look up--look up, man,
and your son may marry the Queen of Sheba if he will."

By this time Maxwell and Heriot had raised the old nobleman, and placed
him on a chair; while the king, observing that he began to recover
himself, continued his consolations more methodically.

"Haud up your head--haud up your head, and listen to your ain kind
native Prince. If there is shame, man, it comesna empty-handed--there
is siller to gild it--a gude tocher, and no that bad a pedigree;--if she
has been a loon, it was your son made her sae, and he can make her an
honest woman again."

These suggestions, however reasonable in the common case, gave no
comfort to Lord Huntinglen, if indeed he fully comprehended them; but
the blubbering of his good-natured old master, which began to accompany
and interrupt his royal speech, produced more rapid effect. The large
tear gushed reluctantly from his eye, as he kissed the withered hands,
which the king, weeping with less dignity and restraint, abandoned to
him, first alternately and then both together, until the feelings of the
man getting entirely the better of the Sovereign's sense of dignity, he
grasped and shook Lord Huntinglen's hands with the sympathy of an equal
and a familiar friend.

"_Compone lachrymas_," said the Monarch; "be patient, man, be patient;
the council, and Baby Charles, and Steenie, may a' gang to the
deevil--he shall not marry her since it moves you so deeply."

"He _shall_ marry her, by God!" answered the earl, drawing himself
up, dashing the tear from his eyes, and endeavouring to recover his
composure. "I pray your Majesty's pardon, but he shall marry her, with
her dishonour for her dowry, were she the veriest courtezan in all
Spain--If he gave his word, he shall make his word good, were it to
the meanest creature that haunts the streets--he shall do it, or my own
dagger shall take the life that I gave him. If he could stoop to use so
base a fraud, though to deceive infamy, let him wed infamy."

"No, no!" the Monarch continued to insinuate, "things are not so bad as
that--Steenie himself never thought of her being a streetwalker, even
when he thought the worst of her."

"If it can at all console my Lord of Huntinglen," said the citizen, "I
can assure him of this lady's good birth, and most fair and unspotted
fame."

"I am sorry for it," said Lord Huntinglen--then interrupting himself, he
said--"Heaven forgive me for being ungrateful for such comfort!--but I
am well-nigh sorry she should be as you represent her, so much better
than the villain deserves. To be condemned to wed beauty and innocence
and honest birth--"

"Ay, and wealth, my lord--wealth," insinuated the king, "is a better
sentence than his perfidy has deserved."

"It is long," said the embittered father, "since I saw he was selfish
and hardhearted; but to be a perjured liar--I never dreaded that such a
blot would have fallen on my race! I will never look on him again."

"Hoot ay, my lord, hoot ay," said the king; "ye maun tak him to task
roundly. I grant you should speak more in the vein of Demea than Mitio,
_vi nempe et via pervulgata patrum_; but as for not seeing him again,
and he your only son, that is altogether out of reason. I tell ye, man,
(but I would not for a boddle that Baby Charles heard me,) that he might
gie the glaiks to half the lasses of Lonnun, ere I could find in my
heart speak such harsh words as you have said of this deil of a Dalgarno
of yours."

"May it please your Majesty to permit me to retire," said Lord
Huntinglen, "and dispose of the case according to your own royal sense
of justice, for I desire no favour for him."

"Aweel, my lord, so be it; and if your lordship can think," added the
Monarch, "of any thing in our power which might comfort you--"

"Your Majesty's gracious sympathy," said Lord Huntinglen, "has already
comforted me as far as earth can; the rest must be from the King of
kings."

"To Him I commend you, my auld and faithful servant," said James with
emotion, as the earl withdrew from his presence. The king remained fixed
in thought for some time, and then said to Heriot, "Jingling Geordie,
ye ken all the privy doings of our Court, and have dune so these thirty
years, though, like a wise man, ye hear, and see, and say nothing.
Now, there is a thing I fain wad ken, in the way of philosophical
inquiry--Did you ever hear of the umquhile Lady Huntinglen, the departed
Countess of this noble earl, ganging a wee bit gleed in her walk through
the world; I mean in the way of slipping a foot, casting a leglin-girth,
or the like, ye understand me?"

[Footnote: A leglin-girth is the lowest hoop upon a _leglin_, or
milk-pail. Allan Ramsay applies the phrase in the same metaphorical
sense.

"Or bairns can read, they first maun spell, I learn'd this frae my
mammy, And cast a leglin-girth mysell,
 Lang ere I married Tammy."
                              _Christ's Kirk On The Green_.]

"On my word as an honest man," said George Heriot, somewhat surprised
at the question, "I never heard her wronged by the slightest breath
of suspicion. She was a worthy lady, very circumspect in her walk, and
lived in great concord with her husband, save that the good Countess was
something of a puritan, and kept more company with ministers than was
altogether agreeable to Lord Huntinglen, who is, as your Majesty well
knows, a man of the old rough world, that will drink and swear."

"O Geordie!" exclaimed the king, "these are auld-warld frailties, of
whilk we dare not pronounce even ourselves absolutely free. But the
warld grows worse from day to day, Geordie. The juveniles of this age
may weel say with the poet--

     'Aetas parentum, pejor avis, tulit Nos nequiores--'

This Dalgarno does not drink so much, or swear so much, as his father;
but he wenches, Geordie, and he breaks his word and oath baith. As
to what you say of the leddy, and the ministers, we are a' fallible
creatures, Geordie, priests and kings, as weel as others; and wha kens
but what that may account for the difference between this Dalgarno and
his father? The earl is the vera soul of honour, and cares nae mair for
warld's gear than a noble hound for the quest of a foulmart; but as
for his son, he was like to brazen us a' out--ourselves, Steenie, Baby
Charles, and our council--till he heard of the tocher, and then, by my
kingly crown, he lap like a cock at a grossart! These are discrepancies
betwixt parent and son not to be accounted for naturally, according to
Baptista Porta, Michael Scott _de secretis_, and others.--Ah, Jingling
Geordie, if your clouting the caldron, and jingling on pots, pans, and
veshels of all manner of metal, hadna jingled a' your grammar out of
your head, I could have touched on that matter to you at mair length."

Heriot was too plain-spoken to express much concern for the loss of his
grammar learning on this occasion; but after modestly hinting that he
had seen many men who could not fill their father's bonnet, though no
one had been suspected of wearing their father's nightcap, he inquired
"whether Lord Dalgarno had consented to do the Lady Hermione justice."

"Troth, man, I have small doubt that he will," quoth the king; "I gave
him the schedule of her worldly substance, which you delivered to us in
the council, and we allowed him half-an-hour to chew the cud upon that.
It is rare reading for bringing him to reason. I left Baby Charles and
Steenie laying his duty before him; and if he can resist doing what
_they_ desire him--why, I wish he would teach _me_ the gate of it. O
Geordie, Jingling Geordie, it was grand to hear Baby Charles laying down
the guilt of dissimulation, and Steenie lecturing on the turpitude of
incontinence!"

"I am afraid," said George Heriot, more hastily than prudently, "I might
have thought of the old proverb of Satan reproving sin."

"Deil hae our saul, neighbour," said the king, reddening, "but ye are
not blate! I gie ye license to speak freely, and, by our saul, ye do not
let the privilege become lost _non utendo_--it will suffer no negative
prescription in your hands. Is it fit, think ye, that Baby Charles
should let his thoughts be publicly seen?--No--no--princes' thoughts are
_arcana imperii_--_Qui nescit dissimulare nescit regnare_. Every liege
subject is bound to speak the whole truth to the king, but there is
nae reciprocity of obligation--and for Steenie having been whiles a
dike-louper at a time, is it for you, who are his goldsmith, and to
whom, I doubt, he awes an uncomatable sum, to cast that up to him?"

Heriot did not feel himself called on to play the part of Zeno and
sacrifice himself for upholding the cause of moral truth; he did not
desert it, however, by disavowing his words, but simply expressed
sorrow for having offended his Majesty, with which the placable king was
sufficiently satisfied.

"And now, Geordie, man," quoth he, "we will to this culprit, and hear
what he has to say for himself, for I will see the job cleared this
blessed day. Ye maun come wi' me, for your evidence may be wanted."

The king led the way, accordingly, into a larger apartment, where the
Prince, the Duke of Buckingham, and one or two privy counsellors were
seated at a table, before which stood Lord Dalgarno, in an attitude of
as much elegant ease and indifference as could be expressed, considering
the stiff dress and manners of the times.

All rose and bowed reverently, while the king, to use a north country
word, expressive of his mode of locomotion, _toddled_ to his chair or
throne, making a sign to Heriot to stand behind him.

"We hope," said his Majesty, "that Lord Dalgarno stands prepared to do
justice to this unfortunate lady, and to his own character and honour?"

"May I humbly inquire the penalty," said Lord Dalgarno, "in case
I should unhappily find compliance with your Majesty's demands
impossible?"

"Banishment frae our Court, my lord," said the king; "frae our Court and
our countenance."

"Unhappy exile that I may be!" said Lord Dalgarno, in a tone of subdued
irony--"I will at least carry your Majesty's picture with me, for I
shall never see such another king."

"And banishment, my lord," said the Prince, sternly, "from these our
dominions."

"That must be by form of law, please your Royal Highness," said
Dalgarno, with an affectation of deep respect; "and I have not heard
that there is a statute, compelling us, under such penalty, to marry
every woman we may play the fool with. Perhaps his Grace of Buckingham
can tell me?"

"You are a villain, Dalgarno," said the haughty and vehement favourite.

"Fie, my lord, fie!--to a prisoner, and in presence of your royal and
paternal gossip!" said Lord Dalgarno. "But I will cut this deliberation
short. I have looked over this schedule of the goods and effects of
Erminia Pauletti, daughter of the late noble--yes, he is called the
noble, or I read wrong, Giovanni Pauletti, of the Houee of Sansovino,
in Genoa, and of the no less noble Lady Maud Olifaunt, of the House of
Glenvarloch--Well, I declare that I was pre-contracted in Spain to this
noble lady, and there has passed betwixt us some certain _proelibatio
matrimonii_; and now, what more does this grave assembly require of me?"

"That you should repair the gross and infamous wrong you have done the
lady, by marrying her within this hour," said the Prince.

"O, may it please your Royal Highness," answered Dalgarno, "I have a
trifling relationship with an old Earl, who calls himself my father, who
may claim some vote in the matter. Alas! every son is not blessed with
an obedient parent!" He hazarded a slight glance towards the throne, to
give meaning to his last words.

"We have spoken ourselves with Lord Huntinglen," said the king, "and are
authorised to consent in his name."

"I could never have expected this intervention of a _proxaneta_, which
the vulgar translate blackfoot, of such eminent dignity," said Dalgarno,
scarce concealing a sneer. "And my father hath consented? He was wont
to say, ere we left Scotland, that the blood of Huntinglen and of
Glenvarloch would not mingle, were they poured into the same basin.
Perhaps he has a mind to try the experiment?"

"My lord," said James, "we will not be longer trifled with--Will you
instantly, and _sine mora_, take this lady to your wife, in our chapel?"

"_Statim atque instanter_," answered Lord Dalgarno; "for I perceive
by doing so, I shall obtain power to render great services to the
commonwealth--I shall have acquired wealth to supply the wants of
your Majesty, and a fair wife to be at the command of his Grace of
Buckingham."

The Duke rose, passed to the end of the table where Lord Dalgarno was
standing, and whispered in his ear, "You have placed a fair sister at my
command ere now."

This taunt cut deep through Lord Dalgarno's assumed composure. He
started as if an adder had stung him, but instantly composed himself,
and, fixing on the Duke's still smiling countenance an eye which spoke
unutterable hatred, he pointed the forefinger of his left hand to the
hilt of his sword, but in a manner which could scarce be observed by any
one save Buckingham. The Duke gave him another smile of bitter scorn,
and returned to his seat, in obedience to the commands of the king, who
continued calling out, "Sit down, Steenie, sit down, I command ye--we
will hae nae harnsbreaking here."

"Your Majesty needs not fear my patience," said Lord Dalgarno; "and
that I may keep it the better, I will not utter another word in this
presence, save those enjoined to me in that happy portion of the
Prayer-Book, which begins with _Dearly Beloved_, and ends with
_amazement_."

"You are a hardened villain, Dalgarno," said the king; "and were I the
lass, by my father's saul, I would rather brook the stain of having been
your concubine, than run the risk of becoming your wife. But she shall
be under our special protection.--Come, my lords, we will ourselves see
this blithesome bridal." He gave the signal by rising, and moved towards
the door, followed by the train. Lord Dalgarno attended, speaking to
none, and spoken to by no one, yet seeming as easy and unembarrassed in
his gait and manner as if in reality a happy bridegroom.

They reached the Chapel by a private entrance, which communicated from
the royal apartment. The Bishop of Winchester, in his pontifical dress,
stood beside the altar; on the other side, supported by Monna Paula, the
colourless, faded, half-lifeless form of the Lady Hermione, or Erminia
Pauletti. Lord Dalgarno bowed profoundly to her, and the Prince,
observing the horror with which she regarded him, walked up, and said
to her, with much dignity,--"Madam, ere you put yourself under the
authority of this man, let me inform you, he hath in the fullest degree
vindicated your honour, so far as concerns your former intercourse. It
is for you to consider whether you will put your fortune and happiness
into the hands of one, who has shown himself unworthy of all trust."

The lady, with much difficulty, found words to make reply. "I owe to
his Majesty's goodness," she said, "the care of providing me some
reservation out of my own fortune, for my decent sustenance. The rest
cannot be better disposed than in buying back the fair fame of which I
am deprived, and the liberty of ending my life in peace and seclusion."

"The contract has been drawn up," said the king, "under our own eye,
specially discharging the _potestas maritalis_, and agreeing they shall
live separate. So buckle them, my Lord Bishop, as fast as you can, that
they may sunder again the sooner."

The Bishop accordingly opened his book and commenced the marriage
ceremony, under circumstances so novel and so inauspicious. The
responses of the bride were only expressed by inclinations of the
head and body; while those of the bridegroom were spoken boldly and
distinctly, with a tone resembling levity, if not scorn. When it was
concluded, Lord Dalgarno advanced as if to salute the bride, but seeing
that she drew back in fear and abhorrence, he contented himself with
making her a low bow. He then drew up his form to its height, and
stretched himself as if examining the power of his limbs, but elegantly,
and without any forcible change of attitude. "I could caper yet,"
he said "though I am in fetters--but they are of gold, and lightly
worn.--Well, I see all eyes look cold on me, and it is time I should
withdraw. The sun shines elsewhere than in England! But first I must ask
how this fair Lady Dalgarno is to be bestowed. Methinks it is but decent
I should know. Is she to be sent to the harem of my Lord Duke? Or is
this worthy citizen, as before--"

"Hold thy base ribald tongue!" said his father, Lord Huntinglen, who had
kept in the background during the ceremony, and now stepping suddenly
forward, caught the lady by the arm, and confronted her unworthy
husband.--"The Lady Dalgarno," he continued, "shall remain as a widow in
my house. A widow I esteem her, as much as if the grave had closed over
her dishonoured husband."

Lord Dalgarno exhibited momentary symptoms of extreme confusion, and
said, in a submissive tone, "If you, my lord, can wish me dead, I
