will, which reached its highest virtue, as mystics hold, in its own
suicide, she chained down her senses from every sight and sound,
and even her mind from every thought, and lay utterly self-resigned,
self-emptied, till consciousness of time and place had vanished, and she
seemed to herself alone in the abyss.

She dared not reflect, she dared not hope, she dared not rejoice, lest
she should break the spell.... Again and again had she broken it at this
very point, by some sudden and tumultuous yielding to her own joy or
awe; but now her will held firm.... She did not feel her own limbs, hear
her own breath.... A light bright mist, an endless network of glittering
films, coming, going, uniting, resolving themselves, was above her
and around her.... Was she in the body or out of the body?....
...............

The network faded into an abyss of still clear light.... A still warm
atmosphere was around her, thrilling through and through her .... She
breathed the light, and floated in it, as a mote in the mid-day beam....
And still her will held firm. ...............

Far away, miles, and aeons, and abysses away, through the interminable
depths of glory, a dark and shadowy spot. It neared and grew.... A dark
globe, ringed with rainbows.... What might it be? She dared not hope....
It came nearer, nearer, nearer, touched her.... The centre quivered,
flickered, took form--a face. A god's? No--Pelagia's.

Beautiful, sad, craving, reproachful, indignant, awful.... Hypatia could
bear no more: and sprang to her feet with a shriek, to experience in
its full bitterness the fearful revulsion of the mystic, when the human
reason and will which he has spurned reassert their God-given rights;
and after the intoxication of the imagination, come its prostration and
collapse.

And this, then, was the answer of the gods! The phantom of her whom
she had despised, exposed, spurned from her! 'No, not their answer--the
answer of my own soul! Fool that I have been! I have been exerting my
will most while I pretended to resign it most! I have been the slave
of every mental desire, while I tried to trample on them! What if that
network of light, that blaze, that globe of darkness, have been, like
the face of Pelagia, the phantoms of my own imagination--ay, even of
my own senses? What if I have mistaken for Deity my own self? What if I
have been my own light, my own abyss?.... Am I not my own abyss, my own
light--my own darkness?' And she smiled bitterly as she said it, and
throwing herself again upon the couch, buried her head in her hands,
exhausted equally in body and in mind.

At last she rose, and sat, careless of her dishevelled locks, gazing
out into vacancy. 'Oh for a sign, for a token! Oh for the golden days of
which the poets sang, when gods walked among men, fought by their side
as friends! And yet.... are these old stories credible, pious, even
modest? Does not my heart revolt from them? Who has shared more than I
in Plato's contempt for the foul deeds, the degrading transformations,
which Homer imputes to the gods of Greece? Must I believe them now? Must
I stoop to think that gods, who live in a region above all sense, will
deign to make themselves palpable to those senses of ours which are
whole aeons of existence below them? Degrade themselves to the base
accidents of matter? Yes! That, rather than nothing!.... Be it even so.
Better, better, better, to believe that Ares fled shrieking and wounded
from a mortal man--better to believe in Zeus's adulteries and Hermes's
thefts--than to believe that gods have never spoken face to face with
men! Let me think, lest I go mad, that beings from that unseen world for
which I hunger have appeared, and held communion with mankind, such
as no reason or sense could doubt--even though those beings were more
capricious and baser than ourselves! Is there, after all, an unseen
world? Oh for a sign, a sign!'

Haggard and dizzy, she wandered into her 'chamber of the gods'; a
collection of antiquities, which she kept there rather as matters of
taste than of worship. All around her they looked out into vacancy with
their white soulless eyeballs, their dead motionless beauty, those cold
dreams of the buried generations. Oh that they could speak, and set her
heart at rest! At the lower end of the room stood a Pallas, completely
armed with aegis, spear, and helmet; a gem of Athenian sculpture, which
she had bought from some merchants after the sack of Athens by the
Goths. There it stood severely fair; but the right hand, alas! was gone;
and there the maimed arm remained extended, as if in sad mockery of the
faith of which the body remained, while the power was dead and vanished.

She gazed long and passionately on the image of her favourite goddess,
the ideal to which she had longed for years to assimilate herself;
till--was it a dream? was it a frolic of the dying sunlight? or did
those lips really bend themselves into a smile?

Impossible! No, not impossible. Had not, only a few years before, the
image of Hecate smiled on a philosopher? Were there not stories of
moving images, and winking pictures, and all the material miracles by
which a dying faith strives desperately--not to deceive others--but to
persuade itself of its own sanity? It had been--it might be--it was--!

No! there the lips were, as they had been from the beginning, closed
upon each other in that stony self-collected calm, which was only not a
sneer. The wonder, if it was one, had passed: and now--did her eyes play
her false, or were the snakes round that Medusa's head upon the shield
all writhing, grinning, glaring at her with stony eyes, longing to
stiffen her with terror into their own likeness?

No! that, too, passed. Would that even it had stayed, for it would
have been a sign of life! She looked up at the face once more: but in
vain--the stone was stone; and ere she was aware, she found herself
clasping passionately the knees of the marble.

'Athene! Pallas! Adored! Ever Virgin! Absolute reason, springing
unbegotten from the nameless One! Hear me! Athene! Have mercy on me!
Speak, if it be to curse me! Thou who alone wieldest the lightnings
of thy father, wield them to strike me dead, if thou wilt; only do
something!--something to prove thine own existence--something to make
me sure that anything exists beside this gross miserable matter, and my
miserable soul. I stand alone in the centre of the universe! I fall and
sicken down the abyss of ignorance, and doubt, and boundless blank
and darkness! Oh, have mercy! I know that thou art not this! Thou art
everywhere and in all things! But I know that this is a form which
pleases thee, which symbolises thy nobleness! T know that thou hast
deigned to speak to those who--Oh! what do I know? Nothing! nothing!
nothing!

And she clung there, bedewing with scalding tears the cold feet of the
image, while there was neither sign, nor voice, nor any that answered.

On a sudden she was startled by a rustling near; and, looking round, saw
close behind her the old Jewess.

'Cry aloud!' hissed the hag, in a tone of bitter scorn; 'cry aloud, for
she is a goddess. Either she is talking, or pursuing, or she is on a
journey; or perhaps she has grown old, as we all shall do some day, my
pretty lady, and is too cross and lazy to stir. What! her naughty doll
will not speak to her, will it not? or even open its eyes, because the
wires are grown rusty? Well, we will find a new doll for her, if she
chooses.'

'Begone, hag! What do you mean by intruding here?' said Hypatia,
springing up; but the old woman went on coolly--

'Why not try the fair young gentleman over there?' pointing to a copy
of the Apollo which we call Belvedere--'What is his name? Old maids are
always cross and jealous, you know. But he--he could not be cruel to
such a sweet face as that. Try the fair young lad! Or, perhaps, if you
are bashful, the old Jewess might try him for you?'

These last words were spoken with so marked a significance, that
Hypatia, in spite of her disgust, found herself asking the hag what
she meant. She made no answer for a few seconds, but remained looking
steadily into her eyes with a glance of fire, before which even the
proud Hypatia, as she had done once before, quailed utterly, so deep was
the understanding, so dogged the purpose, so fearless the power, which
burned within those withered and shrunken sockets.

'Shall the old witch call him up, the fair young Apollo, with the
beauty-bloom upon his chin? He shall come! He shall come! I warrant him
he must come, civilly enough, when old Miriam's finger is once held up.'

'To you? Apollo, the god of light, obey a Jewess?'

'A Jewess? And you a Greek?' almost yelled the old woman. 'And who
are you who ask? And who are your gods, your heroes, your devils,
you children of yesterday, compared with us? You, who were a set of
half-naked savages squabbling about the siege of Troy, when our
Solomon, amid splendours such as Rome and Constantinople never saw, was
controlling demons and ghosts, angels and archangels, principalities and
powers, by the ineffable name? What science have you that you have not
stolen from the Egyptians and Chaldees? And what had the Egyptians which
Moses did not teach them? And what have the Chaldees which Daniel did
not teach them? What does the world know but from us, the fathers
and the masters of magic--us, the lords of the inner secrets of the
universe! Come, you Greek baby--as the priests in Egypt said of your
forefathers, always children, craving for a new toy, and throwing it
away next day--come to the fountainhead of all your paltry wisdom! Name
what you will see, and you shall see it!'

Hypatia was cowed; for of one thing there was no doubt,--that the woman
utterly believed her own words; and that was a state of mind of which
she had seen so little, that it was no wonder if it acted on her with
that overpowering sympathetic force, with which it generally does, and
perhaps ought to, act on the human heart. Besides, her school had always
looked to the ancient nations of the East for the primeval founts of
inspiration, the mysterious lore of mightier races long gone by. Might
she not have found it now?

The Jewess saw her advantage in a moment, and ran on, without giving her
time to answer--

'What sort shall it be, then? By glass and water, or by the moonlight
on the wall, or by the sieve, or by the meal? By the cymbals, or by the
stars? By the table of the twenty-four elements, by which the Empire
was promised to Theodosius the Great, or by the sacred counters of the
Assyrians, or by the sapphire of the Hecatic sphere? Shall I threaten,
as the Egyptian priests used to do, to tear Osiris again in pieces, or
to divulge the mysteries of Isis? I could do so, if I chose; for I know
them all and more. Or shall I use the ineffable name on Solomon's seal,
which we alone, of all the nations of the earth, know? No; it would be a
pity to waste that upon a heathen. It shall be by the sacred wafer. Look
here!--here they are, the wonder-working atomies! Eat no food this day,
except one of these every three hours, and come to me to-night at the
house of your porter, Eudaimon, bringing with you the black agate; and
then--why then, what you have the heart to see, you shall see!'

Hypatia took the wafers, hesitating--

'But what are they?'

'And you profess to explain Homer? Whom did I hear the other morning
lecturing away so glibly on the nepenthe which Helen gave the heroes, to
fill them with the spirit of joy and love; how it was an allegory of
the inward inspiration which flows from spiritual beauty, and all
that?--pretty enough, fair lady; but the question still remains, what
was it? and I say it was this. Take it and try; and then confess, that
while you can talk about Helen, I can act her; and know a little more
about Homer than you do, after all.'

'I cannot believe you! Give me some sign of your power, or how can I
trust you?'

'A sign?--A sign? Kneel down then there, with your face toward the
north; you are over tall for the poor old cripple.'

'I? I never knelt to human being.'

'Then consider that you kneel to the handsome idol there, if you
will--but kneel!'

And, constrained by that glittering eye, Hypatia knelt before her.

'Have you faith? Have you desire? Will you submit? Will you obey?
Self-will and pride see nothing, know nothing. If you do not give up
yourself, neither God nor devil will care to approach. Do you submit?'

'I do! I do!' cried poor Hypatia, in an agony of curiosity and
self-distrust, while she felt her eye quailing and her limbs loosening
more and more every moment under that intolerable fascination.

The old woman drew from her bosom a crystal, and placed the point
against Hypatia's breast. A cold shiver ran through her.... The witch
waved her hands mysteriously round her head, muttering from time to
time, 'Down! down, proud spirit!' and then placed the tips of her skinny
fingers on the victim's forehead. Gradually her eyelids became heavy;
again and again she tried to raise them, and dropped them again
before those fixed glaring eyes...., and in another moment she lost
consciousness....

When she awoke, she was kneeling in a distant part of the room, with
dishevelled hair and garments. What was it so cold that she was clasping
in her arms? The feet of the Apollo! The hag stood by her, chuckling to
herself and clapping her hands.

'How came I here? What have I been doing?'

'Saying such pretty things!--paying the fair youth there such
compliments, as he will not be rude enough to forget in his visit
to-night. A charming prophetic trance you have had! Ah ha! you are not
the only woman who is wiser asleep than awake! Well, you will make a
very pretty Cassandra-or a Clytia, if you have the sense.... It lies
with you, my fair lady. Are you satisfied now? Will you have any more
signs? Shall the old Jewess blast those blue eyes blind to show that she
knows more than the heathen?'

'Oh, I believe you--I believe,' cried the poor exhausted maiden. 'I will
come; and yet--'

'Ah! yes! You had better settle first how he shall appear.'

'As he wills!--let him only come! only let me know that he is a god.
Abamnon said that gods appeared in a clear, steady, unbearable light,
amid a choir of all the lesser deities, archangels, principalities, and
heroes, who derive their life from them.'

'Abamnon was an old fool, then. Do you think young Phoebus ran after
Daphne with such a mob at his heels? or that Jove, when he swam up to
Leda, headed a whole Nile-flock of ducks, and plover, and curlews? No,
he shall come alone--to you alone; and then you may choose for yourself
between Cassandra and Clytia.... Farewell. Do not forget your wafers,
or the agate either, and talk with no one between now and sunset. And
then--my pretty lady!'

And laughing to herself, the old hag glided from the room.

Hypatia sat trembling with shame and dread. She, as a disciple of the
more purely spiritualistic school of Porphyry, had always looked with
aversion, with all but contempt, on those theurgic arts which were so
much lauded and employed by Iamblicus, Abamnon, and those who clung
lovingly to the old priestly rites of Egypt and Chaldaea. They had
seemed to her vulgar toys, tricks of legerdemain, suited only for the
wonder of the mob.... She began to think of them with more favour now.
How did she know that the vulgar did not require signs and wonders to
make them believe?.... How, indeed? for did she not want such herself?
And she opened Abamnon's famous letter to Porphyry, and read earnestly
over, for the twentieth time, his subtle justification of magic, and
felt it to be unanswerable. Magic? What was not magical? The whole
universe, from the planets over her head to the meanest pebble at her
feet, was utterly mysterious, ineffable, miraculous, influencing and
influenced by affinities and repulsions as unexpected, as unfathomable,
as those which, as Abamnon said, drew the gods towards those sounds,
those objects, which, either in form, or colour, or chemical properties,
were symbolic of, or akin to, themselves. What wonder in it, after
all? Was not love and hatred, sympathy and antipathy, the law of the
universe? Philosophers, when they gave mechanical explanations of
natural phenomena, came no nearer to the real solution of them. The
mysterious 'Why?' remained untouched.... All their analyses could only
darken with big words the plain fact that the water hated the oil
with which it refused to mix, the lime loved the acid which it eagerly
received into itself, and, like a lover, grew warm with the rapture of
affection. Why not? What right had we to deny sensation, emotion, to
them, any more than to ourselves? Was not the same universal spirit
stirring in them as in us? And was it not by virtue of that spirit that
we thought, and felt, and loved?--Then why not they, as well as we?
If the one spirit permeated all things, if its all-energising presence
linked the flower with the crystal as well as with the demon and the
god, must it not link together also the two extremes of the great chain
of being? bind even the nameless One itself to the smallest creature
which bore its creative impress? What greater miracle in the attraction
of a god or an angel, by material incense, symbols, and spells, than
in the attraction of one soul to another by the material sounds of the
human voice? Was the affinity between spirit and matter implied in that,
more miraculous than the affinity between the soul and the body?--than
the retention of that soul within that body by the breathing of material
air, the eating of material food? Or even, if the physicists were right,
and the soul were but a material product or energy of the nerves, and
the sole law of the universe the laws of matter, then was not magic
even more probable, more rational? Was it not fair by every analogy
to suppose that there might be other, higher beings than ourselves,
obedient to those laws, and therefore possible to be attracted, even as
human beings were, by the baits of material sights and sounds?.... If
spirit pervaded all things, then was magic probable; if nothing but
matter had existence, magic was morally certain. All that remained in
either case was the test of experience.... And had not that test been
applied in every age, and asserted to succeed? What more rational, more
philosophic action than to try herself those methods and ceremonies
which she was assured on every hand had never failed but through the
ignorance or unfitness of the neophyte?.... Abamnon must be right....
She dared not think him wrong; for if this last hope failed, what was
there left but to eat and drink, for to-morrow we die?



CHAPTER XXVI: MIRIAM'S PLOT


He who has worshipped a woman, even against his will and conscience,
knows well how storm may follow storm, and earthquake earthquake, before
his idol be utterly overthrown. And so Philammon found that evening,
as he sat pondering over the strange chances of the day; for, as he
pondered, his old feelings towards Hypatia began, in spite of the
struggles of his conscience and reason, to revive within him. Not only
pure love of her great loveliness, the righteous instinct which bids us
welcome and honour beauty, whether in man or woman, as something of
real worth--divine, heavenly, ay, though we know not how, in a most deep
sense eternal; which makes our reason give the lie to all merely logical
and sentimental maunderings of moralists about 'the fleeting hues of
this our painted clay'; telling men, as the old Hebrew Scriptures tell
them, that physical beauty is the deepest of all spiritual symbols;
and that though beauty without discretion be the jewel of gold in the
swine's snout, yet the jewel of gold it is still, the sacrament of an
inward beauty, which ought to be, perhaps hereafter may be, fulfilled
in spirit and in truth. Not only this, which whispered to him--and
who shall say that the whisper was of the earth, or of the lower
world?--'She is too beautiful to be utterly evil'; but the very defect
in her creed which he had just discovered, drew him towards her again.
She had no Gospel for the Magdalene, because she was a Pagan.... That,
then, was the fault of her Paganism, not of herself. She felt for
Pelagia, but even if she had not, was not that, too, the fault of her
Paganism? And for that Paganism who was to be blamed? She?.... Was
he the man to affirm that? Had he not seen scandals, stupidities,
brutalities, enough to shake even his faith, educated a Christian? How
much more excuse for her, more delicate, more acute, more lofty than he;
the child, too of a heathen father? Her perfections, were they not
her own?--her defects, those of her circumstances?.... And had she not
welcomed him, guarded him, taught him, honoured him?.... Could he turn
against her? above all now in her distress--perhaps her danger? Was he
not bound to her, if by nothing else, by gratitude? Was not he, of all
men, bound to believe that all she required to make her perfect was
conversion to the true faith?.... And that first dream of converting her
arose almost as bright as ever.... Then he was checked by the thought
of his first utter failure.... At least, if he could not convert her, he
could love her, pray for her.... No, he could not even do that; for to
whom could he pray? He had to repent, to be forgiven, to humble himself
by penitence, perhaps for years, ere he could hope to be heard even for
himself, much less for another.... And so backwards and forwards swayed
his hope and purpose, till he was roused from his meditation by the
voice of the little porter summoning him to his evening meal; and
recollecting, for the first time, that he had tasted no food that day,
he went down, half-unwillingly, and ate.

But as he, the porter, and his negro wife were sitting silently and
sadly enough together, Miriam came in, apparently in high good humour,
and lingered a moment on her way to her own apartments upstairs.

'Eh? At supper? And nothing but lentils and water-melons, when the
flesh-pots of Egypt have been famous any time these two thousand years.
Ah! but times are changed since then!.... You have worn out the old
Hebrew hints, you miserable Gentiles, you, and got a Caesar instead of
a Joseph! Hist, you hussies!' cried she to the girls upstairs, clapping
her hands loudly. 'Here! bring us down one of those roast chickens,
and a bottle of the wine of wines--the wine with the green seal, you
careless daughters of Midian, you, with your wits running on the men,
I'll warrant, every minute I've been out of the house! Ah, you'll smart
for it some day--you'll smart for it some day, you daughters of Adam's
first wife!'

Down came, by the hands of one of the Syrian slave-girls, the fowl and
the wine.

'There, now; we'll all sup together. Wine, that maketh glad the heart of
man!--Youth, you were a monk once, so you have read all about that, eh?
and about the best wine which goes down sweetly, causing the lips of
them that are asleep to speak. And rare wine it was, I warrant, which
the blessed Solomon had in his little country cellar up there in
Lebanon. We'll try if this is not a very fair substitute for it, though.
Come, my little man-monkey, drink, and forget your sorrow! You shall
be temple-sweeper to Beelzebub yet, I promise you. Look at it there,
creaming and curdling, the darling! purring like a cat at the very
thought of touching human lips! As sweet as honey, as strong as fire, as
clear as amber! Drink, ye children of Gehenna; and make good use of the
little time that is left you between this and the unquenchable fire!'

And tossing a cup of it down her own throat, as if it had been water,
she watched her companions with a meaning look, as they drank.

The little porter followed her example gallantly. Philammon looked, and
longed, and sipped blushingly and bashfully, and tried to fancy that he
did not care for it; and sipped again, being willing enough to forget
his sorrow also for a moment; the negress refused with fear and
trembling--'She had a vow on her.'

'Satan possess you and your vow! Drink, you coal out of Tophet! Do you
think it is poisoned? You, the only creature in the world that I should
not enjoy ill-using, because every one else ill-uses you already without
my help! Drink, I say, or I'll turn you pea-green from head to foot!'


The negress put the cup to her lips, and contrived, for her own reasons,
to spill the contents unobserved.

'A very fine lecture that of the Lady Hypatia's the other morning, on
Helen's nepenthe,' quoth the little porter, growing philosophic as
the wine-fumes rose. 'Such a power of extracting the cold water of
philosophy out of the bottomless pit of Mythus, I never did hear. Did
you ever, my Philammonidion?'

'Aha! she and I were talking about that half an hour ago,' said Miriam.

'What! have you seen her?' asked Philammon, with a flutter of the heart.

'If you mean, did she mention you,--why, then, yes!'

'How?--how?'

'Talked of a young Phoebus Apollo--without mentioning names, certainly,
but in the most sensible, and practical, and hopeful way--the wisest
speech that I have heard from her this twelvemonth.'

Philammon blushed scarlet.

'And that,' thought he, in spite of what passed this morning!--Why' what
is the matter with our host?'

'He has taken Solomon's advice, and forgotten his sorrow.'

And so, indeed, he had; for he was sleeping sweetly, with open
lack-lustre eyes, and a maudlin smile at the ceiling; while the negress,
with her head fallen on her chest, seemed equally unconscious of their
presence.

'We'll see,' quoth Miriam; and taking up the lamp, she held the flame
unceremoniously to the arm of each of them; but neither winced nor
stirred.

'Surely your wine is not drugged?' said Philammon, in trepidation.

'Why not? What has made them beasts, may make us angels. You seem none
the less lively for it! Do I?'

'But drugged wine?'

'Why not? The same who made wine made poppy-juice. Both will make man
happy. Why not use both?'

'It is poison!'

'It is the nepenthe, as I told Hypatia, whereof she was twaddling
mysticism this morning. Drink, child, drink! I have no mind to put
you to sleep to-night! I want to make a man of you, or rather, to see
whether you are one!'

And she drained another cup, and then went on, half talking to herself--

'Ay, it is poison; and music is poison; and woman is poison, according
to the new creed, Pagan and Christian; and wine will be poison, and
meat will be poison, some day; and we shall have a world full of mad
Nebuchadnezzars, eating grass like oxen. It is poisonous, and brutal,
and devilish, to be a man, and not a monk, and an eunuch, and a dry
branch. You are all in the same lie, Christians and philosophers, Cyril
and Hypatia! Don't interrupt me, but drink, young fool!--Ay, and the
only man who keeps his manhood, the only man who is not ashamed to be
what God has made him, is your Jew. You will find yourselves in want
of him after all, some day, you besotted Gentiles, to bring you back
to common sense and common manhood.--In want of him and his grand old
books, which you despise while you make idols of them, about Abraham,
and Jacob, and Moses, and David, and Solomon, whom you call saints, you
miserable hypocrites, though they did what you are too dainty to do,
and had their wives and their children, and thanked God for a beautiful
woman, as Adam did before them, and their sons do after them--Drink, I
say--and believed that God had really made the world, and not the devil,
and had given them the lordship over it, as you will find out to your
cost some day.'

Philammon heard, and could not answer; and on she rambled.

'And music, too? Our priests were not afraid of sackbut and psaltery,
dulcimer and trumpet, in the house of the Lord; for they knew who had
given them the cunning to make them. Our prophets were not afraid of
calling for music, when they wished to prophesy, and letting it soften
and raise their souls, and open and quicken them till they saw into the
inner harmony of things, and beheld the future in the present; for they
knew who made the melody and harmony, and made them the outward symbols
of the inward song which runs through sun and stars, storm and tempest,
fulfilling his word--in that these sham philosophers the heathen are
wiser than those Christian monks. Try it!--try it! Come with me! Leave
these sleepers here, and come to my rooms. You long to be as wise as
Solomon. Then get at wisdom as Solomon did, and give your heart first to
know folly and madness.... You have read the Book of the Preacher?'

Poor Philammon! He was no longer master of himself. The arguments--the
wine--the terrible spell of the old woman's voice and eye, and the
strong overpowering will which showed out through them, dragged him
along in spite of himself. As if in a dream, he followed her up the
stairs.

'There, throw away that stupid, ugly, shapeless philosopher's cloak.
So! You have on the white tunic I gave you? And now you look as a human
being should. And you have been to the baths to-day? Well--you have the
comfort of feeling now like other people, and having that alabaster skin
as white as it was created, instead of being tanned like a brute's hide.
Drink, I say! Ay--what was that face, that figure, made for? Bring a
mirror here, hussy! There, look in that and judge for yourself? Were
those lips rounded for nothing? Why were those eyes set in your head,
and made to sparkle bright as jewels, sweet as mountain honey? Why were
those curls laid ready for soft fingers to twine themselves among
them, and look all the whiter among the glossy black knots? Judge for
yourself!'

Alas! poor Philammon!

'And after all,' thought he, 'is it not true, as well as pleasant?'

'Sing to the poor boy, girls!--sing to him! and teach him for the first
time in his little ignorant life, the old road to inspiration!'

One of the slave-girls sat down on the divan, and took up a double
flute; while the other rose, and accompanying the plaintive dreamy air
with a slow dance, and delicate twinklings of her silver armlets and
anklets, and the sistrum which she held aloft, she floated gracefully
round and round the floor and sang--

Why were we born but for bliss? Why are we ripe, but to fall? Dream
not that duty can bar thee from beauty, Like water and sunshine, the
heirloom of all.

Lips were made only to kiss; Hands were made only to toy; Eyes were made
only to lure on the lonely, The longing, the loving, and drown them in
joy!

Alas, for poor Philammon! And yet no! The very poison brought with it
its own anti-dote; and, shaking off by one strong effort of will the
spell of the music and the wine, he sprang to his feet....

'Never! If love means no more than that--if it is to be a mere delicate
self-indulgence, worse than the brute's, because it requires the
prostration of nobler faculties, and a selfishness the more huge in
proportion to the greatness of the soul which is crushed inward by
it--then I will have none of it! I have had my dream--yes! but it was
of one who should be at once my teacher and my pupil, my debtor and my
queen--who should lean on me, and yet support me--supply my defects,
although with lesser light, as the old moon fills up the circle of the
new--labour with me side by side in some great work--rising with me for
ever as I rose: and this is the base substitute! Never!'

Whether or not this was unconsciously forced into words by the vehemence
of his passion, or whether the old Jewess heard, or pretended to hear, a
footstep coming up the stair, she at all events sprang instantly to her
feet.

'Hist! Silence, girls! I hear a visitor. What mad maiden has come to beg
a love-charm of the poor old witch at this time of night? Or have the
Christian bloodhounds tracked the old lioness of Judah to her den at
last? We'll see!'

And she drew a dagger from her girdle, and stepped boldly to the door.
As she went out she turned--

'So! my brave young Apollo! You do not admire simple woman? You must
have something more learned and intellectual and spiritual, and so
forth. I wonder whether Eve, when she came to Adam in the garden,
brought with her a certificate of proficiency in the seven sciences?
Well, well--like must after like. Perhaps we shall be able to suit you
after all. Vanish, daughters of Midian!'

The girls vanished accordingly, whispering and laughing; and Philammon
found himself alone. Although he was somewhat soothed by the old woman's
last speech, yet a sense of terror, of danger, of coming temptation,
kept him standing sternly on his feet, looking warily round the chamber,
lest a fresh siren should emerge from behind some curtain or heap of
pillows.

On one side of the room he perceived a doorway, filled by a curtain of
gauze, from behind which came the sound of whispering voices. His fear,
growing with the general excitement of his mind, rose into anger as he
began to suspect some snare; and he faced round towards the curtain, and
stood like a wild beast at bay, ready, with uplifted arm, for all evil
spirits, male or female.

'And he will show himself? How shall I accost him?' whispered a
well-known voice--could it be Hypatia's? And then the guttural Hebrew
accent of the old woman answered-- 'As you spoke of him this morning--'

'Oh! I will tell him all, and he must--he must have mercy! But he?--so
awful, so glorious!--'

What the answer was, he could not hear but the next moment a sweet
heavy scent, as of narcotic gums, filled the room--mutterings of
incantations--and then a blaze of light, in which the curtain vanished,
and disclosed to his astonished eyes, enveloped in a glory of luminous
smoke, the hag standing by a tripod, and, kneeling by her, Hypatia
herself, robed in pure white, glittering with diamonds and gold, her
lips parted, her head thrown back, her arms stretched out in an agony of
expectation.

