should not be able to gain the house, Master Vickars; for we heard
that the Spaniards are broken in at several points."

"It was fortunately at the other end of the town to that which I
was stationed," Lionel said; "and I was just in time. You have a
grand hiding place here. It looks like the crypt of a church."

"That is just what it is," the mercer said. "It was the church of
a monastery that stood here a hundred years ago. The monks then
moved into a grander place in Paris, and the monastery and church
which adjoined our house were pulled down and houses erected upon
the site. My grandfather, knowing of the existence of the crypt,
thought that it might afford a rare hiding place in case of danger,
and had the passage driven from his cellar into it. Its existence
could never be suspected; for as our cellar extends over the whole
of our house, as can easily be seen, none would suspect that there
was a hiding place without our walls. There are three or four chambers
as large as this. One of them is stored with all my choicest silks
and velvets, another will serve as a chamber for you and me. I have
enough provisions for a couple of months, and even should they burn
the house down we are safe enough here."



CHAPTER XIX

STEENWYK


Three days passed, and then a slight noise was heard as of the trap
door being raised. Lionel drew his sword.

"It is my servant, no doubt," the merchant said; "he promised to come
and tell me how things went as soon as he could get an opportunity
to come down unobserved. We should hear more noise if it were the
Spaniards." Taking a light he went along the passage, and returned
immediately afterwards followed by his man; the latter had his head
bound up, and carried his arm in a sling. An exclamation of pity
broke from the ladies.

"You are badly hurt, Jacques. What has happened?"

"It is well it is no worse, mistress," he replied. "The Spaniards
are fiends, and behaved as if they were sacking a city of Dutch
Huguenots instead of entering a town inhabited by friends. For an
hour or two they cut and slashed, pillaged and robbed. They came
rushing into the shop, and before I could say a word one ran me
through the shoulder and another laid my head open. It was an hour
or two before I came to my senses. I found the house turned topsy
turvy; everything worth taking had gone, and what was not taken was
damaged. I tied up my head and arm as best I could, and then sat
quiet in a corner till the din outside began to subside. The officers
did their best, I hear, and at last got the men into order. Numbers
of the townsfolk have been killed, and every one of the garrison was
butchered. I tell you, mistress, it is better to have ten Huguenot
armies in possession one after another than one Spanish force, though
the latter come as friends and co-religionists. Well, as soon as
things quieted down the soldiers were divided among the houses of
the townsfolk, and we have a sergeant and ten men quartered above;
but half an hour ago they were called away on some duty, and I took
the opportunity to steal down here."

"Have you told them that we were away, Jacques?"

"No, monsieur; no one has asked me about it. They saw by the
pictures and shrines that you were good Catholics, and after the
first outburst they have left things alone. But if it is not too
dreary for the ladies here, I should advise you to wait for a time
and see how things go before you show yourselves."

"That is my opinion too, Jacques. We can wait here for another two
months if need be. Doubtless, unless the Huguenots show signs of
an intention to attack the town, only a small garrison will be left
here, and it may be that those in our house will be withdrawn."

"Do you think it will be possible for me to make my escape, Jacques?"
Lionel asked.

"I should think so, sir. Ever since the Spaniards entered the town
boats with provisions for Paris have been coming along in great
numbers. From what I hear the soldiers say there is no chance
of a battle at present, for the Huguenot army have drawn off to a
distance, seeing that Paris is revictualled and that there is no
chance of taking it. They say that numbers of the French lords with
the Huguenot army have drawn off and are making for their homes.
At any rate there is no fear of an attack here, and the gates stand
open all day. Numbers of the townsfolk have been to Paris to see
friends there, and I should say that if you had a disguise you
could pass out easily enough."

The question was discussed for some time. Lionel was very anxious
to rejoin the army, and it was finally settled that Jacques should
the next night bring him down a suit of his own clothes, and the
first time the soldiers were all away should fetch him out, accompany
him through the gates of the town, and act as his guide as far as
he could.

The next night Lionel received the clothes. Two days later Jacques
came down early in the morning to say that the soldiers above had
just gone out on duty. Lionel at once assumed his disguise, and
with the heartiest thanks for the great service they had rendered
him took his leave of the kind merchant and his family. Jacques was
charged to accompany him as far as possible, and to set him well
on his way towards the Huguenot army, for Lionel's small knowledge
of French would be detected by the first person who accosted him.
On going out into the street Lionel found that there were many
peasants who had come in to sell fowls, eggs, and vegetables in
the town, and he and Jacques passed without a question through the
gates.

Jacques had, the evening before, ascertained from the soldiers the
position of Parma's army. A long detour had to be made, and it was
two days before they came in sight of the tents of Henry's camp.
They had observed the greatest precautions on their way, and had
only once fallen in with a troop of Parma's cavalry. These had
asked no questions, supposing that Jacques and his companion were
making their way from Paris to visit their friends after the siege,
there being nothing in their attire to attract attention, still
less suspicion. The peasants they met on their way eagerly demanded
news from Paris, but Jacques easily satisfied them by saying that
they had had a terrible time, and that many had died of hunger,
but that now that the river was open again better times had come.
When within a couple of miles of the army Jacques said good-bye to
Lionel, who would have rewarded him handsomely for his guidance,
but Jacques would not accept money.

"You are the master's guest," he said, "and you saved his house
from plunder when your people were in possession. He and my mistress
would never forgive me if I took money from you. I am well content
in having been able to assist so kind a young gentleman."

When Lionel arrived at the camp he soon found his way to Sir Ralph
Pimpernel's tent, where he was received as one from the dead. There
was no difficulty in providing himself again with armour and arms,
for of these there were abundance--the spoils of Ivry--in the
camp. When he was reclothed and rearmed Sir Ralph took him to the
king's tent, and from him Henry learned for the first time the
circumstances that had attended the capture of Lagny.

"And so they put the whole garrison to the sword," the king said
with indignation. "I will make any Spaniards that fall in my hands
pay dearly for it!"

Henry had indeed been completely out generalled by his opponent.
While he had been waiting with his army for a pitched battle Parma
had invested Lagny, and there were no means of relieving it except
by crossing the river in the face of the whole army of the enemy,
an enterprise impossible of execution. As soon as Lagny had fallen
provisions and ammunition were at once poured into Paris, two
thousand boat loads arriving in a single day.

King Henry's army immediately fell to pieces. The cavalry having
neither food nor forage rode off by hundreds every day, and in a
week but two thousand out of his six thousand horse remained with
him. The infantry also, seeing now no hope of receiving their
arrears of pay, disbanded in large numbers, and after an unsuccessful
attempt to carry Paris by a night attack, the king fell back with
the remnant of his force. Corbeil was assaulted and captured by
Parma, and the two great rivers of Paris were now open.

If Parma could have remained with his army in France, the cause
of Henry of Navarre would have been lost. But sickness was making
ravages among his troops. Dissensions broke our between the Spaniards,
Italians, and Netherlanders of his army and their French allies,
who hated the foreigners, though they had come to their assistance.
Lastly, his presence was urgently required in the Netherlands,
where his work was as far from being done as ever. Therefore to the
dismay of the Leaguers he started early in November on his march
back.

No sooner did he retire than the king took the field again,
recaptured Lagny and Corbeil, and recommenced the siege of Paris,
while his cavalry hung upon the rear and flanks of Parma's army and
harassed them continually, until they crossed the frontier, where
the duke found that affairs had not improved during his absence.

Lionel had obtained permission to accompany the force which captured
Lagny, and as soon as they entered the town hurried to the mercer's
house. He found Jacques in possession, and learned that the family
had weeks before left the crypt and reoccupied the house, but had
again taken refuge there when the Huguenots attacked the town. Lionel
at once went below, and was received with delight. He was now able
to repay to some extent the obligations he had received from them,
by protecting them from all interference by the new captors of
the town, from whom the majority of the citizens received harsh
treatment for the part they had taken in attacking the garrison
when the Spaniards first entered.

Prince Maurice's visit to the camp of Henry had been but a short
one; and as soon as Parma had effected the relief of Paris, and
there was no longer a chance of a great battle being fought, he
returned to Holland, followed after the recapture of Lagny by Sir
Ralph Pimpernel and the few survivors of his party, who were all
heartily weary of the long period of inaction that had followed
the victory at Ivry.

They found that during their absence there had been little doing in
the Netherlands, save that Sir Francis Vere, with a small body of
English infantry and cavalry, had stormed some formidable works
the Spaniards had thrown up to prevent relief being given to
Recklinghausen, which they were besieging. He effected the relief
of the town and drove off the besiegers. He then attacked and captured
a fort on the bank of the Rhine, opposite the town of Wesel.

At the end of the year 1590 there were, including the garrisons,
some eight thousand English infantry and cavalry in Holland, and
the year that followed was to see a great change in the nature of
the war. The efforts of Prince Maurice to improve his army were to
bear effect, and with the assistance of his English allies he was
to commence an active offensive war, to astonish his foes by the
rapidity with which he manoeuvred the new fighting machine he had
created, and to commence a new departure in the tactics of war.

In May he took the field, requesting Vere to cooperate with him
in the siege of Zutphen. But Sir Francis determined in the first
place to capture on his own account the Zutphen forts on the opposite
side of the river, since these had been lost by the treachery of
Roland Yorke. He dressed up a score of soldiers, some as peasants,
others as countrywomen, and provided them with baskets of eggs and
other provisions. At daybreak these went down by twos and threes
to the Zutphen ferry, as if waiting to be taken across to the town;
and while waiting for the boat to come across for them, they sat
down near the gate of the fort.

A few minutes later a party of English cavalry were seen riding
rapidly towards the fort. The pretended country people sprang to
their feet, and with cries of alarm ran towards it for shelter.
The gates were thrown open to allow them to enter. As they ran in
they drew out the arms concealed under their clothes and overpowered
the guard. The cavalry dashed up and entered the gate before the
garrison could assemble, and the fort was captured.

Vere at once began to throw up his batteries for the attack upon
the town across the river, and the prince invested the city on
the other side. So diligently did the besiegers work that before a
week had passed after the surprise of the fort the batteries were
completed, thirty-two guns placed in position, and the garrison,
seeing there was no hope of relief, surrendered.

On the very day of taking possession of the town, the allies, leaving
a garrison there, marched against Deventer, seven miles down the
river, and within five days had invested the place, and opened
their batteries upon the weakest part of the town. A breach was
effected, and a storm was ordered. A dispute arose between the
English, Scotch, and Dutch troops as to who should have the honour
of leading the assault. Prince Maurice decided in favour of the
English, in order that they might have an opportunity of wiping
out the stigma on the national honour caused by the betrayal of
Deventer by the traitor Sir William Stanley.

To reach the breach it was necessary to cross a piece of water called
the Haven. Sir Francis Vere led the English across the bridge of
boats which had been thrown over the water; but the bridge was too
short. Some of the troops sprang over and pushed boldly for the
breach, others were pushed over and drowned. Many of those behind
stripped off their armour and swam across the Haven, supported by
some Dutch troops who had been told off to follow the assaulting
party. But at the breach they were met by Van der Berg, the governor,
with seven companies of soldiers, and these fought so courageously
that the assailants were unable to win their way up the breach,
and fell back at last with a loss of two hundred and twenty-five
men killed and wounded.

While the assault was going on, the artillery of the besiegers
continued to play upon other parts of the town, and effected great
damage. On the following night the garrison endeavoured to capture
the bridge across the Haven, but were repulsed with loss, and in
the morning the place surrendered. The success of the patriots was
due in no slight degree to the fact that Parma with the greatest
part of his army was again absent in France, and the besieged towns
had therefore no hope of assistance from without. The States now
determined to seize the opportunity of capturing the towns held by
the Spaniards in Friesland.

The three principal towns in the possession of the Spaniards were
Groningen, Steenwyk, and Coevorden. After capturing several less
important places and forts Prince Maurice advanced against Steenwyk.
But just as he was about to commence the siege he received pressing
letters from the States to hurry south, as Parma was marching with
his whole army to capture the fort of Knodsenburg, which had been
raised in the previous autumn as a preparation for the siege of
the important city of Nymegen.

The Duke of Parma considered that he had ample time to reduce
Knodsenburg before Prince Maurice could return to its assistance.
Two great rivers barred the prince's return, and he would have to
traverse the dangerous district called the Foul Meadow, and the
great quagmire known as the Rouvenian Morass. But Prince Maurice
had now an opportunity of showing the excellence of the army he
had raised and trained. He received the news of Parma's advance on
the 15th of July; two days later he was on the march south, and in
five days had thrown bridges of boats across the two rivers, had
crossed morass and swamp, and appeared in front of the Spanish
army.

One assault had already been delivered by the Spaniards against
Knodsenburg, but this had been repulsed with heavy loss. As soon
as the patriot army approached the neighbourhood, Parma's cavalry
went out to drive in its skirmishers. Vere at once proposed to
Prince Maurice to inflict a sharp blow upon the enemy, and with the
approval of the prince marched with 1200 foot and 500 horse along
the dyke which ran across the low country. Marching to a spot
where a bridge crossed a narrow river he placed half his infantry
in ambush there; the other half a quarter of a mile further back.

Two hundred light cavalry were sent forward to beat up the enemy's
outposts, and then retreat; the rest of the cavalry were posted
in the rear of the infantry. Another dyke ran nearly parallel with
the first, falling into it at some distance in the rear of Vere's
position, and here Prince Maurice stationed himself with a body
of horse and foot to cover Vere's retreat should he be obliged to
fall back. About noon the light cavalry skirmished with the enemy
and fell back, but were not followed. About half an hour later the
scouts brought word that the Spaniards were at hand.

Suddenly and without orders 800 of Maurice's cavalry galloped off
to meet the enemy; but they soon came back again at full speed,
with a strong force of Spanish cavalry in pursuit. Vere's infantry
at once sallied out from their ambush among the trees, poured
their fire into the enemy, and charged them with their pikes. The
Spaniards turned to fly, when Vere's cavalry charged them furiously
and drove them back in headlong rout to their own camp, taking
a great number of prisoners, among them many officers of rank, and
500 horses. Parma finding himself thus suddenly in face of a superior
army, with a rapid river in his rear, fell back across the Waal,
and then proceeded to Spa to recruit his shattered health, leaving
Verdugo, an experienced officer, in command.

Instead of proceeding to besiege Nymegen, Maurice marched away as
suddenly and quickly as before, and captured Hulst, on the borders
of Zeeland and Brabant, a dozen miles only from Antwerp, and then
turning again was, in three days, back at Nymegen, and had placed
sixty-eight pieces of artillery in position. He opened fire on the
20th of October, and the next day the important city of Nymegen
surrendered. This series of brilliant successes greatly raised the
spirits of the Netherlanders, and proportionately depressed those
of the Spaniards and their adherents.

Parma himself was ill from annoyance and disappointment. The army
with which he might have completed the conquest of the Netherlands
had, in opposition to his entreaties and prayers, been frittered
away by Philip's orders in useless expeditions in France, while
the young and active generals of the Dutch and English armies were
snatching town after town from his grasp, and consolidating the
Netherlands, so recently broken up by Spanish strongholds, into a
compact body, whose increasing wealth and importance rendered it
every day a more formidable opponent. It is true that Parma had
saved first Paris and afterwards Rouen for the League, but it was
at the cost of loosening Philip's hold over the most important
outpost of the Spanish dominions.

In the following spring Parma was again forced to march into France
with 20,000 men, and Maurice, as soon as the force started, prepared
to take advantage of its absence. With 6000 foot and 2000 horse
he again appeared at the end of May before Steenwyk. This town was
the key to the province of Drenthe, and one of the safeguards of
Friesland; it was considered one of the strongest fortresses of
the time. Its garrison consisted of sixteen companies of foot and
some cavalry, and 1200 Walloon infantry, commanded by Lewis, the
youngest of the Counts de Berg, a brave lad of eighteen years of
age.

In this siege, for the first time, the spade was used by soldiers
in the field. Hitherto the work had been considered derogatory to
troops, and peasants and miners had been engaged for the work; but
Prince Maurice had taught his soldiers that their duty was to work
as well as fight, and they now proved the value of his teaching.

The besieged made several successful sorties, and Sir Francis Vere
had been severely wounded in the leg. The cannonade effected but
little damage on the strong walls; but the soldiers, working night
and day, drove mines under two of the principal bastions, and
constructed two great chambers there; these were charged, one with
five thousand pounds of powder, the other with half that quantity.
On the 3d of July the mines were sprung. The bastion of the east
gate was blown to pieces and the other bastion greatly injured, but
many of the Dutch troops standing ready for the assault were also
killed by the explosion.

The storming parties, however, rushed forward, and the two bastions
were captured. This left the town at the mercy of the besiegers.
The next day the garrison surrendered, and were permitted to march
away. Three hundred and fifty had been killed, among them young
Count Lewis Van der Berg, and two hundred had been left behind,
severely wounded, in the town. Between five and six hundred of
the besiegers were killed during the course of the siege. The very
day after the surrender of Steenwyk Maurice marched away and laid
siege to Coevorden. This city, which was most strongly fortified,
lay between two great swamps, between which there was a passage of
about half a mile in width.

Another of the Van der Bergs, Count Frederick, commanded the garrison
of a thousand veterans. Verdugo sent to Parma and Mondragon for
aid, but none could be sent to him, and the prince worked at his
fortifications undisturbed. His force was weakened by the withdrawal
of Sir Francis Vere with three of the English regiments, Elizabeth
having sent peremptory orders that this force should follow
those already withdrawn to aid Henry of Navarre in Brittany. Very
unwillingly Vere obeyed, and marched to Doesburg on the Yssel. But
a fortnight after he arrived there, while he was waiting for ships
to transport him to Brittany the news came to him that Verdugo,
having gathered a large force together, was about to attack Prince
Maurice in his camp, and Vere at once started to the prince's aid.

On the night of the 6th of September, Verdugo, with 4000 foot and
1800 cavalry, wearing their shirts outside their armour to enable
them to distinguish each other in the dark, fell upon Maurice's camp.
Fortunately the prince was prepared, having intercepted a letter
from Verdugo to the governor of the town. A desperate battle took
place, but at break of day, while its issue was still uncertain,
Vere, who had marched all night, came up and threw himself into the
battle. His arrival was decisive. Verdugo drew off with a loss of
300 killed, and five days later Coevorden surrendered, and Prince
Maurice's army went into winter quarters.

A few weeks later Parma died, killed by the burden Philip threw
upon him, broken down by the constant disappointment of his hopes
of carrying his work to a successful end, by the incessant interference
of Philip with his plans, and by the anxiety caused by the mutinies
arising from his inability to pay his troops, although he had
borrowed to the utmost on his own possessions, and pawned even his
jewels to keep them from starvation. He was undoubtedly the greatest
commander of his age, and had he been left to carry out his own
plans would have crushed out the last ember of resistance in the
Netherlands and consolidated the power of Spain there.

He was succeeded in his post by the Archduke Albert, but for a time
Ernest Mansfeldt continued to command the army, and to manage the
affairs in the Netherlands. In March, 1593, Prince Maurice appeared
with his army in front of Gertruydenberg. The city itself was
an important one, and its position on the Maas rendered it of the
greatest use to the Spaniards, as through it they were at any moment
enabled to penetrate into the heart of Holland. Gertruydenberg and
