whatever price you place his services at."

"No, no," Scopus said, "I will give him to you, Beric, for the sake
of our friendship, and for your consideration for me in not taking
the rest with you. I have done well by you and him. Stay here and
I will fetch him out to you; it may be that many will desert both
from me and the other lanistae when they hear that you have taken
to the mountains, but for that I cannot be blamed. You have come
far out of your way to come hither."

"Yes, 'tis a long detour, but it will matter little. We shall
skirt round the foot of the hills, cross the Lyris below Praeneste,
and then make straight to the mountains. They will not search for
us in that direction, and we will take shelter in a wood when day
breaks, and gain the mountains tomorrow night. Once there we shall
be safe, and shall move farther south to the wild hills between
Apulia and Campania, or if it is too hot for us there, down into
Bruttium, whence we can, if it be needed, cross into Sicily. I am
not thinking of making war with Rome. We intend to live and die as
free men, and methinks that in the mountains we may laugh at the
whole strength of Rome."

"You will find plenty of others in the same condition there, Beric;
escaped slaves and gladiators constantly make for the hills, and
there have been many expeditions against the bands there, who are
often strong enough to be a danger to the towns near the foot of
the mountains."

"We are not going to turn brigands," Beric said; "there is game on
the hills, and we are all hunters, and I have money enough to pay
for all else we require did we live there for years. But fetch me
Porus. We must be far from here by daylight."

Porus soon came out, much surprised at being suddenly roused from
sleep, and silently brought out of the house by Scopus. As soon as
Beric explained to him what had happened, he joyfully agreed to
join him, and stole in and fetched his arms. Then with a hearty
adieu to Scopus Beric placed himself at the head of his band and
struck off by the road to Praeneste. Walking fast they arrived
at the bank of the Lyris before daybreak, crossed the river in
a fisherman's boat they found on the bank, and just as daylight
showed in the sky entered an extensive grove, having walked over
forty miles since leaving Rome. They slept during the day, taking
it by turns to watch at the edge of the wood, and when it was again
dark started afresh, and were, when morning broke, high up on the
slopes of the Apennines.

"I feel a free man again now," Boduoc said. "It does not seem to
me that I have drawn a breath of fresh air since I entered Rome;
but fresh air, good as it is, Beric, is not altogether satisfying,
and I begin to feel that I have eaten nothing since I supped the
day before yesterday."

"We will push on for another hour," Beric said, "and then we shall
be fairly beyond the range of cultivation. At the last house we
come to we will go in and purchase food. Flour is the principal
thing we need; we shall have no difficulty in getting goats from
the herdsmen who pasture their animals among the hills."

An hour later Beric, with Boduoc and two of his followers, went up
to a farm house. The farmer and his servants ran into the house,
raising cries of alarm at the sight of the four tall armed figures.

"Do not fear," Beric said when he reached the door, "we are not
brigands, but honest men, who desire to pay for what we need."

Somewhat reassured, the farmer came out. "What does my lord require?"
he asked, impressed by a nearer view of Beric's dress and arms.

"How much flour have you in the house?" Beric asked, "and what is
the price of it?"

The farmer had three sacks of flour. "I will take them all," Beric
said, "and three skins of wine if you have them. I would also buy
two sheep if you name me a fair price for the whole."

The farmer named a price not much above that which he would have
obtained in the market, and Beric also bought of him a number of
small bags capable of containing some fifteen or twenty pounds of
flour each. Then one of the men fetched up the rest of the band;
the flour was divided and packed in the small bags; the sheep were
killed and cut up; three of the men lifted the wine skins on to
their shoulders; the rest took the flour and meat, and they marched
away, leaving the farmer and his family astounded at the appearance
of these strange men with fair hair and blue eyes, and of stature
that appeared to them gigantic.

Still ascending the mountain the band halted in a forest. Wood was
soon collected and a fire lighted. The contents of one of the bags
was made into dough at a stream hard by, divided into cakes and
placed on red hot ashes, while the meat was cut up and hung over
the fire.

"We have forgotten drinking horns," Beric said, "but your steel
cap, Porus, will serve us for a drinking cup for today."

After a hearty meal they lay down for some hours to sleep, and then
resumed their march. They were getting well into the heart of the
mountains when a figure suddenly appeared on a crag above them.

"Who are you?" he shouted, "and what do you here in the mountains?"

"We are fugitives from the tyranny of Rome," Beric replied. "We
mean harm to no man, but those who would meddle with us are likely
to regret it."

"You swear that you are fugitives," the man called back.

"I swear," Beric said, holding up his hand.

The man turned round and spoke to someone behind him, and a moment
later a party of fifteen men appeared on the crag and began to
descend into the ravine up which Beric's band were making their
way.

"It is the Britons," the leader exclaimed as he neared them. "Why,
Beric, is it you, tired already of the dignities of Rome? How fares
it with you, Boduoc?"

Beric recognized at once a Gaul, one of the gladiators of Scopus,
who had some months before fled from the ludus. In a minute the
two bands met. Most of the newcomers were Gauls, and, like their
leader, escaped gladiators, and as Beric's name was well known to
all they saluted him with acclamations. Both parties were pleased
at the meeting, for, akin by race and speaking dialects of the same
language, they regarded each other as natural allies.

"The life of an outlaw will be a change to you after Nero's palace,
Beric," Gatho, their leader, said.

"A pleasant change," Beric replied. "I have no taste for gilded
chains. How do you fare here, Gatho?"

"There are plenty of wild boars among the mountains, and we can
always get a goat when they are lacking. There are plenty of them
wild all over the hills, escaped captives like ourselves. As for
wine and flour, we have occasionally to make a raid on the villages."

"I do not propose to do that," Beric said; "I have money to buy
what we require; and if we set the villagers against us, sooner or
later they will lead the troops after us up the mountains."

"I would gladly do that too, but the means are lacking. We owe the
peasants no ill will, but one must live, you know."

"Have you any place you make your headquarters?"

"An hour's march from hence; I will lead you to it."

The united bands continued to climb the hills, and on emerging from
the ravine Gatho led them for some distance along the upper edge
of a forest, and then turned up a narrow gorge in the hillside with
a little rivulet running down it. The ravine widened out as they
went up it, till they reached a spot where it formed a circular
area of some hundred and fifty feet in diameter, surrounded on all
sides by perpendicular rocks, with a tiny cascade a hundred feet
in height falling into it at the farther end. Some rough huts of
boughs of trees were erected near the centre.

"A good hiding place," Beric said, "but I see no mode of retreat,
and if a peasant were to lead a party of Romans to the entrance
you would be caught in a trap."

"We have only been here ten days," Gatho said, "and never stop long
in one place; but it has the disadvantage you speak of. However,
we have always one or two men posted lower down, at points where
they can see any bodies of men ascending the hills. They brought
us notice of your coming when you were far below, so you see we
are not likely to be taken by surprise, and the Roman soldiers are
not fond of night marches among the mountains."

As it was some hours since the Britons had partaken of their meal
they were quite ready to join the Gauls in another, and the carcass
of a wild boar hanging up near the huts was soon cut up and roasting
over a fire, the Britons contributing wine and flour to the meal.
After it was over there was a long talk, and after consulting
together Gatho and his band unanimously agreed in asking Beric to
take command of the whole party.

"We all know you, Beric," Gatho said. "None could like you have
fought a lion barehanded, and I know that there was no one in the
ludus who was your match with the sword, while Boduoc and the other
five were infinitely superior to any of us in strength. Besides,
you are well versed in Roman ways, and have led an army against
them, therefore we all are ready to accept you as our leader and
to obey your orders if you will take us."

"I will do so willingly, Gatho. I do not wish to have more than
fifty men with me, for it would be difficult to find subsistence
for a larger number. A hundred is the outside number, and doubtless
we shall be able to gather other recruits should we choose to raise
the band to that number; but all who follow me must obey me as
implicitly as did my own tribesmen in our struggle with the Romans,
and must swear to do no harm to innocent people, and to abstain
from all violence and robbery. I am ready to be a leader of outlaws
but not of brigands. I desire only to live a free life among the
mountains. If the Romans come against us we will fight against them,
and the spoil we may take from them is lawful booty, to be used in
exchange for such things as we may require. But with the peasants
we will make friends, and if we treat them well they will bring us
news of any expeditions that may be on foot for our capture. As I
said I have money enough to buy everything we want at present, and
can obtain more if necessary, so that there is no reason for us
to rob these poor people of their goods. Here we are too near Rome
for them to be disaffected, but further south we shall find them
not unwilling to aid us, for the provinces are ground into the dust
by the exactions necessary to pay for the cost of the rebuilding
of Rome and to support the extravagance of Nero."

The Gauls cheerfully took the required oath.

"You, Gatho, will continue to act as my lieutenant with your
Gauls, Boduoc commands the Britons under me. It may be necessary
at times for the band to divide, as when game is scarce we may find
a difficulty in keeping together, especially if we recruit our band
up to a hundred. I am determined to have no malefactors who have
fled from justice nor riotous men among us. I should prefer that
they should be chiefly your countrymen, but we will not refuse
gladiators of other nations who have been captured as prisoners of
war. We want no escaped slaves among us. A man who has once been
a slave might try to buy his pardon and freedom by betraying us.
We will be free men all, asking only to live in freedom among the
mountains, injuring none, but determined to fight and die in defence
of that freedom."

These sentiments were warmly welcomed by the Gauls. The next day the
number of men on the lookout was increased, and the band, breaking
up into small parties, scattered among the mountains in pursuit of
wild boars and goats. Some were to return, successful or not, at
night to the encampment, and on the following day to take the place
of those on watch, and relays were provided so that during the week
each would take a turn at that duty.

Never did men enjoy a week's hunting with greater zest than
the Britons. To them life seemed to begin anew, and although the
skies were bluer and the mountains higher and rougher than those
of Britain, it seemed to them that they were once again enjoying
their native air, and of an evening rude chants of Gaul and Britain
echoed among the rocks.

Porus, the Syrian, stood somewhat apart from the rest, not
understanding the tongue of the others, and he therefore became
naturally the special companion of Beric; for having been six years
in Rome he spoke Latin fluently.

"It is I who must go down to get you news, Beric," he said one
day. "You Britons could not disguise yourselves, for even if you
stained your cheeks and dyed your hair your blue eyes and your
height would betray you at once. The Gauls, too, though shorter
than you, are still much taller and broader men than the Romans,
and there are none of them who speak the language well enough to
ask a question without their foreign tongue being detected. I am
about the height of the Romans, and am swarthier than the Gauls,
and could, if I borrowed the dress of one of the goatherds, pass
among them without notice. It would certainly be well, as you were
saying, to know what is being done below, and whether there is any
idea of sending troops up into the mountains to search for us.

"You may be sure that after the scare you gave Nero, and the defeat
of his guards, the matter will not be allowed to drop, and that
they will search all Italy for you. I should think that, at first,
they will seek for you in the north, thinking that you would be
likely, after taking to the hills--which you would be sure to do,
for such a party could never hope to traverse the plains unnoticed--to
keep along the chain to the north, cross the Cisalpine plains,
and try the passage of the great mountains."

"At any rate it will be well, Porus, to know what they are doing.
If they are at present confining their search to the northern
range we can stay where we are with confidence. I should be sorry
to move, for we are well placed here; there is good water and game
is abundant. We certainly shall soon lack wine, but for everything
else we can manage. We have meat in abundance, and have flour to
last for some time, for both we and the Gauls eat but little bread;
besides, if pushed, we can do as the peasants do, pound up acorns
and beechnuts and make a sort of bread of them."

"Very well, Beric, I will go down tomorrow."

Early in the morning, however, two of the men on sentry came in
and said that they observed the glitter of the sun on spearhead
and armour far down the hillside.

"If they are after us," Beric said, "as I expect they are, they
have doubtless learned that we are somewhere in this part of the
mountains from the man of whom we bought the wine and flour. I
don't suppose he intended to do us harm, but when he went down to
purchase fresh supplies he may well have mentioned that a party of
strong men of unusual height, and with fair hair, had bought up
his stock, paying for it honestly, which would perhaps surprise
him more than anything. If the news had come to the ears of any of
the officials, they, knowing the hue and cry which was being made
for us, would have sent word at once to Praeneste or Rome. We must
at once recall those who are away. Philo, take a couple of brands
and go and light the signal fire."

A pile of dry wood had been placed in readiness upon a projecting
rock a mile away and standing in position where it was visible from
a considerable extent of the hillside. It had been settled that
the parties of hunters who did not return at nightfall should
occasionally send one of their number to a point whence he could
get a view of the beacon.

"Directly the pile is well alight, Philo, pluck up green bushes
and tufts of grass and throw upon it, so as to make as much smoke
as possible."

There were eighteen men in the encampment, and four out on guard.
Boduoc and Gatho were both away, and as soon as Philo had started
with the brands Beric and Porus set out with the two scouts.

"That was where we saw them," one of them said, pointing far down
the hillside, "but by this time they will no doubt have entered
the wooded belt."

"We must find out something about their numbers," Beric said. "Not
that I wish to fight; for were we to inflict losses upon them they
would more than ever make efforts to overtake us. Still, it will
be as well to know what force they may think sufficient to capture
us."

"I will go down through the forest," Porus said, "doubtless they
will have some light armed troops with the spearmen; but they must
be fleet indeed if they overtake me after all my training."

"Do not let them see you if you can help it, Porus, or they will
follow close behind you, although they might not overtake you, and
that might bring on a fight."

"I will be careful;" and leaving his buckler behind him, Porus
started on his way down the mountain.

In an hour and a half he returned. "I have had a good view of them,"
he said; "they have halted at the place where we got the flour.
There are a hundred heavy armed troops and a hundred archers and
slingers."

"They have come in strength," Beric said; "it shows that they do
not hold the Britons cheaply. We will return at once to the camp.
By this time the hunters should be back."

Sending one of the men to call in the other sentries, they returned
to the huts. Boduoc, with a party of ten men, had already come in,
and said that they had seen Gatho's party making their way down
from a point high up in the mountains.

"We will pause no longer," Beric said, "we shall meet them as they
descend; take the flour and what little wine remains, and let us
be going. Scatter the fire and extinguish the brands; unless they
have found some goatherd who has marked us coming and going, they
may not find this place. I hope they will not do so, as it would
encourage them by the thought that they had nearly captured us."

The party had ascended the mountain half a mile when they met Gatho
returning.

"I like not to retreat without fighting," he said, when he had
heard from Beric of the coming of the Romans and their force; "but
I agree with you that it is better not to anger them farther."

"I want three of the fleetest footed of your men, Gatho, to stay
behind with Porus and watch them, themselves unseen. We will cross
over the crest of the hills to the eastern side, Porus. Do you mark
that tall craig near the summit; you will find one of us there,
and he will lead you to our camping place. I want to know whether
the Romans, after spending the day searching the hills, go back
through the forest, or whether they encamp here. In the one case we
can return, in the other it will be better to move south at once.
We could laugh at their heavy armed spearmen, but their archers
and slingers carry no more weight than we do, and would harass us
sorely with their missiles, which we have no means of returning."

As soon as the men to remain with Porus were chosen, the rest of
the band proceeded on their way.



CHAPTER XIX: OUTLAWS


It was late at night before Porus with the three Gauls joined the
rest of the band in their new encampment on the eastern slope of
the hills.

"As soon as the moon rises, Beric, we must be up and moving.
The Romans are in earnest. When they came through the forest they
ascended for some little distance, and then the spearmen halted
and the light armed troops scattered in parties of four searching
the country like dogs after game. They were not very long before
they discovered signs of us, whether footmarks or broken twigs I
know not, but following them they soon came upon the entrance of
the ravine. No doubt our marks were plain enough there, for the
spearmen were brought down. What happened then I know not; no doubt
they entered and found that we had gone. At any rate, in a short
time they set out briskly up the mountain, the spearmen as before
keeping together, and the light armed men scattering.

"All day they searched, and it was well that you crossed the crest.
They halted for the night halfway between the forest and the summit,
and I determined to learn something of their intentions. So after
it was dark I laid aside my arms and crawled into the camp. The
ground was broken and rough, and there was no great difficulty in
getting close to their fires. I learned that the whole of the legion
at Praeneste had been sent into the mountains, and that there were
twenty parties of equal force; they were but a mile and a half apart,
and considered that they could search every foot of the ground for
thirty miles along, and would assuredly discover us if we were still
in this part. More than that, troops from Corfinium and Marrubium
had started to search the eastern slopes, and between them they
made sure that they should catch you, now that they had found, by
the heat of the earth where our fire had been, that we must have
been there but an hour or so before their arrival."

"If that is the case we must make our way to the south at once,"
Beric said. "It is well indeed that we decided to retreat without
fighting, for had we retired, closely pursued by their archers,
their shouts would certainly have been heard by some of the other
parties. It is fortunate we did not light a fire; had we done so it
might have brought some of the troops from Marrubium, which cannot
be far distant from here, upon us. The moon will not be up for
three hours yet, and it is useless to try to make our way among
these mountains until we have her light, therefore let all lie down
to sleep; I will keep guard and will rouse you when it is time to
move."

Beric sat listening intently for any sound that would tell of the
approach of foemen. He had, however, but small fear that the Romans
were moving at present. It would be even more difficult for them
than for his men to make their way about in the darkness; besides,
the day must have been an extremely fatiguing one for them. They
had, doubtless, started long before dawn, had had to climb the
mountains, and had been all day on their feet. They would scarcely
recommence the search before morning. Easy on this score, his
thoughts turned to Rome. That Aemilia had gained the shelter of
the Catacombs he had no doubt, and he wondered how she fared there
among the Christian fugitives. As to Norbanus he had but slight
hopes of ever seeing him alive. Nero's vengeance always extended
to the families of those who offended him, and Norbanus would
certainly be held responsible for the flight of Aemilia. He thought
it indeed probable that as soon as Aemilia left, Norbanus would
have called his friends together, and, having opened his veins,
would die as Piso had done discussing philosophy with them.

As soon as the moon was fairly up he aroused his companions and
they started along the hillside. It was difficult work making their
way on, now descending into a deep ravine, now climbing a rugged
slope, now passing along a bare shoulder. There was no pause until
day broke, when they descended into a gorge and lay down among
some clumps of bushes, one man being sent half a mile down while
two others were posted on each side of the ravine. They had good
reason for hope, however, that they had got beyond the point to
which the searching parties would extend on the eastern side of the
hill. The day passed without alarms, although the sentries above
more than once heard the sounds of distant trumpets. As soon as
the sun set they continued their way, halting again until the moon
rose, and then keeping south until daybreak.

They were sure now that they were far beyond the parties of Romans,
but after a few hours' sleep they again pressed on, and at night
lighted their fires and prepared for a longer stay. But the orders
of Nero were so imperative that the troops, having thoroughly
searched the mountains at the point where they had ascended them,
united, and also moved south in a long line extending from the
summit of the hills to the lower edge of the forest; and after two
days' halt the fugitives again moved south, and continued their
journey until they found themselves among the wild and lofty hills
of Bruttium.

But their numbers had swollen as they went, for the other fugitive
bands among the hills were also driven south by the advance of
the Romans, and it was a miscellaneous body of gladiators, escaped
slaves, and malefactors, in all over five hundred strong, that crossed
the mountains into Bruttium. There was a general wish among them
that Beric should take the command of the whole. This, however, he
absolutely declined to do, upon the ground that it was impossible
for so large a body of men to keep together, as there would be no
means of feeding them. Scattered about they would find an ample
supply of meat from the wild goats, boars and semi-wild swine,
but together, they would soon scare away the game. From among the
gladiators, however, he picked out sufficient men to raise his
own force to a hundred strong, and separating from the rest he led
them, guided by a charcoal burner, to one of the wildest and most
inaccessible points in the promontory.

Here they were safe from pursuit. Bruttium, now called Calabria,
is a chain of rugged hills, at that time thickly covered with wood,
and although it was possible fairly to search the Apennines in the
centre of Italy with six or seven thousand men, a large army would
fail to find a band of fugitives in the recesses of the mountains
of the south. On the evening of their arrival at the spot they
determined to make their headquarters, Beric held a sort of council
of war, the whole of the band, as was the custom both in Gaul and
Britain, joining in the deliberations.

"So far," Beric began, "we have retreated without fighting; Rome
cannot complain that we have been in insurrection against her, we
have simply acted as fugitives; but as there is nowhere else whither
we can retire, we must turn upon them if they again pursue us. We
must then regard this as our abode for a long time, and make ourselves
as comfortable as we can. Huts we can erect of the branches of
trees, the skins of the goats we kill will provide us with bedding,
