gown of serge or sackcloth, and to be called the Hermit of the Well.
So fast as each succeeding anchorite died there were enough candidates
eager to supply his place; for it was no bad _metier_ to some penniless
imposter to become the quack and patentee of a holy specific. The choice
of these candidates always rested with the superior of the neighbouring
monastery; and it is not impossible that he made an indifferently good
percentage upon the annual advantages of his protection and choice.

At the time the traveller appeared, the former hermit had just departed
this life, and it was, therefore, to the vacancy thus occasioned that
he had procured himself to be elected. The incumbent appeared quite of a
different mould from the former occupants of the hermitage. He accepted,
it is true, the gifts laid at regular periods upon a huge stone between
the hermitage and the well, but he distributed among the donors alms far
more profitable than their gifts. He entered no village, borne upon an
ass laden with twin sacks, for the purpose of sanctimoniously robbing
the inhabitants; no profane songs were ever heard resounding from his
dwelling by the peasant incautiously lingering at a late hour too
near its vicinity; my guide, the monk, complained bitterly of his
unsociability, and no scandalous legend of nymph-like comforters and
damsel visitants haunting the sacred dwelling escaped from the garrulous
friar's well-loaded budget.

"Does he study much?" said I, with the interest of a student.

"I fear me not," quoth the monk. "I have had occasion often to enter his
abode, and I have examined all things with a close eye,--for, praised
be the Lord, I have faculties more than ordinarily clear and
observant,--but I have seen no books therein, excepting a missal, and
a Latin or Greek Testament, I know not well which; nay, so incurious or
unlearned is the holy man that he rejected even a loan of the 'Life of
Saint Francis,' notwithstanding it has many and rare pictures, to say
nothing of its most interesting and amazing tales."

More might the monk have said, had we not now suddenly entered a thick
and sombre wood. A path cut through it was narrow, and only capable of
admitting a traveller on foot or horseback; and the boughs overhead were
so darkly interlaced that the light scarcely, and only in broken and
erratic glimmerings, pierced the canopy.

"It is the wood," said the monk, crossing himself, "wherein the
wonderful adventure happened to Saint Francis, which I will one day
narrate at length to you."

"And we are near the well, I suppose?" said I.

"It is close at hand," answered the monk.

In effect we had not proceeded above fifty yards before the path brought
us into a circular space of green sod, in the midst of which was a small
square stone building, of plain but not inelegant shape, and evidently
of great antiquity. At one side of this building was an iron handle, for
the purpose of raising water, that cast itself into a stone basin,
to which was affixed by a strong chain an iron cup. An inscription in
monkish Latin was engraved over the basin, requesting the traveller to
pause and drink, and importing that what that water was to the body,
faith was to the soul; near the cistern was a rude seat, formed by the
trunk of a tree. The door of the well-house was of iron, and secured by
a chain and lock; perhaps the pump was so contrived that only a certain
quantum of the sanctified beverage could be drawn up at a time, without
application to some mechanism within; and wayfarers were thereby
prevented from helping themselves _ad libitum_, and thus depriving the
anchorite of the profit and the necessity of his office.

It was certainly a strange, lonely, and wild place; and the green sward,
round as a fairy ring, in the midst of trees, which, black, close, and
huge, circled it like a wall; and the solitary gray building in the
centre, gaunt and cold, startled the eye with the abruptness of its
appearance, and the strong contrast made by its wan hues to the dark
verdure and forest gloom around it.

I took a draught of the water, which was very cold and tasteless, and
reminded the monk of his disorder in the reins, to which a similar
potation might possibly be efficacious. To this suggestion the monk
answered that he would certainly try the water some other time; but that
at present the wine he had drunk might pollute its divine properties. So
saying, he turned off the conversation by inviting me to follow him to
the hermitage.

In our way thither he pointed out a large fragment of stone, and
observed that the water would do me evil instead of good if I forgot to
remunerate its guardian. I took the hint, and laid a piece of silver on
the fragment.

A short journey through the wood brought us to the foot of a hill
covered with trees, and having at its base a strong stone door, the
entrance to the excavated home of the anchorite. The monk gently tapped
thrice at this door, but no answer came. "The holy man is from home,"
said he, "let us return."

We did so; and the monk, keeping behind me, managed, as he thought
unseen, to leave the stone as naked as we had found it! We now struck
through another path in the wood, and were soon at the convent. I did
not lose the opportunity to question the Abbot respecting his tenant:
I learned from him little more than the particulars I have already
narrated, save that in concluding his details, he said:--

"I can scarcely doubt but that the Hermit is, like yourself, a person
of rank; his bearing and his mien appear to denote it. He has given,
and gives yearly, large sums to the uses of the convent: and, though
he takes the customary gifts of the pious villagers, it is only by
my advice and for the purpose of avoiding suspicion. Should he be
considered rich, it might attract cupidity; and there are enough bold
hands and sharp knives in the country to place the wealthy and the
unguarded in some peril. Whoever he may be--for he has not confided his
secret to me--I do not doubt but that he is doing penance for some great
crime; and, whatever be the crime, I suspect that its earthly punishment
is nearly over. The Hermit is naturally of a delicate and weak frame,
and year after year I have marked him sensibly wearing away; so that
when I last saw him, three days since, I was shocked at the visible
ravages which disease or penance had engraven upon him. If ever Death
wrote legibly, its characters are in that brow and cheek."

"Poor man! Know you not even whom to apprise of his decease when he is
no more?"

"I do not yet; but the last time I saw him he told me that he found
himself drawing near his end, and that he should not quit life without
troubling me with one request."

After this the Abbot spoke of other matters, and my visit expired.

Interested in the recluse more deeply than I acknowledged to myself,
I found my steps insensibly leading me homeward by the more circuitous
road which wound first by the holy well. I did not resist the impulse,
but walked musingly onward by the waning twilight, for the day was now
over, until I came to the well. As I emerged from the wood, I started
involuntarily and drew back. A figure, robed from head to foot in a long
sable robe, sat upon the rude seat beside the well; sat so still, so
motionless, that coming upon it abruptly in that strange place, the
heart beat irregularly at an apparition so dark in hue and so death-like
in its repose. The hat, large, broad, and overhanging, which suited the
costume, was lying on the ground; and the face, which inclined upward,
seemed to woo the gentle air of the quiet and soft skies. I approached a
few steps, and saw the profile of the countenance more distinctly than
I had done before. It was of a marble whiteness; the features, though
sharpened and attenuated by disease, were of surpassing beauty; the hair
was exceedingly, almost effeminately, long, and hung in waves of perfect
jet on either side; the mouth was closed firmly, and deep lines or
rather furrows were traced from its corners to either nostril. The
stranger's beard, of a hue equally black as the hair, was dishevelled
and neglected, but not very long; and one hand, which lay on the sable
robe, was so thin and wan you might have deemed the very starlight could
have shone through it. I did not doubt that it was the recluse whom I
saw; I drew near and accosted him.

"Your blessing, holy Father, and your permission to taste the healing of
your well."

Sudden as was my appearance, and abrupt my voice, the Hermit evinced by
no startled gesture a token of surprise. He turned very slowly round,
cast upon me an indifferent glance, and said, in a sweet and very low
tone,--

"You have my blessing, Stranger: there is water in the cistern; drink,
and be healed."

I dipped the bowl in the basin, and took sparingly of the water. In the
accent and tone of the stranger, my ear, accustomed to the dialects of
many nations, recognized something English; I resolved, therefore, to
address him in my native tongue, rather than the indifferent Italian in
which I had first accosted him.

"The water is fresh and cooling: would, holy Father, that it could
penetrate to a deeper malady than the ills of flesh; that it could
assuage the fever of the heart, or lave from the wearied mind the dust
which it gathers from the mire and travail of the world."

Now the Hermit testified surprise; but it was slight and momentary. He
gazed upon me more attentively than he had done before, and said, after
a pause,--

"My countryman! and in this spot! It is not often that the English
penetrate into places where no ostentatious celebrity dwells to sate
curiosity and flatter pride. My countryman: it is well, and perhaps
fortunate. Yes," he said, after a second pause, "yes; it were indeed
a boon, had the earth a fountain for the wounds which fester and the
disease which consumes the heart."

"The earth has oblivion, Father, if not a cure."

"It is false!" cried the Hermit, passionately, and starting wildly
from his seat; "the earth has _no_ oblivion. The grave,--is _that_
forgetfulness? No, no: _there is no grave for the soul_! The deeds pass;
the flesh corrupts: but the memory passes not, and withers not. From age
to age, from world to world, through eternity, throughout creation, it
is perpetuated; and immortality,--a curse,--_a hell_!"

Surprised by the vehemence of the Hermit, I was still more startled by
the agonizing and ghastly expression of his face.

"My Father," said I, "pardon me if I have pressed upon a sore. I also
have that within which, did a stranger touch it, would thrill my whole
frame with torture, and I would fain ask from your holy, soothing, and
pious comfort, something of alleviation or of fortitude."

The Hermit drew near to me; he laid his thin hand upon my arm, and
looked long and wistfully in my face. It was then that a suspicion
crept through me which after observation proved to be true, that the
wanderings of those dark eyes and the meaning of that blanched brow were
tinctured with insanity.

"Brother and fellow man," said he, mournfully, "hast thou in truth
suffered? and dost thou still smart at the remembrance? We are friends
then. If thou hast suffered as much as I have, I will fall down and do
homage to thee as a superior; for pain has its ranks, and I think at
times that none ever climbed the height that I have done. Yet you look
not like one who has had nights of delirium, and days in which the heart
lay in the breast, as a corpse endowed with consciousness might lie
in the grave, feeling the worm gnaw it, and the decay corrupt, and yet
incapable of resistance or of motion. Your cheek is thin, but firm; your
eye is haughty and bright; you have the air of one who has lived with
men, and struggled and not been vanquished in the struggle. Suffered!
No, man, no,--_you_ have not suffered!"

"My Father, it is not in the countenance that Fate graves her records. I
have, it is true, contended with my fellows; and if wealth and honour be
the premium, not in vain: but I have not contended against Sorrow with
a like success; and I stand before you, a being who, if passion be a
tormentor and the death of the loved a loss, has borne that which the
most wretched will not envy."

Again a fearful change came over the face of the recluse: he grasped my
arm more vehemently, "You speak my own sorrows; you utter my own curse;
I will see you again; you may do my last will better than yon monks. Can
I trust you? If you have in truth known misfortune, I will! I will! yea,
even to the outpouring--merciful, merciful God, what would I say,--what
would I reveal!"

Suddenly changing his voice, he released me, and said, touching his
forehead with a meaning gesture and a quiet smile, "You say you are my
rival in pain. Have you ever known the rage and despair of the heart
mount _here_? It is a wonderful thing to be calm as I am now, when that
rising makes itself felt in fire and torture!"

"If there be aught, Father, which a man who cares not what country he
visit, or what deed--so it be not of guilt or shame--he commit, can do
towards the quiet of your soul, say it, and I will attempt your will."

"You are kind, my Son," said the Hermit, resuming his first melancholy
and dignified composure of mien and bearing; "and there is something in
your voice which seems to me like a tone that I have heard in youth. Do
you live near at hand?"

"In the valley, about four miles hence; I am, like yourself, a fugitive
from the world."

"Come to me then to-morrow at eve; to-morrow! No, that is a holy eve,
and I must keep it with scourge and prayer. The next at sunset. I shall
be collected then, and I would fain know more of you than I do. Bless
you, my Son; adieu."

"Yet stay, Father, may I not conduct you home?"

"No; my limbs are weak, but I trust they can carry me to that home, till
I be borne thence to my last. Farewell! the night grows, and man fills
even these shades with peril. The eve after next, at sunset, we meet
again."

So saying, the hermit waved his hand, and I stood apart, watching his
receding figure, until the trees cloaked the last glimpse from my view.
I then turned homeward, and reached my cottage in safety, despite of the
hermit's caution. But I did not retire to rest: a powerful foreboding,
rather than suspicion, that, in the worn and wasted form which I had
beheld, there was identity with one whom I had not met for years, and
whom I had believed to be no more, thrillingly possessed me.

"Can--can it be?" thought I. "Can grief have a desolation, or
remembrance an agony, sufficient to create so awful a change? And of all
human beings, for that one to be singled out; that one in whom passion
and sin were, if they existed, nipped in their earliest germ, and
seemingly rendered barren of all fruit! If too, almost against the
evidence of sight and sense, an innate feeling has marked in that most
altered form the traces of a dread recognition, would not his memory
have been yet more vigilant than mine? Am I so changed that he should
have looked me in the face so wistfully, and found there naught save the
lineaments of a stranger?" And, actuated by this thought, I placed the
light by the small mirror which graced my chamber. I recalled, as I
gazed, my features as they had been in earliest youth. "No," I said,
with a sigh, "there is nothing here that he should recognize."

And I said aright: my features, originally small and delicate, had grown
enlarged and prominent. The long locks of my youth (for only upon state
occasions did my early vanity consent to the fashion of the day) were
succeeded by curls, short and crisped; the hues, alternately pale and
hectic, that the dreams of romance had once spread over my cheek,
had settled into the unchanging bronze of manhood; the smooth lip and
unshaven chin were clothed with a thick hair; the once unfurrowed brow
was habitually knit in thought; and the ardent, restless expression that
boyhood wore had yielded to the quiet unmoved countenance of one in
whom long custom has subdued all outward sign of emotion, and many
and various events left no prevalent token of the mind save that of an
habitual but latent resolution. My frame, too, once scarcely less slight
than a woman's, was become knit and muscular; and nothing was left by
which, in the foreign air, the quiet brow, and the athletic form, my
very mother could have recognized the slender figure and changeable face
of the boy she had last beheld. The very sarcasm of the eye was gone;
and I had learned the world's easy lesson,--the dissimulation of
composure.

I have noted one thing in others, and it was particularly noticeable
in me; namely, that few who mix very largely with men, and with the
courtier's or the citizen's design, ever retain the key and tone of
their original voice. The voice of a young man is as yet modulated by
nature, and expresses the passion of the moment; that of the matured
pupil of art expresses rather the customary occupation of his life.
Whether he aims at persuading, convincing, or commanding others, his
voice irrevocably settles into the key he ordinarily employs; and, as
persuasion is the means men chiefly employ in their commerce with each
other, especially in the regions of a court, so a tone of artificial
blandness and subdued insinuation is chiefly that in which the accents
of worldly men are clothed; the artificial intonation, long continued,
grows into nature, and the very pith and basis of the original sound
fritter themselves away. The change was great in me, for at that time
which I brought in comparison with the present my age was one in which
the voice is yet confused and undecided, struggling between the accents
of youth and boyhood; so that even this most powerful and unchanging
of all claims upon the memory was in a great measure absent in me; and
nothing but an occasional and rare tone could have produced even that
faint and unconscious recognition which the Hermit had confessed.

I must be pardoned these egotisms, which the nature of my story renders
necessary.

With what eager impatience did I watch the hours to the appointed
interview with the Hermit languish themselves away! However, before that
time arrived and towards the evening of the next day, I was surprised by
the rare honour of a visit from Anselmo himself. He came attended by two
of the mendicant friars of his order, and they carried between them a
basket of tolerable size, which, as mine hostess afterwards informed me,
with many a tear, went back somewhat heavier than it came, from the
load of certain _receptacula_ of that rarer wine which she had had the
evening before the indiscreet hospitality to produce.

The Abbot came to inform me that the Hermit had been with him that
morning, making many inquiries respecting me. "I told him," said he,
"that I was acquainted with your name and birth, but that I was under
a solemn promise not to reveal them, without your consent; and I am now
here, my Son, to learn from you whether that consent may be obtained?"

"Assuredly not, holy Father!" said I, hastily; nor was I contented until
I had obtained a renewal of his promise to that effect. This seemed to
give the Abbot some little chagrin: perhaps the Hermit had offered a
reward for my discovery. However, I knew that Anselmo, though a griping
was a trustworthy man, and I felt safe in his renewed promise. I saw him
depart with great satisfaction, and gave myself once more to conjectures
respecting the strange recluse.

As the next evening I prepared to depart towards the hermitage, I took
peculiar pains to give my person a foreign and disguised appearance. A
loose dress, of rude and simple material, and a high cap of fur, were
pretty successful in accomplishing this purpose. And, as I gave the last
look at the glass before I left the house, I said inly, "If there be any
truth in my wild and improbable conjecture respecting the identity of
the anchorite, I think time and this dress are sufficient wizards to
secure me from a chance of discovery. I will keep a guard upon my words
and tones, until, if my thought be verified, a moment fit for unmasking
myself arrives. But would to God that the thought be groundless! In
such circumstances, and after such an absence, to meet _him_! No; and
yet--Well, this meeting will decide."



CHAPTER IV.

THE SOLUTION OF MANY MYSTERIES.--A DARK VIEW OF THE LIFE AND NATURE OF
MAN.

POWERFUL, though not clearly developed in my own mind, was the motive
which made me so strongly desire to preserve the _incognito_ during my
interview with the Hermit. I have before said that I could not resist a
vague but intense belief that he was a person whom I had long believed
in the grave; and I had more than once struggled against a dark but
passing suspicion that that person was in some measure--mediately,
though not directly--connected with the mysteries of my former life.
If both these conjectures were true, I thought it possible that the
communication the Hermit wished to make might be made yet more willingly
to me as a stranger than if he knew who was in reality his confidant.
And, at all events, if I could curb the impetuous gushings of my own
heart, which yearned for immediate disclosure, I might by hint and
prelude ascertain the advantages and disadvantages of revealing myself.

I arrived at the well: the Hermit was already at the place of
rendezvous, seated in the same posture in which I had before seen him. I
made my reverence and accosted him.

"I have not failed you, Father."

"That is rarely a true boast with men," said the Hermit, smiling
mournfully, but without sarcasm; "and were the promise of greater avail,
it might not have been so rigidly kept."

"The promise, Father, seemed to me of greater weight than you would
intimate," answered I.

"How mean you?" said the Hermit, hastily.

"Why, that we may perhaps serve each other by our meeting: you, Father,
may comfort me by your counsels; I you by my readiness to obey your
request."

The Hermit looked at me for some moments, and, as well as I could,
I turned away my face from his gaze. I might have spared myself the
effort. He seemed to recognize nothing familiar in my countenance;
perhaps his mental malady assisted my own alteration.

"I have inquired respecting you," he said, after a pause, "and I hear
that you are a learned and wise man, who has seen much of the world, and
played the part both of soldier and of scholar in its various theatres:
is my information true?"

"Not true with the respect to the learning, Father, but true with regard
to the experience. I have been a pilgrim in many countries of Europe."

"Indeed!" said the Hermit, eagerly. "Come with me to my home, and tell
me of the wonders you have seen."

I assisted the Hermit to rise, and he walked slowly towards the cavern,
leaning upon my arm. Ob, how that light touch thrilled through my
frame! How I longed to cry, "Are you not the one whom I have loved,
and mourned, and believed buried in the tomb?" But I checked myself. We
moved on in silence. The Hermit's hand was on the door of the cavern,
when he said, in a calm tone, but with evident effort, and turning his
face from me while he spoke:--

"And did your wanderings ever carry you into the farther regions of the
north? Did the fame of the great Czar ever lead you to the city he has
founded?"

"I am right! I am right!" thought I, as I answered, "In truth, holy
Father, I spent not a long time at Petersburg; but I am not a stranger
either to its wonders or its inhabitants."

"Possibly, then, you may have met with the English favourite of the
Czar of whom I hear in my retreat that men have lately spoken somewhat
largely?" The Hermit paused again. We were now in a long, low passage,
almost in darkness. I scarcely saw him, yet I heard a convulsed movement
in his throat before he uttered the remainder of the sentence. "He is
called the Count Devereux."

"Father," said I, calmly, "I have both seen and known the man."

"Ha!" said the Hermit, and he leaned for a moment against the wall;
"known him--and--how--how--I mean, where is he at this present time?"

"That, Father, is a difficult question respecting one who has led so
active a life. He was ambassador at the court of------just before I left
it."

We had now passed the passage and gained a room of tolerable size; an
iron lamp burned within, and afforded a sufficient but somewhat dim
light. The Hermit, as I concluded my reply, sank down on a long stone
bench, beside a table of the same substance, and leaning his face on
his hand, so that the long, large sleeve he wore perfectly concealed his
features, said, "Pardon me; my breath is short, and my frame weak; I am
quite exhausted, but will speak to you more anon."

I uttered a short answer, and drew a small wooden stool within a few
feet of the Hermit's seat. After a brief silence he rose, placed wine,
bread, and preserved fruits before me and bade me eat. I seemed to
comply with his request, and the apparent diversion of my attention from
himself somewhat relieved the embarrassment under which he evidently
laboured.

"May I hope," he said, "that were my commission to this--to the Count
Devereux--you would execute it faithfully and with speed? Yet stay: you
have a high mien, as of one above fortune, but your garb is rude and
poor; and if aught of gold could compensate your trouble, the Hermit has
other treasuries besides this cell."

"I will do your bidding, Father, without robbing the poor. You wish,
then, that I should seek Morton Devereux; you wish that I should summon
him hither; you wish to see and to confer with him?"

"God of mercy forbid!" cried the Hermit, and with such a vehemence that
I was startled from the design of revealing myself, which I was on the
point of executing. "I would rather that these walls would crush me into
dust, or that this solid stone would crumble beneath my feet,--ay, even
into a bottomless pit, than meet the glance of Morton Devereux!"

"Is it even so?" said I, stooping over the wine-cup; "ye have been foes
then, I suspect. Well, it matters not: tell me your errand, and it shall
be done."

"Done!" cried the Hermit, and a new and certainly a most natural
suspicion darted within him, "done! and--fool that I am!--who or what
are you that I should believe you take so keen an interest in the wishes
of a man utterly unknown to you? I tell you that my wish is that you
should cross seas and traverse lands until you find the man I have named
to you. Will a stranger do this, and without hire? No--no--I was a fool,
and will trust the monks, and give gold, and then my errand will be
sped."

"Father, or rather brother," said I, with a slow and firm voice, "for
you are of mine own age, and you have the passion and the infirmity
which make brethren of all mankind, I am one to whom all places are
alike: it matters not whether I visit a northern or a southern clime; I
have wealth, which is sufficient to smooth toil; I have leisure, which
makes occupation an enjoyment. More than this, I am one who in his
gayest and wildest moments has ever loved mankind, and would have
renounced at any time his own pleasure for the advantage of another. But
at this time, above all others, I am most disposed to forget myself, and
there is a passion in your words which leads me to hope that it may be a
great benefit which I can confer upon you."

"You speak well," said the Hermit, musingly, "and I may trust you; I
will consider yet a little longer, and to-morrow at this hour you shall
have my final answer. If you execute the charge I entrust to you, may
the blessing of a dying and most wretched man cleave to you forever! But
hush; the clock strikes: it is my hour of prayer."

And, pointing to a huge black clock that hung opposite the door, and
indicated the hour of nine (according to our English mode of numbering
the hours), the Hermit fell on his knees, and, clasping his hands
tightly, bent his face over them in the attitude of humiliation and
devotion. I followed his example. After a few minutes he rose: "Once in
every three hours," said he, with a ghastly expression, "for the last
twelve years have I bowed my soul in anguish before God, and risen to
feel that it was in vain: I am cursed without and within!"

"My Father, my Father, is this your faith in the mercies of the Redeemer
who died for man?"

"Talk not to me of faith!" cried the Hermit, wildly. "Ye laymen and
worldlings know nothing of its mysteries and its powers. But begone! the
dread hour is upon me, when my tongue is loosed and my brain darkened,
and I know not my words and shudder at my own thoughts. Begone! no human
being shall witness those moments: they are only for Heaven and my own
soul."

So saying, this unhappy and strange being seized me by the arm and
dragged me towards the passage we had entered. I was in doubt whether
to yield to or contend with him; but there was a glare in his eye and
a flush upon his brow, which, while it betrayed the dreadful disease
of his mind, made me fear that resistance to his wishes might operate
dangerously upon a frame so feeble and reduced. I therefore mechanically
obeyed him. He opened again the entrance to his rugged home, and the
moonlight streamed wanly over his dark robes and spectral figure.

"Go," said he, more mildly than before, "go, and forgive the vehemence
of one whose mind and heart alike are broken within him. Go, but return
to-morrow at sunset. Your air disposes me to trust you."

So saying, he closed the door upon me, and I stood without the cavern
alone.

But did I return home? Did I hasten to press my couch in sleep and sweet
forgetfulness, while he was in that gloomy sepulture of the living, a
prey to anguish, and torn by the fangs of madness and a fierce disease?
No: on the damp grass, beneath the silent skies, I passed a night which
could scarcely have been less wretched than his own. My conjecture was
now and in full confirmed. Heavens! how I loved that man! how, from my
youngest years, had my soul's fondest affections interlaced themselves
with him! with what anguish had I wept his imagined death! and now to
know that he lay within those walls, smitten from brain to heart with so
fearful and mysterious a curse,--to know, too, that he dreaded the sight
of me,--of me who would have laid down my life for his! the grave, which
I imagined his home, had been a mercy to a doom like this.

"He fears," I murmured, and I wept as I said it, "to look on one who
would watch over, and soothe, and bear with him, with more than a
woman's love! By what awful fate has this calamity fallen on one so
holy and so pure? or by what preordered destiny did I come to these
solitudes, to find at the same time a new charm for the earth and a
spell to change it again into a desert and a place of woe?"

All night I kept vigil by the cave, and listened if I could catch moan
or sound; but everything was silent: the thick walls of the rock kept
even the voice of despair from my ear. The day dawned, and I retired
among the trees, lest the Hermit might come out unawares and see me. At
sunrise I saw him appear for a few moments and again retire, and I then
hastened home, exhausted and wearied by the internal conflicts of the
night, to gather coolness and composure for the ensuing interview, which
I contemplated at once with eagerness and dread.

At the appointed hour I repaired to the cavern: the door was partially
closed; I opened it, hearing no answer to my knock, and walked gently
along the passage; but I now heard shrieks and groans and wild laughter
as I neared the rude chamber. I paused for a moment, and then in terror
and dismay entered the apartment. It was empty, but I saw near the clock
a small door, from within which the sounds that alarmed me proceeded. I
had no scruple in opening it, and found myself in the Hermit's sleeping
chamber,--a small dark room, where, upon a straw pallet, lay the
wretched occupant in a state of frantic delirium. I stood mute and
horror-struck, while his exclamations of frenzy burst upon my ear.

"There--there!" he cried, "I have struck thee to the heart, and now I
will kneel, and kiss those white lips, and bathe my hands in that blood!
Ha!--do I hate thee?--hate--ay--hate,--abhor, detest! Have
you the beads there?--let me tell them. Yes, I will go to the
confessional--confess?--No, no--all the priests in the world could
not lift up a soul so heavy with guilt. Help--help--help! I am
falling--falling--there is the pit, and the fire, and the devils! Do you
hear them laugh?--I can laugh too!--ha! ha! ha! Hush, I have written it
all out, in a fair hand; he shall read it; and then, O God! what curses
he will heap upon my head! Blessed Saint Francis, hear me! Lazarus,
Lazarus, speak for me!"

Thus did the Hermit rave, while my flesh crept to hear him. I stood by
his bedside, and called on him, but he neither heard nor saw me. Upon
the ground, by the bed's head, as if it had dropped from under
the pillow, was a packet seated and directed to myself. I knew the
handwriting at a glance, even though the letters were blotted and
irregular, and possibly traced in the first moment that his present
curse fell upon the writer. I placed the packet in my bosom; the
Hermit saw not the motion; he lay back on the bed, seemingly in utter
exhaustion. I turned away, and hastened to the monastery for assistance.
As I hurried through the passage, the Hermit's shrieks again broke upon
me, with a fiercer vehemence than before. I flew from them, as if
they were sounds from the abyss of Hades. I flew till, breathless,
and half-senseless myself, I fell down exhausted by the gate of the
monastery.

The two most skilled in physic of the brethren were immediately
summoned, and they lost not a moment in accompanying me to the cavern.
All that evening, until midnight, the frenzy of the maniac seemed rather
to increase than abate. But at that hour, exactly indeed as the clock
struck twelve, he fell all at once into a deep sleep.

Then for the first time, but not till the weary brethren had at this
favourable symptom permitted themselves to return for a brief interval
to the monastery, to seek refreshment for themselves and to bring down
new medicines for the patient,--then, for the first time, I rose from
the Hermit's couch by which I had hitherto kept watch, and repairing to
the outer chamber, took forth the packet superscribed with my name.

There, alone in that gray vault, and by the sepulchral light of the
single lamp, I read what follows:--

