which, when kneaded well up together with a slice of sarcasm, Paris
calls philosophy."

"And what, my dear Enguerrand, do you propose to do?"

"That depends on whether we are really besieged. If so, of course I
become a soldier."

"I hope not a National Guard?"

"I care not in what name I fight, so that I fight for France."

As Enguerrand said these simple words, his whole countenance, seemed
changed. The crest rose; his eyes sparkled; the fair and delicate
beauty which had made him the darling of women--the joyous sweetness
of expression and dainty grace of high breeding which made him the most
popular companion to men,--were exalted in a masculine nobleness of
aspect, from which a painter might have taken hints for a study of the
young Achilles separated for ever from effeminate companionship at the
sight of the weapons of war. De Mauleon gazed on him admiringly. We have
seen that he shared the sentiments uttered--had resolved on the same
course of action. But it was with the tempered warmth of a man who seeks
to divest his thoughts and his purpose of the ardour of romance,
and who, in serving his country, calculates on the gains to his own
ambition. Nevertheless he admired in Enguerrand the image of his own
impulsive and fiery youth.

"And you, I presume," resumed Enguerrand, "will fight too, but rather
with pen than with sword."

"Pens will now only be dipped in red ink, and commonsense never writes
in that colour; as for the sword, I have passed the age of forty-five,
at which military service halts. But if some experience in active
service, some knowledge of the art by which soldiers are disciplined
and led, will be deemed sufficient title to a post of command, however
modest the grade be, I shall not be wanting among the defenders of
Paris."

"My brave dear Vicomte, if you are past the age to serve, you are in the
ripest age to command; and with the testimonials and the cross you
won in Algeria, your application for employment will be received with
gratitude by any general so able as Trochu."

"I don't know whether I shall apply to Trochu. I would rather be elected
to command even by the Mobiles or the National Guard, of whom I have
just spoken disparagingly; and no doubt both corps will soon claim and
win the right to choose their officers. But if elected, no matter by
whom, I shall make a preliminary condition; the men under me shall
train, and drill, and obey,--soldiers of a very different kind from the
youthful Pekins nourished on absinthe and self-conceit, and applauding
that Bombastes Furioso, M. Hugo, when he assures the enemy that Paris
will draw an idea from its scabbard. But here comes Savarin. Bon jour,
my dear poet."

"Don't say good day. An evil day for journalists and writers who do not
out-Herod Blanqui and Pyat. I know not how I shall get bread and cheese.
My poor suburban villa is to be pulled down by way of securing Paris;
my journal will be suppressed by way of establishing the liberty of the
press. I ventured to suggest that the people of France should have some
choice in the form of their government."

"That was very indiscreet, my poor Savarin," said Victor; "I wonder your
printing-office has not been pulled down. We are now at the moment when
wise men hold their tongues."

"Perhaps so, M. de Mauleon. It might have been wiser for all of us,
you as well as myself, if we had not allowed our tongues to be so free
before this moment arrived. We live to learn; and if we ever have what
may be called a passable government again, in which we may say pretty
much what we like, there is one thing I will not do, I will not
undermine that government without seeing a very clear way to the
government that is to follow it. What say you, Pierre Firmin?"

"Frankly, I say that I deserve your rebuke," answered De Mauleon
thoughtfully. "But, of course, you are going to take or send Madame
Savarin out of Paris."

"Certainly. We have made a very pleasant party for our hegira this
evening-among others the Morleys. Morley is terribly disgusted. A Red
Republican slapped him on the shoulder and said, 'American, we have
a republic as well as you.' 'Pretty much you know about republics,'
growled Morley; 'a French republic is as much like ours as a baboon is
like a man.' On which the Red roused the mob, who dragged the American
off to the nearest station of the National Guard, where he was accused
of being a Prussian spy. With some difficulty, and lots of brag about
the sanctity of the stars and stripes, he escaped with a reprimand, and
caution how to behave himself in future. So he quits a city in which
there no longer exists freedom of speech. My wife hoped to induce
Mademoiselle Cicogna to accompany us; I grieve to say she refuses. You
know she is engaged in marriage to Gustave Rameau; and his mother dreads
the effect that these Red Clubs and his own vanity may have upon his
excitable temperament if the influence of Mademoiselle Cicogna be
withdrawn."

"How could a creature so exquisite as Isaura Cicogna ever find
fascination in Gustave Rameau!" exclaimed Enguerrand.

"A woman like her," answered De Mauleon, "always finds a fascination in
self-sacrifice."

"I think you divine the truth," said Savarin, rather mournfully. "But
I must bid you good-bye. May we live to shake hands reunis sons des
meilleurs auspices."

Here Savarin hurried off, and the other two men strolled into the Champs
Elysees, which were crowded with loungers, gay and careless, as if there
had been no disaster at Sedan, no overthrow of an Empire, no enemy on
its road to Paris.

In fact the Parisians, at once the most incredulous and the most
credulous of all populations, believed that the Prussians would never be
so impertinent as to come in sight of the gates. Something would occur
to stop them! The king had declared he did not war on Frenchmen, but on
the Emperor: the Emperor gone, the war was over. A democratic republic
was instituted. A horrible thing in its way, it is true; but how could
the Pandour tyrant brave the infection of democratic doctrines among
his own barbarian armies? Were not placards, addressed to our "German
brethren," posted upon the walls of Paris, exhorting the Pandours to
fraternise with their fellow-creatures? Was not Victor Hugo going to
publish "a letter to the German people"? Had not Jules Favre graciously
offered peace, with the assurance that "France would not cede a stone of
her fortresses--an inch of her territory? She would pardon the
invaders and not march upon Berlin!" To all these, and many more such
incontestable proofs, that the idea of a siege was moonshine, did
Enguerrand and Victor listen as they joined group after group of
their fellow-countrymen: nor did Paris cease to harbour such pleasing
illusions, amusing itself with piously laying crowns at the foot of the
statue of Strasbourg, swearing "they would be worthy of their Alsatian
brethren," till on the 19th of September the last telegram was received,
and Paris was cut of from the rest of the world by the iron line of
the Prussian invaders. "Tranquil and terrible," says Victor Hugo, "she
awaits the invasion! A volcano needs no assistance."




CHAPTER XII.

We left Graham Vane slowly recovering from the attack of fever which had
arrested his journey to Berlin in quest of the Count von Rudesheimn. He
was, however, saved the prosecution of that journey, and his direction
turned back to France by a German newspaper which informed him that
the King of Prussia was at Rheims, and that the Count von Rudesheim was
among the eminent personages gathered there around their sovereign. In
conversing the same day with the kindly doctor who attended him, Graham
ascertained that this German noble held a high command in the German
armies, and bore a no less distinguished reputation as a wise political
counsellor than he had earned as a military chief. As soon as he
was able to travel, and indeed before the good doctor sanctioned his
departure, Graham took his way to Rheims, uncertain, however, whether
the Count would still be found there. I spare the details of his
journey, interesting as they were. On reaching the famous and, in the
eyes of Legitimists, the sacred city, the Englishman had no difficulty
in ascertaining the house, not far from the cathedral, in which the
Count von Rudesheim had taken his temporary abode. Walking towards it
from the small hotel in which he had been lucky enough to find a room
disengaged--slowly, for he was still feeble--he was struck by the quiet
conduct of the German soldiery, and, save in their appearance, the
peaceful aspect of the streets. Indeed, there was an air of festive
gaiety about the place, as in an English town in which some popular
regiment is quartered. The German soldiers thronged the shops, buying
largely; lounged into the cafes; here and there attempted flirtations
with the grisettes, who laughed at their French and blushed at their
compliments; and in their good-humoured, somewhat bashful cheeriness,
there was no trace of the insolence of conquest.

But as Graham neared the precincts of the cathedral his ear caught a
grave and solemn music, which he at first supposed to come from within
the building. But as he paused and looked round, he saw a group of the
German military, on whose stalwart forms and fair manly earnest faces
the setting sun cast its calm lingering rays. They were chanting, in
voices not loud but deep, Luther's majestic hymn:

"Nun danket alle Gott." The chant awed even the ragged beggar boys who
had followed the Englishman, as they followed any stranger, would have
followed King William himself, whining for alms. "What a type of the
difference between the two nations!" thought Graham; "the Marseillaise,
and Luther's Hymn!" While thus meditating and listening, a man in a
general's uniform came slowly out of the cathedral, with his hands
clasped behind his back, and his head bent slightly downwards. He, too,
paused on hearing the hymn; then unclasped his hand and beckoned to one
of the officers, to whom approaching he whispered a word or two, and
passed on towards the Episcopal palace. The hymn hushed, and the singers
quietly dispersed. Graham divined rightly that the general had thought
a hymn thanking the God of battles might wound the feelings of the
inhabitants of the vanquished city--not, however, that any of them were
likely to understand the language in which the thanks were uttered.
Graham followed the measured steps of the general, whose hands were
again clasped behind his back--the musing habit of Von Moltke, as it
had been of Napoleon the First. Continuing his way, the Englishman soon
reached the house in which the Count von Rudesheim was lodged, and,
sending in his card, was admitted at once through an anteroom in which
sate two young men, subaltern officers apparently employed in draughting
maps, into the presence of the Count.

"Pardon me," said Graham, after the first conventional salutation, "if
I interrupt you for a moment or so in the midst of events so grave, on a
matter that must seem to you very trivial."

"Nay," answered the Count, "there is nothing so trivial in this world
but what there will be some one to whom it is important. Say how I can
serve you."

"I think, M. le Comte, that you once received in your household, as
teacher or governess, a French lady, Madame Marigny."

"Yes, I remember her well--a very handsome woman. My wife and daughter
took great interest in her. She was married out of my house."

"Exactly--and to whom?"

"An Italian of good birth, who was then employed by the Austrian
Government in some minor post, and subsequently promoted to a better one
in the Italian dominion, which then belonged to the house of Hapsburg,
after which we lost sight of him and his wife."

"An Italian--what was his name?"

"Ludovico Cicogna."

"Cicogna!" exclaimed Graham, turning very pale. "Are you sure that was
the name?"

"Certainly. He was a cadet of a very noble house, and disowned by
relations too patriotic to forgive him for accepting employment under
the Austrian Government."

"Can you not give me the address of the place in Italy to which he was
transferred on leaving Austria?"

"No; but if the information be necessary to you, it can be obtained
easily at Milan, where the head of the family resides, or indeed in
Vienna, through any ministerial bureau."

"Pardon me one or two questions more. Had Madame Marigny any children by
a former husband?"

"Not that I know of: I never heard so. Signor Cicogna was a widower,
and had, if I remember right, children by his first wife, who was also
a Frenchwoman. Before he obtained office in Austria, he resided, I
believe, in France. I do not remember how many children he had by his
first wife. I never saw them. Our acquaintance began at the baths of
Toplitz, where he saw and fell violently in love with Madame Marigny.
After their marriage, they went to his post, which was somewhere, I
think, in the Tyrol. We saw no more of them; but my wife and daughter
kept up a correspondence with the Signora Cicogna for a short time. It
ceased altogether when she removed into Italy."

"You do not even know if the Signora is still living?"

"No."

"Her husband, I am told, is dead."

"Indeed! I am concerned to hear it. A good-looking, lively, clever man.
I fear he must have lost all income when the Austrian dominions passed
to the house of Savoy."

"Many thanks for your information. I can detain you no longer," said
Graham, rising.

"Nay, I am not very busy at this moment; but I fear we Germans have
plenty of work on our hands."

"I had hoped that, now the French Emperor, against whom your king made
war, was set aside, his Prussian majesty would make peace with the
French people."

"Most willingly would he do so if the French people would let him. But
it must be through a French Government legally chosen by the people.
And they have chosen none! A mob at Paris sets up a provisional
administration, that commences by declaring that it will not give up 'an
inch of its territory nor a stone of its fortresses.' No terms of peace
can be made with such men holding such talk." After a few words more
over the state of public affairs,--in which Graham expressed the English
side of affairs, which was all for generosity to the vanquished; and the
Count argued much more ably on the German, which was all for security
against the aggressions of a people that would not admit itself to be
vanquished,--the short interview closed.

As Graham at night pursued his journey to Vienna, there came into his
mind Isaura's song of the Neapolitan fisherman. Had he, too, been blind
to the image on the rock? Was it possible that all the while he had been
resisting the impulse of his heart, until the discharge of the mission
entrusted to him freed his choice and decided his fortunes, the very
person of whom he was in search had been before him, then to be for
ever won, lost to him now for ever? Could Isaura Cicogna be the child
of Louise Duval by Richard King? She could not have been her child by
Cicogna: the dates forbade that hypothesis. Isaura must have been five
years old when Louise married the Italian. Arrived at Milan, Graham
quickly ascertained that the post to which Ludovico Cicogna had been
removed was in Verona, and that he had there died eight years ago.
Nothing was to be learned as to his family or his circumstances at the
time of his death. The people of whose history we know the least are
the relations we refuse to acknowledge. Graham continued his journey
to Verona. There he found on inquiry that the Cicognas had occupied an
apartment in a house which stood at the outskirts of the town and had
been since pulled down to make way for some public improvements. But
his closest inquiries could gain him no satisfactory answers to the
all-important questions as to Ludovico Cicogna's family. His political
alienation from the Italian cause, which was nowhere more ardently
espoused than at Verona, had rendered him very unpopular. He visited at
no Italian houses. Such society as he had was confined to the Austrian
military within the Quadrilateral or at Venice, to which city he made
frequent excursions: was said to lead there a free and gay life, very
displeasing to the Signora, whom he left in Verona. She was but little
seen, and faintly remembered as very handsome and proud-looking. Yes,
there were children--a girl, and a boy several years younger than the
girl; but whether she was the child of the Signora by a former marriage,
or whether the Signora was only the child's stepmother, no one could
say. The usual clue, in such doubtful matters obtainable through
servants, was here missing. The Cicognas had only kept two servants, and
both were Austrian subjects, who had long left the country,--their very
names forgotten.

Graham now called to mind the Englishman Selby, for whom Isaura had such
grateful affection, as supplying to her the place of her father. This
must have been the Englishman whom Louise Duval had married after
Cicogna's death. It would be no difficult task, surely, to ascertain
where he had resided. Easy enough to ascertain all that Graham wanted to
know from Isaura herself, if a letter could reach her. But, as he knew
by the journals, Paris was now invested--cut off from all communication
with the world beyond. Too irritable, anxious, and impatient to wait for
the close of the siege, though he never suspected it could last so long
as it did, he hastened to Venice, and there learned through the
British consul that the late Mr. Selby was a learned antiquarian, an
accomplished general scholar, a fanatico in music, a man of gentle
temper though reserved manners; had at one time lived much at Venice:
after his marriage with the Signora Cicogna he had taken up his abode
near Florence. To Florence Graham now went. He found the villa on the
skirts of Fiesole at which Mr. Selby had resided. The peasant who had
officiated as gardener and shareholder in the profits of vines and
figs, was still, with his wife, living on the place. Both man and wife
remembered the Inglese well; spoke of him with great affection, of his
wife with great dislike. They said her manners were very haughty, her
temper very violent; that she led the Inglese a very unhappy life; that
there were a girl and a boy, both hers by a former marriage; but
when closely questioned whether they were sure that the girl was the
Signora's child by the former husband, or whether she was not the child
of that husband by a former wife, they could not tell; they could only
say that both were called by the same name--Cicogna; that the boy was
the Signora's favourite--that indeed she seemed wrapt up in him; that
he died of a rapid decline a few months after Mr. Selby had hired the
place, and that shortly after his death the Signora left the place and
never returned to it; that it was little more than a year that she had
lived with her husband before this final separation took place. The girl
remained with Mr. Selby, who cherished and loved her as his own child.
Her Christian name was Isaura, the boy's Luigi. A few years later, Mr.
Selby left the villa and went to Naples, where they heard he had died.
They could give no information as to what had become of his wife: Since
the death of her boy that lady had become very much changed--her spirits
quite broken, no longer violent. She would sit alone and weep bitterly.
The only person out of her family she would receive was the priest; till
the boy's death she had never seen the priest, nor been known to attend
divine service.

"Was the priest living?"

"Oh, no; he had been dead two years. A most excellent man--a saint,"
said the peasant's wife.

"Good priests are like good women," said the peasant, drily; "there are
plenty of them, but they are all underground."

On which remark the wife tried to box his ears. The contadino had
become a freethinker since the accession of the house of Savoy. His wife
remained a good Catholic. Said the peasant as, escaping from his wife,
he walked into the high-road with Graham, "My belief, Eccellenza, is,
that the priest did all the mischief."

"What mischief?"

"Persuaded the Signora to leave her husband. The Inglese was not a
Catholic. I heard the priest call him a heretic. And the padre, who,
though not so bad as some of his cloth, was a meddling bigot, thought it
perhaps best for her soul that it should part company with a heretic's
person. I can't say for sure, but I think that was it. The padre seemed
to triumph when the Signora was gone." Graham mused. The peasant's
supposition was not improbable. A woman such as Louise Duval appeared to
be--of vehement passions and ill-regulated mind--was just one of those
who, in a moment of great sorrow, and estranged from the ordinary
household affections, feel, though but imperfectly, the necessity of a
religion, and, ever in extremes, pass at once from indifferentism into
superstition.

Arrived at Naples, Graham heard little of Selby except as a literary
recluse, whose only distraction from books was the operatic stage. But
he heard much of Isaura; of the kindness which Madame de Grantmesnil
had shown to her, when left by Selby's death alone in the world; of the
interest which the friendship and the warm eulogies of one so eminent as
the great French writer had created for Isaura in the artistic circles;
of the intense sensation her appearance, her voice, her universal
genius, had made in that society, and the brilliant hopes of her
subsequent career on the stage the cognoscenti had formed. No one knew
anything of her mother; no one entertained a doubt that Isaura was
by birth a Cicogna. Graham could not learn the present whereabouts of
Madame de Grantmesnil. She had long left Naples, and had been last heard
of at Genoa; was supposed to have returned to France a little before the
war. In France she had no fixed residence.

The simplest mode of obtaining authentic information whether Isaura
was the daughter of Ludovico Cicogna by his first wife--namely, by
registration of her birth--failed him; because, as von Rudesheim had
said, his first wife was a Frenchwoman. The children had been born
somewhere in France, no one could even guess where. No one had ever seen
the first wife, who had never appeared in Italy, nor had even heard what
was her maiden name.

Graham, meanwhile, was not aware that Isaura was still in the besieged
city, whether or not already married to Gustave Rameau; so large a
number of the women had quitted Paris before the siege began, that he
had reason to hope she was among them. He heard through an American that
the Morleys had gone to England before the Prussian investment; perhaps
Isaura had gone with them. He wrote to Mrs. Morley, inclosing his letter
to the Minister of the United States at the Court of St. James's, and
while still at Naples received her answer. It was short, and malignantly
bitter. "Both myself and Madame Savarin, backed by Signora Venosta,
earnestly entreated Mademoiselle Cicogna to quit Paris, to accompany us
to England. Her devotion to her affianced husband would not permit
her to listen to us. It is only an Englishman who could suppose Isaura
Cicogna to be one of those women who do not insist on sharing the perils
of those they love. You ask whether she was the daughter of Ludovico
Cicogna by his former marriage, or of his second wife by him. I cannot
answer. I don't even know whether Signor Cicogna ever had a former wife.
Isaura Cicogna never spoke to me of her parents. Permit me to ask--what
business is it of yours now? Is it the English pride that makes you
wish to learn whether on both sides she is of noble family? How can that
discovery alter your relations towards the affianced bride of another?"

On receipt of this letter, Graham quitted Naples, and shortly afterwards
found himself at Versailles. He obtained permission to establish himself
there, though the English were by no means popular. Thus near to Isaura,
thus sternly separated from her, Graham awaited the close of the siege.
Few among those at Versailles believed that the Parisians would endure
it much longer. Surely they would capitulate before the bombardment,
which the Germans themselves disliked to contemplate as a last resource,
could commence.

In his own mind Graham was convinced that Isaura was the child of
Richard King. It seemed to him probable that Louise Duval, unable
to assign any real name to the daughter of the marriage she
disowned,--neither the name borne by the repudiated husband, nor her
own maiden name,--would, on taking her daughter to her new home, have
induced Cicogna to give the child his name, or that after Cicogna's
death she herself had so designated the girl. A dispassionate confidant,
could Graham have admitted any confidant whatever, might have suggested
the more than equal probability that Isaura was Cicogna's daughter by
his former espousal. But then what could have become of Richard King's
child? To part with the fortune in his hands, to relinquish all the
ambitious dreams which belonged to it, cost Graham Vane no pang: but he
writhed with indignant grief when he thought that the wealth of Richard
King's heiress was to pass to the hands of Gustave Rameau,--that this
was to be the end of his researches--this the result of the sacrifice
his sense of honour imposed on him. And now that there was the
probability that he must convey to Isaura this large inheritance, the
practical difficulty of inventing some reason for such a donation, which
he had, while at a distance made light of, became seriously apparent.
How could he say to Isaura that he had L200,000. in trust for her,
without naming any one so devising it? Still more, how constitute
himself her guardian, so as to secure it to herself, independently
of her husband? Perhaps Isaura was too infatuated with Rameau, or too
romantically unselfish, to permit the fortune so mysteriously conveyed
being exclusively appropriated to herself. And if she were already
married to Rameau, and if he were armed with the right to inquire into
the source of this fortune, how exposed to the risks of disclosure would
become the secret Graham sought to conceal. Such a secret affecting
the memory of the sacred dead, affixing a shame on the scutcheon of
the living, in the irreverent hands of a Gustave Rameau,--it was too
dreadful to contemplate such a hazard. And yet, if Isaura were
the missing heiress, could Graham Vane admit any excuse for basely
withholding from her, for coolly retaining to himself the wealth for
which he was responsible? Yet, torturing as were these communings with
himself, they were mild in their torture compared to the ever-growing
anguish of the thought that in any case the only woman he had ever
loved--ever could love,--who might but for his own scruples and
prejudices have been the partner of his life, was perhaps now actually
the wife of another, and, as such, in what terrible danger! Famine
within the walls of the doomed city: without, the engines of death
waiting for a signal. So near to her, and yet so far! So willing to die
for her, if for her he could not live: and with all his devotion, all
his intellect, all his wealth, so powerless!




CHAPTER XIII.

It is now the middle of November-a Sunday. The day has been mild, and
is drawing towards its close. The Parisians have been enjoying the
sunshine. Under the leafless trees in the public gardens and the Champs
Elysees children have been at play. On the Boulevards the old elegance
of gaiety is succeeded by a livelier animation. Itinerant musicians
gather round them ragged groups. Fortune-tellers are in great request,
especially among the once brilliant Laises and Thaises, now looking
more shabby, to whom they predict the speedy restoration of Nabobs and
Russians, and golden joys. Yonder Punch is achieving a victory over the
Evil One, who wears the Prussian spiked helmet, and whose face has been
recently beautified into a resemblance to Bismarck. Punch draws to his
show a laughing audience of Moblots and recruits to the new companies
of the National Guard. Members of the once formidable police, now
threadbare and hunger-pinched, stand side by side with unfortunate
beggars and sinister-looking patriots who have served their time in the
jails or galleys.

Uniforms of all variety are conspicuous--the only evidence visible of
an enemy at the walls. But the aspects of the wearers of warlike
accoutrements are debonnaire and smiling, as of revellers on a holiday
of peace. Among these defenders of their country, at the door of
a crowded cafe, stands Frederic Lemercier, superb in the costume,
bran-new, of a National Guard,--his dog Fox tranquilly reposing on its
haunches, with eyes fixed upon its fellow-dog philosophically musing on
the edge of Punch's show, whose master is engaged in the conquest of the
Bismarck fiend.

"Lemercier," cried the Vicomte de Breze, approaching the cafe, "I
scarcely recognise you in that martial guise. You look magnifique--the
galons become you. Peste! an officer already?"

"The National Guards and Mobiles are permitted to choose their own
officers, as you are aware. I have been elected, but to subaltern grade,
by the warlike patriots of my department. Enguerrand de Vandemar is
elected a captain of the Mobiles in his, and Victor de Mauleon is
appointed to the command of a battalion of the National Guards. But I
soar above jealousy at such a moment,--

        "'Rome a choisi mon bras; je n'examine rien.'"

"You have no right to be jealous. De Mauldon has had experience and won
distinction in actual service, and from all I hear is doing wonders with
his men--has got them not only to keep but to love drill. I heard no
less an authority than General V---- say that if all the officers of the
National Guard were like De Mauleon, that body would give an example of
discipline to the line."

"I say nothing as to the promotion of a real soldier like the
Vicomte--but a Parisian dandy like Euguerrand de Vande--"

"You forget that Enguerrand received a military education--an advantage
denied to you."

"What does that matter? Who cares for education nowadays? Besides, have
I not been training ever since the 4th of September, to say nothing of
the hard work on the ramparts?"

"Parlez moi de cela it is indeed hard work on the ramparts. Infandum
dolorem quorum pars magna fui. Take the day duty. What with rising at
seven o'clock, and being drilled between a middle-aged and corpulent
grocer on one side and a meagre beardless barber's apprentice on the
other; what with going to the bastions at eleven, and seeing half one's
companions drunk before twelve; what with trying to keep their fists
off one's face when one politely asks them not to call one's general a
traitor or a poltroon,--the work of the ramparts would be insupportable,
if I did not take a pack of cards with me, and enjoy a quiet rubber
with three other heroes in some sequestered corner. As for night work,
nothing short of the indomitable fortitude of a Parisian could sustain
it; the tents made expressly not to be waterproof, like the groves of
the Muses,

                      "' per
          Quos et aquea subeant et aurae.'

A fellow-companion of mine tucks himself up on my rug, and pillows his
head on my knapsack. I remonstrate--he swears--the other heroes wake
up and threaten to thrash us both; and just when peace is made, and one
hopes for a wink of sleep, a detachment of spectators, chiefly gamins,
coming to see that all is safe in the camp, strike up the Marseillaise.
Ah, the world will ring to the end of time with the sublime attitude of
Paris in the face of the Vandal invaders, especially when it learns that
the very shoes we stand in are made of cardboard. In vain we complain.
The contractor for shoes is a staunch Republican, and jobs by right
divine. May I ask if you have dined yet?"

"Heavens! no, it is too early. But I am excessively hungry. I had only
a quarter of jugged cat for breakfast, and the brute was tough. In reply
to your question, may I put another--Did you lay in plenty of stores?"

"Stores? no; I am a bachelor, and rely on the stores of my married
friends."

"Poor De Breze! I sympathise with you, for I am in the same boat, and
dinner invitations have become monstrous rare."

"Oh, but you are so confoundedly rich! What to you are forty francs for
a rabbit, or eighty francs for a turkey?"

"Well, I suppose I am rich, but I have no money, and the ungrateful
restaurants will not give me credit. They don't believe in better days."

"How can you want money?"

"Very naturally. I had invested my capital famously-the best
speculations--partly in house rents, partly in company shares; and
houses pay no rents, and nobody will buy company shares. I had 1,000
napoleons on hand, it is true, when Duplessis left Paris--much more, I
thought, than I could possibly need, for I never believed in the siege.
But during the first few weeks I played at whist with bad luck, and
since then so many old friends have borrowed of me that I doubt if I
have 200 francs left. I have despatched four letters to Duplessis by
pigeon and balloon, entreating him to send me 25,000 francs by some
trusty fellow who will pierce the Prussian lines. I have had two
answers: 1st, that he will find a man; 2nd, that the man is found and
on his way. Trust to that man, my dear friend, and meanwhile lend me 200
francs."

"Mon cher, desole to refuse; but I was about to ask you to share your
200 francs with me who live chiefly by my pen; and that resource is cut
off. Still, il faut vivre--one must dine."

"That is a fact, and we will dine together to-day at my expense; limited
liability, though--eight francs a head."

"Generous Monsieur, I accept. Meanwhile let us take a turn towards the
Madeleine."

The two Parisians quit the cafe, and proceed up the Boulevard. On their
way they encounter Savarin. "Why," said De Breze, "I thought you had
left Paris with Madame."

"So I did, and deposited her safely with the Morleys at Boulogne. These
kind Americans were going to England, and they took her with them. But
I quit Paris! No: I am old; I am growing obese. I have always been
short-sighted. I can neither wield a sword nor handle a musket. But
Paris needs defenders; and every moment I was away from her I sighed to
myself, 'il faut etre la!' I returned before the Vandals had possessed
themselves of our railways, the convoi overcrowded with men like myself,
who had removed wives and families; and when we asked each other why we
went back, every answer was the same, 'il faut etre la.' No, poor child,
no--I have nothing to give you."

These last words were addressed to a woman young and handsome, with
a dress that a few weeks ago might have been admired for taste and
elegance by the lady leaders of the ton, but was now darned, and dirty,
and draggled.

"Monsieur, I did not stop you to ask for alms. You do not seem to
remember me, M. Savarin."

"But I do," said Lemercier, "surely I address Mademoiselle Julie
Caumartin."

"Ah, excuse me, le petit Frederic," said Julie with a sickly attempt at
coquettish sprightliness; "I had no eyes except for M. Savarin."

"And why only for me, my poor child?" asked the kindhearted author.

"Hush!" She drew him aside. "Because you can give me news of that
monster Gustave. It is not true, it cannot be true, that he is going to
be married?"

"Nay, surely, Mademoiselle, all connection between you and young Rameau
has ceased for months--ceased from the date of that illness in July
which nearly carried him off."

"I resigned him to the care of his mother," said the girl; "but when he
no longer needs a mother, he belongs to me. Oh, consider, M. Savarin,
for his sake I refused the most splendid offers! When he sought me, I
had my coupe, my opera-box, my cachemires, my jewels. The Russians--the
English--vied for my smiles. But I loved the man. I never loved before:
I shall never love again; and after the sacrifices I have made for him,
nothing shall induce me to give him up. Tell me, I entreat, my dear M.
Savarin, where he is hiding. He has left the parental roof, and they
refused there to give me his address."

"My poor girl, don't be mechante. It is quite true that Gustave Rameau
is engaged to be married; and any attempt of yours to create scandal--"

"Monsieur," interrupted Julie, vehemently, "don't talk to me about
scandal! The man is mine, and no one else shall have him. His address?"

"Mademoiselle," cried Savarin, angrily, "find it out for yourself."
Then--repentant of rudeness to one so young and so desolate--he
added, in mild expostulatory accents: "Come, come, ma belle enfant, be
reasonable: Gustave is no loss. He is reduced to poverty."

"So much the better. When he was well off I never cost him more than a
supper at the Maison Doree; and if he is poor he shall marry me, and I
will support him!"

"You!--and how?"

"By my profession when peace comes; and meanwhile I have offers from a
cafe to recite warlike songs. Ah! you shake your head incredulously. The
ballet-dancer recite verses? Yes! he taught me to recite his own Soyez
bon pour moi. M. Savarin! do say where I can find mon homme."

"No."

"That is your last word?"

"It is."

The girl drew her thin shawl round her and hurried off. Savarin rejoined
his friends. "Is that the way you console yourself for the absence of
Madame?" asked De Breze, drily.

"Fie!" cried Savarin, indignantly; "such bad jokes are ill-timed. What
strange mixtures of good and bad, of noble and base, every stratum of
Paris life contains! There is that poor girl, in one way contemptible,
no doubt, and yet in another way she has an element of grandeur. On the
whole, at Paris, the women, with all their faults, are of finer mould
than the men."

"French gallantry has always admitted that truth," said Lemercier. "Fox,
Fox, Fox." Uttering this cry, he darted forward after the dog, who had
strayed a few yards to salute another dog led by a string, and caught
the animal in his arms. "Pardon me," he exclaimed, returning to his
friends, "but there are so many snares for dogs at present. They are
just coming into fashion for roasts, and Fox is so plump."

"I thought," said Savarin, "that it was resolved at all the sporting
clubs that, be the pinch of famine ever so keen, the friend of man
should not be eaten."

"That was while the beef lasted; but since we have come to cats, who
shall predict immunity to dogs? Quid intactum nefasti linquimus? Nothing
is sacred from the hand of rapine."

The church of the Madeleine now stood before them. Moblots were playing
pitch-and-toss on its steps.

"I don't wish you to accompany me, Messieurs," said Lemercier,
apologetically, "but I am going to enter the church."

"To pray?" asked De Breze, in profound astonishment. "Not exactly; but
I want to speak to my friend Rochebriant, and I know I shall find him
there."

"Praying?" again asked De Breze.

"Yes."

"That is curious--a young Parisian exquisite at prayer--that is worth
seeing. Let us enter, too, Savarin."

They enter the church. It is filled, and even the sceptical De Breze
is impressed and awed by the sight. An intense fervour pervades the
congregation. The majority, it is true, are women, many of them in
deep mourning, and many of their faces mourning deeper than the dress.
Everywhere may be seen gushing tears, and everywhere faintly heard the
sound of stifled sighs. Besides the women are men of all ages--young,
middle-aged, old, with heads bowed and hands clasped, pale, grave,
and earnest. Most of them were evidently of the superior grade of
life--nobles, and the higher bourgeoisie: few of the ouvrier class, very
few, and these were of an earlier generation. I except soldiers, of whom
there were many, from the provincial Mobiles, chiefly Bretons; you know
the Breton soldiers by the little cross worn on their kepis.

Among them Lemercier at once distinguished the noble countenance of
Alain de Rochebriant. De Breze and Savarin looked at each other with
solemn eyes. I know not when either had last been within a church;
perhaps both were startled to find that religion still existed in
Paris--and largely exist it does, though little seen on the surface
of society, little to be estimated by the articles of journals and the
reports of foreigners. Unhappily, those among whom it exists are not the
ruling class--are of the classes that are dominated over and obscured in
every country the moment the populace becomes master. And at that moment
the journals chiefly read were warring more against the Deity than
the Prussians--were denouncing soldiers who attended mass. "The Gospel
certainly makes a bad soldier," writes the patriot Pyat.

Lemercier knelt down quietly. The other two men crept noiselessly out,
and stood waiting for him on the steps, watching the Moblots (Parisian
Moblots) at play.

"I should not wait for the roturier if he had not promised me a roti,"
said the Vicomte de Breze, with a pitiful attempt at the patrician wit
of the ancien regime.

Savarin shrugged his shoulders. "I am not included in the invitation,"
said he, "and therefore free to depart. I must go and look up a former
confrere who was an enthusiastic Red Republican, and I fear does not get
so much to eat since he has no longer an Emperor to abuse."

So Savarin went away. A few minutes afterwards Lemercier emerged from
the church with Alain.




CHAPTER XIV.

"I knew I should find you in the Madeleine," said Lemercier, "and I
wished much to know when you had news from Duplessis. He and your fair
fiancee are with your aunt still staying at Rochebriant?"

"Certainly. A pigeon arrived this morning with a few lines. All well
there."

"And Duplessis thinks, despite the war, that he shall be able, when the
time comes, to pay Louvier the mortgage-sum?"

"He never doubts that. His credit in London is so good. But of course
all works of improvement are stopped."

"Pray did he mention me?--anything about the messenger who was to pierce
the Prussian lines?"

"What! has the man not arrived? It is two weeks since he left."

"The Uhlans have no doubt shot him--the assassins, and drunk up my
25,000 francs--the thieves."

"I hope not. But in case of delay, Duplessis tells me I am to remit to
you 2,000 francs for your present wants. I will send them to you this
evening."

"How the deuce do you possess such a sum?"

"I came from Brittany with a purse well filled. Of course I could have
no scruples in accepting money from my destined father-in-law."

"And you can spare this sum?"

"Certainly--the State now provides for me; I am in command of a Breton
company."

"True. Come and dine with me and De Breze."

"Alas! I cannot. I have to see both the Vandemars before I return to
the camp for the night. And now-hush--come this way (drawing Frederic
further from De Breze), I have famous news for you. A sortie on a grand
scale is imminent; in a few days we may hope for it."

"I have heard that so often that I am incredulous."

"Take it as a fact now."

"What! Trochu has at last matured his plan?"

"He has changed its original design, which was to cut through the
Prussian lines to Rouen, occupying there the richest country for
supplies, guarding the left bank of the Seine and a watercourse to
convoy them to Paris. The incidents of war prevented that: he has a
better plan now. The victory of the army of the Loire at Orleans opens
a new enterprise. We shall cut our way through the Prussians, join that
army, and with united forces fall on the enemy at the rear. Keep this a
secret as yet, but rejoice with me that we shall prove to the invaders
what men who fight for their native soil can do under the protection of
Heaven."

"Fox, Fox, mon cheri," said Lemercier, as he walked towards the cafe
Riche with De Breze; "thou shalt have a festin de Balthazar under the
protection of Heaven."




CHAPTER XV.

On leaving Lemercier and De Breze, Savarin regained the Boulevard,
and pausing every now and then to exchange a few words with
acquaintances--the acquaintances of the genial author were
numerous--turned into the quartier Chaussee d'Antin, and gaining a
small neat house, with a richly-ornamented facade, mounted very
clean, well-kept stairs to a third story. On one of the doors on the
landing-place was nailed a card, inscribed, "Gustave Rameau, homme de
lettres." Certainly it is not usual in Paris thus to afficher one's self
as a "man of letters"? But Genius scorns what is usual. Had not Victor
Hugo left in the hotel-books on the Rhine his designation "homme de
lettres"? Did not the heir to one of the loftiest houses in the peerage
of England, and who was also a first-rate amateur in painting, inscribe
on his studio when in Italy, "--artiste"? Such examples, no doubt, were
familiar to Gustave Rameau, and "homme de lettres" was on the scrap of
pasteboard nailed to his door.

Savarin rang; the door opened, and Gustave appeared. The poet was, of
course, picturesquely attired. In his day of fashion he had worn within
doors a very pretty fanciful costume, designed after portraits of the
young Raffaelle; that costume he had preserved--he wore it now. It
looked very threadbare, and the pourpoint very soiled. But the beauty of
the poet's face had survived the lustre of the garments. True, thanks
to absinthe, the cheeks had become somewhat puffy and bloated. Grey was
distinctly visible in the long ebon tresses. But still the beauty of
the face was of that rare type which a Thorwaldsen or a Gibson seeking a
model for a Narcissus would have longed to fix into marble.

Gustave received his former chief with a certain air of reserved
dignity; led him into his chamber, only divided by a curtain from his
accommodation for washing and slumber, and placed him in an arm-chair
beside a drowsy fire--fuel had already become very dear.

"Gustave," said Savarin, "are you in a mood favourable to a little
serious talk?"

"Serious talk from M. Savarin is a novelty too great not to command my
profoundest interest."

"Thank you,--and to begin: I who know the world and mankind advise you,
who do not, never to meet a man who wishes to do you a kindness with
an ungracious sarcasm. Irony is a weapon I ought to be skilled in, but
weapons are used against enemies, and it is only a tyro who flourishes
his rapier in the face of his friends."

"I was not aware that M. Savarin still permitted me to regard him as a
friend."

"Because I discharged the duties of friend--remonstrated, advised, and
warned. However, let bygones be bygones. I entreated you not to quit the
safe shelter of the paternal roof. You insisted on doing so. I entreated
you not to send to one of the most ferocious of the Red, or rather,
