true cause, he wearied himself with vain conjectures, and knew not that
Edward involuntarily did homage to the superior chivalry of his gallant
favourite, when he dreaded that, above all men, Hastings should be made
aware of the guilty secret which the philosopher and his child could
tell. If Hastings gave his name and rank to Sibyll, how powerful a
weight would the tale of a witness now so obscure suddenly acquire!

Turning from the image of Sibyll, thus beset with thoughts of danger,
embarrassment, humiliation, disgrace, ruin, Lord Hastings recalled the
words of Gloucester; and the stately image of Katherine, surrounded with
every memory of early passion, every attribute of present ambition, rose
before him; and he slept at last, to dream not of Sibyll and the humble
orchard, but of Katherine in her maiden bloom, of the trysting-tree by
the halls of Middleham, of the broken ring, of the rapture and the woe
of his youth's first high-placed love.




CHAPTER IV. THE STRIFE WHICH SIBYLL HAD COURTED, BETWEEN KATHERINE AND
HERSELF, COMMENCES IN SERIOUS EARNEST.

Hastings felt relieved when, the next day, several couriers arrived with
tidings so important as to merge all considerations into those of state.
A secret messenger from the French court threw Gloucester into one of
those convulsive passions of rage, to which, with all his intellect and
dissimulation, he was sometimes subject, by the news of Anne's betrothal
to Prince Edward; nor did the letter from Clarence to the king,
attesting the success of one of his schemes, comfort Richard for the
failure of the other. A letter from Burgundy confirmed the report of the
spy, announced Duke Charles's intention of sending a fleet to prevent
Warwick's invasion, and rated King Edward sharply for his supineness in
not preparing suitably against so formidable a foe. The gay and reckless
presumption of Edward, worthier of a knight-errant than a monarch,
laughed at the word invasion. "Pest on Burgundy's ships! I only wish
that the earl would land!" [Com, iii. c. 5] he said to his council.
None echoed the wish! But later in the day came a third messenger with
information that roused all Edward's ire; careless of each danger in
the distance, he ever sprang into energy and vengeance when a foe was
already in the field. And the Lord Fitzhugh (the young nobleman before
seen among the rebels at Olney, and who had now succeeded to the
honours of his House) had suddenly risen in the North, at the head of a
formidable rebellion. No man had so large an experience in the warfare
of those districts, the temper of the people, and the inclinations of
the various towns and lordships as Montagu; he was the natural chief to
depute against the rebels. Some animated discussion took place as to the
dependence to be placed in the marquis at such a crisis; but while the
more wary held it safer, at all hazards, not to leave him unemployed,
and to command his services in an expedition that would remove him
from the neighbourhood of his brother, should the latter land, as was
expected, on the coast of Norfolk, Edward, with a blindness of conceit
that seems almost incredible, believed firmly in the infatuated loyalty
of the man whom he had slighted and impoverished, and whom, by his offer
of his daughter to the Lancastrian prince, he had yet more recently
cozened and deluded. Montagu was hastily summoned, and received orders
to march at once to the North, levy forces, and assume their command.
The marquis obeyed with fewer words than were natural to him, left the
presence, sprang on his horse, and as he rode from the palace, drew a
letter from his bosom. "Ah, Edward," said he, setting his teeth, "so,
after the solemn betrothal of thy daughter to my son, thou wouldst
have given her to thy Lancastrian enemy. Coward, to bribe his peace!
recreant, to belie thy word! I thank thee for this news, Warwick; for
without that injury I feel I could never, when the hour came, have
drawn sword against this faithless man,--especially for Lancaster. Ay,
tremble, thou who deridest all truth and honour! He who himself betrays,
cannot call vengeance treason!"

Meanwhile, Edward departed, for further preparations, to the Tower of
London. New evidences of the mine beneath his feet here awaited the
incredulous king. On the door of St. Paul's, of many of the metropolitan
churches, on the Standard at Chepe, and on London Bridge, during
the past night, had been affixed, none knew by whom, the celebrated
proclamation, signed by Warwick and Clarence (drawn up in the bold style
of the earl), announcing their speedy return, containing a brief
and vigorous description of the misrule of the realm, and their
determination to reform all evils and redress all wrongs. [See, for this
proclamation, Ellis's "Original Letters," vol. i., second series,
letter 42.] Though the proclamation named not the restoration of the
Lancastrian line (doubtless from regard for Henry's safety), all men
in the metropolis were already aware of the formidable league between
Margaret and Warwick. Yet, even still, Edward smiled in contempt, for
he had faith in the letter received from Clarence, and felt assured that
the moment the duke and the earl landed, the former would betray
his companion stealthily to the king; so, despite all these exciting
subjects of grave alarm, the nightly banquet at the Tower was never
merrier and more joyous. Hastings left the feast ere it deepened into
revel, and, absorbed in various and profound contemplation, entered his
apartment. He threw himself on a seat, and leaned his face on his hands.

"Oh, no, no!" he muttered; "now, in the hour when true greatness is
most seen, when prince and peer crowd around me for counsel, when noble,
knight, and squire crave permission to march in the troop of which
Hastings is the leader,--now I feel how impossible, how falsely fair,
the dream that I could forget all--all for a life of obscurity, for a
young girl's love! Love! as if I had not felt its delusions to palling!
love, as if I could love again: or, if love--alas, it must be a light
reflected but from memory! And Katherine is free once more!" His eye
fell as he spoke, perhaps in shame and remorse that, feeling thus now,
he had felt so differently when he bade Sibyll smile till his return!

"It is the air of this accursed court which taints our best resolves!"
he murmured, as an apology for himself; but scarcely was the poor excuse
made, than the murmur broke into an exclamation of surprise and joy. A
letter lay before him; he recognized the hand of Katherine. What years
had passed since her writing had met his eye, since the lines that bade
him "farewell, and forget!" Those lines had been blotted with tears,
and these, as he tore open the silk that bound them--these, the trace
of tears, too, was on them! Yet they were but few, and in tremulous
characters. They ran thus:--

To-morrow, before noon, the Lord Hastings is prayed to visit one whose
life he hath saddened by the thought and the accusation that she hath
clouded and embittered his. KATHERINE DE BONVILLE.

Leaving Hastings to such meditations of fear or of hope as these lines
could call forth, we lead the reader to a room not very distant from his
own,--the room of the illustrious Friar Bungey.

The ex-tregetour was standing before the captured Eureka, and gazing on
it with an air of serio-comic despair and rage. We say the Eureka, as
comprising all the ingenious contrivances towards one single object
invented by its maker, a harmonious compound of many separate details;
but the iron creature no longer deserved that superb appellation,
for its various members were now disjointed and dislocated, and lay
pell-mell in multiform confusion.

By the side of the friar stood a female, enveloped in a long scarlet
mantle, with the hood partially drawn over the face, but still leaving
visible the hard, thin, villanous lips, the stern, sharp chin, and the
jaw resolute and solid as if hewed from stone.

"I tell thee, Graul," said the friar, "that thou hast had far the best
of the bargain. I have put this diabolical contrivance to all manner of
shapes, and have muttered over it enough Latin to have charmed a monster
into civility. And the accursed thing, after nearly pinching off three
fingers, and scalding me with seething water, and spluttering and
sputtering enough to have terrified any man but Friar Bungey out of his
skin, is obstinatus ut mulum,--dogged as a mule; and was absolutely good
for nought, till I happily thought of separating this vessel from all
the rest of the gear, and it serves now for the boiling my eggs! But by
the soul of Father Merlin, whom the saints assoil, I need not have given
myself all this torment for a thing which, at best, does the work of a
farthing pipkin!"

"Quick, master; the hour is late! I must go while yet the troopers and
couriers and riders, hurrying to and fro, keep the gates from closing.
What wantest thou with Graul?"

"More reverence, child!" growled the friar. "What I want of thee is
briefly told, if thou hast the wit to serve me. This miserable
Warner must himself expound to me the uses and trick of his malignant
contrivance. Thou must find and bring him hither!"

"And if he will not expound?"

"The deputy governor of the Tower will lend me a stone dungeon, and, if
need be, the use of the brake to unlock the dotard's tongue."

"On what plea?"

"That Adam Warner is a wizard, in the pay of Lord Warwick, whom a more
mighty master like myself alone can duly examine and defeat."

"And if I bring thee the sorcerer, what wilt thou teach me in return?"

"What desirest thou most?"

Graul mused, and said, "There is war in the wind. Graul follows the
camp, her trooper gets gold and booty. But the trooper is stronger than
Graul; and when the trooper sleeps it is with his knife by his side,
and his sleep is light and broken, for he has wicked dreams. Give me a
potion to make sleep deep, that his eyes may not open when Graul filches
his gold, and his hand may be too heavy to draw the knife from its
sheath!"

"Immunda, detestabilis! thine own paramour!"

"He hath beat me with his bridle rein, he hath given a silver broad
piece to Grisell; Grisell hath sat on his knee; Graul never pardons!"

The friar, rogue as he was, shuddered. "I cannot help thee to murder, I
cannot give thee the potion; name some other reward."

"I go--"

"Nay, nay, think, pause."

"I know where Warner is hid. By this hour to-morrow night, I can place
him in thy power. Say the word, and pledge me the draught."

"Well, well, mulier abominabilis!--that is, irresistible bonnibell. I
cannot give thee the potion; but I will teach thee an art which can make
sleep heavier than the anodyne, and which wastes not like the essence,
but strengthens by usage,--an art thou shalt have at thy fingers'
ends, and which often draws from the sleeper the darkest secrets of his
heart." [We have before said that animal magnetism was known to Bungey,
and familiar to the necromancers, or rather theurgists, of the Middle
Ages.]

"It is magic," said Graul, with joy.

"Ay, magic."

"I will bring thee the wizard. But listen; he never stirs abroad, save
with his daughter. I must bring both."

"Nay, I want not the girl."

"But I dare not throttle her, for a great lord loves her, who would find
out the deed and avenge it; and if she be left behind, she will go
to the lord, and the lord will discover what thou hast done with the
wizard, and thou wilt hang!"

"Never say 'Hang' to me, Graul: it is ill-mannered and ominous. Who is
the lord?"

"Hastings."

"Pest!--and already he hath been searching for the thing yonder; and I
have brooded over it night and day, like a hen over a chalk egg,--only
that the egg does not snap off the hen's claws, as that diabolism would
fain snap off my digits. But the war will carry Hastings away in its
whirlwind; and, in danger, the duchess is my slave, and will bear me
through all. So, thou mayst bring the girl; and strangle her not; for
no good ever comes of a murder,--unless, indeed, it be absolutely
necessary!"

"I know the men who will help me, bold ribauds, whom I will guerdon
myself; for I want not thy coins, but thy craft. When the curfew has
tolled, and the bat hunts the moth, we will bring thee the quarry--"

Graul turned; but as she gained the door, she stopped, and said
abruptly, throwing back her hood,--

"What age dost thou deem me?"

"Marry," quoth the friar, "an' I had not seen thee on thy mother's knee
when she followed my stage of tregetour, I should have guessed thee for
thirty; but thou hast led too jolly a life to look still in the blossom.
Why speer'st thou the question?"

"Because when trooper and ribaud say to me, 'Graul, thou art too worn
and too old to drink of our cup and sit in the lap, to follow the young
fere to the battle, and weave the blithe dance in the fair,' I would
depart from my sisters, and have a hut of my own, and a black cat
without a white hair, and steal herbs by the new moon, and bones from
the charnel, and curse those whom I hate, and cleave the misty air on
a besom, like Mother Halkin of Edmonton. Ha, ha! Master, thou shalt
present me then to the Sabbat. Graul has the mettle for a bonny witch!"

The tymbestere vanished with a laugh. The friar muttered a paternoster
for once, perchance, devoutly, and after having again deliberately
scanned the disjecta membra of the Eureka, gravely took forth a duck's
egg from his cupboard, and applied the master-agent of the machine which
Warner hoped was to change the face of the globe to the only practical
utility it possessed to the mountebank's comprehension.




CHAPTER V. THE MEETING OF HASTINGS AND KATHERINE.

The next morning, while Edward was engaged in levying from his opulent
citizens all the loans he could extract, knowing that gold is the sinew
of war; while Worcester was manning the fortress of the Tower, in which
the queen, then near her confinement, was to reside during the campaign;
while Gloucester was writing commissions to captains and barons to raise
men; while Sir Anthony Lord Rivers was ordering improvements in his
dainty damasquine armour, and the whole Fortress Palatine was animated
and alive with the stir of the coming strife,--Lord Hastings escaped
from the bustle, and repaired to the house of Katherine. With
what motive, with what intentions, was not known clearly to
himself,--perhaps, for there was bitterness in his very love for
Katherine, to enjoy the retaliation due to his own wounded pride, and
say to the idol of his youth, as he had said to Gloucester, "Time is,
time was;" perhaps with some remembrance of the faith due to Sibyll,
wakened up the more now that Katherine seemed actually to escape from
the ideal image into the real woman,--to be easily wooed and won. But,
certainly, Sibyll's cause was not wholly lost, though greatly shaken and
endangered, when Lord Hastings alighted at Lady Bonville's gate; but his
face gradually grew paler, his mien less assured, as he drew nearer and
nearer to the apartment and the presence of the widowed Katherine.

She was seated alone, and in the same room in which he had last
seen her. Her deep mourning only served, by contrasting the pale and
exquisite clearness of her complexion, to enhance her beauty. Hastings
bowed low, and seated himself by her side in silence.

The Lady of Bonville eyed him for some moments with an unutterable
expression of melancholy and tenderness. All her pride seemed to have
gone; the very character of her face was changed: grave severity had
become soft timidity, and stately self-control was broken into the
unmistaken struggle of hope and fear.

"Hastings--William!" she said, in a gentle and low whisper, and at the
sound of that last name from those lips, the noble felt his veins thrill
and his heart throb. "If," she continued, "the step I have taken seems
to thee unwomanly and too bold, know, at least, what was my design and
my excuse. There was a time" (and Katherine blushed) "when, thou knowest
well, that, had this hand been mine to bestow, it would have been his
who claimed the half of this ring." And Katherine took from a small
crystal casket the well-remembered token.

"The broken ring foretold but the broken troth," said Hastings, averting
his face.

"Thy conscience rebukes thy words," replied Katherine, sadly; "I pledged
my faith, if thou couldst win my father's word. What maid, and that maid
a Nevile, could so forget duty and honour as to pledge thee more? We
were severed. Pass--oh, pass over that time! My father loved me dearly;
but when did pride and ambition ever deign to take heed of the wild
fancies of a girl's heart? Three suitors, wealthy lords, whose alliance
gave strength to my kindred in the day when their very lives depended on
their swords, were rivals for Earl Salisbury's daughter. Earl Salisbury
bade his daughter choose. Thy great friend and my own kinsman, Duke
Richard of York, himself pleaded for thy rivals. He proved to me that my
disobedience--if, indeed, for the first time, a child of my House could
disobey its chief--would be an external barrier to thy fortune; that
while Salisbury was thy foe, he himself could not advance thy valiancy
and merit; that it was with me to forward thy ambition, though I could
not reward thy love; that from the hour I was another's, my mighty
kinsmen themselves--for they were generous--would be the first to aid
the duke in thy career. Hastings, even then I would have prayed, at
least, to be the bride, not of man, but God. But I was trained--as what
noble demoiselle is not?--to submit wholly to a parent's welfare and his
will. As a nun, I could but pray for the success of my father's cause;
as a wife, I could bring to Salisbury and to York the retainers and
strongholds of a baron. I obeyed. Hear me on. Of the three suitors for
my hand, two were young and gallant,--women deemed them fair and comely;
and had my choice been one of these, thou mightest have deemed that a
new love had chased the old. Since choice was mine, I chose the man
love could not choose, and took this sad comfort to my heart, 'He, the
forsaken Hastings, will see in my very choice that I was but the slave
of duty, my choice itself my penance.'"

Katherine paused, and tears dropped fast from her eyes. Hastings held
his hand over his countenance, and only by the heaving of his heart was
his emotion visible. Katherine resumed:--

"Once wedded, I knew what became a wife. We met again; and to thy first
disdain and anger (which it had been dishonour in me to soothe by one
word that said, 'The wife remembers the maiden's love'),--to these,
thy first emotions, succeeded the more cruel revenge, which would have
changed sorrow and struggle to remorse and shame. And then, then--weak
woman that I was!--I wrapped myself in scorn and pride. Nay, I felt deep
anger--was it unjust?--that thou couldst so misread and so repay the
heart which had nothing left save virtue to compensate for love. And
yet, yet, often when thou didst deem me most hard, most proof against
memory and feeling--But why relate the trial? Heaven supported me, and
if thou lovest me no longer, thou canst not despise me."

At these last words Hastings was at her feet, bending over her hand, and
stifled by his emotions. Katherine gazed at him for a moment through her
own tears, and then resumed:--

"But thou hadst, as man, consolations no woman would desire or covet.
And oh, what grieved me most was, not--no, not the jealous, the
wounded vanity, but it was at least this self-accusation, this
remorse--that--but for one goading remembrance, of love returned and
love forsaken,--thou hadst never so descended from thy younger nature,
never so trifled with the solemn trust of TIME. Ah, when I have heard or
seen or fancied one fault in thy maturer manhood, unworthy of thy bright
youth, anger of myself has made me bitter and stern to thee; and if
I taunted or chid or vexed thy pride, how little didst thou know that
through the too shrewish humour spoke the too soft remembrance! For
this--for this; and believing that through all, alas! my image was not
replaced, when my hand was free, I was grateful that I might still--"
(the lady's pale cheek grew brighter than the rose, her voice faltered,
and became low and indistinct)--"I might still think it mine to atone
to thee for the past. And if," she added, with a sudden and generous
energy, "if in this I have bowed my pride, it is because by pride thou
wert wounded; and now, at last, thou hast a just revenge."

O terrible rival for thee, lost Sibyll! Was it wonderful that, while
that head drooped upon his breast, while in that enchanted change which
Love the softener makes in lips long scornful, eyes long proud and cold,
he felt that Katherine Nevile--tender, gentle, frank without boldness,
lofty without arrogance--had replaced the austere dame of Bonville, whom
he half hated while he wooed,--oh, was it wonderful that the soul of
Hastings fled back to the old time, forgot the intervening vows and more
chill affections, and repeated only with passionate lips, "Katherine,
loved still, loved ever, mine, mine, at last!"

Then followed delicious silence, then vows, confessions, questions,
answers,--the thrilling interchange of hearts long divided, and now
rushing into one. And time rolled on, till Katherine, gently breaking
from her lover, said,--

"And now that thou hast the right to know and guide my projects,
approve, I pray thee, my present purpose. War awaits thee, and we must
part a while!" At these words her brow darkened and her lip quivered.
"Oh, that I should have lived to mourn the day when Lord Warwick,
untrue to Salisbury and to York, joined his arms with Lancaster and
Margaret,--the day when Katherine could blush for the brother she had
deemed the glory of her House! No, no" (she continued, as Hastings
interrupted her with generous excuses for the earl, and allusion to the
known slights he had received),--"no, no; make not his cause the worse
by telling me that an unworthy pride, the grudge of some thwart to his
policy or power, has made him forget what was due to the memory of his
kinsman York, to the mangled corpse of his father Salisbury. Thinkest
thou that but for this I could--" She stopped, but Hastings divined her
thought, and guessed that, if spoken, it had run thus: "That I could,
even now, have received the homage of one who departs to meet, with
banner and clarion, my brother as his foe?"

The lovely sweetness of the late expression had gone from Katherine's
face, and its aspect showed that her high and ancestral spirit had
yielded but to one passion. She pursued,--

"While this strife lasts, it becomes my widowhood and kindred position
with the earl to retire to the convent my mother founded. To-morrow I
depart."

"Alas!" said Hastings, "thou speakest of the strife as if but a single
field. But Warwick returns not to these shores, nor bows himself to
league with Lancaster, for a chance hazardous and desperate, as Edward
too rashly deems it. It is in vain to deny that the earl is prepared for
a grave and lengthened war, and much I doubt whether Edward can resist
his power; for the idolatry of the very land will swell the ranks of so
dread a rebel. What if he succeed; what if we be driven into exile, as
Henry's friends before us; what if the king-maker be the king-dethroner?
Then, Katherine, then once more thou wilt be at the best of thy hostile
kindred, and once more, dowered as thou art, and thy womanhood still in
its richest bloom, thy hand will be lost to Hastings."

"Nay, if that be all thy fear, take with thee this pledge,--that
Warwick's treason to the House for which my father fell dissolves
his power over one driven to disown him as a brother,--knowing Earl
Salisbury, had he foreseen such disgrace, had disowned him as a son.
And if there be defeat and flight and exile, wherever thou wanderest,
Hastings, shall Katherine be found beside thee. Fare thee well, and Our
Lady shield thee! may thy lance be victorious against all foes,--save
one. Thou wilt forbear my--that is, the earl!" And Katherine, softened
at that thought, sobbed aloud.

"And come triumph or defeat, I have thy pledge?" said Hastings, soothing
her.

"See," said Katherine, taking the broken ring from the casket; "now, for
the first time since I bore the name of Bonville, I lay this relic on my
heart; art thou answered?"




CHAPTER VI. HASTINGS LEARNS WHAT HAS BEFALLEN SIBYLL, REPAIRS TO THE
KING, AND ENCOUNTERS AN OLD RIVAL.

"It is destiny," said Hastings to himself, when early the next morning
he was on his road to the farm--"it is destiny,--and who can resist his
fate?"

"It is destiny!"--phrase of the weak human heart! "It is destiny!" dark
apology for every error! The strong and the virtuous admit no destiny!
On earth guides conscience, in heaven watches God. And destiny is but
the phantom we invoke to silence the one, to dethrone the other!

Hastings spared not his good steed. With great difficulty had he
snatched a brief respite from imperious business, to accomplish the last
poor duty now left to him to fulfil,--to confront the maid whose heart
he had seduced in vain, and say at length, honestly and firmly, "I
cannot wed thee. Forget me, and farewell."

Doubtless his learned and ingenious mind conjured up softer words than
these, and more purfled periods wherein to dress the iron truth. But in
these two sentences the truth lay. He arrived at the farm, he entered
the house; he felt it as a reprieve that he met not the bounding step
of the welcoming Sibyll. He sat down in the humble chamber, and waited a
while in patience,--no voice was heard. The silence at length surprised
and alarmed him. He proceeded farther. He was met by the widowed owner
of the house, who was weeping; and her first greeting prepared him for
what had chanced. "Oh, my lord, you have come to tell me they are
safe, they have not fallen into the hands of their enemies,--the good
gentleman, so meek, the poor lady, so fair!"

Hastings stood aghast; a few sentences more explained all that he
already guessed. A strange man had arrived the evening before at the
house, praying Adam and his daughter to accompany him to the Lord
Hastings, who had been thrown from his horse, and was now in a cottage
in the neighbouring lane,--not hurt dangerously, but unable to be
removed, and who had urgent matters to communicate. Not questioning the
truth of this story, Adam and Sibyll had hurried forth, and returned no
more. Alarmed by their long absence, the widow, who at first received
the message from the stranger, went herself to the cottage, and found
that the story was a fable. Every search had since been made for Adam
and his daughter, but in vain. The widow, confirmed in her previous
belief that her lodgers had been attainted Lancastrians, could but
suppose that they had been thus betrayed to their enemies. Hastings
heard this with a dismay and remorse impossible to express. His only
conjecture was that the king had discovered their retreat, and taken
this measure to break off the intercourse he had so sternly denounced.
Full of these ideas, he hastily remounted, and stopped not till once
more at the gates of the Tower. Hastening to Edward's closet, the moment
he saw the king, he exclaimed, in great emotion, "My liege, my liege, do
not at this hour, when I have need of my whole energy to serve thee,
do not madden my brain, and palsy my arm. This old man--the poor
maid--Sibyll--Warner,--speak, my liege--only tell me they are safe;
promise me they shall go free, and I swear to obey thee in all else! I
will thank thee in the battlefield!"

"Thou art mad, Hastings!" said the king, in great astonishment. "Hush!"
and he glanced significantly at a person who stood before several
heaps of gold, ranged upon a table in the recess of the room. "See,"
he whispered, "yonder is the goldsmith, who hath brought me a loan from
himself and his fellows! Pretty tales for the city thy folly will send
abroad!"

But before Hastings could vent his impatient answer, this person,
to Edward's still greater surprise, had advanced from his place, and
forgetting all ceremony, had seized Hastings by the hem of his surcoat,
exclaiming,--

"My lord, my lord, what new horror is this? Sibyll!--methought she was
worthless, and had fled to thee!"

"Ten thousand devils!" shouted the king, "am I ever to be tormented by
that damnable wizard and his witch child? And is it, Sir Peer and Sir
Goldsmith, in your king's closet that ye come, the very eve before he
marches to battle, to speer and glower at each other like two madmen as
ye are?"

Neither peer nor goldsmith gave way, till the courtier, naturally
recovering himself the first, fell on his knee; and said, with firm
though profound respect: "Sire, if poor William Hastings has ever
merited from the king one kindly thought, one generous word, forgive
now whatever may displease thee in his passion or his suit, and tell
him what prison contains those whom it would forever dishonour his
knighthood to know punished and endangered but for his offence."

"My lord," answered the king, softened but still surprised, "think you
seriously that I, who but reluctantly in this lovely month leave my
green lawns of Shene to save a crown, could have been vexing my brain by
stratagems to seize a lass, whom I swear by Saint George I do not envy
thee in the least? If that does not suffice, incredulous dullard, why
then take my kingly word, never before passed for so slight an occasion,
that I know nothing whatsoever of thy damsel's whereabout nor her
pestilent father's,--where they abode of late, where they now be; and,
what is more, if any man has usurped his king's right to imprison
the king's subjects, find him out, and name his punishment. Art thou
convinced?"

"I am, my liege," said Hastings.

"But--" began the goldsmith.

"Holloa, you, too, sir! This is too much! We have condescended to answer
the man who arms three thousand retainers--"

"And I, please your Highness, bring you the gold to pay them," said the
trader, bluntly.

The king bit his lip, and then burst into his usual merry laugh.

"Thou art in the right, Master Alwyn. Finish counting the pieces,
and then go and consult with my chamberlain,--he must off with the
cock-crow; but, since ye seem to understand each other, he shall make
thee his lieutenant of search, and I will sign any order he pleases
for the recovery of the lost wisdom and the stolen beauty. Go and calm
thyself, Hastings."

"I will attend you presently, my lord," said Alwyn, aside, "in your own
apartment."

"Do so," said Hastings; and, grateful for the king's consideration, he
sought his rooms. There, indeed, Alwyn soon joined him, and learned from
the nobleman what filled him at once with joy and terror. Knowing that
Warner and Sibyll had left the Tower, he had surmised that the girl's
virtue had at last succumbed; and it delighted him to hear from Lord
Hastings, whose word to men was never questionable, the solemn
assurance of her unstained chastity. But he trembled at this mysterious
disappearance, and knew not to whom to impute the snare, till the
penetration of Hastings suddenly alighted near, at least, to the clew.
"The Duchess of Bedford," said he, "ever increasing in superstition
as danger increases, may have desired to refind so great a scholar and
reputed an astrologer and magician; if so, all is safe. On the other
hand, her favourite, the friar, ever bore a jealous grudge to poor Adam,
and may have sought to abstract him from her grace's search; here there
may be molestation to Adam, but surely no danger to Sibyll. Hark ye,
Alwyn, thou lovest the maid more worthily, and--" Hastings stopped
short; for such is infirm human nature, that, though he had mentally
resigned Sibyll forever, he could not yet calmly face the thought of
resigning her to a rival. "Thou lovest her," he renewed, more coldly,
"and to thee, therefore, I may safely trust the search which time and
circumstance and a soldier's duty forbid to me. And believe--oh, believe
that I say not this from a passion which may move thy jealousy, but
rather with a brother's holy love. If thou canst but see her safe, and
lodged where no danger nor wrong can find her, thou hast no friend in
the wide world whose service through life thou mayst command like mine."

"My lord," said Alwyn, dryly, "I want no friends! Young as I am, I have
lived long enough to see that friends follow fortune, but never make it!
I will find this poor maid and her honoured father, if I spend my last
groat on the search. Get me but such an order from the king as may place
the law at my control, and awe even her grace of Bedford,--and I promise
the rest!"

Hastings, much relieved, deigned to press the goldsmith's reluctant
hand; and, leaving him alone for a few minutes, returned with a
warrant from the king, which seemed to Alwyn sufficiently precise and
authoritative. The goldsmith then departed, and first he sought the
friar, but found him not at home. Bungey had taken with him, as was
his wont, the keys of his mysterious apartment. Alwyn then hastened
elsewhere, to secure those experienced in such a search, and to head
it in person. At the Tower, the evening was passed in bustle and
excitement,--the last preparations for departure. The queen, who was
then far advanced towards her confinement, was, as we before said, to
remain at the Tower, which was now strongly manned. Roused from her
wonted apathy by the imminent dangers that awaited Edward, the night
was passed by her in tears and prayers, by him in the sound sleep of
confident valour. The next morning departed for the North the several
leaders,--Gloucester, Rivers, Hastings, and the king.




CHAPTER VII. THE LANDING OF LORD WARWICK, AND THE EVENTS THAT ENSUE
THEREON.

And Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, "prepared such a greate navie
as lightly hath not been seene before gathered in manner of all nations,
which armie laie at the mouth of the Seyne ready to fight with the Earl
of Warwick, when he should set out of his harborowe." [Hall, p. 282, ed.
1809.]

But the winds fought for the Avenger. In the night came "a terrible
tempest," which scattered the duke's ships "one from another, so that
two of them were not in compagnie together in one place;" and when the
tempest had done its work, it passed away; and the gales were fair,
and the heaven was clear, when, the next day, the earl "halsed up the
sayles," and came in sight of Dartmouth.

It was not with an army of foreign hirelings that Lord Warwick set forth
on his mighty enterprise. Scanty indeed were the troops he brought from
France,--for he had learned from England that "men so much daily and
hourely desired and wished so sore his arrival and return, that almost
all men were in harness, looking for his landyng." [The popular feeling
in favour of the earl is described by Hall, with somewhat more eloquence
and vigour than are common with that homely chronicler: "The absence of
the Earle of Warwick made the common people daily more and more to long
and bee desirous to have the sight of him, and presently to behold his
personage. For they judged that the sunne was clerely taken from the
world when hee was absent. In such high estimation amongst the people
was his name, that neither no one manne they had in so much honour,
neither no one persone they so much praised, or to the clouds so highly
extolled. What shall I say? His only name sounded in every song, in the
mouth of the common people, and his persone [effigies] was represented
with great reverence when publique plaies or open triumphes should bee
skewed or set furthe abrode in the stretes," etc. This lively passage,
if not too highly coloured, serves to show us the rude saturnalian kind
of liberty that existed, even under a king so vindictive as Edward IV.
Though an individual might be banged for the jest that he would make his
son heir to the crown (namely, the grocer's shop, which bore that sign),
yet no tyranny could deal with the sentiment of the masses. In our own
day it would be less safe than in that to make public exhibition "in
plaies and triumphes" of sympathy with a man attainted as a traitor, and
in open rebellion to the crown.] As his ships neared the coast, and the
banner of the Ragged Staff, worked in gold, shone in the sun, the shores
swarmed with armed crowds, not to resist but to welcome. From cliff to
cliff, wide and far, blazed rejoicing bonfires; and from cliff to cliff,
wide and far, burst the shout, when, first of all his men, bareheaded,
but, save the burgonet, in complete mail, the popular hero leaped to
shore.

"When the earl had taken land, he made a proclamation, in the name of
King Henry VI., upon high paynes commanding and charging all men apt or
able to bear armour, to prepare themselves to fight against Edward, Duke
of York, who had untruly usurped the croune and dignity of this realm."
[Hall, p. 82.]

And where was Edward? Afar, following the forces of Fitzhugh and
Robin of Redesdale, who by artful retreat drew him farther and farther
northward, and left all the other quarters of the kingdom free to send
their thousands to the banners of Lancaster and Warwick. And even as the
news of the earl's landing reached the king, it spread also through all
the towns of the North; and all the towns of the North were in "a great
rore, and made fires, and sang songs, crying, 'King Henry! King Henry! a
Warwicke! a Warwicke!'" But his warlike and presumptuous spirit forsook
not the chief of that bloody and fatal race,--the line of the English
Pelops,--"bespattered with kindred gore." [Aeschylus: Agamemnon] A
messenger from Burgundy was in his tent when the news reached him. "Back
to the duke!" cried Edward; "tell him to recollect his navy, guard the
sea, scour the streams, that the earl shall not escape, nor return to
France; for the doings in England, let me alone! I have ability and
puissance to overcome all enemies and rebels in mine own realm." [Hall,
p. 283.]

And therewith he raised his camp, abandoned the pursuit of Fitzhugh,
summoned Montagu to join him (it being now safer to hold the marquis
near him, and near the axe, if his loyalty became suspected), and
marched on to meet the earl. Nor did the earl tarry from the encounter.
His army, swelling as he passed, and as men read his proclamations to
reform all grievances and right all wrongs, he pressed on to meet the
king, while fast and fast upon Edward's rear came the troops of Fitzhugh
and Hilyard, no longer flying but pursuing. The king was the more
anxious to come up to Warwick, inasmuch as he relied greatly upon the
treachery of Clarence, either secretly to betray or openly to desert the
earl. And he knew that if he did the latter on the eve of a battle, it
could not fail morally to weaken Warwick, and dishearten his army by
fear that desertion should prove, as it ever does, the most contagious
disease that can afflict a camp. It is probable, however, that the
enthusiasm which had surrounded the earl with volunteers so numerous had
far exceeded the anticipations of the inexperienced Clarence, and would
have forbid him that opportunity of betraying the earl. However this be,
the rival armies drew nearer and nearer. The king halted in his rapid
march at a small village, and took up his quarters in a fortified house,
to which there was no access but by a single bridge. [Sharon Turner,
Comines.] Edward himself retired for a short time to his couch, for he
had need of all his strength in the battle he foresaw; but scarce had he
closed his eyes, when Alexander Carlile [Hearne: Fragment], the serjeant
of the royal minstrels, followed by Hastings and Rivers (their jealousy
laid at rest for a time in the sense of their king's danger), rushed
into his room.

"Arm, sire, arm!--Lord Montagu has thrown off the mask, and rides
through thy troops, shouting 'Long live King Henry!'"

"Ah, traitor!" cried the king, leaping from his bed. "From Warwick hate
was my due, but not from Montagu! Rivers, help to buckle on my mail.
Hastings, post my body-guard at the bridge. We will sell our lives
dear."

Hastings vanished. Edward had scarcely hurried on his helm, cuirass, and
greaves, when Gloucester entered, calm in the midst of peril.

"Your enemies are marching to seize you, brother. Hark! behind you rings
the cry, 'A Fitzhugh! a Robin! death to the tyrant!' Hark! in front, 'A
Montagu! a Warwick! Long live King Henry!' I come to redeem my word,--to
share your exile or your death. Choose either while there is yet time.
Thy choice is mine!"

And while he spoke, behind, before, came the various cries nearer and
nearer. The lion of March was in the toils.

"Now, my two-handed sword!" said Edward. "Gloucester, in this weapon
learn my choice!"

But now all the principal barons and captains, still true to the king
whose crown was already lost, flocked in a body to the chamber. They
fell on their knees, and with tears implored him to save himself for a
happier day.

"There is yet time to escape," said D'Eyncourt, "to pass the bridge, to
gain the seaport! Think not that a soldier's death will be left thee.
Numbers will suffice to encumber thine arm, to seize thy person. Live
not to be Warwick's prisoner,--shown as a wild beast in its cage to the
hooting crowd!"

"If not on thyself," exclaimed Rivers, "have pity on these loyal
gentlemen, and for the sake of their lives preserve thine own. What is
flight? Warwick fled!"

"True,--and returned!" added Gloucester. "You are right, my lords. Come,
sire, we must fly. Our rights fly not with us, but shall fight for us in
absence!"

The calm WILL of this strange and terrible boy had its effect upon
Edward. He suffered his brother to lead him from the chamber, grinding
his teeth in impotent rage. He mounted his horse, while Rivers held
the stirrup, and with some six or seven knights and earls rode to the
bridge, already occupied by Hastings and a small but determined guard.

"Come, Hastings," said the king, with a ghastly smile,--"they tell us we
must fly!"

"True, sire, haste, haste! I stay but to deceive the enemy by feigning
to defend the pass, and to counsel, as I best may, the faithful soldiers
we leave behind."

"Brave Hastings!" said Gloucester, pressing his hand, "you do well, and
I envy you the glory of this post. Come, sire."

"Ay, ay," said the king, with a sudden and fierce cry, "we go,--but
at least slaughtering as we go. See! yon rascal troop! ride we through
their midst! Havock and revenge!"

He set spurs to his steed, galloped over the bridge, and before his
companions could join him, dashed alone into the very centre of the
advanced guard sent to invest the fortress, and while they were yet
shouting, "Where is the tyrant, where is Edward?"

"Here!" answered a voice of thunder,--"here, rebels and faytors, in your
ranks!"

This sudden and appalling reply, even more than the sweep of the
gigantic sword, before which were riven sallet and mail as the woodman's
axe rives the fagot, created amongst the enemy that singular panic,
which in those ages often scattered numbers before the arm and the name
of one. They recoiled in confusion and dismay. Many actually threw down
their arms and fled. Through a path broad and clear amidst the forest
of pikes, Gloucester and the captains followed the flashing track of the
king, over the corpses, headless or limbless, that he felled as he rode.

Meanwhile, with a truer chivalry, Hastings, taking advantage of the
sortie which confused and delayed the enemy, summoned such of the loyal
as were left in the fortress, advised them, as the only chance of life,
to affect submission to Warwick; but when the time came, to remember
their old allegiance, [Sharon Turner, vol. iii. 280.] and promising that
he would not desert them, save with life, till their safety was pledged
by the foe, reclosed his visor, and rode back to the front of the
bridge.

And now the king and his comrades had cut their way through all barrier,
but the enemy still wavered and lagged, till suddenly the cry of "Robin
of Redesdale!" was heard, and sword in hand, Hilyard, followed by a
troop of horse, dashed to the head of the besiegers, and, learning the
king's escape, rode off in pursuit. His brief presence and sharp rebuke
reanimated the falterers, and in a few minutes they gained the bridge.

"Halt, sirs," cried Hastings; "I would offer capitulation to your
leader! Who is he?"

A knight on horseback advanced from the rest. Hastings lowered the point
of his sword.

"Sir, we yield this fortress to your hands upon one condition,--our men
yonder are willing to submit, and shout with you for Henry VI. Pledge
me your word that you and your soldiers spare their lives and do them no
wrong, and we depart."

"And if I pledge it not?" said the knight.

"Then for every warrior who guards this bridge count ten dead men
amongst your ranks."

"Do your worst,--our bloods are up! We want life for life! revenge for
the subjects butchered by your tyrant chief! Charge! to the attack!
charge! pike and bill!" The knight spurred on, the Lancastrians
followed, and the knight reeled from his horse into the moat below,
felled by the sword of Hastings.

For several minutes the pass was so gallantly defended that the strife
seemed uncertain, though fearfully unequal, when Lord Montagu himself,
hearing what had befallen, galloped to the spot, threw down his
truncheon, cried "Hold!" and the slaughter ceased. To this nobleman
Hastings repeated the terms he had proposed.

"And," said Montagu, turning with anger to the Lancastrians, who formed
a detachment of Fitzhugh's force--"can Englishmen insist upon butchering
Englishmen? Rather thank we Lord Hastings that he would spare good King
Henry so many subjects' lives! The terms are granted, my lord; and your
own life also, and those of your friends around you, vainly brave in a
wrong cause. Depart!"

"Ah, Montagu," said Hastings, touched, and in a whisper, "what pity that
so gallant a gentleman should leave a rebel's blot upon his scutcheon!"

"When chiefs and suzerains are false and perjured, Lord Hastings,"
answered Montagu, "to obey them is not loyalty, but serfdom; and revolt
is not disloyalty, but a freeman's duty. One day thou mayst know that
truth, but too late." [It was in the midst of his own conspiracy against
Richard of Gloucester that the head of Lord Hastings fell.]

Hastings made no reply, waved his hand to his fellow-defenders of the
bridge, and, followed by them, went slowly and deliberately on, till
clear of the murmuring and sullen foe; then putting spurs to their
steeds, these faithful warriors rode fast to rejoin their king; overtook
Hilyard on the way, and after a fierce skirmish, a blow from Hastings
unhorsed and unhelmed the stalwart Robin, and left him so stunned as to
check further pursuit. They at last reached the king, and gaining, with
him and his party, the town of Lynn, happily found one English and two
Dutch vessels on the point of sailing. Without other raiment than the
mail they wore, without money, the men a few hours before hailed as
sovereign or as peers fled from their native land as outcasts
and paupers. New dangers beset them on the sea: the ships of the
Easterlings, at war both with France and England, bore down upon their
vessels. At the risk of drowning they ran ashore near Alcmaer. The large
ships of the Easterlings followed as far as the low water would permit,
"intendeing at the fludde to have obtained their prey." [Hall.] In this
extremity, the lord of the province (Louis of Grauthuse) came aboard
their vessels, protected the fugitives from the Easterlings,
conducted them to the Hague, and apprised the Duke of Burgundy how his
brother-in-law had lost his throne. Then were verified Lord Warwick's
predictions of the faith of Burgundy! The duke for whose alliance
Edward had dishonoured the man to whom he owed his crown, so feared the
victorious earl, that "he had rather have heard of King Edward's death
than of his discomfiture;" [Hall, p. 279] and his first thought was to
send an embassy to the king-maker, praying the amity and alliance of the
restored dynasty.




CHAPTER VIII. WHAT BEFELL ADAM WARNER AND SIBYLL WHEN MADE SUBJECT TO
THE GREAT FRIAR BUNGEY.

We must now return to the Tower of London,--not, indeed, to its lordly
halls and gilded chambers, but to the room of Friar Bungey. We must go
back somewhat in time; and on the day following the departure of the
king and his lords, conjure up in that strangely furnished apartment the
form of the burly friar, standing before the disorganized Eureka, with
Adam Warner by his side.

Graul, as we have seen, had kept her word, and Sibyll and her father,
having fallen into the snare, were suddenly gagged, bound, led through
by-paths to a solitary hut, where a covered wagon was in waiting, and
finally, at nightfall, conducted to the Tower. The friar, whom his own
repute, jolly affability, and favour with the Duchess of Bedford made
a considerable person with the authorities of the place, had already
obtained from the deputy-governor an order to lodge two persons, whom
his zeal for the king sought to convict of necromantic practices
in favour of the rebellion, in the cells set apart for such unhappy
captives. Thither the prisoners were conducted. The friar did not object
to their allocation in contiguous cells; and the jailer deemed him
mighty kind and charitable, when he ordered that they might be well
served and fed till their examination.

He did not venture, however, to summon his captives till the departure
of the king, when the Tower was in fact at the disposition of his
powerful patroness, and when he thought he might stretch his authority
as far as he pleased, unquestioned and unchid.

Now, therefore, on the day succeeding Edward's departure, Adam Warner
was brought from his cell, and led to the chamber where the triumphant
friar received him in majestic state. The moment Warner entered, he
caught sight of the chaos to which his Eureka was resolved, and uttering
