undulating line all round, and the light smokes, seen in some weather.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER TO THE SAME.

_Milwaukie, July _29, 1848.

DEAR R.:  * * * Daily I thought of you during my visit to the
Rock-river territory. It is only five years since the poor Indians
have been dispossessed of this region of sumptuous loveliness, such as
can hardly be paralleled in the world. No wonder they poured out their
blood freely before they would go. On one island, belonging to a Mr.
H., with whom we stayed, are still to be found their "caches" for
secreting provisions,--the wooden troughs in which they pounded their
corn, the marks of their tomahawks upon felled trees. When he first
came, he found the body of an Indian woman, in a canoe, elevated on
high poles, with all her ornaments on. This island is a spot, where
Nature seems to have exhausted her invention in crowding it with all
kinds of growths, from the richest trees down to the most delicate
plants. It divides the river which there sweeps along in clear and
glittering current, between noble parks, richest green lawns, pictured
rocks crowned with old hemlocks, or smooth bluffs, three hundred feet
high, the most beautiful of all. Two of these,--the Eagle's Nest, and
the Deer's Walk, still the resort of the grand and beautiful creature
from which they are named,--were the scene of some of the happiest
hours of my life. I had no idea, from verbal description, of the
beauty of these bluffs, nor can I hope to give any to others. They lie
so magnificently bathed in sunlight, they touch the heavens with so
sharp and fair a line. This is one of the finest parts of the river;
but it seems beautiful enough to fill any heart and eye all along its
course, nowhere broken or injured by the hand of man. And there, I
thought, if we two could live, and you could have a farm which would
not cost a twentieth part the labor of a New England farm, and would
pay twenty times as much for the labor, and have our books and, our
pens and a little boat on the river, how happy we might be for four or
five years,--at least, _as_ happy as Fate permits mortals to be.
For we, I think, are congenial, and if I could hope permanent peace on
the earth, I might hope it with you.

You will be glad to hear that I feel overpaid for coming here. Much is
my life enriched by the images of the great Niagara, of the vast
lakes, of the heavenly sweetness of the prairie scenes, and, above
all, by the heavenly region where I would so gladly have lived. My
health, too, is materially benefited. I hope to come back better
fitted for toil and care, as well as with beauteous memories to
sustain me in them.

Affectionately always, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO MISS R.

_Chicago_, _August_ 4, 1848.

I HAVE hoped from time to time, dear ----, that I should receive a few
lines from you, apprizing me how you are this summer, but a letter
from Mrs. F---- lately comes to tell me that you are not better, but,
at least when at Saratoga, worse.

So writing is of course fatiguing, and I must not expect letters any
more. To that I could make up my mind if I could hear that you were
well again. I fear, if your malady disturbs you as much as it did, it
must wear on your strength very much, and it seems in itself
dangerous. However, it is good to think that your composure is such
that disease can only do its legitimate work, and not undermine two
ways,--the body with its pains, and the body through the mind with
thoughts and fears of pains.

I should have written to you long ago except that I find little to
communicate this summer, and little inclination to communicate that
little; so what letters I have sent, have been chiefly to beg some
from my friends. I have had home-sickness sometimes here, as do
children for the home where they are even little indulged, in the
boarding-school where they are only tolerated. This has been in the
town, where I have felt the want of companionship, because the
dissipation of fatigue, or expecting soon to move again, has prevented
my employing myself for myself; and yet there was nothing well worth
looking at without. When in the country I have enjoyed myself highly,
and my health has improved day by day. The characters of persons are
brought out by the little wants and adventures of country life as you
see it in this region; so that each one awakens a healthy interest;
and the same persons who, if I saw them at these hotels, would not
have a word to say that could fix the attention, become most pleasing
companions; their topics are before them, and they take the hint. You
feel so grateful, too, for the hospitality of the log-cabin; such
gratitude as the hospitality of the rich, however generous, cannot
inspire; for these wait on you with their domestics and money, and
give of their superfluity only; but here the Master gives you his bed,
his horse, his lamp, his grain from the field, his all, in short; and
you see that he enjoys doing so thoroughly, and takes no thought for
the morrow; so that you seem in fields full of lilies perfumed with
pure kindness; and feel, verily, that Solomon in all his glory could
not have entertained you so much to the purpose. Travelling, too,
through the wide green woods and prairies, gives a feeling both of
luxury and repose that the sight of highly-cultivated country never
can. There seems to be room enough for labor to pause and man to fold
his arms and gaze, forgetting poverty, and care, and the thousand
walls and fences that in the cultivated region must be built and daily
repaired both for mind and body. Nature seems to have poured forth her
riches so without calculation, merely to mark the fulness of her joy;
to swell in larger strains the hymn, "the one Spirit doeth all things
veil, for its life is love."

I will not ask you to write to me now, as I shall so soon be at home.
Probably, too, I shall reserve a visit to B---- for another summer; I
have been so much a rover that when once on the road I shall wish to
hasten home.

Ever yours, M.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE SAME.

_Cambridge, January_ 21, 1644.

MY DEAR ------: I am anxious to get a letter, telling me how you fare
this winter in the cottage. Your neighbors who come this way do not
give very favorable accounts of your looks; and, if you are well
enough, I should like to see a few of those firm, well-shaped
characters from your own hand. Is there no chance of your coming to
Boston all this winter? I had hoped to see you for a few hours at
least.

I wrote you one letter while at the West; I know not if it was ever
received; it was sent by a private opportunity, one of those "traps to
catch the unwary," as they have been called. It was no great loss, if
lost. I did not feel like writing letters while travelling. It took
all my strength of mind to keep moving and to receive so many new
impressions. Surely I never had so clear an idea before of the
capacity to bless, of mere _Earth_, when fresh from the original
breath of the creative spirit. To have this impression, one must see
large tracts of wild country, where the traces of man's inventions are
too few and slight to break the harmony of the first design. It will
not be so, long, even where I have been now; in three or four years
those vast flowery plains will be broken up for tillage,--those
shapely groves converted into logs and boards. I wished I could have
kept on now, for two or three years, while yet the first spell rested
on the scene. I feel much refreshed, even by this brief intimacy with
Nature in an aspect of large and unbroken lineaments.

I came home with a treasure of bright pictures and suggestions, and
seemingly well. But my strength, which had been sustained by a free,
careless life in the open air, has yielded to the chills of winter,
and a very little work, with an ease that is not encouraging. However,
I have had the influenza, and that has been about as bad as fever to
everybody. _Now_ I am pretty well, but much writing does not
agree with me.

* * * I wish you were near enough for me to go in and see you now and
then. I know that, sick or well, you are always serene, and sufficient
to yourself; but now you are so much shut up, it might animate
existence agreeably to hear some things I might have to tell. * * *

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE SAME.

* * * 1844.

Just as I was beginning to visit the institutions here, of a remedial
and benevolent kind, I was stopped by influenza. So soon as I am quite
well I shall resume the survey. I do not expect to do much,
practically, for the suffering, but having such an organ of expression
as the _Tribune_, any suggestions that are well grounded may be
of use. I have always felt great interest for those women who are
trampled in the mud to gratify the brute appetites of men, and I
wished I might be brought, naturally, into contact with them. Now I am
so, and I think I shall have much that is interesting to tell you when
we meet.

I go on very moderately, for my strength is not great; but I am now
connected with a person who is anxious I should not overtask it. I
hope to do more for the paper by-and-by. At present, besides the time
I spend in looking round and examining my new field, I am publishing a
volume, of which you will receive a copy, called "Woman in the
Nineteenth Century." A part of my available time is spent in attending
to it as it goes through the press; for, really, the work seems but
half done when your book is _written_. I like being here; the
streams of life flow free, and I learn much. I feel so far satisfied
as to have laid my plans to stay a year and a half, if not longer, and
to have told Mr. G---- that I probably shall do so. That is long
enough for a mortal to look forward, and not too long, as I must look
forward in order to get what I want from Europe.

Mr. Greeley is a man of genuine excellence, honorable, benevolent, of
an uncorrupted disposition, and of great, abilities.  In modes of life
and manners he is the man of the people, and of the _American_
people. * * *

I rejoice to hear that your situation is improved. I hope to pass a
day or two with you next summer, if you can receive me when I can
come. I want to hear from you now and then, if it be only a line to
let me know the state of your health. Love to Miss G----, and tell her
I have the cologne-bottle on my mantle-piece now. I sent home for all
the little gifts I had from friends, that my room might look more
homelike. My window commands a most beautiful view, for we are quite
out of the town, in a lovely place on the East River. I like this, as
I can be in town when I will, and here have much retirement. You were
right in supposing my signature is the star.

Ever affectionately yours.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO HER BROTHER, R.

_Fishkill-Landing, Nov 28, 1844._

DEAR R.:

       *       *       *       *       *

The seven weeks of proposed abode here draw to a close, and have
brought what is rarest,--fruition, of the sort proposed from them. I
have been here all the time, except that three weeks since I went down
to New York, and with ---- visited the prison at Sing-Sing. On
Saturday we went up to Sing-Sing in a little way-boat, thus seeing
that side of the river to much greater advantage than we can in the
mammoth boats. We arrived in resplendent moonlight, by which we might
have supposed the prisons palaces, if we had not known too well what
was within.

On Sunday ---- addressed the male convicts in a strain of most noble
and pathetic eloquence. They listened with earnest attention; many
were moved to tears,--some, I doubt not, to a better life. I never
felt such sympathy with an audience;--as I looked over that sea of
faces marked with the traces of every ill, I felt that at least
heavenly truth would not be kept out by self-complacency and a
dependence on good appearances.

I talked with a circle of women, and they showed the natural aptitude
of the sex for refinement. These women--some black, and all from the
lowest haunts of vice--showed a sensibility and a sense of propriety
which would not have disgraced any place.

Returning, we had a fine storm on the river, clearing up with strong
winds.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO HER BROTHER,  A. B. F.

_Rome, Jan._ 20, 1849.

My Dear A.: Your letter and mother's gave me the first account of your
illness. Some letters were lost during the summer, I do not know how.
It did seem very hard upon you to have that illness just after your
settlement; but it is to be hoped we shall some time know a good
reason for all that seems so strange. I trust you are now becoming
fortified in your health, and if this could only be, feel as if things
would go well with you in this difficult world. I trust you are on the
threshold of an honorable and sometimes happy career. From many pains,
many dark hours, let none of the progeny of Eve hope to escape! * * * *

Meantime, I hope to find you in your home, and make you a good visit
there. Your invitation is sweet in its tone, and rouses a vision of
summer woods and New England Sunday-morning bells.

It seems to me that mother is at last truly in her sphere, living with
one of her children. Watch over her carefully, and don't let her do
too much. Her spirit is only all too willing,--but the flesh is weak,
and her life so precious to us all! * * * *

       *       *       *       *       *

TO MAZZINI.

"Al Cittadino Reppresentante del Popolo Romano."

_Rome, March_ 8, 1849.

Dear Mazzini: Though knowing you occupied by the most important
affairs, I again feel impelled to write a few lines. What emboldens me
is the persuasion that the best friends, in point of sympathy and
intelligence,--the only friends of a man of ideas and of marked
character,--must be women. You have your mother; no doubt you have
others, perhaps many. Of that I know nothing; only I like to offer
also my tribute of affection.

When I think that only two years ago you thought of coming into Italy
with us in disguise, it seems very glorious that you are about to
enter republican Rome as a Roman citizen. It seems almost the most
sublime and poetical fact of history. Yet, even in the first thrill of
joy, I felt "he will think his work but beginning, now."

When I read from your hand these words, "II lungo esilio teste
ricominciato, la vita non confortata, fuorche d'affetti lontani e
contesi, e la speranza lungamente protrata, e il desiderio che
comincia a farmi si supremo, di dormire finalmente in pace, da che non
ho potuto, vivere in terra mia,"--when I read these words they made me
weep bitterly, and I thought of them always with a great pang at the
heart. But it is not so, dear Mazzini,--you do not return to sleep
under the sod of Italy, but to see your thought springing up all over
the soil. The gardeners seem to me, in point of instinctive wisdom or
deep thought, mostly incompetent to the care of the garden; but on
idea like this will be able to make use of any implements. The
necessity, it is to be hoped, will educate the men, by making them
work. It is not this, I believe, which still keeps your heart so
melancholy; for I seem to read the same melancholy in your answer to
the Roman assembly, You speak of "few and late years," but some full
ones still remain. A century is not needed, nor should the same man,
in the same form of thought, work too long on an age. He would mould
and bind it too much to himself. Better for him to die and return
incarnated to give the same truth on yet another side. Jesus of
Nazareth died young; but had he not spoken and acted as much truth as
the world could bear in his time? A frailty, a perpetual short-coming,
motion in a curve-line, seems the destiny of this earth.

The excuse awaits us elsewhere; there must be one,--for it is true,
as said Goethe, "care is taken that the tree grow not up into the
heavens." Men like you, appointed ministers, must not be less earnest
in their work; yet to the greatest, the day, the moment is all their
kingdom, God takes care of the increase.

Farewell! For your sake I could wish at this moment to be an Italian
and a man of action; but though I am an _American_, I am not even
_a woman of action_; so the best I can do is to pray with the
whole heart, "Heaven bless dear Mazzini!--cheer his heart, and give
him worthy helpers to carry out his holy purposes."

       *       *       *       *       *

TO MR. AND MRS. SPRING.

_Florence, Dec._ 12, 1840.

DEAR M. AND R.: * * * Your letter, dear R, was written in your noblest
and most womanly spirit. I thank you warmly for your sympathy about my
little boy. What he is to me, even you can hardly dream; you that have
three, in whom the natural thirst of the heart was earlier satisfied,
can scarcely know what my one ewe-lamb is to me. That he may live,
that I may find bread for him, that I may not spoil him by overweening
love, that I may grow daily better for his sake, are the
ever-recurring thoughts,--say prayers,--that give their hue to all the
current of my life.

But, in answer to what you say, that it is still better to give the
world a living soul than a portion of my life in a printed book, it is
true; and yet, of my book I could know whether it would be of some
worth or not; of my child, I must wait to see what his worth will be.
I play with him, my ever-growing mystery! but from the solemnity of
the thoughts he brings is refuge only in God. Was I worthy to be
parent of a soul, with its eternal, immense capacity for weal and woe?
"God be merciful to me a sinner!" comes so naturally to a mother's
heart!

       *       *       *       *       *

What you say about the Peace way is deeply true; if any one see
clearly how to work in that way, let him, in God's name! Only, if he
abstain from fighting against giant wrongs, let him be sure he is
really and ardently at work undermining them, or, better still,
sustaining the rights that are to supplant them. Meanwhile, I am not
sure that I can keep my hands free from blood. Cobden is good; but if
he had stood in Kossuth's place, would he not have drawn his sword
against the Austrian? You, could you let a Croat insult your wife,
carry off your son to be an Austrian serf, and leave your daughter
bleeding in the dust? Yet it is true that while Moses slew the
Egyptian, Christ stood still to be spit upon; and it is true that
death to man could do him no harm. You have the truth, you have the
right, but could you act up to it in all circumstances? Stifled under
the Roman priesthood, would you not have thrown it off with all your
force? Would you have waited unknown centuries, hoping for the moment
when you could see another method?

Yet the agonies of that baptism of blood I feel, O how deeply! in the
golden June days of Rome. Consistent no way, I felt I should have
shrunk back,--I could not have had it shed. Christ did not have to see
his dear ones pass the dark river; he could go alone, however, in
prophetic spirit. No doubt he foresaw the crusades.

In answer to what you say of ----, I wish the little effort I made for
him had been wiselier applied. Yet these are not the things one
regrets. It does not do to calculate too closely with the affectionate
human impulse. We must be content to make many mistakes, or we should
move too slowly to help our brothers much.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO HER BROTHER, R.

_Florence, Jan._ 8, 1850.

My Dear R.: * * * * The way in which you speak of my marriage is such
as I expected from you. Now that we have once exchanged words on these
important changes in our lives, it matters little to write letters, so
much has happened, and the changes are too great to be made clear in
writing. It would not be worth while to keep the family thinking of
me. I cannot fix precisely the period of my return, though at present
it seems to me probable we may make the voyage in May or June. At
first we should wish to go and make a little visit to mother. I should
take counsel with various friends before fixing myself in any place;
see what openings there are for me, &c. I cannot judge at all before I
am personally in the United States, and wish to engage myself no way.
Should I finally decide on the neighborhood of New York, I should see
you all, often. I wish, however, to live with mother, if possible. We
will discuss it on all sides when I come. Climate is one thing I must
think of. The change from the Roman winter to that of New England
might be very trying for Ossoli. In New York he would see Italians
often, hear his native tongue, and feel less exiled. If we had our
affairs in New York and lived in the neighboring country, we could
find places as quiet as C------, more beautiful, and from which access
to a city would be as easy by means of steam.

On the other hand, my family and most cherished friends are in New
England. I shall weigh all advantages at the time, and choose as may
then seem best.

I feel also the great responsibility about a child, and the mixture of
solemn feeling with the joy its sweet ways and caresses give; yet this
is only different in degree, not in kind, from what we should feel in
other relations. We may more or less impede or brighten the destiny of
