treason to Rome, Carus, to lament that the fates have cast down from a
throne? one who filled its seat so well. Hadst thou hearkened to the
message of Petronius, thou mightest still, lady, have sat upon thy native
seat. The crown of Palmyra might still have girt thy brow."

'"But not of the East," rejoined the Queen.

'"Fight against ambition, Carus! thou seest how, by aiming at too much, it
loses all. It is the bane of humanity. When I am dead, may ambition then
die, nor rise again."

'"May it be so," replied his general; "it has greatly cursed the world.
It were better perhaps that it died now."

'"It cannot," replied Aurelian; "its life is too strong. I lament too,
great Queen, for so I may well call thee, that upon an ancient defender of
our Roman honor, upon her who revenged Rome upon the insolent Persian,
this heavy fate should fall. I would willingly have met for the first time
in a different way the brave conqueror of Sapor, the avenger of the wrongs
and insults of the virtuous Valerian. The debt of Rome to Zenobia is
great, and shall yet, in some sort at least, be paid. Curses upon those
who moved thee to this war. They have brought this calamity upon thee,
Queen, not I, nor thou. What ill designing aspirants have urged thee on?
This is not a woman's war."

'"Was not that a woman's war," replied the Queen, "that drove the Goths
from upper Asia? Was not that a woman's war that hemmed Sapor in his
capital, and seized his camp? and that which beat Heraclianus, and gained
thereby Syria and Mesopotamia? and that which worsted Probus, and so won
the crown of Egypt? Does it ask for more, to be beaten by Romans, than to
conquer these? Rest assured, great prince, that the war was mine. My
people were indeed with me, but it was I who roused, fired, and led them
on. I had indeed great advisers. Their names are known throughout the
world. Why should I name the renowned Longinus, the princely Gracchus, the
invincible Zabdas, the honest Otho? Their names are honored in Rome as
well as here. They have been with me; but without lying or vanity, I may
say I have been their head."

'"Be it so; nevertheless, thy services shall be remembered. But let us
now to the affairs before us. The city has not surrendered--though thy
captivity is known, the gates still are shut. A word from thee would
open them."

'"It is a word I cannot speak," replied the Queen; her countenance
expressing now, instead of sorrow, indignation. "Wouldst thou that I too
should turn traitor?"

'"It surely would not be that," replied the Emperor. "It can avail naught
to contend further--it can but end in a wider destruction, both of your
people and my soldiers."

'"Longinus, I may suppose," said Zenobia, "is now supreme. Let the Emperor
address him, and what is right will be done."

'Aurelian turned, and held a brief conversation with some of his officers.

'"Within the walls," said the Emperor, again addressing the Queen, "thou
hast sons. Is it not so?"

'"It is not they," said the Queen quickly, her countenance growing pale,
"it is not they, nor either of them, who have conspired against me!"

'"No--not quite so. Yet he who betrayed thee calls himself of thy family.
Thy sons surely were not in league with him. Soldiers," cried the Emperor,
"lead forth the great Antiochus, and his slave."

'At his name, the Queen started--the Princess uttered a faint cry, and
seemed as if she would have fallen.

'A fold of the tent was drawn aside, and the huge form of Antiochus
appeared, followed by the Queen's slave, her head bent down and eyes cast
upon the ground. If a look could have killed, the first glance of
Zenobia, so full of a withering contempt, would have destroyed her base
kinsman. He heeded it but so much as to blush and turn away his face from
her. Upon Sindarina the Queen gazed with a look of deepest sorrow. The
beautiful slave stood there where she entered, not lifting her head, but
her bosom rising and falling with some great emotion--conscious, as it
seemed, that the Queen's look was fastened upon her, and fearing to meet
it. But it was so only for a moment, when raising her head, and revealing
a countenance swollen with grief, she rushed toward the Queen, and threw
herself at her feet, embracing them, and covering them with kisses. Her
deep sobs took away all power of speech. The Queen only said, "My poor
Sindarina!"

'The stern voice of Aurelian was first heard, "Bear her away--bear her
from the tent."

'A guard seized her, and forcibly separating her from Zenobia, bore her
weeping away.

'"This," said Aurelian, turning now to Zenobia, "this is thy kinsman, as
he tells me--the Prince Antiochus?"

'The Queen replied not.

'"He has done Rome a great service." Antiochus raised his head, and
straightened his stooping shoulders, "He has the merit of ending a
weary and disastrous war. It is a rare fortune to fall to any one. 'Tis
a work to grow great upon. Yet, Prince," turning to Antiochus, "the
work is not complete. The city yet holds out. If I am to reward thee
with the sovereign power, as thou sayest, thou must open the gates.
Canst thou do it?"

'"Great Prince," replied the base spirit eagerly, "it is provided for.
Allow me but a few moments, and a place proper for it, and the gates I
warrant shall quickly swing upon their hinges."

'"Ah! do you say so? That is well. What, I pray, is the process?"

'"At a signal which I shall make, noble Prince, and which has been agreed
upon, every head of every one of the Queen's party rolls in the
dust--Longinus, Gracchus, and his daughter, Seleucus, Gabrayas, and a host
more--their heads fall. The gates are then to be thrown open."

'"Noble Palmyrene, you have the thanks of all. Of the city then we are at
length secure. For this, thou wouldst have the rule of it under Rome,
wielding a sceptre in the name of the Roman Senate, and paying tribute as
a subject province? Is it not so?"

'"It is. That is what I would have, and would do, most excellent
Aurelian."

'"Who are thy associates in this? Are the Queen's sons, Herennianus,
Timolaus, Vabalathus, of thy side, and partners in this enterprise?"

'"They are not privy to the design to deliver up to thy great power the
Queen their mother; but they are my friends, and most surely do I count
upon their support. As I shall return king of Palmyra, they will gladly
share my power."

'"But if friends of thine, they are enemies of mine," rejoined Aurelian,
in terrific tones; "they are seeds of future trouble; they may sprout up
into kings also, to Rome's annoyance. They must be crushed. Dost thou
understand me?"

'"I do, great Prince. Leave them to me. I will do for them. But to say the
truth they are too weak to disturb any--friends or enemies."

'"Escape not so. They must die." roared Aurelian.

'"They shall--they shall," ejaculated the alarmed Antiochus; "soon as I am
within the walls their heads shall be sent to thee."

'"That now is as I would have it. One thing more thou hast asked--that
the fair slave who accompanies thee be spared to thee, to be thy Queen."

'"It was her desire--hers, noble Aurelian, not mine."

'"But didst thou not engage to her as much?"

'"Truly I did. But among princes such words are but politic ones: that
is well understood. Kings marry for the state. I would be higher
matched;" and the sensual demon cast his eyes significantly towards the
Princess Julia.

'"Am I understood?" continued Antiochus, Aurelian making no response. "The
Princess Julia I would raise to the throne." The monster seemed to dilate
to twice his common size, as his mind fed upon the opening glories.

'Aurelian had turned from him, looking first at his Roman attendants,
then at the Queen and Julia--his countenance kindling with some
swelling passion.

'"Do I understand thee?" he then said. "I understand thee to say that for
the bestowment of the favors and honors thou hast named, thou wilt do the
things thou hast now specifically promised? Is it not so?"

'"It is, gracious king."

'"Dost thou swear it?"

'"I swear it by the great God of Light!"

'The countenance of the Emperor now grew black with as it seemed mingled
fury and contempt. Antiochus started, and his cheek paled. A little light
reached his thick brain.

'"Romans," cried Aurelian, "pardon me for so abusing your ears! And you,
our royal captives! I knew not that such baseness lived--still less that
it was here. Thou foul stigma upon humanity! Why opens not the earth under
thee, but that it loathes and rejects thee! Is a Roman like thee, dost
thou think, to reward thy unheard-of treacheries? Thou knowest no more
what a Roman is, than what truth and honor are. Soldiers! seize yonder
miscreant, write traitor on his back, and spurn him forth the camp. His
form and his soul both offend alike. Hence, monster!"

'Antiochus was like one thunderstruck. Trembling in every joint, he sought
to appeal to the Emperor's mercy, but the guard stopped his mouth, and
dragged him from the tent. His shrieks pierced the air as the soldiers
scourged him beyond the encampment.

'"It was not for me," said Aurelian, as these ceased to be heard, "to
refuse what fate threw into my hands. Though I despise the traitorous
informer, I could not shut my ear to the facts he revealed, without myself
betraying the interests of Rome. But, believe me, it was information I
would willingly have spared, My infamy were as his to have rewarded the
traitor. Fear not, great Queen; I pledge the word of a Roman and an
Emperor for thy safety. Thou art safe both from Roman and Palmyrene."

'"What I have but now been witness of," replied the Queen, "assures me
that in the magnanimity of Aurelian I may securely rest."

'"As the Queen uttered these words, a sound as of a distant tumult, and
the uproar of a multitude, caught the ears of all within the tent.

'"What mean these tumultuous cries?" inquired Aurelian of his attending
guard. "They increase and approach."

'"It may be but the soldiers at their game with Antiochus," replied
Probus.

'But it was not so. At the moment a Centurion, breathless, and with his
head bare, rushed madly into the tent.

'"Speak," said the Emperor, "what is it?"

'"The legions!" said the Centurion, as soon as he could command his words,
"the legions are advancing, crying out for the Queen of Palmyra! They have
broken from their camp and their leaders, and in one mixed body come to
surround the Emperor's tent."

'"As he ended, the fierce cries of the enraged soldiery were distinctly
heard, like the roaring of a forest torn by a tempest. Aurelian, baring
his sword, and calling upon his friends to do the same, sprang toward
the entrance of the tent. They were met by the dense throng of the
soldiers, who now pressed against the tent, and whose savage yells now
could be heard,--

'"The head of Zenobia."--"Deliver the Queen to our will."--"Throw out
the head of Zenobia, and we will return to our quarters."--"She
belongs to us."

'At the same moment the sides of the tent were thrown up, showing the
whole plain filled with the heaving multitude, and being itself instantly
crowded with the ringleaders and their more desperate associates. Zenobia,
supporting the Princess, who clung to her, and pale through a just
apprehension of every horror, but otherwise firm and undaunted, cried out
to Aurelian, "Save us, O Emperor, from this foul butchery!"

'"We will die else!" replied the Emperor; who with the word, sprang upon a
soldier making toward the Queen, and with a blow clove him to the earth.
Then swinging round him that sword which had drunk the blood of thousands,
and followed by the gigantic Sandarion, by Probus, and Carus, a space
around the Queen was soon cleared.

'"Back, ruffians," cried Aurelian, in a voice of thunder, "for you are no
longer Romans! back to the borders of the tent. There I will hear your
complaints." The soldiers fell back, and their ferocious cries ceased.

'"Now," cried the Emperor, addressing them, "what is your will, that thus
in wild disorder you throng my tent?"

'One from the crowd replied--"Our will is that the Queen of Palmyra be
delivered to us as our right, instantly. Thousands and thousands of our
bold companions lie buried upon these accursed plains, slain by her and
her fiery engines. We demand her life. It is but justice, and faint
justice too."

'"Her life!"--"Her life!"--arose in one shout from the innumerable
throng.

'The Emperor raised his hand, waving his sword dropping with the blood of
the slain soldier; the noise subsided; and his voice, clear and loud like
the tone of a trumpet, went to the farthest bounds of the multitude.

'"Soldiers," he cried, "you ask for justice; and justice you shall
have."--"Aurelian is ever just!" cried many voices.--"But you shall not
have the life of the Queen of Palmyra."--He paused; a low murmur went
through the crowd.--"Or you must first take the life of your Emperor, and
of these who stand with him."--The soldiers were silent.--"In asking the
life of Zenobia," he continued, "you know not what you ask. Are any here
who went with Valerian to the Persian war?" A few voices responded, "I was
there,--and I,--and I."--"Are there any here whose parents, or brothers,
or friends fell into the tiger clutches of the barbarian Sapor, and died
miserably in hopeless captivity?"--Many voices every where throughout the
crowd were heard in reply, "Yes, yes,--Mine were there, and mine."--"Did
you ever hear it said," continued Aurelian, "that Rome lifted a finger for
their rescue, or for that of the good Valerian?"--They were silent, some
crying, "No, no."--"Know then, that when Rome forgot her brave soldiers
and her Emperor, Zenobia remembered and avenged them; and Rome fallen into
contempt with the Persian, was raised to her ancient renown by the arms of
her ally, the brave Zenobia, and her dominions throughout the East saved
from the grasp of Sapor only by her valor. While Gallienus wallowed in
sensuality and forgot Rome, and even his own great father, the Queen of
Palmyra stood forth, and with her royal husband, the noble Odenatus, was
in truth the savior of the empire. And is it her life you would have? Were
that a just return? Were that Roman magnanimity? And grant that thousands
of your brave companions lie buried upon these plains: it is but the
fortune of war. Were they not slain in honorable fight, in the siege of a
city, for its defence unequalled in all the annals of war? Cannot Romans
honor courage and conduct, though in an enemy? But you ask for justice. I
have said you shall have justice. You shall. It is right that the heads
and advisers of this revolt, for such the senate deems it, should be cut
off. It is the ministers of princes who are the true devisers of a
nation's acts. These, when in our power, shall be yours. And now, who,
soldiers! stirred up this mutiny, bringing inexpiable shame upon our brave
legions? Who are the leaders of the tumult?"

'Enough were found to name them;

'"Firmus! Carinus! the Centurions Plancus! Tatius! Burrhus! Valens!
Crispinus!"

'"Guards! seize them and hew them down. Soldiers! to your tents." The
legions fell back as tumultuously as they had come together; the faster,
as the dying groans of the slaughtered ringleaders fell upon their ears.

'The tent of the Emperor was once more restored to order. After a brief
conversation, in which Aurelian expressed his shame for the occurrence of
such disorders in the presence of the Queen, the guard were commanded to
convey back to the palace of Seleucus, whence they had been taken, Zenobia
and the Princess.'

Such are the principal matters contained in the communications of
Nichomachus.

When the facts contained in them became known, the senate, the council,
the army, and the people, agreed in the belief, that the Queen's safety
and their own would now be best secured by an immediate capitulation.
Accordingly, heralds bearing letters from Longinus, in the name of the
council, proceeded to the Roman camp. No other terms could be obtained
than a verbal promise that the city, the walls, and the common people
should be spared; but the surrender, beyond that, must be unconditional.

Upon learning the terms prescribed by the conqueror, many were for further
resistance. 'The language of Aurelian,' they said, 'is ambiguous. He will
spare the city, walls, and common people. Are our senators and counsellors
to be sacrificed? Are they, who have borne the burden of the day, now to
be selected, as the only ones who are to suffer? It shall not be so.'

Generous sentiments like these were heard on all sides. But they were
answered and overcome, by Gracchus especially, and others. Said Gracchus
to the people, 'Doubtless punishment will be inflicted by Rome upon some.
Our resistance is termed by her, rebellion, revolt, conspiracy; the
leaders will be sought and punished. It is ever her course. But this is a
light evil compared with a wide-spread massacre of this whole population,
the destruction of these famous temples, the levelling of these proud
walls. Aurelian has said that these shall be spared. His word, though an
unwritten and informal one, may be trusted. My counsel is, that it be at
once accepted. What if a few grey heads among us are taken off? That will
not touch the existence or prosperity of Palmyra. You can spare them. Your
children will soon grow up to take our places, and fill them, I hope, with
a better wisdom.'

But such words only served at first the more to strengthen the people in
their resolution, that their rulers should not be the only sacrifice.
None were loved throughout the city more than Gracchus and Otho, none
revered like Longinus. It was a long and painful struggle between
affection and the convictions of reason before it ended, and the consent
of the people was obtained to deliver up the city to the mercy of
Aurelian. But it was obtained.

I was sitting with Fausta and Calpurnius, speaking of the things that had
happened, and of the conduct of the Queen, when Gracchus entered and
joined us, informing us that 'ambassadors were now gone to the camp of
Aurelian, clothed with authority to deliver up the city into his hands. So
that now the end has drawn on, and Palmyra ceases to exist.'

Fausta, although knowing that this must happen, and might at any
moment, could not hear the fatal words, announcing the death of her
country, as she deemed it, and quenching forever in darkness the bright
dreams upon which she had fed so long, without renewed grief. We were a
long time silent.

'Something yet remains,' at length Gracchus resumed, 'for us to resolve
upon and do. Before many hours have elapsed, a Roman army will fill the
streets of the city, perhaps our houses also, and a general plunder may
be commenced of all the valuables we possess. It will be useless to
conceal what it will be well enough known, from the manner in which we
live, must be beneath our roof. It will but expose our lives. Yet,
Fausta, your jewels, valued by you as gifts, and other things precious
for the same or a like reason, may easily be secreted, nor yet be missed
by the licensed robbers. See to this, my child; but except this there is
now naught to do concerning such affairs, but to sit still and observe
the general wreck. But there are other and weightier matters to be
decided upon, and that at once.'

'Concerning the care of ourselves, you mean?' said Fausta.

'I do,' replied Gracchus.

'I,' said Fausta, 'would remain here, where I am.'

'It is that which I wish,' replied her father. 'I commit you to the care
of Lucius. For Calpurnius, he must leave you, and as he would live, fly if
that yet be possible beyond the walls, or conceal himself within them.'

'Never!' said Calpurnius; 'I can do neither. I have never shunned a
danger--and I cannot.'

'Let pride and passion now,' said Gracchus, 'go fast asleep. We have no
occasion for them; they are out of place, dealing as we now do with stern
necessities. Your life will be especially sought by Aurelian; it is a life
that cannot be spared. Fausta needs you. In you she must find, or nowhere,
father, husband, friend. Lucius, when these troubles are over, will return
to Rome, and I shall be in the keeping of Aurelian. You must live; for
her sake, if not for your own.'

'For mine too, surely, if for hers,' replied Calpurnius.

'Father,' said Fausta, throwing her arms around him, 'why, why must you
fall into the hands of Aurelian? Why not, with Calpurnius, fly from these
now hated walls?'

'My daughter!' replied Gracchus, 'let not your love of me make you
forgetful of what I owe my own name and our country's. Am I not bound by
the words of Aurelian?--"He will spare the city and the common
people"--reserving for himself their rulers and advisers. Were they all to
fly or shrink into concealment, can we doubt that then the fury of the
fierce Roman would discharge itself upon the helpless people, and men,
women and children suffer in our stead? And shall I fly while the rest are
true to their trust?'

'The gods forbid!' sobbed Fausta.

'Now you are yourself again. Life is of little account with me. For you I
would willingly hold on upon it, though in any event my grasp would be
rapidly growing weaker and weaker; age would come and weaken and dissolve
it. But for myself, I can truly say, I survey the prospect of death with
indifference. Life is one step; death is another. I have taken the first,
I am as ready to take the second. But to preserve life, agreeable as I
have found it, by any sacrifice--'

'O, that were dying twice!' said Fausta; 'I know it.'

'Be thankful then that I shall die but once, and so dry your tears. Of
nothing am I more clear, than that if the loss of my head will bring
security to the city and the people, I can offer it to the executioner
with scarce a single regret. But let us leave this. But few hours remain
to do what is yet to be done.'

It was so indeed. Already the commotion in the streets indicated that the
entrance of the Roman army was each moment expected.

It was determined that Calpurnius should avail himself of the old conduit,
and fly beyond the walls. To this he consented, though with pain; and
bidding us farewell, departed. Fausta retired to fulfil the injunctions of
her father, while Gracchus employed himself in arranging a few papers, to
be entrusted to my keeping.

In the course of a few hours the gates of the city were thrown open, and
the army of the conqueror made its unobstructed entrance. Soon as the
walls were secured, the towers of the gates, and the arms of the Queen's
remaining forces, Aurelian himself approached, and by the Roman gate
passed into a city that had cost him so dear to gain. He rode through its
principal streets and squares, gazing with admiration at the magnificence
which every where met his view. As he arrived at the far-famed Temple of
the Sun, and was told to what deity it was dedicated, he bared his head,
flung himself from his horse, and on foot, followed by an innumerable
company of Romans, ascended its long flight of steps, and there within its
walls returned solemn thanks to the great God of Light, the protecting
deity of his house, for the success that had crowned his arms.

When this act of worship had been performed, and votive offerings had been
hung upon the columns of the temple, the Emperor came forth, and after
visiting and inspecting all that was beautiful and rare, made
proclamation of his will concerning the city and its inhabitants. This
was, that all gold and silver, precious stones, all pictures, statues, and
other works of art, were to be placed in the hands of the Romans, and that
all the members of the Queen's senate and council, with the nobility, were
to be delivered up as prisoners of war, together with certain specified
portions of the army. Beyond these requisitions, the persons and property
of the citizens were to be respected. No violence of any kind on the part
of the soldiers would be allowed, or pardoned if committed.

Immediately upon this, the Roman army was converted into a body of
laborers and artisans, employed in the construction of wains of every form
and size, for the transportation across the desert to the sea-coast, of
whatever would adorn the triumph of Aurelian, or add to the riches of the
great capital of the world. Vast numbers of elephants and camels were
collected from the city, and from all the neighboring territory, with
which to drag the huge and heavy loaded wagons through the deep sands and
over the rough and rocky plains of Syria. The palaces of the nobles and
the wealthy merchants have been stripped of every embellishment of art and
taste. The private and public gardens, the fountains, the porticos, have
each and all been robbed of every work, in either marble or brass, which
had the misfortune or the merit to have been wrought by artists of
distinguished names. The palaces of the Queen and of Longinus were objects
of especial curiosity and desire, and, as it were, their entire contents,
after being secured with utmost art from possibility of injury, have been
piled upon carriages prepared for them, ready for their journey toward
Rome. It was pitiful to look on and see this wide desolation of scenes,
that so little while ago had offered to the eye all that the most
cultivated taste could have required for its gratification. The citizens
stood around in groups, silent witnesses of the departing glories of their
city and nation.

But the sight saddest of all to behold, was that of the senators and
counsellors of Palmyra, led guarded from the city to the camp of Aurelian.
All along the streets through which they passed, the people stood in dumb
and motionless array, to testify in that expressive manner their affection
and their grief. Voices were indeed occasionally heard invoking the
blessings of the gods upon them, or imprecating curses upon the head of
the scourge Aurelian. Whenever Longinus and Gracchus appeared, their names
were uttered in the tones with which children would cry out to venerated
parents, whom they beheld for the last time; beheld borne away from them
by a power they could not resist to captivity or death. No fear of the
legion that surrounded them availed to repress or silence such testimonies
of regard. And if confidence was reposed in the Roman soldiery, that they
would not, because conquerors and the power was theirs, churlishly deny
them the freedom to relieve in that manner their over-burdened hearts, it
was not--happy was I, as a Roman, to witness it--misplaced. They resented
it not either by word or look or act, but moved on like so many statues in
mail, turning neither to the one hand nor the other, nor apparently so
