
A rumour had now got into circulation, too, which diffused a greater
dread all through London, even than these publicly announced intentions
of the rioters, though all men knew that if they were successfully
effected, there must ensue a national bankruptcy and general ruin. It
was said that they meant to throw the gates of Bedlam open, and let all
the madmen loose. This suggested such dreadful images to the people's
minds, and was indeed an act so fraught with new and unimaginable
horrors in the contemplation, that it beset them more than any loss or
cruelty of which they could foresee the worst, and drove many sane men
nearly mad themselves.

So the day passed on: the prisoners moving their goods; people running
to and fro in the streets, carrying away their property; groups standing
in silence round the ruins; all business suspended; and the soldiers
disposed as has been already mentioned, remaining quite inactive. So the
day passed on, and dreaded night drew near again.

At last, at seven o'clock in the evening, the Privy Council issued a
solemn proclamation that it was now necessary to employ the military,
and that the officers had most direct and effectual orders, by an
immediate exertion of their utmost force, to repress the disturbances;
and warning all good subjects of the King to keep themselves, their
servants, and apprentices, within doors that night. There was then
delivered out to every soldier on duty, thirty-six rounds of powder and
ball; the drums beat; and the whole force was under arms at sunset.

The City authorities, stimulated by these vigorous measures, held a
Common Council; passed a vote thanking the military associations who
had tendered their aid to the civil authorities; accepted it; and placed
them under the direction of the two sheriffs. At the Queen's palace,
a double guard, the yeomen on duty, the groom-porters, and all other
attendants, were stationed in the passages and on the staircases at
seven o'clock, with strict instructions to be watchful on their posts
all night; and all the doors were locked. The gentlemen of the Temple,
and the other Inns, mounted guard within their gates, and strengthened
them with the great stones of the pavement, which they took up for the
purpose. In Lincoln's Inn, they gave up the hall and commons to the
Northumberland Militia, under the command of Lord Algernon Percy; in
some few of the city wards, the burgesses turned out, and without
making a very fierce show, looked brave enough. Some hundreds of stout
gentlemen threw themselves, armed to the teeth, into the halls of the
different companies, double-locked and bolted all the gates, and
dared the rioters (among themselves) to come on at their peril. These
arrangements being all made simultaneously, or nearly so, were completed
by the time it got dark; and then the streets were comparatively clear,
and were guarded at all the great corners and chief avenues by
the troops: while parties of the officers rode up and down in all
directions, ordering chance stragglers home, and admonishing the
residents to keep within their houses, and, if any firing ensued, not
to approach the windows. More chains were drawn across such of the
thoroughfares as were of a nature to favour the approach of a great
crowd, and at each of these points a considerable force was stationed.
All these precautions having been taken, and it being now quite dark,
those in command awaited the result in some anxiety: and not without a
hope that such vigilant demonstrations might of themselves dishearten
the populace, and prevent any new outrages.

But in this reckoning they were cruelly mistaken, for in half an hour,
or less, as though the setting in of night had been their preconcerted
signal, the rioters having previously, in small parties, prevented the
lighting of the street lamps, rose like a great sea; and that in so many
places at once, and with such inconceivable fury, that those who had the
direction of the troops knew not, at first, where to turn or what to do.
One after another, new fires blazed up in every quarter of the town,
as though it were the intention of the insurgents to wrap the city in a
circle of flames, which, contracting by degrees, should burn the whole
to ashes; the crowd swarmed and roared in every street; and none but
rioters and soldiers being out of doors, it seemed to the latter as if
all London were arrayed against them, and they stood alone against the
town.

In two hours, six-and-thirty fires were raging--six-and-thirty great
conflagrations: among them the Borough Clink in Tooley Street, the
King's Bench, the Fleet, and the New Bridewell. In almost every street,
there was a battle; and in every quarter the muskets of the troops were
heard above the shouts and tumult of the mob. The firing began in the
Poultry, where the chain was drawn across the road, where nearly a score
of people were killed on the first discharge. Their bodies having been
hastily carried into St Mildred's Church by the soldiers, the latter
fired again, and following fast upon the crowd, who began to give way
when they saw the execution that was done, formed across Cheapside, and
charged them at the point of the bayonet.

The streets were now a dreadful spectacle. The shouts of the rabble,
the shrieks of women, the cries of the wounded, and the constant firing,
formed a deafening and an awful accompaniment to the sights which every
corner presented. Wherever the road was obstructed by the chains, there
the fighting and the loss of life were greatest; but there was hot work
and bloodshed in almost every leading thoroughfare.

At Holborn Bridge, and on Holborn Hill, the confusion was greater than
in any other part; for the crowd that poured out of the city in two
great streams, one by Ludgate Hill, and one by Newgate Street, united at
that spot, and formed a mass so dense, that at every volley the people
seemed to fall in heaps. At this place a large detachment of soldiery
were posted, who fired, now up Fleet Market, now up Holborn, now up Snow
Hill--constantly raking the streets in each direction. At this place
too, several large fires were burning, so that all the terrors of that
terrible night seemed to be concentrated in one spot.

Full twenty times, the rioters, headed by one man who wielded an axe
in his right hand, and bestrode a brewer's horse of great size and
strength, caparisoned with fetters taken out of Newgate, which clanked
and jingled as he went, made an attempt to force a passage at this
point, and fire the vintner's house. Full twenty times they were
repulsed with loss of life, and still came back again; and though
the fellow at their head was marked and singled out by all, and was a
conspicuous object as the only rioter on horseback, not a man could
hit him. So surely as the smoke cleared away, so surely there was he;
calling hoarsely to his companions, brandishing his axe above his head,
and dashing on as though he bore a charmed life, and was proof against
ball and powder.

This man was Hugh; and in every part of the riot, he was seen. He headed
two attacks upon the Bank, helped to break open the Toll-houses on
Blackfriars Bridge, and cast the money into the street: fired two of the
prisons with his own hand: was here, and there, and everywhere--always
foremost--always active--striking at the soldiers, cheering on the
crowd, making his horse's iron music heard through all the yell and
uproar: but never hurt or stopped. Turn him at one place, and he made
a new struggle in another; force him to retreat at this point, and he
advanced on that, directly. Driven from Holborn for the twentieth
time, he rode at the head of a great crowd straight upon Saint Paul's,
attacked a guard of soldiers who kept watch over a body of prisoners
within the iron railings, forced them to retreat, rescued the men they
had in custody, and with this accession to his party, came back again,
mad with liquor and excitement, and hallooing them on like a demon.

It would have been no easy task for the most careful rider to sit a
horse in the midst of such a throng and tumult; but though this madman
rolled upon his back (he had no saddle) like a boat upon the sea, he
never for an instant lost his seat, or failed to guide him where he
would. Through the very thickest of the press, over dead bodies and
burning fragments, now on the pavement, now in the road, now riding up
a flight of steps to make himself the more conspicuous to his party,
and now forcing a passage through a mass of human beings, so closely
squeezed together that it seemed as if the edge of a knife would
scarcely part them,--on he went, as though he could surmount all
obstacles by the mere exercise of his will. And perhaps his not being
shot was in some degree attributable to this very circumstance; for his
extreme audacity, and the conviction that he must be one of those to
whom the proclamation referred, inspired the soldiers with a desire to
take him alive, and diverted many an aim which otherwise might have been
more near the mark.

The vintner and Mr Haredale, unable to sit quietly listening to the
noise without seeing what went on, had climbed to the roof of the house,
and hiding behind a stack of chimneys, were looking cautiously down into
the street, almost hoping that after so many repulses the rioters would
be foiled, when a great shout proclaimed that a parry were coming round
the other way; and the dismal jingling of those accursed fetters warned
them next moment that they too were led by Hugh. The soldiers had
advanced into Fleet Market and were dispersing the people there; so that
they came on with hardly any check, and were soon before the house.

'All's over now,' said the vintner. 'Fifty thousand pounds will be
scattered in a minute. We must save ourselves. We can do no more, and
shall have reason to be thankful if we do as much.'

Their first impulse was, to clamber along the roofs of the houses, and,
knocking at some garret window for admission, pass down that way into
the street, and so escape. But another fierce cry from below, and a
general upturning of the faces of the crowd, apprised them that they
were discovered, and even that Mr Haredale was recognised; for Hugh,
seeing him plainly in the bright glare of the fire, which in that part
made it as light as day, called to him by his name, and swore to have
his life.

'Leave me here,' said Mr Haredale, 'and in Heaven's name, my good
friend, save yourself! Come on!' he muttered, as he turned towards Hugh
and faced him without any further effort at concealment: 'This roof is
high, and if we close, we will die together!'

'Madness,' said the honest vintner, pulling him back, 'sheer madness.
Hear reason, sir. My good sir, hear reason. I could never make myself
heard by knocking at a window now; and even if I could, no one would be
bold enough to connive at my escape. Through the cellars, there's a kind
of passage into the back street by which we roll casks in and out. We
shall have time to get down there before they can force an entry. Do
not delay an instant, but come with me--for both our sakes--for mine--my
dear good sir!'

As he spoke, and drew Mr Haredale back, they had both a glimpse of the
street. It was but a glimpse, but it showed them the crowd, gathering
and clustering round the house: some of the armed men pressing to the
front to break down the doors and windows, some bringing brands from
the nearest fire, some with lifted faces following their course upon the
roof and pointing them out to their companions: all raging and roaring
like the flames they lighted up. They saw some men thirsting for the
treasures of strong liquor which they knew were stored within; they saw
others, who had been wounded, sinking down into the opposite doorways
and dying, solitary wretches, in the midst of all the vast assemblage;
here a frightened woman trying to escape; and there a lost child; and
there a drunken ruffian, unconscious of the death-wound on his head,
raving and fighting to the last. All these things, and even such trivial
incidents as a man with his hat off, or turning round, or stooping down,
or shaking hands with another, they marked distinctly; yet in a glance
so brief, that, in the act of stepping back, they lost the whole, and
saw but the pale faces of each other, and the red sky above them.

Mr Haredale yielded to the entreaties of his companion--more because he
was resolved to defend him, than for any thought he had of his own life,
or any care he entertained for his own safety--and quickly re-entering
the house, they descended the stairs together. Loud blows were
thundering on the shutters, crowbars were already thrust beneath the
door, the glass fell from the sashes, a deep light shone through every
crevice, and they heard the voices of the foremost in the crowd so close
to every chink and keyhole, that they seemed to be hoarsely whispering
their threats into their very ears. They had but a moment reached the
bottom of the cellar-steps and shut the door behind them, when the mob
broke in.

The vaults were profoundly dark, and having no torch or candle--for
they had been afraid to carry one, lest it should betray their place of
refuge--they were obliged to grope with their hands. But they were not
long without light, for they had not gone far when they heard the crowd
forcing the door; and, looking back among the low-arched passages,
could see them in the distance, hurrying to and fro with flashing links,
broaching the casks, staving the great vats, turning off upon the right
hand and the left, into the different cellars, and lying down to drink
at the channels of strong spirits which were already flowing on the
ground.

They hurried on, not the less quickly for this; and had reached the only
vault which lay between them and the passage out, when suddenly, from
the direction in which they were going, a strong light gleamed upon
their faces; and before they could slip aside, or turn back, or hide
themselves, two men (one bearing a torch) came upon them, and cried in
an astonished whisper, 'Here they are!'

At the same instant they pulled off what they wore upon their heads. Mr
Haredale saw before him Edward Chester, and then saw, when the vintner
gasped his name, Joe Willet.

Ay, the same Joe, though with an arm the less, who used to make the
quarterly journey on the grey mare to pay the bill to the purple-faced
vintner; and that very same purple-faced vintner, formerly of Thames
Street, now looked him in the face, and challenged him by name.

'Give me your hand,' said Joe softly, taking it whether the astonished
vintner would or no. 'Don't fear to shake it; it's a friendly one and
a hearty one, though it has no fellow. Why, how well you look and how
bluff you are! And you--God bless you, sir. Take heart, take heart.
We'll find them. Be of good cheer; we have not been idle.'

There was something so honest and frank in Joe's speech, that Mr
Haredale put his hand in his involuntarily, though their meeting
was suspicious enough. But his glance at Edward Chester, and that
gentleman's keeping aloof, were not lost upon Joe, who said bluntly,
glancing at Edward while he spoke:

'Times are changed, Mr Haredale, and times have come when we ought to
know friends from enemies, and make no confusion of names. Let me tell
you that but for this gentleman, you would most likely have been dead by
this time, or badly wounded at the best.'

'What do you say?' cried Mr Haredale.

'I say,' said Joe, 'first, that it was a bold thing to be in the crowd
at all disguised as one of them; though I won't say much about that, on
second thoughts, for that's my case too. Secondly, that it was a brave
and glorious action--that's what I call it--to strike that fellow off
his horse before their eyes!'

'What fellow! Whose eyes!'

'What fellow, sir!' cried Joe: 'a fellow who has no goodwill to you, and
who has the daring and devilry in him of twenty fellows. I know him of
old. Once in the house, HE would have found you, here or anywhere. The
rest owe you no particular grudge, and, unless they see you, will only
think of drinking themselves dead. But we lose time. Are you ready?'

'Quite,' said Edward. 'Put out the torch, Joe, and go on. And be silent,
there's a good fellow.'

'Silent or not silent,' murmured Joe, as he dropped the flaring link
upon the ground, crushed it with his foot, and gave his hand to Mr
Haredale, 'it was a brave and glorious action;--no man can alter that.'

Both Mr Haredale and the worthy vintner were too amazed and too much
hurried to ask any further questions, so followed their conductors
in silence. It seemed, from a short whispering which presently ensued
between them and the vintner relative to the best way of escape, that
they had entered by the back-door, with the connivance of John Grueby,
who watched outside with the key in his pocket, and whom they had taken
into their confidence. A party of the crowd coming up that way, just as
they entered, John had double-locked the door again, and made off for
the soldiers, so that means of retreat was cut off from under them.

However, as the front-door had been forced, and this minor crowd, being
anxious to get at the liquor, had no fancy for losing time in breaking
down another, but had gone round and got in from Holborn with the rest,
the narrow lane in the rear was quite free of people. So, when they had
crawled through the passage indicated by the vintner (which was a mere
shelving-trap for the admission of casks), and had managed with some
difficulty to unchain and raise the door at the upper end, they emerged
into the street without being observed or interrupted. Joe still holding
Mr Haredale tight, and Edward taking the same care of the vintner, they
hurried through the streets at a rapid pace; occasionally standing aside
to let some fugitives go by, or to keep out of the way of the soldiers
who followed them, and whose questions, when they halted to put any,
were speedily stopped by one whispered word from Joe.



Chapter 68


While Newgate was burning on the previous night, Barnaby and his
father, having been passed among the crowd from hand to hand, stood in
Smithfield, on the outskirts of the mob, gazing at the flames like men
who had been suddenly roused from sleep. Some moments elapsed before
they could distinctly remember where they were, or how they got
there; or recollected that while they were standing idle and listless
spectators of the fire, they had tools in their hands which had been
hurriedly given them that they might free themselves from their fetters.

Barnaby, heavily ironed as he was, if he had obeyed his first impulse,
or if he had been alone, would have made his way back to the side of
Hugh, who to his clouded intellect now shone forth with the new lustre
of being his preserver and truest friend. But his father's terror
of remaining in the streets, communicated itself to him when he
comprehended the full extent of his fears, and impressed him with the
same eagerness to fly to a place of safety.

In a corner of the market among the pens for cattle, Barnaby knelt down,
and pausing every now and then to pass his hand over his father's face,
or look up to him with a smile, knocked off his irons. When he had seen
him spring, a free man, to his feet, and had given vent to the transport
of delight which the sight awakened, he went to work upon his own, which
soon fell rattling down upon the ground, and left his limbs unfettered.

Gliding away together when this task was accomplished, and passing
several groups of men, each gathered round a stooping figure to hide
him from those who passed, but unable to repress the clanking sound of
hammers, which told that they too were busy at the same work,--the two
fugitives made towards Clerkenwell, and passing thence to Islington, as
the nearest point of egress, were quickly in the fields. After wandering
about for a long time, they found in a pasture near Finchley a poor
shed, with walls of mud, and roof of grass and brambles, built for
some cowherd, but now deserted. Here, they lay down for the rest of the
night.

They wandered to and fro when it was day, and once Barnaby went off
alone to a cluster of little cottages two or three miles away, to
purchase some bread and milk. But finding no better shelter, they
returned to the same place, and lay down again to wait for night.

Heaven alone can tell, with what vague hopes of duty, and affection;
with what strange promptings of nature, intelligible to him as to a man
of radiant mind and most enlarged capacity; with what dim memories of
children he had played with when a child himself, who had prattled
of their fathers, and of loving them, and being loved; with how many
half-remembered, dreamy associations of his mother's grief and tears and
widowhood; he watched and tended this man. But that a vague and shadowy
crowd of such ideas came slowly on him; that they taught him to be sorry
when he looked upon his haggard face, that they overflowed his eyes when
he stooped to kiss him, that they kept him waking in a tearful gladness,
shading him from the sun, fanning him with leaves, soothing him when he
started in his sleep--ah! what a troubled sleep it was--and wondering
when SHE would come to join them and be happy, is the truth. He sat
beside him all that day; listening for her footsteps in every breath
of air, looking for her shadow on the gently-waving grass, twining the
hedge flowers for her pleasure when she came, and his when he awoke; and
stooping down from time to time to listen to his mutterings, and wonder
why he was so restless in that quiet place. The sun went down, and night
came on, and he was still quite tranquil; busied with these thoughts, as
if there were no other people in the world, and the dull cloud of smoke
hanging on the immense city in the distance, hid no vices, no crimes, no
life or death, or cause of disquiet--nothing but clear air.

But the hour had now come when he must go alone to find out the blind
man (a task that filled him with delight) and bring him to that place;
taking especial care that he was not watched or followed on his way
back. He listened to the directions he must observe, repeated them again
and again, and after twice or thrice returning to surprise his father
with a light-hearted laugh, went forth, at last, upon his errand:
leaving Grip, whom he had carried from the jail in his arms, to his
care.

Fleet of foot, and anxious to return, he sped swiftly on towards the
city, but could not reach it before the fires began, and made the night
angry with their dismal lustre. When he entered the town--it might be
that he was changed by going there without his late companions, and on
no violent errand; or by the beautiful solitude in which he had passed
the day, or by the thoughts that had come upon him,--but it seemed
peopled by a legion of devils. This flight and pursuit, this cruel
burning and destroying, these dreadful cries and stunning noises, were
THEY the good lord's noble cause!

Though almost stupefied by the bewildering scene, still he found the
blind man's house. It was shut up and tenantless.

He waited for a long while, but no one came. At last he withdrew; and as
he knew by this time that the soldiers were firing, and many people must
have been killed, he went down into Holborn, where he heard the great
crowd was, to try if he could find Hugh, and persuade him to avoid the
danger, and return with him.

If he had been stunned and shocked before, his horror was increased a
thousandfold when he got into this vortex of the riot, and not being an
actor in the terrible spectacle, had it all before his eyes. But there,
in the midst, towering above them all, close before the house they were
attacking now, was Hugh on horseback, calling to the rest!

Sickened by the sights surrounding him on every side, and by the heat
and roar, and crash, he forced his way among the crowd (where many
recognised him, and with shouts pressed back to let him pass), and in
time was nearly up with Hugh, who was savagely threatening some one, but
whom or what he said, he could not, in the great confusion, understand.
At that moment the crowd forced their way into the house, and Hugh--it
was impossible to see by what means, in such a concourse--fell headlong
down.

Barnaby was beside him when he staggered to his feet. It was well he
made him hear his voice, or Hugh, with his uplifted axe, would have
cleft his skull in twain.

'Barnaby--you! Whose hand was that, that struck me down?'

'Not mine.'

'Whose!--I say, whose!' he cried, reeling back, and looking wildly
round. 'What are you doing? Where is he? Show me!'

'You are hurt,' said Barnaby--as indeed he was, in the head, both by the
blow he had received, and by his horse's hoof. 'Come away with me.'

As he spoke, he took the horse's bridle in his hand, turned him, and
dragged Hugh several paces. This brought them out of the crowd, which
was pouring from the street into the vintner's cellars.

'Where's--where's Dennis?' said Hugh, coming to a stop, and checking
Barnaby with his strong arm. 'Where has he been all day? What did
he mean by leaving me as he did, in the jail, last night? Tell me,
you--d'ye hear!'

With a flourish of his dangerous weapon, he fell down upon the ground
like a log. After a minute, though already frantic with drinking and
with the wound in his head, he crawled to a stream of burning spirit
which was pouring down the kennel, and began to drink at it as if it
were a brook of water.

Barnaby drew him away, and forced him to rise. Though he could neither
stand nor walk, he involuntarily staggered to his horse, climbed upon
his back, and clung there. After vainly attempting to divest the animal
of his clanking trappings, Barnaby sprung up behind him, snatched the
bridle, turned into Leather Lane, which was close at hand, and urged the
frightened horse into a heavy trot.

He looked back, once, before he left the street; and looked upon a sight
not easily to be erased, even from his remembrance, so long as he had
life.

The vintner's house with a half-a-dozen others near at hand, was one
great, glowing blaze. All night, no one had essayed to quench the
flames, or stop their progress; but now a body of soldiers were actively
engaged in pulling down two old wooden houses, which were every moment
in danger of taking fire, and which could scarcely fail, if they were
left to burn, to extend the conflagration immensely. The tumbling
down of nodding walls and heavy blocks of wood, the hooting and
the execrations of the crowd, the distant firing of other military
detachments, the distracted looks and cries of those whose habitations
were in danger, the hurrying to and fro of frightened people with
their goods; the reflections in every quarter of the sky, of deep, red,
soaring flames, as though the last day had come and the whole universe
were burning; the dust, and smoke, and drift of fiery particles,
scorching and kindling all it fell upon; the hot unwholesome vapour,
the blight on everything; the stars, and moon, and very sky,
obliterated;--made up such a sum of dreariness and ruin, that it seemed
as if the face of Heaven were blotted out, and night, in its rest and
quiet, and softened light, never could look upon the earth again.

But there was a worse spectacle than this--worse by far than fire and
smoke, or even the rabble's unappeasable and maniac rage. The gutters
of the street, and every crack and fissure in the stones, ran with
scorching spirit, which being dammed up by busy hands, overflowed
the road and pavement, and formed a great pool, into which the people
dropped down dead by dozens. They lay in heaps all round this fearful
pond, husbands and wives, fathers and sons, mothers and daughters, women
with children in their arms and babies at their breasts, and drank until
they died. While some stooped with their lips to the brink and never
raised their heads again, others sprang up from their fiery draught,
and danced, half in a mad triumph, and half in the agony of suffocation,
until they fell, and steeped their corpses in the liquor that had killed
them. Nor was even this the worst or most appalling kind of death that
happened on this fatal night. From the burning cellars, where they
drank out of hats, pails, buckets, tubs, and shoes, some men were drawn,
alive, but all alight from head to foot; who, in their unendurable
anguish and suffering, making for anything that had the look of water,
rolled, hissing, in this hideous lake, and splashed up liquid fire
which lapped in all it met with as it ran along the surface, and
neither spared the living nor the dead. On this last night of the great
riots--for the last night it was--the wretched victims of a senseless
outcry, became themselves the dust and ashes of the flames they had
kindled, and strewed the public streets of London.

With all he saw in this last glance fixed indelibly upon his mind,
Barnaby hurried from the city which enclosed such horrors; and holding
down his head that he might not even see the glare of the fires upon the
quiet landscape, was soon in the still country roads.

He stopped at about half-a-mile from the shed where his father lay, and
with some difficulty making Hugh sensible that he must dismount, sunk
the horse's furniture in a pool of stagnant water, and turned the animal
loose. That done, he supported his companion as well as he could, and
led him slowly forward.



Chapter 69


It was the dead of night, and very dark, when Barnaby, with his
stumbling comrade, approached the place where he had left his father;
but he could see him stealing away into the gloom, distrustful even of
him, and rapidly retreating. After calling to him twice or thrice that
there was nothing to fear, but without effect, he suffered Hugh to sink
upon the ground, and followed to bring him back.

He continued to creep away, until Barnaby was close upon him; then
turned, and said in a terrible, though suppressed voice:

'Let me go. Do not lay hands upon me. You have told her; and you and she
together have betrayed me!'

Barnaby looked at him, in silence.

'You have seen your mother!'

'No,' cried Barnaby, eagerly. 'Not for a long time--longer than I can
tell. A whole year, I think. Is she here?'

His father looked upon him steadfastly for a few moments, and then
said--drawing nearer to him as he spoke, for, seeing his face, and
hearing his words, it was impossible to doubt his truth:

'What man is that?'

'Hugh--Hugh. Only Hugh. You know him. HE will not harm you. Why, you're
afraid of Hugh! Ha ha ha! Afraid of gruff, old, noisy Hugh!'

'What man is he, I ask you,' he rejoined so fiercely, that Barnaby
stopped in his laugh, and shrinking back, surveyed him with a look of
terrified amazement.

'Why, how stern you are! You make me fear you, though you are my father.
Why do you speak to me so?'

--'I want,' he answered, putting away the hand which his son, with
a timid desire to propitiate him, laid upon his sleeve,--'I want an
answer, and you give me only jeers and questions. Who have you brought
with you to this hiding-place, poor fool; and where is the blind man?'

'I don't know where. His house was close shut. I waited, but no person
came; that was no fault of mine. This is Hugh--brave Hugh, who broke
into that ugly jail, and set us free. Aha! You like him now, do you? You
like him now!'

'Why does he lie upon the ground?'

'He has had a fall, and has been drinking. The fields and trees go
round, and round, and round with him, and the ground heaves under his
feet. You know him? You remember? See!'

They had by this time returned to where he lay, and both stooped over
him to look into his face.

'I recollect the man,' his father murmured. 'Why did you bring him
here?'

'Because he would have been killed if I had left him over yonder. They
were firing guns and shedding blood. Does the sight of blood turn you
sick, father? I see it does, by your face. That's like me--What are you
looking at?'

'At nothing!' said the murderer softly, as he started back a pace or
two, and gazed with sunken jaw and staring eyes above his son's head.
'At nothing!'

He remained in the same attitude and with the same expression on his
face for a minute or more; then glanced slowly round as if he had lost
something; and went shivering back, towards the shed.

'Shall I bring him in, father?' asked Barnaby, who had looked on,
wondering.

He only answered with a suppressed groan, and lying down upon the
ground, wrapped his cloak about his head, and shrunk into the darkest
corner.

Finding that nothing would rouse Hugh now, or make him sensible for a
moment, Barnaby dragged him along the grass, and laid him on a little
heap of refuse hay and straw which had been his own bed; first having
brought some water from a running stream hard by, and washed his wound,
and laved his hands and face. Then he lay down himself, between the two,
to pass the night; and looking at the stars, fell fast asleep.

Awakened early in the morning, by the sunshine and the songs of birds,
and hum of insects, he left them sleeping in the hut, and walked into
the sweet and pleasant air. But he felt that on his jaded senses,
oppressed and burdened with the dreadful scenes of last night, and many
nights before, all the beauties of opening day, which he had so often
tasted, and in which he had had such deep delight, fell heavily. He
thought of the blithe mornings when he and the dogs went bounding on
together through the woods and fields; and the recollection filled his
eyes with tears. He had no consciousness, God help him, of having done
wrong, nor had he any new perception of the merits of the cause in which
he had been engaged, or those of the men who advocated it; but he was
full of cares now, and regrets, and dismal recollections, and wishes
(quite unknown to him before) that this or that event had never
happened, and that the sorrow and suffering of so many people had been
spared. And now he began to think how happy they would be--his father,
mother, he, and Hugh--if they rambled away together, and lived in some
lonely place, where there were none of these troubles; and that perhaps
the blind man, who had talked so wisely about gold, and told him of
the great secrets he knew, could teach them how to live without being
pinched by want. As this occurred to him, he was the more sorry that he
had not seen him last night; and he was still brooding over this regret,
when his father came, and touched him on the shoulder.

'Ah!' cried Barnaby, starting from his fit of thoughtfulness. 'Is it
only you?'

'Who should it be?'

'I almost thought,' he answered, 'it was the blind man. I must have some
talk with him, father.'

'And so must I, for without seeing him, I don't know where to fly or
what to do, and lingering here, is death. You must go to him again, and
bring him here.'

'Must I!' cried Barnaby, delighted; 'that's brave, father. That's what I
want to do.'

'But you must bring only him, and none other. And though you wait at
his door a whole day and night, still you must wait, and not come back
without him.'

'Don't you fear that,' he cried gaily. 'He shall come, he shall come.'

'Trim off these gewgaws,' said his father, plucking the scraps of ribbon
and the feathers from his hat, 'and over your own dress wear my cloak.
Take heed how you go, and they will be too busy in the streets to notice
you. Of your coming back you need take no account, for he'll manage
that, safely.'

'To be sure!' said Barnaby. 'To be sure he will! A wise man, father, and
one who can teach us to be rich. Oh! I know him, I know him.'

He was speedily dressed, and as well disguised as he could be. With a
lighter heart he then set off upon his second journey, leaving Hugh,
who was still in a drunken stupor, stretched upon the ground within the
shed, and his father walking to and fro before it.

The murderer, full of anxious thoughts, looked after him, and paced up
and down, disquieted by every breath of air that whispered among the
boughs, and by every light shadow thrown by the passing clouds upon the
daisied ground. He was anxious for his safe return, and yet, though his
own life and safety hung upon it, felt a relief while he was gone. In
the intense selfishness which the constant presence before him of his
great crimes, and their consequences here and hereafter, engendered,
every thought of Barnaby, as his son, was swallowed up and lost. Still,
his presence was a torture and reproach; in his wild eyes, there were
terrible images of that guilty night; with his unearthly aspect, and his
half-formed mind, he seemed to the murderer a creature who had sprung
into existence from his victim's blood. He could not bear his look, his
voice, his touch; and yet he was forced, by his own desperate condition
and his only hope of cheating the gibbet, to have him by his side, and
to know that he was inseparable from his single chance of escape.

He walked to and fro, with little rest, all day, revolving these things
in his mind; and still Hugh lay, unconscious, in the shed. At length,
when the sun was setting, Barnaby returned, leading the blind man, and
talking earnestly to him as they came along together.

The murderer advanced to meet them, and bidding his son go on and speak
to Hugh, who had just then staggered to his feet, took his place at the
blind man's elbow, and slowly followed, towards the shed.

'Why did you send HIM?' said Stagg. 'Don't you know it was the way to
have him lost, as soon as found?'

'Would you have had me come myself?' returned the other.

'Humph! Perhaps not. I was before the jail on Tuesday night, but missed
you in the crowd. I was out last night, too. There was good work last
night--gay work--profitable work'--he added, rattling the money in his
pockets.

'Have you--'

--'Seen your good lady? Yes.'

'Do you mean to tell me more, or not?'

'I'll tell you all,' returned the blind man, with a laugh. 'Excuse
me--but I love to see you so impatient. There's energy in it.'

'Does she consent to say the word that may save me?'

'No,' returned the blind man emphatically, as he turned his face towards
him. 'No. Thus it is. She has been at death's door since she lost her
darling--has been insensible, and I know not what. I tracked her to a
hospital, and presented myself (with your leave) at her bedside. Our
talk was not a long one, for she was weak, and there being people near
I was not quite easy. But I told her all that you and I agreed upon, and
pointed out the young gentleman's position, in strong terms. She tried
to soften me, but that, of course (as I told her), was lost time. She
cried and moaned, you may be sure; all women do. Then, of a sudden, she
found her voice and strength, and said that Heaven would help her and
her innocent son; and that to Heaven she appealed against us--which she
did; in really very pretty language, I assure you. I advised her, as
a friend, not to count too much on assistance from any such distant
quarter--recommended her to think of it--told her where I lived--said I
knew she would send to me before noon, next day--and left her, either in
a faint or shamming.'

When he had concluded this narration, during which he had made several
pauses, for the convenience of cracking and eating nuts, of which
he seemed to have a pocketful, the blind man pulled a flask from his
pocket, took a draught himself, and offered it to his companion.

'You won't, won't you?' he said, feeling that he pushed it from him.
'Well! Then the gallant gentleman who's lodging with you, will. Hallo,
bully!'

'Death!' said the other, holding him back. 'Will you tell me what I am
to do!'

'Do! Nothing easier. Make a moonlight flitting in two hours' time with
the young gentleman (he's quite ready to go; I have been giving him good
advice as we came along), and get as far from London as you can. Let me
know where you are, and leave the rest to me. She MUST come round; she
can't hold out long; and as to the chances of your being retaken in
the meanwhile, why it wasn't one man who got out of Newgate, but three
hundred. Think of that, for your comfort.'

'We must support life. How?'

'How!' repeated the blind man. 'By eating and drinking. And how get meat
and drink, but by paying for it! Money!' he cried, slapping his pocket.
'Is money the word? Why, the streets have been running money. Devil send
that the sport's not over yet, for these are jolly times; golden, rare,
roaring, scrambling times. Hallo, bully! Hallo! Hallo! Drink, bully,
drink. Where are ye there! Hallo!'

With such vociferations, and with a boisterous manner which bespoke his
perfect abandonment to the general licence and disorder, he groped his
way towards the shed, where Hugh and Barnaby were sitting on the ground.

'Put it about!' he cried, handing his flask to Hugh. 'The kennels run
with wine and gold. Guineas and strong water flow from the very pumps.
About with it, don't spare it!'

Exhausted, unwashed, unshorn, begrimed with smoke and dust, his hair
clotted with blood, his voice quite gone, so that he spoke in whispers;
his skin parched up by fever, his whole body bruised and cut, and beaten
about, Hugh still took the flask, and raised it to his lips. He was in
the act of drinking, when the front of the shed was suddenly darkened,
and Dennis stood before them.

'No offence, no offence,' said that personage in a conciliatory tone, as
Hugh stopped in his draught, and eyed him, with no pleasant look, from
head to foot. 'No offence, brother. Barnaby here too, eh? How are you,
Barnaby? And two other gentlemen! Your humble servant, gentlemen. No
offence to YOU either, I hope. Eh, brothers?'

Notwithstanding that he spoke in this very friendly and confident
manner, he seemed to have considerable hesitation about entering, and
remained outside the roof. He was rather better dressed than usual:
wearing the same suit of threadbare black, it is true, but having round
his neck an unwholesome-looking cravat of a yellowish white; and, on his
hands, great leather gloves, such as a gardener might wear in following
his trade. His shoes were newly greased, and ornamented with a pair of
rusty iron buckles; the packthread at his knees had been renewed; and
where he wanted buttons, he wore pins. Altogether, he had something the
look of a tipstaff, or a bailiff's follower, desperately faded, but who
had a notion of keeping up the appearance of a professional character,
and making the best of the worst means.

'You're very snug here,' said Mr Dennis, pulling out a mouldy
pocket-handkerchief, which looked like a decomposed halter, and wiping
his forehead in a nervous manner.

'Not snug enough to prevent your finding us, it seems,' Hugh answered,
sulkily.

'Why I'll tell you what, brother,' said Dennis, with a friendly smile,
'when you don't want me to know which way you're riding, you must wear
another sort of bells on your horse. Ah! I know the sound of them you
wore last night, and have got quick ears for 'em; that's the truth.
Well, but how are you, brother?'

He had by this time approached, and now ventured to sit down by him.

'How am I?' answered Hugh. 'Where were you yesterday? Where did you go
when you left me in the jail? Why did you leave me? And what did you
mean by rolling your eyes and shaking your fist at me, eh?'

'I shake my fist!--at you, brother!' said Dennis, gently checking Hugh's
uplifted hand, which looked threatening.

'Your stick, then; it's all one.'

'Lord love you, brother, I meant nothing. You don't understand me by
half. I shouldn't wonder now,' he added, in the tone of a desponding and
an injured man, 'but you thought, because I wanted them chaps left in
the prison, that I was a going to desert the banners?'

Hugh told him, with an oath, that he had thought so.

'Well!' said Mr Dennis, mournfully, 'if you an't enough to make a man
mistrust his feller-creeturs, I don't know what is. Desert the banners!
Me! Ned Dennis, as was so christened by his own father!--Is this axe
your'n, brother?'

'Yes, it's mine,' said Hugh, in the same sullen manner as before; 'it
might have hurt you, if you had come in its way once or twice last
night. Put it down.'

'Might have hurt me!' said Mr Dennis, still keeping it in his hand, and
feeling the edge with an air of abstraction. 'Might have hurt me! and me
exerting myself all the time to the wery best advantage. Here's a world!
And you're not a-going to ask me to take a sup out of that 'ere bottle,
eh?'

Hugh passed it towards him. As he raised it to his lips, Barnaby jumped
up, and motioning them to be silent, looked eagerly out.

'What's the matter, Barnaby?' said Dennis, glancing at Hugh and dropping
the flask, but still holding the axe in his hand.

'Hush!' he answered softly. 'What do I see glittering behind the hedge?'

'What!' cried the hangman, raising his voice to its highest pitch, and
laying hold of him and Hugh. 'Not SOLDIERS, surely!'

That moment, the shed was filled with armed men; and a body of horse,
galloping into the field, drew up before it.

'There!' said Dennis, who remained untouched among them when they had
seized their prisoners; 'it's them two young ones, gentlemen, that the
proclamation puts a price on. This other's an escaped felon.--I'm sorry
for it, brother,' he added, in a tone of resignation, addressing himself
to Hugh; 'but you've brought it on yourself; you forced me to do it; you
wouldn't respect the soundest constitootional principles, you know; you
went and wiolated the wery framework of society. I had sooner have
given away a trifle in charity than done this, I would upon my soul.--If
you'll keep fast hold on 'em, gentlemen, I think I can make a shift to
tie 'em better than you can.'

But this operation was postponed for a few moments by a new occurrence.
The blind man, whose ears were quicker than most people's sight, had
been alarmed, before Barnaby, by a rustling in the bushes, under cover
of which the soldiers had advanced. He retreated instantly--had hidden
somewhere for a minute--and probably in his confusion mistaking the
point at which he had emerged, was now seen running across the open
meadow.

An officer cried directly that he had helped to plunder a house last
night. He was loudly called on, to surrender. He ran the harder, and in
a few seconds would have been out of gunshot. The word was given, and
the men fired.

There was a breathless pause and a profound silence, during which all
eyes were fixed upon him. He had been seen to start at the discharge, as
if the report had frightened him. But he neither stopped nor slackened
his pace in the least, and ran on full forty yards further. Then,
without one reel or stagger, or sign of faintness, or quivering of any
limb, he dropped.

Some of them hurried up to where he lay;--the hangman with them.
Everything had passed so quickly, that the smoke had not yet scattered,
but curled slowly off in a little cloud, which seemed like the dead
man's spirit moving solemnly away. There were a few drops of blood upon
the grass--more, when they turned him over--that was all.

'Look here! Look here!' said the hangman, stooping one knee beside the
body, and gazing up with a disconsolate face at the officer and men.
'Here's a pretty sight!'

'Stand out of the way,' replied the officer. 'Serjeant! see what he had
about him.'

The man turned his pockets out upon the grass, and counted, besides some
foreign coins and two rings, five-and-forty guineas in gold. These were
bundled up in a handkerchief and carried away; the body remained there
for the present, but six men and the serjeant were left to take it to
the nearest public-house.

'Now then, if you're going,' said the serjeant, clapping Dennis on the
back, and pointing after the officer who was walking towards the shed.

To which Mr Dennis only replied, 'Don't talk to me!' and then repeated
what he had said before, namely, 'Here's a pretty sight!'

'It's not one that you care for much, I should think,' observed the
serjeant coolly.

'Why, who,' said Mr Dennis rising, 'should care for it, if I don't?'

'Oh! I didn't know you was so tender-hearted,' said the serjeant.
'That's all!'

'Tender-hearted!' echoed Dennis. 'Tender-hearted! Look at this man. Do
you call THIS constitootional? Do you see him shot through and through
instead of being worked off like a Briton? Damme, if I know which
party to side with. You're as bad as the other. What's to become of the
country if the military power's to go a superseding the ciwilians in
this way? Where's this poor feller-creetur's rights as a citizen, that
he didn't have ME in his last moments! I was here. I was willing. I
was ready. These are nice times, brother, to have the dead crying out
against us in this way, and sleep comfortably in our beds arterwards;
wery nice!'

Whether he derived any material consolation from binding the prisoners,
is uncertain; most probably he did. At all events his being summoned to
that work, diverted him, for the time, from these painful reflections,
and gave his thoughts a more congenial occupation.
