'For King Monmouth!'

'Let them have it, lads!' and instantly a storm of musket bullets
whistled and sung about our ears. As the sheet of flame sprang out of
the darkness the maddened, half-broken horses dashed wildly away across
the plain, resisting the efforts of the riders to pull them up. There
are some, indeed, who say that those efforts were not very strong, and
that our troopers, disheartened at the check at the ditch, were not
sorry to show their heels to the enemy. As to my Lord Grey, I can say
truly that I saw him in the dim light among the flying squadrons, doing
all that a brave cavalier could do to bring them to a stand. Away they
went, however, thundering through the ranks of the foot and out over the
moor, leaving their companions to bear the whole brunt of the battle.

'On to your faces, men!' shouted Saxon, in a voice which rose high above
the crash of the musketry and the cries of the wounded. The pikemen and
scythesmen threw themselves down at his command, while the musqueteers
knelt in front of them, loading and firing, with nothing to aim at save
the burning matches of the enemy's pieces, which could be seen twinkling
through the darkness. All along, both to the right and the left, a
rolling fire had broken out, coming in short, quick volleys from the
soldiers, and in a continuous confused rattle from the peasants. On the
further wing our four guns had been brought into play, and we could hear
their dull growling in the distance.

'Sing, brothers, sing!' cried our stout-hearted chaplain, Master Joshua
Pettigrue, bustling backwards and forwards among the prostrate ranks.
'Let us call upon the Lord in our day of trial!' The men raised a loud
hymn of praise, which swelled into a great chorus as it was taken up by
the Taunton burghers upon our right and the miners upon our left. At
the sound the soldiers on the other side raised a fierce huzza, and the
whole air was full of clamour.

Our musqueteers had been brought to the very edge of the Bussex Rhine,
and the Royal troops had also advanced as far as they were able, so that
there were not five pikes'-lengths between the lines. Yet that short
distance was so impassable that, save for the more deadly fire, a
quarter of a mile might have divided us. So near were we that the
burning wads from the enemy's muskets flew in flakes of fire over
our heads, and we felt upon our faces the hot, quick flush of their
discharges. Yet though the air was alive with bullets, the aim of the
soldiers was too high for our kneeling ranks, and very few of the men
were struck. For our part, we did what we could to keep the barrels of
our muskets from inclining upwards. Saxon, Sir Gervas, and I walked
our horses up and down without ceasing, pushing them level with our
sword-blades, and calling on the men to aim steadily and slowly. The
groans and cries from the other side of the ditch showed that some, at
least, of our bullets had not been fired in vain.

'We hold our own in this quarter,' said I to Saxon. 'It seems to me that
their fire slackens.'

'It is their horse that I fear,' he answered. 'They can avoid the ditch,
since they come from the hamlets on the flank. They may be upon us at
any time.'

'Hullo, sir!' shouted Sir Gervas, reining up his steed upon the very
brink of the ditch, and raising his cap in salute to a mounted officer
upon the other side. 'Can you tell me if we have the honour to be
opposed to the foot guards?'

'We are Dumbarton's regiment, sir,' cried the other. 'We shall give ye
good cause to remember having met us.'

'We shall be across presently to make your further acquaintance,' Sir
Gervas answered, and at the same moment rolled, horse and all, into the
ditch, amid a roar of exultation from the soldiers. Half-a-dozen of his
musqueteers sprang instantly, waist deep, into the mud, and dragged our
friend out of danger, but the charger, which had been shot through the
heart, sank without a struggle.

'There is no harm!' cried the Baronet, springing to his feet, 'I would
rather fight on foot like my brave musqueteers.' The men broke out
a-cheering at his words, and the fire on both sides became hotter
than ever. It was a marvel to me, and to many more, to see these brave
peasants with their mouths full of bullets, loading, priming, and firing
as steadily as though they had been at it all their lives, and holding
their own against a veteran regiment which has proved itself in other
fields to be second to none in the army of England.

The grey light of morning was stealing over the moor, and still the
fight was undecided. The fog hung about us in feathery streaks, and
the smoke from our guns drifted across in a dun-coloured cloud, through
which the long lines of red coats upon the other side of the rhine
loomed up like a battalion of giants. My eyes ached and my lips prinkled
with the smack of the powder. On every side of me men were falling fast,
for the increased light had improved the aim of the soldiers. Our good
chaplain, in the very midst of a psalm, had uttered a great shout
of praise and thanksgiving, and so passed on to join those of his
parishioners who were scattered round him upon the moor. Hope-above
Williams and Keeper Milson, under-officers, and among the stoutest
men in the company, were both down, the one dead and the other sorely
wounded, but still ramming down charges, and spitting bullets into his
gun-barrel. The two Stukeleys of Somerton, twins, and lads of great
promise, lay silently with grey faces turned to the grey sky, united in
death as they had been in birth. Everywhere the dead lay thick amid the
living. Yet no man flinched from his place, and Saxon still walked
his horse among them with words of hope and praise, while his stern,
deep-lined face and tall sinewy figure were a very beacon of hope to
the simple rustics. Such of my scythesmen as could handle a musket were
thrown forward into the fighting line, and furnished with the arms and
pouches of those who had fallen.

Ever and anon as the light waxed I could note through the rifts in the
smoke and the fog how the fight was progressing in other parts of the
field. On the right the heath was brown with the Taunton and Frome
men, who, like ourselves, were lying down to avoid the fire. Along the
borders of the Bussex Rhine a deep fringe of their musqueteers were
exchanging murderous volleys, almost muzzle to muzzle, with the
left wing of the same regiment with which we were engaged, which was
supported by a second regiment in broad white facings, which I believe
to have belonged to the Wiltshire Militia. On either bank of the black
trench a thick line of dead, brown on the one side, and scarlet on the
other, served as a screen to their companions, who sheltered themselves
behind them and rested their musket-barrels upon their prostrate bodies.
To the left amongst the withies lay five hundred Mendip and Bagworthy
miners, singing lustily, but so ill-armed that they had scarce one gun
among ten wherewith to reply to the fire which was poured into them.
They could not advance, and they would not retreat, so they sheltered
themselves as best they might, and waited patiently until their leaders
might decide what was to be done. Further down for half a mile or more
the long rolling cloud of smoke, with petulant flashes of flame spurting
out through it, showed that every one of our raw regiments was bearing
its part manfully. The cannon on the left had ceased firing. The Dutch
gunners had left the Islanders to settle their own quarrels, and were
scampering back to Bridgewater, leaving their silent pieces to the Royal
Horse.

The battle was in this state when there rose a cry of 'The King, the
King!' and Monmouth rode through our ranks, bare-headed and wild-eyed,
with Buyse, Wade, and a dozen more beside him. They pulled up within a
spear's-length of me, and Saxon, spurring forward to meet them, raised
his sword to the salute. I could not but mark the contrast between
the calm, grave face of the veteran, composed yet alert, and the half
frantic bearing of the man whom we were compelled to look upon as our
leader.

'How think ye, Colonel Saxon?' he cried wildly. 'How goes the fight? Is
all well with ye? What an error, alas! what an error! Shall we draw off,
eh? How say you?'

'We hold our own here, your Majesty,' Saxon answered. 'Methinks had we
something after the nature of palisados or stockados, after the Swedish
fashion, we might even make it good against the horse.'

'Ah, the horse!' cried the unhappy Monmouth. 'If we get over this, my
Lord Grey shall answer for it. They ran like a flock of sheep. What
leader could do anything with such troops? Oh, lack-a-day, lack-a-day!
Shall we not advance?'

'There is no reason to advance, your Majesty, now that the surprise has
failed,' said Saxon. 'I had sent for carts to bridge over the trench,
according to the plan which is commended in the treatise, "De vallis et
fossis," but they are useless now. We can but fight it out as we are.'

'To throw troops across would be to sacrifice them,' said Wade. 'We have
lost heavily, Colonel Saxon, but I think from the look of yonder bank
that ye have given a good account of the red-coats.'

'Stand firm! For God's sake, stand firm!' cried Monmouth distractedly.
'The horse have fled, and the cannoniers also. Oh! what can I do with
such men? What shall I do? Alas, alas!' He set spurs to his horse and
galloped off down the line, still ringing his hands and uttering his
dismal wailings. Oh, my children, how small, how very small a thing is
death when weighed in the balance with dishonour! Had this man but borne
his fate silently, as did the meanest footman who followed his banners,
how proud and glad would we have been to have discoursed of him, our
princely leader. But let him rest. The fears and agitations and petty
fond emotions, which showed upon him as the breeze shows upon the water,
are all stilled now for many a long year. Let us think of the kind heart
and forget the feeble spirit.

As his escort trooped after him, the great German man-at-arms separated
from them and turned back to us. 'I am weary of trotting up and down
like a lust-ritter at a fair,' said he. 'If I bide with ye I am like to
have my share of any fighting which is going. So, steady, mein Liebchen.
That ball grazed her tail, but she is too old a soldier to wince at
trifles. Hullo, friend, where is your horse?'

'At the bottom of the ditch,' said Sir Gervas, scraping the mud off his
dress with his sword-blade. ''Tis now half-past two,' he continued,
'and we have been at this child's-play for an hour and more. With a line
regiment, too! It is not what I had looked forward to!'

'You shall have something to console you anon,' cried the German, with
his eyes shining. 'Mein Gott! Is it not splendid? Look to it, friend
Saxon, look to it!'

It was no light matter which had so roused the soldier's admiration. Out
of the haze which still lay thick upon our right there twinkled here and
there a bright gleam of silvery light, while a dull, thundering noise
broke upon our ears like that of the surf upon a rocky shore. More and
more frequent came the fitful flashes of steel, louder and yet louder
grew the hoarse gathering tumult, until of a sudden the fog was rent,
and the long lines of the Royal cavalry broke out from it, wave after
wave, rich in scarlet and blue and gold, as grand a sight as ever the
eye rested upon. There was something in the smooth, steady sweep of so
great a body of horsemen which gave the feeling of irresistible power.
Rank after rank, and line after line, with waving standards, tossing
manes, and gleaming steel, they poured onwards, an army in themselves,
with either flank still shrouded in the mist. As they thundered along,
knee to knee and bridle to bridle, there came from them such a gust of
deep-chested oaths with the jangle of harness, the clash of steel, and
the measured beat of multitudinous hoofs, that no man who hath not stood
up against such a whirlwind, with nothing but a seven-foot pike in his
hand, can know how hard it is to face it with a steady lip and a firm
grip.

But wonderful as was the sight, there was, as ye may guess, my
dears, little time for us to gaze upon it. Saxon and the German flung
themselves among the pikemen and did all that men could do to thicken
their array. Sir Gervas and I did the same with the scythesmen, who had
been trained to form a triple front after the German fashion, one rank
kneeling, one stooping, and one standing erect, with weapons advanced.
Close to us the Taunton men had hardened into a dark sullen ring,
bristling with steel, in the centre of which might be seen and heard
their venerable Mayor, his long beard fluttering in the breeze, and his
strident voice clanging over the field. Louder and louder grew the roar
of the horse. 'Steady, my brave lads,' cried Saxon, in trumpet tones.
'Dig the pike-butt into the earth! Best it on the right foot! Give not
an inch! Steady!' A great shout went up from either side, and then the
living wave broke over us.

What hope is there to describe such a scene as that--the crashing of
wood, the sharp gasping cries, the snorting of horses, the jar when the
push of pike met with the sweep of sword! Who can hope to make
another see that of which he himself carries away so vague and dim an
impression? One who has acted in such a scene gathers no general sense
of the whole combat, such as might be gained by a mere onlooker, but
he has stamped for ever upon his mind just the few incidents which may
chance to occur before his own eyes. Thus my memories are confined to a
swirl of smoke with steel caps and fierce, eager faces breaking through
it, with the red gaping nostrils of horses and their pawing fore-feet
as they recoiled from the hedge of steel. I see, too, a young beardless
lad, an officer of dragoons, crawling on hands and knees under the
scythes, and I hear his groan as one of the peasants pinned him to the
ground. I see a bearded, broad-faced trooper riding a grey horse just
outside the fringe of the scythes, seeking for some entrance, and
screaming the while with rage. Small things imprint themselves upon a
man's notice at such a time. I even marked the man's strong white teeth
and pink gums. At the same time I see a white-faced, thin-lipped man
leaning far forward over his horse's neck and driving at me with his
sword point, cursing the while as only a dragoon can curse. All these
images start up as I think of that fierce rally, during which I hacked
and cut and thrust at man and horse without a thought of parry or
of guard. All round rose a fierce babel of shouts and cries, godly
ejaculations from the peasants and oaths from the horsemen, with Saxon's
voice above all imploring his pikemen to stand firm. Then the cloud
of horse-men recoiled, circling off over the plain, and the shout of
triumph from my comrades, and an open snuff-box thrust out in front of
me, proclaimed that we had seen the back of as stout a squadron as ever
followed a kettledrum.

But if we could claim it as a victory, the army in general could scarce
say as much. None but the very pick of the troops could stand against
the flood of heavy horses and steel-clad men. The Frome peasants were
gone, swept utterly from the field. Many had been driven by pure weight
and pressure into the fatal mud which had checked our advance. Many
others, sorely cut and slashed, lay in ghastly heaps all over the ground
which they had held. A few by joining our ranks had saved themselves
from the fate of their companions. Further off the men of Taunton still
stood fast, though in sadly diminished numbers. A long ridge of horses
and cavaliers in front of them showed how stern had been the attack and
how fierce the resistance. On our left the wild miners had been broken
at the first rush, but had fought so savagely, throwing themselves upon
the ground and stabbing upwards at the stomachs of the horses, that they
had at last beaten off the dragoons. The Devonshire militiamen, however,
had been scattered, and shared the fate of the men of Frome. During the
whole of the struggle the foot upon the further bank of the Bussex Rhine
were pouring in a hail of bullets, which our musqueteers, having to
defend themselves against the horse, were unable to reply to.

It needed no great amount of soldierly experience to see that the battle
was lost, and that Monmouth's cause was doomed. It was broad daylight
now, though the sun had not yet risen. Our cavalry was gone, our
ordnance was silent, our line was pierced in many places, and more than
one of our regiments had been destroyed. On the right flank the Horse
Guards Blue, the Tangiers Horse, and two dragoon regiments were forming
up for a fresh attack. On the left the foot-guards had bridged the ditch
and were fighting hand to hand with the men from North Somerset. In
front a steady fire was being poured into us, to which our reply was
feeble and uncertain, for the powder carts had gone astray in the dark,
and many were calling hoarsely for ammunition, while others were loading
with pebbles instead of ball. Add to this that the regiments which still
held their ground had all been badly shaken by the charge, and had lost
a third of their number. Yet the brave clowns sent up cheer after cheer,
and shouted words of encouragement and homely jests to each other,
as though a battle were but some rough game which must as a matter of
course be played out while there was a player left to join in it.

'Is Captain Clarke there?' cried Decimus Saxon, riding up with his
sword-arm flecked with blood. 'Ride over to Sir Stephen Timewell and
tell him to join his men to ours. Apart we shall be broken--together we
may stand another charge.'

Setting spurs to Covenant I rode over to our companions and delivered
the message. Sir Stephen, who had been struck by a petronel bullet,
and wore a crimsoned kerchief bound round his snow-white head, saw
the wisdom of the advice, and moved his townsmen as directed. His
musqueteers being better provided with powder than ours did good service
by keeping down for a time the deadly fire from across the fosse.

'Who would have thought it of him?' cried Sir Stephen, with flashing
eyes, as Buyse and Saxon rode out to meet him. 'What think ye now of our
noble monarch, our champion of the Protestant cause?'

'He is no very great Krieger,' said Buyse. 'Yet perhaps it may be from
want of habit as much as from want of courage.'

'Courage!' cried the old Mayor, in a voice of scorn. 'Look over yonder
and behold your King.' He pointed out over the moor with a finger
which shook as much from anger as from age. There, far away, showing
up against the dark peat-coloured soil, rode a gaily-dressed cavalier,
followed by a knot of attendants, galloping as fast as his horse would
carry him from the field of battle. There was no mistaking the fugitive.
It was the recreant Monmouth.

'Hush!' cried Saxon, as we all gave a cry of horror and execration;
'do not dishearten our brave lads! Cowardice is catching and will run
through an army like the putrid fever.'

'Der Feigherzige!' cried Buyse, grinding his teeth. 'And the brave
country folk! It is too much.'

'Stand to your pikes, men!' roared Saxon, in a voice of thunder, and
we had scarce time to form our square and throw ourselves inside of it,
before the whirlwind of horse was upon us once more. When the Taunton
men had joined us a weak spot had been left in our ranks, and through
this in an instant the Blue Guards smashed their way, pouring through
the opening, and cutting fiercely to right and left. The burghers on the
one side and our own men on the other replied by savage stabs from their
pikes and scythes, which emptied many a saddle, but while the struggle
was at its hottest the King's cannon opened for the first time with a
deafening roar upon the other side of the rhine, and a storm of balls
ploughed their way through our dense ranks, leaving furrows of dead
and wounded behind them. At the same moment a great cry of 'Powder! For
Christ's sake, powder!' arose from the musqueteers whose last charge had
been fired. Again the cannon roared, and again our men were mowed down
as though Death himself with his scythe were amongst us. At last our
ranks were breaking. In the very centre of the pikemen steel caps were
gleaming, and broadswords rising and falling. The whole body was swept
back two hundred paces or more, struggling furiously the while, and
was there mixed with other like bodies which had been dashed out of all
semblance of military order, and yet refused to fly. Men of Devon, of
Dorset, of Wiltshire, and of Somerset, trodden down by horse, slashed by
dragoons, dropping by scores under the rain of bullets, still fought on
with a dogged, desperate courage for a ruined cause and a man who
had deserted them. Everywhere as I glanced around me were set faces,
clenched teeth, yells of rage and defiance, but never a sound of fear
or of submission. Some clambered up upon the cruppers of the riders and
dragged them backwards from their saddles. Others lay upon their faces
and hamstrung the chargers with their scythe-blades, stabbing the
horsemen before they could disengage themselves. Again and again the
guards crashed through them from side to side, and yet the shattered
ranks closed up behind them and continued the long-drawn struggle. So
hopeless was it and so pitiable that I could have found it in my heart
to wish that they would break and fly, were it not that on the broad
moor there was no refuge which they could make for. And all this time,
while they struggled and fought, blackened with powder and parched with
thirst, spilling their blood as though it were water, the man who called
himself their King was spurring over the countryside with a loose rein
and a quaking heart, his thoughts centred upon saving his own neck, come
what might to his gallant followers.

Large numbers of the foot fought to the death, neither giving nor
receiving quarter; but at last, scattered, broken, and without
ammunition, the main body of the peasants dispersed and fled across the
moor, closely followed by the horse. Saxon, Buyse, and I had done all
that we could to rally them once more, and had cut down some of the
foremost of the pursuers, when my eye fell suddenly upon Sir Gervas,
standing hatless with a few of his musqueteers in the midst of a swarm
of dragoons. Spurring our horses we cut a way to his rescue, and laid
our swords about us until we had cleared off his assailants for the
moment.

'Jump up behind me!' I cried. 'We can make good our escape.'

He looked up smiling and shook his head. 'I stay with my company,' said
he.

'Your company!' Saxon cried. 'Why, man, you are mad! Your company is cut
off to the last man.'

'That's what I mean,' he answered, flicking some dirt from his cravat.
'Don't ye mind! Look out for yourselves. Goodbye, Clarke! Present my
compliments to--' The dragoons charged down upon us again. We were all
borne backwards, fighting desperately, and when we could look round the
Baronet was gone for ever. We heard afterwards that the King's troops
found upon the field a body which they mistook for that of Monmouth, on
account of the effeminate grace of the features and the richness of the
attire. No doubt it was that of our undaunted friend, Sir Gervas Jerome,
a name which shall ever be dear to my heart. When, ten years afterwards,
we heard much of the gallantry of the young courtiers of the household
of the French King, and of the sprightly courage with which they fought
against us in the Lowlands at Steinkirk and elsewhere, I have always
thought, from my recollection of Sir Gervas, that I knew what manner of
men they were.

And now it was every man for himself. In no part of the field did
the insurgents continue to resist. The first rays of the sun shining
slantwise across the great dreary plain lit up the long line of the
scarlet battalions, and glittered upon the cruel swords which rose and
fell among the struggling drove of resistless fugitives. The German had
become separated from us in the tumult, and we knew not whether he lived
or was slain, though long afterwards we learned that he made good his
escape, only to be captured with the ill-fated Duke of Monmouth. Grey,
Wade, Ferguson, and others had contrived also to save themselves, while
Stephen Timewell lay in the midst of a stern ring of his hard-faced
burghers, dying as he had lived, a gallant Puritan Englishman. All this
we learned afterwards. At present we rode for our lives across the moor,
followed by a few scattered bodies of horse, who soon abandoned their
pursuit in order to fasten upon some more easy prey.

We were passing a small clump of alder bushes when a loud manly voice
raised in prayer attracted our attention. Pushing aside the branches, we
came upon a man, seated with his back up against a great stone, cutting
at his own arm with a broad-bladed knife, and giving forth the Lord's
prayer the while, without a pause or a quiver in his tone. As he glanced
up from his terrible task we both recognised him as one Hollis, whom I
have mentioned as having been with Cromwell at Dunbar. His arm had
been half severed by a cannon-ball, and he was quietly completing the
separation in order to free himself from the dangling and useless limb.
Even Saxon, used as he was to all the forms and incidents of war, stared
open-eyed and aghast at this strange surgery; but the man, with a short
nod of recognition, went grimly forward with his task, until, even as
we gazed, he separated the last shred which held it, and lay over with
blanched lips which still murmured the prayer. (1) We could do little
to help him, and, indeed, might by our halt attract his pursuers to his
hiding-place; so, throwing him down my flask half filled with water, we
hastened on upon our way. Oh, war, my children, what a terrible thing it
is! How are men cozened and cheated by the rare trappings and prancing
steeds, by the empty terms of honour and of glory, until they forget
in the outward tinsel and show the real ghastly horror of the accursed
thing! Think not of the dazzling squadrons, nor of the spirit-stirring
blare of the trumpets, but think of that lonely man under the shadow of
the alders, and of what he was doing in a Christian age and a Christian
land. Surely I, who have grown grey in harness, and who have seen as
many fields as I have years of my life, should be the last to preach
upon this subject, and yet I can clearly see that, in honesty, men must
either give up war, or else they must confess that the words of the
Redeemer are too lofty for them, and that there is no longer any use in
pretending that His teaching can be reduced to practice. I have seen a
Christian minister blessing a cannon which had just been founded, and
another blessing a war-ship as it glided from the slips. They,
the so-called representatives of Christ, blessed these engines of
destruction which cruel man has devised to destroy and tear his
fellow-worms. What would we say if we read in Holy Writ of our Lord
having blessed the battering-rams and the catapults of the legions?
Would we think that it was in agreement with His teaching? But there!
As long as the heads of the Church wander away so far from the spirit of
its teaching as to live in palaces and drive in carriages, what wonder
if, with such examples before them, the lower clergy overstep at times
the lines laid down by their great Master?

Looking back from the summit of the low hills which lie to the westward
of the moor, we could see the cloud of horse-men streaming over the
bridge of the Parret and into the town of Bridgewater, with the helpless
drove of fugitives still flying in front of them. We had pulled up our
horses, and were looking sadly and silently back at the fatal plain,
when the thud of hoofs fell upon our ears, and, turning round, we found
two horsemen in the dress of the guards riding towards us. They had made
a circuit to cut us off, for they were riding straight for us with drawn
swords and eager gestures.

'More slaughter,' I said wearily. 'Why will they force us to it?'

Saxon glanced keenly from beneath his drooping lids at the approaching
horsemen, and a grim smile wreathed his face in a thousand lines and
wrinkles.

'It is our friend who set the hounds upon our track at Salisbury,' he
said. 'This is a happy meeting. I have a score to settle with him.'

It was, indeed, the hot-headed young comet whom we had met at the outset
of our adventures. Some evil chance had led him to recognise the tall
figure of my companion as we rode from the field, and to follow him, in
the hope of obtaining revenge for the humiliation which he had met with
at his hands. The other was a lance-corporal, a man of square soldierly
build, riding a heavy black horse with a white blaze upon its forehead.

Saxon rode slowly towards the officer, while the trooper and I fixed our
eyes upon each other.

'Well, boy,' I heard my companion say, 'I trust that you have learned to
fence since we met last.'

The young guardsman gave a snarl of rage at the taunt, and an instant
afterwards the clink of their sword-blades showed that they had met.
For my own part I dared not spare a glance upon them, for my opponent
attacked me with such fury that it was all that I could do to keep him
off. No pistol was drawn upon either side. It was an honest contest of
steel against steel. So constant were the corporal's thrusts, now at my
face, now at my body, that I had never an opening for one of the heavy
cuts which might have ended the matter. Our horses spun round each
other, biting and pawing, while we thrust and parried, until at last,
coming together knee to knee, we found ourselves within sword-point, and
grasped each other by the throat. He plucked a dagger from his belt and
struck it into my left arm, but I dealt him a blow with my gauntleted
hand, which smote him off his horse and stretched him speechless upon
the plain. Almost at the same moment the cornet dropped from his horse,
wounded in several places. Saxon sprang from his saddle, and picking the
soldier's dagger from the ground, would have finished them both had I
not jumped down also and restrained him. He flashed round upon me with
so savage a face that I could see that the wild-beast nature within him
was fairly roused.

'What hast thou to do?' he snarled. 'Let go!'

'Nay, nay! Blood enough hath been shed,' said I. 'Let them lie.'

'What mercy would they have had upon us?' he cried passionately,
struggling to get his wrist free. 'They have lost, and must pay
forfeit.'

'Not in cold blood,' I said firmly. 'I shall not abide it.'

'Indeed, your lordship,' he sneered, with the devil peeping out through
his eyes. With a violent wrench he freed himself from my grasp, and
springing back, picked up the sword which he had dropped.

'What then?' I asked, standing on my guard astride of the wounded man.

He stood for a minute or more looking at me from under his heavy-hung
brows, with his whole face writhing with passion. Every instant I
expected that he would fly at me, but at last, with a gulp in his
throat, he sheathed his rapier with a sharp clang, and sprang back into
the saddle.

'We part here,' he said coldly. 'I have twice been on the verge of
slaying you, and the third time might be too much for my patience. You
are no fit companion for a cavalier of fortune. Join the clergy, lad; it
is your vocation.'

'Is this Decimus Saxon who speaks, or is it Will Spotterbridge?' I
asked, remembering his jest concerning his ancestry, but no answering
smile came upon his rugged face. Gathering up his bridle in his left
hand, he shot one last malignant glance at the bleeding officer, and
galloped off along one of the tracks which lead to the southward. I
stood gazing after him, but he never sent so much as a hand-wave back,
riding on with a rigid neck until he vanished in a dip in the moor.

'There goes one friend,' thought I sadly, 'and all forsooth because I
will not stand by and see a helpless man's throat cut. Another friend is
dead on the field. A third, the oldest and dearest of all, lies wounded
at Bridgewater, at the mercy of a brutal soldiery. If I return to my
home I do but bring trouble and danger to those whom I love. Whither
shall I turn?' For some minutes I stood irresolute beside the prostrate
guardsmen, while Covenant strolled slowly along cropping the scanty
herbage, and turning his dark full eyes towards me from time to time, as
though to assure me that one friend at least was steadfast. Northward I
looked at the Polden Hills, southwards, at the Blackdowns, westward
at the long blue range of the Quantocks, and eastward at the broad fen
country; but nowhere could I see any hope of safety. Truth to say, I
felt sick at heart and cared little for the time whether I escaped or
no.

A muttered oath followed by a groan roused me from my meditations.
The corporal was sitting up rubbing his head with a look of stupid
astonishment upon his face, as though he were not very sure either of
where he was or how he came there. The officer, too, had opened his
eyes and shown other signs of returning consciousness. His wounds were
clearly of no very serious nature. There was no danger of their pursuing
me even should they wish to do so, for their horses had trotted off to
join the numerous other riderless steeds who were wandering all over the
moorlands. I mounted, therefore, and rode slowly away, saving my good
charger as much as possible, for the morning's work had already told
somewhat heavily upon him.

There were many scattered bodies of horse riding hither and thither over
the marshes, but I was able to avoid them, and trotted onwards, keeping
to the waste country until I found myself eight or ten miles from the
battlefield. The few cottages and houses which I passed wore deserted,
and many of them bore signs of having been plundered. Not a peasant was
to be seen. The evil fame of Kirke's lambs had chased away all those who
had not actually taken arms. At last, after riding for three hours, I
bethought me that I was far enough from the main line of pursuit to
be free from danger, so I chose out a sheltered spot where a clump of
bushes overhung a little brook. There, seated upon a bank of velvet
moss, I rested my weary limbs, and tried to wash the stains of battle
from my person.

It was only now when I could look quietly at my own attire that it was
brought home to me how terrible the encounter must have been in which
I had been engaged, and how wonderful it was that I had come off so
scatheless. Of the blows which I had struck in the fight I had faint
remembrance, yet they must have been many and terrible, for my sword
edge was as jagged and turned as though I had hacked for an hour at an
iron bar. From head to foot I was splashed and crimsoned with blood,
partly my own, but mostly that of others. My headpiece was dinted with
blows. A petronel bullet had glanced off my front plate, striking it
at an angle, and had left a broad groove across it. Two or three other
cracks and stars showed where the good sheet of proof steel had saved
me. My left arm was stiff and well-nigh powerless from the corporal's
stab, but on stripping off my doublet and examining the place, I found
that though there had been much bleeding the wound was on the outer side
of the bone, and was therefore of no great import. A kerchief dipped in
