
The blood rushed over the pale, meager features of the peddler, until
his face was one glow of fire; but it passed quickly away, as he
replied,--

"I have told you truth. Caesar met me, as he was going on his errand
this morning, and with him I have laid the plan which, if executed as I
wish, will save you--otherwise you are lost; and I again tell you, that
no other power on earth, not even Washington, can save you."

"I submit," said the prisoner, yielding to his earnest manner, and
goaded by the fears that were thus awakened anew.

The peddler beckoned him to be silent, and walking to the door, opened
it, with the stiff, formal air with which he had entered the apartment.

"Friend, let no one enter," he said to the sentinel. "We are about to go
to prayer, and would wish to be alone."

"I don't know that any will wish to interrupt you," returned the
soldier, with a waggish leer of his eye; "but, should they be so
disposed, I have no power to stop them, if they be of the prisoner's
friends. I have my orders, and must mind them, whether the Englishman
goes to heaven, or not."

"Audacious sinner!" said the pretended priest, "have you not the fear of
God before your eyes? I tell you, as you will dread punishment at the
last day, to let none of the idolatrous communion enter, to mingle in
the prayers of the righteous."

"Whew-ew-ew--what a noble commander you'd make for Sergeant Hollister!
You'd preach him dumb in a roll call. Harkee, I'll thank you not to make
such a noise when you hold forth, as to drown our bugles, or you may get
a poor fellow a short horn at his grog, for not turning out to the
evening parade. If you want to be alone, have you no knife to stick over
the door latch, that you must have a troop of horse to guard your
meetinghouse?"

The peddler took the hint, and closed the door immediately, using the
precaution suggested by the dragoon.

"You overact your part," said young Wharton, in constant apprehension of
discovery; "your zeal is too intemperate."

"For a foot soldier and them Eastern militia, it might be," said
Harvey, turning a bag upside down, that Caesar now handed him; "but
these dragoons are fellows that you must brag down. A faint heart,
Captain Wharton, would do but little here; but come, here is a black
shroud for your good-looking countenance," taking, at the same time, a
parchment mask, and fitting it to the face of Henry. "The master and the
man must change places for a season."

"I don't t'ink he look a bit like me," said Caesar, with disgust, as he
surveyed his young master with his new complexion.

"Stop a minute, Caesar," said the peddler, with the lurking drollery
that at times formed part of his manner, "till we get on the wool."

"He worse than ebber now," cried the discontented African. "A t'ink
colored man like a sheep! I nebber see sich a lip, Harvey; he most as
big as a sausage!"

Great pains had been taken in forming the different articles used in the
disguise of Captain Wharton, and when arranged, under the skillful
superintendence of the peddler, they formed together a transformation
that would easily escape detection, from any but an extraordinary
observer.

The mask was stuffed and shaped in such a manner as to preserve the
peculiarities, as well as the color, of the African visage; and the wig
was so artfully formed of black and white wool, as to imitate the
pepper-and-salt color of Caesar's own head, and to exact plaudits from
the black himself, who thought it an excellent counterfeit in everything
but quality.

"There is but one man in the American army who could detect you, Captain
Wharton," said the peddler, surveying his work with satisfaction, "and
he is just now out of our way."

"And who is he?"

"The man who made you prisoner. He would see your white skin through a
plank. But strip, both of you; your clothes must be exchanged from
head to foot."

Caesar, who had received minute instructions from the peddler in their
morning interview, immediately commenced throwing aside his coarse
garments, which the youth took up and prepared to invest himself with;
unable, however, to repress a few signs of loathing.

In the manner of the peddler there was an odd mixture of care and humor;
the former was the result of a perfect knowledge of their danger, and
the means necessary to be used in avoiding it; and the latter proceeded
from the unavoidably ludicrous circumstances before him, acting on an
indifference which sprang from habit, and long familiarity with such
scenes as the present.

"Here, captain," he said, taking up some loose wool, and beginning to
stuff the stockings of Caesar, which were already on the leg of the
prisoner; "some judgment is necessary in shaping this limb. You will
have to display it on horseback; and the Southern dragoons are so used
to the brittle-shins, that should they notice your well-turned calf,
they'd know at once it never belonged to a black."

"Golly!" said Caesar, with a chuckle, that exhibited a mouth open from
ear to ear, "Massa Harry breeches fit."

"Anything but your leg," said the peddler, coolly pursuing the toilet of
Henry. "Slip on the coat, captain, over all. Upon my word, you'd pass
well at a pinkster frolic; and here, Caesar, place this powdered wig
over your curls, and be careful and look out of the window, whenever the
door is open, and on no account speak, or you will betray all."

"I s'pose Harvey t'ink a colored man ain't got a tongue like oder folk,"
grumbled the black, as he took the station assigned to him.

Everything now was arranged for action, and the peddler very
deliberately went over the whole of his injunctions to the two actors in
the scene. The captain he conjured to dispense with his erect military
carriage, and for a season to adopt the humble paces of his father's
negro; and Caesar he enjoined to silence and disguise, so long as he
could possibly maintain them. Thus prepared, he opened the door, and
called aloud to the sentinel, who had retired to the farthest end of the
passage, in order to avoid receiving any of that spiritual comfort,
which he felt was the sole property of another.

"Let the woman of the house be called," said Harvey, in the solemn key
of his assumed character; "and let her come alone. The prisoner is in a
happy train of meditation, and must not be led from his devotions."

Caesar sank his face between his hands; and when the soldier looked into
the apartment, he thought he saw his charge in deep abstraction. Casting
a glance of huge contempt at the divine, he called aloud for the good
woman of the house. She hastened at the summons, with earnest zeal,
entertaining a secret hope that she was to be admitted to the gossip of
a death-bed repentance.

"Sister," said the minister, in the authoritative tones of a master,
"have you in the house `The Christian Criminal's last Moments, or
Thoughts on Eternity, for them who die a violent Death'?"

"I never heard of the book!" said the matron in astonishment.

"'Tis not unlikely; there are many books you have never heard of: it is
impossible for this poor penitent to pass in peace, without the
consolations of that volume. One hour's reading in it is worth an age of
man's preaching."

"Bless me, what a treasure to possess! When was it put out?"

"It was first put out at Geneva in the Greek language, and then
translated at Boston. It is a book, woman, that should be in the hands
of every Christian, especially such as die upon the gallows. Have a
horse prepared instantly for this black, who shall accompany me to my
brother--, and I will send down the volume yet in season. Brother,
compose thy mind; you are now in the narrow path to glory."

Caesar wriggled a little in his chair, but he had sufficient
recollection to conceal his face with hands that were, in their turn,
concealed by gloves. The landlady departed, to comply with this very
reasonable request, and the group of conspirators were again left to
themselves.

"This is well," said the peddler; "but the difficult task is to deceive
the officer who commands the guard--he is lieutenant to Lawton, and has
learned some of the captain's own cunning in these things. Remember,
Captain Wharton," continued he with an air of pride, "that now is the
moment when everything depends on our coolness."

"My fate can be made but little worse than it is at present, my worthy
fellow," said Henry; "but for your sake I will do all that in me lies."

"And wherein can I be more forlorn and persecuted than I now am?" asked
the peddler, with that wild incoherence which often crossed his manner.
"But I have promised _one_ to save you, and to him I have never yet
broken my word."

"And who is he?" said Henry, with awakened interest.

"No one."

The man soon returned, and announced that the horses were at the door.
Harvey gave the captain a glance, and led the way down the stairs, first
desiring the woman to leave the prisoner to himself, in order that he
might digest the wholesome mental food that he had so lately received.

A rumor of the odd character of the priest had spread from the sentinel
at the door to his comrades; so that when Harvey and Wharton reached the
open space before the building, they found a dozen idle dragoons
loitering about with the waggish intention of quizzing the fanatic, and
employed in affected admiration of the steeds.

"A fine horse!" said the leader in this plan of mischief; "but a little
low in flesh. I suppose from hard labor in your calling."

"My calling may be laborsome to both myself and this faithful beast, but
then a day of settling is at hand, that will reward me for all my
outgoings and incomings," said Birch, putting his foot in the stirrup,
and preparing to mount.

"You work for pay, then, as we fight for't?" cried another of the party.

"Even so--is not the laborer worthy of his hire?"

"Come, suppose you give us a little preaching; we have a leisure moment
just now, and there's no telling how much good you might do a set of
reprobates like us, in a few words. Here, mount this horseblock, and
take your text where you please."

The men now gathered in eager delight around the peddler, who, glancing
his eye expressively towards the captain, who had been suffered to
mount, replied,--

"Doubtless, for such is my duty. But, Caesar, you can ride up the road
and deliver the note--the unhappy prisoner will be wanting the book, for
his hours are numbered."

"Aye, aye, go along, Caesar, and get the book," shouted half a dozen
voices, all crowding eagerly around the ideal priest, in anticipation
of a frolic.

The peddler inwardly dreaded, that, in their unceremonious handling of
himself and garments, his hat and wig might be displaced, when detection
would be certain; he was therefore fain to comply with their request.
Ascending the horseblock, after hemming once or twice, and casting
several glances at the captain, who continued immovable, he commenced as
follows:--

"I shall call your attention, my brethren, to that portion of Scripture
which you will find in the second book of Samuel, and which is written
in the following words:--'_And the king lamented over Abner, and said.
Died Abner as a fool dieth? Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put
into fetters: as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou. And
all the people wept again over him_.' Caesar, ride forward, I say, and
obtain the book as directed; thy master is groaning in spirit even now
for the want of it."

"An excellent text!" cried the dragoons. "Go on--go on--let the
snowball stay; he wants to be edified as well as another."

"What are you at there, scoundrels?" cried Lieutenant Mason, as he came
in sight from a walk he had taken to sneer at the evening parade of the
regiment of militia. "Away with every man of you to your quarters, and
let me find that each horse is cleaned and littered, when I come round."
The sound of the officer's voice operated like a charm, and no priest
could desire a more silent congregation, although he might possibly have
wished for one that was more numerous. Mason had not done speaking, when
it was reduced to the image of Caesar only. The peddler took that
opportunity to mount, but he had to preserve the gravity of his
movements, for the remark of the troopers upon the condition of their
beasts was but too just, and a dozen dragoon horses stood saddled and
bridled at hand, ready to receive their riders at a moment's warning.

"Well, have you bitted the poor fellow within," said Mason, "that he can
take his last ride under the curb of divinity, old gentleman?"

"There is evil in thy conversation, profane man," cried the priest,
raising his hands and casting his eyes upwards in holy horror; "so I
will depart from thee unhurt, as Daniel was liberated from the
lions' den."

"Off with you, for a hypocritical, psalm-singing, canting rogue in
disguise," said Mason scornfully. "By the life of Washington! it worries
an honest fellow to see such voracious beasts of prey ravaging a country
for which he sheds his blood. If I had you on a Virginia plantation for
a quarter of an hour, I'd teach you to worm the tobacco with
the turkeys."

"I leave you, and shake the dust off my shoes, that no remnant of this
wicked hole may tarnish the vestments of the godly."

"Start, or I will shake the dust from your jacket, designing knave! A
fellow to be preaching to my men! There's Hollister put the devil in
them by his exhorting; the rascals were getting too conscientious to
strike a blow that would raze the skin. But hold! Whither do you travel,
Master Blackey, in such godly company?"

"He goes," said the minister, hastily speaking for his companion, "to
return with a book of much condolence and virtue to the sinful youth
above, whose soul will speedily become white, even as his outwards are
black and unseemly. Would you deprive a dying man of the consolation of
religion?"

"No, no, poor fellow, his fate is bad enough; a famous good breakfast
his prim body of an aunt gave us. But harkee, Mr. Revelation, if the
youth must die _secundum arlem_, let it be under a gentleman's
directions, and my advice is, that you never trust that skeleton of
yours among us again, or I will take the skin off and leave you naked."

"Out upon thee for a reviler and scoffer of goodness!" said Birch,
moving slowly, and with a due observance of clerical dignity, down the
road, followed by the imaginary Caesar. "But I leave thee, and that
behind me that will prove thy condemnation, and take from thee a hearty
and joyful deliverance."

"Damn him," muttered the trooper. "The fellow rides like a stake, and
his legs stick out like the cocks of his hat. I wish I had him below
these hills, where the law is not over-particular, I'd---"

"Corporal of the guard!--corporal of the guard!" shouted the sentinel in
the passage to the chambers, "corporal of the guard!--corporal of
the guard!"

The subaltern flew up the narrow stairway that led to the room of the
prisoner, and demanded the meaning of the outcry.

The soldier was standing at the open door of the apartment, looking in
with a suspicious eye on the supposed British officer. On observing his
lieutenant, he fell back with habitual respect, and replied, with an air
of puzzled thought,--

"I don't know, sir; but just now the prisoner looked queer. Ever since
the preacher has left him, he don't look as he used to do--but," gazing
intently over the shoulder of his officer, "it must be him, too! There
is the same powdered head, and the darn in the coat, where he was hit
the day we had the last brush with the enemy."

"And then all this noise is occasioned by your doubting whether that
poor gentleman is your prisoner, or not, is it, sirrah? Who the devil do
you think it can be, else?"

"I don't know who else it can be," returned the fellow, sullenly; "but
he has grown thicker and shorter, if it is he; and see for yourself,
sir, he shakes all over, like a man in an ague."

This was but too true. Caesar was an alarmed auditor of this short
conversation, and, from congratulating himself upon the dexterous escape
of his young master, his thoughts were very naturally beginning to dwell
upon the probable consequences to his own person. The pause that
succeeded the last remark of the sentinel, in no degree contributed to
the restoration of his faculties. Lieutenant Mason was busied in
examining with his own eyes the suspected person of the black, and
Caesar was aware of the fact, by stealing a look through a passage under
one of his arms, that he had left expressly for the purpose of
reconnoitering. Captain Lawton would have discovered the fraud
immediately, but Mason was by no means so quick-sighted as his
commander. He therefore turned rather contemptuously to the soldier,
and, speaking in an undertone, observed,

"That anabaptist, methodistical, quaker, psalm-singing rascal has
frightened the boy, with his farrago about flames and brimstone. I'll
step in and cheer him with a little rational conversation."

"I have heard of fear making a man white," said the soldier, drawing
back, and staring as if his eyes would start from their sockets, "but it
has changed the royal captain to a black!"

The truth was, that Caesar, unable to hear what Mason uttered in a low
voice, and having every fear aroused in him by what had already passed,
incautiously removed the wig a little from one of his ears, in order to
hear the better, without in the least remembering that its color might
prove fatal to his disguise. The sentinel had kept his eyes fastened on
his prisoner, and noticed the action. The attention of Mason was
instantly drawn to the same object; and, forgetting all delicacy for a
brother officer in distress, or, in short, forgetting everything but the
censure that might alight on his corps, the lieutenant sprang forward
and seized the terrified African by the throat; for no sooner had Caesar
heard his color named, than he knew his discovery was certain; and at
the first sound of Mason's heavy boot on the floor, he arose from his
seat, and retreated precipitately to a corner of the room.

"Who are you?" cried Mason, dashing the head of the old man against the
angle of the wall at each interrogatory. "Who the devil are you, and
where is the Englishman? Speak, thou thundercloud! Answer me, you
jackdaw, or I'll hang you on the gallows of the spy!"

Caesar continued firm. Neither the threats nor the blows could extract
any reply, until the lieutenant, by a very natural transition in the
attack, sent his heavy boot forward in a direction that brought it in
direct contact with the most sensitive part of the negro--his shin. The
most obdurate heart could not have exacted further patience, and Caesar
instantly gave in. The first words he spoke were--

"Golly! massa, you t'ink I got no feelin'?"

"By heavens!" shouted the lieutenant, "it is the negro himself!
Scoundrel! where is your master, and who was the priest?" While
speaking, he made a movement as if about to renew the attack; but Caesar
cried aloud for mercy, promising to tell all that he knew.

"Who was the priest?" repeated the dragoon, drawing back his formidable
leg, and holding it in threatening suspense. "Harvey, Harvey!" cried
Caesar, dancing from one leg to the other, as he thought each member in
turn might be assailed.

"Harvey who, you black villain?" cried the impatient lieutenant, as he
executed a full measure of vengeance by letting his leg fly.

"Birch!" shrieked Caesar, falling on his knees, the tears rolling in
large drops over his shining face.

"Harvey Birch!" echoed the trooper, hurling the black from him, and
rushing from the room. "To arms! to arms! Fifty guineas for the life of
the peddler spy--give no quarter to either. Mount, mount! to arms!
to horse!"

During the uproar occasioned by the assembling of the dragoons, who all
rushed tumultuously to their horses, Caesar rose from the floor, where
he had been thrown by Mason, and began to examine into his injuries.
Happily for himself, he had alighted on his head, and consequently
sustained no material damage.




CHAPTER XXIX


     Away went Gilpin, neck or nought,
     Away went hat and wig;
     He little dreamt, when he set out,
     Of running such a rig.
                              --COWPER.

The road which it was necessary for the peddler and the English captain
to travel, in order to reach the shelter of the hills, lay, for a half
mile, in full view from the door of the building that had so recently
been the prison of the latter; running for the whole distance over the
rich plain, that spreads to the very foot of the mountains, which here
rise in a nearly perpendicular ascent from their bases; it then turned
short to the right, and was obliged to follow the windings of nature, as
it won its way into the bosom of the Highlands.

To preserve the supposed difference in their stations, Harvey rode a
short distance ahead of his companion, and maintained the sober,
dignified pace, that was suited to his assumed character. On their
right, the regiment of foot, that we have already mentioned, lay, in
tents; and the sentinels who guarded their encampment were to be seen
moving with measured tread under the hills themselves.

The first impulse of Henry was, certainly, to urge the beast he rode to
his greatest speed at once, and by a coup de main not only accomplish
his escape, but relieve himself from the torturing suspense of his
situation. But the forward movement that the youth made for this purpose
was instantly checked by the peddler.

"Hold up!" he cried, dexterously reining his own horse across the path
of the other. "Would you ruin us both? Fall into the place of a black,
following his master. Did you not see their blooded chargers, all
saddled and bridled, standing in the sun before the house? How long do
you think that miserable Dutch horse you are on would hold his speed, if
pursued by the Virginians? Every foot that we can gain, without giving
the alarm, counts a day in our lives. Ride steadily after me, and on no
account look back. They are as subtle as foxes, aye, and as ravenous for
blood as wolves!"

Henry reluctantly restrained his impatience, and followed the direction
of the peddler. His imagination, however, continually alarmed him with
the fancied sounds of pursuit, though Birch, who occasionally looked
back under the pretense of addressing his companion, assured him that
all continued quiet and peaceful.

"But," said Henry, "it will not be possible for Caesar to remain long
undiscovered. Had we not better put our horses to the gallop, and by the
time they can reflect on the cause of our flight, we can reach the
corner of the woods?"

"Ah! you little know them, Captain Wharton," returned the peddler.
"There is a sergeant at this moment looking after us, as if he thought
all was not right; the keen-eyed fellow watches me like a tiger lying in
wait for his leap. When I stood on the horseblock, he half suspected
that something was wrong. Nay, check your beast--we must let the animals
walk a little, for he is laying his hand on the pommel of his saddle. If
he mounts, we are gone. The foot-soldiers could reach us with
their muskets."

"What does he now?" asked Henry, reining his horse to a walk, but at the
same time pressing his heels into the animal's sides, to be in readiness
for a spring.

"He turns from his charger, and looks the other way, now trot on
gently--not so fast--not so fast. Observe the sentinel in the field, a
little ahead of us--he eyes us keenly."

"Never mind the footman," said Henry, impatiently, "he can do nothing
but shoot us--whereas these dragoons may make me a captive again.
Surely, Harvey, there are horse moving down the road behind us. Do you
see nothing particular?"

"Humph!" ejaculated the peddler. "There is something particular, indeed,
to be seen behind the thicket on our left. Turn your head a little, and
you may see and profit by it too."

Henry eagerly seized this permission to look aside, and the blood
curdled to his heart as he observed that they were passing a gallows,
which unquestionably had been erected for his own execution. He turned
his face from the sight, in undisguised horror.

"There is a warning to be prudent," said the peddler, in the sententious
manner that he often adopted.

"It is a terrific sight, indeed!" cried Henry, for a moment veiling his
eyes with his hand, as if to drive a vision from before him.

The peddler moved his body partly around, and spoke with energetic but
gloomy bitterness, "And yet, Captain Wharton, you see it where the
setting sun shines full upon you; the air you breathe is clear, and
fresh from the hills before you. Every step that you take leaves that
hated gallows behind; and every dark hollow, and every shapeless rock in
the mountains, offers you a hiding place from the vengeance of your
enemies. But I have seen the gibbet raised, when no place of refuge
offered. Twice have I been buried in dungeons, where, fettered and in
chains, I have passed nights in torture, looking forward to the
morning's dawn that was to light me to a death of infamy. The sweat has
started from limbs that seemed already drained of their moisture; and if
I ventured to the hole that admitted air through grates of iron to look
out upon the smiles of nature, which God has bestowed for the meanest of
His creatures, the gibbet has glared before my eyes, like an evil
conscience harrowing the soul of a dying man. Four times have I been in
their power, besides this last; but--twice--did I think my hour had
come. It is hard to die at the best, Captain Wharton; but to spend your
last moments alone and unpitied, to know that none near you so much as
think of the fate that is to you the closing of all that is earthly; to
think that, in a few hours, you are to be led from the gloom, which, as
you dwell on what follows, becomes dear to you, to the face of day, and
there to meet all eyes fixed upon you, as if you were a wild beast; and
to lose sight of everything amidst the jeers and scoffs of your fellow
creatures--that, Captain Wharton, that indeed is to die!"

Henry listened in amazement, as his companion uttered this speech with a
vehemence altogether new to him; both seemed to have forgotten their
danger and their disguises.

"What! were you ever so near death as that?"

"Have I not been the hunted beast of these hills for three years past?"
resumed Harvey; "and once they even led me to the foot of the gallows
itself, and I escaped only by an alarm from the royal troops. Had they
been a quarter of an hour later, I must have died. There was I placed in
the midst of unfeeling men, and gaping women and children, as a monster
to be cursed. When I would pray to God, my ears were insulted with the
history of my crimes; and when, in all that multitude, I looked around
for a single face that showed me any pity, I could find none--no, not
even one; all cursed me as a wretch who would sell his country for gold.
The sun was brighter to my eyes than common--but it was the last time I
should see it. The fields were gay and pleasant, and everything seemed
as if this world was a kind of heaven. Oh, how sweet life was to me at
that moment! 'Twas a dreadful hour, Captain Wharton, and such as you
have never known. You have friends to feel for you, but I had none but a
father to mourn my loss, when he might hear of it; but there was no
pity, no consolation near, to soothe my anguish. Everything seemed to
have deserted me. I even thought that HE had forgotten that I lived."

"What! did you feel that God Himself had forgotten you, Harvey?"

"God never forsakes His servants," returned Birch, with reverence, and
exhibiting naturally a devotion that hitherto he had only assumed.

"And whom did you mean by HE?"

The peddler raised himself in his saddle to the stiff and upright
posture that was suited to his outward appearance. The look of fire,
that for a short time glowed on his countenance, disappeared in the
solemn lines of unbending self-abasement, and, speaking as if addressing
a negro, he replied,--

"In heaven there is no distinction of color, my brother, therefore you
have a precious charge within you, that you must hereafter render an
account of;" dropping his voice--"this is the last sentinel near the
road; look not back, as you value your life."

Henry remembered his situation, and instantly assumed the humble
demeanor of his adopted character. The unaccountable energy of the
peddler's manner was soon forgotten in the sense of his own immediate
danger; and with the recollection of his critical situation, returned
all the uneasiness that he had momentarily forgotten.

"What see you, Harvey?" he cried, observing the peddler to gaze towards
the building they had left, with ominous interest. "What see you at
