of trees, and the outline of the blockhouse should have shown up in
front of them.  There was no sign of it.  It was gone!



CHAPTER XXXIV.


THE MEN OF BLOOD.

So unexpected was the blow that even De Lhut, hardened from his
childhood to every shock and danger, stood shaken and dismayed.
Then, with an oath, he ran at the top of his speed towards the line of
figures, his companions following at his heels.

As they drew nearer they could see through the dusk that it was not
indeed a line.  A silent and motionless officer stood out some twenty
paces in front of his silent and motionless men.  Further, they could
see that he wore a very high and singular head-dress.  They were still
rushing forward, breathless with apprehension, when to their horror this
head-dress began to lengthen and broaden, and a great bird flapped
heavily up and dropped down again on the nearest tree-trunk.  Then they
knew that their worst fears were true, and that it was the garrison of
Poitou which stood before them.

They were lashed to low posts with willow withies, some twenty of them,
naked all, and twisted and screwed into every strange shape which an
agonised body could assume.  In front where the buzzard had perched was
the gray-headed commandant, with two cinders thrust into his sockets and
his flesh hanging from him like a beggar's rags.  Behind was the line of
men, each with his legs charred off to the knees, and his body so
haggled and scorched and burst that the willow bands alone seemed to
hold it together.  For a moment the four comrades stared in silent
horror at the dreadful group.  Then each acted as his nature bade him.
De Catinat staggered up against a tree-trunk and leaned his head upon
his arm, deadly sick.  Du Lhut fell down upon his knees and said
something to heaven, with his two clenched hands shaking up at the
darkening sky.  Ephraim Savage examined the priming of his gun with a
tightened lip and a gleaming eye, while Amos Green, without a word,
began to cast round in circles in search of a trail.

But Du Lhut was on his feet again in a moment, and running up and down
like a sleuth-hound, noting a hundred things which even Amos would have
overlooked.  He circled round the bodies again and again.  Then he ran a
little way towards the edge of the woods, and then came back to the
charred ruins of the blockhouse, from some of which a thin reek of smoke
was still rising.

"There is no sign of the women and children," said he.

"My God!  There were women and children?"

"They are keeping the children to burn at their leisure in their
villages.  The women they may torture or may adopt as the humour takes
them.  But what does the old man want?"

"I want you to ask him, Amos," said the seaman, "why we are yawing and
tacking here when we should be cracking on all sail to stand after
them?"

Du Lhut smiled and shook his head.  "Your friend is a brave man," said
he, "if he thinks that with four men we can follow a hundred and fifty."

"Tell him, Amos, that the Lord will bear us up," said the other
excitedly.  "Say that He will be with us against the children of
Jeroboam, and we will cut them off utterly, and they shall be destroyed.
What is the French for 'slay and spare not'?  I had as soon go about
with my jaw braced up, as with folk who cannot understand a plain
language."

But Du Lhut waved aside the seaman's suggestions.  "We must have a care
now," said he, "or we shall lose our own scalps, and be the cause of
those at Sainte Marie losing theirs as well."

"Sainte Marie!" cried De Catinat.  "Is there then danger at Sainte
Marie?"

"Ay, they are in the wolf's mouth now.  This business was done last
night.  The place was stormed by a war-party of a hundred and fifty men.
This morning they left and went north upon foot.  They have been
_cached_ among the woods all day between Poitou and  Sainte Marie."

"Then we have come through them?"

"Yes, we have come through them.  They would keep their camp to-day and
send out scouts.  Brown Moose and his son were among them and struck our
trail.  To-night--"

"To-night they will attack Sainte Marie?"

"It is possible.  And yet with so small a party I should scarce have
thought that they would have dared.  Well, we can but hasten back as
quickly as we can, and give them warning of what is hanging over them."

And so they turned for their weary backward journey, though their minds
were too full to spare a thought upon the leagues which lay behind them
or those which were before.  Old Ephraim, less accustomed to walking
than his younger comrades, was already limping and footsore, but, for
all his age, he was as tough as hickory, and full of endurance.  Du Lhut
took the lead again and they turned their faces once more towards the
north.

The moon was shining brightly in the sky, but it was little aid to the
travellers in the depths of the forest.  Where it had been shadowy in
the daytime it was now so absolutely dark that De Catinat could not see
the tree-trunks against which he brushed.  Here and there they came upon
an open glade bathed in the moonshine, or perhaps a thin shaft of silver
light broke through between the branches, and cast a great white patch
upon the ground, but Du Lhut preferred to avoid these more open spaces,
and to skirt the glades rather than to cross them.  The breeze had
freshened a little, and the whole air was filled with the rustle and
sough of the leaves.  Save for this dull never-ceasing sound all would
have been silent had not the owl hooted sometimes from among the
tree-tops, and the night-jar whirred above their heads.

Dark as it was, Du Lhut walked as swiftly as during the sunlight, and
never hesitated about the track.  His comrades could see, however, that
he was taking them a different way to that which they had gone in the
morning, for twice they caught a sight of the glimmer of the broad river
upon their left, while before they had only seen the streams which
flowed into it.  On the second occasion he pointed to where, on the
farther side, they could see dark shadows flitting over the water.

"Iroquois canoes," he whispered.  "There are ten of them with eight men
in each.  They are another party, and they are also going north."

"How do you know that they are another party?"

"Because we have crossed the trail of the first within the hour."

De Catinat was filled with amazement at this marvellous man who could
hear in his sleep and could detect a trail when the very tree-trunks
were invisible to ordinary eyes.  Du Lhut halted a little to watch the
canoes, and then turned his back to the river, and plunged into the
woods once more.  They had gone a mile or two when suddenly he came to a
dead stop, snuffing at the air like a hound on a scent.

"I smell burning wood," said he.  "There is a fire within a mile of us
in that direction."

"I smell it too," said Amos.  "Let us creep up that way and see their
camp."

"Be careful, then," whispered Du Lhut, "for your lives may hang from a
cracking twig."

They advanced very slowly and cautiously until suddenly the red flare of
a leaping fire twinkled between the distant trunks.  Still slipping
through the brushwood, they worked round until they had found a point
from which they could see without a risk of being seen.

A great blaze of dry logs crackled and spurtled in the centre of a small
clearing.  The ruddy flames roared upwards, and the smoke spread out
above it until it looked like a strange tree with gray foliage and trunk
of fire.  But no living being was in sight and the huge fire roared and
swayed in absolute solitude in the midst of the silent woodlands.
Nearer they crept and nearer, but there was no movement save the rush of
the flames, and no sound but the snapping of the sticks.

"Shall we go up to it?" whispered De Catinat.  The wary old pioneer
shook his head.  "It may be a trap," said he.

"Or an abandoned camp?"

"No, it has not been lit more than an hour."

"Besides, it is far too great for a camp fire," said Amos.

"What do you make of it?" asked Du Lhut.

"A signal."

"Yes, I daresay that you are right.  This light is not a safe neighbour,
so we shall edge away from it and then make a straight line for Sainte
Marie."

The flames were soon but a twinkling point behind them, and at last
vanished behind the trees.  Du Lhut pushed on rapidly until they came to
the edge of a moonlit clearing.  He was about to skirt this, as he had
done others, when suddenly he caught De Catinat by the shoulder and
pushed him down behind a clump of sumach, while Amos did the same with
Ephraim  Savage.

A man was walking down the other side of the open space.  He had just
emerged, and was crossing it diagonally, making in the direction of the
river.  His body was bent double, but as he came out from the shadow of
the trees they could see that he was an Indian brave in full war-paint,
with leggings, loin-cloth, and musket.  Close at his heels came a
second, and then a third and a fourth, on and on until it seemed as if
the wood were full of men, and that the line would never come to an end.
They flitted past like shadows in the moonlight, in absolute silence,
all crouching and running in the same swift stealthy fashion.  Last of
all came a man in the fringed tunic of a hunter, with a cap and feather
upon his head.  He passed across like the others, and they vanished into
the shadows as silently as they had appeared.  It was five minutes
before Du Lhut thought it safe to rise from their shelter.

"By Saint Anne," he whispered, "did you count them?"

"Three hundred and ninety-six," said Amos.

"I made it four hundred and two."

"And you thought that there were only a hundred and fifty of them!"
cried De Catinat.

"Ah, you do not understand.  This is a fresh band.  The others who took
the blockhouse must be over there, for their trail lies between us and
the river."

"They could not be the same," said Amos, "for there was not a fresh
scalp among them."

Du Lhut gave the young hunter a glance of approval.  "On my word," said
he, "I did not know that your woodsmen are as good as they seem to be.
You have eyes, monsieur, and it may please you some day to remember that
Greysolon du Lhut told you so."

Amos felt a flush of pride at these words from a man whose name was
honoured wherever trader or trapper smoked round a camp fire.  He was
about to make some answer when a dreadful cry broke suddenly out of the
woods, a horrible screech, as from some one who was goaded to the very
last pitch of human misery.  Again and again, as they stood with
blanched cheeks in the darkness, they heard that awful cry swelling up
from the night and ringing drearily through the forest.

"They are torturing the women," said Du Lhut.

"Their camp lies over there."

"Can we do nothing to aid them?" cried Amos.

"Ay, ay, lad," said the captain in English.  "We can't pass distress
signals without going out of our course.  Let us put about and run down
yonder."

"In that camp," said Du Lhut slowly, "there are now nearly six hundred
warriors.  We are four.  What you say has no sense.  Unless we warn them
at Sainte Marie, these devils will lay some trap for them.  Their
parties are assembling by land and by water, and there may be a thousand
before daybreak.  Our duty is to push on and give our warning."

"He speaks the truth," said Amos to Ephraim.  "Nay, but you must not go
alone!"  He seized the stout old seaman by the arm and held him by main
force to prevent him from breaking off through the woods.

"There is one thing which we can do to spoil their night's amusement,"
said Du Lhut.  "The woods are as dry as powder, and there has been no
drop of rain for a long three months."

"Yes?"

"And the wind blows straight for their camp, with the river on the other
side of it."

"We should fire the woods!"

"We cannot do better."

In an instant Du Lhut had scraped together a little bundle of dry twigs,
and had heaped them up against a withered beech tree which was as dry as
tinder.  A stroke of flint and steel was enough to start a little
smoulder of flame, which lengthened and spread until it was leaping
along the white strips of hanging bark.  A quarter of a mile farther on
Du Lhut did the same again, and once more beyond that, until at three
different points the forest was in a blaze.  As they hurried onwards
they could hear the dull roaring of the flames behind them, and at last,
as they neared Sainte Marie, they could see, looking back, the long
rolling wave of fire travelling ever westward towards the Richelieu, and
flashing up into great spouts of flame as it licked up a clump of pines
as if it were a bundle of faggots.  Du Lhut chuckled in his silent way
as he looked back at the long orange glare in the sky.

"They will need to swim for it, some of them," said he.  "They have not
canoes to take them all off.  Ah, if I had but two hundred of my
_coureurs-de-bois_ on the river at the farther side of them not one
would have got away."

"They had one who was dressed like a white man," remarked Amos.

"Ay, and the most deadly of the lot.  His father was a Dutch trader, his
mother an Iroquois, and he goes by the name of the Flemish Bastard.  Ah,
I know him well, and I tell you that if they want a king in hell, they
will find one all ready in his wigwam.  By Saint Anne, I have a score to
settle with him, and I may pay it before this business is over.
Well, there are the lights of Sainte Marie shining down below there.
I can understand that sigh of relief, monsieur, for, on my word, after
what we found at Poitou, I was uneasy myself until I should see them."



CHAPTER XXXV.


THE TAPPING OF DEATH.

Day was just breaking as the four comrades entered the gate of the
stockade, but early as it was the _censitaires_ and their families were
all afoot staring at the prodigious fire which raged to the south of
them.  De Catinat burst through the throng and rushed upstairs to Adele,
who had herself flown down to meet him, so that they met in each other's
arms half-way up the great stone staircase with a burst of those little
inarticulate cries which are the true unwritten language of love.
Together, with his arm round her, they ascended to the great hall where
old De la Noue with his son were peering out of the window at the
wonderful spectacle.

"Ah, monsieur," said the old nobleman, with his courtly bow, "I am
indeed rejoiced to see you safe under my roof again, not only for your
own sake, but for that of madame's eyes, which, if she will permit an
old man to say so, are much too pretty to spoil by straining them all
day in the hopes of seeing some one coming out of the forest.  You have
done forty miles, Monsieur de Catinat, and are doubtless hungry and
weary.  When you are yourself again I must claim my revenge in piquet,
for the cards lay against me the other night."

But Du Lhut had entered at De Catinat's heels with his tidings of
disaster.

"You will have another game to play, Monsieur de Sainte-Marie," said he.
"There are six hundred Iroquois in the woods and they are preparing to
attack."

"Tut, tut, we cannot allow our arrangements to be altered by a handful
of savages," said the seigneur.  "I must apologise to you, my dear De
Catinat, that you should be annoyed by such people while you are upon my
estate.  As regards the piquet, I cannot but think that your play from
king and knave is more brilliant than safe.  Now when I played piquet
last with De Lannes of Poitou--"

"De Lannes of Poitou is dead, and all his people," said Du Lhut.
"The blockhouse is a heap of smoking ashes."

The seigneur raised his eyebrows and took a pinch of snuff, tapping the
lid of his little round gold box.

"I always told him that his fort would be taken unless he cleared away
those maple trees which grew up to the very walls.  They are all dead,
you say?"

"Every man."

"And the fort burned?"

"Not a stick was left standing."

"Have you seen these rascals?"

"We saw the trail of a hundred and fifty.  Then there were a hundred in
canoes, and a war-party of four hundred passed us under the Flemish
Bastard.  Their camp is five miles down the river, and there cannot be
less than six hundred."

"You were fortunate in escaping them."

"But they were not so fortunate in escaping us.  We killed Brown Moose
and his son, and we fired the woods so as to drive them out of their
camp."

"Excellent! Excellent!" said the seigneur, clapping gently with his
dainty hands.  "You have done very well indeed, Du Lhut!  You are, I
presume, very tired?"

"I am not often tired.  I am quite ready to do the journey again."

"Then perhaps you would pick a few men and go  back into the woods to
see what these villains are doing?"

"I shall be ready in five minutes."

"Perhaps you would like to go also, Achille?" His son's dark eyes and
Indian face lit up with a  fierce joy.

"Yes, I shall go also," he answered.

"Very good, and we shall make all ready in your absence.  Madame, you
will excuse these little annoyances which mar the pleasure of your
visit.  Next time that you do me the honour to come here I trust that we
shall have cleared all these vermin from my estate.  We have our
advantages.  The Richelieu is a better fish pond, and these forests are
a finer deer preserve than any of which the king can boast.  But on the
other hand we have, as you see, our little troubles.  You will excuse me
now, as there are one or two things which demand my attention.
De Catinat, you are a tried soldier and I should be glad of your advice.
Onega, give me my lace handkerchief and my cane of clouded amber, and
take care of madame until her husband and I return."

It was bright daylight now, and the square enclosure within the stockade
was filled with an anxious crowd who had just learned the evil tidings.
Most of the _censitaires_ were old soldiers and trappers who had served
in many Indian wars, and whose swarthy faces and bold bearing told their
own story.  They were sons of a race which with better fortune or with
worse has burned more powder than any other nation upon earth, and as
they stood in little groups discussing the situation and examining their
arms, a leader could have asked for no more hardy or more war-like
following.  The women, however, pale and breathless, were hurrying in
from the outlying cottages, dragging their children with them, and
bearing over their shoulders the more precious of their household goods.
The confusion, the hurry, the cries of the children, the throwing down
of bundles and the rushing back for more, contrasted sharply with the
quiet and the beauty of the woods which encircled them, all bathed in
the bright morning sunlight.  It was strange to look upon the fairy
loveliness of their many-tinted foliage, and to know that the spirit of
murder and cruelty was roaming unchained behind that lovely screen.

The scouting party under Du Lhut and Achille de la Noue had already
left, and at the order of the seigneur the two gates were now secured
with huge bars of oak fitted into iron staples on either side.
The children were placed in the lower store-room with a few women to
watch them, while the others were told off to attend to the fire
buckets, and to reload the muskets.  The men had been paraded, fifty-two
of them in all, and they were divided into parties now for the defence
of each part of the stockade.  On one side it had been built up to
within a few yards of the river, which not only relieved them from the
defence of that face, but enabled them to get fresh water by throwing a
bucket at the end of a rope from the stockade.  The boats and canoes of
Sainte Marie were drawn up on the bank just under the wall, and were
precious now as offering a last means of escape should all else fail.
The next fort, St. Louis, was but a few leagues up the river, and De la
Noue had already sent a swift messenger to them with news of the danger.
At least it would be a point on which they might retreat should the
worst come to the worst.  And that the worst might come to the worst was
very evident to so experienced a woodsman as Amos Green.  He had left
Ephraim Savage snoring in a deep sleep upon the floor, and was now
walking round the defences with his pipe in his mouth, examining with a
critical eye every detail in connection with them.  The stockade was
very strong, nine feet high and closely built of oak stakes which were
thick enough to turn a bullet.  Half-way up it was loop-holed in long
narrow slits for the fire of the defenders.  But on the other hand the
trees grew up to within a hundred yards of it, and formed a screen for
the attack, while the garrison was so scanty that it could not spare
more than twenty men at the utmost for each face.  Amos knew how daring
and dashing were the Iroquois warriors, how cunning and fertile of
resource, and his face darkened as he thought of the young wife who had
come so far in their safe-keeping, and of the women and children whom he
had seen crowding into the fort.

"Would it not be better if you could send them up the river?" he
suggested to the seigneur.

"I should very gladly do so, monsieur, and perhaps if we are all alive
we may manage it to-night if the weather should be cloudy.  But I cannot
spare the men to guard them, and I cannot send them without a guard when
we know that Iroquois canoes are on the river and their scouts are
swarming on the banks."

"You are right.  It would be madness."

"I have stationed you on this eastern face with your friends and with
fifteen men.  Monsieur de Catinat, will you command the party?"

"Willingly."

"I will take the south face as it seems to be the point of danger.
Du Lhut can take the north, and five men should be enough to watch the
river side."

"Have we food and powder?"

"I have flour and smoked eels enough to see this matter through.
Poor fare, my dear sir, but I daresay you learned in Holland that a cup
of ditch water after a brush may have a better smack than the
blue-sealed Frontiniac which you helped me to finish the other night.
As to powder, we have all our trading stores to draw upon."

"We have not time to clear any of these trees?" asked the soldier.

"Impossible.  They would make better shelter down than up."

"But at least I might clear that patch of brushwood round the birch
sapling which lies between the east face and the edge of the forest.
It is good cover for their skirmishers."

"Yes, that should be fired without delay."

"Nay, I think that I might do better," said Amos.  "We might bait a trap
for them there.  Where is this powder of which you spoke?"

"Theuriet, the major-domo, is giving out powder in the main
store-house."

"Very good." Amos vanished upstairs, and returned with a large linen bag
in his hand.  This he filled with powder, and then, slinging it over his
shoulder, he carried it out to the clump of bushes and placed it at the
base of the sapling, cutting a strip out of the bark immediately above
the spot.  Then with a few leafy branches and fallen leaves he covered
the powder bag very carefully over so that it looked like a little
