should certainly fight on foot, as would Havelok himself, in the old
way. It is not good to trust to the four feet of a horse when one means
business.

We bided where we were, waiting to see what these men did, and soon
beyond them grew the long cloud of dust starred with shifting sparks
that told us that the host of Hodulf was on foot and advancing. It
seemed to me that here we had a good place to meet it, for the land went
down in a long slope that was in our favour, and therefore I set a man
on my horse, and sent him back with all speed to Havelok to bid him
hasten. Our host was not so far behind me, and I could see both from
this hill. We had full time to take position here before Hodulf's army
was in reach.

Now it seemed that the foemen would see what they could also, and they
began to move toward us. It was plain that we should have a small fight
on our own account directly, for I did not mean to let them take our
place. We moved, therefore, toward them, and at that the half-dozen
horsemen made for us at a trot. Then I saw that their leader was Hodulf
himself.

We were in a track that led across the hill, and here on the slope it
was worn deep with ages of traffic between the two towns, and on either
side the heather grew thick and high, so that the horsemen could not get
round us. So Hodulf rode forward to where we barred the way, and told me
to stand aside.

"What next?" I asked. "I may as well bid you go back, for I came here to
stop you."

"Come over to me, and leave this half-crowned kinglet of yours. It shall
be worth your while."

"Hard up for men must you be, Hodulf," said one of my courtmen, laughing.

At that he made a sign to his followers, for they came on us at the
gallop, with levelled spears. We closed up, and hewed the spear points
off, and then dealt with the horses and men who foundered among us, and
they struggled back, leaving three men and four horses in the roadway.
It was bravely done, too, for there were only eight of them, and they
did us no harm beyond a bruise or two. I wished that we had taken or
slain Hodulf, however, for that might have made things easier in the end.

Hodulf got back to his courtmen, and now they came on. At that moment
over the hill behind us rode Havelok and Raven, and saw at once what was
on hand. They had ridden on, but the host was hard after them.

"Send a man to bid the host halt," Havelok said to me, "for we can end
the matter here. Now shall I be hand to hand with Hodulf, even as I
would wish."

I sent a man back as he bade me, and he stayed the host half a mile
beyond the hill, where they were not seen. Hodulf's army was yet two
miles away across the heath, and none had gone back to hasten it.

Now Havelok went forward, holding up his hand in token of parley, and
his enemy rode from his men to meet him.

"There is much between us, Hodulf," Havelok said, "and we have been
together along this road before. Yet for the sake of the men who follow
us it may be that we can make peace."

"That is for me to say," answered Hodulf, "for you have invaded my land,
and are the peace breaker."

"I might mind you of a blood feud between us two," said Havelok, "but
that is not the business of the host. For the sake of the land I will
say this. Give up the throne that you have held for me, and you shall go
hence with what treasure you have gathered, taking your Norsemen with
you. There will be no shame in doing that, for I am able now to hold the
land for myself."

Hodulf laughed a short laugh.

"Fine talk that for the son of Grim the thrall, who drowned Havelok for
me! 'Nidring' should I be if I gave up to you."

"If things must go in that way, we will settle the matter here and now.
Will you that we fight hand to hand while our men look on, or shall we
go back to them and charge? I like the first plan best myself, as I
would avenge my father and sisters, and also that insult of the way in
which we passed this road together twelve years ago."

So said Havelok, and his words fell like ice from his lips, and he was
very still as he spoke, though the red flush crept into his cheek and
his brows lowered.

And Hodulf did not answer at once. He looked at the towering young
warrior before him, and maybe into his mind there crept the thought of
the children whom he had slain, whom this one would avenge. Well he knew
that the true Havelok was speaking with him, though he would not own it,
and branded my father with the name of thrall for the sake of insult to
his foster son.

At last he said, "We will go back to the men, for you have advantage in
that bulk of yours."

"As you will," answered Havelok. "Twelve years ago that was on your side."

He reined round at once, and touched his horse with the spur without
another glance at his enemy. And then we shouted, and Raven spurred
forward with a great oath, for Hodulf plucked his sword from the
scabbard, and with a new treachery in his heart, rode after our brother
and was almost on him. The shout was just in time, for Havelok turned in
his saddle as the blow was falling.

Quick as light, he took it on the shaft of the spear he carried, and
turned it, wheeling his horse short round at the same time. Lindsey
training was there in that horsemanship of his. Hodulf's horse shot past
as the blow failed, and then Raven seemed to be the next man to be dealt
with.

But Havelok called to him to stand aside, for this was his own fight;
and at that Hodulf had his horse in hand again, and was ready to meet
his foe fairly.

And now Havelok had cast aside the spear, and taken the axe from the
saddle bow; and these two met, unshielded, for neither had time to
unsling the round buckler from his shoulder.

It was no long fight, for now Hodulf's men were coming up, and there
need be no more thought of aught but ending one who was ready to smite a
foul blow before us all shamelessly. Havelok spurred his horse, and the
two met and closed for one moment. Then down went the Norseman with
cleft helm, and the old wrongs were avenged, and there was but one king
in the land.

Then Hodulf's men were on Havelok, but not before Raven was at his back,
and over Hodulf there was a struggle in which Havelok was in peril for a
short time before we closed round him. Well fought the courtmen of the
fallen king, and well fought my men, and we bore them back, fighting
every foot of ground, until there were only five of them left, and these
five yielded in all honour, being outnumbered. Yet ours was a smaller
band by half ere there was an end.

It had not lasted long, and still the host of Hodulf was so far off that
they knew not so much as that there was any fighting. Then we went to
the hilltop, and set the banner there, and our line came on and halted
along the crest.

One hardly need say what wonder and rejoicing there was when it was
known how Hodulf had met his end, and Sigurd and other chiefs went to
where we had fought, and looked on him. And one took the helm, which had
round it the stolen crown, and gave it to Havelok.

"Set it on the standard," he said, "for we may need that it shall be
shown presently. As for Hodulf, bear him aside out of the path of the
host, that we may lay him in mound when all is ended."

One cried that he did not deserve honour of any kind, and there were
some who agreed to that openly. I will not say that I was not one of
them, for I had seen the foul play, and heard the insult to Grim, my father.

But Havelok answered gravely, "He has been a king, and I have not heard
that he was altogether a bad one. All else was between him and me, and
that is paid for by his death. Think only of the twelve years in which
you have owned him as lord, and then you will know that it is right that
he should be given the last honours. You had no feud as had I."

Then they did as he bade them, and that gladly, for the words were
king-like, and of good omen for the days to come. I saw Sigurd and the
older chiefs glance at each other, and it was plain that they were well
pleased.

Now the host came on, and it was greater than ours; but when there was
no sign of its leader the march wavered, and at last halted altogether.
Whereon some chiefs rode to speak to us, and Havelok met them with his
leaders. He had to speak first, for they could not well ask where Hodulf
was. The helm was a token that told them much.

"I met your king even now," he said, "and I offered him peace and
honourable return to Norway with his property if he would give up the
throne that is mine by right. Maybe I was wrong in thinking that he
might do so, but he refused. There were certain matters between us two,
besides that of the crown, which needed settling; and therefore, after
that, I challenged him to fight on these points, that being needful
before they were done with. So we fought, and our feud was ended. Hodulf
is dead, and his courtmen would not live after him while there was a
chance of avenging his fall. That was before the host came up. Now I
offer peace and friendship to all, and I can blame none who have held to
the king who has fallen. It was not to be expected that all would own me
at once. Only those Norsemen who came with Hodulf or have come hither
since must leave the land, and they shall go in honour, taking their
goods with them. Their time is up; that is all."

It was a long speech for Havelok, but in it was all that could be said.
Long and closely did the chiefs look at him as he spoke, for none of
them had seen him before. His words were not idly to be set aside
either, and they spoke together in a low voice when he had ended.

"This is a matter for the whole host to settle," one said at last. "We
will speak to them, and give you an answer shortly."

"Take one of Hodulf's courtmen with you, that he may tell all of the
fight," Havelok said: "he need not come back."

I gave the man his arms again, for he might as well have them if he stayed.

"Thanks, lord," he said. "Here is one who will tell the truth for Havelok."

Then our host sat down, and we watched the foemen as the news came to
them. We could not hear, of course, for they were a quarter of a mile
away, but if any tumult rose we should be warned in time. They were very
still, however. There was a long talk, and then one chief came back to us.

"I am going to ask a strange thing," he said, "but the men wish to see
Havelok face to face."

Now Sigurd said that this was too great a risk, and even Withelm agreed
with him.

But Havelok answered, "The men are my own men, but they are not sure
that I am the right king. It is plain that I am like my father, and
therefore it is safe for me to go."

"That," said the chief, "is what we told them, and what they wish to see."

"Then," said Havelok, "I will come. Bid your men sit down, and bid the
horsemen dismount, and I will ride to them with five others. Then can be
no fear on either side."

"That will do well," said Sigurd; and the chief went back, and at once
the host sat down.

Then Havelok rode to them, and with him went we three and Sigurd and Biorn.

There was a murmur of wonder as he came, and it grew louder as he
unhelmed and stayed before them.

And then one shouted, "Skoal to Havelok Gunnarsson!" and at once the
shout was taken up along the line. And that shout grew until the chiefs
joined in it, for it was the voice of the host, which cannot be
gainsaid; and without more delay, one by one the leaders pressed forward
and knelt on one knee to their king, and did homage to him. Only the
Norsemen held back; and presently, when we were talking to the Danish
chiefs in all friendly wise, they drew apart with their men, and formed
up into a close-ranked body that looked dangerous.

"Surely they do not mean to fight!" said Withelm.

Then one of them shouted that he must speak to the king, and that seemed
as if they owned him at least, so Havelok went to them.

"You have heard my terms," he said, "and I think that they are all that
you could ask. What is amiss?"

"Your terms are good enough," the speaker said, "and we know that our
time is come. But we must have surety that the people will not fall on
us, for we are flying, as it were. And we want the body of our king. We
would not have him buried any wise, as if he was a thrall."

"He shall be given to you, and as for the rest none shall harm you.
Moreover, for that saying about your king I will add this: that if there
are any of you who hold lands to which there is no Danish heir, he shall
take service with me if he will, and so keep them."

So there was no man in all the host who was not content; and that was
the second king-making of Havelok, as it were, for now there was no man
against him. The hosts were disbanded then and there, and we went that
day to Hodulf's town, and took possession of all that had been in his
hands. Then was rejoicing over all the land, for a king of the old line
was on the throne once more, and his way was full of promise.


    CHAPTER XXII. KING ALSI'S WELCOME.

Now there was one thing that was in the minds of all of us, and that was
the winning of Goldberga's kingdom for her; but that was a matter which
was not to be thought of yet for a long while. Two years were we in
Denmark, and well loved was Havelok by all, whether one speaks of the
other kings who owned him as Gunnar's heir at once, or the people over
whom he and Goldberga reigned. But we sent messages to Arngeir and to
Ragnar to say that all was well, and we heard from them in time how Alsi
feared what was to come, and had rather make friends with the Anglians
than offend them. So he had not given out anything that was against the
princess, but had told all how she had wedded the heir of Denmark, and
that she had given up her land to himself, and followed her husband
across the sea. It was not hard for him to feign gladness in her
well-doing; and Berthun counselled Ragnar to let things be thus, and yet
prepare for her return.

In my own heart was the wish to go back to England always, for there was
my home; and I found that it was the same with my brothers, for there is
that in the English land which makes all who touch it love it. And there
was the mound that held my father, and there were the folk among whom we
had been brought up in the town that we had made; and I longed to see
once more the green marshes and the grey wolds of Lindsey, and the brown
waves of the wide Humber rolling shorewards, line after line. I tired of
the heaths and forests and peat mosses of this land of my birth. And if
that was so to me, it was a yet deeper longing in the hearts of the
brothers who hardly remembered this place; and after a while we spoke of
it more often.

I do not know if we said much to others, but at last the younger chiefs
began to wonder when the promised time when they should cross the
"swan's path" for Goldberga should come. Maybe they tired of the long
peace, as a Dane will. But when that talk began, Withelm knew that
things were ripe, and he told Havelok. That was in the third spring of
Havelok's kingship, when it grew near to the time when men fit out their
ships.

"This is what I have looked for," he said; "and now we will delay no
longer, for here am I king indeed, and there is none who will rise
against me. Wonderful it is that men have hailed me thus. And now I will
tell you, brother, that I long for England. If I might take my friends
with me, I do not think that I should care if I never came here again.
It is not my home; and here my Goldberga is not altogether happy, well
as the folk love her."

Thereafter he called a great Thing[12] of all the
freemen in the land, and set the matter plainly before them, asking if
they minded the words he spoke when they crowned the queen, and if they
were still ready to follow him to the winning of her crown beyond the sea.

There was no doubt what the answer would be; and it was said at once
that the sooner the ships were got ready the better.

"Then," said Havelok, "who shall mind this land while I am away? It may
be long ere I come back."

Now there was a cry that I should be king while Havelok was away,
forsooth! and a poor hand I should have made at the business. But I said
that it was foolishness, and that, moreover, I would go with Havelok.
And when they said that this was modesty on my part, I answered that I
had seen several kings, and that there was but one who was worth
thinking of, and that was my brother; therefore, I would go on serving
him where I could see him.

"This is what Grim, my father, said to me long ago," I said--"I was to
mind the old saying, 'Bare is back without brother behind it;' and,
therefore, I must see Havelok safe through this."

"Why, brother," says Havelok, laughing, "if that saying must be
remembered--and I at least know it is true--it would make for
leaving you behind me here to see all fair when my back was turned."

Then he saw that I was grieved, for I thought for the moment that he
would bid me to stay, and so I should have to do so; but he took my part.

"I cannot be without my brothers," he said. "If I had any word in the
matter--which mainly concerns the folk to be ruled, as it seems to me
(for I do not know of any man who would not uphold me)--I should say
that Sigurd the jarl was the right man, for all know that he is a good
ruler, nor will it be any new thing to submit to him."

