There was a pathos mingled with Rienzi's words which touched the milder
brother of Montreal. He bowed in silence. Rienzi surveyed him wistfully,
and sighed. Then, changing the conversation, he spoke of their intended
siege of Palestrina, and shortly afterwards retired to rest.

Left alone, the brothers regarded each other for some moments in
silence. "Brettone," said Arimbaldo at length, in a whispered voice, "my
heart misgives me. I like not Walter's ambitious schemes. With our
own countrymen we are frank and loyal, why play the traitor with this
high-souled Roman?" (The anonymous biographer of Rienzi makes the
following just remark: "Sono li tedeschi, come discendon de la Alemagna,
semplici, puri, senza fraude, come si allocano tra' taliani, diventano
mastri coduti, viziosi, che sentono ogni malizia."--"Vita di Cola di
Rienzi", lib. ii. cap. 16.)

"Tush!" said Brettone. "Our brother's hand of iron alone can sway this
turbulent people; and if Rienzi be betrayed, so also are his enemies,
the Barons. No more of this! I have tidings from Montreal; he will be in
Rome in a few days."

"And then?"

"Rienzi, weakened by the Barons (for he must not conquer)--the Barons,
weakened by Rienzi--our Northmen seize the Capitol, and the soldiery,
now scattered throughout Italy, will fly to the standard of the Great
Captain. Montreal must be first Podesta, then King, of Rome."

Arimbaldo moved restlessly in his seat, and the brethren conferred no
more on their projects.

The situation of Rienzi was precisely that which tends the most to
sour and to harden the fairest nature. With an intellect capable of the
grandest designs, a heart that beat with the loftiest emotions, elevated
to the sunny pinnacle of power and surrounded by loud-tongued adulators,
he knew not among men a single breast in which he could confide. He was
as one on a steep ascent, whose footing crumbles, while every bough at
which he grasps seems to rot at his touch. He found the people more
than ever eloquent in his favour, but while they shouted raptures as he
passed, not a man was capable of making a sacrifice for him! The
liberty of a state is never achieved by a single individual; if not the
people--if not the greater number--a zealous and fervent minority, at
least must go hand in hand with him. Rome demanded sacrifices in all who
sought the Roman regeneration--sacrifices of time, ease, and money. The
crowd followed the procession of the Senator, but not a single Roman
devoted his life, unpaid, to his standard; not a single coin was
subscribed in the defence of freedom. Against him were arrayed the most
powerful and the most ferocious Barons of Italy; each of whom could
maintain, at his own cost, a little army of practised warriors. With
Rienzi were traders and artificers, who were willing to enjoy the fruits
of liberty, but not to labour at the soil; who demanded, in return for
empty shouts, peace and riches; and who expected that one man was to
effect in a day what would be cheaply purchased by the struggle of a
generation. All their dark and rude notion of a reformed state was to
live unbutchered by the Barons and untaxed by their governors. Rome, I
say, gave to her Senator not a free arm, nor a voluntary florin. (This
plain fact is thoroughly borne out by every authority.) Well aware of
the danger which surrounds the ruler who defends his state by foreign
swords, the fondest wish, and the most visionary dream of Rienzi, was to
revive amongst the Romans, in their first enthusiasm at his return, an
organised and voluntary force, who, in protecting him, would protect
themselves:--not, as before, in his first power, a nominal force of
twenty thousand men, who at any hour might yield (as they did yield) to
one hundred and fifty; but a regular, well disciplined, and trusty body,
numerous enough to resist aggression, not numerous enough to become
themselves the aggressors.

Hitherto all his private endeavours, his public exhortations, had
failed; the crowd listened--shouted--saw him quit the city to meet their
tyrants, and returned to their shops, saying to each other, "What a
great man!"

The character of Rienzi has chiefly received for its judges men of the
closet, who speculate upon human beings as if they were machines; who
gauge the great, not by their merit, but their success; and who have
censured or sneered at the Tribune, where they should have condemned the
People! Had but one-half the spirit been found in Rome which ran
through a single vein of Cola di Rienzi, the august Republic, if not
the majestic empire, of Rome, might be existing now! Turning from the
people, the Senator saw his rude and savage troops, accustomed to the
licence of a tyrant's camp, and under commanders in whom it was ruin
really to confide--whom it was equal ruin openly to distrust. Hemmed
in on every side by dangers, his character daily grew more restless,
vigilant, and stern; and still, with all the aims of the patriot, he
felt all the curses of the tyrant. Without the rough and hardening
career which, through a life of warfare, had brought Cromwell to a
similar power--with more of grace and intellectual softness in his
composition, he resembled that yet greater man in some points of
character--in his religious enthusiasm; his rigid justice, often
forced by circumstance into severity, but never wantonly cruel or
blood-thirsty; in his singular pride of country; and his mysterious
command over the minds of others. But he resembled the giant Englishman
far more in circumstance than original nature, and that circumstance
assimilated their characters at the close of their several careers.
Like Cromwell, beset by secret or open foes, the assassin's dagger ever
gleamed before his eyes; and his stout heart, unawed by real, trembled
at imagined, terrors. The countenance changing suddenly from red to
white--the bloodshot, restless eye, belying the composed majesty of
mien--the muttering lips--the broken slumber--the secret corselet; these
to both were the rewards of Power!

The elasticity of youth had left the Tribune! His frame, which had
endured so many shocks, had contracted a painful disease in the dungeon
at Avignon ("Dicea che ne la prigione era stato ascarmato." "Vita di
Cola di Rienzi", lib. ii. cap. 18.)--his high soul still supported him,
but the nerves gave way. Tears came readily into his eyes, and often,
like Cromwell, he was thought to weep from hypocrisy, when in truth
it was the hysteric of over-wrought and irritable emotion. In all his
former life singularly temperate, ("Solea prima esser sobrio, temperato,
astinente, or a e diventato distemperatissimo bevitore," &c.--Ibid.) he
now fled from his goading thoughts to the beguiling excitement of wine.
He drank deep, though its effects were never visible upon him except
in a freer and wilder mood, and the indulgence of that racy humour,
half-mirthful, half-bitter, for which his younger day had been
distinguished. Now the mirth had more loudness, but the bitterness more
gall.

Such were the characteristics of Rienzi at his return to power--made
more apparent with every day. Nina he still loved with the same
tenderness, and, if possible, she adored him more than ever: but, the
zest and freshness of triumphant ambition gone, somehow or other,
their intercourse together had not its old charm. Formerly they talked
constantly of the future--of the bright days in store for them. Now,
with a sharp and uneasy pang, Rienzi turned from all thought of that
"gay tomorrow." There was no "gay tomorrow" for him! Dark and thorny
as was the present hour, all beyond seemed yet less cheering and
more ominous. Still he had some moments, brief but brilliant, when,
forgetting the iron race amongst whom he was thrown, he plunged into
scholastic reveries of the worshipped Past, and half-fancied that he
was of a People worthy of his genius and his devotion. Like most men who
have been preserved through great dangers, he continued with increasing
fondness to nourish a credulous belief in the grandeur of his own
destiny. He could not imagine that he had been so delivered, and for no
end! He was the Elected, and therefore the Instrument, of Heaven.
And thus, that Bible which in his loneliness, his wanderings, and his
prison, had been his solace and support, was more than ever needed in
his greatness.

It was another cause of sorrow and chagrin to one who, amidst such
circumstances of public danger, required so peculiarly the support and
sympathy of private friends,--that he found he had incurred amongst his
old coadjutors the common penalty of absence. A few were dead; others,
wearied with the storms of public life, and chilled in their ardour
by the turbulent revolutions to which, in every effort for her
amelioration, Rome had been subjected, had retired,--some altogether
from the city, some from all participation in political affairs. In his
halls, the Tribune-Senator was surrounded by unfamiliar faces, and a new
generation. Of the heads of the popular party, most were animated by a
stern dislike to the Pontifical domination, and looked with suspicion
and repugnance upon one who, if he governed for the People, had been
trusted and honoured by the Pope. Rienzi was not a man to forget former
friends, however lowly, and had already found time to seek an interview
with Cecco del Vecchio. But that stern Republican had received him with
coldness. His foreign mercenaries, and his title of Senator, were things
that the artisan could not digest. With his usual bluntness, he had said
so to Rienzi.

"As for the last," answered the Tribune, affably, "names do not alter
natures. When I forget that to be delegate to the Pontiff is to be the
guardian of his flock, forsake me. As for the first, let me but see five
hundred Romans sworn to stand armed day and night for the defence of
Rome, and I dismiss the Northmen."

Cecco del Vecchio was unsoftened; honest, but uneducated--impracticable,
and by nature a malcontent, he felt as if he were no longer necessary
to the Senator, and this offended his pride. Strange as it may seem, the
sullen artisan bore, too, a secret grudge against Rienzi, for not
having seen and selected him from a crowd of thousands on the day of his
triumphal entry. Such are the small offences which produce deep danger
to the great!

The artisans still held their meetings, and Cecco del Vecchio's voice
was heard loud in grumbling forebodings. But what wounded Rienzi yet
more than the alienation of the rest, was the confused and altered
manner of his old friend and familiar, Pandulfo di Guido. Missing
that popular citizen among those who daily offered their homage at the
Capitol, he had sent for him, and sought in vain to revive their ancient
intimacy. Pandulfo affected great respect, but not all the condescension
of the Senator could conquer his distance and his restraint. In fact,
Pandulfo had learned to form ambitious projects of his own; and but for
the return of Rienzi, Pandulfo di Guido felt that he might now, with
greater safety, and indeed with some connivance from the Barons, have
been the Tribune of the People. The facility to rise into popular
eminence which a disordered and corrupt state, unblest by a regular
constitution, offers to ambition, breeds the jealousy and the rivalship
which destroy union, and rot away the ties of party.

Such was the situation of Rienzi, and yet, wonderful to say, he seemed
to be adored by the multitude; and law and liberty, life and death, were
in his hands!

Of all those who attended his person, Angelo Villani was the most
favoured; that youth who had accompanied Rienzi in his long exile,
had also, at the wish of Nina, attended him from Avignon, through his
sojourn in the camp of Albornoz. His zeal, intelligence, and frank and
evident affection, blinded the Senator to the faults of his character,
and established him more and more in the gratitude of Rienzi. He loved
to feel that one faithful heart beat near him, and the page, raised to
the rank of his chamberlain, always attended his person, and slept in
his ante-chamber.

Retiring that night at Tivoli, to the apartment prepared for him, the
Senator sat down by the open casement, through which were seen, waving
in the starlight, the dark pines that crowned the hills, while the
stillness of the hour gave to his ear the dash of the waterfalls heard
above the regular and measured tread of the sentinels below. Leaning his
cheek upon his hand, Rienzi long surrendered himself to gloomy thought,
and, when he looked up, he saw the bright blue eye of Villani fixed in
anxious sympathy on his countenance.

"Is my Lord unwell?" asked the young chamberlain, hesitating.

"Not so, my Angelo; but somewhat sick at heart. Methinks, for a
September night, the air is chill!"

"Angelo," resumed Rienzi, who had already acquired that uneasy curiosity
which belongs to an uncertain power,--"Angelo, bring me hither yon
writing implements; hast thou heard aught what the men say of our
probable success against Palestrina?"

"Would my Lord wish to learn all their gossip, whether it please or
not?" answered Villani.

"If I studied only to hear what pleased me, Angelo, I should never have
returned to Rome."

"Why, then, I heard a constable of the Northmen say, meaningly, that the
place will not be carried."

"Humph! And what said the captains of my Roman Legion?"

"My Lord, I have heard it whispered that they fear defeat less than they
do the revenge of the Barons, if they are successful."

"And with such tools the living race of Europe and misjudging posterity
will deem that the workman is to shape out the Ideal and the Perfect!
Bring me yon Bible."

As Angelo reverently brought to Rienzi the sacred book, he said,

"Just before I left my companions below, there was a rumour that the
Lord Adrian Colonna had been imprisoned by his kinsman."

"I too heard, and I believe, as much," returned Rienzi: "these Barons
would gibbet their own children in irons, if there were any chance of
the shackles growing rusty for want of prey. But the wicked shall be
brought low, and their strong places shall be made desolate."

"I would, my Lord," said Villani, "that our Northmen had other captains
than these Provencals."

"Why?" asked Rienzi, abruptly.

"Have the creatures of the Captain of the Grand Company ever held faith
with any man whom it suited the avarice or the ambition of Montreal to
betray? Was he not, a few months ago, the right arm of John di Vico,
and did he not sell his services to John di Vico's enemy, the Cardinal
Albornoz? These warriors barter men as cattle."

"Thou describest Montreal rightly: a dangerous and an awful man. But
methinks his brothers are of a duller and meaner kind; they dare not
the crimes of the Robber Captain. Howbeit, Angelo, thou hast touched a
string that will make discord with sleep tonight. Fair youth, thy young
eyes have need of slumber; withdraw, and when thou hearest men envy
Rienzi, think that--"

"God never made Genius to be envied!" interrupted Villani, with an
energy that overcame his respect. "We envy not the sun, but rather the
valleys that ripen beneath his beams."

"Verily, if I be the sun," said Rienzi, with a bitter and melancholy
smile, "I long for night,--and come it will, to the human as to the
celestial Pilgrim!--Thank Heaven, at least, that our ambition cannot
make us immortal!"



Chapter 9.V. The Biter Bit.

The next morning, when Rienzi descended to the room where his captains
awaited him, his quick eye perceived that a cloud still lowered upon the
brow of Messere Brettone. Arimbaldo, sheltered by the recess of the rude
casement, shunned his eye.

"A fair morning, gentles," said Rienzi; "the Sun laughs upon our
enterprise. I have messengers from Rome betimes--fresh troops will join
us ere noon."

"I am glad, Senator," answered Brettone, "that you have tidings which
will counteract the ill of those I have to narrate to thee. The soldiers
murmur loudly--their pay is due to them; and, I fear me, that without
money they will not march to Palestrina."

"As they will," returned Rienzi, carelessly. "It is but a few days since
they entered Rome; pay did they receive in advance--if they demand
more, the Colonna and Orsini may outbid me. Draw off your soldiers, Sir
Knight, and farewell."

Brettone's countenance fell--it was his object to get Rienzi more and
more in his power, and he wished not to suffer him to gain that strength
which would accrue to him from the fall of Palestrina: the indifference
of the Senator foiled and entrapped him in his own net.

"That must not be," said the brother of Montreal, after a confused
silence; "we cannot leave you thus to your enemies--the soldiers, it is
true, demand pay--"

"And should have it," said Rienzi. "I know these mercenaries--it is
ever with them, mutiny or money. I will throw myself on my Romans,
and triumph--or fall, if so Heaven decrees, with them. Acquaint your
constables with my resolve."

Scarce were these words spoken, ere, as previously concerted with
Brettone, the chief constable of the mercenaries appeared at the door.
"Senator," said he, with a rough semblance of aspect, "your orders to
march have reached me, I have sought to marshal my men--but--"

"I know what thou wouldst say, friend," interrupted Rienzi, waving
his hand: "Messere Brettone will give you my reply. Another time, Sir
Captain, more ceremony with the Senator of Rome--you may withdraw."

The unforeseen dignity of Rienzi rebuked and abashed the constable; he
looked at Brettone, who motioned him to depart. He closed the door and
withdrew.

"What is to be done?" said Brettone.

"Sir Knight," replied Rienzi, gravely, "let us understand each other.
Would you serve me or not? If the first, you are not my equal, but
subordinate--and you must obey and not dictate; if the last, my debt to
you shall be discharged, and the world is wide enough for both."

"We have declared allegiance to you," answered Brettone, "and it shall
be given."

"One caution before I re-accept your fealty," replied Rienzi, very
slowly. "For an open foe, I have my sword--for a traitor, mark me, Rome
has the axe; of the first I have no fear; for the last, no mercy."

"These are not words that should pass between friends," said Brettone,
turning pale with suppressed emotion.

"Friends!--ye are my friends, then!--your hands! Friends, so ye
are!--and shall prove it! Dear Arimbaldo, thou, like myself, art
book-learned,--a clerkly soldier. Dost thou remember how in the Roman
history it is told that the Treasury lacked money for the soldiers? The
Consul convened the Nobles. 'Ye,' said he, 'that have the offices and
dignity should be the first to pay for them.' Ye heed me, my friends;
the nobles took the hint, they found the money--the army was paid. This
example is not lost on you. I have made you the leaders of my force,
Rome hath showered her honours on you. Your generosity shall commence
the example which the Romans shall thus learn of strangers. Ye gaze at
me, my friends! I read your noble souls--and thank ye beforehand. Ye
have the dignity and the office; ye have also the wealth!--pay the
hirelings, pay them!" (See the anonymous biographer, lib. ii. cap. 19.)

Had a thunderbolt fallen at the feet of Brettone, he could not have been
more astounded than at this simple suggestion of Rienzi's. He lifted
his eyes to the Senator's face, and saw there that smile which he had
already, bold as he was, learned to dread. He felt himself fairly
sunk in the pit he had digged for another. There was that in the
Senator-Tribune's brow that told him to refuse was to declare open war,
and the moment was not ripe for that.

"Ye accede," said Rienzi; "ye have done well."

The Senator clapped his hands--his guard appeared.

"Summon the head constables of the soldiery."

The brothers still remained dumb.

The constables entered.

"My friends," said Rienzi, "Messere Brettone and Messere Arimbaldo have
my directions to divide amongst your force a thousand florins. This
evening we encamp beneath Palestrina."

The constables withdrew in visible surprise. Rienzi gazed a moment on
the brothers, chuckling within himself--for his sarcastic humour enjoyed
his triumph. "You lament not your devotion, my friends!"

"No," said Brettone, rousing himself; "the sum but trivially swells our
debt."

"Frankly said--your hands once more!--the good people of Tivoli expect
me in the Piazza--they require some admonitions. Adieu till noon."

When the door closed on Rienzi, Brettone struck the handle of his sword
fiercely--"The Roman laughs at us," said he. "But let Walter de Montreal
once appear in Rome, and the proud jester shall pay us dearly for this."

"Hush!" said Arimbaldo, "walls have ears, and that imp of Satan, young
Villani, seems to me ever at our heels!"

"A thousand florins! I trust his heart hath as many drops," growled the
chafed Brettone, unheeding his brother.

The soldiers were paid--the army marched--the eloquence of the Senator
had augmented his force by volunteers from Tivoli, and wild and
half armed peasantry joined his standard from the Campagna and the
neighbouring mountains.

Palestrina was besieged: Rienzi continued dexterously to watch the
brothers of Montreal. Under pretext of imparting to the Italian
volunteers the advantage of their military science, he separated them
from their mercenaries, and assigned to them the command of the less
disciplined Italians, with whom, he believed, they could not venture
to tamper. He himself assumed the lead of the Northmen--and, despite
themselves, they were fascinated by his artful, yet dignified
affability, and the personal courage he displayed in some sallies of the
besieged Barons. But as the huntsmen upon all the subtlest windings of
their prey,--so pressed the relentless and speeding Fates upon Cola di
Rienzi!



Chapter 9.VI. The Events Gather to the End.

While this the state of the camp of the besiegers, Luca di Savelli and
Stefanello Colonna were closeted with a stranger, who had privately
entered Palestrina on the night before the Romans pitched their tents
beneath its walls. This visitor, who might have somewhat passed his
fortieth year, yet retained, scarcely diminished, the uncommon beauty of
form and countenance for which his youth had been remarkable. But it was
no longer that character of beauty which has been described in his first
introduction to the reader. It was no longer the almost woman delicacy
of feature and complexion, or the highborn polish, and graceful suavity
of manner, which distinguished Walter de Montreal: a life of vicissitude
and war had at length done its work. His bearing was now abrupt and
imperious, as that of one accustomed to rule wild spirits, and he had
exchanged the grace of persuasion for the sternness of command. His
athletic form had grown more spare and sinewy, and instead of the brow
half shaded by fair and clustering curls, his forehead, though yet
but slightly wrinkled, was completely bald at the temples; and by its
unwonted height, increased the dignity and manliness of his aspect. The
bloom of his complexion was faded, less by outward exposure than inward
thought, into a bronzed and settled paleness; and his features seemed
more marked and prominent, as the flesh had somewhat sunk from the
contour of the cheek. Yet the change suited the change of age and
circumstance; and if the Provencal now less realised the idea of
the brave and fair knight-errant, he but looked the more what the
knight-errant had become--the sagacious counsellor and the mighty
leader.

"You must be aware," said Montreal, continuing a discourse which
appeared to have made great impression on his companions, "that in this
contest between yourselves and the Senator, I alone hold the balance.
Rienzi is utterly in my power--my brothers, the leaders of his army;
myself, his creditor. It rests with me to secure him on the throne, or
to send him to the scaffold. I have but to give the order, and the Grand
Company enter Rome; but without their agency, methinks if you keep faith
with me, our purpose can be effected."

"In the meanwhile, Palestrina is besieged by your brothers!" said
Stefanello, sharply.

"But they have my orders to waste their time before its walls. Do you
not see, that by this very siege, fruitless, as, if I will, it shall be,
Rienzi loses fame abroad, and popularity in Rome."

"Sir Knight," said Luca di Savelli, "you speak as a man versed in the
profound policy of the times; and under all the circumstances which
menace us, your proposal seems but fitting and reasonable. On the one
hand, you undertake to restore us and the other Barons to Rome; and to
give Rienzi to the Staircase of the Lion--"

"Not so, not so," replied Montreal, quickly. "I will consent either so
to subdue and cripple his power, as to render him a puppet in our hands,
a mere shadow of authority--or, if his proud spirit chafe at its cage,
to give it once more liberty amongst the wilds of Germany. I would
fetter or banish him, but not destroy; unless (added Montreal, after a
moment's pause) fate absolutely drives us to it. Power should not demand
victims; but to secure it, victims may be necessary."

"I understand your refinements," said Luca di Savelli, with his icy
smile, "and am satisfied. The Barons once restored, our palaces once
more manned, and I am willing to take the chance of the Senator's
longevity. This service you promise to effect?"

"I do."

"And, in return, you demand our assent to your enjoying the rank of
Podesta for five years?"

"You say right."

"I, for one, accede to the terms," said the Savelli: "there is my hand;
I am wearied of these brawls, even amongst ourselves, and think that a
Foreign Ruler may best enforce order: the more especially, if like
you, Sir Knight, one whose birth and renown are such as to make him
comprehend the difference between Barons and Plebeians."

"For my part," said Stefanello, "I feel that we have but a choice of
evils--I like not a foreign Podesta; but I like a plebeian Senator still
less;--there too is my hand, Sir Knight."

"Noble Signors," said Montreal, after a short pause, and turning his
piercing gaze from one to the other with great deliberation, "our
compact is sealed; one word by way of codicil. Walter de Montreal is no
Count Pepin of Minorbino! Once before, little dreaming, I own, that the
victory would be so facile, I intrusted your cause and mine to a deputy;
your cause he promoted, mine he lost. He drove out the Tribune, and
then suffered the Barons to banish himself. This time I see to my own
affairs; and, mark you, I have learned in the Grand Company one lesson;
viz. never to pardon spy or deserter, of whatever rank. Your forgiveness
for the hint. Let us change the theme. So ye detain in your fortress my
old friend the Baron di Castello?"

"Ay," said Luca di Savelli; for Stefanello, stung by Montreal's threat,
which he dared not openly resent, preserved a sullen silence; "Ay, he is
one noble the less to the Senator's council."

"You act wisely. I know his views and temper; at present dangerous to
our interests. Yet use him well, I entreat you; he may hereafter serve
us. And now, my Lords, my eyes are weary, suffer me to retire. Pleasant
dreams of the New Revolution to us all!"

"By your leave, noble Montreal, we will attend you to your couch," said
Luca di Savelli.

"By my troth, and ye shall not. I am no Tribune to have great Signors
for my pages; but a plain gentleman, and a hardy soldier: your
attendants will conduct me to whatever chamber your hospitality assigns
to one who could sleep soundly beneath the rudest hedge under your open
skies."

Savelli, however, insisted on conducting the Podesta that was to be, to
his apartment. He then returned to Stefanello, whom he found pacing the
saloon with long and disordered strides.

"What have we done, Savelli?" said he, quickly; "sold our city to a
barbarian!"

"Sold!" said Savelli; "to my mind it is the other part of the contract
in which we have played our share. We have bought, Colonna, not
sold--bought our lives from yon army; bought our power, our fortunes,
our castles, from the Demagogue Senator; bought, what is better than
all, triumph and revenge. Tush, Colonna, see you not that if we had
balked this great warrior, we had perished? Leagued with the Senator,
the Grand Company would have marched to Rome; and, whether Montreal
assisted or murdered Rienzi, (for methinks he is a Romulus, who would
brook no Remus), we had equally been undone. Now, we have made our own
terms, and our shares are equal. Nay, the first steps to be taken are in
our favour. Rienzi is to be snared, and we are to enter Rome."

"And then the Provencal is to be Despot of the city."

"Podesta, if you please. Podestas who offend the people are often
banished, and sometimes stoned--Podestas who insult the nobles are often
stilettoed, and sometimes poisoned," said Savelli. "'Sufficient for the
day is the evil thereof.' Meanwhile, say nothing to the bear, Orsini.
Such men mar all wisdom. Come, cheer thee, Stefanello."

"Luca di Savelli, you have not such a stake in Rome as I have," said
the young Lord, haughtily; "no Podesta can take from you the rank of the
first Signor of the Italian metropolis!"

"An you had said so to the Orsini, there would have been drawing of
swords," said Savelli. "But cheer thee, I say; is not our first care to
destroy Rienzi, and then, between the death of one foe and the rise of
another, are there not such preventives as Ezzelino da Romano has taught
to wary men? Cheer thee, I say; and, next year, if we but hold together,
Stefanello Colonna and Luca di Savelli will be joint Senators of Rome,
and these great men food for worms!"

While thus conferred the Barons, Montreal, ere he retired to rest, stood
gazing from the open lattice of his chamber over the landscape below,
which slept in the autumnal moonlight, while at a distance gleamed, pale
and steady, the lights round the encampment of the besiegers.

"Wide plains and broad valleys," thought the warrior, "soon shall ye
repose in peace beneath a new sway, against which no petty tyrant
shall dare rebel. And ye, white walls of canvass, even while I gaze--ye
admonish me how realms are won. Even as, of old, from the Nomad tents
was built up the stately Babylon, (Isaiah, c. xxii.) that 'was not till
the Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness;' so by
the new Ishmaelites of Europe shall a race, undreamt of now, be founded;
and the camp of yesterday, be the city of tomorrow. Verily, when, for
one soft offence, the Pontiff thrust me from the bosom of the Church,
little guessed he what enemy he raised to Rome! How solemn is the
night!--how still the heavens and earth!--the very stars are as hushed,
as if intent on the events that are to pass below! So solemn and so
still feels mine own spirit, and an awe unknown till now warns me that I
approach the crisis of my daring fate!"




BOOK X. THE LION Of BASALT.

     "Ora voglio contare la morte del Tribuno."--("Vita di Cola di
     Rienzi", lib. ii. cap. 24.)

     "Now will I narrate the death of the Tribune."--"Life of
     Cola di Rienzi".



Chapter 10.I. The Conjunction of Hostile Planets in the House of Death.

On the fourth day of the siege, and after beating back to those almost
impregnable walls the soldiery of the Barons, headed by the Prince of
the Orsini, the Senator returned to his tent, where despatches from Rome
awaited him. He ran his eye hastily over them, till he came to the last;
yet each contained news that might have longer delayed the eye of a man
less inured to danger. From one he learned that Albornoz, whose blessing
had confirmed to him the rank of Senator, had received with special
favour the messengers of the Orsini and Colonna. He knew that the
Cardinal, whose views connected him with the Roman Patricians, desired
his downfall; but he feared not Albornoz: perhaps in his secret heart
he wished that any open aggression from the Pontiff's Legate might throw
him wholly on the people.

He learned further, that, short as had been his absence, Pandulfo di
Guido had twice addressed the populace, not in favour of the Senator,
but in artful regrets of the loss to the trade of Rome in the absence of
her wealthiest nobles.

"For this, then, he has deserted me," said Rienzi to himself. "Let him
beware!"

The tidings contained in the next touched him home: Walter de Montreal
had openly arrived in Rome. The grasping and lawless bandit, whose
rapine filled with a robber's booty every bank in Europe--whose
Company was the army of a King--whose ambition, vast, unprincipled,
and profound, he so well knew--whose brothers were in his camp--their
treason already more than suspected;--Walter de Montreal was in Rome!

The Senator remained perfectly aghast at this new peril; and then said,
setting his teeth as in a vice,

"Wild tiger, thou art in the Lion's den!" Then pausing, he broke out
again, "One false step, Walter de Montreal, and all the mailed hands of
the Grand Company shall not pluck thee from the abyss! But what can I
do? Return to Rome--the plans of Montreal unpenetrated--no accusation
against him! On what pretence can I with honour raise the siege? To
leave Palestrina, is to give a triumph to the Barons--to abandon Adrian,
to degrade my cause. Yet, while away from Rome, every hour breeds
treason and danger. Pandulfo, Albornoz, Montreal--all are at
work against me. A keen and trusty spy, now;--ha, well thought
of--Villani!--What, ho--Angelo Villani!"

The young chamberlain appeared.

"I think," said Rienzi, "to have often heard, that thou art an orphan?"

"True, my Lord; the old Augustine nun who reared my boyhood, has told me
again and again that my parents are dead. Both noble, my Lord; but I am
the child of shame. And I say it often, and think of it ever, in order
to make Angelo Villani remember that he has a name to win."

"Young man, serve me as you have served, and if I live you shall have no
need to call yourself an orphan. Mark me! I want a friend--the Senator
of Rome wants a friend--only one friend--gentle Heaven! only one!"

Angelo sank on his knee, and kissed the mantle of his Lord.

"Say a follower. I am too mean to be Rienzi's friend."

"Too mean!--go to!--there is nothing mean before God, unless it be a
base soul under high titles. With me, boy, there is but one nobility,
and Nature signs its charter. Listen: thou hearest daily of Walter de
Montreal, brother to these Provencals--great captain of great robbers?"

"Ay, and I have seen him, my Lord."

"Well, then, he is in Rome. Some daring thought--some well-supported and
deep-schemed villany, could alone make that bandit venture openly into
an Italian city, whose territories he ravaged by fire and sword a
few months back. But his brothers have lent me money--assisted my
return;--for their own ends, it is true: but the seeming obligation
gives them real power. These Northern swordsmen would cut my throat if
