bargain. There, father, that is off my mind; often I longed to tell it
some one, but I durst not to the women; or Margaret would not have had
a friend left in the world; for those two black-hearted villains are the
favourites, 'Tis always so. Have not the old folk just taken a brave new
shop for them in this very town, in the Hoog Straet? There may you see
their sign, a gilt sheep and a lambkin; a brace of wolves sucking their
dam would be nigher the mark. And there the whole family feast this day;
oh, 'tis a fine world. What, not a word, holy father; you sit there like
stone, and have not even a curse to bestow on them, the stony-hearted
miscreants. What, was it not enough the poor lad was all alone in a
strange land; must his own flesh and blood go and lie away the one
blessing his enemies had left him? And then think of her pining and
pining all these years, and sitting at the window looking adown the
street for Gerard! and so constant, so tender, and true: my wife says
she is sure no woman ever loved a man truer than she loves the lad those
villains have parted from her; and the day never passes but she weeps
salt tears for him. And when I think, that, but for those two greedy
lying knaves, yon winsome lad, whose life I saved, might be by her side
this day the happiest he in Holland; and the sweet lass, that saved my
life, might be sitting with her cheek upon her sweetheart's shoulder,
the happiest she in Holland in place of the saddest; oh, I thirst for
their blood, the nasty, sneaking, lying, cogging, cowardly, heartless,
bowelless--how now?"

The monk started wildly up, livid with fury and despair, and rushed
headlong from the place with both hands clenched and raised on high.
So terrible was this inarticulate burst of fury, that Jorian's puny ire
died out at sight of it, and he stood looking dismayed after the human
tempest he had launched.

While thus absorbed he felt his arm grasped by a small, tremulous hand.

It was Margaret Brandt.

He started; her coming there just then seemed so strange. She had waited
long on Peter's tombstone, but the friar did not come, So she went into
the church to see if he was there still. She could not find him.

Presently, going up the south aisle, the gigantic shadow of a friar came
rapidly along the floor and part of a pillar, and seemed to pass through
her. She was near screaming; but in a moment remembered Jorian's shadow
had come in so from the churchyard; and tried to clamber out the nearest
way. She did so, but with some difficulty; and by that time Clement was
just disappearing down the street; yet, so expressive at times is the
body as well as the face, she could see he was greatly agitated. Jorian
and she looked at one another, and at the wild figure of the distant
friar.

"Well?" said she to Jorian, trembling.

"Well," said he, "you startled me. How come you here of all people?"

"Is this a time for idle chat? What said he to you? He has been speaking
to you; deny it not."

"Girl, as I stand here, he asked me whereabout you were buried in this
churchyard."

"Ah!"

"I told him, nowhere, thank Heaven: you were alive and saving other folk
from the churchyard."

"Well?"

"Well, the long and the short is, he knew thy Gerard in Italy; and a
letter came saying you were dead; and it broke thy poor lad's heart. Let
me see; who was the letter written by? Oh, by the demoiselle van
Eyck. That was his way of it. But I up and told him nay; 'twas neither
demoiselle nor dame that penned yon lie, but Ghysbrecht Van Swieten, and
those foul knaves, Cornelis and Sybrandt; these changed the true letter
for one of their own; I told him as how I saw the whole villainy done
through a chink; and now, if I have not been and told you!"

"Oh, cruel! cruel! But he lives. The fear of fears is gone. Thank God!"

"Ay, lass; and as for thine enemies, I have given them a dig. For yon
friar is friendly to Gerard, and he is gone to Eli's house, methinks.
For I told him where to find Gerard's enemies and thine, and wow but he
will give them their lesson. If ever a man was mad with rage, its yon.
He turned black and white, and parted like a stone from a sling. Girl,
there was thunder in his eye and silence on his lips. Made me cold a
did."

"Oh, Jorian, what have you done?" cried Margaret. "Quick! quick! help me
thither, for the power is gone all out of my body. You know him not as
I do. Oh, if you had seen the blow he gave Ghysbrecht; and heard the
frightful crash! Come, save him from worse mischief. The water is deep
enow; but not bloody yet, come!"

Her accents were so full of agony that Jorian sprang out of the grave
and came with her, huddling on his jerkin as he went.

But as they hurried along, he asked her what on earth she meant? "I talk
of this friar, and you answer me of Gerard."

"Man, see you not, this is Gerard!"

"This, Gerard? what mean ye?"

"I mean, yon friar is my boy's father. I have waited for him long,
Jorian. Well, he is come to me at last. And thank God for it. Oh, my
poor child! Quicker, Jorian, quicker!"

"Why, thou art mad as he. Stay! By St. Bavon, yon was Gerard's face;
'twas nought like it; yet somehow--'twas it. Come on! come on! let me
see the end of this."

"The end? How many of us will live to see that?"

They hurried along in breathless silence, till they reached Hoog Straet.

Then Jorian tried to reassure her. "You are making your own trouble,"
said he; "who says he has gone thither? more likely to the convent to
weep and pray, poor soul. Oh, cursed, cursed villains!"

"Did not you tell him where those villains bide?"

"Ay, that I did."

"Then quicker, oh, Jorian, quicker. I see the house. Thank God and all
the saints, I shall be in time to calm him. I know what I'll say to him;
Heaven forgive me! Poor Catherine; 'tis of her I think: she has been a
mother to me."

The shop was a corner house, with two doors; one in the main street, for
customers, and a house-door round the corner.

Margaret and Jorian were now within twenty yards of the shop, when they
heard a roar inside, like as of some wild animal, and the friar burst
out, white and raging, and went tearing down the street.

Margaret screamed, and sank fainting on Jorian's arm.

Jorian shouted after him, "Stay, madman, know thy friends." But he was
deaf, and went headlong, shaking his clenched fists high, high in the
air.

"Help me in, good Jorian," moaned Margaret, turning suddenly calm. "Let
me know the worst; and die."

He supported her trembling limbs into the house.

It seemed unnaturally still; not a sound.

Jorian's own heart beat fast.

A door was before him, unlatched. He pushed it softly with his left
hand, and Margaret and he stood on the threshold.

What they saw there you shall soon know.



CHAPTER LXXXVIII

It was supper-time. Eli's family were collected round the board;
Margaret only was missing. To Catherine's surprise, Eli said he would
wait a bit for her.

"Why, I told her you would not wait for the duke."

"She is not the duke; she is a poor, good lass, that hath waited not
minutes, but years, for a graceless son of mine. You can put the meat
on the board all the same; then we can fall to, without farther loss o'
time, when she does come."

The smoking dishes smelt so savoury that Eli gave way. "She will come if
we begin," said he; "they always do, Come, sit ye down, Mistress Joan;
y'are not here for a slave, I trow, but a guest. There, I hear a quick
step off covers, and fall to."

The covers were withdrawn, and the knives brandished.

Then burst into the room, not the expected Margaret, but a Dominican
friar, livid with rage.

He was at the table in a moment, in front of Cornelis and Sybrandt,
threw his tall body over the narrow table, and with two hands hovering
above their shrinking heads, like eagles over a quarry, he cursed
them by name, soul and body, in this world and the next. It was an age
eloquent in curses; and this curse was so full, so minute, so blighting,
blasting, withering, and tremendous, that I am afraid to put all the
words on paper. "Cursed be the lips," he shrieked, "which spoke the
lie that Margaret was dead; may they rot before the grave, and kiss
white-hot iron in hell thereafter; doubly cursed be the hands that
changed those letters, and be they struck off by the hangman's knife,
and handle hell fire for ever; thrice accursed be the cruel hearts
that did conceive that damned lie, to part true love for ever; may they
sicken and wither on earth joyless, loveless, hopeless; and wither to
dust before their time; and burn in eternal fire," He cursed the meat
at their mouths and every atom of their bodies, from their hair to the
soles of their feet. Then turning from the cowering, shuddering pair,
who had almost hid themselves beneath the table, he tore a letter out of
his bosom, and flung it down before his father.

"Read that, thou hard old man, that didst imprison thy son, read, and
see what monsters thou hast brought into the world, The memory of my
wrongs and hers dwell with you all for ever! I will meet you again at
the judgment day; on earth ye will never see me more."

And in a moment, as he had come, so he was gone, leaving them stiff, and
cold, and white as statues round the smoking board.

And this was the sight that greeted Margaret's eyes and Jorian's--pale
figures of men and women petrified around the untasted food, as Eastern
poets feigned.

Margaret glanced her eye round, and gasped out, "Oh, joy! all here; no
blood hath been shed. Oh, you cruel, cruel men! I thank God he hath not
slain you."

At sight of her Catherine gave an eloquent scream; then turned her head
away. But Eli, who had just cast his eye over the false letter, and
begun to understand it all, seeing the other victim come in at that very
moment with her wrongs reflected in her sweet, pale face, started to his
feet in a transport of rage, and shouted, "Stand clear, and let me get
at the traitors, I'll hang for them," And in a moment he whipped out his
short sword, and fell upon them.

"Fly!" screamed Margaret. "Fly!"

They slipped howling under the table, and crawled out the other side.

But ere they could get to the door, the furious old man ran round and
intercepted them. Catherine only screamed and wrung her hands; your
notables are generally useless at such a time; and blood would certainly
have flowed, but Margaret and Jorian seized the fiery old man's arms,
and held them with all their might, whilst the pair got clear of the
house; then they let him go; and he went vainly raging after them out
into the street.

They were a furlong off, running like hares.

He hacked down the board on which their names were written, and brought
it indoors, and flung it into the chimney-place. Catherine was sitting
rocking herself with her apron over her head. Joan had run to her
husband. Margaret had her arms round Catherine's neck; and pale and
panting, was yet making efforts to comfort her.

But it was not to be done, "Oh, my poor children!" she cried. "Oh,
miserable mother! 'Tis a mercy Kate was ill upstairs. There, I have
lived to thank God for that!" she cried, with a fresh burst of sobs. "It
would have killed her. He had better have stayed in Italy, as come home
to curse his own flesh and blood and set us all by the ears.

"Oh, hold your chat, woman," cried Eli angrily; "you are still on the
side of the ill-doer, You are cheap served; your weakness made the
rogues what they are; I was for correcting them in their youth: for
sore ills, sharp remedies; but you still sided with their faults, and
undermined me, and baffled wise severity. And you, Margaret, leave
comforting her that ought rather to comfort you; for what is her hurt
to yours? But she never had a grain of justice under her skin; and never
will. So come thou to me, that am thy father from this hour."

This was a command; so she kissed Catherine, and went tottering to him,
and he put her on a chair beside him, and she laid her feeble head on
his honest breast; but not a tear: it was too deep for that.

"Poor lamb," said he. After a while--"Come, good folks," said true Eli,
in a broken voice, to Jorian and Joan, "we are in a little trouble, as
you see; but that is no reason you should starve. For our Lady's sake,
fall to; and add not to my grief the reputation of a churl. What the
dickens!" added he, with a sudden ghastly attempt at stout-heartedness,
"the more knaves I have the luck to get shut of, the more my need of
true men and women, to help me clear the dish, and cheer mine eye with
honest faces about me where else were gaps. Fall to, I do entreat ye."

Catherine, sobbing, backed his request. Poor, simple, antique,
hospitable souls! Jorian, whose appetite, especially since his illness,
was very keen, was for acting on this hospitable invitation; but Joan
whispered a word in his ear, and he instantly drew back, "Nay, I'll
touch no meat that Holy Church hath cursed."

"In sooth, I forgot," said Eli apologetically. "My son, who was reared
at my table, hath cursed my victuals. That seems strange. Well, what God
wills, man must bow to."

The supper was flung out into the yard.

Jorian took his wife home, and heavy sadness reigned in Eli's house that
night.

Meantime, where was Clement?

Lying at full length upon the floor of the convent church, with his lips
upon the lowest step of the altar, in an indescribable state of terror,
misery, penitence, and self-abasement: through all which struggled
gleams of joy that Margaret was alive.

Night fell and found him lying there weeping and praying; and morning
would have found him there too; but he suddenly remembered that,
absorbed in his own wrongs and Margaret's, he had committed another sin
besides intemperate rage. He had neglected a dying man.

He rose instantly, groaning at his accumulated wickedness, and set out
to repair the omission. The weather had changed; it was raining hard,
and when he got clear of the town, he heard the wolves baying; they were
on the foot, But Clement was himself again, or nearly; he thought little
of danger or discomfort, having a shameful omission of religious duty to
repair: he went stoutly forward through rain and darkness.

And as he went, he often beat his breast, and cried, "MEA CULPA! MEA
CULPA!"



CHAPTER LXXXIX

What that sensitive mind, and tender conscience, and loving heart, and
religious soul, went through even in a few hours, under a situation so
sudden and tremendous, is perhaps beyond the power of words to paint.

Fancy yourself the man; and then put yourself in his place! Were I to
write a volume on it, we should have to come to that at last.

I shall relate his next two overt acts. They indicate his state of mind
after the first fierce tempest of the soul had subsided. After
spending the night with the dying hermit in giving and receiving holy
consolations, he set out not for Rotterdam, but for Tergou. He went
there to confront his fatal enemy the burgomaster, and by means of that
parchment, whose history, by-the-by was itself a romance, to make him
disgorge; and give Margaret her own.

Heated and dusty, he stopped at the fountain, and there began to eat his
black bread and drink of the water. But in the middle of his frugal meal
a female servant came running, and begged him to come and shrive her
dying master, He returned the bread to his wallet, and followed her
without a word.

She took him--to the Stadthouse.

He drew back with a little shudder when he saw her go in.

But he almost instantly recovered himself, and followed her into the
house, and up the stairs. And there in bed, propped up by pillows, lay
his deadly enemy, looking already like a corpse.

Clement eyed him a moment from the door, and thought of all the tower,
the wood, the letter. Then he said in a low voice, "Pax vobiscum!" He
trembled a little while he said it.

The sick man welcomed him as eagerly as his weak state permitted. "Thank
Heaven, thou art come in time to absolve me from my sins, father, and
pray for my soul, thou and thy brethren."

"My son," said Clement, "before absolution cometh confession. In which
act there must be no reservation, as thou valuest thy soul's weal.
Bethink thee, therefore, wherein thou hast most offended God and the
Church, while I offer up a prayer for wisdom to direct thee."

Clement then kneeled and prayed; and when he rose from his knees, he
said to Ghysbrecht, with apparent calmness, "My son, confess thy sins."

"Ah, father," said the sick man, "they are many and great."

"Great, then, be thy penitence, my son; so shalt thou find God's mercy
great."

Ghysbrecht put his hands together, and began to confess with every
appearance of contrition.

He owned he had eaten meat in mid-Lent. He had often absented himself
from mass on the Lord's day, and saints' days; and had trifled with
other religious observances, which he enumerated with scrupulous
fidelity.

When he had done, the friar said quietly, "'Tis well, my son, These be
faults. Now to thy crimes, Thou hadst done better to begin with them."

"Why, father, what crimes lie to my account if these be none?"

"Am I confessing to thee, or thou to me?" said Clement somewhat
severely.

"Forgive me, father! Why, surely, I to you. But I know not what you call
crimes."

"The seven deadly sins, art thou clear of them?"

"Heaven forefend I should be guilty of them. I know them not by name."

"Many do them all that cannot name them. Begin with that one which leads
to lying, theft, and murder."

"I am quit of that one, any way. How call you it?"

"AVARICE, my son."

"Avarice? Oh, as to that, I have been a saving man all my day; but I
have kept a good table, and not altogether forgotten the poor. But,
alas, I am a great sinner, Mayhap the next will catch me, What is the
next?"

"We have not yet done with this one. Bethink thee, the Church is not to
be trifled with."

"Alas! am I in a condition to trifle with her now? Avarice? Avarice?"

He looked puzzled and innocent.

"Hast thou ever robbed the fatherless?" inquired the friar.

"Me? robbed the fatherless?" gasped Ghysbrecht; "not that I mind."

"Once more, my son, I am forced to tell thee thou art trifling with the
Church. Miserable man! another evasion, and I leave thee, and fiends
will straightway gather round thy bed, and tear thee down to the
bottomless pit."

"Oh, leave me not! leave me not!" shrieked the terrified old man. "The
Church knows all. I must have robbed the fatherless. I will confess. Who
shall I begin with? My memory for names is shaken."

The defence was skilful, but in this case failed.

"Hast thou forgotten Floris Brandt?" said Clement stonily.

The sick man reared himself in bed in a pitiable state of terror. "How
knew you that?" said he.

"The Church knows many things," said Clement coldly, "and by many ways
that are dark to thee, Miserable impenitent, you called her to your
side, hoping to deceive her, You said, 'I will not confess to the cure
but to some friar who knows not my misdeeds. So will I cheat the Church
on my deathbed, and die as I have lived,' But God, kinder to thee than
thou art to thyself, sent to thee one whom thou couldst not deceive. He
has tried thee; He was patient with thee, and warned thee not to trifle
with Holy Church; but all is in vain; thou canst not confess; for thou
art impenitent as a stone. Die, then, as thou hast lived. Methinks I see
the fiends crowding round the bed for their prey. They wait but for me
to go. And I go."

He turned his back; but Ghysbrecht, in extremity of terror, caught him
by the frock. "Oh, holy man, mercy! stay. I will confess all, all. I
robbed my friend Floris, Alas! would it had ended there; for he lost
little by me; but I kept the land from Peter his son, and from Margaret,
Peter's daughter. Yet I was always going to give it back; but I
couldn't, I couldn't."

"Avarice, my son, avarice, Happy for thee 'tis not too late."

"No; I will leave it her by will. She will not have long to wait for it
now; not above a month or two at farthest."

"For which month's possession thou wouldst damn thy soul for ever, Thou
fool!"

The sick man groaned, and prayed the friar to be reasonable.

The friar firmly, but gently and persuasively, persisted, and with
infinite patience detached the dying man's gripe from another's
property. There were times when his patience was tried, and he was on
the point of thrusting his hand into his bosom and producing the deed,
which he had brought for that purpose; but after yesterday's outbreak
he was on his guard against choler; and to conclude, he conquered his
impatience; he conquered a personal repugnance to the man, so strong
as to make his own flesh creep all the time he was struggling with this
miser for his soul; and at last, without a word about the deed, he won
upon him to make full and prompt restitution.

How the restitution was made will be briefly related elsewhere: also
certain curious effects produced upon Ghysbrecht by it; and when and on
what terms Ghysbrecht and Clement parted.

I promised to relate two acts of the latter, indicative of his mind.

This is one. The other is told in two words.

As soon as he was quite sure Margaret had her own, and was a rich
woman--

He disappeared.



CHAPTER XC

It was the day after that terrible scene: the little house in the
Hoog Straet was like a grave, and none more listless and dejected than
Catherine, so busy and sprightly by nature, After dinner, her eyes red
with weeping, she went to the convent to try and soften Gerard, and lay
the first stone at least of a reconciliation.

It was some time before she could make the porter understand whom she
was seeking. Eventually she learned he had left late last night, and was
not expected back, She went sighing with the news to Margaret. She found
her sitting idle, like one with whom life had lost its savour; she had
her boy clasped so tight in her arms, as if he was all she had left, and
she feared some one would take him too. Catherine begged her to come to
the Hoog Straet.

"What for?" sighed Margaret. "You cannot but say to yourselves, she is
the cause of all."

"Nay, nay," said Catherine, "we are not so ill-hearted, and Eli is so
fond on you; you will maybe soften him."

"Oh, if you think I can do any good, I'll come," said Margaret, with a
weary sigh.

They found Eli and a carpenter putting up another name in place of
Cornelis and Sybrandt's; and what should that name be but Margaret
Brandt's.

With all her affection for Margaret, this went through poor Catherine
like a knife. "The bane of one is another's meat," said she.

"Can he make me spend the money unjustly?" replied Margaret coldly.

"You are a good soul," said Catherine. "Ay, so best, sith he is the
strongest."

The next day Giles dropped in, and Catherine told the story all in
favour of the black sheep, and invited his pity for them, anathematized
by their brother, and turned on the wide world by their father. But
Giles's prejudices ran the other way; he heard her out, and told her
bluntly the knaves had got off cheap; they deserved to be hanged at
Margaret's door into the bargain, and dismissing them with contempt,
crowed with delight at the return of his favourite. "I'll show him,"
said he, "what 'tis to have a brother at court with a heart to serve a
friend, and a head to point the way."

"Bless thee, Giles," murmured Margaret softly.

"Thou wast ever his stanch friend, dear Giles," said little Kate; "but
alack, I know not what thou canst do for him now."

Giles had left them, and all was sad and silent again, when a
well-dressed man opened the door softly, and asked was Margaret Brandt
here.

"D'ye hear, lass? You are wanted," said Catherine briskly. In her the
Gossip was indestructible.

"Well, mother," said Margaret listlessly, "and here I am."

A shuffling of feet was heard at the door, and a colourless, feeble old
man was assisted into the room. It was Ghysbrecht Van Swieten. At
sight of him Catherine shrieked, and threw her apron over her head, and
Margaret shuddered violently, and turned her head swiftly away, not to
see him.

A feeble voice issued from the strange visitor's lips, "Good people, a
dying man hath come to ask your forgiveness."

"Come to look on your work, you mean," said Catherine, taking down her
apron and bursting out sobbing. "There, there, she is fainting; look to
her, Eli, quick."

"Nay," said Margaret, in a feeble voice, "the sight of him gave me a
turn, that is all, Prithee, let him say his say, and go; for he is the
murderer of me and mine."

"Alas," said Ghysbrecht, "I am too feeble to say it standing and no one
biddeth me sit down."

Eli, who had followed him into the house, interfered here, and said,
half sullenly, half apologetically, "Well, burgomaster, 'tis not our
wont to leave a visitor standing whiles we sit. But man, man, you have
wrought us too much ill." And the honest fellow's voice began to shake
with anger he fought hard to contain, because it was his own house.

Then Ghysbrecht found an advocate in one who seldom spoke in vain in
that family.

It was little Kate. "Father, mother," said she, "my duty to you, but
this is not well. Death squares all accounts, And see you not death in
his face? I shall not live long, good friends; and his time is shorter
than mine."

Eli made haste and set a chair for their dying enemy with his own hands.
Ghysbrecht's attendants put him into it. "Go fetch the boxes," said he.
They brought in two boxes, and then retired, leaving their master alone
in the family he had so cruelly injured.

Every eye was now bent on him, except Margaret's. He undid the boxes
with unsteady fingers, and brought out of one the title-deeds of a
property at Tergou. "This land and these houses belonged to Floris
Brandt, and do belong to thee of right, his granddaughter. These I did
usurp for a debt long since defrayed with interest. These I now restore
their rightful owner with penitent tears. In this other box are three
hundred and forty golden angels, being the rent and fines I have
received from that land more than Floris Brandt's debt to me, I have
kept it compt, still meaning to be just one day; but Avarice withheld
me, pray, good people, against temptation! I was not born dishonest: yet
you see."

"Well, to be sure!" cried Catherine. "And you the burgomaster! Hast
whipt good store of thieves in thy day. However," said she, on second
thoughts, "'tis better late than never, What, Margaret, art deaf? The
good man hath brought thee back thine own. Art a rich woman. Alack, what
a mountain o' gold!"

"Bid him keep land and gold, and give me back my Gerard, that he stole
from me with his treason," said Margaret, with her head still averted.

"Alas!" said Ghysbrecht, "would I could, what I can I have done. Is it
nought? It cost me a sore struggle; and I rose from my last bed to do it
myself, lest some mischance should come between her and her rights."

"Old man," said Margaret, "since thou, whose idol is pelf, hast done
this, God and the saints will, as I hope, forgive thee. As for me, I am
neither saint nor angel, but only a poor woman, whose heart thou hast
broken, Speak to him, Kate, for I am like the dead."

Kate meditated a little while; and then her soft silvery voice fell
like a soothing melody upon the air, "My poor sister hath a sorrow that
riches cannot heal, Give her time, Ghysbrecht; 'tis not in nature she
should forgive thee all. Her boy is fatherless; and she is neither maid,
wife, nor widow; and the blow fell but two days syne, that laid her
heart a bleeding."

A single heavy sob from Margaret was the comment to these words.

"Therefore, give her time! And ere thou diest, she will forgive thee
all, ay, even to pleasure me, that haply shall not be long behind thee,
Ghysbrecht. Meantime, we, whose wounds be sore, but not so deep as hers,
do pardon thee, a penitent and a dying man; and I, for one, will pray
for thee from this hour; go in peace!"

Their little oracle had spoken; it was enough. Eli even invited him
to break a manchet and drink a stoup of wine to give him heart for his
journey.

But Ghysbrecht declined, and said what he had done was a cordial to him,
"Man seeth but a little way before him, neighbour. This land I clung
so to it was a bed of nettles to me all the time. 'Tis gone; and I feel
happier and livelier like for the loss on't."

He called his men, and they lifted him into the litter.

When he was gone Catherine gloated over the money. She had never seen
so much together, and was almost angry with Margaret, for "sitting out
there like an image." And she dilated on the advantages of money.

And she teased Margaret till at last she prevailed on her to come and
look at it.

"Better let her be, mother," said Kate, "How can she relish gold, with a
heart in her bosom liker lead?" But Catherine persisted.

The result was, Margaret looked down at all her wealth with wondering
eyes. Then suddenly wrung her hands and cried with piercing anguish,
"TOO LATE! TOO LATE!" And shook off her leaden despondency, only to go
into strong hysterics over the wealth that came too late to be shared
with him she loved.

A little of this gold, a portion of this land, a year or two ago, when
it was as much her own as now; and Gerard would have never left her side
for Italy or any other place.

"Too late! Too late!"



CHAPTER XCI

Not many days after this came the news that Margaret Van Eyck was dead
and buried. By a will she had made a year before, she left all her
property, after her funeral expenses and certain presents to Reicht
Heynes, to her dear daughter Margaret Brandt, requesting her to keep
Reicht as long as unmarried.

By this will Margaret inherited a furnished house, and pictures and
sketches that in the present day would be a fortune: among the pictures
was one she valued more than a gallery of others.

It represented "A Betrothal." The solemnity of the ceremony was marked
in the grave face of the man, and the demure complacency of the woman.
She was painted almost entirely by Margaret Van Eyck, but the rest
of the picture by Jan. The accessories were exquisitely finished, and
remain a marvel of skill to this day. Margaret Brandt sent word to
Reicht to stay in the house till such time as she could find the heart
to put foot in it, and miss the face and voice that used to meet her
there; and to take special care of the picture "in the little cubboord:"
meaning the diptych.

The next thing was, Luke Peterson came home, and heard that Gerard was a
monk.

He was like to go mad with joy. He came to Margaret, and said--"heed,
mistress. If he cannot marry you I can."

"You?" said Margaret. "Why, I have seen him."

"But he is a friar."

"He was my husband, and my boy's father long ere he was a friar. And I
have seen him, I've seen him."

Luke was thoroughly puzzled. "I'll tell you what," said he; "I have
got a cousin a lawyer. I'll go and ask him whether you are married or
single."

"Nay, I shall ask my own heart, not a lawyer. So that is your regard for
me; to go making me the town talk, oh, fie!"

"That is done already without a word from me."

"But not by such as seek my respect. And if you do it, never come nigh
me again."

"Ay," said Luke, with a sigh, "you are like a dove to all the rest; but
you are a hardhearted tyrant to me."

"'Tis your own fault, dear Luke, for wooing me. That is what lets me
from being as kind to you as I desire, Luke, my bonny lad, listen to
me. I am rich now; I can make my friends happy, though not myself. Look
round the street, look round the parish. There is many a quean in it
fairer than I twice told, and not spoiled with weeping. Look high; and
take your choice. Speak you to the lass herself, and I'll speak to the
mother; they shall not say thee nay; take my word for't."

"I see what ye mean," said Luke, turning very red. "But if I can't have
your liking, I will none o' your money. I was your servant when you were
poor as I; and poorer. No; if you would liever be a friar's leman than
an honest man's wife, you are not the woman I took you for: so part we
withouten malice: seek you your comfort on yon road, where never a she
did find it yet, and for me, I'll live and die a bachelor. Good even,
mistress."

"Farewell, dear Luke; and God forgive you for saying that to me."

For some days Margaret dreaded, almost as much as she desired, the
coming interview with Gerard. She said to herself, "I wonder not he
keeps away a while; for so should I." However, he would hear he was
a father; and the desire to see their boy would overcome everything.
"And," said the poor girl to herself, "if so be that meeting does not
kill me, I feel I shall be better after it than I am now."

But when day after day went by, and he was not heard of, a freezing
suspicion began to crawl and creep towards her mind. What if his absence
was intentional? What if he had gone to some cold-blooded monks his
fellows, and they had told him never to see her more? The convent had
ere this shown itself as merciless to true lovers as the grave itself.

At this thought the very life seemed to die out of her.

And now for the first time deep indignation mingled at times with her
grief and apprehension. "Can he have ever loved me? To run from me and
his boy without a word! Why, this poor Luke thinks more of me than he
does."

While her mind was in this state, Giles came roaring. "I've hit the
clout; our Gerard is Vicar of Gouda."


A very brief sketch of the dwarf's court life will suffice to prepare
the reader for his own account of this feat. Some months before he went
to court his intelligence had budded. He himself dated the change from
a certain 8th of June, when, swinging by one hand along with the week's
washing on a tight rope in the drying ground, something went crack
inside his head; and lo! intellectual powers unchained. At court his
shrewdness and bluntness of speech, coupled with his gigantic voice and
his small stature, made him a Power: without the last item I fear they
would have conducted him to that unpopular gymnasium, the gallows. The
young Duchess of Burgundy, and Marie the heiress apparent, both petted
him, as great ladies have petted dwarfs in all ages; and the court poet
melted butter by the six-foot rule, and poured enough of it down his
back to stew Goliah in. He even amplified, versified, and enfeebled
certain rough and ready sentences dictated by Giles.

The centipedal prolixity that resulted went to Eli by letter, thus
entitled--

     "The high and puissant Princess Marie
     of Bourgogne her lytel jantilman hys
     complaynt of y' Coort, and
     praise of a rusticall lyfe, versificated, and empapyred
     by me the lytel jantilman's right lovynge
     and obsequious servitor, etc."

But the dwarf reached his climax by a happy mixture of mind and muscle;
thus:

The day before a grand court joust he challenged the Duke's giant to
a trial of strength. This challenge made the gravest grin, and aroused
expectation.

Giles had a lofty pole planted ready, and at the appointed hour went up
it like a squirrel, and by strength of arm made a right angle with his
body, and so remained: then slid down so quickly, that the high and
puissant princess squeaked, and hid her face in her hands, not to see
the demise of her pocket-Hercules.

The giant effected only about ten feet, then looked ruefully up and
ruefully down, and descended, bathed in perspiration to argue the
matter.

"It was not the dwarf's greater strength, but his smaller body."

The spectators received this excuse with loud derision. There was the
fact, the dwarf was great at mounting a pole: the giant only great at
excuses. In short Giles had gauged their intellects: with his own body
no doubt.

"Come," said he, "an ye go to that, I'll wrestle ye, my lad, if so be
you will let me blindfold your eyne."

The giant, smarting under defeat, and thinking he could surely recover
it by this means, readily consented.

"Madam," said Giles, "see you yon blind Samson? At a signal from me he
shall make me a low obeisance, and unbonnet to me."

"How may that be, being blinded?" inquired a maid of honour.

"I'll wager on Giles for one," said the princess.

"That is my affair."

When several wagers were laid pro and con, Giles hit the giant in the
bread-basket. He went double (the obeisance), and his bonnet fell off.

The company yelled with delight at this delicate stroke of wit, and
Giles took to his heels. The giant followed as soon as he could recover
his breath and tear off his bandage. But it was too late; Giles had
prepared a little door in the wall, through which he could pass, but not
a giant, and had coloured it so artfully, it looked like a wall; this
door he tore open, and went headlong through, leaving no vestige but
this posy, written very large upon the reverse of his trick door--

     Long limbs, big body, panting wit
     By wee and wise is bet and bit

After this Giles became a Force.

He shall now speak for himself.

Finding Margaret unable to believe the good news, and sceptical as to
the affairs of Holy Church being administered by dwarfs, he narrated as
follows:

"When the princess sent for me to her bedroom as of custom, to keep her
out of languor, I came not mirthful nor full of country dicts, as is my
wont, but dull as lead.

"'Why, what aileth thee?' quo' she. 'Art sick?' 'At heart,' quo' I.
'Alas, he is in love,' quo' she. Whereat five brazen hussies, which they
call them maids of honour, did giggle loud. 'Not so mad as that,' said
I, 'seeing what I see at court of women folk.'

"'There, ladies,' quo' the princess, 'best let him a be. 'Tis a liberal
mannikin, and still giveth more than he taketh of saucy words.'

"'In all sadness,' quo' she, 'what is the matter?'

"I told her I was meditating, and what perplexed me was, that other folk
could now and then keep their word, but princes never.

"'Heyday,' says she, 'thy shafts fly high this morn.' I told her, 'Ay,
for they hit the Truth.'

"She said I was as keen as keen; but it became not me to put riddles to
her, nor her to answer them. 'Stand aloof a bit, mesdames,' said she,
'and thou speak withouten fear;' for she saw I was in sad earnest.

"I began to quake a bit; for mind ye, she can doff freedom and don
dignity quicker than she can slip out of her dressing-gown into kirtle
of state. But I made my voice so soft as honey (wherefore smilest?), and
I said 'Madam, one evening, a matter of five years agone, as ye sat
with your mother, the Countess of Charolois, who is now in heaven, worse
luck, you wi' your lute, and she wi' her tapestry, or the like, do ye
mind there came came into ye a fair youth with a letter from a painter
body, one Margaret Van Eyck?"

"She said she thought she did, 'Was it not a tall youth, exceeding
comely?'

"'Ay, madam,' said I; 'he was my brother.'

"'Your brother?' said she, and did eye me like all over, (What dost
smile at?")

"So I told her all that passed between her and Gerard, and how she was
for giving him a bishopric; but the good countess said, 'Gently, Marie!
he is too young; and with that they did both promise him a living:
'Yet,' said I, 'he hath been a priest a long while, and no living. Hence
my bile.'

"'Alas!' said she, ''tis not by my good will; for all this thou hast said
is sooth, and more. I do remember my dear mother said to me, "See thou
to it if I be not here."' So then she cried out, 'Ay, dear mother, no
word of thine shall ever fall to the ground.'

"I, seeing her so ripe, said quickly, 'Madam, the Vicar of Gouda died
last week.' (For when ye seek favours of the great, behoves ye know the
very thing ye aim at.)

"'Then thy brother is vicar of Gouda,' quo' she, 'so sure as I am
heiress of Burgundy and the Netherlands. Nay, thank me not, good Giles,'
quo' she, 'but my good mother. And I do thank thee for giving of me
somewhat to do for her memory. And doesn't she fall a weeping for her
mother? And doesn't that set me off a-snivelling for my good brother
that I love so dear, and to think that a poor little elf like me could
yet speak in the ear of princes, and make my beautiful brother vicar of
Gouda; eh, lass, it is a bonny place, and a bonny manse, and hawthorn in
every bush at spring-tide, and dog-roses and eglantine in every summer
hedge. I know what the poor fool affects, leave that to me."

The dwarf began his narrative strutting to and fro before Margaret, but
he ended it in her arms; for she could not contain herself, but caught
him, and embraced him warmly. "Oh, Giles," she said, blushing, and
kissing him, "I cannot keep my hands off thee, thy body it is so little,
and thy heart so great. Thou art his true friend. Bless thee! bless
thee! bless thee! Now we shall see him again. We have not set eyes on
him since that terrible day."

"Gramercy, but that is strange," said Giles. "Maybe he is ashamed of
having cursed those two vagabones, being our own flesh and blood, worse
luck."

"Think you that is why he hides?" said Margaret eagerly;

"Ay, if he is hiding at all. However, I'll cry him by bellman.

"Nay, that might much offend him."

"What care I? Is Gouda to go vicarless and the manse in nettles?"

And to Margaret's secret satisfaction, Giles had the new vicar cried in
Rotterdam and the neighbouring towns. He easily persuaded Margaret that
in a day or two Gerard would be sure to hear, and come to his benefice.
She went to look at his manse, and thought how comfortable it might be
made for him, and how dearly she should love to do it.

But the days rolled on, and Gerard came neither to Rotterdam nor Gouda.
Giles was mortified, Margaret indignant, and very wretched. She said to
herself, "Thinking me dead, he comes home, and now, because I am alive,
he goes back to Italy, for that is where he has gone."

Joan advised her to consult the hermit of Gouda.

"Why, sure he is dead by this time."

"Yon one, belike. But the cave is never long void; Gouda ne'er wants a
hermit."

But Margaret declined to go again to Gouda on such an errand, "What can
he know, shut up in a cave? less than I, belike. Gerard hath gone back
t' Italy. He hates me for not being dead."

Presently a Tergovian came in with a word from Catherine that Ghysbrecht
Van Swieten had seen Gerard later than any one else. On this Margaret
determined to go and see the house and goods that had been left her, and
take Reicht Heynes home to Rotterdam. And as may be supposed, her steps
took her first to Ghysbrecht's house. She found him in his garden,
seated in a chair with wheels. He greeted her with a feeble voice, but
cordially; and when she asked him whether it was true he had seen
Gerard since the fifth of August, he replied, "Gerard no more, but Friar
Clement. Ay, I saw him; and blessed be the day he entered my house."

He then related in his own words his interview with Clement.

He told her, moreover, that the friar had afterwards acknowledged he
came to Tergou with the missing deed in his bosom on purpose to make him
disgorge her land; but that finding him disposed towards penitence, he
had gone to work the other way.

"Was not this a saint; who came to right thee, but must needs save his
enemy's soul in the doing it?"

To her question, whether he had recognized him, he said, "I ne'er
suspected such a thing. 'Twas only when he had been three days with me
that he revealed himself, Listen while I speak my shame and his praise.

"I said to him, 'The land is gone home, and my stomach feels lighter;
but there is another fault that clingeth to me still;' then told I him
of the letter I had writ at request of his brethren, I whose place it
was to check them. Said I, 'Yon letter was writ to part two lovers, and
the devil aiding, it hath done the foul work. Land and houses I can
give back, but yon mischief is done for ever.' 'Nay,' quoth he, 'not for
ever, but for life. Repent it then while thou livest.' 'I shall,' said
I, 'but how can God forgive it? I would not,' said I, 'were I He.'

"'Yet will He certainly forgive it,' quoth he; 'for He is ten times more
forgiving than I am, and I forgive thee.' I stared at him; and then he
said softly, but quavering like, 'Ghysbrecht, look at me closer. I am
Gerard, the son of Eli.' And I looked, and looked, and at last, lo! it
was Gerard. Verily I had fallen at his feet with shame and contrition,
but he would not suffer me. 'That became not mine years and his, for a
particular fault. I say not I forgive thee without a struggle,' said he,
'not being a saint. But these three days thou hast spent in penitence,
I have worn under thy roof in prayer; and I do forgive thee.' Those were
his very words."

Margaret's tears began to flow, for it was in a broken and contrite
voice the old man told her this unexpected trait in her Gerard. He
continued, "And even with that he bade me farewell.

"'My work here is done now,' said he. I had not the heart to stay him;
for let him forgive me ever so, the sight of me must be wormwood to
him. He left me in peace, and may a dying man's blessing wait on him, go
where he will. Oh, girl, when I think of his wrongs, and thine, and how
he hath avenged himself by saving this stained soul of mine, my heart is
broken with remorse, and these old eyes shed tears by night and day."

"Ghysbrecht," said Margaret, weeping, "since he hath forgiven thee, I
forgive thee too: what is done, is done; and thou hast let me know this
day that which I had walked the world to hear. But oh, burgomaster, thou
art an understanding man, now help a poor woman, which hath forgiven
thee her misery."

She then told him all that had befallen, "And," said she, "they will not
keep the living for him for ever. He bids fair to lose that, as well as
break all our hearts."

"Call my servant," cried the burgomaster, with sudden vigour.

He sent him for a table and writing materials, and dictated letters to
the burgomasters in all the principal towns in Holland, and one to a
Prussian authority, his friend. His clerk and Margaret wrote them,
and he signed them. "There," said he, "the matter shall be despatched
throughout Holland by trusty couriers, and as far as Basle in
Switzerland; and fear not, but we will soon have the vicar of Gouda to
his village."

She went home animated with fresh hopes, and accusing herself of
ingratitude to Gerard. "I value my wealth now," said she.

She also made a resolution never to blame his conduct till she should
hear from his own lips his reason.

Not long after her return from Tergou a fresh disaster befell.
Catherine, I must premise, had secret interviews with the black sheep,
the very day after they were expelled; and Cornelis followed her to
Tergou, and lived there on secret contributions, but Sybrandt chose to
remain in Rotterdam. Ere Catherine left, she asked Margaret to lend her
two gold angels. "For," said she, "all mine are spent." Margaret was
delighted to lend them or give them; but the words were scarce out of
her mouth ere she caught a look of regret and distress on Kate's face,
and she saw directly whither her money was going. She gave Catherine the
money, and went and shut herself up with her boy. Now this money was to
last Sybrandt till his mother could make some good excuse for visiting
Rotterdam again, and then she would bring the idle dog some of her own
industrious savings.

But Sybrandt, having gold in his pocket, thought it inexhaustible: and
being now under no shadow of restraint, led the life of a complete sot;
until one afternoon, in a drunken frolic, he climbed on the roof of the
stable at the inn he was carousing in, and proceeded to walk along it, a
feat he had performed many times when sober. But now his unsteady brain
made his legs unsteady, and he rolled down the roof and fell with a
loud thwack on to an horizontal paling, where he hung a moment in a
semicircle; then toppled over and lay silent on the ground, amidst roars
of laughter from his boon companions. When they came to pick him up he
could not stand; but fell down giggling at each attempt.

On this they went staggering and roaring down the street with him,
and carried him at great risk of another fall to the shop in the Hoog
Straet. For he had babbled his own shame all over the place.

As soon as he saw Margaret he hiccupped out, "Here is the doctor that
cures all hurts, a bonny lass." He also bade her observe he bore her no
malice, for he was paying her a visit sore against his will. "Wherefore,
prithee send away these drunkards, and let you and me have t'other
glass, to drown all unkindness."

All this time Margaret was pale and red by turns at sight of her enemy
and at his insolence; but one of the men whispered what had happened,
and a streaky something in Sybrandt's face arrested her attention.

"And he cannot stand up, say you?"

"A couldn't just now. Try, comrade! Be a man now!"

"I am a better man than thou," roared Sybrandt. "I'll stand up and fight
ye all for a crown."

He started to his feet, and instantly rolled into his attendant's arms
with a piteous groan. He then began to curse his boon companions, and
declare they had stolen away his legs. "He could feel nothing below the
waist."

"Alas, poor wretch," said Margaret. She turned very gravely to the men,
and said, "Leave him here. And if you have brought him to this, go on
your knees, for you have spoiled him for life. He will never walk again;
his back is broken."

The drunken man caught these words, and the foolish look of intoxication
fled, and a glare of anguish took its place. "The curse," he groaned;
"the curse!"

Margaret and Reicht Heynes carried him carefully, and laid him on the
softest bed.

"I must do as he would do," whispered Margaret. "He was kind to
Ghysbrecht."

Her opinion was verified, Sybrandt's spine was fatally injured; and
he lay groaning and helpless, fed and tended by her he had so deeply
injured.

The news was sent to Tergou, and Catherine came over.

It was a terrible blow to her. Moreover, she accused herself as the
cause. "Oh, false wife; oh, weak mother," she cried, "I am rightly
punished for my treason to my poor Eli."

She sat for hours at a time by his bedside rocking herself in silence,
and was never quite herself again; and the first grey hairs began to
