gathered round the tables in the atrium; while behind them, closing the
long vista of the illumined rooms beyond, the spray of the distant
fountain sparkled in the moonbeams. There, the garlands wreathed around
the columns of the hall--there, gleamed still and frequent the marble
statue--there, amidst peals of jocund laughter, rose the music and the
lay.

              EPICUREAN SONG

       Away with your stories of Hades,
          Which the Flamen has forged to affright us--
       We laugh at your three Maiden Ladies,
          Your Fates--and your sullen Cocytus.

       Poor Jove has a troublesome life, sir,
          Could we credit your tales of his portals--
       In shutting his ears on his wife, sir,
          And opening his eyes upon mortals.

       Oh, blest be the bright Epicurus!
          Who taught us to laugh at such fables;
        On Hades they wanted to moor us,
          And his hand cut the terrible cables.

       If, then, there's a Jove or a Juno,
          They vex not their heads about us, man;
        Besides, if they did, I and you know
          'Tis the life of a god to live thus, man!

       What! think you the gods place their bliss--eh?--
         In playing the spy on a sinner?
        In counting the girls that we kiss, eh?
          Or the cups that we empty at dinner?

       Content with the soft lips that love us,
          This music, this wine, and this mirth, boys,
        We care not for gods up above us--
         We know there's no god for this earth, boys!

While Lydon's piety (which accommodating as it might be, was in no
slight degree disturbed by these verses, which embodied the fashionable
philosophy of the day) slowly recovered itself from the shock it had
received, a small party of men, in plain garments and of the middle
class, passed by his resting-place.  They were in earnest conversation,
and did not seem to notice or heed the gladiator as they moved on.

'O horror on horrors!' said one; 'Olinthus is snatched from us! our
right arm is lopped away!  When will Christ descend to protect his own?'

'Can human atrocity go farther said another: 'to sentence an innocent
man to the same arena as a murderer!  But let us not despair; the
thunder of Sinai may yet be heard, and the Lord preserve his saint.
"The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God."'

At that moment out broke again, from the illumined palace, the burden of
the reveller's song:--

    We care not for gods up above us--
       We know there's no god for this earth, boys!

Ere the words died away, the Nazarenes, moved by sudden indignation,
caught up the echo, and, in the words of one of their favorite hymns,
shouted aloud:--

        THE WARNING HYMN OF THE NAZARENES

       Around--about--for ever near thee,
        God--OUR GOD--shall mark and hear thee!
        On his car of storm He sweeps!
        Bow, ye heavens, and shrink, ye deeps!
        Woe to the proud ones who defy Him!--
       Woe to the dreamers who deny Him!
            Woe to the wicked, woe!
          The proud stars shall fail--
         The sun shall grow pale--
       The heavens shrivel up like a scroll--
         Hell's ocean shall bare
          Its depths of despair,
        Each wave an eternal soul!
          For the only thing, then,
          That shall not live again
            Is the corpse of the giant TIME.

           Hark, the trumpet of thunder!
           Lo, earth rent asunder!
         And, forth, on His Angel-throne,
           He comes through the gloom,
           The Judge of the Tomb,
         To summon and save His own!
              Oh, joy to Care, and woe to Crime,
              He comes to save His own!
        Woe to the proud ones who defy Him!
        Woe to the dreamers who deny Him!
              Woe to the wicked, woe!

A sudden silence from the startled hall of revel succeeded these ominous
words: the Christians swept on, and were soon hidden from the sight of
the gladiator.  Awed, he scarce knew why, by the mystic denunciations of
the Christians, Lydon, after a short pause, now rose to pursue his way
homeward.

Before him, how serenely slept the starlight on that lovely city! how
breathlessly its pillared streets reposed in their security!--how softly
rippled the dark-green waves beyond!--how cloudless spread, aloft and
blue, the dreaming Campanian skies!  Yet this was the last night for the
gay Pompeii! the colony of the hoar Chaldean! the fabled city of
Hercules! the delight of the voluptuous Roman!  Age after age had
rolled, indestructive, unheeded, over its head; and now the last ray
quivered on the dial-plate of its doom!  The gladiator heard some light
steps behind--a group of females were wending homeward from their visit
to the amphitheatre.  As he turned, his eye was arrested by a strange
and sudden apparition.  From the summit of Vesuvius, darkly visible at
the distance, there shot a pale, meteoric, livid light--it trembled an
instant and was gone.  And at the same moment that his eye caught it,
the voice of one of the youngest of the women broke out hilariously and
shrill:--

       TRAMP! TRAMP! HOW GAILY THEY GO!
        HO, HO! FOR THE MORROW'S MERRY SHOW!




BOOK THE FIFTH

Chapter I

THE DREAM OF ARBACES.  A VISITOR AND A WARNING TO THE EGYPTIAN.
THE awful night preceding the fierce joy of the amphitheatre rolled
drearily away, and greyly broke forth the dawn of THE LAST DAY OF
POMPEII!  The air was uncommonly calm and sultry--a thin and dull mist
gathered over the valleys and hollows of the broad Campanian fields.
But yet it was remarked in surprise by the early fishermen, that,
despite the exceeding stillness of the atmosphere, the waves of the sea
were agitated, and seemed, as it were, to run disturbedly back from the
shore; while along the blue and stately Sarnus, whose ancient breadth of
channel the traveler now vainly seeks to discover, there crept a hoarse
and sullen murmur, as it glided by the laughing plains and the gaudy
villas of the wealthy citizens.  Clear above the low mist rose the
time-worn towers of the immemorial town, the red-tiled roofs of the
bright streets, the solemn columns of many temples, and the
statue-crowned portals of the Forum and the Arch of Triumph.  Far in the
distance, the outline of the circling hills soared above the vapors, and
mingled with the changeful hues of the morning sky.  The cloud that had
so long rested over the crest of Vesuvius had suddenly vanished, and its
rugged and haughty brow looked without a frown over the beautiful scenes
below.

Despite the earliness of the hour, the gates of the city were already
opened.  Horsemen upon horsemen, vehicle after vehicle, poured rapidly
in; and the voices of numerous pedestrian groups, clad in holiday
attire, rose high in joyous and excited merriment; the streets were
crowded with citizens and strangers from the populous neighborhood of
Pompeii; and noisily--fast--confusedly swept the many streams of life
towards the fatal show.

Despite the vast size of the amphitheatre, seemingly so disproportioned
to the extent of the city, and formed to include nearly the whole
population of Pompeii itself, so great, on extraordinary occasions, was
the concourse of strangers from all parts of Campania, that the space
before it was usually crowded for several hours previous to the
commencement of the sports, by such persons as were not entitled by
their rank to appointed and special seats.  And the intense curiosity
which the trial and sentence of two criminals so remarkable had
occasioned, increased the crowd on this day to an extent wholly
unprecedented.

While the common people, with the lively vehemence of their Campanian
blood, were thus pushing, scrambling, hurrying on--yet, amidst all their
eagerness, preserving, as is now the wont with Italians in such
meetings, a wonderful order and unquarrelsome good humor, a strange
visitor to Arbaces was threading her way to his sequestered mansion.  At
the sight of her quaint and primaeval garb--of her wild gait and
gestures--the passengers she encountered touched each other and smiled;
but as they caught a glimpse of her countenance, the mirth was hushed at
once, for the face was as the face of the dead; and, what with the
ghastly features and obsolete robes of the stranger, it seemed as if one
long entombed had risen once more amongst the living.  In silence and
awe each group gave way as she passed along, and she soon gained the
broad porch of the Egyptian's palace.

The black porter, like the rest of the world, astir at an unusual hour,
started as he opened the door to her summons.

The sleep of the Egyptian had been usually profound during the night;
but, as the dawn approached, it was disturbed by strange and unquiet
dreams, which impressed him the more as they were colored by the
peculiar philosophy he embraced.

He thought that he was transported to the bowels of the earth, and that
he stood alone in a mighty cavern supported by enormous columns of rough
and primaeval rock, lost, as they ascended, in the vastness of a shadow
athwart whose eternal darkness no beam of day had ever glanced.  And in
the space between these columns were huge wheels, that whirled round and
round unceasingly, and with a rushing and roaring noise.  Only to the
right and left extremities of the cavern, the space between the pillars
was left bare, and the apertures stretched away into galleries--not
wholly dark, but dimly lighted by wandering and erratic fires, that,
meteor-like, now crept (as the snake creeps) along the rugged and dank
soil; and now leaped fiercely to and fro, darting across the vast gloom
in wild gambols--suddenly disappearing, and as suddenly bursting into
tenfold brilliancy and power.  And while he gazed wonderingly upon the
gallery to the left, thin, mist-like, aerial shapes passed slowly up;
and when they had gained the hall they seemed to rise aloft, and to
vanish, as the smoke vanishes, in the measureless ascent.

He turned in fear towards the opposite extremity--and behold! there came
swiftly, from the gloom above, similar shadows, which swept hurriedly
along the gallery to the right, as if borne involuntarily adown the
sides of some invisible stream; and the faces of these spectres were
more distinct than those that emerged from the opposite passage; and on
some was joy, and on others sorrow--some were vivid with expectation and
hope, some unutterably dejected by awe and horror.  And so they passed,
swift and constantly on, till the eyes of the gazer grew dizzy and
blinded with the whirl of an ever-varying succession of things impelled
by a power apparently not their own.

Arbaces turned away, and, in the recess of the hall, he saw the mighty
form of a giantess seated upon a pile of skulls, and her hands were busy
upon a pale and shadowy woof; and he saw that the woof communicated with
the numberless wheels, as if it guided the machinery of their movements.
He thought his feet, by some secret agency, were impelled towards the
female, and that he was borne onwards till he stood before her, face to
face.  The countenance of the giantess was solemn and hushed, and
beautifully serene. It was as the face of some colossal sculpture of his
own ancestral sphinx. No passion--no human emotion, disturbed its
brooding and unwrinkled brow: there was neither sadness, nor joy, nor
memory, nor hope: it was free from all with which the wild human heart
can sympathize.  The mystery of mysteries rested on its beauty--it awed,
but terrified not: it was the Incarnation of the sublime.  And Arbaces
felt the voice leave his lips, without an impulse of his own; and the
voice asked:

'Who art thou, and what is thy task?'

'I am That which thou hast acknowledged,' answered, without desisting
from its work, the mighty phantom.  'My name is NATURE!  These are the
wheels of the world, and my hand guides them for the life of all
things.'

'And what,' said the voice of Arbaces, 'are these galleries, that
strangely and fitfully illumined, stretch on either hand into the abyss
of gloom?'

'That,' answered the giant-mother, 'which thou beholdest to the left, is
the gallery of the Unborn.  The shadows that flit onward and upward into
the world, are the souls that pass from the long eternity of being to
their destined pilgrimage on earth.  That which thou beholdest to thy
right, wherein the shadows descending from above sweep on, equally
unknown and dim, is the gallery of the Dead!'

'And wherefore, said the voice of Arbaces, 'yon wandering lights, that
so wildly break the darkness; but only break, not reveal?'

'Dark fool of the human sciences! dreamer of the stars, and would-be
decipherer of the heart and origin of things! those lights are but the
glimmerings of such knowledge as is vouchsafed to Nature to work her
way, to trace enough of the past and future to give providence to her
designs. Judge, then, puppet as thou art, what lights are reserved for
thee!'

Arbaces felt himself tremble as he asked again, 'Wherefore am I here?'

'It is the forecast of thy soul--the prescience of thy rushing doom--the
shadow of thy fate lengthening into eternity as declines from earth.'

Ere he could answer, Arbaces felt a rushing WIND sweep down the cavern,
as the winds of a giant god.  Borne aloft from the ground, and whirled
on high as a leaf in the storms of autumn, he beheld himself in the
midst of the Spectres of the Dead, and hurrying with them along the
length of gloom.  As in vain and impotent despair he struggled against
the impelling power, he thought the WIND grew into something like a
shape--a spectral outline of the wings and talons of an eagle, with
limbs floating far and indistinctly along the air, and eyes that, alone
clearly and vividly seen, glared stonily and remorselessly on his own.

'What art thou?' again said the voice of the Egyptian.

'I am That which thou hast acknowledged'; and the spectre laughed
aloud--'and my name is NECESSITY.'

'To what dost thou bear me?'

'To the Unknown.'

'To happiness or to woe?'

'As thou hast sown, so shalt thou reap.'

'Dread thing, not so!  If thou art the Ruler of Life, thine are my
misdeeds, not mine.'

'I am but the breath of God!' answered the mighty WIND.

'Then is my wisdom vain!' groaned the dreamer.

'The husbandman accuses not fate, when, having sown thistles, he reaps
not corn.  Thou hast sown crime, accuse not fate if thou reapest not the
harvest of virtue.'

The scene suddenly changed.  Arbaces was in a place of human bones; and
lo! in the midst of them was a skull, and the skull, still retaining its
fleshless hollows, assumed slowly, and in the mysterious confusion of a
dream, the face of Apaecides; and forth from the grinning jaws there
crept a small worm, and it crawled to the feet of Arbaces.  He attempted
to stamp on it and crush it; but it became longer and larger with that
attempt.  It swelled and bloated till it grew into a vast serpent: it
coiled itself round the limbs of Arbaces; it crunched his bones; it
raised its glaring eyes and poisonous jaws to his face.  He writhed in
vain; he withered--he gasped--beneath the influence of the blighting
breath--he felt himself blasted into death. And then a voice came from
the reptile, which still bore the face of Apaecides and rang in his
reeling ear:

'THY VICTIM IS THY JUDGE!  THE WORM THOU WOULDST CRUSH BECOMES THE
SERPENT THAT DEVOURS THEE!'

With a shriek of wrath, and woe, and despairing resistance, Arbaces
awoke--his hair on end--his brow bathed in dew--his eyes glazed and
staring--his mighty frame quivering as an infant's, beneath the agony of
that dream.  He awoke--he collected himself--he blessed the gods whom he
disbelieved, that he was in a dream--he turned his eyes from side to
side--he saw the dawning light break through his small but lofty
window--he was in the Precincts of Day--he rejoiced--he smiled; his eyes
fell, and opposite to him he beheld the ghastly features, the lifeless
eye, the livid lip--of the hag of Vesuvius!

'Ha!' he cried, placing his hands before his eyes, as to shut out the
grisly vision, 'do I dream still?--Am I with the dead?'

'Mighty Hermes--no!  Thou art with one death-like, but not dead.
Recognize thy friend and slave.'

There was a long silence.  Slowly the shudders that passed over the
limbs of the Egyptian chased each other away, faintlier and faintlier
dying till he was himself again.

'It was a dream, then,' said he.  'Well--let me dream no more, or the
day cannot compensate for the pangs of night.  Woman, how camest thou
here, and wherefore?'

'I came to warn thee,' answered the sepulchral voice of the saga.

'Warn me!  The dream lied not, then?  Of what peril?'

'Listen to me.  Some evil hangs over this fated city.  Fly while it be
time. Thou knowest that I hold my home on that mountain beneath which
old tradition saith there yet burn the fires of the river of Phlegethon;
and in my cavern is a vast abyss, and in that abyss I have of late
marked a red and dull stream creep slowly, slowly on; and heard many and
mighty sounds hissing and roaring through the gloom.  But last night, as
I looked thereon, behold the stream was no longer dull, but intensely
and fiercely luminous; and while I gazed, the beast that liveth with me,
and was cowering by my side, uttered a shrill howl, and fell down and
died, and the slaver and froth were round his lips.  I crept back to my
lair; but I distinctly heard, all the night, the rock shake and tremble;
and, though the air was heavy and still, there were the hissing of pent
winds, and the grinding as of wheels, beneath the ground.  So, when I
rose this morning at the very birth of dawn, I looked again down the
abyss, and I saw vast fragments of stone borne black and floatingly over
the lurid stream; and the stream itself was broader, fiercer, redder
than the night before.  Then I went forth, and ascended to the summit of
the rock: and in that summit there appeared a sudden and vast hollow,
which I had never perceived before, from which curled a dim, faint
smoke; and the vapor was deathly, and I gasped, and sickened, and nearly
died.  I returned home.  I took my gold and my drugs, and left the
habitation of many years; for I remembered the dark Etruscan prophecy
which saith, "When the mountain opens, the city shall fall--when the
smoke crowns the Hill of the Parched Fields, there shall be woe and
weeping in the hearths of the Children of the Sea." Dread master, ere I
leave these walls for some more distant dwelling, I come to thee.  As
thou livest, know I in my heart that the earthquake that sixteen years
ago shook this city to its solid base, was but the forerunner of more
deadly doom.  The walls of Pompeii are built above the fields of the
Dead, and the rivers of the sleepless Hell.  Be warned and fly!'

'Witch, I thank thee for thy care of one not ungrateful.  On yon table
stands a cup of gold; take it, it is thine.  I dreamt not that there
lived one, out of the priesthood of Isis, who would have saved Arbaces
from destruction.  The signs thou hast seen in the bed of the extinct
volcano,' continued the Egyptian, musingly, 'surely tell of some coming
danger to the city; perhaps another earthquake--fiercer than the last.
Be that as it may, there is a new reason for my hastening from these
walls.  After this day I will prepare my departure.  Daughter of
Etruria, whither wendest thou?'

'I shall cross over to Herculaneum this day, and, wandering thence along
the coast, shall seek out a new home.  I am friendless: my two
companions, the fox and the snake, are dead.  Great Hermes, thou hast
promised me twenty additional years of life!'

'Aye,' said the Egyptian, 'I have promised thee.  But, woman,' he added,
lifting himself upon his arm, and gazing curiously on her face, 'tell
me, I pray thee, wherefore thou wishest to live?  What sweets dost thou
discover in existence?'

'It is not life that is sweet, but death that is awful,' replied the
hag, in a sharp, impressive tone, that struck forcibly upon the heart of
the vain star-seer.  He winced at the truth of the reply; and no longer
anxious to retain so uninviting a companion, he said, 'Time wanes; I
must prepare for the solemn spectacle of this day. Sister, farewell!
enjoy thyself as thou canst over the ashes of life.'

The hag, who had placed the costly gift of Arbaces in the loose folds of
her vest, now rose to depart.  When she had gained the door she paused,
turned back, and said, 'This may be the last time we meet on earth; but
whither flieth the flame when it leaves the ashes?--Wandering to and
fro, up and down, as an exhalation on the morass, the flame may be seen
in the marshes of the lake below; and the witch and the Magian, the
pupil and the master, the great one and the accursed one, may meet
again.  Farewell!'

'Out, croaker!' muttered Arbaces, as the door closed on the hag's
tattered robes; and, impatient of his own thoughts, not yet recovered
from the past dream, he hastily summoned his slaves.

It was the custom to attend the ceremonials of the amphitheatre in
festive robes, and Arbaces arrayed himself that day with more than usual
care.  His tunic was of the most dazzling white: his many fibulae were
formed from the most precious stones: over his tunic flowed a loose
eastern robe, half-gown, half-mantle, glowing in the richest hues of the
Tyrian dye; and the sandals, that reached half way up the knee, were
studded with gems, and inlaid with gold.  In the quackeries that
belonged to his priestly genius, Arbaces never neglected, on great
occasions, the arts which dazzle and impose upon the vulgar; and on this
day, that was for ever to release him, by the sacrifice of Glaucus, from
the fear of a rival and the chance of detection, he felt that he was
arraying himself as for a triumph or a nuptial feast.

It was customary for men of rank to be accompanied to the shows of the
amphitheatre by a procession of their slaves and freedmen; and the long
'family' of Arbaces were already arranged in order, to attend the litter
of their lord.

Only, to their great chagrin, the slaves in attendance on Ione, and the
worthy Sosia, as gaoler to Nydia, were condemned to remain at home.

'Callias,' said Arbaces, apart to his freedman, who was buckling on his
girdle, 'I am weary of Pompeii; I propose to quit it in three days,
should the wind favor.  Thou knowest the vessel that lies in the harbor
which belonged to Narses, of Alexandria; I have purchased it of him.
The day after tomorrow we shall begin to remove my stores.'

'So soon!  'Tis well.  Arbaces shall be obeyed--and his ward, Ione?'

'Accompanies me.  Enough!--Is the morning fair?'

'Dim and oppressive; it will probably be intensely hot in the forenoon.'

'The poor gladiators, and more wretched criminals!  Descend, and see
that the slaves are marshalled.'

Left alone, Arbaces stepped into his chamber of study, and thence upon
the portico without.  He saw the dense masses of men pouring fast into
the amphitheatre, and heard the cry of the assistants, and the cracking
of the cordage, as they were straining aloft the huge awning under which
the citizens, molested by no discomforting ray, were to behold, at
luxurious ease, the agonies of their fellow creatures.  Suddenly a wild
strange sound went forth, and as suddenly died away--it was the roar of
the lion.  There was a silence in the distant crowd; but the silence was
followed by joyous laughter--they were making merry at the hungry
impatience of the royal beast.

'Brutes!' muttered the disdainful Arbaces are ye less homicides than I
am? I slay but in self-defence--ye make murder pastime.'

He turned with a restless and curious eye, towards Vesuvius. Beautifully
glowed the green vineyards round its breast, and tranquil as eternity
lay in the breathless skies the form of the mighty hill.

'We have time yet, if the earthquake be nursing,' thought Arbaces; and
he turned from the spot.  He passed by the table which bore his mystic
scrolls and Chaldean calculations.

'August art!' he thought, 'I have not consulted thy decrees since I
passed the danger and the crisis they foretold.  What matter?--I know
that henceforth all in my path is bright and smooth. Have not events
already proved it?  Away, doubt--away, pity!  Reflect O my heart--
reflect, for the future, but two images--Empire and Ione!'



Chapter II

THE AMPHITHEATRE.

NYDIA, assured by the account of Sosia, on his return home, and
satisfied that her letter was in the hands of Sallust, gave herself up
once more to hope.  Sallust would surely lose no time in seeking the
praetor--in coming to the house of the Egyptian--in releasing her--in
breaking the prison of Calenus.  That very night Glaucus would be free.
Alas! the night passed--the dawn broke; she heard nothing but the
hurried footsteps of the slaves along the hall and peristyle, and their
voices in preparation for the show.  By-and-by, the commanding voice of
Arbaces broke on her ear--a flourish of music rung out cheerily: the
long procession were sweeping to the amphitheatre to glut their eyes on
the death-pangs of the Athenian!

The procession of Arbaces moved along slowly, and with much solemnity
till now, arriving at the place where it was necessary for such as came
in litters or chariots to alight, Arbaces descended from his vehicle,
and proceeded to the entrance by which the more distinguished spectators
were admitted.  His slaves, mingling with the humbler crowd, were
stationed by officers who received their tickets (not much unlike our
modern Opera ones), in places in the popularia (the seats apportioned to
the vulgar).  And now, from the spot where Arbaces sat, his eyes scanned
the mighty and impatient crowd that filled the stupendous theatre.

On the upper tier (but apart from the male spectators) sat women, their
gay dresses resembling some gaudy flower-bed; it is needless to add that
they were the most talkative part of the assembly; and many were the
looks directed up to them, especially from the benches appropriated to
the young and the unmarried men.  On the lower seats round the arena sat
the more high-born and wealthy visitors--the magistrates and those of
senatorial or equestrian dignity; the passages which, by corridors at
the right and left, gave access to these seats, at either end of the
oval arena, were also the entrances for the combatants.  Strong palings
at these passages prevented any unwelcome eccentricity in the movements
of the beasts, and confined them to their appointed prey.  Around the
parapet which was raised above the arena, and from which the seats
gradually rose, were gladiatorial inscriptions, and paintings wrought in
fresco, typical of the entertainments for which the place was designed.
Throughout the whole building wound invisible pipes, from which, as the
day advanced, cooling and fragrant showers were to be sprinkled over the
spectators.  The officers of the amphitheatre were still employed in the
task of fixing the vast awning (or velaria) which covered the whole, and
which luxurious invention the Campanians arrogated to themselves: it was
woven of the whitest Apulian wool, and variegated with broad stripes of
crimson.  Owing either to some inexperience on the part of the workmen,
or to some defect in the machinery, the awning, however, was not
arranged that day so happily as usual; indeed, from the immense space of
the circumference, the task was always one of great difficulty and
art--so much so, that it could seldom be adventured in rough or windy
weather.  But the present day was so remarkably still that there seemed
to the spectators no excuse for the awkwardness of the artificers; and
when a large gap in the back of the awning was still visible, from the
obstinate refusal of one part of the velaria to ally itself with the
rest, the murmurs of discontent were loud and general.

The aedile Pansa, at whose expense the exhibition was given, looked
particularly annoyed at the defect, and, vowed bitter vengeance on the
head of the chief officer of the show, who, fretting, puffing,
perspiring, busied himself in idle orders and unavailing threats.

The hubbub ceased suddenly--the operators desisted--the crowd were
stilled--the gap was forgotten--for now, with a loud and warlike
flourish of trumpets, the gladiators, marshalled in ceremonious
procession, entered the arena.  They swept round the oval space very
slowly and deliberately, in order to give the spectators full leisure to
admire their stern serenity of feature--their brawny limbs and various
arms, as well as to form such wagers as the excitement of the moment
might suggest.

'Oh!' cried the widow Fulvia to the wife of Pansa, as they leaned down
from their lofty bench, 'do you see that gigantic gladiator? how drolly
he is dressed!'

'Yes,' said the aedile's wife, with complacent importance, for she knew
all the names and qualities of each combatant; 'he is a retiarius or
netter; he is armed only, you see, with a three-pronged spear like a
trident, and a net; he wears no armor, only the fillet and the tunic.
He is a mighty man, and is to fight with Sporus, yon thick-set
gladiator, with the round shield and drawn sword, but without body
armor; he has not his helmet on now, in order that you may see his
face--how fearless it is!--by-and-by he will fight with his vizor down.'

'But surely a net and a spear are poor arms against a shield and sword?'

'That shows how innocent you are, my dear Fulvia; the retiarius has
generally the best of it.'

'But who is yon handsome gladiator, nearly naked--is it not quite
improper? By Venus! but his limbs are beautifully shaped!'

'It is Lydon, a young untried man! he has the rashness to fight yon
other gladiator similarly dressed, or rather undressed--Tetraides. They
fight first in the Greek fashion, with the cestus; afterwards they put
on armor, and try sword and shield.'

'He is a proper man, this Lydon; and the women, I am sure, are on his
side.'

'So are not the experienced betters; Clodius offers three to one against
him!'

