remains of my army. I thank you again, most heartily, for your
generous conduct; and, believe me, you may always command my
services in any direction. I only regret that these unhappy
political difficulties should drive you, and so many of your brave
countrymen, into the service of a power that has always been, and
so far as I can see is likely to remain, an enemy of England."

"I may say, sir, that Lord Godolphin has, for a certain reason,
promised to befriend me; and that, if you write to him on the
subject of a safe conduct, I think I could rely upon his taking a
favourable view of the matter."

"I will do so, certainly," the earl said. "His power is great. If
he is favourably disposed towards you, you may consider the matter
as done."

They chatted for some time longer, and then Desmond said:

"I think now, sir, that it would be safe to move. Everything is
perfectly quiet without, and I have no doubt that, by this time,
the cavalry have all returned to Badajos. However, I will
accompany you for a short distance, for you may be stopped by some
of our advance posts. You had best take the cloak and hat of my
follower, and, as I am well known, no questions will then be
asked."

"By the way," Lord Galway added as, Mike having brought up the
horses, he mounted; "where shall I send a letter to you, with your
safe conduct? We are in communication with many persons at Madrid,
and can pass a letter through the lines at any time."

"When there, I lodge at the house of Don Pedro Sarasta, in the
Calle del Retiro. I will request him to forward any letters to me,
should I be absent."

The earl made a note of the address in his pocketbook, and then,
putting on Mike's cloak and hat, started with Desmond, who passed
him without question through the lines of outposts; which were
indeed but carelessly kept, as it was certain that, after the
signal victory that had been gained, it would be a long time
before any enemy would venture to attack them.

Two days after the fight, the Marquis de Bay moved forward with
his army, with the intention of fighting another battle; but
Galway and Frontiera had, by this time, reorganized their forces,
and occupied so strong a position, near Elvas, that he could not
venture to attack them. However, he occupied the country for a
considerable distance beyond the frontier, subsisting his army
upon the provisions and forage collected by his cavalry in the
villages and small towns. As it was evident that, after the proof
given of the inability of the Portuguese to withstand any attack,
there was no probability of offensive operations being renewed by
the allies; and, the heat becoming intense, the force was
withdrawn across the frontier and went into quarters, the general
returning to Madrid, where he received an enthusiastic welcome
from the inhabitants.

By this time, however, the knowledge that the king of France was
entering into negotiations, which would necessitate his desertion
of Spain, greatly excited the population against the French
stationed in the capital. They were hissed and hooted when they
appeared in the streets, and for a time, the indignation was so
great that the troops were ordered to remain in their barracks.
The king himself, however, gained rather than lost popularity, as
he issued a proclamation to the people, saying that, having
accepted their invitation to be their king, he would remain with
them until driven from his throne by force; and he confided
absolutely in their affection, and aid, to enable him to withstand
any foes who might attempt to dethrone him.

In the autumn another change occurred. Although, in order to
obtain peace, he had granted all the demands, however exorbitant,
of the allies, and had undertaken to withdraw his troops from
Spain, Louis stood firm when to these conditions they added
another, namely, that he should himself undertake, by force, to
dethrone his grandson. This monstrous demand united, at once, both
those who wished to continue the war rather than grant such
humiliating terms as those which had been insisted upon, and the
party who were in favour of peace, even at that cost. The
negotiations were abruptly broken off, and the French troops, who
were already on the march towards the frontier, received orders to
remain in Spain.

Now that he had O'Neil with him, the time in Madrid passed more
pleasantly for Desmond than before. He was frequently away for several
days, carrying despatches to the commanders of the forces in Valencia
and Barcelona. In the capital the French were again regarded as
friends, and as several successes had been gained and places captured,
in Catalonia, the hope that the civil war that had so long been waged
was approaching its end, and the confidence engendered by the victory
on the Caya, made the people doubt whether any attempt at invasion
from the west would be contemplated, and they gave themselves up to
gaiety. Balls and fetes were frequently organized, and at these the
French were among the most honoured guests.

Early in the spring preparations were made for active operations.
Lieutenant General O'Mahony had just returned from Sicily, where
he had rendered distinguished service. In the previous year,
Crofton had been made a major general, and two new regiments of
Irish infantry had been formed, of deserters from the enemy in
Catalonia and Portugal. These were commanded by Colonel Dermond
M'Auliffe and Colonel John Comerford. These two regiments, with
another under Colonel Macdonald, marched from Madrid in April.

As the Marquis de Bay was not yet moving he offered O'Mahony, who
had the command of the force, the services of Desmond and O'Neil
as aides-de-camp. The offer was a welcome one, for, as none of the
men in the newly raised regiments was acquainted with the
language, Desmond, who now spoke Spanish well, would be far more
valuable to him than Spanish officers could be.

For two months the little force moved about in Catalonia, the
rapidity of its marches baffling the attempts of the archduke's
forces to interfere with its operations. These were principally
directed against various small fortresses, held by partisans of
Charles. Several of these were captured, thus clearing the roads
they guarded, and opening the country for the more important
operations that Philip himself was about to undertake.

It was not until July that the royal army approached Lerida, where
O'Mahony's force joined it. General Stanhope marched, with the
troops under his command, and encamped at Balaguer; where he was
joined by Baron de Wetzel, with some troops which had been brought
from Italy. As Stanhope's force was insufficient to give battle
until joined by the main army of Charles, he marched, on the 31st
of July, headed by two English and two Dutch regiments of
dragoons, to secure the passes near Alfaro, and so check the
advance of the Spaniards.

After performing a long and difficult march, they took up a
defensive position. Stanhope found, however, that the river in
front of him was so low that cavalry and artillery could pass
easily, and even infantry could cross without difficulty. Scarcely
had he taken up his position when two brigades of infantry and
nineteen squadrons of cavalry were seen approaching, having been
detached from the Spanish army to occupy the position which had
been secured by the rapidity of Stanhope's march. They therefore
waited for their main army to come up, but before it did so, the
whole of Stanhope's force had arrived, and was prepared for
battle.

Although it was past six o'clock in the evening, Charles, on his
arrival, decided to fall upon the enemy before they could encamp,
which they might do in a position in which it would be difficult
to attack them. Fourteen cannon at once opened fire from an
eminence, whence they commanded the position taken up by the
advance force of the Spaniards. This position was on low ground in
front of the ridge upon which the village of Almenara stood, and
nothing could be seen of the force that lay behind this ridge.

The advanced force of Spaniards ascended this ridge, as soon as
the artillery opened upon them, and General Stanhope obtained
leave from Marshal Staremberg, who commanded the archduke's army,
to charge them. With ten squadrons of horse he rode up the ascent,
and there, when he gained it, saw to his surprise twenty-two
squadrons facing him, flanked with infantry, and supported with
another line of cavalry equally strong. He sent back at once for
fourteen squadrons from his second line, and when six of these
came up he advanced against the Spaniards, who at the same time
moved forward to meet him.

The cavalry on Philip's left at once gave way. The centre and
right, aided by the fire of the infantry, made a stout fight, but
were driven back by the English and Dutch cavalry. The fighting
was severe, for of the six English squadrons who charged, two
hundred men and twenty-one officers were killed or wounded.

Philip's second line of cavalry gave but feeble support, and
Stanhope's horse soon had them all in confusion, and, driving them
from the field, pursued them hotly. The fugitives dashed into
their own infantry, who were just arriving in force, and their
panic communicated itself to them, and a total rout took place.
The pursuit was kept up until it was so dark that the troopers
were unable to see each other's faces, and they then halted,
having defeated the Spanish without the aid of their infantry,
which had not come up in time to take any part in the fight. Much
of the baggage, together with tents, many cannon, and a quantity
of ammunition, fell into the hands of the victors. Owing to the
darkness, the number of prisoners taken was small.

O'Mahony and his troops had taken no part in the engagement, as,
having arrived late on the previous evening after a long march,
they were still at Lerida. It had not been deemed necessary to
hurry them forward, as no battle was expected to take place for
some days--as, indeed, would have been the case had the force sent
forward arrived at the river before Stanhope.

The routed troops arrived under the shelter of the guns of Lerida.
Charles did not attack them there, but, making a detour, seized
several places in Aragon, with the intention of cutting the line
by which Philip would probably retire, and forcing him to fight
again. Philip, however, on his part, marched from Lerida in order
to retire into Castile by way of Saragossa. Charles followed
hotly, and a portion of his cavalry came up to the rear of the
enemy in the defile of Penalva. Here the Spaniards posted a strong
force of grenadiers, and the defile being too narrow for the
cavalry to act, these dismounted, and a hot fight took place, in
which both parties claimed the victory. However, Philip retired
the same day in great haste. Charles, arriving three hours later,
ate the dinner that had been prepared for his rival.

The Spaniards, covered by the defence of the pass, crossed the
Ebro and posted themselves in a strong position within a mile of
Saragossa. On the 21st of August Marshal Staremberg, with his
generals, having reconnoitred their position, gave orders for the
attack to take place the next morning, and at daybreak the cannon
on both sides opened fire. General Stanhope, who commanded on the
left wing, found that the enemy had the greater part of their
cavalry facing him, and therefore strengthened his force by four
battalions of foot and six squadrons of Portuguese horse.

The Spanish line ran obliquely, from the river on their left to a
steep hill on their right, occupied by their cavalry and a battery
of artillery. These, therefore, were much nearer to the attacking
force than were those on the plain.

The battle began at twelve o'clock, Charles's force marching in
two lines, with the exception of Stanhope's cavalry and infantry.
These, from their situation, were the first to come in contact
with the enemy. The four battalions first pushed forward up the
hill, and, driving the Spanish cavalry back, allowed Stanhope's
horse to ascend the hill and form on its crest. The battle
speedily ranged along the whole line. The Spaniards, with superior
numbers, gained ground on their left. Here O'Mahony's corps were
stationed, and they drove a portion of the allies across the Ebro
again; but this success was more than counterbalanced on the other
flank, where Stanhope's cavalry and infantry carried all before
them. The latter, posted in a hollow, opened so heavy a fire upon
the Spanish infantry, as they advanced, that they fell into
disorder; and as their cavalry were driven off, hotly pursued by
Stanhope, they fell back upon the centre, which they threw into
disorder. Seeing that the battle was lost, the Marquis de Bay gave
the order to retire.

Two hours after the first shot was fired, the rout of the Spanish
centre and right was complete, but a considerable portion of the
troops were rallied by de Bay at Alagon, three leagues above
Saragossa. The left wing, under Generals Amezaga and O'Mahony,
were checked in their course of victory by the disaster which
befell the centre and right; but, maintaining their discipline,
they fell back in good order, and rejoined their defeated comrades
at Alagon.

All the cannon and most of the colours of the regiments forming
the centre and right fell into the hands of the victors. The loss
of the allies was about two thousand men, killed or wounded; and
that of the Spaniards and French three thousand killed and
wounded, and between five and six thousand prisoners. Philip rode
at once to Madrid, and on the evening of the battle the archduke
entered Saragossa; while de Bay retired, with the broken remains
of his troops, towards Navarre.

Desmond and O'Neil, who had ridden behind O'Mahony, saw the
Spanish troops of the archduke yield before the impetuous attacks
of the Irish regiments, who, as they pressed their foes backwards,
burst into loud cheering, believing the victory already won.
Presently, O'Mahony stopped the advance.

"We must not push too far forward," he said. "It seems to me that
things are not going so well in other directions. Our centre is
being pressed back. What is going on on the right I cannot say,
but the enemy seems to have gained the top of the hill, for our
cannon there are silent. If the centre is driven back, those we
have now beaten will rally, and we shall be taken in flank by the
fire of their centre. Therefore, let us be content with what we
have done, and wait and see how things turn out elsewhere."

Even before the rout of the Spanish right, their centre was
yielding, for opposed to them were the British and Dutch
regiments, whose attack they were altogether unable to withstand.
It soon became clear that, at all other points on the field, the
battle was going against the Spaniards, and an aide-de-camp
presently rode up, hastily, with orders from Marshal de Bay for
his left to fall back and retire to Alagon.

Deep was the rage and disappointment among the troops of O'Mahony
and Amezaga, as they faced about and set out on their march. They
were unmolested. The troops they had beaten were in no disposition
to follow them, while the allied cavalry and the infantry of their
centre were in full pursuit of the rest of Philip's army, the
remnants of which the little force joined, at Alagon, before
nightfall.

It was some days before the archduke's army moved forward again.
The troops were exhausted by the long marches they had made, and
there was a difference of opinion among the generals as to the
course that had best be followed. The king wished to pursue the
beaten enemy and, if possible, to intercept their march towards
France, but Count Staremberg and Stanhope were of opinion that
they should first occupy Madrid, and then march into Navarre, so
as to bar the advance of fresh French troops into Spain, and at
the same time open communications by sea with England, whence they
could be supplied with reinforcements and stores of provisions.

Finally, Charles gave way, and the allies marched towards Madrid.
The main portion of the army halted at Alcala, a day's march from
the capital, and General Stanhope marched on with his division to
Madrid, which opened its gates without resistance, Philip having
retired with his army. Charles entered the city on the 28th of
September, 1710.

The alarm, in France, at the news of the defeat at Saragossa was
great, and Louis at once despatched the Duke of Vendome to command
there. The latter, travelling fast, and gathering up the garrisons
of the towns through which he passed, crossed the frontier at
nearly the same time as Charles entered Madrid, and effected a
junction with de Bay's army; which had, by this time, been
increased by some fourteen thousand men, drawn from the garrisons
of towns in Navarre, Castile, Galicia, and Valencia.

Vendome had no doubt that the intention of the allies, in marching
upon Madrid, was to open communication with the Portuguese, and
determined to throw himself between the capital and the frontier.
Marching with all speed, he encamped near Salamanca on the 6th of
October, and thence moved to Plasencia, thereby securing the
bridge of Almarez, and preventing the Portuguese from joining
Charles.

Had it not been for the usual indecision and want of energy on the
part of the Portuguese Government, the junction might have been
effected before Vendome arrived at Plasencia, for both Charles and
Stanhope had, after the victory of Saragossa, written urgently,
begging that the Portuguese army should at once advance and join
them at Madrid; and that, at any rate, if the whole army could not
move, at least the troops in the pay of England should push
forward instantly. Stanhope, indeed had marched with his division
to the bridge of Almarez to facilitate the junction, and had
defeated a Spanish force guarding the bridge. However, the
Portuguese did not arrive; and when a messenger brought the
alarming news that a Spanish and French army had occupied
Plasencia, Stanhope fell back towards Madrid.

As large French reinforcements were known to be approaching the
frontier, and Philip's army was already much superior in numbers
to that of the allies, it was decided, in a council of war, to
evacuate Madrid. The forces which had occupied Toledo and other
towns were recalled, and, early in December, the army left the
capital; the archduke riding at once to Barcelona, while the army,
of which Stanhope's division formed the rear guard, followed in
the same direction.

The movement had been delayed too long. Vendome and Philip were
already at hand, and on the 9th fell upon Stanhope's division at
Brihuega. This force, consisting of eight English battalions and the
same number of Portuguese horse, defended themselves desperately, and
although the town was wholly without fortifications, they repulsed
every attack until their ammunition was exhausted, and they were then
forced to surrender. Staremberg, on hearing that Stanhope was attacked
and surrounded, turned back and marched with all speed to relieve him,
but on arriving within three hours' march of the town, heard that he
had surrendered.

The Duke of Vendome, hearing of his coming, drew his troops out
and formed them in line of battle, and the next morning attacked
him vigorously. The allied right held their ground, but the left
fled, and Vendome swept his right round and took the centre and
right of the allies in the rear. Three battalions of the second
line, however, fell in turn upon the French rear and repulsed
them, and the left wing, rallying again, renewed the battle.

The combat was indecisive, both parties claiming the victory.
Staremberg wrote to Charles that he had captured all the enemy's
guns, and had killed six thousand of them; while the French
claimed that they had totally defeated the allies, and captured
all their cannon, killed four thousand, and taken nine thousand
prisoners. The balance of probability lies to some extent with the
French, for the day after the battle, Staremberg retired and
marched to Barcelona; but the fact that he was not at once pursued
shows that the French and Spaniards must have suffered very
heavily.

Desmond had passed unscathed through the battle of Saragossa.
O'Neil had been severely wounded, but had managed to sit his horse
until the division effected its junction with the Marquis de Bay's
shattered forces. Great was the wrath among the two Irish
regiments at the issue of the battle.

"What is the use," an officer said to Desmond, "of our throwing
away our lives, fighting for these Spaniards, when they themselves
are useless, save when they meet the Portuguese, who are still
more contemptible? Here have we, on level ground, fairly beaten
the enemy, while the right and centre, although having a great
advantage in position, allow themselves to be scattered like a
flock of sheep."

"They had stouter foes to meet than we had," Desmond said. "We had
only Spaniards opposed to us, while they had English and Dutch to
fight; and as the best French troops have found, in Flanders, that
these were at least a match for them, we must not blame the
Spanish too severely for giving way before they were attacked."

"There is something in that, I admit, Kennedy. It seems to me
that, in this war, it would be much better if the Spaniards and
Portuguese had both remained at home, and allowed the French and
us fight it out with the English and Dutch. The battles would have
been small, but at least they would have been desperately fought."

"But it would be absurd, Moore, for us to lay down our lives in a
struggle in which those principally concerned took no part
whatever, and which was of no great interest either to us or to
the English. After the way in which Louis was ready to throw over
Spain and Philip at the beginning of the year, the Spanish
alliance can be of no great advantage to him, and I do not think
that even Philip's orders would induce a Spanish army to march
across the frontier to assist France. Therefore, as Louis can gain
nothing by the Spanish alliance, why should he weaken himself by
sending forces here to maintain Philip on the throne?"

"But with the Archduke Charles here, he would have an enemy on his
frontier. Philip might not assist him, but Charles would be
actively hostile. The English and Dutch troops would be pouring
into the peninsula, and we should have another Flanders in the
south of France."

"Well," Desmond said, after a pause; "the best way I can see out
of it is for both Philip and Charles to withdraw, and allow the
Spanish to elect a Spaniard for their king; or, if they could not
agree to that, which I don't suppose they could do, choose some
foreign prince belonging to a petty state which stands altogether
aloof from European affairs, and seat him on the throne. If,
again, they would not accept him, England and France should
mutually agree not to interfere in the affair, and let the
Spaniards indulge in civil war as long as it pleases them."

Moore laughed.

"It might be a good solution, Kennedy, but there is no more chance
of Philip or Charles renouncing their pretensions, or indeed of
the French on one side and the allies on the other permitting them
to do so, than there is of the world becoming an utopia, where war
shall be unknown, and all peoples live together in peace and
amity."

"Well," Desmond said, "for my part, I am sick of fighting in
quarrels that do not concern me, and when this campaign comes to
an end I shall, if possible, rejoin Berwick. The cause of the
Stuarts is not advanced, in the slightest, by what is taking place
in Spain, and if I am to fight, I would rather do so where victory
would benefit us."

"I don't know that you are not right," the other assented. "It
certainly seems a pity that the best blood of Ireland should be
spilled, in Flanders and Spain, in the service of a foreign
country. To my mind, the terms of the surrender of Limerick were
disadvantageous both to Ireland and England. England has gained a
number of inveterate foes who, with good and wise treatment, might
now be fighting in her own ranks. Ireland has lost her best blood,
men who were her natural leaders, and belonged to the old
families, whom all respected."

"I am sure it was a mistake," Desmond said. "If the terms had been
an absolute equality in all matters of religion, and the free
pardon of all, without confiscation of their property or other
disability, it would have gone far to reconcile our people to
defeat; for they would have seen that they could not hope for more
than the right of free exercise of their religion, if the Stuarts
came to the throne again."

"Perhaps you are right, Kennedy. I know that I myself, had it not
been for the persecutions and the priest hunting, and the closing
of our chapels, should never have thought of leaving Ireland and
taking foreign service. But now there is no going back."

"No, I suppose not," Desmond said, gloomily. "Nothing short of an
amnesty, ensuring freedom of worship, and perfect civil equality
to all, would induce the majority of us to return to Ireland; and,
indeed, it is not easy to see what we could do if we got there.
The estates of our fathers are in the hands of strangers. We
should soon be altogether without resources, and we should be
almost driven to conspire again, even though success would in no
way mend the matter.

"However, there is no chance of such an act being passed, for,
even if the English Ministry desired to do so, the Protestant
feeling in England and Scotland would be too strong for them; and
Parliament, which strongly represents that feeling, would reject
the bill by an immense majority."

"Then there is nothing to do but to go on fighting," Moore said.

"I see nothing else for it, Moore, but I own that I do not care
for the life. I have had three years of it now, and don't like the
prospect of another thirty."

"You have been fortunate, too, Kennedy!"

"Yes, I have been fortunate in the way of getting promotion;
fortunate that I was not, long before this, put under the sod; but
it is no great gratification to be a captain, and though in
another thirty years, if I live, I may be a general, I don't think
