    O, weigh the risks that on the war attend;
    Pity the parent in his sad, old age,
    Left at far Ardea to lament thine end."
    Thus he; but naught fierce Turnus can assuage;
The healing hand but chafes, and words augment his rage.

VII. Then he, scarce gathering utterance, spake again,
    "Good Sire, thy trouble for my sake forego;
    Leave me the price of glory--to be slain.
    I too can hurl, nor feeble is my blow,
    The whistling shaft, that lays the foeman low,
    And drinks his life-blood. Vain shall be his prayer.
    No goddess mother shall be there, to throw
    Her mist around him, with a woman's care,
And screen her darling son with empty shades of air."

VIII. The Queen, with death before her, filled with fears,
    Wept sore and checked the fiery suitor's way.
    "O Turnus! if thou heed'st me, by these tears;--
    Hope of my age, Latinus' strength and stay,
    Prop of our falling house! one boon I pray;
    Forbear the fight. What fate awaiteth thee,
    Awaits me too. If Trojans win the day,
    With thee I'll leave the loathed light, nor see
AEneas wed my child, a captive slave, as she."

IX. With tears Lavinia heard her mother speak.
    A crimson blush her glowing face o'erspread,
    And hot fires kindled on her burning cheek.
    As Indian ivory, when stained with red,
    Or lilies, mixt with roses in a bed,
    So flushed the maid, with varying thoughts distrest.
    He, wild with love, upon Lavinia fed
    His constant gaze, but maddening with unrest,
Burned for the fight still more, and thus the Queen addressed:

X.  "Vex me not, mother, marching to the fray,
    With these thy tears and bodings of despair.
    'Tis not in me the fatal hour to stay.
    Thou, Idmon, to the Phrygian tyrant bear
    The unwelcome word: to-morrow let him spare
    To lead his Teucrians to the fight. Each side
    Shall rest awhile; when morning shines in air,
    His blood or mine the quarrel shall decide,
And he or I shall win, whose prowess earns, the bride."

XI. Thus speaking, to his home the chieftain hies
    And bids his steeds be harnessed for the fight:
    Soon for the pleasure of their master's eyes
    They stand before him, neighing in their might.
    In days of old from Orithyia bright
    To King Pilumnus came those coursers twain,
    Swifter than breezes and than snow more white;
    His ready grooms attend, a nimble train,
And clap the sounding breast and comb the abundant mane.

XII. Himself the shining corselet, stiff with gold
    And orichalcum, on his shoulders laid.
    His sword and shield he fitted to his hold,
    And donned the helm, with crimson plumes arrayed,
    The sword the Fire-King for his sire had made,
    And dipped still glowing in the Stygian flood,
    Last, the strong spear-beam in his hand he swayed
    (Against a pillar in the house it stood),
Auruncan Actor's spoils, and shook the quivering wood,

XIII. And shouted, "Now, O never known to fail
    Thy master's call, my trusty spear, I trow
    The hour is come. Once, mightiest under mail,
    Did Actor wield thee; Turnus wields thee now.
    Grant this strong hand to lay the foeman low,
    This Phrygian eunuch of his arms to spoil,
    And rend his shattered breastplate with a blow;
    Dragged in the dust, his dainty curls to soil,
Hot from the crisping tongs, and wet with myrrh and oil."

XIV. Such furies urge him, and, ablaze with ire,
    His hot face sparkles, and his eyes burn bright,
    And from his eye-balls leaps the living fire;
    As when a bull, in prelude for the fight,
    Roars terribly, and fills the hinds with fright,
    And, butting at a chance-met tree, would try
    To vent his fury on his horns of might,
    And with his fierce hoofs flings the sand on high,
And gores the empty air, and challenges the sky.

XV. Nor less, meanwhile, and terrible in arms,--
    The arms that Venus to her son doth lend,--
    AEneas rages, and the War-God warms.
    Pleased with the challenge, singly to contend,
    And bring the weary warfare to an end,
    His friends he cheers, and calms Iulus' care,
    Unfolding Fate, then heralds hastes to send,
    His answer to the Latin King to bear:
The challenge he accepts, the terms of peace are fair.

XVI. Scarce Morning glimmered on the mountains grey,
    And Phoebus' steeds, uprising from the main,
    With lifted nostrils breathed approaching day.
    Mixt with the Trojans, the Rutulian train,
    Beneath the lofty town-walls on the plain
    Mark out the lists, and mid-way in the ring,
    Their braziers set, as common rites ordain.
    These, apron-girt and crowned with vervain, bring
Fire for the turf-piled hearths, and water from the spring.

XVII. Forth, as to war, Ausonia's spear-armed host,
    Trojans and Tuscans, to the field proceed,
    And to and fro, in gold and purple, post
    Asilas brave, Assaracus's seed,
    Mnestheus, Messapus, tamer of the steed.
    Back step both armies at the trumpet's call,
    Their spears in earth, their shields upon the mead.
    An unarmed crowd, old men and matrons, all
Stand by the lofty gates, and throng the towers and wall.

XVIII. But Juno, seated on a neighbouring height,
    Now Alban called, then nameless and unknown,
    Gazed from its summit on the field of fight,
    And, musing, on the marshalled hosts looked down
    Of Troy and Latium, and Latinus' town,
    Then straight--a goddess to a goddess--spake
    To Turnus' sister, who the sway doth own
    Of sounding river and of stagnant lake,
Raised by the King of air, as yielding for his sake.

XIX. "Nymph, pride of rivers, darling of my love,
    Thou know'st, Juturna, how to all whoe'er
    Of Latin maidens climbed the couch of Jove,
    I thee preferred, and gave his courts to share.
    Learn now thy woe, lest I the blame should bear.
    While Fate and Fortune smiled on Latium's sway,
    Thy walls I saved, and Turnus was my care.
    Now in ill hour I see him tempt the fray;
Fate and the foe speed on the inevitable day.

XX. "Not I this fight, this wager can behold.
    Thou, if thou durst, thy brother's doom arrest.
    Go; luck perchance may follow thee." Fast rolled
    Juturna's tears, and thrice she smote her breast.
    "No time to weep," said Juno, "speed thy quest,
    And save thy brother, if thou canst, ere dead,
    Or wake the war, and rend the league unblest;
    'Tis I who bid thee to be bold." She said,
And left her, tost with doubt, and full of wildering dread.

XXI. Forth come the Kings; Latinus, proudly borne
    High in his four-horse chariot, shines afar.
    Twelve gilded rays the monarch's brows adorn,
    His Sire's, the Sun-God's. Wielding as for war
    Two spears, comes Turnus in his two-horse car.
    There, Rome's great founder, doth AEneas ride,
    With dazzling shield, bright-shining as a star,
    And arms divine, and at his father's side
Ascanius takes his place, Rome's second hope and pride.

XXII. And clad in robes of purest white, the priest
    Leads forth the youngling of a bristly swine,
    And two-year sheep, by shearer's hands unfleec'd.
    And they, with eyes turned to the dawn divine,
    Bared the bright steel, the victim's brow to sign,
    And strewed the cakes of salted meal, and poured
    On blazing altars bowls of sacred wine;
    And good AEneas drew his glittering sword,
And thus, with pious prayer, the immortal gods adored:

XXIII. "Witness, O Sun, thou Earth attest my prayer,
    For whom I toil. Thou, Jove, supreme in sway,
    And thou, great Juno, pleased at length to spare.
    O mighty Mars, whose nod directs the fray;
    Springs, Streams, and Powers whom Air and Sea obey.
    If Turnus win--O let the vow remain--
    Humbly to King Evander, as they may,
    Troy's sons shall fly, Iulus quit the reign,
Nor seed of mine e'er vex the Latin field again.

XXIV. "But else, if victory smile upon my sword
    (As rather deem I, and may Heaven decree),
    I wish not Troy to be Italia's lord,
    Nor claim the crown; let each, unquelled and free,
    In deathless league on equal terms agree.
    Arms, empire let Latinus keep; I claim
    To bring our rites and deities. For me
    My Teucrian friends another town shall frame,
And bless the rising towers with fair Lavinia's name."

XXV. Thus first AEneas; then with uplift eyes,
    His right hand stretching to the stars in prayer,
    "Hear me, AEneas," old Latinus cries,
    "By the same Earth, and Sea and Stars I swear,
    By the twin offering of Latona fair,
    And two-faced Janus, and Hell's powers malign,
    And Dis unpitying; let Jove give ear,
    The Sire whose bolt the solemn league doth sign,
Witness these fires and gods,--my hand is on the shrine,--

XXVI. "No time with Latins shall this league unbind,
    Whate'er the issue, or the peace confound,
    No force shall shake the purpose of my mind.
    Nay--though the circling Ocean burst its bound,
    And all the Earth were in a deluge drowned,
    And Heaven with Hell should mingle. Sure as now
    This sceptre" (haply in his hand was found
    The Royal sceptre) "nevermore, I trow,
Shall bourgeon with fresh leaves, or spread a shadowing bough,

XXVII. "Since once in forests, from its parent tree
    Lopped clean away, the woodman stripped it bare
    Of boughs and leaves, now fashioned, as ye see,
    And cased in brass by cunning craftsman's care,
    For fathers of the Latin realm to bear."
    So they, amid their chiefest, Sire with Sire,
    Confirm the league. These o'er the flames prepare
    To slay the victims, and, as rites require,
The living entrails tear, and feed the sacred fire.

XXVIII. Long while unequal to Rutulian eyes
    The combat seemed, and trouble tossed them sore,
    Now more, beholding nearer, how in size
    And strength the champions differed, yea, and more,
    Beholding Turnus, as he moved before
    The altars, sad and silently, and seeks
    With downcast eyes Heaven's favour to implore,
    The wanness of his youthful frame, that speaks
Of health and hope now fled, the pallor of his cheeks.

XXIX. Soon as Juturna saw the whispers grow
    From tongue to tongue, and marked the changing tone,
    The hearts of people wavering to and fro,
    Amidst them,--now in form of Camers known,
    Great Camers, sprung from grandsires of renown,
    His father famed for many a brave emprise,
    Himself as famed for exploits of his own,--
    Amidst them, mistress of her part, she flies,
And scatters words of doubt, and many a dark surmise.

XXX. "Shame, will ye risk, Rutulians, for his host
    The life of one? In number, strength and show
    Do we not match them? _Those_ are all they boast,
    Trojans, Arcadians and Etruscans. Lo,
    Fight we by turns, each scarce can find a foe.
    He to his gods, whose shrines he dies to shield,
    Will rise, and praised will be his name below.
    We, reft of home, to tyrant lords shall yield,
And toil as slaves, who sit so slackly on the field."

XXXI. So saying, Juturna to the youths imparts
    Fresh rage, and murmurs through the concourse run,
    And changed are Latin and Laurentian hearts,
    And they, who lately sought the strife to shun,
    And longed for rest, now wish the league undone,
    And, pitying Turnus, wrongly doomed to die,
    Call out for arms. And now, her work begun,
    Juturna shows a lying sign on high,
That shakes Italian hearts, and cheats the wondering eye.

XXXII. Jove's golden eagle through the crimson skies
    In chase of clanging marsh-fowl, swooped in flight
    Down on a swan, and trussed the noble prize.
    The Latins gaze, when lo, a wondrous sight!
    Back wheels the flock, and all with screams unite,
    And darkening, as a cloud, in dense array
    Press on the foe, till, overborne by might,
    And yielding to sheer weight, he drops the prey
Into the stream below, and cloudward soars away.

XXXIII. With shouts the glad Rutulians hail the sign,
    And lift their hands. Then spake the seer straightway,
    Tolumnius: "Welcome, welcome, powers divine!
    'Twas this--'twas this I longed for, day by day.
    To arms! 'Tis I, Tolumnius, lead the way.
    Poor souls! whom yon strange pirate would enslave,
    Like feeble birds, and make your coast a prey.
    He too shall fly, and vanish o'er the wave.
Stand close and fight as one, your captive king to save."

XXXIV. He spake and hurled his javelin at the foes,
    Advancing. Shrill the cornel hissed, and flew
    True to its quarry. Then a shout uprose,
    And the ranks wavered, and hearts throbbed anew
    With ardour, as the gathering tumult grew.
    On went the missile to where, side by side,
    Nine brethren stood, of comely form, whom, true
    To her Gylippus, bare a Tuscan bride,
Nine tall Arcadian sons, in bloom of youthful pride.

XXXV. One, where the belt chafes, and the strong clasp bites
    The broidered edges,--comeliest of the band,
    And sheathed in shining mail--the steel-head smites,
    And rives the ribs, and rolls him on the sand.
    Blind with hot rage, his brethren, sword in hand,
    Or snatching missiles, to avenge the slain,
    Rush to the charge. Laurentum's ranks withstand
    Their onset, and a deluge sweeps the plain,
Trojans, Agylla's bands, Arcadia's glittering train.

XXXVI. One passion burns,--to let the sword decide.
    Stript stand the altars, and the shrines are bare;
    Dark drives the storm of javelins far and wide,
    The iron tempest hurtles in the air,
    And bowls and censers from the hearths they tear.
    Himself Latinus, flying, bears afar
    His home-gods, outraged by the league's misfare.
    Some leap to horse, and others yoke the car,
Or bare the glittering sword, and hurry to the war.

XXXVII. Aulestes first, a king with kingly crown,
    Messapus scares, and, spurring forward, fain
    To break the treaty, rides the Tuscan down.
    He, bating ground, falls back, and hurled amain
    Against the altars, pitches on the plain.
    Up comes Messapus, with his beam-like spear,
    And smites him, pleading sorely but in vain,
    Steep-rising heavily smites him, with a jeer,
"He hath it; Heaven hath gained a better victim here."

XXXVIII. Up Latins rush, and strip the limbs yet warm,
    A brand half-burnt fierce Corynoeus there
    Flings full at Ebusus, as with lifted arm
    He nears him, and the long beard, all aflare,
    Shines crackling, with a smell of burning hair.
    He with his left hand, following up the throw,
    Grasps the long locks, and, planting firm and fair
    His knee, beneath him pins the prostrate foe,
And drives the stark sword home, so deadly is the blow.

XXXIX. Then, fired with fury, Podalirius flew
    At shepherd Alsus, as he rushed among
    The foremost. With his naked sword he drew
    Behind him close, and o'er his foeman hung.
    He turning round his broad axe backward swung,
    And clave the chin and forehead. Left and right
    The dark blood o'er the spattered arms outsprung.
    Hard rest and iron slumber seal his sight,
The drooping eyelids close on everlasting night.

XL. Unarmed, AEneas, with uncovered brow,
    Stretched out his hands, and shouted to his train:
    "Where rush ye, men? what sudden discord now
    Is this? Be calm; your idle wrath refrain.
    The truce is struck; the treaty's terms are plain.
    To me belongs the battle, not to you.
    Give way to me, nor fret and fume in vain.
    This hand shall make the treaty firm and true.
These rites, this solemn pact give Turnus for my due."

XLI. So spake he, fain the tumult to allay,
    And scarce had ceased, when, whistling as it flew,
    A feathered shaft came hurtling on its way,
    And smote the good AEneas; whose, and who
    That shaft had sped, what wind had borne it true,
    What chance with fame Ausonia's host had crowned,
    What God, perhaps, had aided them--none knew.
    The glory of that noble deed was drowned,
And none was found to boast of great AEneas' wound.

XLII. When Turnus saw the Trojan prince retire,
    The chiefs bewildered, and their hearts unstrung,
    Hope unexpected set his soul on fire,
    And, calling for his steeds and arms, he sprung
    Upon his chariot, and the reins outflung.
    On drives he; many a hero of renown
    Sinks, crushed to death; the dying roll among
    The dead; whole ranks beneath his wheels go down,
And fast at flying hosts the fliers' spears are thrown.

XLIII. As when grim Mars, by Hebrus' icy flood,
    Clashing his brazen buckler, drives apace
    His fierce steeds, maddening with the lust of blood;
    They o'er the plain the flying winds outrace,
    And with their trampling groan the fields of Thrace;
    And round the War-God his attendants throng,
    Hatred, and Treachery and Fear's dark face;
    So Turnus drove the battling ranks among,
And lashed his smoking steeds, and waved the whistling thong.

XLIV. In piteous sort he tramples on the slain;
    The flying horse-hoofs spirt the crimson dew,
    And tread the gore down in the sandy plain.
    Now, man to man, at Thamyris he flew,
    And Pholus. Sthenelus aloof he slew;
    Aloof the two Imbracidae lay dead,
    Glaucus and Lades, of the Lycian crew,
    Both armed alike, whom Imbracus had bred
To fight, or on swift steeds the flying winds to head.

XLV. Elsewhere afield, amid the foremost, fought
    The brave Eumedes. (From the loins he came
    Of noble Dolon, and to war he brought
    The borrowed lustre of his grandsire's name,
    The strength and spirit of his sire of fame,
    Who for his meed, when offering to explore
    The Danaan camp, Pelides' car would claim.
    Poor fool! Tydides paid the boaster's score,
And for Achilles' steeds he hankers now no more.)

XLVI. Him Turnus sees, and through the void afar
    Speeds a light lance, then bids the coursers stand,
    And, lightly leaping from his two-horsed car,
    Stamps on his neck, fall'n breathless on the sand,
    And wrests the shining dagger from his hand.
    Deep in his throat he deals a deadly wound,
    And cries, "Now, Trojan, take the wished-for land.
    Lie there, and measure the Hesperian ground;
Their meed, who tempt my sword; thus city-walls they found."

XLVII. Asbutes, Sybaris and Chloreus bleed,
    Dares the bold, Orsilochus the brave,
    Thymoetes, pitched from off his plunging steed.
    As on the AEgean when the North-winds rave,
    And the fierce gale rolls shoreward wave on wave,
    And drives the cloud-rack through the sky; so these
    Shrank back from Turnus, as his path he clave,
    Urged by his impulse, and each turns and flees;
Loose streams his horsehair crest, blown backward by the breeze.

XLVIII. His fiery onset, and his shouts of pride
    Bold Phlegeus brooked not, but himself he flung
    Before the car, and caught and turned aside
    The foaming steeds. But while, thus dragged along,
    Grasping the bridle, on the yoke he hung,
    His shieldless side the broad-tipt javelin found,
    And pierced, and, staying, to the corslet clung,
    With linen folds and brazen links twice bound.
And lightly scored the skin, and grazed him with the wound.

XLIX. His shield before him, at the foe he made,
    And drew his short sword, turning sharply round,
    And trusted to the naked steel for aid,
    When wheel and axle, urged with onward bound,
    Struck down and dashed him headlong to the ground,
    And Turnus, reaching forward, sword in hand,
    Room 'twixt the hauberk and the helmet found
    And lopped the head with his avenging brand,
And left the bleeding trunk to welter on the sand.

L.  While Turnus thus dealt havoc as he flew,
    Back with AEneas from the combat went
    Ascanius, Mnestheus, and Achates true,
    And helped the bleeding hero to his tent.
    Faltering and pale, as on the spear he leant,
    Fretting, and tugging at the shaft in vain,
    Quick help he summons,--with the broadsword's rent
    The wound to widen, and the lurking bane
Cut out, and send him back to battle on the plain.

LI. Iapis, son of Iasus, was there,
    The best-beloved of Phoebus. Long ago
    Apollo, fired to see a youth so fair,
    His arts and gifts had offered to bestow,
    His augury, his lyre, his sounding bow.
    But he, in hope a bed-rid parent's days
    To lengthen, sought the leech's craft to know,
    The power of simples, and the silent praise
Of healing arts, and scorned the great Apollo's bays.

LII. Dark-frowning stands, still propt upon his spear,
    AEneas, heedless of his friends around
    And young Iulus, weeping in his fear.
    Tight-girt like Paeon, with the robes upbound,
    Beside him kneels the aged leech renowned.
    With busy haste Apollo's salves he tries,
    In vain, in vain he coaxes in the wound
    The stubborn steel, the pincer's teeth he plies:
Fate bides averse, his help the healing god denies;

LIII. And more and more, along the echoing wold,
    The war's wild horror thickens on the ear,
    And storm-like, in the darkened skies uprolled,
    The driving dust-clouds show the danger near.
    Now horsemen, galloping in haste, appear,
    And darts and arrows, as the foe draw nigh,
    Fall in the tents, and fill the camp with fear,
    And a grim clamour mounts the vaulted sky,
The shouts of those that fight, the groans of those that die.

LIV. Then, Venus, for her darling filled with grief,
    A stalk of dittany on Ida's crown
    Seeks out, and gathers, for his wound's relief,
    The flower of purple and the leaves of down.
    (To wounded wild-goats 'twas a plant well-known)
    This brings the Goddess, veiled in mist, and brews
    In a bright bowl a mixture of her own,
    And, steeped in water from the stream, she strews
Soft balm of fragrant scent, and sweet ambrosial dews.

LV. Therewith the leech, unwitting, rinsed the wound,
    And the pain fled, and all the blood was stayed.
    Out came the dart, and he again was sound.
    "Arms! bring his arms! Why stand ye thus afraid?"
    Iapis cries, and, foremost to upbraid,
    Inflames them to the fight. "No hand of mine,
    No power of leech-craft, nor a mortal's aid
    This healing wrought; a greater power divine,
AEneas, sends thee back, by greater deeds to shine."

LVI. He, hot for fight, the golden cuishes bound,
    And shook the spear, then put his corslet on,
    And strung the shield, and in his arms enwound,
    And gently through the helmet kissed his son.
    "Learn, boy, of me, how gallant deeds are done,
    Fortune of others. I will guard thee now,
    And lead to fame. Let riper manhood con
