light I caused the women and children who remained with us, perhaps some
six hundred in all, for very few of the former who were unmarried, or
who being married were still young and comely, had chosen to desert our
refuge, to ascend the pyramid, guessing that the Spaniards would attack
us at dawn. I stayed, however, with the three hundred fighting men that
were left to me, a hundred or more having thrown themselves upon the
mercy of the Spaniards, with the refugees, to await the Spanish onset
under shelter of the walls of the courtyard. At dawn it began, and by
midday, do what we could to stay it, the wall was stormed, and leaving
nearly a hundred dead and wounded behind me, I was driven to the winding
way that led to the summit of the pyramid. Here they assaulted us again,
but the road was steep and narrow, and their numbers gave them no great
advantage on it, so that the end of it was that we beat them back with
loss, and there was no more fighting that day.

The night which followed we spent upon the summit of the pyramid, and
for my part I was so weary that after I had eaten I never slept more
soundly. Next morning the struggle began anew; and this time with better
success to the Spaniards. Inch by inch under cover of the heavy fire
from their arquebusses and pieces, they forced us upward and backward.
All day long the fight continued upon the narrow road that wound from
stage to stage of the pyramid. At length, as the sun sank, a company of
our foes, their advance guard, with shouts of victory, emerged upon the
flat summit, and rushed towards the temple in its centre. All this while
the women had been watching, but now one of them sprang up, crying with
a loud voice:

'Seize them; they are but few.'

Then with a fearful scream of rage, the mob of women cast themselves
upon the weary Spaniards and Tlascalans, bearing them down by the weight
of their numbers. Many of them were slain indeed, but in the end the
women conquered, ay, and made their victims captive, fastening them
with cords to the rings of copper that were let into the stones of the
pavement, to which in former days those doomed to sacrifice had been
secured, when their numbers were so great that the priests feared
lest they should escape. I and the soldiers with me watched this sight
wondering, then I cried out:

'What! men of the Otomie, shall it be said that our women outdid us in
courage?' and without further ado, followed by a hundred or more of my
companions, I rushed desperately down the steep and narrow path.

At the first corner we met the main array of Spaniards and their allies,
coming up slowly, for now they were sure of victory, and so great was
the shock of our encounter that many of them were hurled over the edge
of the path, to roll down the steep sides of the pyramid. Seeing the
fate of their comrades, those behind them halted, then began to retreat.
Presently the weight of our rush struck them also, and they in turn
pushed upon those below, till at length panic seized them, and with a
great crying the long line of men that wound round and round the pyramid
from its base almost to its summit, sought their safety in flight. But
some of them found none, for the rush of those above pressing with ever
increasing force upon their friends below, drove many to their death,
since here on the pyramid there was nothing to cling to, and if once
a man lost his foothold on the path, his fall was broken only when his
body reached the court beneath. Thus in fifteen short minutes all that
the Spaniards had won this day was lost again, for except the prisoners
at its summit, none of them remained alive upon the teocalli; indeed so
great a terror took them, that bearing with them their dead and wounded,
they retreated under cover of the night to their camp without the walls
of the courtyard.

Now, weary but triumphant, we wended back towards the crest of the
pyramid, but as I turned the corner of the second angle that was perhaps
nearly one hundred feet above the level of the ground, a thought struck
me and I set those with me at a task. Loosening the blocks of stone that
formed the edge of the roadway, we rolled them down the sides of the
pyramid, and so laboured on removing layer upon layer of stones and
of the earth beneath, till where the path had been, was nothing but a
yawning gap thirty feet or more in width.

'Now,' I said, surveying our handiwork by the light of the rising moon,
'that Spaniard who would win our nest must find wings to fly with.'

'Ay, Teule,' answered one at my side, 'but say what wings shall WE
find?'

'The wings of Death,' I said grimly, and went on my upward way.


It was near midnight when I reached the temple, for the labour of
levelling the road took many hours and food had been sent to us from
above. As I drew nigh I was amazed to hear the sound of solemn chanting,
and still more was I amazed when I saw that the doors of the temple of
Huitzel were open, and that the sacred fire which had not shone there
for many years once more flared fiercely upon his altar. I stood still
listening. Did my ears trick me, or did I hear the dreadful song of
sacrifice? Nay, again its wild refrain rang out upon the silence:


To Thee we sacrifice! Save us, O Huitzel, Huitzel, lord god!


I rushed forward, and turning the angle of the temple I found myself
face to face with the past, for there as in bygone years were the
pabas clad in their black robes, their long hair hanging about their
shoulders, the dreadful knife of glass fixed in their girdles; there to
the right of the stone of sacrifice were those destined to the god, and
there being led towards it was the first victim, a Tlascalan prisoner,
his limbs held by men clad in the dress of priests. Near him, arrayed
in the scarlet robe of sacrifice, stood one of my own captains, who I
remembered had once served as a priest of Tezcat before idolatry was
forbidden in the City of Pines, and around were a wide circle of women
that watched, and from whose lips swelled the awful chant.

Now I understood it all. In their last despair, maddened by the loss of
fathers, husbands, and children, by their cruel fate, and standing face
to face with certain death, the fire of the old faith had burnt up in
their savage hearts. There was the temple, there were the stone and
implements of sacrifice, and there to their hands were the victims taken
in war. They would glut a last revenge, they would sacrifice to their
fathers' gods as their fathers had done before them, and the victims
should be taken from their own victorious foes. Ay, they must die, but
at the least they would seek the Mansions of the Sun made holy by the
blood of the accursed Teule.

I have said that it was the women who sang this chant and glared so
fiercely upon the victims, but I have not yet told all the horror of
what I saw, for in the fore-front of their circle, clad in white robes,
the necklet of great emeralds, Guatemoc's gift, flashing upon her
breast, the plumes of royal green set in her hair, giving the time of
the death chant with a little wand, stood Montezuma's daughter, Otomie
my wife. Never had I seen her look so beautiful or so dreadful. It was
not Otomie whom I saw, for where was the tender smile and where the
gentle eyes? Here before me was a living Vengeance wearing the shape of
woman. In an instant I guessed the truth, though I did not know it all.
Otomie, who although she was not of it, had ever favoured the Christian
faith, Otomie, who for years had never spoken of these dreadful rites
except with anger, whose every act was love and whose every word was
kindness, was still in her soul an idolater and a savage. She had hidden
this side of her heart from me well through all these years, perchance
she herself had scarcely known its secret, for but twice had I seen
anything of the buried fierceness of her blood. The first time was when
Marina had brought her a certain robe in which she might escape from
the camp of Cortes, and she had spoken to Marina of that robe; and the
second when on this same day she had played her part to the Tlascalan,
and had struck him down with her own hand as he bent over me.

All this and much more passed through my mind in that brief moment,
while Otomie marked the time of the death chant, and the pabas dragged
the Tlascalan to his doom.

The next I was at her side.

'What passes here?' I asked sternly.

Otomie looked on me with a cold wonder, and empty eyes as though she did
not know me.

'Go back, white man,' she answered; 'it is not lawful for strangers to
mingle in our rites.'

I stood bewildered, not knowing what to do, while the flame burned and
the chant went up before the effigy of Huitzel, of the demon Huitzel
awakened after many years of sleep.

Again and yet again the solemn chant arose, Otomie beating time with her
little rod of ebony, and again and yet again the cry of triumph rose to
the silent stars.

Now I awoke from my dream, for as an evil dream it seemed to me, and
drawing my sword I rushed towards the priest at the altar to cut him
down. But though the men stood still the women were too quick for me.
Before I could lift the sword, before I could even speak a word, they
had sprung upon me like the jaguars of their own forests, and like
jaguars they hissed and growled into my ear:

'Get you gone, Teule,' they said, 'lest we stretch you on the stone with
your brethren.' And still hissing they pushed me thence.

I drew back and thought for a while in the shadow of the temple. My eye
fell upon the long line of victims awaiting their turn of sacrifice.
There were thirty and one of them still alive, and of these five were
Spaniards. I noted that the Spaniards were chained the last of all the
line. It seemed that the murderers would keep them till the end of the
feast, indeed I discovered that they were to be offered up at the rising
of the sun. How could I save them, I wondered. My power was gone. The
women could not be moved from their work of vengeance; they were mad
with their sufferings. As well might a man try to snatch her prey from a
puma robbed of her whelps, as to turn them from their purpose. With the
men it was otherwise, however. Some of them mingled in the orgie indeed,
but more stood aloof watching with a fearful joy the spectacle in
which they did not share. Near me was a man, a noble of the Otomie, of
something more than my own age. He had always been my friend, and after
me he commanded the warriors of the tribe. I went to him and said,
'Friend, for the sake of the honour of your people, help me to end
this.'

'I cannot, Teule,' he answered, 'and beware how you meddle in the play,
for none will stand by you. Now the women have power, and you see they
use it. They are about to die, but before they die they will do as their
fathers did, for their strait is sore, and though they have been put
aside, the old customs are not forgotten.'

'At the least can we not save these Teules?' I answered.

'Why should you wish to save the Teules? Will they save us some few days
hence, when WE are in their power?'

'Perhaps not,' I said, 'but if we must die, let us die clean from this
shame.'

'What then do you wish me to do, Teule?'

'This: I would have you find some three or four men who are not fallen
into this madness, and with them aid me to loose the Teules, for we
cannot save the others. If this may be done, surely we can lower them
with ropes from that point where the road is broken away, down to the
path beneath, and thus they may escape to their own people.'

'I will try,' he answered, shrugging his shoulders, 'not from any
tenderness towards the accursed Teules, whom I could well bear to see
stretched upon the stone, but because it is your wish, and for the sake
of the friendship between us.'

Then he went, and presently I saw several men place themselves, as
though by chance, between the spot where the last of the line of Indian
prisoners, and the first of the Spaniards were made fast, in such a
fashion as to hide them from the sight of the maddened women, engrossed
as they were in their orgies.

Now I crept up to the Spaniards. They were squatted upon the ground,
bound by their hands and feet to the copper rings in the pavement. There
they sat silently awaiting the dreadful doom, their faces grey with
terror, and their eyes starting from their sockets.

'Hist!' I whispered in Spanish into the ear of the first, an old man
whom I knew as one who had taken part in the wars of Cortes. 'Would you
be saved?'

He looked up quickly, and said in a hoarse voice:

'Who are you that talk of saving us? Who can save us from these she
devils?'

'I am Teule, a man of white blood and a Christian, and alas that I must
say it, the captain of this savage people. With the aid of some few men
who are faithful to me, I purpose to cut your bonds, and afterwards you
shall see. Know, Spaniard, that I do this at great risk, for if we are
caught, it is a chance but that I myself shall have to suffer those
things from which I hope to rescue you.'

'Be assured, Teule,' answered the Spaniard, 'that if we should get safe
away, we shall not forget this service. Save our lives now, and the
time may come when we shall pay you back with yours. But even if we are
loosed, how can we cross the open space in this moonlight and escape the
eyes of those furies?'

'We must trust to chance for that,' I answered, and as I spoke, fortune
helped us strangely, for by now the Spaniards in their camp below had
perceived what was going forward on the crest of the teocalli. A yell of
horror rose from them and instantly they opened fire upon us with their
pieces and arquebusses, though, because of the shape of the pyramid and
of their position beneath it, the storm of shot swept over us, doing
us little or no hurt. Also a great company of them poured across the
courtyard, hoping to storm the temple, for they did not know that the
road had been broken away.

Now, though the rites of sacrifice never ceased, what with the roar of
cannon, the shouts of rage and terror from the Spaniards, the hiss of
musket balls, and the crackling of flames from houses which they had
fired to give them more light, and the sound of chanting, the turmoil
and confusion grew so great as to render the carrying out of my purpose
easier than I had hoped. By this time my friend, the captain of the
Otomie, was at my side, and with him several men whom he could trust.
Stooping down, with a few swift blows of a knife I cut the ropes which
bound the Spaniards. Then we gathered ourselves into a knot, twelve of
us or more, and in the centre of the knot we set the five Spaniards.
This done, I drew my sword and cried:

'The Teules storm the temple!' which was true, for already their long
line was rushing up the winding path. 'The Teules storm the temple, I go
to stop them,' and straightway we sped across the open space.

None saw us, or if they saw us, none hindered us, for all the company
were intent upon the consummation of a fresh sacrifice; moreover, the
tumult was such, as I afterwards discovered, that we were scarcely
noticed. Two minutes passed, and our feet were set upon the winding way,
and now I breathed again, for we were beyond the sight of the women.
On we rushed swiftly as the cramped limbs of the Spaniards would carry
them, till presently we reached that angle in the path where the breach
began. The attacking Spaniards had already come to the further side of
the gap, for though we could not see them, we could hear their cries
of rage and despair as they halted helplessly and understood that their
comrades were beyond their aid.

'Now we are sped,' said the Spaniard with whom I had spoken; 'the road
is gone, and it must be certain death to try the side of the pyramid.'

'Not so,' I answered; 'some fifty feet below the path still runs, and
one by one we will lower you to it with this rope.'

Then we set to work. Making the cord fast beneath the arms of a soldier
we let him down gently, till he came to the path, and was received there
by his comrades as a man returned from the dead. The last to be lowered
was that Spaniard with whom I had spoken.

'Farewell,' he said, 'and may the blessing of God be on you for this act
of mercy, renegade though you are. Say, now, will you not come with me?
I set my life and honour in pledge for your safety. You tell me that
you are still a Christian man. Is that a place for Christians?' and he
pointed upwards.

'No, indeed,' I answered, 'but still I cannot come, for my wife and son
are there, and I must return to die with them if need be. If you bear me
any gratitude, strive in return to save their lives, since for my own I
care but little.'

'That I will,' he said, and then we let him down among his friends, whom
he reached in safety.

Now we returned to the temple, giving it out that the Spaniards were in
retreat, having failed to cross the breach in the roadway. Here before
the temple the orgie still went on. But two Indians remained alive; and
the priests of sacrifice grew weary.

'Where are the Teules?' cried a voice. 'Swift! strip them for the
altar.'

But the Teules were gone, nor, search where they would, could they find
them.

'Their God has taken them beneath His wing,' I said, speaking from the
shadow and in a feigned voice. 'Huitzel cannot prevail before the God of
the Teules.'

Then I slipped aside, so that none knew that it was I who had spoken,
but the cry was caught up and echoed far and wide.

'The God of the Christians has hidden them beneath His wing. Let us make
merry with those whom He rejects,' said the cry, and the last of the
captives were dragged away.

Now I thought that all was finished, but this was not so. I have spoken
of the secret purpose which I read in the sullen eyes of the Indian
women as they laboured at the barricades, and I was about to see its
execution. Madness still burned in the hearts of these women; they had
accomplished their sacrifice, but their festival was still to come. They
drew themselves away to the further side of the pyramid, and, heedless
of the shots which now and again pierced the breast of one of them--for
here they were exposed to the Spanish fire--remained a while in
preparation. With them went the priests of sacrifice, but now, as
before, the rest of the men stood in sullen groups, watching what
befell, but lifting no hand or voice to hinder its hellishness.

One woman did not go with them, and that woman was Otomie my wife.

She stood by the stone of sacrifice, a piteous sight to see, for her
frenzy or rather her madness had outworn itself, and she was as she had
ever been. There stood Otomie, gazing with wide and horror-stricken
eyes now at the tokens of this unholy rite and now at her own hands--as
though she thought to see them red, and shuddered at the thought. I
drew near to her and touched her on the shoulder. She turned swiftly,
gasping,

'Husband! husband!'

'It is I,' I answered, 'but call me husband no more.'

'Oh! what have I done?' she wailed, and fell senseless in my arms.


And here I will add what at the time I knew nothing of, for it was told
me in after years by the Rector of this parish, a very learned man,
though one of narrow mind. Had I known it indeed, I should have spoken
more kindly to Otomie my wife even in that hour, and thought more gently
of her wickedness. It seems, so said my friend the Rector, that from the
most ancient times, those women who have bent the knee to demon gods,
such as were the gods of Anahuac, are subject at any time to become
possessed by them, even after they have abandoned their worship, and to
be driven in their frenzy to the working of the greatest crimes. Thus,
among other instances, he told me that a Greek poet named Theocritus
sets out in one of his idyls how a woman called Agave, being engaged in
a secret religious orgie in honour of a demon named Dionysus, perceived
her own son Pentheus watching the celebration of the mysteries, and
thereon becoming possessed by the demon she fell on him and murdered
him, being aided by the other women. For this the poet, who was also a
worshipper of Dionysus, gave her great honour and not reproach, seeing
that she did the deed at the behest of this god, 'a deed not to be
blamed.'

Now I write of this for a reason, though it has nothing to do with me,
for it seems that as Dionysus possessed Agave, driving her to unnatural
murder, so did Huitzel possess Otomie, and indeed she said as much to me
afterwards. For I am sure that if the devils whom the Greeks worshipped
had such power, a still greater strength was given to those of Anahuac,
who among all fiends were the first. If this be so, as I believe, it was
not Otomie that I saw at the rites of sacrifice, but rather the demon
Huitzel whom she had once worshipped, and who had power, therefore, to
enter into her body for awhile in place of her own spirit.



CHAPTER XXXVI

THE SURRENDER


Taking Otomie in my arms, I bore her to one of the storehouses attached
to the temple. Here many children had been placed for safety, among them
my own son.

'What ails our mother, father?' said the boy. 'And why did she shut
me in here with these children when it seems that there is fighting
without?'

'Your mother has fainted,' I answered, 'and doubtless she placed you
here to keep you safe. Now do you tend her till I return.'

'I will do so,' answered the boy, 'but surely it would be better that I,
who am almost a man, should be without, fighting the Spaniards at your
side rather than within, nursing sick women.'

'Do as I bid you, son,' I said, 'and I charge you not to leave this
place until I come for you again.'

Now I passed out of the storehouse, shutting the door behind me. A
minute later I wished that I had stayed where I was, since on the
platform my eyes were greeted by a sight more dreadful than any that
had gone before. For there, advancing towards us, were the women divided
into four great companies, some of them bearing infants in their arms.
They came singing and leaping, many of them naked to the middle. Nor
was this all, for in front of them ran the pabas and such of the women
themselves as were persons in authority. These leaders, male and female,
ran and leaped and sang, calling upon the names of their demon-gods,
and celebrating the wickednesses of their forefathers, while after them
poured the howling troops of women.

To and fro they rushed, now making obeisance to the statue of Huitzel,
now prostrating themselves before his hideous sister, the goddess of
Death, who sat beside him adorned with her carven necklace of men's
skulls and hands, now bowing around the stone of sacrifice, and now
thrusting their bare arms into the flames of the holy fire. For an hour
or more they celebrated this ghastly carnival, of which even I, versed
as I was in the Indian customs, could not fully understand the meaning,
and then, as though some single impulse had possessed them, they
withdrew to the centre of the open space, and, forming themselves into a
double circle, within which stood the pabas, of a sudden they burst into
a chant so wild and shrill that as I listened my blood curdled in my
veins.

Even now the burden of that chant with the vision of those who sang it
sometimes haunts my sleep at night, but I will not write it here. Let
him who reads imagine all that is most cruel in the heart of man, and
every terror of the evillest dream, adding to these some horror-ridden
tale of murder, ghosts, and inhuman vengeance; then, if he can, let him
shape the whole in words and, as in a glass darkly, perchance he may
mirror the spirit of that last ancient song of the women of the Otomie,
with its sobs, its cries of triumph, and its death wailings.

Ever as they sang, step by step they drew backwards, and with them went
the leaders of each company, their eyes fixed upon the statues of their
gods. Now they were but a segment of a circle, for they did not advance
towards the temple; backward and outward they went with a slow and
solemn tramp. There was but one line of them now, for those in the
second ring filled the gaps in the first as it widened; still they drew
on till at length they stood on the sheer edge of the platform. Then
the priests and the women leaders took their place among them and for a
moment there was silence, until at a signal one and all they bent them
backwards. Standing thus, their long hair waving on the wind, the light
of burning houses flaring upon their breasts and in their maddened eyes,
they burst into the cry of:

'SAVE US, HUITZEL! RECEIVE US, LORD GOD, OUR HOME!'

Thrice they cried it, each time more shrilly than before, then suddenly
they were GONE, the women of the Otomie were no more!

With their own self-slaughter they had consummated the last celebration
of the rites of sacrifice that ever shall be held in the City of Pines.
The devil gods were dead and their worshippers with them.


A low murmur ran round the lips of the men who watched, then one cried,
and his voice rang strangely in the sudden silence: 'May our wives,
the women of the Otomie, rest softly in the Houses of the Sun, for of a
surety they teach us how to die.'

'Ay,' I answered, 'but not thus. Let women do self-murder, our foes have
swords for the hearts of men.'

I turned to go, and before me stood Otomie.

'What has befallen?' she said. 'Where are my sisters? Oh! surely I have
dreamed an evil dream. I dreamed that the gods of my forefathers were
strong once more, and that once more they drank the blood of men.'

'Your ill dream has a worse awakening, Otomie,' I answered. 'The gods of
hell are still strong indeed in this accursed land, and they have taken
