and her. The crew, of course, though they were a little vexed at losing
their pet, consoled themselves with the thought that she was a "real
born lady," and Mr. Oxenham's daughter, too; and there was not a man on
board who did not prick up his ears for a message if she approached him,
or one who would not have, I verily believe, jumped overboard to do her
a pleasure.

Only Yeo kept sorrowfully apart. He never looked at her, spoke to her,
met her even, if he could. His dream had vanished. He had found her! and
after all, she did not care for him? Why should she?

But it was hard to have hunted a bubble for years, and have it break
in his hand at last. "Set not your affections on things on the earth,"
murmured Yeo to himself, as he pored over his Bible, in the vain hope of
forgetting his little maid.

But why did Amyas wish to increase the distance between himself and
Ayacanora? Many reasons might be given: I deny none of them. But the
main one, fantastic as it may seem, was simply, that while she had
discovered herself to be an Englishwoman, he had discovered her to be a
Spaniard. If her father were seven times John Oxenham (and even that the
perverse fellow was inclined to doubt), her mother was a Spaniard--Pah!
one of the accursed race; kinswoman--perhaps, to his brother's
murderers! His jaundiced eyes could see nothing but the Spanish element
in her; or, indeed, in anything else. As Cary said to him once, using a
cant phrase of Sidney's, which he had picked up from Frank, all heaven
and earth were "spaniolated," to him. He seemed to recollect nothing but
that Heaven had "made Spaniards to be killed, and him to kill them." If
he had not been the most sensible of John Bulls, he would certainly have
forestalled the monomania of that young Frenchman of rank, who, some
eighty years after him, so maddened his brain by reading of the Spanish
cruelties, that he threw up all his prospects and turned captain of
filibusters in the West Indies, for the express purpose of ridding them
of their tyrants; and when a Spanish ship was taken, used to relinquish
the whole booty to his crew, and reserve for himself only the pleasure
of witnessing his victims' dying agonies.

But what had become of that bird-like song of Ayacanora's which had
astonished them on the banks of the Meta, and cheered them many a time
in their anxious voyage down the Magdalena? From the moment that she
found out her English parentage, it stopped. She refused utterly to sing
anything but the songs and psalms which she picked up from the English.
Whether it was that she despised it as a relic of her barbarism, or
whether it was too maddening for one whose heart grew heavier and
humbler day by day, the nightingale notes were heard no more.

So homeward they ran, before a favoring southwest breeze: but long
ere they were within sight of land, Lucy Passmore was gone to her rest
beneath the Atlantic waves.



CHAPTER XXVIII

HOW AMYAS CAME HOME THE THIRD TIME

     "It fell about the Martinmas,
         When nights were lang and mirk,
     That wife's twa sons cam hame again,
         And their hats were o' the birk.

     "It did na graw by bush or brae,
         Nor yet in ony shough;
     But by the gates o' paradise
         That birk grew fair eneugh."

                The Wife of Usher's Well.

It is the evening of the 15th of February, 1587, and Mrs. Leigh (for
we must return now to old scenes and old faces) is pacing slowly up and
down the terrace-walk at Burrough, looking out over the winding river,
and the hazy sand-hills, and the wide western sea, as she has done every
evening, be it fair weather or foul, for three weary years. Three years
and more are past and gone, and yet no news of Frank and Amyas, and
the gallant ship and all the gallant souls therein; and loving eyes in
Bideford and Appledore, Clovelly and Ilfracombe, have grown hollow with
watching and with weeping for those who have sailed away into the West,
as John Oxenham sailed before them, and have vanished like a dream, as
he did, into the infinite unknown. Three weary years, and yet no word.
Once there was a flush of hope, and good Sir Richard (without Mrs.
Leigh's knowledge), had sent a horseman posting across to Plymouth, when
the news arrived that Drake, Frobisher, and Carlisle had returned with
their squadron from the Spanish Main. Alas! he brought back great news,
glorious news; news of the sacking of Cartagena, San Domingo, Saint
Augustine; of the relief of Raleigh's Virginian Colony: but no news of
the Rose, and of those who had sailed in her. And Mrs. Leigh bowed her
head, and worshipped, and said, "The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken
away; blessed be the name of the Lord!"

Her hair was now grown gray; her cheeks were wan; her step was feeble.
She seldom went from home, save to the church, and to the neighboring
cottages. She never mentioned her sons' names; never allowed a word to
pass her lips, which might betoken that she thought of them; but every
day, when the tide was high, and red flag on the sandhills showed that
there was water over the bar, she paced the terrace-walk, and devoured
with greedy eyes the sea beyond in search of the sail which never came.
The stately ships went in and out as of yore; and white sails hung off
the bar for many an hour, day after day, month after month, year after
year: but an instinct within told her that none of them were the sails
she sought. She knew that ship, every line of her, the cut of every
cloth; she could have picked it out miles away, among a whole fleet, but
it never came, and Mrs. Leigh bowed her head and worshipped, and went
to and fro among the poor, who looked on her as an awful being, and one
whom God had brought very near to Himself, in that mysterious heaven of
sorrow which they too knew full well. And lone women and bed-ridden men
looked in her steadfast eyes, and loved them, and drank in strength from
them; for they knew (though she never spoke of her own grief) that she
had gone down into the fiercest depths of the fiery furnace, and was
walking there unhurt by the side of One whose form was as of the Son
of God. And all the while she was blaming herself for her "earthly"
longings, and confessing nightly to Heaven that weakness which she could
not shake off, which drew her feet at each high tide to the terrace-walk
beneath the row of wind-clipt trees.

But this evening Northam is in a stir. The pebble ridge is thundering
far below, as it thundered years ago: but Northam is noisy enough
without the rolling of the surge. The tower is rocking with the pealing
bells: the people are all in the streets shouting and singing round
bonfires. They are burning the pope in effigy, drinking to the queen's
health, and "So perish all her enemies!" The hills are red with bonfires
in every village; and far away, the bells of Bideford are answering
the bells of Northam, as they answered them seven years ago, when Amyas
returned from sailing round the world. For this day has come the news
that Mary Queen of Scots is beheaded in Fotheringay; and all England,
like a dreamer who shakes off some hideous nightmare, has leapt up in
one tremendous shout of jubilation, as the terror and the danger of
seventeen anxious years is lifted from its heart for ever.

Yes, she is gone, to answer at a higher tribunal than that of the
Estates of England, for all the noble English blood which has been
poured out for her; for all the noble English hearts whom she has
tempted into treachery, rebellion, and murder. Elizabeth's own words
have been fulfilled at last, after years of long-suffering,--

     "The daughter of debate,
       That discord aye doth sow,
     Hath reap'd no gain where former rule
       Hath taught still peace to grow."

And now she can do evil no more. Murder and adultery, the heart which
knew no forgiveness, the tongue which could not speak truth even for its
own interest, have past and are perhaps atoned for; and her fair face
hangs a pitiful dream in the memory even of those who knew that either
she, or England, must perish.

     "Nothing is left of her
     Now, but pure womanly."

And Mrs. Leigh, Protestant as she is, breathes a prayer, that the Lord
may have mercy on that soul, as "clear as diamond, and as hard," as she
said of herself. That last scene, too, before the fatal block--it could
not be altogether acting. Mrs. Leigh had learned many a priceless lesson
in the last seven years; might not Mary Stuart have learned something
in seventeen? And Mrs. Leigh had been a courtier, and knew, as far as a
chaste Englishwoman could know (which even in those coarser days was not
very much), of that godless style of French court profligacy in which
poor Mary had had her youthful training, amid the Medicis, and the
Guises, and Cardinal Lorraine; and she shuddered, and sighed to
herself"--To whom little is given, of them shall little be required!"
But still the bells pealed on and would not cease.

What was that which answered them from afar out of the fast darkening
twilight? A flash, and then the thunder of a gun at sea.

Mrs. Leigh stopped. The flash was right outside the bar. A ship in
distress it could not be. The wind was light and westerly. It was a
high spring-tide, as evening floods are always there. What could it be?
Another flash, another gun. The noisy folks of Northam were hushed at
once, and all hurried into the churchyard which looks down on the broad
flats and the river.

There was a gallant ship outside the bar. She was running in, too, with
all sails set. A large ship; nearly a thousand tons she might be; but
not of English rig. What was the meaning of it? A Spanish cruiser about
to make reprisals for Drake's raid along the Cadiz shore! Not that,
surely. The Don had no fancy for such unscientific and dare-devil
warfare. If he came, he would come with admiral, rear-admiral, and
vice-admiral, transports, and avisos, according to the best-approved
methods, articles, and science of war. What could she be?

Easily, on the flowing tide and fair western wind, she has slipped
up the channel between the two lines of sandhill. She is almost off
Appledore now. She is no enemy; and if she be a foreigner, she is a
daring one, for she has never veiled her topsails,--and that, all know,
every foreign ship must do within sight of an English port, or stand the
chance of war; as the Spanish admiral found, who many a year since
was sent in time of peace to fetch home from Flanders Anne of Austria,
Philip the Second's last wife.

For in his pride he sailed into Plymouth Sound without veiling topsails,
or lowering the flag of Spain. Whereon, like lion from his den, out
rushed John Hawkins the port admiral, in his famous Jesus of Lubec
(afterwards lost in the San Juan d'Ulloa fight), and without argument or
parley, sent a shot between the admiral's masts; which not producing the
desired effect, alongside ran bold Captain John, and with his next
shot, so says his son, an eye-witness, "lackt the admiral through and
through;" whereon down came the offending flag; and due apologies were
made, but not accepted for a long time by the stout guardian of her
majesty's honor. And if John Hawkins did as much for a Spanish fleet in
time of peace, there is more than one old sea-dog in Appledore who will
do as much for a single ship in time of war, if he can find even an iron
pot to burn powder withal.

The strange sail passed out of sight behind the hill of Appledore; and
then there rose into the quiet evening air a cheer, as from a hundred
throats. Mrs. Leigh stood still, and listened. Another gun thundered
among the hills; and then another cheer.

It might have been twenty minutes before the vessel hove in sight again
round the dark rocks of the Hubbastone, as she turned up the Bideford
river. Mrs. Leigh had stood that whole time perfectly motionless, a pale
and scarcely breathing statue, her eyes fixed upon the Viking's rock.

Round the Hubbastone she came at last. There was music on board, drums
and fifes, shawms and trumpets, which wakened ringing echoes from every
knoll of wood and slab of slate. And as she opened full on Burrough
House, another cheer burst from her crew, and rolled up to the hills
from off the silver waters far below, full a mile away.

Mrs. Leigh walked quickly toward the house, and called her maid,--

"Grace, bring me my hood. Master Amyas is come home!"

"No, surely? O joyful sound! Praised and blessed be the Lord, then;
praised and blessed be the Lord! But, madam, however did you know that?"

"I heard his voice on the river; but I did not hear Mr. Frank's with
him, Grace!"

"Oh, be sure, madam, where the one is the other is. They'd never part
company. Both come home or neither, I'll warrant. Here's your hood,
madam."

And Mrs. Leigh, with Grace behind her, started with rapid steps towards
Bideford.

Was it true? Was it a dream? Had the divine instinct of the mother
enabled her to recognize her child's voice among all the rest, and at
that enormous distance; or was her brain turning with the long effort of
her supernatural calm?

Grace asked herself, in her own way, that same question many a time
between Burrough and Bideford. When they arrived on the quay the
question answered itself.

As they came down Bridgeland Street (where afterwards the tobacco
warehouses for the Virginia trade used to stand, but which then was but
a row of rope-walks and sailmakers' shops), they could see the strange
ship already at anchor in the river. They had just reached the lower end
of the street, when round the corner swept a great mob, sailors, women,
'prentices, hurrahing, questioning, weeping, laughing: Mrs. Leigh
stopped; and behold, they stopped also.

"Here she is!" shouted some one; "here's his mother!"

"His mother? Not their mother!" said Mrs. Leigh to herself, and turned
very pale; but that heart was long past breaking.

The next moment the giant head and shoulders of Amyas, far above the
crowd, swept round the corner.

"Make a way! Make room for Madam Leigh!"--And Amyas fell on his knees at
her feet.

She threw her arms round his neck, and bent her fair head over his,
while sailors, 'prentices, and coarse harbor-women were hushed into holy
silence, and made a ring round the mother and the son.

Mrs. Leigh asked no question. She saw that Amyas was alone.

At last he whispered, "I would have died to save him, mother, if I
could."

"You need not tell me that, Amyas Leigh, my son."

Another silence.

"How did he die?" whispered Mrs. Leigh.

"He is a martyr. He died in the----"

Amyas could say no more.

"The Inquisition?"

"Yes."

A strong shudder passed through Mrs. Leigh's frame, and then she lifted
up her head.

"Come home, Amyas. I little expected such an honor--such an honor--ha!
ha! and such a fair young martyr, too; a very St. Stephen! God, have
mercy on me; and let me not go mad before these folk, when I ought to be
thanking Thee for Thy great mercies! Amyas, who is that?"

And she pointed to Ayacanora, who stood close behind Amyas, watching
with keen eyes the whole.

"She is a poor wild Indian girl--my daughter, I call her. I will tell
you her story hereafter."

"Your daughter? My grand-daughter, then. Come hither, maiden, and be my
grand-daughter."

Ayacanora came obedient, and knelt down, because she had seen Amyas
kneel.

"God forbid, child! kneel not to me. Come home, and let me know whether
I am sane or mazed, alive or dead."

And drawing her hood over her face, she turned to go back, holding Amyas
tight by one hand, and Ayacanora by the other.

The crowd let them depart some twenty yards in respectful silence, and
then burst into a cheer which made the old town ring.

Mrs. Leigh stopped suddenly.

"I had forgotten, Amyas. You must not let me stand in the way of your
duty. Where are your men?"

"Kissed to death by this time; all of them, that is, who are left."

"Left?"

"We went out a hundred, mother, and we came home forty-four--if we are
at home. Is it a dream, mother? Is this you? and this old Bridgeland
Street again? As I live, there stands Evans the smith, at his door,
tankard in hand, as he did when I was a boy!"

The brawny smith came across the street to them; but stopped when he saw
Amyas, but no Frank.

"Better one than neither, madam!" said he, trying a rough comfort. Amyas
shook his hand as he passed him; but Mrs. Leigh neither heard nor saw
him nor any one.

"Mother," said Amyas, when they were now past the causeway, "we are rich
for life."

"Yes; a martyr's death was the fittest for him."

"I have brought home treasure untold."

"What, my boy?"

"Treasure untold. Cary has promised to see to it to-night."

"Very well. I would that he had slept at our house. He was a kindly lad,
and loved Frank. When did he?"--

"Three years ago, and more. Within two months of our sailing."

"Ah! Yes, he told me so."

"Told you so?"

"Yes; the dear lad has often come to see me in my sleep; but you never
came. I guessed how it was--as it should be."

"But I loved you none the less, mother!"

"I know that, too: but you were busy with the men, you know, sweet;
so your spirit could not come roving home like his, which was free.
Yes--all as it should be. My maid, and do you not find it cold here in
England, after those hot regions?"

"Ayacanora's heart is warm; she does not think about cold."

"Warm? perhaps you will warm my heart for me, then."

"Would God I could do it, mother!" said Amyas, half reproachfully.

Mrs. Leigh looked up in his face, and burst into a violent flood of
tears.

"Sinful! sinful that I am!"

"Blessed creature!" cried Amyas, "if you speak so I shall go mad.
Mother, mother, I have been dreading this meeting for months. It has
been a nightmare hanging over me like a horrible black thunder-cloud; a
great cliff miles high, with its top hid in the clouds, which I had to
climb, and dare not. I have longed to leap overboard, and flee from it
like a coward into the depths of the sea.--The thought that you might
ask me whether I was not my brother's keeper--that you might require his
blood at my hands--and now, now! when it comes! to find you all love,
and trust, and patience--mother, mother, it's more than I can bear!" and
he wept violently.

Mrs. Leigh knew enough of Amyas to know that any burst of this kind,
from his quiet nature, betokened some very fearful struggle; and the
loving creature forgot everything instantly, in the one desire to soothe
him.

And soothe him she did; and home the two went, arm in arm together,
while Ayacanora held fast, like a child, by the skirt of Mrs. Leigh's
cloak. The self-help and daring of the forest nymph had given place to
the trembling modesty of the young girl, suddenly cast on shore in a new
world, among strange faces, strange hopes, and strange fears also.

"Will your mother love me?" whispered she to Amyas, as she went in.

"Yes; but you must do what she tells you."

Ayacanora pouted.

"She will laugh at me, because I am wild."

"She never laughs at any one."

"Humph!" said Ayacanora. "Well, I shall not be afraid of her. I thought
she would have been tall like you; but she is not even as big as me."

This hardly sounded hopeful for the prospect of Ayacanora's obedience;
but ere twenty-four hours had passed, Mrs. Leigh had won her over
utterly; and she explained her own speech by saying that she thought so
great a man ought to have a great mother. She had expected, poor thing,
in her simplicity, some awful princess with a frown like Juno's own, and
found instead a healing angel.

Her story was soon told to Mrs. Leigh, who of course, woman-like,
would not allow a doubt as to her identity. And the sweet mother never
imprinted a prouder or fonder kiss upon her son's forehead, than
that with which she repaid his simple declaration, that he had kept
unspotted, like a gentleman and a Christian, the soul which God had put
into his charge.

"Then you have forgiven me, mother?"

"Years ago I said in this same room, what should I render to the Lord
for having given me two such sons? And in this room I say it once again.
Tell me all about my other son, that I may honor him as I honor you."

And then, with the iron nerve which good women have, she made him give
her every detail of Lucy Passmore's story and of all which had happened
from the day of their sailing to that luckless night at Guayra. And when
it was done, she led Ayacanora out, and began busying herself about the
girl's comforts, as calmly as if Frank and Amyas had been sleeping in
their cribs in the next room.

But she had hardly gone upstairs, when a loud knock at the door was
followed by its opening hastily; and into the hall burst, regardless of
etiquette, the tall and stately figure of Sir Richard Grenville.

Amyas dropped on his knees instinctively. The stern warrior was quite
unmanned; and as he bent over his godson, a tear dropped from that iron
cheek, upon the iron cheek of Amyas Leigh.

"My lad! my glorious lad! and where have you been? Get up, and tell me
all. The sailors told me a little, but I must hear every word. I knew
you would do something grand. I told your mother you were too good a
workman for God to throw away. Now, let me have the whole story. Why, I
am out of breath! To tell truth, I ran three-parts of the way hither."

And down the two sat, and Amyas talked long into the night; while Sir
Richard, his usual stateliness recovered, smiled stern approval at each
deed of daring; and when all was ended, answered with something like a
sigh:

"Would God that I had been with you every step! Would God, at least,
that I could show as good a three-years' log-book, Amyas, my lad!"

"You can show a better one, I doubt not."

"Humph! With the exception of one paltry Spanish prize, I don't know
that the queen is the better, or her enemies the worse, for me, since we
parted last in Dublin city."

"You are too modest, sir."

"Would that I were; but I got on in Ireland, I found, no better than my
neighbors; and so came home again, to find that while I had been wasting
my time in that land of misrule, Raleigh had done a deed to which I can
see no end. For, lad, he has found (or rather his two captains, Amadas
and Barlow, have found for him) between Florida and Newfoundland, a
country, the like of which, I believe, there is not on the earth for
climate and fertility. Whether there be gold there, I know not, and it
matters little; for there is all else on earth that man can want; furs,
timber, rivers, game, sugar-canes, corn, fruit, and every commodity
which France, Spain, or Italy can yield, wild in abundance; the savages
civil enough for savages, and, in a word, all which goes to the making
of as noble a jewel as her majesty's crown can wear. The people call it
Wingandacoa; but we, after her majesty, Virginia."

"You have been there, then?"

"The year before last, lad; and left there Ralf Lane, Amadas, and some
twenty gentlemen, and ninety men, and, moreover, some money of my own,
and some of old Will Salterne's, which neither of us will ever see
again. For the colony, I know not how, quarrelled with the Indians (I
fear I too was over-sharp with some of them for stealing--if I was, God
forgive me!), and could not, forsooth, keep themselves alive for twelve
months; so that Drake, coming back from his last West Indian voyage,
after giving them all the help he could, had to bring the whole party
home. And if you will believe it, the faint-hearted fellows had not been
gone a fortnight, before I was back again with three ships and all that
they could want. And never was I more wroth in my life, when all I found
was the ruins of their huts, which (so rich is the growth there) were
already full of great melons, and wild deer feeding thereon--a pretty
sight enough, but not what I wanted just then. So back I came; and being
in no overgood temper, vented my humors on the Portugals at the Azores,
and had hard fights and small booty. So there the matter stands, but not
for long; for shame it were if such a paradise, once found by Britons,
should fall into the hands of any but her majesty; and we will try again
this spring, if men and money can be found. Eh, lad?"

"But the prize?"

"Ah! that was no small make-weight to our disasters, after all. I
sighted her for six days' sail from the American coast: but ere we could
lay her aboard it fell dead calm. Never a boat had I on board--they
were all lost in a gale of wind--and the other ships were becalmed two
leagues astern of me. There was no use lying there and pounding her till
she sank; so I called the carpenter, got up all the old chests, and with
them and some spars we floated ourselves alongside, and only just in
time. For the last of us had hardly scrambled up into the chains, when
our crazy Noah's ark went all aboard, and sank at the side, so that if
we had been minded to run away, Amyas, we could not; whereon, judging
valor to be the better part of discretion (as I usually do), we fell to
with our swords and had her in five minutes, and fifty thousand pounds'
worth in her, which set up my purse again, and Raleigh's too, though I
fear it has run out again since as fast as it ran in."

And so ended Sir Richard's story.

Amyas went the next day to Salterne, and told his tale. The old man had
heard the outlines of it already: but he calmly bade him sit down, and
listened to all, his chin upon his hand, his elbows on his knees. His
cheek never blanched, his lips never quivered throughout. Only when
Amyas came to Rose's marriage, he heaved a long breath, as if a weight
was taken off his heart.

"Say that again, sir!"

Amyas said it again, and then went on; faltering, he hinted at the
manner of her death.

"Go on, sir! Why are you afraid? There is nothing to be ashamed of
there, is there?"

Amyas told the whole with downcast eyes, and then stole a look at his
hearer's face. There was no sign of emotion: only somewhat of a proud
smile curled the corners of that iron mouth.

"And her husband?" asked he, after a pause.

"I am ashamed to have to tell you, sir, that the man still lives."

"Still lives, sir?"

"Too true, as far as I know. That it was not my fault, my story bears me
witness."

"Sir, I never doubted your will to kill him. Still lives, you say? Well,
so do rats and adders. And now, I suppose, Captain Leigh, your worship
is minded to recruit yourself on shore a while with the fair lass whom
you have brought home (as I hear) before having another dash at the
devil and his kin!"

"Do not mention that young lady's name with mine, sir; she is no more to
me than she is to you; for she has Spanish blood in her veins."

Salterne smiled grimly.

"But I am minded at least to do one thing, Mr. Salterne, and that is, to
kill Spaniards, in fair fight, by land and sea, wheresoever I shall meet
them. And, therefore, I stay not long here, whithersoever I may be bound
next."

"Well, sir, when you start, come to me for a ship, and the best I have
is at your service; and, if she do not suit, command her to be fitted as
you like best; and I, William Salterne, will pay for all which you shall
command to be done."

"My good sir, I have accounts to square with you after a very different
fashion. As part-adventurer in the Rose, I have to deliver to you your
share of the treasure which I have brought home."

"My share, sir? If I understood you, my ship was lost off the coast of
the Caracas three years agone, and this treasure was all won since?"

"True; but you, as an adventurer in the expedition, have a just claim
for your share, and will receive it."

"Captain Leigh, you are, I see, as your father was before you, a just
and upright Christian man: but, sir, this money is none of mine, for it
was won in no ship of mine.--Hear me, sir! And if it had been, and
that ship"--(he could not speak her name)--"lay safe and sound now by
Bideford quay, do you think, sir, that William Salterne is the man to
make money out of his daughter's sin and sorrow, and to handle the price
of blood? No, sir! You went like a gentleman to seek her, and like a
gentleman, as all the world knows, you have done your best, and I thank
you: but our account ends there. The treasure is yours, sir; I have
enough, and more than enough, and none, God help me, to leave it to, but
greedy and needy kin, who will be rather the worse than the better for
it. And if I have a claim in law for aught--which I know not, neither
shall ever ask--why, if you are not too proud, accept that claim as a
plain burgher's thank-offering to you, sir, for a great and a noble love
which you and your brother have shown to one who, though I say it, to my
shame, was not worthy thereof."

"She was worthy of that and more, sir. For if she sinned like a woman,
she died like a saint."

"Yes, sir!" answered the old man, with a proud smile; "she had the right
English blood in her, I doubt not; and showed it at the last. But now,
sir, no more of this. When you need a ship, mine is at your service;
till then, sir, farewell, and God be with you."

And the old man rose, and with an unmoved countenance, bowed Amyas
to the door. Amyas went back and told Cary, bidding him take half of
Salterne's gift: but Cary swore a great oath that he would have none of
it.

"Heir of Clovelly, Amyas, and want to rob you? I who have lost
nothing,--you who have lost a brother! God forbid that I should ever
touch a farthing beyond my original share!"

That evening a messenger from Bideford came running breathless up to
Burrough Court. The authorities wanted Amyas's immediate attendance, for
he was one of the last, it seemed, who had seen Mr. Salterne alive.

Salterne had gone over, as soon as Amyas departed, to an old
acquaintance; signed and sealed his will in their presence with a firm
and cheerful countenance, refusing all condolence; and then gone home,
and locked himself into Rose's room. Supper-time came, and he did not
appear. The apprentices could not make him answer, and at last called
in the neighbors, and forced the door. Salterne was kneeling by his
daughter's bed; his head was upon the coverlet; his Prayer-book was
open before him at the Burial Service; his hands were clasped in
supplication; but he was dead and cold.

His will lay by him. He had left all his property among his poor
relations, saving and excepting all money, etc., due to him as owner and
part-adventurer of the ship Rose, and his new bark of three hundred tons
burden, now lying East-the-water; all which was bequeathed to Captain
Amyas Leigh, on condition that he should re-christen that bark the
Vengeance,--fit her out with part of the treasure, and with her sail
once more against the Spaniard, before three years were past.

And this was the end of William Salterne, merchant.



CHAPTER XXIX

HOW THE VIRGINIA FLEET WAS STOPPED BY THE QUEEN'S COMMAND

     "The daughter of debate,
        That discord still doth sow,
     Shall reap no gain where former rule
        Hath taught still peace to grow.
     No foreign banish'd wight
        Shall anker in this port
     Our realm it brooks no stranger's force;
        Let them elsewhere resort."

                        QU. ELIZABETH. 1569.

And now Amyas is settled quietly at home again; and for the next twelve
months little passes worthy of record in these pages. Yeo has installed
himself as major domo, with no very definite functions, save those of
walking about everywhere at Amyas's heels like a lank gray wolf-hound,
and spending his evenings at the fireside, as a true old sailor
does, with his Bible on his knee, and his hands busy in manufacturing
numberless nicknacks, useful and useless, for every member of the
family, and above all for Ayacanora, whom he insults every week by
humbly offering some toy only fit for a child; at which she pouts, and
is reproved by Mrs. Leigh, and then takes the gift, and puts it away
never to look at it again. For her whole soul is set upon being
an English maid; and she runs about all day long after Mrs. Leigh,
insisting upon learning the mysteries of the kitchen and the still-room,
and, above all, the art of making clothes for herself, and at last for
everybody in Northam. For first, she will be a good housewife, like Mrs.
Leigh; and next a new idea has dawned on her: that of helping others.
To the boundless hospitality of the savage she has been of course
accustomed: but to give to those who can give nothing in return, is a
new thought. She sees Mrs. Leigh spending every spare hour in working
for the poor, and visiting them in their cottages. She sees Amyas, after
public thanks in church for his safe return, giving away money, food,
what not, in Northam, Appledore, and Bideford; buying cottages and
making them almshouses for worn-out mariners; and she is told that
this is his thank-offering to God. She is puzzled; her notion of
a thank-offering was rather that of the Indians, and indeed of the
Spaniards,--sacrifices of human victims, and the bedizenment of the
Great Spirit's sanctuary with their skulls and bones. Not that Amyas,
as a plain old-fashioned churchman, was unmindful of the good old
instinctive rule, that something should be given to the Church itself;
for the vicar of Northam was soon resplendent with a new surplice, and
what was more, the altar with a splendid flagon and salver of plate
(lost, I suppose, in the civil wars) which had been taken in the great
galleon. Ayacanora could understand that: but the almsgiving she could
not, till Mrs. Leigh told her, in her simple way, that whosoever gave
to the poor, gave to the Great Spirit; for the Great Spirit was in them,
and in Ayacanora too, if she would be quiet and listen to him, instead
of pouting, and stamping, and doing nothing but what she liked. And the
poor child took in that new thought like a child, and worked her fingers
to the bone for all the old dames in Northam, and went about with Mrs.
Leigh, lovely and beloved, and looked now and then out from under her
long black eyelashes to see if she was winning a smile from Amyas. And
on the day on which she won one, she was good all day; and on the day on
which she did not, she was thoroughly naughty, and would have worn out
the patience of any soul less chastened than Mrs. Leigh's. But as for
the pomp and glory of her dress, there was no keeping it within bounds;
and she swept into church each Sunday bedizened in Spanish finery, with
such a blaze and rustle, that the good vicar had to remonstrate humbly
with Mrs. Leigh on the disturbance which she caused to the eyes and
thoughts of all his congregation. To which Ayacanora answered, that she
was not thinking about them, and they need not think about her; and that
if the Piache (in plain English, the conjuror), as she supposed, wanted
a present, he might have all her Mexican feather-dresses; she would
not wear them--they were wild Indian things, and she was an English
maid--but they would just do for a Piache; and so darted upstairs,
brought them down, and insisted so stoutly on arraying the vicar
therein, that the good man beat a swift retreat. But he carried off
with him, nevertheless, one of the handsomest mantles, which, instead
of selling it, he converted cleverly enough into an altar-cloth; and for
several years afterwards, the communion at Northam was celebrated upon a
blaze of emerald, azure, and crimson, which had once adorned the sinful
body of some Aztec prince.

So Ayacanora flaunted on; while Amyas watched her, half amused, half in
simple pride of her beauty; and looked around at all gazers, as much as
to say, "See what a fine bird I have brought home!"

Another great trouble which she gave Mrs. Leigh was her conduct to the
ladies of the neighborhood. They came, of course, one and all, not only
to congratulate Mrs. Leigh, but to get a peep at the fair savage; but
the fair savage snubbed them all round, from the vicar's wife to Lady
Grenville herself, so effectually, that few attempted a second visit.

Mrs. Leigh remonstrated, and was answered by floods of tears. "They only
come to stare at a poor wild Indian girl, and she would not be made a
show of. She was like a queen once, and every one obeyed her; but here
every one looked down upon her." But when Mrs. Leigh asked her, whether
she would sooner go back to the forests, the poor girl clung to her like
a baby, and entreated not to be sent away, "She would sooner be a slave
in the kitchen here, than go back to the bad people."

And so on, month after month of foolish storm and foolish sunshine; but
she was under the shadow of one in whom was neither storm nor sunshine,
but a perpetual genial calm of soft gray weather, which tempered down
to its own peacefulness all who entered its charmed influence; and the
outbursts grew more and more rare, and Ayacanora more and more rational,
though no more happy, day by day.

And one by one small hints came out which made her identity certain, at
least in the eyes of Mrs. Leigh and Yeo. After she had become familiar
with the sight of houses, she gave them to understand that she had seen
such things before. The red cattle, too, seemed not unknown to her;
the sheep puzzled her for some time, and at last she gave Mrs. Leigh to
understand that they were too small.

"Ah, madam," quoth Yeo, who caught at every straw, "it is because she
has been accustomed to those great camel sheep (llamas they call them)
in Peru."

But Ayacanora's delight was a horse. The use of tame animals at all was
a daily wonder to her; but that a horse could be ridden was the crowning
miracle of all; and a horse she would ride, and after plaguing Amyas for
one in vain (for he did not want to break her pretty neck), she proposed
confidentially to Yeo to steal one, and foiled in that, went to the
vicar and offered to barter all her finery for his broken-kneed pony.
But the vicar was too honest to drive so good a bargain, and the matter
ended, in Amyas buying her a jennet, which she learned in a fortnight to
ride like a very Gaucho.

And now awoke another curious slumbering reminiscence. For one day, at
Lady Grenville's invitation, the whole family went over to Stow; Mrs.
Leigh soberly on a pillion behind the groom, Ayacanora cantering round
and round upon the moors like a hound let loose, and trying to make
Amyas ride races with her. But that night, sleeping in the same room
with Mrs. Leigh, she awoke shrieking, and sobbed out a long story how
the "Old ape of Panama," her especial abomination, had come to her
bedside and dragged her forth into the courtyard, and how she had
mounted a horse and ridden with an Indian over great moors and high
mountains down into a dark wood, and there the Indian and the horses
vanished, and she found herself suddenly changed once more into a
little savage child. So strong was the impression, that she could not be
persuaded that the thing had not happened, if not that night, at least
some night or other. So Mrs. Leigh at last believed the same, and told
the company next morning in her pious way how the Lord had revealed in
a vision to the poor child who she was, and how she had been exposed in
the forests by her jealous step-father, and neither Sir Richard nor his
wife could doubt but that hers was the true solution. It was probable
that Don Xararte, though his home was Panama, had been often at Quito,
for Yeo had seen him come on board the Lima ship at Guayaquil, one
of the nearest ports. This would explain her having been found by the
Indians beyond Cotopaxi, the nearest peak of the Eastern Andes, if, as
was but too likely, the old man, believing her to be Oxenham's child,
had conceived the fearful vengeance of exposing her in the forests.

Other little facts came to light one by one. They were all connected
(as was natural in a savage) with some animal or other natural object.
Whatever impressions her morals or affections had received, had been
erased by the long spiritual death of that forest sojourn; and Mrs.
Leigh could not elicit from her a trace of feeling about her mother, or
recollection of any early religious teaching. This link, however, was
supplied at last, and in this way.

Sir Richard had brought home an Indian with him from Virginia. Of his
original name I am not sure, but he was probably the "Wanchese" whose
name occurs with that of "Manteo."

This man was to be baptized in the church at Bideford by the name of
Raleigh, his sponsors being most probably Raleigh himself, who may have
been there on Virginian business, and Sir Richard Grenville. All the
notabilities of Bideford came, of course, to see the baptism of the
first "Red man" whose foot had ever trodden British soil, and the mayor
and corporation-men appeared in full robes, with maces and tipstaffs, to
do honor to that first-fruits of the Gospel in the West.

Mrs. Leigh went, as a matter of course, and Ayacanora would needs go
too. She was very anxious to know what they were going to do with the
"Carib."

"To make him a Christian."

"Why did they not make her one?"

Because she was one already. They were sure that she had been christened
as soon as she was born. But she was not sure, and pouted a good deal
at the chance of an "ugly red Carib" being better off than she was.
However, all assembled duly; the stately son of the forest, now
transformed into a footman of Sir Richard's, was standing at the font;
the service was half performed when a heavy sigh, or rather groan, made
all eyes turn, and Ayacanora sank fainting upon Mrs. Leigh's bosom.

She was carried out, and to a neighboring house; and when she came to
herself, told a strange story. How, as she was standing there trying to
recollect whether she too had ever been baptized, the church seemed
to grow larger, the priest's dress richer; the walls were covered with
pictures, and above the altar, in jewelled robes, stood a lady, and in
her arms a babe. Soft music sounded in her ears; the air was full (on
that she insisted much) of fragrant odor which filled the church like
mist; and through it she saw not one, but many Indians, standing by the
font; and a lady held her by the hand, and she was a little girl again.

And after, many questionings, so accurate was her recollection, not only
of the scene, but of the building, that Yeo pronounced:

"A christened woman she is, madam, if Popish christening is worth
calling such, and has seen Indians christened too in the Cathedral
Church at Quito, the inside whereof I know well enough, and too well,
for I sat there three mortal hours in a San Benito, to hear a friar
preach his false doctrines, not knowing whether I was to be burnt or not
next day."

So Ayacanora went home to Burrough, and Raleigh the Indian to
Sir Richard's house. The entry of his baptism still stands,
crooked-lettered, in the old parchment register of the Bideford baptisms
for 1587-3:

     "Raleigh, a Winganditoian: March 26."

His name occurs once more, a year and a month after:

     "Rawly, a Winganditoian, April 1589."

But it is not this time among the baptisms. The free forest wanderer has
pined in vain for his old deer-hunts amid the fragrant cedar woods,
and lazy paddlings through the still lagoons, where water-lilies sleep
beneath the shade of great magnolias, wreathed with clustered vines; and
now he is away to "happier hunting-grounds," and all that is left of
him below sleeps in the narrow town churchyard, blocked in with dingy
houses, whose tenants will never waste a sigh upon the Indian's grave.
There the two entries stand, unto this day; and most pathetic they have
seemed to me; a sort of emblem and first-fruits of the sad fate of that
worn-out Red race, to whom civilization came too late to save, but not
too late to hasten their decay.

But though Amyas lay idle, England did not. That spring saw another and
a larger colony sent out by Raleigh to Virginia, under the charge of one
John White. Raleigh had written more than once, entreating Amyas to take
the command, which if he had done, perhaps the United States had begun
to exist twenty years sooner than they actually did. But his mother had
bound him by a solemn promise (and who can wonder at her for asking, or
at him for giving it?) to wait at home with her twelve months at least.
So, instead of himself, he sent five hundred pounds, which I suppose
are in Virginia (virtually at least) until this day; for they never came
back again to him.

But soon came a sharper trial of Amyas's promise to his mother; and
one which made him, for the first time in his life, moody, peevish, and
restless, at the thought that others were fighting Spaniards, while
he was sitting idle at home. For his whole soul was filling fast with
sullen malice against Don Guzman. He was losing the "single eye," and
his whole body was no longer full of light. He had entered into the
darkness in which every man walks who hates his brother; and it lay upon
him like a black shadow day and night. No company, too, could be more
fit to darken that shadow than Salvation Yeo's. The old man grew more
stern in his fanaticism day by day, and found a too willing listener in
his master; and Mrs. Leigh was (perhaps for the first and last time
in her life) seriously angry, when she heard the two coolly debating
whether they had not committed a grievous sin in not killing the Spanish
prisoners on board the galleon.

It must be said, however (as the plain facts set down in this book
testify), that if such was the temper of Englishmen at that day,
the Spaniards had done a good deal to provoke it; and were just then
attempting to do still more.

For now we are approaching the year 1588, "which an astronomer of
Konigsberg, above a hundred years before, foretold would be an admirable
year, and the German chronologers presaged would be the climacterical
year of the world."

The prophecies may stand for what they are worth; but they were at least
fulfilled. That year was, indeed, the climacterical year of the world;
and decided once and for all the fortunes of the European nations, and
of the whole continent of America.

No wonder, then, if (as has happened in each great crisis of the human
race) some awful instinct that The Day of the Lord was at hand, some dim
feeling that there was war in heaven, and that the fiends of darkness
and the angels of light were arrayed against each other in some mighty
struggle for the possession of the souls of men, should have tried
to express itself in astrologic dreams, and, as was the fashion then,
attributed to the "rulers of the planetary houses" some sympathy with
the coming world-tragedy.

But, for the wise, there needed no conjunction of planets to tell them
that the day was near at hand, when the long desultory duel between
