The sight of the English coast, dim and purple beneath the declining
sun, brought it back to him with a pang.  After all, Tristram was
still lost, and his journey to Holland had been a failure therefore.
With a sudden contempt for all that a moment before he had been
enjoying, he turned to his friend and asked him to take charge for a
while.

Nothing more was said, but Captain Runacles guessed what drove the
little man below like a wounded beast, and began to pace the deck
gloomily.

"He'll never take it up again," he muttered.  "It's all very well,
and he thinks he's getting comfort out of it.  But it won't do."

He paused for a moment, contemplated the distant coast and resumed
his tread, repeating: "It won't do, Jack; it won't do a bit, my boy."


Captain Barker sat in his cabin alone, staring at a knot of wood on
the table before him.  There were traces of tears on his cheeks.

Somebody tapped at the door.

"What is it?"

"The devil," answered Captain Runacles' voice, coolly.  "Six galleys
to the south, between us and the Thames!"

Captain Barker sprang up and hurried up on deck.

"So those are the craft I've heard so much about," he remarked,
taking down the glass through which he had been eyeing them for a
couple of minutes.

"What do you propose, Jack?"

"Propose? Why, propose to do what I'm here for--to save the convoy."

"That's very pretty.  But do you know how fast those sharks can
move?"

"No, I don't.  But I know they can outpace us.  Nevertheless, I'll
save the convoy."

"How?"

"There's only one way."

"And that is--"

"By losing the frigate."

Captain Runacles looked at him for a second, and then placed a hand
on his shoulder.  This simple gesture expressed all his heart.
Captain Barker turned briskly.

"Signal the convoy," he shouted, "to make all sail and run for the
Thames!"


_II--The Galleys._

M. de la Pailletine was in some respects a weak man.  He was
impatient.  Up to this moment his behaviour in an extremely galling
position had been perfect.  He had been content to bide his time and
had furthered every order issued by his rival with the cheerfullest
alacrity.

But when the man at the masthead announced the advance of the
merchant fleet, he allowed himself to be tempted and turned to
Captain Salt who stood beside him.

"You will follow them, of course?"

"Of course I shall do nothing of the sort.  On the contrary, I intend
to steer to the south, out of their sight."

"You will fling away this splendid prize?"

"Let me remind you, monsieur, that we are bound for Harwich."

"But this is folly, Captain Salt!  Harwich will remain where it is,
and we can ravage it at any time.  Never again may we have so fine an
opportunity of capturing thirty-six merchantmen and a British frigate
almost without a blow."

"Excuse me, M. de la Pailletine, but I do not allow my orders to be
criticised."

"Then listen to me, sir," retorted the Commodore, his face red with
fury, as he drew from his coat the orders which the King had
addressed to him.  "You see this paper?  Very well; I destroy it."
He tore it into shreds, and let the pieces flutter over the galley's
side.

"Are you aware of what that action means?" Captain Salt was white to
the lips.

"I am, sir."

"It is treason."

"You think so, perhaps.  But a Frenchman should best know what is due
to the King of France.  Nevertheless, I shall summon the captains to
confirm my action.  Will you attend them in my cabin?"

"Thank you; no, sir.  I am quite sure that they will support you.
It remains to see what his Majesty will say when I report your
contempt of his orders."

"That is for the future to decide.  Meanwhile be good enough to
recollect that I command the squadron from this moment.  Should you
choose to volunteer, well and good.  If not, my cabin is at your
disposal as soon as the captains have left it."

He bowed and turned away to summon the captains.

They came in haste, and were, of course, unanimous; though it is
difficult to say how far they were influenced by sound argument and
how far by pique and a desire to thwart the Englishman.  While they
sat, Captain Salt remained on deck cursing quietly and examining the
approaching enemy with no pleasant stare.

Orders were issued to all the six galleys to attack the fleet.
Four were told off against the merchantmen and commanded to make all
speed to get between them and the Thames; while _L'Heureuse_ herself
and _La Merveille_ (commanded by the Chevalier de Sainte-Croix) were
to attack and take possession of the frigate.

Immediately they began to make all possible haste with sails and
oars.  Captain Salt withdrew to the cabin in dudgeon and M. de la
Pailletine took his place.  From their benches below the slaves heard
his voice shouting out orders right and left, and at once they had to
catch up their oars and row.  The English fleet when first spied was
coming right across their course, and still held on its way when it
perceived the Frenchman's intent.  In pursuance of this intent the
four galleys made off with all speed to place themselves between the
merchantmen and the coast, while the Commodore and the Chevalier de
Sainte-Croix bore down on the frigate, straight as an arrow.

And now began a hard time for Tristram and his companions below.
They tugged and sweated, and presently _L'Heureuse_ began to leap
through the water.  Above the swish of the long sweeps rose a tumult
of oaths, imprecations, outcries, sobs, as the overseers plied their
whips, not caring where they struck.  Overhead they heard the guns
running out, the rolling of shot and trampling of feet, the shouts
and replies of officers and men.  They could see nothing of the
frigate for which they were bound, but from the confusion and hurry
expected every moment to feel the shock as the galley's beak drove
into her.


Then for a second or two all the noise ceased.


The reason was this.  For some little while the frigate held on
her course for the mouth of the Thames.  Not a sail more did she
carry than when she first came in sight.  It almost seemed as
if her captain had not seen the enemy sweeping to destroy him.
For thirty-five minutes she held quietly on beside her convoy.
And then the helm was shifted, and she came down straight into the
Frenchman's teeth.

It was a gallant stroke, and a subtle--so subtle that M. de la
Pailletine mistook its meaning and gave a great shout of joy.
He fancied he saw the English delivered into his hand.  But his
rejoicing was premature.

To begin with, he perceived the next moment that the frigate, by
hastening the attack, had caught his galley alone.  Into this
trap he had been led partly by the excellence of his crew.
Not only was his the fleetest vessel of the six, but he had always
been jealous to choose the strongest _forcats_ to man it.
Moreover, M. de Sainte-Croix had been slow in starting, and by this
time _La Merveille_ was a league or more behind her consort.

Still the Commodore was in no way disturbed.  He admitted to his
lieutenant beside him that the frigate was showing desperate
gallantry; but he never doubted for a moment that his galley alone,
with two hundred fighting-men aboard, would be more than a match for
her.

Down came the _Merry Maid_, closer and closer, her red-crossed flag
fluttering bravely at the peak; and on rushed the galley, until the
two were within cannon-shot.  M. de la Pailletine gave the order, and
sent a shot to meet her from one of the four guns in the prow.
As the thunder of it died away and the smoke cleared, he waited for
the Englishman's reply.  There was none.  The frigate held on her
course, silent as death.


_III.--The Frigate._

The two English captains stood on the quarterdeck, side by side,
the tall man and the dwarf.  Beyond issuing an order or two, neither
had spoken a word for twenty minutes.  Once Captain Barker glanced
over his shoulder to see how the merchantmen were faring, and
calculated that within half an hour their enemies would intercept
them.  Then he looked down on his men, who stood ready by the guns,
motionless, with lips set, repressing the fury of battle; and beyond
them to the galley as she came, churning the sea, her oars rising and
falling like the strong wings of a bird.

"My God!" he said softly, "if only Tristram were here to see!"



_IV--The Galleys._

When the frigate failed to answer his salute, M. de la Pailletine
jumped to a fresh conclusion.

"_Mordieu!_" he cried, "here is another English captain who,
like our friend Salt, is weary of carrying his Sovereign's colours.
He doesn't mean to strike a blow.  A minute and we shall see his flag
hauled down."

But the minute passed, and another, and yet a third, and the English
flag still flew.

By this time they were within musket-shot.  One by one the four guns
had spoken from the galley's prow and still there was no answer.
On the brink of the tragedy there was silence for an instant.
Then a few of the French musketeers seemed to find this intolerable
and fired without receiving the order.  Followed a silence again, and
still the _Merry Maid_ came on as if to impale herself on the
galley's beak.

And then, suddenly, when in five minutes the vessels must have
collided, round flew the frigate's wheel.  For a minute and a half
she fetched up as if awaking to the consequences of her folly;
shuddered and shook against the wind; and, as her sails filled again,
fetched away on the westerly tack for her life.

For a full two minutes the French were taken aback.

"Fools, fools!" shouted M. de la Pailletine, beside himself with joy.

The order flew for the slaves on the larboard benches to hold water
for a minute and the galley's head came round.  Nothing gives more
spirit than a flying enemy.  From mouth to mouth ran the whisper that
the English were showing their heels; and in a moment these poor
devils, who owed all their misery to France, were pulling like
madmen.  Jeers rose from the deck.

"If Monsieur the Englishman does not strike within two minutes, down
he goes to the bottom."

"The idiot, to expose his stern!"

"On the whole, it is just as well that _La Merveille_ is so far
behind.  We shall have all the glory to ourselves--eh, my children?"


On board the frigate Captain Barker said four words only:

"Take the wheel, Jemmy."

Captain Runacles stepped to it and the steersman gave place.

In truth the hunchback, though this was his first acquaintance with a
galley, knew well enough that she would strike for the frigate's
stern as the weakest point.  This was precisely what he wished her to
do.

Captain Runacles stood with his hand on the wheel and waited,
glancing back over his shoulder.

Captain Barker stood by the taffrail with one eye upon the galley and
his face turned in profile to his friend.  His right hand was lifted.


The Commodore had made all his dispositions.  The galley was to
plunge her beak straight into the _Merry Maid's_ stern, and its crew,
after one discharge of cannon to clear the frigate's poop, were to
board at once.  The men stood ready with their hatchets and cutlasses
and set up a wild yell as they drove straight for her.  From below
the slaves echoed it with a melancholy wail.

On they tore.  As they yelled again, _L'Heureuse's_ beak was but
thirty yards from her prey.  A few more leaps and it would strike.

"One--two--"

The little man looked back in their faces and smiled.

"Three--four--five--"

He dropped his hand.  Quick as lightning Captain Jerry spun the wheel
round.  The stern swung sharply off, her sea-way gauged to a nicety.

The next moment the galley flew past.  Her beak, missing the stern,
rushed on, tearing great splinters out of the _Merry Maid's_ flank.
Her starboard oars snapped like matchwood, hurling the slaves
backwards on their benches and killing a dozen on the spot.  Then she
brought up, helplessly disabled, right under the frigate's side.

And then at length the English cheer rang forth.  In an instant the
grappling-irons were out and the frigate held her foe, clasped,
strained close against her ribs, close under her depressed guns.

And at length, too, with a blinding flash and a roar, those English
guns spoke.  A minute had done it all.  Sixty seconds before the
