usual ethics of defeat had, however, no place in General Grant's military
education, and the enemy were at length forced to give way. General
Albert Sydney Johnston, one of the ablest Confederate commanders, was
killed, and General Beauregard retreated, leaving his dead and wounded in
Union hands. The second line of defence was broken. An amusing incident
of this battle--if anything can be amusing in war--was a message sent by
General Beauregard to General Grant explaining why he had withdrawn his
troops. General Grant was strongly tempted to assure Beauregard that no
apologies were necessary.

The capture of New Orleans in the latter part of April, and of Island
Number Ten in the same month gave the National forces control of the
Mississippi nearly up to Vicksburg and down to Memphis. The Confederate
flotilla was defeated and destroyed in a sharp engagement by the Union
river fleet, two miles above Memphis, on June 6, the battle occurring
in full view of that city. It was one of the most dramatic spectacles
of the war. The combat lasted just one hour and three minutes, and as
the Union fleet landed at Memphis, a number of newsboys sprang on shore
from the vessels, shouting: "Here's your New York _Tribune_ and
_Herald_!"--before the city had been formally surrendered. The Unionists
received the National troops like brothers, and one lady brought out from
its hiding place in her chimney a National flag concealed from the
beginning of the war. "We found Memphis," wrote a correspondent, "as
torpid as Syria, where Yusef Browne declared that he saw only one man
exhibit any sign of activity, and he was engaged in tumbling from the
roof of a house." Salt was rubbed into the wounds of the vanquished by
the military assignment of Albert D. Richardson and Col. Thomas W. Knox,
representatives of the _Tribune_ and _Herald_, to edit the bitterest
secession newspaper in the town.

                        *          *          *

In the East the Union cause made no progress. General George B.
McClellan, in command of the Army of the Potomac, was endeavoring to play
the part of a Turenne in a field utterly foreign to European strategy.
Generals Robert E. Lee, Joseph E. Johnston and Thomas Jonathan
("Stonewall") Jackson, the three great Confederate commanders in
Virginia, proved themselves easily the superiors of their antagonists in
the tactics best fitted for American warfare, and but for the stubborn
valor of the Union soldiers at Fair Oaks and in the seven days' battles
ending at Malvern Hills, the Army of the Potomac would probably have been
destroyed. When Malvern Hills was won by the splendid fighting of the
National troops, without any agency of their commander, and when they
were enthusiastic for a forward movement upon Richmond, McClellan
consulted his tactical horoscope, and ordered them to retreat just as if
they had been beaten. The second battle of Bull Run, with General John
Pope in command on the Union side, and Generals Lee, "Stonewall" Jackson
and James Longstreet leading the Confederates, stopped short of being as
disastrous a defeat for the National arms as the first Bull Run, but that
was all.

Lee pushed into Maryland with about 45,000 troops, and encountered
McClellan at Antietam, on September 17, with 85,000. McClellan was
"cautious," as usual, but fighting had to be done, and the rank and file
of the Union forces were, as ever, anxious to fight. Lee was repulsed
after a fearful conflict, in which about 20,000 men were killed and
wounded. General Joseph Hooker, known as "Fighting Joe Hooker," was under
McClellan at Antietam, and behaved most gallantly. Wounded before noon,
Hooker was carried from the field. "Had he not been disabled," wrote a
war correspondent, "he would probably have made it a decisive conflict.
Realizing that it was one of the world's great days, he said: 'I would
gladly have compromised with the enemy by receiving a mortal wound at
night, could I have remained at the head of my troops until the sun went
down.'" McClellan neglected to take advantage of the success achieved at
the cost of so many brave lives, and Mr. George W. Smalley, then of the
_Tribune_, who was on the field, is authority for the statement that
General Hooker was privately requested in behalf of a number of Union
officers, to assume command and follow up the victory. In Hooker's
condition this was impossible, even had he been inclined to take a step
so serious in its possible consequences for himself.

McClellan was superseded in November by General Ambrose E. Burnside, who
had distinguished himself at Antietam, as he always did in a subordinate
command. On December 13, General Burnside suffered a fearful defeat at
Fredericksburg, with a loss of 12,000 men. It was one of Lee's most
brilliant victories, and on the Union side it was a useless sacrifice of
life. "Lee's position," says General Fitzhugh Lee, "was strong by nature
and was made stronger by art. No troops could successfully assail it, and
no commanding general should have ordered it to be done."[1] Burnside was
superseded by Hooker, and the armies in Virginia did but little more
until spring.

      [1] Life of General Robert E. Lee. D. Appleton & Co.

                        *          *          *

After the battle of Shiloh the Confederates made Chattanooga, Tenn., the
base of their operations in the Southwest. General Braxton Bragg, who
succeeded Beauregard in command in that region, invaded Kentucky, and
sought to drive the inhabitants into the Confederate service. A
sanguinary battle at Perryville resulted in the complete repulse of the
Confederates, who retreated into Tennessee, carrying with them a vast
quantity of plunder. General William Starke Rosecrans now came to the
front as a successful Union commander. With Grant's left wing he defeated
the Confederates at Iuka, September 19, and Corinth, October 3 and 4, and
as chief of the Army of the Cumberland, he fought one of the great
battles of the war with General Bragg at Murfreesboro, or Stone River,
December 31 and January 2. Never during the four years of conflict did
the troops on both sides fight more resolutely. The first day was rather
favorable to the Confederates. Little was done on New Year's Day, but on
January 2 the struggle was renewed more fiercely than before. The western
armies had caught Grant's instinct of never recognizing defeat. Charge
after charge was made, first by the Confederates, then by the Union
troops, and at length the Confederate line fell back, and did not charge
again. At midnight of January 4 Bragg retired in the direction of
Chattanooga. The killed, wounded and missing numbered over 20,000,
probably about evenly divided.

                        *          *          *

The Emancipation Proclamation, issued by President Lincoln on New Year's
Day, 1863, was in every sense a statesmanlike and justifiable measure. It
aroused the powerful anti-slavery sentiment of England in support of the
Union, and neutralized Tory sympathy with the Confederacy; it
strengthened the Union cause at home, and it showed that the National
Government was not afraid to punish, and was resolved to weaken its
enemies by the confiscation of their property.




CHAPTER XXXV.

General Grant Invests Vicksburg--The Confederate Garrison--Scenes in the
Beleaguered City--The Surrender--Hooker Defeated at Chancellorsville--
Death of "Stonewall" Jackson--General Meade Takes Command of the Army of
the Potomac--Lee Crosses the Potomac--The Battle of Gettysburg--The First
Two Days--The Third Day--Pickett's Charge--A Thrilling Spectacle--The
Harvest of Death--Lee Defeated--General Thomas, "The Rock of Chickamauga"
--"This Position Must Be Held Till Night"--General Grant Defeats Bragg at
Chattanooga--The Decisive Battle of the West.


The Confederates made Vicksburg a position of marvelous strength. General
William Tecumseh Sherman, who had proved his eminent talent as a
commander under Grant at Shiloh, assaulted the bluffs north of the town
on December 29, 1862, and was repulsed. General Grant, with the
perseverance which he afterward exhibited at Richmond, fought battle
after battle until he had Vicksburg completely invested. Commodore David
D. Porter, with a formidable fleet, bombarded the stronghold from the
river, while Grant's kept up a cannonade day and night from the land
side. General John C. Pemberton had about 15,000 effective men out of
30,000 within the lines of the beleaguered city. Every day the situation
grew more intolerable for the besieged. Rats were on sale in the
market-places with mule-meat. The people lived in cellars and caves,
children were born in caves, and it is interesting to read in a diary of
that fearful time that "the churches are a great resort for those that
have no caves. People fancy that they are not shelled so much, and they
are substantial and the pews good to sleep in." A woman wished to go
through the lines to her friends, and on July 1 an officer with a flag of
truce carried the request. He came back with the statement: "General
Grant says no human being shall pass out of Vicksburg; but the lady may
feel sure danger will soon be over. Vicksburg will surrender on the
fourth." A Confederate general present when this message was received,
said: "Vicksburg will not surrender." But Grant was right. On July 4
silence descended upon Vicksburg. The simoon of shot and shell was over,
and men and women and children crawled from their caves into the light of
day. The river vessels poured in an abundance of provisions, and plenty
succeeded starvation. General Pemberton surrendered 27,000 men as
prisoners of war.

                        *          *          *

General Hooker, notwithstanding his undoubted courage, proved no more
fortunate than his predecessors in command of the Army of the Potomac.
With 90,000 men he attacked Lee and 45,000 men at Chancellorsville, May 1
to 4. The Confederate commander was at his best in this fearful four
days' struggle. Hooker, says a high Confederate authority, had guided his
army "into the mazes of the Wilderness, and got it so mixed and tangled
that no chance was afforded for a display of its mettle." Lee with
inferior forces managed by consummate strategy to meet and overcome
Hooker's subordinates in detail. Then he prepared for a crushing blow at
Hooker himself, which the latter escaped by a timely retreat. The
bombastic Order No. 49 which followed this sweeping disaster for the
Union arms did not deceive either President Lincoln or the people, who
had once more seen the lives of thousands of our gallant troops
sacrificed on the altar of shoulder-strapped incompetency. The killed and
wounded in this battle numbered about 25,000, of whom more than half were
Unionists. These figures repeat eloquently that real soldiers were
waiting for a real general. The death of "Stonewall" Jackson at
Chancellorsville was in no slight degree a compensation for Union losses.

The tide turned at Gettysburg. General George Gordon Meade succeeded
Hooker in command of the Army of the Potomac. Meade was not a brilliant
man, but he was a thorough soldier, and eminently free from that spirit
of envy which was the bane of our armies, which had nearly driven Grant
from the service, and which was responsible for the loss of more than one
battle. Elated by Chancellorsville, Lee determined to invade the North.
The South made an extreme effort to replenish its armies, and that of
Northern Virginia was raised to about 100,000 men. With the greater part
of this magnificent host, including 15,000 cavalry and 280 guns, Lee
marched down the Shenandoah Valley, crossed the Potomac on the
twenty-fifth of June, and headed for Chambersburg. Meade drew near with
the army of the Potomac, and such reinforcements as had been hastily
collected in Pennsylvania on the news of the invasion. At Gettysburg the
two armies met for the decisive battle of the war. Meade had on the field
83,000 men and 300 guns; Lee, 69,000 men and 250 guns. For three days the
two armies contended with frightful losses, and with a courage not
surpassed in ancient or modern warfare. The brave General John F.
Reynolds lost his life in the first encounter, and General Winfield Scott
Hancock was sent by Meade to take charge of the field. On the second day
occurred the desperate conflict for Little Round Top, which resulted in
that key to the Union line being seized and held by the Union troops.
Neither side, however, gained any decided advantage. On the third day Lee
prepared for the grand movement known in history as "Pickett's charge."
Fourteen thousand men were selected as the forlorn hope of the
Confederacy. For two hours before the charge 120 guns kept up a fearful
cannonade upon the Union lines. Meade answered with eighty guns. About
three o'clock in the afternoon Meade ceased firing. Lee thought the
Northern gunners were silenced. He was mistaken; they knew what was
coming.

On moved the charging column, as the smoke of battle lifted, and the
"tattered uniforms and bright muskets" came plainly into view. At an
average distance of about eleven hundred yards the Union batteries
opened. Shot and shell tore through the Confederate ranks. Still they
marched on over wounded and dying and dead. Canister now rained on their
flanks, and as they came within closer range a hurricane of bullets burst
upon them, and men dropped on every side like leaves in the winds of
autumn. The strength of the charging column melted before the gale of
death; but the survivors staggered on. When the remains of the
Confederate right reached the Union works their three brigade commanders
had fallen, every field officer except one had been killed or wounded;
but still the remnant kept its face to the foe, led to annihilation by
the dauntless Armistead. The four brigades on the left of Pickett met a
similar fate. "They moved up splendidly," wrote a Union officer,
"deploying as they crossed the long sloping interval. The front of the
column was nearly up the slope, and within a few yards of the Second
Corps' front and its batteries, when suddenly a terrific fire from every
available gun on Cemetery Ridge burst upon them. Their graceful lines
underwent an instantaneous transformation in a dense cloud of smoke and
dust; arms, heads, blankets, guns and knapsacks were tossed in the air,
and the moan from the battlefield was heard amid the storm of battle."

One half of the 14,000 perished in the charge. Gettysburg was over, and
the tide of invasion from the South was rolled back never to return.
Meade had lost about 23,000 men, and Lee about 23,000. Halleck, whose
business as general-in-chief seemed to be to annoy successful commanders,
and irritate them to the resignation point, blamed Meade for allowing Lee
to retire without another battle, but public opinion upheld the victor of
Gettysburg, and Congress honored him and Generals Hancock and O. O.
Howard with a resolution of thanks.

                        *          *          *

General George H. Thomas, a Southern officer of the Lee and Johnston rank
in military capacity, who fortunately stood by the Union, saved
Chickamauga from being a Union defeat that would have done much to offset
Gettysburg and Vicksburg. Rosecrans had compelled Bragg to evacuate
Chattanooga, and erroneously assumed that the Confederate commander was
in retreat, when in fact he had been reinforced by Longstreet and was
ready to risk another battle. The two armies met in the valley of
Chickamauga. Operations on the Union side were chiefly a series of
blunders which resulted in the right wing of Rosecrans' army being broken
and driven from the field, leaving the brunt of the conflict to be borne
by General Thomas with the left wing.

The magnificent stand made by Thomas against the victorious Confederates,
gained for him the title of the "Rock of Chickamauga." Surrounded on all
sides by a force that a craven commander might have deemed irresistible,
Thomas thought out his plans as coolly as if miles away from danger.
"Take that ridge!" he said calmly to General James B. Steedman, when that
fearless soldier came up with his division; and Thomas pointed to a
commanding ridge held by the enemy. Steedman moved at once to the attack,
and the ridge was carried with a loss of 2900 men. In vain both wings of
the Confederates were hurled, with fierce determination against the
little army of Thomas. With 25,000 men he successfully resisted the
attacks of between 50,000 and 60,000. "It will ruin the army to withdraw
it now; this position must be held till night"--was the answer of Thomas
to Rosecrans; and Thomas held the position until night, and then withdrew
in good order. The Union loss was about 19,000 and that of the
Confederates at least as great. Thomas in the following month succeeded
Rosecrans as commander of the Army of the Cumberland. It is more than
probable that up to that time his merits had not been fully recognized,
owing to unfounded suspicion of his loyalty. When it was said of Thomas
to General Joseph E. Johnston that he "did not know when he was whipped,"
Johnston answered: "Rather say he always knew very well when he was not
whipped."

The Army of the Tennessee, now commanded by Sherman, was brought up to
Chattanooga from Vicksburg, and General Grant was placed in command of
all forces west of the Alleghenies. General Hooker was sent from Virginia
with reinforcements, and General Grant prepared for the decisive battle
of the West. In that battle, which was fought about Chattanooga, November
24 and 25, Bragg was completely defeated with a loss of about 3000 in
killed and wounded and 6000 prisoners. A remarkable feature of this
battle is that the Confederate position on Missionary Ridge was carried
by a charge made by the Union troops without orders from their commanders.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

Grant Appointed Lieutenant-General--Takes Command in Virginia--Battles
of the Wilderness--The Two Armies--Battle of Cedar Creek--Sheridan's
Ride--He Turns Defeat Into Victory--Confederate Disasters on Land and
Sea--Farragut at Mobile--Last Naval Battle of the War--Sherman Enters
Atlanta--Lincoln's Re-election--Sherman's March to the Sea--Sherman
Captures Savannah--Thomas Defeats Hood at Nashville--Fort Fisher
Taken--Lee Appointed General-in-chief--Confederate Defeat at Five
Forks--Lee's Surrender--Johnston's Surrender--End of the War--The South
Prostrate--A Resistance Unparalleled in History--The Blots on the
Confederacy--Cruel Treatment of Union Men and Prisoners--Murder of
Abraham Lincoln--The South Since the War.


The Confederacy having been dismantled in the Southwest--except in Texas,
where secession simply awaited the result in other States--Virginia
became the central battle-ground of the rebellion. There its chief
energies were concentrated for the closing struggle, and there its
greatest leader commanded. It was the part of wisdom, therefore, for the
National Government to make its most successful general chief of all the
National armies, with the understanding that he would personally direct
operations in the most important field. Grant was appointed
lieutenant-general in March, 1864, and he at once gave his attention to
the Army of the Potomac, which Meade continued to command under his
supervision. The Army of Northern Virginia was no longer the
well-equipped host which had gained victory after victory in the earlier
period of the war, but its spirit was undaunted, and Lee, as his
resources diminished, displayed more signally than ever his remarkable
military genius. The two great commanders were face to face, but not on
the equal terms that in '62 or '63 would have presented a duel of giants.
The Confederacy was falling, gradually, it is true, but the end was in
sight. It was virtually confined to four States, Georgia, the Carolinas
and Virginia, and these but shells that only needed Sherman's march to
the sea to prove how hollow they were. General Grant fought his way
through the battles of the Wilderness, Spottsylvania and Cold Harbor, and
across the James River to Petersburg. His losses of men were enormous,
but the strength of his army was maintained by a continuous supply of
recruits from the North. Grant established his lines in front of
Petersburg, and proceeded to reduce that place. He gave Lee no rest, and
exhausted the Confederates with repeated surprises and attacks.

General Lee had about 50,000 men to defend two cities and a line of
intrenchments enveloping both, thirty-five miles long, against about
150,000 men, a large proportion of them veterans, trained and steeled to
war. The time had passed for offensive operations on any effective scale
