austerity of aspect, he presented the snuffbox to the knight, who
received it in some confusion, and restored the mull, which he would by
no means keep except on the terms of exchange.

This transaction was like to give a grave cast to the conversation,
when my uncle took notice that Mr Justice Frogmore had not made his
appearance either at the night-alarm, or now at the general rendezvous.
The baronet hearing Frogmore mentioned, 'Odso! (cried he) I had forgot
the justice.--Pr'ythee, doctor, go and bring him out of his kennel.'
Then laughing till his sides were well shaken, he said he would shew the
captain, that he was not the only person of the drama exhibited for the
entertainment of the company. As to the night-scene, it could not affect
the justice, who had been purposely lodged in the farther end of the
house, remote from the noise, and lulled with a dose of opium into the
bargain. In a few minutes, Mr Justice was led into the parlour in his
nightcap and loose morning-gown, rolling his head from side to side, and
groaning piteously all the way.--'Jesu! neighbour Frogmore (exclaimed
the baronet), what is the matter?--you look as if you was not a man
for this world.--Set him down softly on the couch--poor gentlemen!--Lord
have mercy upon us!--What makes him so pale, and yellow, and bloated?'
'Oh, Sir Thomas! (cried the justice) I doubt 'tis all over with me--
Those mushrooms I eat at your table have done my business--ah! oh!
hey!' 'Now the Lord forbid! (said the other)--what! man, have a good
heart--How does thy stomach feel?--hall?'

To this interrogation he made no reply; but throwing aside his
nightgown, discovered that his waist-coat would not meet upon his belly
by five good inches at least. 'Heaven protect us all! (cried Sir Thomas)
what a melancholy spectacle!--never did I see a man so suddenly swelled,
but when he was either just dead, or just dying.--Doctor, can'st thou
do nothing for this poor object?' 'I don't think the case is quite
desperate (said the surgeon), but I would advise Mr Frogmore to settle
his affairs with all expedition; the parson may come and pray by him,
while I prepare a glyster and an emetic draught.' The justice, rolling
his languid eyes, ejaculated with great fervency, 'Lord, have mercy upon
us! Christ, have mercy upon us!'--Then he begged the surgeon, in the
name of God, to dispatch--'As for my worldly affairs (said he), they
are all settled but one mortgage, which must be left to my heirs--but
my poor soul! my poor soul! what will become of my poor soul? miserable
sinner that I am!' 'Nay, pr'ythee, my dear boy, compose thyself (resumed
the knight); consider the mercy of heaven is infinite; thou can'st
not have any sins of a very deep dye on thy conscience, or the devil's
in't.' 'Name not the devil (exclaimed the terrified Frogmore), I have
more sins to answer for than the world dreams of.--Ah! friend, I have
been sly--sly damn'd sly!--Send for the parson without loss of time, and
put me to bed, for I am posting to eternity.'--He was accordingly raised
from the couch, and supported by two servants, who led him back to his
room; but before he quitted the parlour, he intreated the good company
to assist him with their prayers.--He added, 'Take warning by me, who
am suddenly cut off in my prime, like a flower of the field; and God
forgive you, Sir Thomas, for suffering such poisonous trash to be eaten
at your table.'

He was no sooner removed out of hearing, than the baronet abandoned
himself to a violent fit of laughing, in which he was joined by the
greatest part of the company; but we could hardly prevent the good lady
from going to undeceive the patient, by discovering, that while he slept
his waistcoat had been straitened by the contrivance of the surgeon;
and that the disorder in his stomach and bowels was occasioned by some
antimonial wine, which he had taken over night, under the denomination
of plague-water. She seemed to think that his apprehension might put an
end to his life: the knight swore he was no such chicken, but a
tough old rogue, that would live long enough to plague all his
neighbours.--Upon enquiry, we found his character did not intitle him to
much compassion or respect, and therefore we let our landlord's humour
take its course.--A glyster was actually administered by an old woman
of the family, who had been Sir Thomas's nurse, and the patient took
a draught made with oxymel of squills to forward the operation of the
antimonial wine, which had been retarded by the opiate of the preceding
night. He was visited by the vicar, who read prayers, and began to take
an account of the state of his soul, when those medicines produced their
effect; so that the parson was obliged to hold his nose while he poured
forth spiritual consolation from his mouth. The same expedient was used
by the knight and me, who, with the doctor, entered the chamber at this
juncture, and found Frogmore enthroned on an easing-chair, under the
pressure of a double evacuation. The short intervals betwixt every heave
he employed in crying for mercy, confessing his sins, or asking the
vicar's opinion of his case; and the vicar answered, in a solemn
snuffling tone, that heightened the ridicule of the scene. The emetic
having done its office, the doctor interfered, and ordered the patient
to be put in bed again. When he examined the egesta, and felt his pulse,
he declared that much of the virus was discharged, and, giving him a
composing draught, assured him he had good hopes of his recovery.--This
welcome hint he received with the tears of joy in his eyes, protesting,
that if he should recover, he would always think himself indebted for
his life to the great skill and tenderness of his doctor, whose hand he
squeezed with great fervour; and thus he was left to his repose.

We were pressed to stay dinner, that we might be witnesses of his
resuscitation; but my uncle insisted upon our departing before noon,
that we might reach this town before it should be dark.--In the
mean-time, lady Bullford conducted us into the garden to see a fishpond
just finished, which Mr Bramble censured as being too near the parlour,
where the knight now sat by himself, dozing in an elbow-chair after the
fatigues of his morning atchievement.--In this situation he reclined,
with his feet wrapped in flannel, and supported in a line with his body,
when the door flying open with a violent shock, lieutenant Lismahago
rushed into the room with horror in his looks, exclaiming, 'A mad dog!
a mad dog!' and throwing up the window sash, leaped into the garden--Sir
Thomas, waked by this tremendous exclamation, started up, and forgetting
his gout, followed the lieutenant's example by a kind of instinctive
impulse. He not only bolted thro' the window like an arrow from a bow,
but ran up to his middle in the pond before he gave the least sign of
recollection. Then the captain began to bawl, 'Lord have mercy upon
us!--pray, take care of the gentleman!--for God's sake, mind your
footing, my dear boy!--get warm blankets--comfort his poor carcase--warm
the bed in the green room.'

Lady Bullford was thunder-struck at this phaenomenon, and the rest of
the company gazed in silent astonishment, while the servants hastened
to assist their master, who suffered himself to be carried back into the
parlour without speaking a word.--Being instantly accommodated with dry
clothes and flannels, comforted with a cordial, and replaced in statu
quo, one of the maids was ordered to chafe his lower extremities, an
operation in consequence of which his senses seemed to return and his
good humour to revive.--As we had followed him into the room, he looked
at every individual in his turn, with a certain ludicrous expression in
his countenance, but fixed his eyes in particular upon Lismahago, who
presented him with a pinch of snuff, and when he took it in silence,
'Sir Thomas Bullford (said he), I am much obliged to you for all your
favours, and some of them I have endeavoured to repay in your own coin.'
'Give me thy hand (cried the baronet); thou hast indeed payed me Scot
and lot; and even left a balance in my hands, for which, in presence of
this company, I promise to be accountable.'--So saying, he laughed
very heartily, and even seemed to enjoy the retaliation which had been
exacted at his own expence; but lady Bullford looked very grave; and in
all probability thought the lieutenant had carried his resentment too
far, considering that her husband was valetudinary--but, according
to the proverb, he that will play at bowls must expect to meet with
rubbers. I have seen a tame bear, very diverting when properly managed,
become a very dangerous wild beast when teized for the entertainment of
the spectators.--As for Lismahago, he seemed to think the fright and the
cold bath would have a good effect upon his patient's constitution: but
the doctor hinted some apprehension that the gouty matter might, by such
a sudden shock, be repelled from the extremities and thrown upon some of
the more vital parts of the machine.--I should be very sorry to see this
prognostic verified upon our facetious landlord, who told Mrs Tabitha at
parting, that he hoped she would remember him in the distribution of
the bride's favours, as he had taken so much pains to put the captain's
parts and mettle to the proof.--After all, I am afraid our squire
will appear to be the greatest sufferer by the baronet's wit; for his
constitution is by no means calculated for night-alarms. He has yawned
and shivered all day, and gone to bed without supper; so that, as we
have got into good quarters, I imagine we shall make a halt to-morrow;
in which case, you will have at least one day's respite from the
persecution of

J. MELFORD Oct. 3.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY JONES,

Miss Liddy is so good as to unclose me in a kiver as fur as Gloster,
and the carrier will bring it to hand--God send us all safe to
Monmouthshire, for I'm quite jaded with rambling--'Tis a true saying,
live and learn--0 woman, what chuckling and changing have I seen!--Well,
there's nothing sartain in this world--Who would have thought that
mistriss, after all the pains taken for the good of her prusias sole,
would go for to throw away her poor body? that she would cast the
heys of infection upon such a carrying-crow as Lashmihago! as old
as Mathewsullin, as dry as a red herring, and as poor as a starved
veezel--0, Molly, hadst thou seen him come down the ladder, in a shurt
so scanty, that it could not kiver his nakedness!--The young
'squire called him Dunquickset; but he looked for all the world like
Cradoc-ap-Morgan, the ould tinker, that suffered at Abergany for
steeling of kettle--Then he's a profane scuffle, and, as Mr Clinker
says, no better than an impfiddle, continually playing upon the pyebill
and the new-burth--I doubt he has as little manners as money; for he
can't say a civil word, much more make me a present of a pair of gloves
for goodwill; but he looks as if he wanted to be very forewood and
familiar O! that ever a gentlewoman of years and discretion should tare
her air, and cry and disporridge herself for such a nubjack! as the song
goes

I vow she would fain have a burd That bids such a price for an owl.

but, for sartain, he must have dealt with some Scotch musician to bring
her to this pass--As for me, I put my trust in the Lord; and I have got
a slice of witch elm sowed in the gathers of my under petticoat; and
Mr Clinker assures me, that by the new light of grease, I may deify the
devil and all his works--But I nose what I nose--If mistress should take
up with Lashmyhago, this is no sarvice for me--Thank God, there's no
want of places; and if it wan't for wan thing, I would--but, no matter
Madam Baynar's woman has twenty good pounds a-year and parquisites; and
dresses like a parson of distinkson--I dined with her and the valley
de shambles, with bags and golden jackets; but there was nothing
kimfittable to eat, being as how they lived upon board, and having
nothing but a piss of could cuddling tart and some blamangey, I was
tuck with the cullick, and a murcey it was that mistress had her viol of
assings in the cox.

But, as I was saying, I think for sartain this match will go forewood;
for things are come to a creesus; and I have seen with my own bays, such
smuggling--But I scorn for to exclose the secrets of the family; and
if it wance comes to marrying, who nose but the frolick may go round--I
believes as how, Miss Liddy would have no reversion if her swan would
appear; and you would be surprised, Molly, to receive a bride's fever
from your humble sarvant--but this is all suppository, dear girl; and I
have sullenly promised to Mr Clinker, that neither man, woman, nor child
shall no that arrow said a civil thing to me in the way of infection.
I hope to drink your health at Brambleton-hall, in a horn of October,
before the month be out--Pray let my bed be turned once a-day, and the
windore opened, while the weather is dry; and burn a few billets with
some brush in the footman's garret, and see their mattrash be dry as a
bone: for both our gentlemen have got a sad could by lying in damp shits
at sir Tummas Ballfart's. No more at present, but my sarvice to Saul and
the rest of our fellow-sarvents, being,

Dear Mary Jones, Always yours, WIN. JENKINS Oct. 4.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

This method of writing to you from time to time, without any hopes of an
answer, affords me, I own, some ease and satisfaction in the 'midst of
my disquiet, as it in some degree lightens the burthen of affliction:
but it is at best a very imperfect enjoyment of friendship, because it
admits of no return of confidence and good counsel--I would give the
whole world to have your company for a single day--I am heartily
tired of this itinerant way of life. I am quite dizzy with a perpetual
succession of objects--Besides it is impossible to travel such a
length of way, without being exposed to inconveniencies, dangers, and
disagreeable accidents, which prove very grievous to a poor creature of
weak nerves like me, and make me pay very dear for the gratification of
my curiosity.

Nature never intended me for the busy world--I long for repose and
solitude, where I can enjoy that disinterested friendship which is not
to be found among crouds, and indulge those pleasing reveries that shun
the hurry and tumult of fashionable society--Unexperienced as I am in
the commerce of life, I have seen enough to give me a disgust to the
generality of those who carry it on--There is such malice, treachery,
and dissimulation, even among professed friends and intimate companions,
as cannot fail to strike a virtuous mind with horror; and when Vice
quits the stage for a moment, her place is immediately occupied by
Folly, which is often too serious to excite any thing but compassion.
Perhaps I ought to be silent on the foibles of my poor aunt; but with
you, my dear Willis, I have no secrets; and, truly, her weaknesses are
such as cannot be concealed. Since the first moment we arrived at Bath,
she has been employed constantly in spreading nets for the other sex;
and, at length, she has caught a superannuated lieutenant, who is in a
fair way to make her change her name--My uncle and my brother seem to
have no objection to this extraordinary match, which, I make no doubt,
will afford abundance of matter for conversation and mirth; for my part,
I am too sensible of my own weaknesses, to be diverted with those of
other people--At present, I have something at heart that employs my
whole attention, and keeps my mind in the utmost terror and suspence.

Yesterday in the forenoon, as I stood with my brother at the parlour
window of an inn, where we had lodged, a person passed a horseback, whom
(gracious Heaven!) I instantly discovered to be Wilson! He wore a white
riding-coat, with the cape buttoned up to his chin; looking remarkably
pale, and passed at a round trot, without seeming to observe us--Indeed,
he could not see us; for there was a blind that concealed us from the
view. You may guess how I was affected at this apparition. The light
forsook my eyes; and I was seized with such a palpitation and trembling,
that I could not stand. I sat down upon a couch, and strove to compose
myself, that my brother might not perceive my agitation; but it was
impossible to escape his prying eyes--He had observed the object that
alarmed me; and, doubtless, knew him at the first glance--He now looked
at me with a stern countenance; then he ran out into the street, to see
what road the unfortunate horseman had taken--He afterwards dispatched
his man for further intelligence, and seemed to meditate some violent
design. My uncle, being out of order, we remained another night at the
inn; and all day long Jery acted the part of an indefatigable spy upon
my conduct--He watched my very looks with such eagerness of attention,
as if he would have penetrated into the utmost recesses of my
heart--This may be owing to his regard for my honour, if it is not the
effect of his own pride; but he is so hot, and violent, and unrelenting,
that the sight of him alone throws me into a flutter; and really it
will not be in my power to afford him any share of my affection, if he
persists in persecuting me at this rate. I am afraid he has formed some
scheme of vengeance, which will make me completely wretched! I am afraid
he suspects some collusion from this appearance of Wilson.--Good God!
did he really appear? or was it only a phantom, a pale spectre to
apprise me of his death.

O Letty, what shall I do?--where shall I turn for advice and
consolation? shall I implore the protection of my uncle, who has been
always kind and compassionate.--This must be my last resource.--I dread
the thoughts of making him uneasy; and would rather suffer a thousand
deaths than live the cause of dissension in the family.--I cannot
conceive the meaning of Wilson's coming hither:--perhaps, it was in
quest of us, in order to disclose his real name and situation:--but
wherefore pass without staying to make the least enquiry?--My dear
Willis, I am lost in conjecture. I have not closed an eye since I saw
him.--All night long have I been tossed about from one imagination to
another. The reflection finds no resting place.--I have prayed, and
sighed, and wept plentifully.--If this terrible suspence continues much
longer, I shall have another fit of illness, and then the whole family
will be in confusion--If it was consistent with the wise purposes
of Providence, would I were in my grave--But it is my duty to be
resigned.--My dearest Letty, excuse my weakness--excuse these blots--my
tears fall so fast that I cannot keep the paper dry--yet I ought
to consider that I have as yet no cause to despair but I am such a
faint-hearted timorous creature!

Thank God, my uncle is much better than he was yesterday. He is resolved
to pursue our journey strait to Wales.--I hope we shall take Gloucester
in our way--that hope chears my poor heart I shall once more embrace my
best beloved Willis, and pour all my griefs into her friendly bosom.--0
heaven! is it possible that such happiness is reserved for

The dejected and forlorn LYDIA MELFORD Oct. 4.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WATKIN,

I yesterday met with an incident which I believe you will own to be very
surprising--As I stood with Liddy at the window of the inn where we
had lodged, who should pass by but Wilson a-horse back!--I could not be
mistaken in the person, for I had a full view of him as he advanced; I
plainly perceived by my sister's confusion that she recognized him at
the same time. I was equally astonished and incensed at his appearance,
which I could not but interpret into an insult, or something worse. I
ran out at the gate, and, seeing him turn the corner of the street, I
dispatched my servant to observe his motions, but the fellow was too
late to bring me that satisfaction. He told me, however, that there was
an inn, called the Red Lion, at that end of the town, where he supposed
the horseman had alighted, but that he would not enquire without further
orders. I sent him back immediately to know what strangers were in the
house, and he returned with a report that there was one Mr Wilson lately
arrived. In consequence of this information I charged him with a note
directed to that gentleman, desiring him to meet me in half an hour in
a certain field at the town's end, with a case of pistols, in order
to decide the difference which could not be determined at our last
rencounter: but I did not think proper to subscribe the billet. My man
assured me he had delivered it into his own hand; and, that having read
it, he declared he would wait upon the gentleman at the place and time
appointed.

M'Alpine being an old soldier, and luckily sober at the time, I
entrusted him with my secret. I ordered him to be within call, and,
having given him a letter to be delivered to my uncle in case of
accident, I repaired to the rendezvous, which was an inclosed field at
a little distance from the highway. I found my antagonist had already
taken his ground, wrapped in a dark horseman's coat, with a laced hat
flapped over his eyes; but what was my astonishment, when, throwing off
this wrapper, he appeared to be a person whom I had never seen before!
He had one pistol stuck in a leather belt, and another in his hand ready
for action, and, advancing a few steps, called to know if I was ready--I
answered, 'No,' and desired a parley; upon which he turned the muzzle
of his piece towards the earth; then replaced it in his belt, and met me
half way--When I assured him he was not the man I expected to meet, he
said it might be so: that he had received a slip of paper directed to Mr
Wilson, requesting him to come hither; and that as there was no other in
the place of that name, he naturally concluded the note was intended
for him, and him only--I then gave him to understand, that I had been
injured by a person who assumed that name, which person I had actually
seen within the hour, passing through the street on horseback; that
hearing there was a Mr Wilson at the Red Lion, I took it for granted he
was the man, and in that belief had writ the billet; and I expressed my
surprize, that he, who was a stranger to me and my concerns, should give
me such a rendezvous, without taking the trouble to demand a previous
explanation. He replied, that there was no other of his name in the
whole country; that no such horseman had alighted at the Red Lion since
nine o'clock, when he arrived--that having had the honour to serve his
majesty, he thought he could not decently decline any invitation of
this kind, from what quarter soever it might come, and that if any
explanation was necessary, it did not belong to him to demand it, but
to the gentleman who summoned him into the field. Vexed as I was at this
adventure, I could not help admiring the coolness of this officer, whose
open countenance prepossessed me in his favour. He seemed to be turned
of forty; wore his own short black hair, which curled naturally about
his ears, and was very plain in his apparel--When I begged pardon for
the trouble I had given him, he received my apology with great good
humour.--He told me that he lived about ten miles off, at a small
farm-house, which would afford me tolerable lodging, if I would come
and take diversion of hunting with him for a few weeks; in which case we
might, perhaps, find out the man who had given me offence--I thanked him
very sincerely for his courteous offer, which, I told him, I was not at
liberty to accept at present, on account of my being engaged in a
family party; and so we parted, with mutual professions of good will and
esteem.

Now tell me, dear knight, what am I to make of this singular adventure?
Am I to suppose that the horseman I saw was really a thing of flesh
and blood, or a bubble that vanished into air?--or must I imagine Liddy
knows more of the matter than she chuses to disclose?--If I thought
her capable of carrying on any clandestine correspondence with such a
fellow, I should at once discard all tenderness, and forget that she was
connected with me by the ties of blood--But how is it possible that
a girl of her simplicity and inexperience, should maintain such an
intercourse, surrounded, as she is, with so many eyes, destitute of all
opportunity, and shifting quarters every day of her life!--Besides, she
has solemnly promised. No--I can't think the girl so base--so insensible
to the honour of her family.--What disturbs me chiefly, is the
impression which these occurrences seem to make upon her spirits--These
are the symptoms from which I conclude that the rascal has still a hold
on her affection, surely I have a right to call him a rascal, and to
conclude that his designs are infamous. But it shall be my fault if he
does not one day repent his presumption--I confess I cannot think, much
less write on this subject, with any degree of temper or patience; I
shall therefore conclude with telling you, that we hope to be in Wales
by the latter end of the month: but before that period you will probably
hear again from

your affectionate J. MELFORD Oct. 4.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

When I wrote you by last post, I did not imagine I should be tempted to
trouble you again so soon: but I now sit down with a heart so full that
it cannot contain itself; though I am under such agitation of spirits,
that you are to expect neither method nor connexion in this address--We
have been this day within a hair's breadth of losing honest Matthew
Bramble, in consequence of a cursed accident, which I will endeavour
to explain.--In crossing the country to get into the post road, it was
necessary to ford a river, and we that were a-horseback passed without
any danger or difficulty; but a great quantity of rain having fallen
last night and this morning, there was such an accumulation of water,
that a mill-head gave way, just as the coach was passing under it, and
the flood rushed down with such impetuosity, as first floated, and then
fairly overturned the carriage in the middle of the stream--Lismahago
and I, and the two servants, alighting instantaneously, ran into the
river to give all the assistance in our power.--Our aunt, Mrs Tabitha,
who had the good fortune to be uppermost, was already half way out of
the coach window, when her lover approaching, disengaged her entirely;
but, whether his foot slipt, or the burthen was too great, they fell
over head and ears in each others' arms. He endeavoured more than once
to get up, and even to disentangle himself from her embrace, but she
hung about his neck like a mill-stone (no bad emblem of matrimony), and
if my man had not proved a stanch auxiliary, those two lovers would in
all probability have gone hand in hand to the shades below--For my part,
I was too much engaged to take any cognizance of their distress.--I
snatched out my sister by the hair of the head, and, dragging her to
the bank, recollected that my uncle had, not yet appeared--Rushing again
into the stream, I met Clinker hauling ashore Mrs Jenkins, who looked
like a mermaid with her hair dishevelled about her ears; but, when I
asked if his master was safe, he forthwith shook her from him, and
she must have gone to pot, if a miller had not seasonably come to her
relief.--As for Humphry, he flew like lightning, to the coach, that was
by this time filled with water, and, diving into it, brought up the poor
'squire, to all appearance, deprived of life--It is not in my power to
describe what I felt at this melancholy spectacle--it was such an agony
as baffles all description! The faithful Clinker, taking him up in his
arms, as if he had been an infant of six months, carried him ashore,
howling most piteously all the way, and I followed him in a transport of
grief and consternation--When he was laid upon the grass and turned from
side to side, a great quantity of water ran out at his mouth, then he
opened his eyes, and fetched a deep sigh. Clinker perceiving these signs
of life, immediately tied up his arm with a garter, and, pulling out a
horse-fleam, let him blood in the farrier stile.--At first a few drops
only issued from the orifice, but the limb being chafed, in a little
time the blood began to flow in a continued stream, and he uttered some
incoherent words, which were the most welcome sounds that ever saluted
my ear. There was a country inn hard by, the landlord of which had by
this time come with his people to give their assistance.--Thither my
uncle being carried, was undressed and put to bed, wrapped in warm
blankets; but having been moved too soon, he fainted away, and once more
lay without sense or motion, notwithstanding all the efforts of Clinker
and the landlord, who bathed his temples with Hungary water, and held a
