contend with thee, for the sake of miserable mortals, who, like the
leaves, are at one time very blooming, feeding on the fruit of the soil
and at another again, perish without life. Rather let us cease from
combat as soon as possible; and let them decide the matter themselves."

Thus having spoken, he turned himself back; for he was afraid to come to
strife of hands with his uncle. But him his sister, rustic Diana, the
mistress of wild beasts, harshly rebuked, and uttered this upbraiding
speech:

"Fliest thou, Far-darter? and hast thou yielded the whole victory to
Neptune? and dost thou give easy glory to him? O Fool, why in vain dost
thou hold an useless bow? No longer now shall I hear thee boasting in
the halls of our sire, as formerly amongst the immortal gods, that thou
wouldst fight in opposition to Neptune."

Thus she spoke; but her the far-darting Apollo by no means addressed.
But the venerable spouse of Jove, enraged, rebuked [her] who rejoices in
arrows, with reproaching words:

"How darest thou now, fearless wretch, stand against me? A difficult
match am I for thee to be opposed to my strength, although thou art a
bow-bearer; for Jove has made thee a lioness among women, and suffered
thee to kill whatever woman thou wilt. Certainly it is better to slay
wild beasts among the mountains, or rustic stags, than to fight bravely
with thy betters. But if thou desirest to have a knowledge of battle,
come on, that thou mayest well know how much the better I am; since thou
opposest strength to me."

She spoke, and with her left hand seized both her (Diana's) hands at the
wrist, and with her right plucked the bow[688] from her shoulders.
Smiling, she beat her about the ears with it, while she writhed herself;
and the fleet arrows fell out [of her quiver, as she moved]. Then the
goddess fled, weeping, like a dove which flies from a hawk to a hollow
rock, her hiding-place, (for neither was it fated that she should be
taken by it;) so she fled, weeping, and left her arrows there.

   [Footnote 688: I have followed Kennedy, who says: "The preferable
   meaning of [Greek: toxa] is _arcus_. This Juno employs as an
   instrument of chastisement, to avoid the infliction of which, her
   antagonist turns from side to side, and whilst thus shifting her
   position lets fall her arrows, [Greek: oistoi], ver. 492." Others
   by [Greek: toxa] understood both bow and arrows.]

But the messenger [Mercury], the slayer of Argos, addressed Latona:

"O Latona, I will by no means fight with thee; for difficult indeed
would it be to combat with the wives of cloud-compelling Jove; but
rather, very forward among the immortal gods, boast that thou hast
conquered me by violent force."

Thus indeed he spoke; but Latona collected together the bent bow and the
arrows[689] which had fallen here and there amid the whirl of dust. She,
having taken the arrows, followed her daughter. But the daughter had
arrived at Olympus, and at the brazen-floored palace of Jove, and had
sat down at the knees of her father, weeping, whilst her ambrosial robe
trembled around; and her the Saturnian father drew towards him, and,
sweetly smiling, interrogated her:

"Which now of the heavenly inhabitants, my dear child, has rashly done
such things to thee, as if having done some evil openly?"

But him the fair-crowned mistress of the chase[690] addressed in turn:
"Thy spouse, the white-armed Juno, has injured me, O father, from whom
contention and strife await[691] the immortals."

   [Footnote 689: [Greek: Toxa] here means both bow and arrows.]

   [Footnote 690: A more literal version would be, "the fair crowned
   mistress of the cry," i.e. the hunting cry.]

   [Footnote 691: [Greek: Epheptai], "immitti solet."--Heyne. See
   D'Orville on Chariton, vii. 5, p. 582, ed. Lips.]

Thus they indeed spoke such things with one another. But Phoebus Apollo
came to sacred Ilium; for the wall of the well-built city was a care to
him, lest the Greeks, contrary to fate, should overthrow it that day.
The other ever-existing gods, however, repaired to Olympus, some indeed
indignant, but others greatly boasting. And they sat down beside their
father, the collector of dark clouds: but Achilles slew at once the
Trojans themselves, and their solid-hoofed steeds. And as when a smoke,
ascending from a burning city, reaches the wide heaven, but the wrath of
the gods has excited it; it creates toil to all, and sends griefs upon
many; so did Achilles cause toil and griefs to the Trojans.

Meanwhile aged Priam stood upon a lofty tower, and observed huge
Achilles: but by him the routed Trojans were easily thrown into
confusion, nor was there any might in them. Then groaning, he descended
from the tower to the ground, in order to direct the illustrious guards
at the gates along the wall:

"Hold the gates open in your hands until the people, flying, come into
the city, for Achilles is at hand routing them. Now I think that
destructive deeds will be. But, as soon as they revive, hemmed in within
the wall, put to again the well-fitted doors, for I tremble lest this
destructive man rush within the wall."

Thus he spoke; but they opened the gates and pushed back the bolts; and
they being opened, afforded safety. But Apollo leaped out to meet them,
that he might avert destruction from the Trojans. Then they, parched
with thirst, and covered with dust, fled from the plain directly towards
the city and the lofty wall; but he furiously pursued with his spear;
for fierce madness constantly possessed his heart, and he burned to bear
away glory. Then indeed the sons of the Greeks had taken lofty-gated
Troy, had not Phoebus Apollo excited noble Agenor, a hero, the son of
Antenor, both blameless and brave. And into his heart he threw courage,
and he himself stood beside him, leaning against a beech-tree, that he
might avert the heavy hands of death; but he was overshadowed by much
darkness. But he, when he perceived Achilles, the destroyer of cities,
stood still, and much his heart was darkened[692] as he remained; and
sighing, he thus addressed his own great-hearted soul:

"Alas, me! if indeed I fly from terrible Achilles, in the way by which
the others, routed, are flying, even thus will he seize me, and will
slay me unwarlike; but if I suffer these to be thrown into confusion by
Achilles, the son of Peleus, and fly in another direction on my feet
from the wall through the Ilian plain, until I reach the lawns of Ida,
and enter its thickets; then indeed, having bathed myself at evening in
the river, I may return back to Troy, cleansed from sweat. But why does
my mind commune these things? Truly he may observe me departing from the
city towards the plain, and, quickly pursuing, may overtake me on his
swift feet; then will it no longer be possible to escape Death and Fate;
for he is very powerful beyond all men. But if I go against him in front
of the city--for his body also is without doubt vulnerable by the sharp
brass, there is one soul in it, and men say that he is mortal; although
Jove, the son of Saturn, affords him glory."

So saying, gathering himself up,[693] he awaited Achilles; and his
valiant heart within him burned to combat and to fight. As a panther
advances from a deep thicket against a huntsman,[694] nor is aught
troubled in mind, nor put to flight, although it hears the yelling; and
although anticipating it, he may have wounded, or stricken it,
nevertheless, although pierced with a spear, it desists not from the
combat, till either it be engaged in close fight, or be subdued. Thus
noble Agenor, the son of renowned Antenor, would not fly till he had
made trial of Achilles; but, on the contrary, held before him his
shield, equal on all sides, and took aim at him with his spear, and
shouted aloud:

   [Footnote 692: Cf. Donalson on Soph. Antig. 20, where there is a
   similar use of [Greek: kalchainein]. The present metaphor is
   taken from the troubled and darkling aspect of the sea before a
   storm.]

   [Footnote 693: Cf. xvi. 403, 714.]

   [Footnote 694: This pleonasm of [Greek: aner] is very common; ii.
   474, [Greek: andres aipolii]; iv. 187, [Greek: andres chalkees].
   Cf. iii. 170; xii. 41. So [Greek: andres politai], Phlegon.
   Trall, p. 26. [Greek: Andres demotai], Aristoph. Plut. 254.
   [Greek: Andres basileus], Palaephatus, 39. [Greek: Aner
   oikonomos], Manetho, iv. 610.]

"Certainly now thou art great in hopes in thy mind, O illustrious
Achilles, that thou wilt this day devastate the city of the magnanimous
Trojans. Fool! certainly many griefs will be effected over it, for in it
we are numerous and valiant men, who will defend Ilium for our beloved
parents, our wives, and our children. But thou shalt here fulfil thy
destiny, although being so terrible, and a daring warrior."

He spoke, and hurled the sharp javelin from his heavy hand, and struck
him in the shin below the knee, nor missed: but the greave of
newly-wrought tin around [it] horribly resounded; and the brazen weapon
recoiled from it stricken, nor penetrated: for the gifts of the god
prevented it. Then the son of Peleus next attacked godlike Agenor; nor
did Apollo permit him to obtain glory; but snatched him away, and
covered him with much haze; and sent him to return peacefully from the
battle.

But he by a stratagem averted the son of Peleus from the people; for the
Far-darter, having likened himself in every respect to Agenor, stood
before his feet; and he hastened to pursue him with his feet. Whilst he
was pursuing him, running before at a small interval, over the
corn-bearing plain, turned towards the deep-eddying river Scamander;
(for Apollo beguiled him by deceit, so that he always expected to
overtake him on his feet;) meanwhile the other Trojans being routed,
came delighted in a crowd to the city; and the city was full of them
shut in. Nor did they any longer dare to wait for each other without the
city and the wall, and to inquire who had escaped, and who had fallen in
the battle; but gladly they were poured into the city, whomsoever of
them the feet and knees preserved.




BOOK THE TWENTY-SECOND.


ARGUMENT.

Hector persists in remaining outside the walls, despite the entreaties
of his father. He flies thrice round Troy, fights, and is slain by
Achilles, who drags his body to the fleet at the wheels of his chariot.
The lamentations of his wife and parents follow.


Thus they, indeed, driven by fright through the city, like fawns, were
refreshing themselves from sweat, and were drinking and allaying their
thirst, leaning against the handsome battlements; but the Greeks were
coming near the wall, resting their shields upon their shoulders. But
Hector his destructive fate fettered to remain there, before Ilium and
the Scaean gates. And Phoebus Apollo thus addressed the son of Peleus:

"Why, O son of Peleus, dost thou pursue me, an immortal god, with swift
feet, thyself being a mortal? Nor yet hast thou at all discovered that I
am a god; but thou incessantly ragest. For certainly the labour of the
Trojans is not now a care to thee, whom thou hast routed, and who are
now enclosed within their city, while thou art turned aside hither.
Neither canst thou slay me, since I am not mortal."

But him swift-footed Achilles, greatly indignant,[695] addressed:

   [Footnote 695: Milton, P.L. ii. 708:--

                   --"On th' other side
         Incensed with indignation Satan stood
         Unterrified, and like a comet burn'd,
         That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
         In th' arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
         Shakes pestilence and war."]

"Thou hast injured me, O Far-darter, most destructive of all gods,
having now turned me away hither from the wall; certainly many had now
seized the earth with their teeth, before they had arrived at Ilium. But
now hast thou deprived me of great glory, and hast preserved them
easily, for thou didst not at all dread vengeance after. Certainly I
would punish thee, if the power at least were mine."

Thus saying, he went towards the city greatly elate, hastening like a
steed which bears away the prize, with his chariot, which striving hard,
runs swiftly over the plain. So Achilles briskly moved his feet and his
knees.

But him aged Priam first beheld with his eyes, rushing over the plain,
all shining like a star which rises in autumn; and its resplendent rays
shine among many stars in the depth of the night, which by name they
call the dog of Orion. Very bright indeed is this, but it is a baleful
sign, and brings violent heat upon miserable mortals. So shone the brass
round the breast of him running. But the old man groaned, and smote his
head with his hands, raising them on high,[696] and, groaning, he cried
out greatly, supplicating his dear son. But he stood before the Scaean
gates, insatiably eager to fight with Achilles; but the old man
piteously addressed him, stretching out his hands:

   [Footnote 696: On this gesture of grief, see Gorius, Monum.
   Columb. p. 12.]

"O Hector, do not, my beloved son, await this man alone, without others;
lest that thou shouldst speedily draw on fate, subdued by the son of
Peleus; since he is much more powerful. Cruel! would that he were [only]
as dear to the gods as he is to me; quickly then would the dogs and
vultures devour him lying low; surely sad grief would then depart from
my heart. He who has made me deprived of many and brave sons, slaying,
and selling them into far-distant islands. For even now the Trojans
being shut up in the city, I cannot see my two sons, Lycaon and
Polydorus, whom Laothoe bore to me, queen among women. But if indeed
they live at the camp, surely we will afterwards redeem them with brass
and with gold; for it is within; for aged Altes, renowned by fame, gave
many things to his daughter. But if they are already dead, and in the
mansions of Hades, grief will be to my soul, and to their mother, we who
gave them birth. But to the other people the grief will be shorter, if
thou shouldst not die, subdued by Achilles. But come inside the wall, O
my son, that thou mayest save the Trojan men and women, nor afford great
glory to the son of Peleus, and thou thyself be deprived of thy dear
life. Moreover, pity me, wretched, yet still preserving my senses,[697]
unhappy, whom the Saturnian sire will destroy by grievous fate, upon the
threshold of old age, having seen many evils,[698] my sons slain, my
daughters dragged captives, their chambers plundered, and my infant
children dashed upon the earth in dire hostility, and my
daughters-in-law torn away by the pernicious hands of the Greeks. And
myself perhaps the last--the raw-devouring dogs, whom I have nourished
in my palaces, the attendants of my table, the guards of my portals,
will tear at the entrance of the gates,[699] after some one, having
stricken or wounded me with the sharp brass, shall take away my soul
from my limbs; and who, drinking my blood, will lie in the porch,
infuriated in mind. To a young man, indeed, slain in battle, lacerated
with the sharp brass, it is altogether becoming to lie, for all things
are honourable to him dead, whatever may appear; but when dogs dishonour
the grey head, the hoary beard, and privy members of an old man slain,
that is indeed most pitiable among wretched mortals."

   [Footnote 697: _I.e._ alive. Cf. xxiii.]

   [Footnote 698: On the proverbial woes of Priam, cf. Aristotle
   Eth. i. 9, 10; and Ennius, fragm. Andromach. p. 236--9, with the
   notes of Columna, ed. Hessel.]

   [Footnote 699: Cf. Virg. AEn. ii. 550, sqq., who has imitated this
   passage in his description of the death of Priam.]

The old man spoke, and tore out the hoary locks with his hands, plucking
them from his head; nor did he persuade the mind of Hector. But his
mother, then on the other side, wailing, shed tears, laying bare her
bosom, whilst with the other hand she laid forth her breast; and
shedding tears, addressed to him winged words: "O Hector, my son,
reverence these things, and pity me myself. If ever I afforded thee the
grief-lulling breast, remember these things, O dear son; and being
within the wall, repel [this] hostile man; nor stand a foremost
adversary to him. Wretched one! for if he shall slay thee, neither shall
I mourn thee on the couch, my dear offspring, whom I myself brought
forth, nor will thy rich-dowered wife; but far away from us both, the
swift dogs will devour thee at the ships of the Greeks."

Thus weeping, they twain addressed their dear son, supplicating him
much; nor did they persuade the mind of Hector; but he awaited huge
Achilles, coming near. And as a fierce serpent at its den, fed on evil
poisons, awaits[700] a man, but direful rage enters it, and it glares
horribly, coiling itself around its den; so Hector, possessing
inextinguishable courage, retired not, leaning his splendid shield
against a projecting tower; but, indignant, he thus addressed his own
great-hearted soul:[701]

"Ah me, if indeed I enter the gates and the wall, Polydamas will first
cast reproach upon me,[702] he who advised me to lead the Trojans
towards the city in this disastrous night, when noble Achilles arose to
battle. But I did not obey; certainly it would have been much better.
And now, since by my injurious obstinacy I have destroyed the people, I
fear the Trojan men, and the long-robed Trojan women, lest some one
inferior to me should say, 'Hector, relying on his own strength, has
destroyed the people.' Thus will they say; but it would have been far
better for me, slaying Achilles in the encounter,[703] to return, or
gloriously to be slain by him for the city. But if now I shall lay down
my bossed shield and stout helmet, and, resting my spear against the
wall, I myself going, shall come before renowned Achilles, and promise
that we will give to the Atrides to lead away Helen, and all the
numerous possessions along with her, whatever Paris brought to Troy in
his hollow barks, and who was the origin of the contention, and at the
same time that we will divide others, as many as this city contains,
among the Greeks,--but again I should exact an oath from the elders of
the Trojans,[704] that they would conceal nothing, but divide all things
into two portions, whatever treasure this delightful city contains
within it. Yet why does my soul discuss such things? [I dread] lest I,
going, should reach him, but he pity me not, nor at all respect me, but
slay me, being thus naked, as a woman, after I have put off my armour.
Nor, indeed, is it now allowed to converse with him from an oak, or from
a rock, as a virgin and a youth; a virgin and youth converse with one
another. But it is better to engage him in strife; that as soon as
possible we may know to which, indeed, the Olympian [Jove] will give
glory."


   [Footnote 700: Hesych. [Greek: cheia' e katadysis ton opheon kai
   drakonion].]

   [Footnote 701: Milton, P.L. vi. III:--

          "Abdiel that sight endured not, where he stood
          Among the mightiest, bent on highest deeds,
          And thus his own undaunted heart explores."]

   [Footnote 702: Cf. Aristot. Eth. iii. 8, and Casaub. on Pers.
   Sat. i. 4. "Ne mihi Polydamas, et Troiades Labeonem
   Praetulerint."]

   [Footnote 703: [Greek: Anten].]

   [Footnote 704: This is perhaps the easiest way of expressing
   [Greek: gerousion orkon]. It means an oath to be solemnly kept,
   an oath to which the elders might with propriety pledge
   themselves.]

Thus he pondered, remaining; but near him came Achilles, like unto the
helmet-shaking warrior, Mars, brandishing upon his right shoulder the
dreadful Pelian ash; but the brass shone around, like unto the splendour
either of a blazing fire, or of the rising sun. Then, as tremor seized
Hector, he perceived him, nor could he remain there any longer, but he
left the gates behind him, and fled affrighted; but the son of Peleus
rushed on, trusting to his swift feet. As a falcon in the mountains, the
swiftest of birds, easily dashes after a timid pigeon; she, indeed,
flies away obliquely; but he, close at hand, shrilly screaming,
frequently assails, and his spirit orders him to seize her: thus, eager,
he flew right on; but Hector fled in terror under the wall of the
Trojans, and moved his fleet limbs. Then they rushed by the
prospect-ground and the wind-waving fig-tree, always under the wall
along the public way, and reached the two fair-flowing springs, where
the two springs of the eddying Scamander rise. The one, indeed, flows
with tepid water, and a steam arises from it around, as of burning fire;
whilst the other flows forth in the summer time, like unto hail, or cold
snow, or ice from water. There, at them, are the wide, handsome stone
basins, where the wives and fair daughters of the Trojans used to wash
their splendid garments formerly in time of peace, before the sons of
the Greeks arrived. In this direction they ran past [the one] flying,
but the other pursuing from behind. A brave man, indeed, fled before,
but a much braver swiftly pursued him; since they did not seek to obtain
a victim or a bull's hide, such as are the rewards of men for speed, but
they ran for the life of horse-breaking Hector. And as when
prize-winning[705] solid-hoofed steeds ran very swiftly round the
course, and a great reward is proposed, either a tripod, or a woman [in
honour] of a deceased hero; so they thrice made the circuit of the city
of Priam with their swift feet: and all the gods beheld. Then to them
the father of men and gods commenced an address:

   [Footnote 705: _I.e._ race horses.]

"Alas! certainly I behold with mine eyes a beloved hero pursued round
the wall; and my heart is grieved on account of Hector, who has
sacrificed many thighs of oxen to me, upon the tops of many-valed Ida,
and at other times again in the highest [places of] the city; but now,
indeed, noble Achilles pursues him, on swift feet, around the city of
Priam. But come, deliberate, O ye gods, and consider, whether we shall
preserve him from death, or shall subdue him now, being brave [at the
hands of] Achilles, the son of Peleus."

But him the blue-eyed goddess Minerva then addressed:

"O father, hurler of the white thunder, [collector] of dark clouds, what
a word hast thou spoken! Dost thou wish to liberate from sad death a
man, being mortal, long ago destined to fate? Do it: but all we, the
other gods, will not assent to thee."

Her, then, the cloud-compelling Jupiter, answering, addressed: "Take
courage, Tritonia, beloved child: I by no means speak with serious mind,
but I wish to be mild to thee. Do as is the inclination, nor delay at
all."

Thus speaking, he incited Minerva, already prepared; and, springing
forth, she descended down from the heights of Olympus.

But swift Achilles pursued Hector, incessantly pressing upon him. And as
when a dog pursues the fawn of a deer in the mountains, having roused it
from its lair, through both glens and thickets; and, although
panic-stricken, it crouches down beneath a brake; yet tracking it, he
runs continually on until he finds it; so Hector eluded not the
swift-footed son of Peleus. As often as he would rush against the
Dardanian gates, towards under the well-built towers, if perchance they
might aid him with missile weapons from above, so often, previously
anticipating him, he turned him away towards the plain; whilst he
himself always flew on the side of the city. And as in a dream one
cannot pursue a fugitive; neither can the one escape the other, nor the
other pursue: so the one could not overtake the other in his speed, nor
the other escape him. But how, then, could Hector have escaped the fates
of death, if Apollo had not, for the very last time, met him, who
aroused for him his courage and swift knees? But noble Achilles nodded
to the people with his head, nor permitted them to cast their bitter
weapons at Hector, lest some one, wounding him, should obtain the glory,
and he himself come second. But when for the fourth time they arrived at
the fountains, then, indeed, the Sire raised aloft his golden scales,
and placed in them the two fates of death, bearing long sleep, this of
Achilles, but that of horse-breaking Hector. Holding them by the middle,
he poised them, and the fatal day of Hector inclined and sunk to Hades;
but Phoebus Apollo left him.

Then the blue-eyed goddess Minerva approached the son of Peleus, and,
standing near, addressed to him winged words:

"Now, O illustrious Achilles, dear to Jove, I hope that we two shall
bear back great glory to the Greeks at the ships, having slain Hector,
although being insatiate of war. Now, certainly, it is no longer
possible for him to escape us, not even if far-darting Apollo should
toil much, throwing himself at the feet of the aegis-bearing father Jove.
But do thou now stand and revive; but I, approaching with thee, will
persuade him to engage thee face to face."

Thus spoke Minerva; but he obeyed, and rejoiced in his mind; and stood,
leaning upon his ashen, brass-pointed spear. But she then left him, and
overtook noble Hector, likening herself to Deiphobus, unwearied in her
body and voice; and, standing near, she addressed to him winged words:
"O brother dear, certainly swift Achilles now greatly presses on thee,
pursuing thee with rapid feet round the city of Priam. But come now, let
us stand, and, awaiting, repulse him."

But her mighty crest-tossing Hector in turn addressed:

"Deiphobus, surely thou wert ever before by far the dearest to me of my
brothers, the sons whom Hecuba and Priam produced. But now I think in my
mind that I honour thee still more, since thou hast dared for my sake,
when thou dost behold [me] with thine eyes, to come out of the city;
while others remain within."

But him the azure-eyed goddess Minerva in turn addressed:

"My brother dear, my father and venerable mother indeed greatly
supplicated me, by turn embracing my knees and my companions around, to
remain there (so much do all tremble with fear); but my mind within was
harassed with sad grief. But now let us forthwith eagerly engage, nor
let there any longer be a sparing of our spears, that we may know
whether Achilles, having slain us both, shall bear our bloody spoils to
the hollow barks, or be subdued by thy spear."

Thus having spoken, Minerva also with deception led on. But when they
were near advancing towards each other, him mighty crest-tossing Hector
first addressed:

"No longer, O son of Peleus, will I fly thee as before. Thrice have I
fled round the great city of Priam, nor ever dared to await thee coming
on; but now my mind urges me to stand against thee: certainly I shall
slay, or be slain. But come, let us attest the gods; for they will be
the best witnesses and observers of agreements. For neither will I
cruelly insult thee, if indeed Jove shall give me the victory, and I
take away thy life; but after I shall despoil thy beautiful armour, O
Achilles, I will give back thy body to the Greeks; and so also do thou."

But him swift-footed Achilles sternly regarding, addressed:

"Talk not to me of covenants, O most cursed Hector. As there are not
faithful leagues between lions and men, nor yet have wolves and lambs an
according mind,[706] but ever meditate evils against each other; so it
is not possible for thee and me to contract a friendship, nor shall
there at all be leagues between us,--first shall one, falling, satiate
the invincible warrior Mars with his blood. Call to mind all thy valour;
now it is very necessary for thee to be both a spearman and a daring
warrior. Nor is there any longer any escape for thee, for Pallas Minerva
at once subdues thee beneath my spear, and thou shalt now pay for all
the accumulated sorrows of my companions, whom thou hast slain, raging
with the spear."

   [Footnote 706: See Duport, p. 127; and cf. Hor. Epod. iv. 1.]

He spoke, and brandishing it, sent forth his long-shadowed spear, and
illustrious Hector, seeing it opposite, avoided it; for, looking before
him, he sunk down, and the brazen spear passed over him, and was fixed
in the earth. But Pallas Minerva plucked it out, and gave it back to
Achilles, and escaped the notice of Hector, the shepherd of the people.
Then Hector addressed the illustrious son of Peleus:

"Thou hast erred, O godlike Achilles, nor art thou yet acquainted with
my fate from Jove; certainly thou didst say so, but thou art a prater,
and very subtle in words, in order that, dreading thee, I may be
forgetful of my strength and courage. But not in my back, whilst flying,
shalt thou thrust thy spear, but shalt drive it through my breast,
rushing right on, if God grants this to thee. But now in turn avoid my
brazen spear! would that thou mightst now receive it all in thy body.
Then truly would the war become lighter to the Trojans, thou being
slain; for thou art the greatest bane to them."

He spoke, and, brandishing, sent forth his long-shadowed spear, and
struck the centre of Pelides' shield, nor missed; but the spear was
repelled far away from the shield. But Hector was enraged because his
swift weapon had fled in vain from his hand; and stood dejected, for he
had not another ashen spear. Then he called upon the white-shielded
Deiphobus, greatly shouting, [and] he asked him for a long spear; but he
was not near him; and Hector perceived in his mind, and said:

"Alas! without doubt, now the gods have summoned me to death. For I
indeed thought the hero Deiphobus was by my side; but he is within the
wall, and Minerva has deceived me. But now is evil death near me, nor
far away, neither is there escape. Certainly this long since was more
agreeable to Jove and to the far-darting son of Jove, who formerly,
propitious, preserved me; but now, on the contrary, Fate overtakes me.
Nevertheless I will not perish cowardly and ingloriously at least, but
having done some great deed to be heard of even by posterity."

Thus having spoken, he drew his sharp sword, which hung below his loins,
both huge and strong, and, with collected might, rushed forward, like a
lofty-soaring eagle, which swoops to the plain through the gloomy
clouds, about to snatch either a tender lamb, or a timid hare; thus
Hector rushed forward, brandishing his sharp sword. Achilles also rushed
on, and filled his soul with fierce rage. He sheltered his breast in
front with his shield, beautiful, curiously wrought and nodded with his
shining helmet, four-coned; but the beautiful golden tufts, which Vulcan
had diffused in great abundance round the cone, were shaken. As the star
Hesperus, which is placed the brightest star in heaven,[707] proceeds
amongst other stars in the unseasonable time of night, so it shone from
the well-sharpened spear which Achilles, designing mischief to noble
Hector, brandished in his right hand, eyeing his fair person, where it
would best yield. But the beautiful brazen armour, of which he had
despoiled great Patroclus, having slain him, covered the rest of his
body so much; yet did there appear [a part] where the collar-bones
separate the neck from the shoulders, and where the destruction of life
is most speedy. There noble Achilles, eager, drove into him with the
spear, and the point went out quite through his tender neck. However the
ash, heavy with brass, did not cut away the windpipe, so that, answering
in words, he could address him. But he fell in the dust, and noble
Achilles vaunted over him:

"Hector, thou didst once suppose, when spoiling Patroclus, that thou be
safe, nor dreaded me, being absent. Fool! for I apart, a much braver
avenger of him, was left behind at the hollow ships, I who have relaxed
thy knees. The dogs, indeed, and birds shall dishonourably tear thee,
but the Greeks shall perform his funeral rites."

But him crest-tossing Hector, growing languid, then addressed:

"I supplicate thee by thy soul, thy knees, thy parents, suffer not the
dogs to tear me at the ships of the Greeks; but do thou indeed receive
brass in abundance, and gold, which my father and venerable mother will
give thee; and send my body home, that the Trojans and wives of the
Trojans may make me, dead, partaker of a funeral pyre." [708]

   [Footnote 707: Milton, P.L. v. 166:--

        "Fairest of stars, last in the train of night,
        If better thou belong not to the dawn."]

   [Footnote 708: Cf. AEn. x. 903; xii. 930, sqq.]

But him swift-footed Achilles, sternly regarding, addressed;

"Dog, supplicate me not by my knees, nor by my parents; for would that
my might and mind in any manner urge me myself, tearing thy raw flesh to
pieces, to devour it, such things hast thou done to me. So that there is
not any one who can drive away the dogs from thy head, not even if they
should place ten-fold and twenty-times such ransoms, bringing them
hither, and even promise others; not even if Dardanian Priam should wish
to compensate for thee with gold:[709] not even thus shall thy venerable
mother lament [thee] whom she has borne, having laid thee upon a bier,
but dogs and fowl shall entirely tear thee in pieces."

But him crest-tossing Hector, dying, addressed:

"Surely well knowing thee, I foresaw this, nor was I destined to
persuade thee; for truly within thee there is an iron soul. Reflect now,
lest to thee I be some cause of the wrath of the gods, on that day when
Paris and Phoebus Apollo[710] shall kill thee, though being brave, at the
Scaean gates."

As he spoke thus, the end of death overshadowed him; and his soul flying
from his limbs, descended to Hades, bewailing its destiny, relinquishing
vigour and youth. But him, although dead, noble Achilles addressed:

"Die: but I will then receive my fate whensoever Jove may please to
accomplish it,[711] and the other immortal gods."

He spoke, and plucked the spear from the corpse; and then laid it aside,
but he spoiled the bloody armour from his shoulders. But the other sons
of the Greeks ran round, who also admired the stature and wondrous form,
of Hector;[712] nor did any stand by without inflicting a wound. And
thus would some one say, looking to his neighbour: "Oh, strange! surely
Hector is now much more gentle to be touched, than when he burned the
ships with glowing fire."

   [Footnote 709: _I.e._ to give thy weight in gold. Theognis, 77:
   [Greek: Pistos aner chrysou te kai argyrou anterysasthai Axios].]

   [Footnote 710: Grote, vol. i. p. 406, observes: "After routing
   the Trojans, and chasing them into the town, Achilles was slain
   near the Skaean gate by an arrow from the quiver of Paris,
   directed under the unerring auspices of Apollo," referring to
   Soph. Phil. 334; Virg. AEn. vi. 56.]

   [Footnote 711: "I have conversed with some men who rejoiced in
   the death or calamity of others, and accounted it as a judgment
   upon them for being on the other side, and against them in the
   contention: but within the revolution of a few months, the same
   man met with a more uneasy and unhandsome death; which when I
   saw, I wept, and was afraid; for I knew that it must be so with
   all men; for we also die, and end our quarrels and contentions by
   passing to a final sentence."--Taylor, Holy Dying, i. p. 305, ed.
   Bohn.]

