from Shumir--then the latter must naturally be far, far older still,
and have existed in its completed form IN THE FIFTH THOUSAND B.C.--an
age to which I now unhesitatingly ascribe the South-Babylonian
incantations." This would give our mental vision a sweep of full six
thousand years, a pretty respectable figure! But when we remember that
these first known settlers of Shumir came from somewhere else, and that
they brought with them more than the rudiments of civilization, we are
at once thrown back at least a couple of thousands of years more. For it
must have taken all of that and more for men to pass from a life spent
in caves and hunting the wild beasts to a stage of culture comprising
the invention of a complete system of writing, the knowledge and working
of metals, even to the mixing of copper and tin into bronze, and an
expertness in agriculture equal not only to tilling, but to draining
land. If we further pursue humanity--losing at last all count of time in
years or even centuries--back to its original separation, to its first
appearance on the earth,--if we go further still and try to think of the
ages upon ages during which man existed not at all, yet the earth did,
and was beautiful to look upon--(_had_ there been any to look on it),
and good for the creatures who had it all to themselves--a dizziness
comes over our senses, before the infinity of time, and we draw back,
faint and awed, as we do when astronomy launches us, on a slender thread
of figures, into the infinity of space. The six ages of a thousand years
each which are all that our mind can firmly grasp then come to seem to
us a very poor and puny fraction of eternity, to which we are tempted
to apply almost scornfully the words spoken by the poet of as many
years: "Six ages! six little ages! six drops of time!"[BL]

FOOTNOTES:

[BJ] Maspero, "Histoire Ancienne," p. 173.

[BK] Ztschr. fuer Keilschriftforschung, "Zur altbabylonischen
Chronologie," Heft I.

[BL] Matthew Arnold, in "Mycerinus":

        "Six years! six little years! six drops of time!"




APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VII.


Professor Louis Dyer has devoted some time to preparing a free metrical
translation of "Ishtar's Descent." Unfortunately, owing to his many
occupations, only the first part of the poem is as yet finished. This he
most kindly has placed at our disposal, authorizing us to present it to
our readers.

ISHTAR IN URUGAL.

    Along the gloomy avenue of death
    To seek the dread abysm of Urugal,
    In everlasting Dark whence none returns,
    Ishtar, the Moon-god's daughter, made resolve,
    And that way, sick with sorrow, turned her face.
      A road leads downward, but no road leads back
    From Darkness' realm. There is Irkalla queen,
    Named also Ninkigal, mother of pains.
    Her portals close forever on her guests
    And exit there is none, but all who enter,
    To daylight strangers, and of joy unknown,
    Within her sunless gates restrained must stay.
    And there the only food vouchsafed is dust,
    For slime they live on, who on earth have died.
    Day's golden beam greets none and darkness reigns
    Where hurtling bat-like forms of feathered men
    Or human-fashioned birds imprisoned flit.
    Close and with dust o'erstrewn, the dungeon doors
    Are held by bolts with gathering mould o'ersealed.
      By love distracted, though the queen of love,
    Pale Ishtar downward flashed toward death's domain,
    And swift approached these gates of Urugal,
    Then paused impatient at its portals grim;
    For love, whose strength no earthly bars restrain,
    Gives not the key to open Darkness' Doors.
    By service from all living men made proud,
    Ishtar brooked not resistance from the dead.
    She called the jailer, then to anger changed
    The love that sped her on her breathless way,
    And from her parted lips incontinent
    Swept speech that made the unyielding warder quail.
      "Quick, turnkey of the pit! swing wide these doors,
    And fling them swiftly open. Tarry not!
    For I will pass, even I will enter in.
    Dare no denial, thou, bar not my way,
    Else will I burst thy bolts and rend thy gates,
    This lintel shatter else and wreck these doors.
    The pent-up dead I else will loose, and lead
    Back the departed to the lands they left,
    Else bid the famished dwellers in the pit
    Rise up to live and eat their fill once more.
    Dead myriads then shall burden groaning earth,
    Sore tasked without them by her living throngs."
      Love's mistress, mastered by strong hate,
    The warder heard, and wondered first, then feared
    The angered goddess Ishtar what she spake,
    Then answering said to Ishtar's wrathful might:
    "O princess, stay thy hand; rend not the door,
    But tarry here, while unto Ninkigal
    I go, and tell thy glorious name to her."


ISHTAR'S LAMENT.

    "All love from earthly life with me departed,
      With me to tarry in the gates of death;
    In heaven's sun no warmth is longer hearted,
      And chilled shall cheerless men now draw slow breath.

    "I left in sadness life which I had given,
      I turned from gladness and I walked with woe,
    Toward living death by grief untimely driven,
      I search for Thammuz whom harsh fate laid low

    "The darkling pathway o'er the restless waters
      Of seven seas that circle Death's domain
    I trod, and followed after earth's sad daughters
      Torn from their loved ones and ne'er seen again.

    "Here must I enter in, here make my dwelling
      With Thammuz in the mansion of the dead,
    Driven to Famine's house by love compelling
      And hunger for the sight of that dear head.

    "O'er husbands will I weep, whom death has taken,
      Whom fate in manhood's strength from life has swept,
    Leaving on earth their living wives forsaken,--
      O'er them with groans shall bitter tears be wept.

    "And I will weep o'er wives, whose short day ended
      Ere in glad offspring joyed their husbands' eyes;
    Snatched from loved arms they left their lords untended,--
      O'er them shall tearful lamentations rise.

    "And I will weep o'er babes who left no brothers,
      Young lives to the ills of age by hope opposed,
    The sons of saddened sires and tearful mothers,
      One moment's life by death eternal closed."


NINKIGAL'S COMMAND TO THE WARDER.

    "Leave thou this presence, slave, open the gate;
    Since power is hers to force an entrance here,
    Let her come in as come from life the dead,
    Submissive to the laws of Death's domain.
    Do unto her what unto all thou doest."

Want of space bids us limit ourselves to these few fragments--surely
sufficient to make our readers wish that Professor Dyer might spare some
time to the completion of his task.




                              INDEX.


                   A.

    Abel, killed by Cain, 129.

    Abraham, wealthy and powerful chief, 200;
      goes forth from Ur, 201;
      his victory over Khudur-Lagamar, 222-224.

    Abu-Habba, see Sippar.

    Abu-Shahrein, see Eridhu.

    Accad, Northern or Upper Chaldea, 145;
      meaning of the word, ib.;
      headquarters of Semitism, 204-205.

    Accads, see Shumiro-Accads.

    Accadian language, see Shumiro-Accadian.

    Agade, capital of Accad, 205.

    Agglutinative languages, meaning of the word, 136-137;
      characteristic of Turanian nations, ib.;
      spoken by the people of Shumir and Accad, 144.

    Agricultural life, third stage of culture, first beginning of real
          civilization, 122.

    Akki, the water-carrier, see Sharrukin of Agade.

    Alexander of Macedon conquers Babylon, 4;
      his soldiers destroy the dams of the Euphrates, 5.

    Allah, Arabic for "God," see Ilu.

    Allat, queen of the Dead, 327-329.

    Altai, the great Siberian mountain chain, 146;
      probable cradle of the Turanian race, 147.

    Altaic, another name for the Turanian or Yellow Race, 147.

    Amarpal, also Sin-Muballit, king of Babylon, perhaps Amraphel, King of
          Shinar, 226.

    Amorite, the, a tribe of Canaan, 133.

    Amraphel, see Amarpal.

    Ana, or Zi-ana--"Heaven," or "Spirit of Heaven," p. 154.

    Anatu, goddess, mother of Ishtar, smites Eabani with death and Izdubar
          with leprosy, 310.

    Anthropomorphism, meaning of the word, 355;
      definition and causes of, 355-357.

    Anu, first god of the first Babylonian Triad, same as Ana, 240;
      one of the "twelve great gods," 246.

    Anunnaki, minor spirits of earth, 154, 250.

    Anunit (the Moon), wife of Shamash, 245.

    Apsu (the Abyss), 264.

    Arali, or Arallu, the Land of the Dead, 157;
      its connection with the Sacred Mountain, 276.

    Arallu, see Arali.

    Aram, a son of Shem, eponymous ancestor of the Aramaeans in Gen.
          x., 131.

    Arabs, their conquest and prosperous rule in Mesopotamia, 5;
      Baghdad, their capital, 5;
      nomads in Mesopotamia, 8;
      their superstitious horror of the ruins and sculptures, 11;
      they take the gigantic head for Nimrod, 22-24;
      their strange ideas about the colossal winged bulls and lions and
            their destination, 24-25;
      their habit of plundering ancient tombs at Warka, 86;
      their conquests and high culture in Asia and Africa, 118.

    Arbela, city of Assyria, built in hilly region, 50.

    Architecture, Chaldean, created by local conditions, 37-39;
      Assyrian, borrowed from Chaldea, 50.

    Areph-Kasdim, see Arphaxad, meaning of the word, 200.

    Arphaxad, eldest son of Shem, 200.

    Arphakshad, see Arphaxad.

    Asshur, a son of Shem, eponymous ancestor of the Assyrians in Genesis
          x., 131.

    Asshurbanipal, King of Assyria, his Library, 100-112;
      conquers Elam, destroys Shushan, and restores the statue of the
            goddess Nana to Erech, 194-195.

    Asshur-nazir-pal, King of Assyria, size of hall in his palace at Calah
          (Nimrud), 63.

    Assyria, the same as Upper Mesopotamia, 7;
      rise of, 228.

    Astrology, meaning of the word, 106;
      a corruption of astronomy, 234;
      the special study of priests, ib.

    Astronomy, the ancient Chaldeans' proficiency in, 230;
      fascination of, 231;
      conducive to religious speculation, 232;
      degenerates into astrology, 234;
      the god Nebo, the patron of, 242.


                   B.

    Babbar, see Ud.

    Babel, same as Babylon, 237.

    Bab-el-Mandeb, Straits of, 189.

    Bab-ilu, Semitic name of Babylon; meaning of the name, 225, 249.

    Babylonia, a part of Lower Mesopotamia, 7;
      excessive flatness of, 9;
      later name for "Shumir and Accad" and for "Chaldea," 237.

    Baghdad, capital of the Arabs' empire in Mesopotamia, 5;
      its decay, 6.

    Bassorah, see Busrah.

    Bedouins, robber tribes of, 8;
      distinctively a nomadic people, 116-118.

    Bel, third god of the first Babylonian Triad, 239;
      meaning of the name, 240;
      one of the "twelve great gods," 246;
      his battle with Tiamat, 288-290.

    Belit, the wife of Bel, the feminine principle of nature, 244-245;
      one of the "twelve great gods," 246.

    Bel-Maruduk, see Marduk.

    Berosus, Babylonian priest; his History of Chaldea, 128;
      his version of the legend of Oannes, 184-185;
      his account of the Chaldean Cosmogony, 260-261, 267;
      his account of the great tower and the confusion of tongues, 292-293;
      his account of the Deluge, 299-301.

    Birs-Nimrud or Birs-i-Nimrud, see Borsippa.

    Books, not always of paper, 93;
      stones and bricks used as books, 97;
      walls and rocks, ib., 97-99.

    Borsippa (Mound of Birs-Nimrud), its peculiar shape, 47;
      Nebuchadnezzar's inscription found at, 72;
      identified with the Tower of Babel, 293.

    Botta begins excavations at Koyunjik, 14;
      his disappointment, 15;
      his great discovery at Khorsabad, 15-16.

    Bricks, how men came to make, 39;
      sun-dried or raw, and kiln-dried or baked, 40;
      ancient bricks from the ruins used for modern constructions; trade
            with ancient bricks at Hillah, 42.
