
'I am a lawyer, certainly,' said Fairford; 'but my holding such a
respectable condition in life warrants that I am neither an informer
nor a spy. Here is sufficient evidence that I have seen Father
Buonaventure.'

He put Buonaventure's letter into Redgauntlet's hand, and watched his
looks closely while he read it. 'Double-dyed infatuation!' he muttered,
with looks in which sorrow, displeasure, and anxiety were mingled.
'"Save me from the indiscretion of my friends," says the Spaniard; "I
can save myself from the hostility of my enemies."'

He then read the letter attentively, and for two or three minutes
was lost in thought, while some purpose of importance seemed to have
gathered and sit brooding upon his countenance. He held up his finger
towards his satellite, Cristal Nixon, who replied to his signal with a
prompt nod; and with one or two of the attendants approached Fairford in
such a manner as to make him apprehensive they were about to lay hold of
him.

At this moment a noise was heard from withinside of the house, and
presently rushed forth Peter Peebles, pursued by Nanty Ewart with his
drawn hanger, and the worthy Quaker, who was endeavouring to prevent
mischief to others, at some risk of bringing it on himself.

A wilder and yet a more absurd figure can hardly be imagined, than that
of Poor Peter clattering along as fast as his huge boots would permit
him, and resembling nothing so much as a flying scarecrow; while the
thin emaciated form of Nanty Ewart, with the hue of death on his cheek,
and the fire of vengeance glancing from his eye, formed a ghastly
contrast with the ridiculous object of his pursuit.

Redgauntlet threw himself between them. 'What extravagant folly is
this?' he said. 'Put up your weapon, captain. Is this a time to indulge
in drunken brawls, or is such a miserable object as that a fitting
antagonist for a man of courage?'

'I beg pardon,' said the captain, sheathing his weapon--'I was a little
bit out of the way, to be sure; but to know the provocation, a man must
read my heart, and that I hardly dare to do myself. But the wretch is
safe from me. Heaven has done its own vengeance on us both.'

While he spoke in this manner, Peter Peebles, who had at first crept
behind Redgauntlet in bodily fear, began now to reassume his spirits.
Pulling his protector by the sleeve, 'Mr. Herries--Mr. Herries,' he
whispered, eagerly, 'ye have done me mair than ae gude turn, and if ye
will but do me anither at this dead pinch, I'll forgie the girded keg of
brandy that you and Captain Sir Harry Redgimlet drank out yon time. Ye
sall hae an ample discharge and renunciation, and, though I should see
you walking at the Cross of Edinburgh, or standing at the bar of the
Court of Justiciary, no the very thumbikins themselves should bring to
my memory that ever I saw you in arms yon day.'

He accompanied this promise by pulling so hard at Redgauntlet's cloak,
that he at last turned round. 'Idiot! speak in a word what you want.'

'Aweel, aweel. In a word, then,' said Peter Peebles, 'I have a warrant
on me to apprehend that man that stands there, Alan Fairford by name,
and advocate by calling. I bought it from Maister Justice Foxley's
clerk, Maister Nicholas Faggot, wi' the guinea that you gied me.

'Ha!' said Redgauntlet, 'hast thou really such a warrant? let me see it.
Look sharp that no one escape, Cristal Nixon.'

Peter produced a huge, greasy, leathern pocketbook, too dirty to
permit its original colour to be visible, filled with scrolls of notes,
memorials to counsel, and Heaven knows what besides. From amongst this
precious mass he culled forth a paper, and placed it in the hands of
Redgauntlet, or Herries, as he continued to call him, saying, at the
same time, 'It's a formal and binding warrant, proceeding on my affidavy
made, that the said Alan Fairford, being lawfully engaged in my service,
had slipped the tether and fled over the Border, and was now lurking
there and thereabouts, to elude and evite the discharge of his bounden
duty to me; and therefore granting warrant to constables and others,
to seek for, take, and apprehend him, that he may be brought before
the Honourable Justice Foxley for examination, and, if necessary, for
commitment. Now, though a' this be fairly set down, as I tell ye, yet
where am I to get an officer to execute this warrant in sic a country as
this, where swords and pistols flee out at a word's speaking, and folk
care as little for the peace of King George as the peace of Auld King
Coul? There's that drunken skipper, and that wet Quaker, enticed me into
the public this morning, and because I wadna gie them' as much brandy as
wad have made them blind-drunk, they baith fell on me, and were in the
way of guiding me very ill.'

While Peter went on in this manner, Redgauntlet glanced his eye over the
warrant, and immediately saw that it must be a trick passed by Nicholas
Faggot, to cheat the poor insane wretch out of his solitary guinea. But
the Justice had actually subscribed it, as he did whatever his clerk
presented to him, and Redgauntlet resolved to use it for his own
purposes.

Without making any direct answer, therefore, to Peter Peebles, he walked
up gravely to Fairford, who had waited quietly for the termination of
a scene in which he was not a little surprised to find his client, Mr.
Peebles, a conspicuous actor.

'Mr. Fairford,' said Redgauntlet, 'there are many reasons which might
induce me to comply with the request, or rather the injunctions, of the
excellent Father Buonaventure, that I should communicate with you upon
the present condition of my ward, whom you know under the name of
Darsie Latimer; but no man is better aware than you that the law must be
obeyed, even in contradiction to our own feelings; now this poor man
has obtained a warrant for carrying you before a magistrate, and, I am
afraid, there is a necessity of your yielding to it, although to the
postponement of the business which you may have with me.'

'A warrant against me!' said Alan, indignantly; 'and at that poor
miserable wretch's instance?--why, this is a trick, a mere and most
palpable trick.'

'It may be so,' replied Redgauntlet, with great equanimity; 'doubtless
you know best; only the writ appears regular, and with that respect
for the law which has been,' he said, with hypocritical formality, 'a
leading feature of my character through life, I cannot dispense with
giving my poor aid to the support of a legal warrant. Look at it
yourself, and be satisfied it is no trick of mine.'

Fairford ran over the affidavit and the warrant, and then exclaimed once
more, that it was an impudent imposition, and that he would hold those
who acted upon such a warrant liable in the highest damages. 'I guess
at your motive, Mr. Redgauntlet,' he said, 'for acquiescing in so
ridiculous a proceeding. But be assured you will find that, in this
country, one act of illegal violence will not be covered or atoned for
by practising another. You cannot, as a man of sense and honour, pretend
to say you regard this as a legal warrant.'

'I am no lawyer, sir,' said Redgauntlet; 'and pretend not to know what
is or is not law--the warrant is quite formal, and that is enough for
me.'

'Did ever any one hear,' said Fairford, 'of an advocate being compelled
to return to his task, like a collier or a salter [See Note 10.] who has
deserted his master?'

'I see no reason why he should not,' said Redgauntlet, dryly, 'unless
on the ground that the services of the lawyer are the most expensive and
least useful of the two.'

'You cannot mean this in earnest,' said Fairford; 'you cannot really
mean to avail yourself of so poor a contrivance, to evade the word
pledged by your friend, your ghostly father, in my behalf. I may have
been a fool for trusting it too easily, but think what you must be if
you can abuse my confidence in this manner. I entreat you to reflect
that this usage releases me from all promises of secrecy or connivance
at what I am apt to think are very dangerous practices, and that'--

'Hark ye, Mr. Fairford,' said Redgauntlet; 'I must here interrupt you
for your own sake. One word of betraying what you may have seen, or what
you may have suspected, and your seclusion is like to have either a very
distant or a very brief termination; in either case a most undesirable
one. At present, you are sure of being at liberty in a very few
days--perhaps much sooner.'

'And my friend,' said Alan Fairford, 'for whose sake I have run myself
into this danger, what is to become of him? Dark and dangerous man!' he
exclaimed, raising his voice, I will not be again cajoled by deceitful
promises'--

'I give you my honour that your friend is well,' interrupted
Redgauntlet; 'perhaps I may permit you to see him, if you will but
submit with patience to a fate which is inevitable.'

But Alan Fairford, considering his confidence as having been abused,
first by Maxwell, and next by the priest, raised his voice, and appealed
to all the king's lieges within hearing, against the violence with
which he was threatened. He was instantly seized on by Nixon and two
assistants, who, holding down his arms, and endeavouring to stop his
mouth, were about to hurry him away.

The honest Quaker, who had kept out of Redgauntlet's presence, now came
boldly forward.

'Friend,' said he, 'thou dost more than thou canst answer. Thou knowest
me well, and thou art aware that in me thou hast a deeply injured
neighbour, who was dwelling beside thee in the honesty and simplicity of
his heart.'

'Tush, Jonathan,' said Redgauntlet; 'talk not to me, man; it is neither
the craft of a young lawyer, nor the SIMPLICITY of an old hypocrite, can
drive me from my purpose.

'By my faith,' said the captain, coming forward in his turn, 'this is
hardly fair, general; and I doubt,' he added, 'whether the will of my
owners can make me a party to such proceedings. Nay, never fumble with
your sword-hilt, but out with it like a man, if you are for a tilting.'
He unsheathed his hanger, and continued--'I will neither see my comrade
Fairford, nor the old Quaker, abused. D----n all warrants, false or
true--curse the justice--confound the constable!--and here stands little
Nanty Ewart to make good what he says against gentle and simple, in
spite of horse-shoe or horse-radish either.'

The cry of 'Down with all warrants!' was popular in the ears of the
militia of the inn, and Nanty Ewart was no less so. Fishers, ostlers,
seamen, smugglers, began to crowd to the spot. Crackenthorp endeavoured
in vain to mediate. The attendants of Redgauntlet began to handle their
firearms; but their master shouted to them to forbear, and, unsheathing
his sword as quick as lightning, he rushed on Ewart in the midst of
his bravado, and struck his weapon from his hand with such address and
force, that it flew three yards from him. Closing with him at the same
moment, he gave him a severe fall, and waved his sword over his head, to
show he was absolutely at his mercy.

'There, you drunken vagabond,' he said, 'I give you your life--you are
no bad fellow if you could keep from brawling among your friends. But
we all know Nanty Ewart,' he said to the crowd around, with a forgiving
laugh, which, joined to the awe his prowess had inspired, entirely
confirmed their wavering allegiance.

They shouted, 'The laird for ever!' while poor Nanty, rising from the
earth, on whose lap he had been stretched so rudely, went in quest of
his hanger, lifted it, wiped it, and, as he returned the weapon to the
scabbard, muttered between his teeth, 'It is true they say of him, and
the devil will stand his friend till his hour come; I will cross him no
more.'

So saying, he slunk from the crowd, cowed and disheartened by his
defeat.

'For you, Joshua Geddes,' said Redgauntlet, approaching the Quaker, who,
with lifted hands and eyes, had beheld the scene of violence, 'l shall
take the liberty to arrest thee for a breach of the peace, altogether
unbecoming thy pretended principles; and I believe it will go hard with
thee both in a court of justice and among thine own Society of Friends,
as they call themselves, who will be but indifferently pleased to
see the quiet tenor of their hypocrisy insulted by such violent
proceedings.'

'I violent!' said Joshua; 'I do aught unbecoming the principles of the
Friends! I defy thee, man, and I charge thee, as a Christian, to forbear
vexing my soul with such charges: it is grievous enough to me to have
seen violences which I was unable to prevent.'

'O Joshua, Joshua!' said Redgauntlet, with a sardonic smile; 'thou light
of the faithful in the town of Dumfries and the places adjacent, wilt
thou thus fall away from the truth? Hast thou not, before us all,
attempted to rescue a man from the warrant of law? Didst thou not
encourage that drunken fellow to draw his weapon--and didst thou not
thyself flourish thy cudgel in the cause? Think'st thou that the oaths
of the injured Peter Peebles, and the conscientious Cristal Nixon,
besides those of such gentlemen as look on this strange scene, who not
only put on swearing as a garment, but to whom, in Custom House matters,
oaths are literally meat and drink,--dost thou not think, I say, that
these men's oaths will go further than thy Yea and Nay in this matter?'

'I will swear to anything,' said Peter. 'All is fair when it comes to an
oath AD LITEM.'

'You do me foul wrong,' said the Quaker, undismayed by the general
laugh. 'I encouraged no drawing of weapons, though I attempted to move
an unjust man by some use of argument--I brandished no cudgel, although
it may be that the ancient Adam struggled within me, and caused my hand
to grasp mine oaken staff firmer than usual, when I saw innocence borne
down with violence. But why talk I what is true and just to thee, who
hast been a man of violence from thy youth upwards? Let me rather speak
to thee such language as thou canst comprehend. Deliver these young men
up to me,' he said, when he had led Redgauntlet a little apart from the
crowd, 'and I will not only free thee from the heavy charge of damages
which thou hast incurred by thine outrage upon my property, but I will
add ransom for them and for myself. What would it profit thee to do the
youths wrong, by detaining them in captivity?'

'Mr. Geddes,' said Redgauntlet, in a tone more respectful than he had
hitherto used to the Quaker, 'your language is disinterested, and I
respect the fidelity of your friendship. Perhaps we have mistaken each
other's principles and motives; but if so, we have not at present time
for explanation. Make yourself easy. I hope to raise your friend
Darsie Latimer to a pitch of eminence which you will witness with
pleasure;--nay, do not attempt to answer me. The other young man shall
suffer restraint a few days, probably only a few hours,--it is not more
than due for his pragmatical interference in what concerned him not.
Do you, Mr. Geddes, be so prudent as to take your horse and leave this
place, which is growing every moment more unfit for the abode of a man
of peace. You may wait the event in safety at Mount Sharon.'

'Friend,' replied Joshua, 'I cannot comply with thy advice; I will
remain here, even as thy prisoner, as thou didst but now threaten,
rather than leave the youth who hath suffered by and through me and my
misfortunes, in his present state of doubtful safety. Wherefore I will
not mount my steed Solomon; neither will I turn his head towards Mount
Sharon, until I see an end of this matter.'

'A prisoner, then, you must be,' said Redgauntlet. 'I have no time to
dispute the matter further with you. But tell me for what you fix your
eyes so attentively on yonder people of mine.'

'To speak the truth,' said the Quaker, 'I admire to behold among them
a little wretch of a boy called Benjie, to whom I think Satan has given
the power of transporting himself wheresoever mischief is going forward;
so that it may be truly said, there is no evil in this land wherein he
hath not a finger, if not a whole hand.'

The boy, who saw their eyes fixed on him as they spoke, seemed
embarrassed, slid rather desirous of making his escape; but at a signal
from Redgauntlet he advanced, assuming the sheepish look and rustic
manner with which the jackanapes covered much acuteness and roguery.

'How long have you been with the party, sirrah?' said Redgauntlet.

'Since the raid on the stake-nets,' said Benjie, with his finger in his
mouth.

'And what made you follow us?'

'I dauredna stay at hame for the constables,' replied the boy.

'And what have you been doing all this time?'

'Doing, sir? I dinna ken what ye ca' doing--I have been doing naething,'
said Benjie; then seeing something in Redgauntlet's eye which was not
to be trifled with, he added, 'Naething but waiting on Maister Cristal
Nixon.'

'Hum!--aye--indeed?' muttered Redgauntlet. 'Must Master Nixon bring his
own retinue into the field? This must be seen to.'

He was about to pursue his inquiry, when Nixon himself came to him with
looks of anxious haste, 'The Father is come,' he whispered, 'and the
gentlemen are getting together in the largest room of the house, and
they desire to see you. Yonder is your nephew, too, making a noise like
a man in Bedlam.'

'I will look to it all instantly,' said Redgauntlet. 'Is the Father
lodged as I directed?'

Cristal nodded.

'Now, then, for the final trial,' said Redgauntlet. He folded his
hands--looked upwards--crossed himself--and after this act of devotion
(almost the first which any one had observed him make use of) he
commanded Nixon to keep good watch--have his horses and men ready for
every emergence--look after the safe custody of the prisoners--but treat
them at the same time well and civilly. And, these orders given, he
darted hastily into the house.




CHAPTER XXII

NARRATIVE CONTINUED

Redgauntlet's first course was to the chamber of his nephew. He unlocked
the door, entered the apartment, and asked what he wanted, that he made
so much noise.

'I want my liberty,' said Darsie, who had wrought himself up to a pitch
of passion in which his uncle's wrath had lost its terrors. 'I desire
my liberty, and to be assured of the safety of my beloved friend, Alan
Fairford, whose voice I heard but now.'

'Your liberty shall be your own within half an hour from this
period--your friend shall be also set at freedom in due time--and you
yourself be permitted to have access to his place of confinement.'

'This does not satisfy me,' said Darsie; 'I must see my friend
instantly; he is here, and he is here endangered on my account only--I
have heard violent exclamations--the clash of swords. You will gain no
point with me unless I have ocular demonstration of his safety.'

'Arthur--dearest nephew,' answered Redgauntlet, 'drive me not mad! Thine
own fate--that of thy house--that of thousands--that of Britain herself,
are at this moment in the scales; and you are only occupied about the
safety of a poor insignificant pettifogger!'

'He has sustained injury at your hands, then?' said Darsie, fiercely. 'I
know he has; but if so, not even our relationship shall protect you.'

'Peace, ungrateful and obstinate fool!' said Redgauntlet. Yet
stay--will you be satisfied if you see this Alan Fairford, the bundle
of bombazine--this precious friend of yours--well and sound? Will you,
I say, be satisfied with seeing him in perfect safety without attempting
to speak to or converse with him?' Darsie signified his assent. 'Take
hold of my arm, then,' said Redgauntlet; 'and do you, niece Lilias, take
the other; and beware; Sir Arthur, how you bear yourself.'

Darsie was compelled to acquiesce, sufficiently aware that his uncle
would permit him no interview with a friend whose influence would
certainly be used against his present earnest wishes, and in some
measure contented with the assurance of Fairford's personal safety.

Redgauntlet led them through one or two passages (for the house, as
we have before said, was very irregular, and built at different times)
until they entered an apartment, where a man with shouldered carabine
kept watch at the door, but readily turned the key for their reception.
In this room they found Alan Fairford and the Quaker, apparently in
deep conversation with each other. They looked up as Redgauntlet and
his party entered; and Alan pulled off his hat and made a profound
reverence, which the young lady, who recognized him,--though, masked
as she was, he could not know her,--returned with some embarrassment,
arising probably from the recollection of the bold step she had taken in
visiting him.

Darsie longed to speak, but dared not. His uncle only said, 'Gentlemen,
I know you are as anxious on Mr. Darsie Latimer's account as he is upon
yours. I am commissioned by him to inform you, that he is as well as you
are--I trust you will all meet soon. Meantime, although I cannot suffer
you to be at large, you shall be as well treated as is possible under
your temporary confinement.'

He passed on, without pausing to hear the answers which the lawyer and
the Quaker were hastening to prefer; and only waving his hand by way
of adieu, made his exit, with the real and the seeming lady whom he
had under his charge, through a door at the upper end of the apartment,
which was fastened and guarded like that by which they entered.

Redgauntlet next led the way into a very small room; adjoining which,
but divided by a partition, was one of apparently larger dimensions; for
they heard the trampling of the heavy boots of the period, as if several
persons were walking to and fro and conversing in low and anxious
whispers.

'Here,' said Redgauntlet to his nephew, as he disencumbered him from
the riding-skirt and the mask, 'I restore you to yourself, and trust you
will lay aside all effeminate thoughts with this feminine dress. Do
not blush at having worn a disguise to which kings and heroes have been
reduced. It is when female craft or female cowardice find their way
into a manly bosom, that he who entertains these sentiments should take
eternal shame to himself for thus having resembled womankind. Follow me,
while Lilias remains here. I will introduce you to those whom I hope to
see associated with you in the most glorious cause that hand ever drew
sword in.'

Darsie paused. 'Uncle,' he said, 'my person is in your hands; but
remember, my will is my own. I will not be hurried into any resolution
of importance. Remember what I have already said--what I now
repeat--that I will take no step of importance but upon conviction.'

'But canst thou be convinced, thou foolish boy, without hearing and
understanding the grounds on which we act?'

So saying he took Darsie by the arm, and walked with him to the next
room--a large apartment, partly filled with miscellaneous articles of
commerce, chiefly connected with contraband trade; where, among bales
and barrels, sat, or walked to and fro, several gentlemen, whose manners
and looks seemed superior to the plain riding dresses which they wore.

There was a grave and stern anxiety upon their countenances, when, on
Redgauntlet's entrance, they drew from their separate coteries into one
group around him, and saluted him with a formality which had something
in it of ominous melancholy. As Darsie looked around the circle, he
thought he could discern in it few traces of that adventurous hope which
urges men upon desperate enterprises; and began to believe that the
conspiracy would dissolve of itself, without the necessity of his
placing himself in direct opposition to so violent a character as his
uncle, and incurring the hazard with which such opposition must be
attended.

Mr. Redgauntlet, however, did not, or would not, see any such marks of
depression of spirit amongst his coadjutors, but met them with cheerful
countenance, and a warm greeting of welcome. 'Happy to meet you here,
my lord,' he said, bowing low to a slender young man. 'I trust you
come with the pledges of your noble father, of B--, and all that loyal
house.--Sir Richard, what news in the west? I am told you had two
hundred men on foot to have joined when the fatal retreat from Derby was
commenced. When the White Standard is again displayed, it shall not
be turned back so easily, either by the force of its enemies, or the
falsehood of its friends.--Doctor Grumball, I bow to the representative
of Oxford, the mother of learning and loyalty.--Pengwinion, you
Cornish chough, has this good wind blown you north?--Ah, my brave
Cambro-Britons, when was Wales last in the race of honour?'

Such and such-like compliments he dealt around, which were in general
answered by silent bows; but when he saluted one of his own countrymen
by the name of MacKellar, and greeted Maxwell of Summertrees by that
of Pate-in-Peril, the latter replied, 'that if Pate were not a fool,
he would be Pate-in-Safety;' and the former, a thin old gentle-man, in
tarnished embroidery, said bluntly, 'Aye, troth, Redgauntlet, I am here
just like yourself; I have little to lose--they that took my land the
last time, may take my life this; and that is all I care about it.'

The English gentlemen, who were still in possession of their paternal
estates, looked doubtfully on each other, and there was something
whispered among them of the fox which had lost his tail.

Redgauntlet hastened to address them. 'I think, my lords and gentlemen,'
he said, 'that I can account for something like sadness which has crept
upon an assembly gathered together for so noble a purpose. Our numbers
seem, when thus assembled, too small and inconsiderable to shake the
firm-seated usurpation of a half-century. But do not count us by what
we are in thew and muscle, but by what our summons can do among our
countrymen. In this small party are those who have power to raise
battalions, and those who have wealth to pay them. And do not believe
our friends who are absent are cold or indifferent to the cause. Let us
once light the signal, and it will be hailed by all who retain love for
the Stuart, and by all--a more numerous body--who hate the Elector. Here
I have letters from'--

Sir Richard Glendale interrupted the speaker. 'We all confide,
Redgauntlet, in your valour and skill--we admire your perseverance; and
probably nothing short of your strenuous exertions, and the emulation
awakened by your noble and disinterested conduct, could have brought
so many of us, the scattered remnant of a disheartened party, to meet
together once again in solemn consultation; for I take it, gentlemen,'
he said, looking round, 'this is only a consultation.'

'Nothing more,' said the young lord.

'Nothing more,' said Doctor Grumball, shaking his large academical
peruke.

And, 'Only a consultation,' was echoed by the others.

Redgauntlet bit his lip. 'I had hopes,' he said, 'that the discourses
I have held with most of you, from time to time, had ripened into more
maturity than your words imply, and that we were here to execute as
well as to deliberate; and for this we stand prepared. I can raise five
hundred men with my whistle.'

'Five hundred men!' said one of the Welsh squires; 'Cot bless us! and
pray you, what cood could five hundred men do?'

'All that the priming does for the cannon, Mr. Meredith,' answered
Redgauntlet; 'it will enable us to seize Carlisle, and you know what our
friends have engaged for in that case.'

'Yes--but,' said the young nobleman, 'you must not hurry us on too fast,
Mr. Redgauntlet; we are all, I believe, as sincere and truehearted in
this business as you are, but we will not be driven forward blindfold.
We owe caution to ourselves and our families, as well as to those whom
we are empowered to represent on this occasion.'

'Who hurries you, my lord? Who is it that would drive this meeting
forward blindfold? I do not understand your lordship,' said Redgauntlet.

'Nay,' said Sir Richard Glendale, 'at least do not let us fall under
our old reproach of disagreeing among ourselves. What my lord means,
Redgauntlet, is, that we have this morning heard it is uncertain
whether you could even bring that body of men whom you count upon; your
countryman, Mr. MacKellar, seemed, just before you came in, to doubt
whether your people would rise in any force, unless you could produce
the authority of your nephew.'

'I might ask,' said Redgauntlet,' what right MacKellar, or any one, has
to doubt my being able to accomplish what I stand pledged for? But our
hopes consist in our unity. Here stands my nephew. Gentlemen, I present
to you my kinsman, Sir Arthur Darsie Redgauntlet of that Ilk.'

'Gentlemen,' said Darsie, with a throbbing bosom, for he felt the crisis
a very painful one, 'Allow me to say, that I suspend expressing my
sentiments on the important subject under discussion until I have heard
those of the present meeting.'

'Proceed in your deliberations, gentlemen,' said Redgauntlet; 'I will
show my nephew such reasons for acquiescing in the result, as will
entirely remove any scruples which may hang around his mind.'

Dr. Grumball now coughed, 'shook his ambrosial curls,' and addressed the
assembly.

'The principles of Oxford,' he said,' are well understood, since she
was the last to resign herself to the Arch-Usurper,--since she has
condemned, by her sovereign authority, the blasphemous, atheistical,
and anarchical tenets of Locke, and other deluders of the public
mind. Oxford will give men, money and countenance, to the cause of the
rightful monarch. But we have, been often deluded by foreign powers,
who have availed themselves of our zeal to stir up civil dissensions, in
Britain, not for the advantage of our blessed though banished monarch,
but to stir up disturbances by which they might profit, while we, their
tools, are sure to be ruined. Oxford, therefore, will not rise, unless
our sovereign comes in person to claim our allegiance, in which case,
God forbid we should refuse him our best obedience.'

'It is a very cood advice,' said Mr. Meredith.

'In troth,' said Sir Richard Glendale, 'it is the very keystone of our
enterprise, and the only condition upon which I myself and others
could ever have dreamt of taking up arms. No insurrection which has not
Charles Edward himself at its head, will, ever last longer than till a
single foot company of redcoats march to disperse it.'

'This is my own opinion, and that of all my family,' said the young
nobleman already mentioned; 'and I own I am somewhat surprised at being
summoned to attend a dangerous rendezvous such as this, before something
certain could have been stated to us on this most important preliminary
point.'

'Pardon me, my lord,' said Redgauntlet; 'I have not been so unjust
either to myself or my friends--I had no means of communicating to our
distant confederates (without the greatest risk of discovery) what is
known to some of my honourable friends. As courageous, and as resolved,
as when, twenty years since, he threw himself into the wilds of Moidart,
Charles Edward has instantly complied with the wishes of his faithful
subjects. Charles Edward is in this country--Charles Edward is in this
house!--Charles Edward waits but your present decision, to receive the
homage of those who have ever called themselves his loyal liegemen. He
that would now turn his coat, and change his note, must do so under the
eye of his sovereign.'

There was a deep pause. Those among the conspirators whom mere habit, or
a desire of preserving consistency, had engaged in the affair, now saw
with terror their retreat cut off; and others, who at a distance had
regarded the proposed enterprise as hopeful, trembled when the moment
of actually embarking in it was thus unexpectedly and almost inevitably
precipitated.

'How now, my lords and gentlemen!' said Redgauntlet; is it delight and
rapture that keep you thus silent? where are the eager welcomes that
should be paid to your rightful king, who a second time confides his
person to the care of his subjects, undeterred by the hairbreadth
escapes and severe privations of his former expedition? I hope there is
no gentleman here that is not ready to redeem, in his prince's presence,
the pledge of fidelity which he offered in his absence.'

'I, at least,' said the young nobleman resolutely, and laying his hand
on his sword, 'will not be that coward. If Charles is come to these
shores, I will be the first to give him welcome, and to devote my life
and fortune to his service.'

'Before Cot,' said Mr. Meredith, 'I do not see that Mr. Redgauntlet has
left us anything else to do.'

'Stay,' said Summertrees, 'there is yet one other question. Has he
brought any of those Irish rapparees with him, who broke the neck of our
last glorious affair?'

'Not a man of them,' said Redgauntlet.

'I trust,' said Dr. Grumball, 'that there are no Catholic priests in his
company. I would not intrude on the private conscience of my sovereign,
but, as an unworthy son of the Church of England, it is my duty to
consider her security.'

'Not a Popish dog or cat is there, to bark or mew about his Majesty,'
said Redgauntlet. 'Old Shaftesbury himself could not wish a prince's
person more secure from Popery--which may not be the worst religion
in the world, notwithstanding. Any more doubts, gentlemen? can no more
plausible reasons be discovered for postponing the payment of our duty,
and discharge of our oaths and engagements? Meantime your king waits
your declaration--by my faith he hath but a frozen reception!'

'Redgauntlet,' said Sir Richard Glendale, calmly, 'your reproaches shall
not goad me into anything of which my reason disapproves. That I respect
my engagement as much as you do, is evident, since I am here, ready to
support it with the best blood in my veins. But has the king really come
hither entirely unattended?'

'He has no man with him but young ------, as aide de camp, and a single
valet de chambre.'

'No MAN--but, Redgauntlet, as you are a gentleman, has he no woman with
him?'

Redgauntlet cast his eyes on the ground and replied, 'I am sorry to
say--he has.'

The company looked at each other, and remained silent for a moment.
At length Sir Richard proceeded. 'I need not repeat to you, Mr.
Redgauntlet, what is the well-grounded opinion of his Majesty's friends
concerning that most unhappy connexion there is but one sense and
feeling amongst us upon the subject. I must conclude that our humble
remonstrances were communicated by you, sir, to the king?'

'In the same strong terms in which they were couched,' replied
Redgauntlet. 'I love his Majesty's cause more than I fear his
displeasure.'

'But, apparently, our humble expostulation has produced no effect.
This lady, who has crept into his bosom, has a sister in the Elector
