of the secret his master concealed so well; tricks, turns, counsels, and
traps were all useless, D'Artagnan let nothing confidential escape him.
The evening passed thus. After supper the portmanteau occupied
D'Artagnan, he took a turn to the stable, patted his horse, and examined
his shoes and legs; then, having counted over his money, he went to bed,
sleeping as if only twenty, because he had neither inquietude nor
remorse; he closed his eyes five minutes after he had blown out his
lamp. Many events might, however, have kept him awake. Thought boiled in
his brain, conjectures abounded, and D'Artagnan was a great drawer of
horoscopes; but, with that imperturbable phlegm which does more than
genius for the fortune and happiness of men of action, he put off
reflection till the next day, for fear, he said, not to be fresh when he
wanted to be so.

The day came. The Rue des Lombards had its share of the caresses of
Aurora with the rosy fingers, and D'Artagnan arose like Aurora. He did
not awaken anybody, he placed his portmanteau under his arm, descended
the stairs without making one of them creak, and without disturbing one
of the sonorous snorings in every story from the garret to the cellar,
then, having saddled his horse, shut the stable and house doors, he set
off, at a foot-pace, on his expedition to Bretagne. He had done quite
right not to trouble himself with all the political and diplomatic
affairs which solicited his attention; for, in the morning, in freshness
and mild twilight, his ideas developed themselves in purity and
abundance. In the first place, he passed before the house of Fouquet,
and threw in a large gaping box the fortunate order which, the evening
before, he had had so much trouble to recover from the hooked fingers of
the intendant. Placed in an envelope, and addressed to Fouquet, it had
not even been divined by Planchet, who in divination was equal to
Calchas or the Pythian Apollo. D'Artagnan thus sent back the order to
Fouquet, without compromising himself, and without having thenceforward
any reproaches to make himself. When he had effected this proper
restitution, "Now," he said to himself, "let us inhale much maternal
air, much freedom from cares, much health, let us allow the horse
Zephyr, whose flanks puff as if he had to respire an atmosphere, to
breathe, and let us be very ingenious in our little calculations. It is
time," said D'Artagnan, "to form a plan of the campaign, and, according
to the method of M. Turenne, who has a large head full of all sorts of
good counsels, before the plan of the campaign it is advisable to draw a
striking portrait of the generals to whom we are opposed. In the first
place, M. Fouquet presents himself. What is M. Fouquet? M. Fouquet,"
replied D'Artagnan to himself, "is a handsome man, very much beloved by
the women, a generous man very much beloved by the poets; a man of wit,
much execrated by pretenders. Well, now I am neither woman, poet, nor
pretender: I neither love not hate monsieur le surintendant. I find
myself, therefore, in the same position in which M. Turenne found
himself when opposed to the Prince de Conde at Jargeau, Gien and the
Faubourg Saint-Antoine. He did not execrate monsieur le prince, it is
true, but he obeyed the king. Monsieur le prince is an agreeable man,
but the king is king. Turenne heaved a deep sigh, called Conde 'My
cousin,' and swept away his army. Now what does the king wish? That does
not concern me. Now, what does M. Colbert wish? Oh, that's another
thing. M. Colbert wishes all that M. Fouquet does not wish. Then what
does M. Fouquet wish? Oh, that is serious. M. Fouquet wishes precisely
for all the king wishes."

This monologue ended, D'Artagnan began to laugh, whilst making his whip
whistle in the air. He was already on the high road, frightening the
birds in the hedges, listening to the livres chinking and dancing in his
leather pocket, at every step; and, let us confess it, every time that
D'Artagnan found himself in such conditions, tenderness was not his
dominant vice. "Come," said he, "I cannot think the expedition a very
dangerous one; and it will fall out with my voyage as with that piece M.
Monk took me to see in London, which was called, I think, 'Much Ado
about Nothing.'"




Chapter LXVI. The Journey.


It was perhaps the fiftieth time since the day on which we open this
history, that this man, with a heart of bronze and muscles of steel, had
left house and friends, everything, in short, to go in search of fortune
and death. The one--that is to say, death--had constantly retreated
before him, as if afraid of him; the other--that is to say, fortune--for
only a month past had really made an alliance with him. Although he was
not a great philosopher, after the fashion of either Epicurus or
Socrates, he was a powerful spirit, having knowledge of life, and
endowed with thought. No one is as brave, as adventurous, or as skillful
as D'Artagnan, without at the same time being inclined to be a dreamer.
He had picked up, here and there, some scraps of M. de la Rochefoucault,
worthy of being translated into Latin by MM. de Port Royal; and he had
made a collection, en passant, in the society of Athos and Aramis, of
many morsels of Seneca and Cicero, translated by them, and applied to
the uses of common life. That contempt of riches which our Gascon had
observed as an article of faith during the thirty-five first years of
his life, had for a long time been considered by him as the first
article of the code of bravery. "Article first," said he, "A man is
brave because he has nothing. A man has nothing because he despises
riches." Therefore, with these principles, which, as we have said, had
regulated the thirty-five first years of his life, D'Artagnan was no
sooner possessed of riches, than he felt it necessary to ask himself if,
in spite of his riches, he were still brave. To this, for any other but
D'Artagnan, the events of the Place de Greve might have served as a
reply. Many consciences would have been satisfied with them, but
D'Artagnan was brave enough to ask himself sincerely and conscientiously
if he were brave. Therefore to this:--

"But it appears to me that I drew promptly enough, and cut and thrust
pretty freely on the Place de Greve, to be satisfied of my bravery,"
D'Artagnan had himself replied. "Gently, captain, that is not an answer.
I was brave that day, because they were burning my house, and there are
a hundred, and even a thousand, to speak against one, that if those
gentlemen of the riots had not formed that unlucky idea, their plan of
attack would have succeeded, or, at least, it would not have been I who
would have opposed myself to it. Now, what will be brought against me? I
have no house to be burnt in Bretagne; I have no treasure there that can
be taken from me.--No; but I have my skin; that precious skin of M.
d'Artagnan, which to him is worth more than all the houses and all the
treasures of the world. That skin to which I cling above everything,
because it is, everything considered, the binding of a body which
encloses a heart very warm and ready to fight, and, consequently, to
live. Then, I do desire to live: and, in reality, I live much better,
more completely, since I have become rich. Who the devil ever said that
money spoiled life? Upon my soul, it is no such thing, on the contrary,
it seems as if I absorbed a double quantity of air and sun. Mordioux!
what will it be then, if I double that fortune; and if, instead of the
switch I now hold in my hand, I should ever carry the baton of a
marechal? Then I really don't know if there will be, from that moment,
enough of air and sun for me. In fact, this is not a dream, who the
devil would oppose it, if the king made me a marechal, as his father,
King Louis XIII., made a duke and constable of Albert de Luynes? Am I
not as brave, and much more intelligent, than that imbecile De Vitry?
Ah! that's exactly what will prevent my advancement: I have too much
wit. Luckily, if there is any justice in this world, fortune owes me
many compensations. She owes me certainly a recompense for all I did for
Anne of Austria, and an indemnification for all she has not done for me.
Then, at the present, I am very well with a king, and with a king who
has the appearance of determining to reign. May God keep him in that
illustrious road! For, if he is resolved to reign, he will want me; and
if he wants me, he will give me what he has promised me--warmth and
light; so that I march, comparatively, now, as I marched formerly,--from
nothing to everything. Only the nothing of to-day is the all of former
days; there has only this little change taken place in my life. And now
let us see! let us take the part of the heart, as I just now was
speaking of it. But in truth, I only spoke of it from memory." And the
Gascon applied his hand to his breast, as if he were actually seeking
the place where his heart was.

"Ah! wretch!" murmured he, smiling with bitterness. "Ah! poor mortal
species! You hoped, for an instant, that you had not a heart, and now
you find you have one--bad courtier as thou art,--and even one of the
most seditious. You have a heart which speaks to you in favor of M.
Fouquet. And what is M. Fouquet, when the king is in question?--A
conspirator, a real conspirator, who did not even give himself the
trouble to conceal his being a conspirator; therefore, what a weapon
would you not have against him, if his good grace, and his intelligence
had not made a scabbard for that weapon. An armed revolt!--for, in fact,
M. Fouquet has been guilty of an armed revolt. Thus, while the king
vaguely suspects M. Fouquet of rebellion, I know it--I could prove that
M. Fouquet had caused the shedding of the blood of his majesty's
subjects. Now, then, let us see. Knowing all that, and holding my
tongue, what further would this heart wish in return for a kind action
of M. Fouquet's, for an advance of fifteen thousand livres, for a
diamond worth a thousand pistoles, for a smile in which there was as
much bitterness as kindness?--I save his life."

"Now, then, I hope," continued the musketeer, "that this imbecile of a
heart is going to preserve silence, and so be fairly quits with M.
Fouquet. Now, then, the king becomes my sun, and as my heart is quits
with M. Fouquet, let him beware who places himself between me and my
sun! Forward, for his majesty Louis XIV.!--Forward!"

These reflections were the only impediments which were able to retard
the progress of D'Artagnan. These reflections once made, he increased
the speed of his horse. But, however perfect his horse Zephyr might be,
it could not hold out at such a pace forever. The day after his
departure from Paris, his mount was left at Chartres, at the house of an
old friend D'Artagnan had met with in an hotelier of that city. From
that moment the musketeer travelled on post-horses. Thanks to this mode
of locomotion, he traversed the space separating Chartres from
Chateaubriand. In the last of these two cities, far enough from the
coast to prevent any one guessing that D'Artagnan wished to reach the
sea--far enough from Paris to prevent all suspicion of his being a
messenger from Louis XIV., whom D'Artagnan had called his sun, without
suspecting that he who was only at present a rather poor star in the
heaven of royalty, would, one day, make that star his emblem; the
messenger of Louis XIV., we say, quitted his post and purchased a bidet
of the meanest appearance,--one of those animals which an officer of the
cavalry would never choose, for fear of being disgraced. Excepting the
color, this new acquisition recalled to the mind of D'Artagnan the
famous orange-colored horse, with which, or rather upon which, he had
made his first appearance in the world. Truth to say, from the moment he
crossed this new steed, it was no longer D'Artagnan who was
travelling,--it was a good man clothed in an iron-gray justaucorps,
brown haut-de-chausses, holding the medium between a priest and a
layman; that which brought him nearest to the churchman was, that
D'Artagnan had placed on his head a calotte of threadbare velvet, and
over the calotte, a large black hat; no more sword, a stick hung by a
cord to his wrist, but to which, he promised himself, as an unexpected
auxiliary, to join, upon occasion, a good dagger, ten inches long,
concealed under his cloak. The bidet purchased at Chateaubriand
completed the metamorphosis; it was called, or rather D'Artagnan called
if, Furet (ferret).

"If I have changed Zephyr into Furet," said D'Artagnan, "I must make
some diminutive or other of my own name. So, instead of D'Artagnan, I
will be Agnan, short; that is a concession which I naturally owe to my
gray coat, my round hat, and my rusty calotte."

Monsieur d'Artagnan traveled, then, pretty easily upon Furet, who ambled
like a true butter-woman's pad, and who, with his amble, managed
cheerfully about twelve leagues a day, upon four spindle-shanks, of
which the practiced eye of D'Artagnan had appreciated the strength and
safety beneath the thick mass of hair which covered them. Jogging along,
the traveler took notes, studied the country, which he traversed
reserved and silent, ever seeking the most plausible pretext for
reaching Belle-Ile-en-Mer, and for seeing everything without arousing
suspicion. In this manner, he was enabled to convince himself of the
importance the event assumed in proportion as he drew near to it. In
this remote country, in this ancient duchy of Bretagne, which was not
France at that period, and is not so even now, the people knew nothing
of the king of France. They not only did not know him, but were
unwilling to know him. One face--a single one--floated visibly for them
upon the political current. Their ancient dukes no longer ruled them;
government was a void--nothing more. In place of the sovereign duke, the
seigneurs of parishes reigned without control; and, above these
seigneurs, God, who has never been forgotten in Bretagne. Among these
suzerains of chateaux and belfries, the most powerful, the richest, the
most popular, was M. Fouquet, seigneur of Belle-Isle. Even in the
country, even within sight of that mysterious isle, legends and
traditions consecrate its wonders. Every one might not penetrate it: the
isle, of an extent of six leagues in length, and six in breadth, was a
seignorial property, which the people had for a long time respected,
covered as it was with the name of Retz, so redoubtable in the country.
Shortly after the erection of this seignory into a marquistate,
Belle-Isle passed to M. Fouquet. The celebrity of the isle did not date
from yesterday; its name, or rather its qualification, is traced back to
the remotest antiquity. The ancients called it Kalonese, from two Greek
words, signifying beautiful isle. Thus, at a distance of eighteen
hundred years, it had borne, in another idiom, the same name it still
bears. There was, then, something in itself in this property of M.
Fouquet's, besides its position of six leagues off the coast of France;
a position which makes it a sovereign in its maritime solitude, like a
majestic ship which disdains roads, and proudly casts anchor in
mid-ocean.

D'Artagnan learnt all this without appearing the least in the world
astonished. He also learnt the best way to get intelligence was to go to
La Roche-Bernard, a tolerably important city at the mouth of the
Vilaine. Perhaps there he could embark; if not, crossing the salt
marshes, he would repair to Guerande or Le Croisic, to wait for an
opportunity to cross over to Belle-Isle. He had discovered, besides,
since his departure from Chateaubriand, that nothing would be impossible
for Furet under the impulsion of M. Agnan, and nothing to M. Agnan
through the initiative of Furet. He prepared, then, to sup off a teal
and a torteau, in a hotel of La Roche-Bernard, and ordered to be brought
from the cellar, to wash down these two Breton dishes, some cider,
which, the moment it touched his lips, he perceived to be more Breton
still.




Chapter LXVII. How D'Artagnan became Acquainted with a Poet.


Before taking his place at table, D'Artagnan acquired, as was his
custom, all the information he could; but it is an axiom of curiosity,
that every man who wishes to question well and fruitfully ought in the
first place to lay himself open to questions. D'Artagnan sought, then,
with his usual skill, a promising questioner in the hostelry of La
Roche-Bernard. At the moment, there were in the house, on the first
story, two travelers either preparing for supper, or at supper itself.
D'Artagnan had seen their nags in the stable, and their equipages in the
salle. One traveled with a lackey, undoubtedly a person of
consideration;--two Perche mares, sleek, sound beasts, were suitable
means of locomotion. The other, a little fellow, a traveler of meagre
appearance, wearing a dusty surtout, dirty linen, and boots more worn by
the pavement than the stirrup, had come from Nantes with a cart drawn by
a horse so like Furet in color, that D'Artagnan might have gone a
hundred miles without finding a better match. This cart contained divers
large packets wrapped in pieces of old stuff.

"That traveler yonder," said D'Artagnan to himself, "is the man for my
money. He will do, he suits me; I ought to do for him and suit him; M.
Agnan, with the gray doublet and the rusty calotte, is not unworthy of
supping with the gentleman of the old boots and still older horse."

This said, D'Artagnan called the host, and desired him to send his teal,
tourteau, and cider up to the chamber of the gentleman of modest
exterior. He himself climbed, a plate in his hand, the wooden staircase
which led to the chamber, and began to knock at the door.

"Come in!" said the unknown. D'Artagnan entered, with a simper on his
lips, his plate under his arm, his hat in one hand, his candle in the
other.

"Excuse me, monsieur," said he, "I am as you are, a traveler; I know no
one in the hotel, and I have the bad habit of losing my spirits when I
eat alone; so that my repast appears a bad one to me, and does not
nourish me. Your face, which I saw just now, when you came down to have
some oysters opened,--your face pleased me much. Besides, I have
observed you have a horse just like mine, and that the host, no doubt on
account of that resemblance, has placed them side by side in the stable,
where they appear to agree amazingly well together. I therefore,
monsieur, do not see any reason why the masters should be separated when
the horses are united. Accordingly, I am come to request the pleasure of
being admitted to your table. My name is Agnan, at your service,
monsieur, the unworthy steward of a rich seigneur, who wishes to
purchase some salt-mines in this country, and sends me to examine his
future acquisitions. In truth, monsieur, I should be well pleased if my
countenance were as agreeable to you as yours is to me; for, upon my
honor, I am quite at your service."

The stranger, whom D'Artagnan saw for the first time,--for before he had
only caught a glimpse of him,--the stranger had black and brilliant
eyes, a yellow complexion, a brow a little wrinkled by the weight of
fifty years, bonhomie in his features collectively, but some cunning in
his look.

"One would say," thought D'Artagnan, "that this merry fellow has never
exercised more than the upper part of his head, his eyes, and his brain.
He must be a man of science: his mouth, nose, and chin signify
absolutely nothing."

"Monsieur," replied the latter, with whose mind and person we have been
making so free, "you do me much honor; not that I am ever ennuye, for I
have," added he, smiling, "a company which amuses me always: but, never
mind that, I am happy to receive you." But when saying this, the man
with the worn boots cast an uneasy look at his table, from which the
oysters had disappeared, and upon which there was nothing left but a
morsel of salt bacon.

"Monsieur," D'Artagnan hastened to say, "the host is bringing me up a
pretty piece of roasted poultry and a superb tourteau." D'Artagnan had
read in the look of his companion, however rapidly it disappeared, the
fear of an attack by a parasite: he divined justly. At this opening, the
features of the man of modest exterior relaxed; and, as if he had
watched the moment for his entrance, as D'Artagnan spoke, the host
appeared, bearing the announced dishes. The tourteau and the teal were
added to the morsel of broiled bacon; D'Artagnan and his guest bowed,
sat down opposite to each other, and, like two brothers, shared the
bacon and the other dishes.

"Monsieur," said D'Artagnan, "you must confess that association is a
wonderful thing."

"How so?" replied the stranger, with his mouth full.

"Well, I will tell you," replied D'Artagnan.

The stranger gave a short truce to the movement of his jaws, in order to
hear the better.

"In the first place," continued D'Artagnan, "instead of one candle,
which each of us had, we have two."

"That is true!" said the stranger, struck with the extreme lucidity of
the observation.

"Then I see that you eat my tourteau in preference, whilst I, in
preference, eat your bacon."

"That is true again."

"And then, in addition to being better lighted and eating what we
prefer, I place the pleasure of your company."

"Truly, monsieur, you are very jovial," said the unknown, cheerfully.

"Yes, monsieur; jovial, as all people are who carry nothing on their
minds, or, for that matter, in their heads. Oh! I can see it is quite
another sort of thing with you," continued D'Artagnan; "I can read in
your eyes all sorts of genius."

"Oh, monsieur!"

"Come, confess one thing."

"What is that?"

"That you are a learned man."

"Ma foi! monsieur."

"Hein?"

"Almost."

"Come, then!"

"I am an author."

"There!" cried D'Artagnan, clapping his hands, "I knew I could not be
deceived! It is a miracle!"

"Monsieur--"

"What, shall I have the honor of passing the evening in the society of
an author, of a celebrated author, perhaps?"

"Oh!" said the unknown, blushing, "celebrated, monsieur, celebrated is
not the word."

"Modest!" cried D'Artagnan, transported, "he is modest!" Then, turning
towards the stranger, with a character of blunt bonhomie: "But tell me
at least the name of your works, monsieur; for you will please to
observe you have not told me your name, and I have been forced to divine
your genius."

"My name is Jupenet, monsieur," said the author.

"A fine name! a grand name! upon my honor; and I do not know why--pardon
me the mistake, if it be one--but surely I have heard that name
somewhere."

"I have made verses," said the poet, modestly.

"Ah! that is it, then; I have heard them read."

"A tragedy."

"I must have seen it played."

The poet blushed again, and said: "I do not think that can be the case,
for my verses have never been printed."

"Well, then, it must have been the tragedy which informed me of your
name."

"You are again mistaken, for MM. the comedians of the Hotel de
Bourgogne, would have nothing to do with it," said the poet, with a
smile, the receipt for which certain sorts of pride alone knew the
secret. D'Artagnan bit his lips. "Thus, then, you see, monsieur,"
continued the poet, "you are in error on my account, and that not being
at all known to you, you have never heard tell of me."

"Ah! that confounds me. That name, Jupenet, appears to me, nevertheless,
a fine name, and quite as worthy of being known as those of MM.
Corneille, or Rotrou, or Garnier. I hope, monsieur, you will have the
goodness to repeat to me a part of your tragedy presently, by way of
dessert, for instance. That will be sugared roast meat,--mordioux! Ah!
pardon me, monsieur, that was a little oath which escaped me, because it
is a habit with my lord and master. I sometimes allow myself to usurp
that little oath, as it seems in pretty good taste. I take this liberty
only in his absence, please to observe, for you may understand that in
his presence--but, in truth, monsieur, this cider is abominable; do you
not think so? And besides, the pot is of such an irregular shape it will
not stand on the table."

"Suppose we were to make it level?"

"To be sure; but with what?"

"With this knife."

"And the teal, with what shall we cut that up? Do you not, by chance,
mean to touch the teal?"

"Certainly."

"Well, then--"

"Wait."

And the poet rummaged in his pocket, and drew out a piece of brass,
oblong, quadrangular, about a line in thickness, and an inch and a half
in length. But scarcely had this little piece of brass seen the light,
than the poet appeared to have committed an imprudence, and made a
movement to put it back again in his pocket. D'Artagnan perceived this,
for he was a man that nothing escaped. He stretched forth his hand
towards the piece of brass: "Humph! that which you hold in your hand is
pretty; will you allow me to look at it?"

"Certainly," said the poet, who appeared to have yielded too soon to a
first impulse. "Certainly, you may look at it: but it will be in vain
for you to look at it," added he, with a satisfied air; "if I were not
to tell you its use, you would never guess it."

D'Artagnan had seized as an avowal the hesitation of the poet, and his
eagerness to conceal the piece of brass which a first movement had
induced him to take out of his pocket. His attention, therefore, once
awakened on this point, he surrounded himself with a circumspection
which gave him a superiority on all occasions. Besides, whatever M.
Jupenet might say about it, by a simple inspection of the object, he
perfectly well knew what it was. It was a character in printing.

"Can you guess, now, what this is?" continued the poet.

"No," said D'Artagnan, "no, ma foi!"

"Well, monsieur," said M. Jupenet, "this little piece of metal is a
printing letter."

"Bah!"

"A capital."

"Stop, stop, stop," said D'Artagnan, opening his eyes very innocently.

"Yes, monsieur, a capital; the first letter of my name."

"And this is a letter, is it?"

"Yes, monsieur."

"Well, I will confess one thing to you."

"And what is that?"

"No, I will not, I was going to say something stupid."

"No, no," said Master Jupenet, with a patronizing air.

"Well, then, I cannot comprehend, if that is a letter, how you can make
a word."

"A word?"

"Yes, a printed word."

"Oh, that's very easy."

"Let me see."

"Does it interest you?"

"Enormously."

"Well, I will explain the thing to you. Attend."

"I am attending."

"This is it."

"Good."

"Look attentively."

"I am looking." D'Artagnan, in fact, appeared absorbed in observations.
Jupenet drew from his pocket seven or eight other pieces of brass
smaller than the first.

"Ah, ah," said D'Artagnan.

"What!"

"You have, then, a whole printing-office in your pocket. Peste! that is
curious, indeed."

"Is it not?"

"Good God, what a number of things we learn by traveling."

"To your health!" said Jupenet, quite enchanted.

"To yours, mordioux, to yours. But--an instant--not in this cider. It is
an abominable drink, unworthy of a man who quenches his thirst at the
Hippocrene fountain--is not it so you call your fountain, you poets?"

"Yes, monsieur, our fountain is so called. That comes from two Greek
words--hippos, which means a horse, and--"

"Monsieur," interrupted D'Artagnan, "you shall drink of a liquor which
comes from one single French word, and is none the worse for that--from
the word grape; this cider gives me the heartburn. Allow me to inquire
of your host if there is not a good bottle of Beaugency, or of the Ceran
growth, at the back of the large bins in his cellar."

The host, being sent for, immediately attended.

"Monsieur," interrupted the poet, "take care, we shall not have time to
drink the wine, unless we make great haste, for I must take advantage of
the tide to secure the boat."

"What boat?" asked D'Artagnan.

"Why the boat which sets out for Belle-Isle."

"Ah--for Belle-Isle," said the musketeer, "that is good."

"Bah! you will have plenty of time, monsieur," replied the hotelier,
uncorking the bottle, "the boat will not leave this hour."

"But who will give me notice?" said the poet.

"Your fellow-traveler," replied the host.

"But I scarcely know him."

"When you hear him departing, it will be time for you to go."

"Is he going to Belle-Isle, likewise, then?"

"Yes."

"The traveler who has a lackey?" asked D'Artagnan. "He is some
gentleman, no doubt?"

"I know nothing of him."

"What!--know nothing of him?"

"No, all I know is, that he is drinking the same wine as you."

"Peste!--that is a great honor for us," said D'Artagnan, filling his
companion's glass, whilst the host went out.

"So," resumed the poet, returning to his dominant ideas, "you never saw
any printing done?"

"Never."

"Well, then, take the letters thus, which compose the word, you see: A
B; ma foi! here is an R, two E E, then a G." And he assembled the
letters with a swiftness and skill which did not escape the eye of
D'Artagnan.

"Abrege," said he, as he ended.

"Good!" said D'Artagnan; "here are plenty of letters got together; but
how are they kept so?" And he poured out a second glass for the poet. M.
Jupenet smiled like a man who has an answer for everything; then he
pulled out--still from his pocket--a little metal ruler, composed of two
parts, like a carpenter's rule, against which he put together, and in a
line, the characters, holding them under his left thumb.

"And what do you call that little metal ruler?" said D'Artagnan, "for, I
suppose, all these things have names."

"This is called a composing-stick," said Jupenet; "it is by the aid of
this stick that the lines are formed."

"Come, then, I was not mistaken in what I said; you have a press in your
pocket," said D'Artagnan, laughing with an air of simplicity so stupid,
that the poet was completely his dupe.

"No," replied he; "but I am too lazy to write, and when I have a verse
in my head, I print it immediately. That is a labor spared."

"Mordioux!" thought D'Artagnan to himself, "this must be cleared up."
And under a pretext, which did not embarrass the musketeer, who was
fertile in expedients, he left the table, went downstairs, ran to the
shed under which stood the poet's little cart, and poked the point of
his poniard into the stuff which enveloped one of the packages, which he
found full of types, like those which the poet had in his pocket.

"Humph!" said D'Artagnan, "I do not yet know whether M. Fouquet wishes
to fortify Belle-Isle; but, at all events, here are some spiritual
munitions for the castle." Then, enchanted with his rich discovery, he
ran upstairs again, and resumed his place at the table.

D'Artagnan had learnt what he wished to know. He, however, remained,
none the less, face to face with his partner, to the moment when they
heard from the next room symptoms of a person's being about to go out.
The printer was immediately on foot; he had given orders for his horse
to be got ready. His carriage was waiting at the door. The second
traveler got into his saddle, in the courtyard, with his lackey.
D'Artagnan followed Jupenet to the door; he embarked his cart and horse
on board the boat. As to the opulent traveler, he did the same with his
two horses and servant. But all the wit D'Artagnan employed in
endeavoring to find out his name was lost--he could learn nothing. Only
he took such notice of his countenance, that it was impressed upon his
mind forever. D'Artagnan had a great inclination to embark with the two
travelers, but an interest more powerful than curiosity--that of
success--repelled him from the shore, and brought him back again to the
hostelry. He entered with a sigh, and went to bed directly in order to
be ready early in the morning with fresh ideas and the sage counsel of
sufficing sleep.




Chapter LXVIII. D'Artagnan continues his Investigations.


At daybreak D'Artagnan saddled Furet, who had fared sumptuously all
night, devouring the remainder of the oats and hay left by his
companions. The musketeer sifted all he possibly could out of the host,
who he found cunning, mistrustful, and devoted, body and soul, to M.
Fouquet. In order not to awaken the suspicions of this man, he carried
on his fable of being a probable purchaser of some salt-mines. To have
embarked for Belle-Isle at Roche-Bernard, would have been to expose
himself still further to comments which had, perhaps, been already made,
and would be carried to the castle. Moreover, it was singular that this
traveler and his lackey should have remained a mystery to D'Artagnan, in
spite of all the questions addressed by him to the host, who appeared to
know him perfectly well. The musketeer then made some inquiries
concerning the salt-mines, and took the road to the marshes, leaving the
sea on his right, and penetrating into that vast and desolate plain
which resembles a sea of mud, of which, here and there, a few crests of
salt silver the undulations. Furet walked admirably, with his little
nervous legs, along the foot-wide causeways which separate the
salt-mines. D'Artagnan, aware of the consequences of a fall, which would
result in a cold bath, allowed him to go as he liked, contenting himself
with looking at, on the horizon, three rocks, that rose up like
lance-blades from the bosom of the plain, destitute of verdure. Piriac,
the bourgs of Batz and Le Croisic, exactly resembling each other,
attracted and suspended his attention. If the traveler turned round, the
better to make his observations, he saw on the other side an horizon of
three other steeples, Guerande, Le Pouliguen, and Saint-Joachim, which,
in their circumference, represented a set of skittles, of which he and
Furet were but the wandering ball. Piriac was the first little port on
his right. He went thither, with the names of the principal salters on
his lips. At the moment he reached the little port of Piriac, five large
barges, laden with stone, were leaving it. It appeared strange to
D'Artagnan, that stones should be leaving a country where none are
found. He had recourse to all the amenity of M. Agnan to learn from the
people of the port the cause of this singular arrangement. An old
fisherman replied to M. Agnan, that the stones very certainly did not
come from Piriac or the marshes.

"Where do they come from, then?" asked the musketeer.

"Monsieur, they come from Nantes and Paimboeuf."

"Where are they going, then?"

"Monsieur, to Belle-Isle."

"Ah! ah!" said D'Artagnan, in the same tone he had assumed to tell the
printer that his character interested him; "are they building at
Belle-Isle, then?"

"Why, yes, monsieur, M. Fouquet has the walls of the castle repaired
every year."

"It is in ruins, then?"

"It is old."

"Thank you."

"The fact is," said D'Artagnan to himself, "nothing is more natural;
every proprietor has a right to repair his own property. It would be
like telling me I was fortifying the Image-de-Notre-Dame, when I was
simply obliged to make repairs. In good truth, I believe false reports
have been made to his majesty, and he is very likely to be in the
wrong."

"You must confess," continued he then, aloud, and addressing the
fisherman--for his part of a suspicious man was imposed upon him by the
object even of his mission--"you must confess, my dear monsieur, that
these stones travel in a very curious fashion."

"How so?" said the fisherman.

"They come from Nantes or Paimboeuf by the Loire, do they not?"

"With the tide."

"That is convenient,--I don't say it is not; but why do they not go
straight from Saint-Nazaire to Belle-Isle?"

"Eh! because the chalands (barges) are fresh-water boats, and take the
sea badly," replied the fisherman.

"That is not sufficient reason."

"Pardon me, monsieur, one may see that you have never been a sailor,"
added the fisherman, not without a sort of disdain.

"Explain to me, if you please, my good man. It appears to me that to
come from Paimboeuf to Piriac, and go from Piriac to Belle-Isle, is as
if we went from Roche-Bernard to Nantes, and from Nantes to Piriac."

"By water that would be the nearest way," replied the fisherman
imperturbably.

"But there is an elbow?"

The fisherman shook his head.

"The shortest road from one place to another is a straight line,"
continued D'Artagnan.

"You forget the tide, monsieur."

"Well! take the tide."

"And the wind."

"Well, and the wind."

"Without doubt; the current of the Loire carries barks almost as far as
Croisic. If they want to lie by a little, or to refresh the crew, they
come to Piriac along the coast; from Piriac they find another inverse
current, which carries them to the Isle-Dumal, two leagues and a half."

"Granted."

"There the current of the Vilaine throws them upon another isle, the
Isle of Hoedic."

"I agree with that."

"Well, monsieur, from that isle to Belle-Isle the way is quite straight.
The sea, broken both above and below, passes like a canal--like a mirror
between the two isles; the chalands glide along upon it like ducks upon
the Loire; that's how it is."

"It does not signify," said the obstinate M. Agnan; "it is a long way
round."

"Ah! yes; but M. Fouquet will have it so," replied, as conclusive, the
fisherman, taking off his woolen cap at the enunciation of that
respected name.

A look from D'Artagnan, a look as keen and piercing as a sword-blade,
found nothing in the heart of the old man but a simple confidence--on
his features, nothing but satisfaction and indifference. He said, "M.
Fouquet will have it so," as he would have said, "God has willed it."

D'Artagnan had already advanced too far in this direction; besides, the
chalands being gone, there remained nothing at Piriac but a single
bark--that of the old man, and it did not look fit for sea without great
preparation. D'Artagnan therefore patted Furet, who, as a new proof of
his charming character, resumed his march with his feet in the
salt-mines, and his nose to the dry wind, which bends the furze and the
broom of this country. They reached Le Croisic about five o'clock.

If D'Artagnan had been a poet, it was a beautiful spectacle: the immense
strand of a league or more, the sea covers at high tide, and which, at
the reflux, appears gray and desolate, strewed with polypi and seaweed,
with pebbles sparse and white, like bones in some vast old cemetery. But
the soldier, the politician, and the ambitious man, had no longer the
sweet consolation of looking towards heaven to read there a hope or a
warning. A red sky signifies nothing to such people but wind and
disturbance. White and fleecy clouds upon the azure only say that the
sea will be smooth and peaceful. D'Artagnan found the sky blue, the
breeze embalmed with saline perfumes, and he said: "I will embark with
the first tide, if it be but in a nutshell."

At Le Croisic as at Piriac, he had remarked enormous heaps of stone
lying along the shore. These gigantic walls, diminished every tide by
the barges for Belle-Isle, were, in the eyes of the musketeer, the
consequence and the proof of what he had well divined at Piriac. Was it
a wall that M. Fouquet was constructing? Was it a fortification that he
was erecting? To ascertain that, he must make fuller observations.
D'Artagnan put Furet into a stable; supped, went to bed, and on the
morrow took a walk upon the port or rather upon the shingle. Le Croisic
has a port of fifty feet; it has a look-out which resembles an enormous
brioche (a kind of cake) elevated on a dish. The flat strand is the
dish. Hundreds of barrowsful of earth amalgamated with pebbles, and
rounded into cones, with sinuous passages between, are look-outs and
brioches at the same time. It is so now, and it was so two hundred years
ago, only the brioche was not so large, and probably there were to be
seen to trellises of lath around the brioche, which constitute an
ornament, planted like gardes-fous along the passages that wind towards
the little terrace. Upon the shingle lounged three or four fishermen
talking about sardines and shrimps. D'Artagnan, with his eyes animated
by a rough gayety, and a smile upon his lips, approached these
fishermen.

"Any fishing going on to-day?" said he.

"Yes, monsieur," replied one of them, "we are only waiting for the
tide."

"Where do you fish, my friends?"

"Upon the coasts, monsieur."

"Which are the best coasts?"

