
(ll. 252-259) And when Leeky saw him fallen forward, but still half
alive, he pressed through those who fought in front and hurled a sharp
reed at him; but the point of the spear was stayed and did not break
his shield. Then noble Rueful, like Ares himself, struck his flawless
head-piece made of four pots--he only among the Frogs showed prowess in
the throng. But when he saw the other rush at him, he did not stay to
meet the stout-hearted hero but dived down to the depths of the lake.

(ll. 260-271) Now there was one among the Mice, Slice-snatcher,
who excelled the rest, dear son of Gnawer the son of blameless
Bread-stealer. He went to his house and bade his son take part in the
war. This warrior threatened to destroy the race of Frogs utterly [3603],
and splitting a chestnut-husk into two parts along the joint, put the
two hollow pieces as armour on his paws: then straightway the Frogs were
dismayed and all rushed down to the lake, and he would have made good
his boast--for he had great strength--had not the Son of Cronos, the
Father of men and gods, been quick to mark the thing and pitied the
Frogs as they were perishing. He shook his head, and uttered this word:

(ll. 272-276) 'Dear, dear, how fearful a deed do my eyes behold!
Slice-snatcher makes no small panic rushing to and fro among the Frogs
by the lake. Let us then make all haste and send warlike Pallas or even
Ares, for they will stop his fighting, strong though he is.'

(ll. 277-284) So said the Son of Cronos; but Hera answered him: 'Son of
Cronos, neither the might of Athena nor of Ares can avail to deliver
the Frogs from utter destruction. Rather, come and let us all go to
help them, or else let loose your weapon, the great and formidable
Titan-killer with which you killed Capaneus, that doughty man, and great
Enceladus and the wild tribes of Giants; ay, let it loose, for so the
most valiant will be slain.'

(ll. 285-293) So said Hera: and the Son of Cronos cast a lurid
thunderbolt: first he thundered and made great Olympus shake, and the
cast the thunderbolt, the awful weapon of Zeus, tossing it lightly
forth. Thus he frightened them all, Frogs and Mice alike, hurling his
bolt upon them. Yet even so the army of the Mice did not relax, but
hoped still more to destroy the brood of warrior Frogs. Only, the Son
of Cronos, on Olympus, pitied the Frogs and then straightway sent them
helpers.

(ll. 294-303) So there came suddenly warriors with mailed backs and
curving claws, crooked beasts that walked sideways, nut-cracker-jawed,
shell-hided: bony they were, flat-backed, with glistening shoulders and
bandy legs and stretching arms and eyes that looked behind them. They
had also eight legs and two feelers--persistent creatures who are called
crabs. These nipped off the tails and paws and feet of the Mice with
their jaws, while spears only beat on them. Of these the Mice were all
afraid and no longer stood up to them, but turned and fled. Already the
sun was set, and so came the end of the one-day war.




OF THE ORIGIN OF HOMER AND HESIOD, AND OF THEIR CONTEST

(aka "The Contest of Homer and Hesiod")

Everyone boasts that the most divine of poets, Homer and Hesiod, are
said to be his particular countrymen. Hesiod, indeed, has put a name
to his native place and so prevented any rivalry, for he said that
his father 'settled near Helicon in a wretched hamlet, Ascra, which is
miserable in winter, sultry in summer, and good at no season.' But, as
for Homer, you might almost say that every city with its inhabitants
claims him as her son. Foremost are the men of Smyrna who say that he
was the Son of Meles, the river of their town, by a nymph Cretheis, and
that he was at first called Melesigenes. He was named Homer later, when
he became blind, this being their usual epithet for such people. The
Chians, on the other hand, bring forward evidence to show that he
was their countryman, saying that there actually remain some of his
descendants among them who are called Homeridae. The Colophonians
even show the place where they declare that he began to compose when a
schoolmaster, and say that his first work was the "Margites".

As to his parents also, there is on all hands great disagreement.

Hellanicus and Cleanthes say his father was Maeon, but Eugaeon says
Meles; Callicles is for Mnesagoras, Democritus of Troezen for Daemon,
a merchant-trader. Some, again, say he was the son of Thamyras, but the
Egyptians say of Menemachus, a priest-scribe, and there are even those
who father him on Telemachus, the son of Odysseus. As for his mother,
she is variously called Metis, Cretheis, Themista, and Eugnetho. Others
say she was an Ithacan woman sold as a slave by the Phoenicians; other,
Calliope the Muse; others again Polycasta, the daughter of Nestor.

Homer himself was called Meles or, according to different accounts,
Melesigenes or Altes. Some authorities say he was called Homer, because
his father was given as a hostage to the Persians by the men of Cyprus;
others, because of his blindness; for amongst the Aeolians the blind are
so called. We will set down, however, what we have heard to have been
said by the Pythia concerning Homer in the time of the most sacred
Emperor Hadrian. When the monarch inquired from what city Homer came,
and whose son he was, the priestess delivered a response in hexameters
after this fashion:

'Do you ask me of the obscure race and country of the heavenly siren?
Ithaca is his country, Telemachus his father, and Epicasta, Nestor's
daughter, the mother that bare him, a man by far the wisest of mortal
kind.' This we must most implicitly believe, the inquirer and the
answerer being who they are--especially since the poet has so greatly
glorified his grandfather in his works.

Now some say that he was earlier than Hesiod, others that he was
younger and akin to him. They give his descent thus: Apollo and Aethusa,
daughter of Poseidon, had a son Linus, to whom was born Pierus. From
Pierus and the nymph Methone sprang Oeager; and from Oeager and Calliope
Orpheus; from Orpheus, Dres; and from him, Eucles. The descent is
continued through Iadmonides, Philoterpes, Euphemus, Epiphrades and
Melanopus who had sons Dius and Apelles. Dius by Pycimede, the daughter
of Apollo had two sons Hesiod and Perses; while Apelles begot Maeon who
was the father of Homer by a daughter of the River Meles.

According to one account they flourished at the same time and even had
a contest of skill at Chalcis in Euboea. For, they say, after Homer had
composed the "Margites", he went about from city to city as a minstrel,
and coming to Delphi, inquired who he was and of what country? The
Pythia answered:

'The Isle of Ios is your mother's country and it shall receive you dead;
but beware of the riddle of the young children.' [3701]

Hearing this, it is said, he hesitated to go to Ios, and remained in the
region where he was. Now about the same time Ganyctor was celebrating
the funeral rites of his father Amphidamas, king of Euboea, and invited
to the gathering not only all those who were famous for bodily strength
and fleetness of foot, but also those who excelled in wit, promising
them great rewards. And so, as the story goes, the two went to Chalcis
and met by chance. The leading Chalcidians were judges together with
Paneides, the brother of the dead king; and it is said that after a
wonderful contest between the two poets, Hesiod won in the following
manner: he came forward into the midst and put Homer one question after
another, which Homer answered. Hesiod, then, began:

'Homer, son of Meles, inspired with wisdom from heaven, come, tell me
first what is best for mortal man?'

HOMER: 'For men on earth 'tis best never to be born at all; or being
born, to pass through the gates of Hades with all speed.'

Hesiod then asked again:

'Come, tell me now this also, godlike Homer: what think you in your
heart is most delightsome to men?'

Homer answered:

'When mirth reigns throughout the town, and feasters about the house,
sitting in order, listen to a minstrel; when the tables beside them are
laden with bread and meat, and a wine-bearer draws sweet drink from
the mixing-bowl and fills the cups: this I think in my heart to be most
delightsome.'

It is said that when Homer had recited these verses, they were so
admired by the Greeks as to be called golden by them, and that even now
at public sacrifices all the guests solemnly recite them before feasts
and libations. Hesiod, however, was annoyed by Homer's felicity and
hurried on to pose him with hard questions. He therefore began with the
following lines:

'Come, Muse; sing not to me of things that are, or that shall be, or
that were of old; but think of another song.'

Then Homer, wishing to escape from the impasse by an apt answer,
replied:--

'Never shall horses with clattering hoofs break chariots, striving for
victory about the tomb of Zeus.'

Here again Homer had fairly met Hesiod, and so the latter turned to
sentences of doubtful meaning [3702]: he recited many lines and required
Homer to complete the sense of each appropriately. The first of the
following verses is Hesiod's and the next Homer's: but sometimes Hesiod
puts his question in two lines.

HESIOD: 'Then they dined on the flesh of oxen and their horses' necks--'

HOMER: 'They unyoked dripping with sweat, when they had had enough of
war.'

HESIOD: 'And the Phrygians, who of all men are handiest at ships--'

HOMER: 'To filch their dinner from pirates on the beach.'

HESIOD: 'To shoot forth arrows against the tribes of cursed giants with
his hands--'

HOMER: 'Heracles unslung his curved bow from his shoulders.'

HESIOD: 'This man is the son of a brave father and a weakling--'

HOMER: 'Mother; for war is too stern for any woman.'

HESIOD: 'But for you, your father and lady mother lay in love--'

HOMER: 'When they begot you by the aid of golden Aphrodite.'

HESIOD: 'But when she had been made subject in love, Artemis, who
delights in arrows--'

HOMER: 'Slew Callisto with a shot of her silver bow.'

HESIOD: 'So they feasted all day long, taking nothing--'

HOMER: 'From their own houses; for Agamemnon, king of men, supplied
them.'

HESIOD: 'When they had feasted, they gathered among the glowing ashes
the bones of the dead Zeus--'

HOMER: 'Born Sarpedon, that bold and godlike man.'

HESIOD: 'Now we have lingered thus about the plain of Simois, forth from
the ships let us go our way, upon our shoulders--'

HOMER: 'Having our hilted swords and long-helved spears.'

HESIOD: 'Then the young heroes with their hands from the sea--'

HOMER: 'Gladly and swiftly hauled out their fleet ship.'

HESIOD: 'Then they came to Colchis and king Aeetes--'

HOMER: 'They avoided; for they knew he was inhospitable and lawless.'

HESIOD: 'Now when they had poured libations and deeply drunk, the
surging sea--'

HOMER: 'They were minded to traverse on well-built ships.'

HESIOD: 'The Son of Atreus prayed greatly for them that they all might
perish--'

HOMER: 'At no time in the sea: and he opened his mouth said:'

HESIOD: 'Eat, my guests, and drink, and may no one of you return home to
his dear country--'

HOMER: 'Distressed; but may you all reach home again unscathed.'

When Homer had met him fairly on every point Hesiod said:

'Only tell me this thing that I ask: How many Achaeans went to Ilium
with the sons of Atreus?'

Homer answered in a mathematical problem, thus:

'There were fifty hearths, and at each hearth were fifty spits, and
on each spit were fifty carcases, and there were thrice three hundred
Achaeans to each joint.'

This is found to be an incredible number; for as there were fifty
hearths, the number of spits is two thousand five hundred; and of
carcasses, one hundred and twenty thousand...

Homer, then, having the advantage on every point, Hesiod was jealous and
began again:

'Homer, son of Meles, if indeed the Muses, daughters of great Zeus the
most high, honour you as it is said, tell me a standard that is both
best and worst for mortal-men; for I long to know it.' Homer replied:
'Hesiod, son of Dius, I am willing to tell you what you command, and
very readily will I answer you. For each man to be a standard will I
answer you. For each man to be a standard to himself is most excellent
for the good, but for the bad it is the worst of all things. And now ask
me whatever else your heart desires.'

HESIOD: 'How would men best dwell in cities, and with what observances?'

HOMER: 'By scorning to get unclean gain and if the good were honoured,
but justice fell upon the unjust.'

HESIOD: 'What is the best thing of all for a man to ask of the gods in
prayer?'

HOMER: 'That he may be always at peace with himself continually.'

HESIOD: 'Can you tell me in briefest space what is best of all?'

HOMER: 'A sound mind in a manly body, as I believe.'

HESIOD: 'Of what effect are righteousness and courage?'

HOMER: 'To advance the common good by private pains.'

HESIOD: 'What is the mark of wisdom among men?'

HOMER: 'To read aright the present, and to march with the occasion.'

HESIOD: 'In what kind of matter is it right to trust in men?'

HOMER: 'Where danger itself follows the action close.'

HESIOD: 'What do men mean by happiness?'

HOMER: 'Death after a life of least pain and greatest pleasure.'

After these verses had been spoken, all the Hellenes called for Homer
to be crowned. But King Paneides bade each of them recite the finest
passage from his own poems. Hesiod, therefore, began as follows:

'When the Pleiads, the daughters of Atlas, begin to rise begin the
harvest, and begin ploughing ere they set. For forty nights and days
they are hidden, but appear again as the year wears round, when first
the sickle is sharpened. This is the law of the plains and for those
who dwell near the sea or live in the rich-soiled valleys, far from the
wave-tossed deep: strip to sow, and strip to plough, and strip to reap
when all things are in season.' [3703]

Then Homer:

'The ranks stood firm about the two Aiantes, such that not even Ares
would have scorned them had he met them, nor yet Athena who saves
armies. For there the chosen best awaited the charge of the Trojans
and noble Hector, making a fence of spears and serried shields. Shield
closed with shield, and helm with helm, and each man with his fellow,
and the peaks of their head-pieces with crests of horse-hair touched
as they bent their heads: so close they stood together. The murderous
battle bristled with the long, flesh-rending spears they held, and the
flash of bronze from polished helms and new-burnished breast-plates
and gleaming shields blinded the eyes. Very hard of heart would he have
been, who could then have seen that strife with joy and felt no pang.'
[3704]

Here, again, the Hellenes applauded Homer admiringly, so far did
the verses exceed the ordinary level; and demanded that he should be
adjudged the winner. But the king gave the crown to Hesiod, declaring
that it was right that he who called upon men to follow peace and
husbandry should have the prize rather than one who dwelt on war and
slaughter. In this way, then, we are told, Hesiod gained the victory
and received a brazen tripod which he dedicated to the Muses with this
inscription:

'Hesiod dedicated this tripod to the Muses of Helicon after he had
conquered divine Homer at Chalcis in a contest of song.'

After the gathering was dispersed, Hesiod crossed to the mainland and
went to Delphi to consult the oracle and to dedicate the first fruits of
his victory to the god. They say that as he was approaching the temple,
the prophetess became inspired and said:

'Blessed is this man who serves my house,--Hesiod, who is honoured by
the deathless Muses: surely his renown shall be as wide as the light
of dawn is spread. But beware of the pleasant grove of Nemean Zeus; for
there death's end is destined to befall you.'

When Hesiod heard this oracle, he kept away from the Peloponnesus,
supposing that the god meant the Nemea there; and coming to Oenoe in
