"It is the livery of the Bardolfs," said Lady Joan.

"I always call them Firebrace; I cannot get out of it," said Mr
Mountchesney. "Well, I am glad it is they; I thought it might be an
irruption of barbarians. Lady Bardolf will bring us some news."

Lord and Lady Bardolf were not alone; they were accompanied by a
gentleman who had been staying on a visit at Firebrace, and who, being
acquainted with Lord de Mowbray, had paid his respects to the castle in
his way to London. This gentleman was the individual who had elevated
them to the peerage--Mr Hatton. A considerable intimacy had sprung
up between him and his successful clients. Firebrace was an old place
rebuilt in the times of the Tudors, but with something of its more
ancient portions remaining, and with a storehouse of muniments that had
escaped the civil wars. Hatton revelled in them, and in pursuing his
researches, had already made discoveries which might perhaps place the
coronet of the earldom of Lovel on the brow of the former champion
of the baronetage, who now however never mentioned the Order. Lord de
Mowbray was well content to see Mr Hatton, a gentleman in whom he did
not repose the less confidence, because his advice given him three years
ago, respecting the writ of right and the claim upon his estate had
proved so discreet and correct. Acting on that advice Lord de Mowbray
had instructed his lawyers to appear to the action without entering into
any unnecessary explanation of the merits of his case. He counted on the
accuracy of Mr Hatton's judgment, that the claim would not be pursued;
and he was right; after some fencing and preliminary manoeuvring, the
claim had not been pursued. Lord de Mowbray therefore, always
gracious, was disposed to accord a very distinguished reception to his
confidential counsellor. He pressed very much his guests to remain with
him some days, and though that was not practicable, Mr Hatton promised
that he would not leave the neighbourhood without paying another visit
to the castle.

"And you continue quiet here?" said Mr Hatton to Lord de Mowbray.

"And I am told we shall keep so," said Lord de Mowbray. "The mills are
mostly at work, and the men take the reduced wages in a good spirit. The
fact is our agitators in this neighbourhood suffered pretty smartly in
'39, and the Chartists have lost their influence.

"I am sorry for poor Lady St Julians," said Lady Bardolf to Lady de
Mowbray. "It must be such a disappointment, and she has had so many; but
I understand there is nobody to blame but herself. If she had only left
the Prince alone, but she would not be quiet!"

"And where are the Deloraines?"

"They are at Munich; with which they are delighted. And Lady Deloraine
writes me that Mr Egremont has promised to join them there. If he do,
they mean to winter at Rome."

"Somebody said he was going to be married," said Lady de Mowbray.

"His mother wishes him to marry," said Lady Bardolf; "but I have heard
nothing."

Mr Mountchesney came in and greeted the Bardolfs with some warmth. "How
delightful in the country in August to meet somebody that you have seen
in London in June!" he exclaimed. "Now, dear Lady Bardolf do tell me
something, for you can conceive nothing so triste as we are here. We
never get a letter. Joan only corresponds with philosophers and Maud
with clergymen; and none of my friends ever write to me."

"Perhaps you never write to them?"

"Well, I never have been a letter writer; because really I never wanted
to write or to be written to. I always knew what was going on because I
was on the spot; I was doing the things that people were writing letters
about--but now not being in the world any longer, doing nothing, living
in the country--and the country in August--I should like to receive
letters every day, but I do not know who to fix upon as a correspondent.
Eugene de Vere will not write, Milford cannot; and as for Fitz-heron he
is so very selfish, he always wants his letters answered."

"That is very unreasonable," said Lady Bardolf.

"Besides what can they tell me at this moment? They have gone to the
Moors and are enjoying themselves. They asked me to go with them, but I
could not go, because you see I could not leave Joan; though why I could
not leave her, I really cannot understand, because Egerton has got some
moors this year, and he leaves Lady Augusta with her father."

Lady Maud entered the room in her bonnet, returning from an airing. She
was all animation--charmed to see everybody; she had been to Mowbray to
hear some singing at the Roman Catholic chapel in that town; a service
had been performed and a collection made for the suffering workpeople of
the place. She had been apprised of it for some days, was told that she
would hear the most beautiful voice that she had ever listened to, but
it had far exceeded her expectations. A female voice it seemed; no
tones could be conceived more tender and yet more thrilling: in short
seraphic.

Mr Mountchesney blamed her for not taking him. He liked music, singing,
especially female singing; when there was so little to amuse him, he was
surprised that Lady Maud had not been careful that he should have
been present. His sister-in-law reminded him that she had particularly
requested him to drive her over to Mowbray, and he had declined the
honour as a bore.

"Yes," said Mr Mountchesney, "but I thought Joan was going with you, and
that you would be shopping."

"It was a good thing our House was adjourned before these disturbances
in Lancashire," said Lord Bardolf to Lord de Mowbray.

"The best thing we can all do is to be on our estates I believe," said
Lord de Mowbray.

"My neighbour Marney is in a great state of excitement," said Lord
Bardolf; "all his yeomanry out."

"But he is quiet at Marney?"

"In a way; but these fires puzzle us. Marney will not believe that the
condition of the labourer has anything to do with them; and he certainly
is a very acute man. But still I don't know what to say to it. The
poor-law is very unpopular in my parish. Marney will have it, that the
incendiaries are all strangers hired by the anti-Corn-law League."

"Ah! here is Lady Joan," exclaimed Lady Bardolf, as the wife of Mr
Mountchesney entered the room; "My dearest Lady Joan!"

"Why Joan," said Mr Mountchesney, "Maud has been to Mowbray, and heard
the most delicious singing. Why did we not go?"

"I did mention it to you, Alfred."

"I remember you said something about going to Mowbray, and that you
wanted to go to several places. But there is nothing I hate so much as
shopping. It bores me more than anything. And you are so peculiarly long
when you are shopping. But singing, and beautiful singing in a Catholic
chapel by a woman; perhaps a beautiful woman, that is quite a different
thing, and I should have been amused, which nobody seems ever to think
of here. I do not know how you find it, Lady Bardolf, but the country
to me in August is a something;"--and not finishing his sentence, Mr
Mountchesney gave a look of inexpressible despair.

"And you did not see this singer?" said Mr Hatton, sidling up to Lady
Maud, and speaking in a subdued tone.

"I did not, but they tell me she is most beautiful; something
extraordinary; I tried to see her, but it was impossible."

"Is she a professional singer?"

"I should imagine not; a daughter of one of the Mowbray people I
believe."

"Let us have her over to the Castle, Lady de Mowbray," said Mr
Mountchesney.

"If you like," replied Lady de Mowbray, with a languid smile.

"Well at last I have got something to do," said Mr Mountchesney. "I will
ride over to Mowbray, find out the beautiful singer, and bring her to
the Castle."




Book 6 Chapter 5



The beam of the declining sun, softened by the stained panes of a small
gothic window, suffused the chamber of the Lady Superior of the convent
of Mowbray. The vaulted room, of very moderate dimensions, was furnished
with great simplicity and opened into a small oratory. On a table were
several volumes, an ebon cross was fixed in a niche, and leaning in a
high-backed chair, sate Ursula Trafford. Her pale and refined complexion
that in her youth had been distinguished for its lustre, became her
spiritual office; and indeed her whole countenance, the delicate brow,
the serene glance, the small aquiline nose, and the well-shaped mouth,
firm and yet benignant, betokened the celestial soul that habited that
gracious frame.

The Lady Superior was not alone; on a low seat by her side, holding
her hand, and looking up into her face with a glance of reverential
sympathy, was a maiden over whose head five summers have revolved since
first her girlhood broke upon our sight amid the ruins of Marney Abbey,
five summers that have realized the matchless promise of her charms, and
while they have added something to her stature have robbed it of nothing
of its grace, and have rather steadied the blaze of her beauty than
diminished its radiance.

"Yes, I mourn over them," said Sybil, "the deep convictions that made
me look forward to the cloister as my home. Is it that the world has
assoiled my soul? Yet I have not tasted of worldly joys; all that I
have known of it has been suffering and tears. They will return, these
visions of my sacred youth, dear friend, tell me that they will return!"

"I too have had visions in my youth, Sybil, and not of the cloister, yet
am I here."

"And what should I infer?" said Sybil enquiringly.

"That my visions were of the world, and brought me to the cloister, and
that yours were of the cloister and have brought you to the world."

"My heart is sad," said Sybil, "and the sad should seek the shade."

"It is troubled, my child, rather than sorrowful."

Sybil shook her head.

"Yes, my child," said Ursula, "the world has taught you that there are
affections which the cloister can neither satisfy nor supply. Ah! Sybil,
I too have loved."

The blood rose to the cheek of Sybil, and then returned as quickly to
the heart; her trembling hand pressed that of Ursula as she sighed and
murmured, "No, no, no."

"Yes, it is his spirit that hovers over your life, Sybil; and in vain
you would forget what haunts your heart. One not less gifted than him;
as good, as gentle, as gracious; once too breathed in my ear the accents
of joy. He was, like myself, the child of an old house, and Nature had
invested him with every quality that can dazzle and can charm. But his
heart was as pure, and his soul as lofty, as his intellect and frame
were bright,--" and Ursula paused.

Sybil pressed the hand of Ursula to her lips and whispered, "Speak on."

"The dreams of by-gone days," continued Ursula in a voice of emotion,
"the wild sorrows than I can recall, and yet feel that I was wisely
chastened. He was stricken in his virtuous pride, the day before he was
to have led me to that altar where alone I found the consolation that
never fails. And thus closed some years of human love, my Sybil," said
Ursula, bending forward and embracing her. "The world for a season
crossed their fair current, and a power greater than the world forbade
their banns; but they are hallowed; memory is my sympathy; it is soft
and free, and when he came here to enquire after you, his presence and
agitated heart recalled the past."

"It is too wild a thought," said Sybil, "ruin to him, ruin to all. No,
we are severed by a fate as uncontrollable as severed you dear friend;
ours is a living death."

"The morrow is unforeseen," said Ursula. "Happy indeed would it be for
me, my Sybil, that your innocence should be enshrined within these holy
walls, and that the pupil of my best years, and the friend of my serene
life, should be my successor in this house. But I feel a deep persuasion
that the hour has not arrived for you to take the step that never can be
recalled."

So saying, Ursula embraced and dismissed Sybil; for the conversation,
the last passages of which we have given, had Occurred when Sybil
according to her wont on Saturday afternoon had come to request the
permission of the Lady Superior to visit her father.

It was in a tolerably spacious and not discomfortable chamber, the first
floor over the printing-office of the Mowbray Phalanx, that Gerard had
found a temporary home. He had not long returned from his factory,
and pacing the chamber with a disturbed step, he awaited the expected
arrival of his daughter.

She came; the faithful step, the well-known knock; the father and the
daughter embraced; he pressed to his heart the child who had clung to
him through so many trials, and who had softened so many sorrows, who
had been the visiting angel in his cell, and whose devotion had led
captivity captive.

Their meetings, though regular, were now comparatively rare. The
sacred day united them, and sometimes for a short period the previous
afternoon, but otherwise the cheerful hearth and welcome home were no
longer for Gerard. And would the future bring them to him? And what was
to be the future of his child? His mind vacillated between the convent
of which she now seldom spoke, and which with him was never a cherished
idea, and those dreams of restored and splendid fortunes which his
sanguine temperament still whispered him, in spite of hope so long
deferred and expectations so often baulked, might yet be realized. And
sometimes between these opposing visions, there rose a third and more
practical, though less picturesque result, the idea of her marriage. And
with whom? It was impossible that one so rarely gifted and educated with
so much daintiness, could ever make a wife of the people. Hatton offered
wealth, but Sybil had never seemed to comprehend his hopes, and Gerard
felt that their ill-assorted ages was a great barrier. There was of
all the men of his own order but one, who from his years, his great
qualities, his sympathy, and the nature of his toil and means, seemed
not unfitted to be the husband of his daughter; and often had Gerard
mused over the possibility of these intimate ties with Morley. Sybil
had been, as it were, bred up under his eye; an affection had always
subsisted between them, and he knew well that in former days Sybil had
appreciated and admired the great talents and acquirements of their
friend. At one period he almost suspected that Morley was attached to
her. And yet, from causes which he had never attempted to penetrate,
probably from a combination of unintentional circumstances, Sybil and
Morley had for the last two or three years been thrown little together,
and their intimacy had entirely died away. To Gerard it seemed that
Morley had ever proved his faithful friend: Morley had originally
dissuaded him with energy against that course which had led to his
discomfiture and punishment; when arrested, his former colleague was his
bail, was his companion and adviser during his trial; had endeavoured to
alleviate his imprisonment; and on his release had offered to share his
means with Gerard, and when these were refused, he at least supplied
Gerard with a roof. And yet with all this, that abandonment of heart and
brain, and deep sympathy with every domestic thought that characterized
old days, was somehow or other wanting. There was on the part of Morley
still devotion, but there was reserve.

"You are troubled, my father," said Sybil, as Gerard continued to pace
the chamber.

"Only a little restless. I am thinking what a mistake it was to have
moved in '39."

Sybil sighed.

"Ah! you were right, Sybil," continued Gerard; "affairs were not ripe.
We should have waited three years."

"Three years!" exclaimed Sybil, starting; "are affairs riper now?"

"The whole of Lancashire is in revolt," said Gerard. "There is not a
sufficient force to keep them in check. If the miners and colliers rise,
and I have cause to believe that it is more than probable they will move
before many days are past,--the game is up."

"You terrify me," said Sybil.

"On the Contrary," said Gerard, smiling, "the news is good enough; I'll
not say too good to be true, for I had it from one of the old delegates
who is over here to see what can be done in our north countree."

"Yes," said Sybil inquiringly, and leading on her father.

"He came to the works; we had some talk. There are to be no leaders this
time, at least no visible ones. The people will do it themselves. All
the children of Labour are to rise on the same day, and to toil no more,
till they have their rights. No violence, no bloodshed, but toil halts,
and then our oppressors will learn the great economical truth as well as
moral lesson, that when Toil plays Wealth ceases."

"When Toil ceases the People suffer," said Sybil. "That is the only
truth that we have learnt, and it is a bitter one."

"Can we be free without suffering," said Gerard. "Is the greatest of
human blessings to be obtained as a matter of course; to be plucked like
fruit, or seized like a running stream? No, no: we must suffer, but
we are wiser than of yore,--we will not conspire. Conspiracies are for
aristocrats, not for nations."

"Alas, alas! I see nothing but woe," said Sybil. "I cannot believe that
after all that has passed, the people here will move: I cannot believe
that after all that has passed, all that you, that we, have endured,
that you, my father, will counsel them to move."

"I counsel nothing," said Gerard. "It must be a great national instinct
that does it: but if all England, if Wales, if Scotland won't work, is
Mowbray to have a monopoly?"

"Ah! that's a bitter jest," said Sybil. "England, Wales, Scotland will
be forced to work as they were forced before. How can they subsist
without labour? And if they could, there is an organised power that will
subdue them."

"The Benefit Societies, the Sick and Burial Clubs, have money in the
banks that would maintain the whole working classes, with aid in kind
that will come, for six weeks, and that will do the business. And as for
force, why there are not five soldiers to each town in the kingdom. It's
a glittering bugbear this fear of the military; simultaneous strikes
would baffle all the armies in Europe."

"I'll go back and pray that all this is wild talk," said Sybil
earnestly. "After all that has passed, were it only for your child, you
should not speak, much less think, this, my father. What havoc to our
hearts and homes has been all this madness! It has separated us; it has
destroyed our happy home; it has done more than this--" and here she
wept.

"Nay, nay, my child," said Gerard, coming up and soothing her; "one
cannot weigh one's words before those we love. I can't hear of the
people moving with coldness--that's out of nature; but I promise you
I'll not stimulate the lads here. I am told they are little inclined to
stir. You found me in a moment of what I must call I suppose elation;
but I hear they beat the red-coats and police at Staley Bridge, and that
pricked my blood a bit. I have been ridden down before this when I was a
lad, Sybil, by Yeomanry hoofs. You must allow a little for my feelings."

She extended her lips to the proffered embrace of her father. He blessed
her and pressed her to his heart, and soothed her apprehensions with
many words of softness. There was a knock at the door.

"Come in," said Gerard. And there came in Mr Hatton.

They had not met since Gerard's release from York Castle. There Hatton
had visited him, had exercised his influence to remedy his grievances,
and had more than once offered him the means of maintenance on receiving
his freedom. There were moments of despondency when Gerard had almost
wished that the esteem and regard with which Sybil looked upon Hatton
might have matured into sentiments of a deeper nature; but on this
subject the father had never breathed a word. Nor had Hatton, except
to Gerard, ever intimated his wishes, for we could scarcely call them
hopes. He was a silent suitor of Sybil, watching opportunities and ready
to avail himself of circumstances which he worshipped. His sanguine
disposition, fed by a very suggestive and inventive mind, and stimulated
by success and a prosperous life, sustained him always to the last.
Hatton always believed that everything desirable must happen if a man
had energy and watched circumstances. He had confidence too in the
influence of his really insinuating manner; his fine taste, his tender
tone, his ready sympathy, all which masked his daring courage and
absolute recklessness of means.

There were general greetings of the greatest warmth. The eyes of Hatton
were suffused with tears as he congratulated Gerard on his restored
health, and pressed Sybil's hand with the affection of an old friend
between both his own.

"I was down in this part of the world on business," said Hatton, "and
thought I would come over here for a day to find you all out." And
then after some general conversation he said "And where do you think I
accidentally paid a visit a day or two back? At Mowbray Castle. I see
you are surprised. I saw all your friends. I did not ask his Lordship
how the writ of right went on. I dare say he thinks 'tis all hushed. But
he is mistaken. I have learnt something which may help us over the stile
yet."

"Well-a-day," said Gerard, "I once thought if I could get back the lands
the people would at last have a friend; but that's past. I have been a
dreamer of dreams often when I was overlooking them at work. And so we
all have I suppose. I would willingly give up my claim if I could be
sure the Lancashire lads will not come to harm this bout."

"'Tis a more serious business," said Hatton, "than any thing of the kind
that has yet happened. The government are much alarmed. They talk of
sending the Guards down into the north, and bringing over troops from
Ireland."

"Poor Ireland!" said Gerard. "Well, I think the frieze-coats might give
us a helping hand now, and employ the troops at least."

"No, my dear father, say not such things."

"Sybil will not let me think of these matters friend Hatton," said
Gerard smiling. "Well, I suppose it's not in my way, at least I
certainly did not make the best hand of it in '39; but it was London
that got me into that scrape. I cannot help fancying that were I on our
Moors here a bit with some good lads it might be different, and I must
say so, I must indeed, Sybil."

"But you are very quiet here I hope," said Hatton.

"Oh! yes," said Gerard, "I believe our spirit is sufficiently broken
at Mowbray. Wages weekly dropping, and just work enough to hinder sheer
idleness; that sort of thing keeps the people in very humble trim. But
wait a bit, and when they have reached the starvation point I fancy we
shall hear a murmur."

"I remember our friend Morley in '39, when we returned from London, gave
me a very good character of the disposition of the people here," said
Hatton; "I hope it continues the same. He feared no outbreak then, and
the distress in '39 was severe."

"Well," said Gerard, "the wages have been dropping ever since. The
people exist, but you can scarcely say they live. But they are cowed I
fancy. An empty belly is sometimes as apt to dull the heart as inflame
the courage. And then they have lost their leaders, for I was away you
see, and have been quiet enough since I came out; and Warner is broken:
he has suffered more from his time than I did; which is strange, for he
had his pursuits; whereas I was restless enough, and that's the truth,
and had it not been for Sybil's daily visit I think, though I may never
be allowed to live in a castle, I should certainly have died in one."

"And how is Morley?"

"Right well; the same as you left him: I saw not a straw's change when I
came out. His paper spreads. He still preaches moral force, and
believes that we shall all end in living in communities. But as the only
community of which I have personal experience is a gaol, I am not much
more inclined to his theory than heretofore."




Book 6 Chapter 6



The reader may not have altogether forgotten Mr Nixon and his comates,
the miners and colliers of that district not very remote from Mowbray,
which Morley had visited at the commencement of this history, in order
to make fruitless researches after a gentleman whom he subsequently so
unexpectedly stumbled upon. Affairs were as little flourishing in that
region as at Mowbray itself, and the distress fell upon a population
less accustomed to suffering and whose spirit was not daunted by the
recent discomfiture and punishment of their leaders.

"It can't last," said Master Nixon as he took his pipe from his mouth at
the Rising Sun.

He was responded to by a general groan. "It comes to this," he
continued, "Natur has her laws, and this is one; a fair day's wage for a
fair day's work."

"I wish you may get it," said Juggins, "with a harder stint every week
and a shilling a day knocked off."

"And what's to come to-morrow?" said Waghorn. "The butty has given
notice to quit in Parker's field this day se'nnight. Simmons won't drop
wages, but works half time."

"The boys will be at play afore long," said a collier.

"Hush!" said Master Nixon with a reproving glance, "play is a very
serious word. The boys are not to go to play as they used to do without
by your leave or with your leave. We must appoint a committee to
consider the question and we must communicate with the other trades."

"You're the man, Master Nixon, to choose for churchwarden," replied the
reproved miner with a glance of admiration.

"What is Diggs doing?" said Master Nixon in a solemn tone.

"A-dropping wages and a-raising tommy like fun," said Master Waghorn.

"There is a great stir in Hell-house yard," said a miner who entered the
tap room at this moment, much excited. "They say that all the workshops
will be shut to-morrow; not an order for a month past. They have got a
top-sawyer from London there who addresses them every evening, and says
that we have a right to four shillings a day wages, eight hours' work
and two pots of ale."

"A fair day's wage for a fair day's work," said Master Nixon. "I would
not stickle about hours, but the money and the drink are very just."

"If Hell-house yard is astir," said Waghorn, "there will be a good deal
to be seen yet."

"It's grave," said Master Nixon. "What think you of a deputation there?
It might come to good."

"I should like to hear the top-sawyer from London," said Juggins. "We
had a Chartist here the other day, but he did not understand our case at
all."

"I heard him," said Master Nixon, "but what's his Five Points to us? Why
he ayn't got tommy among them."

"Nor long stints," said Waghorn.

"Nor butties," said Juggins.

"He's a pretty fellow to come and talk to us," said a collier. "He had
never been down a pit in all his life."

The evening passed away in the tap room of the Rising Sun in reflections
on the present critical state of affairs and in consultations as to
the most expedient course for the future. The rate of wages which for
several years in this district had undergone a continuous depression,
had just received another downward impulse and was threatened with still
further reduction, for the price of iron became every day lower in the
market, and the article itself so little in demand that few but the
great capitalists who could afford to accumulate their produce were able
to maintain their furnaces in action. The little men who still continued
their speculations could only do so partially, by diminishing the days
of service and increasing their stints or toil and by decreasing the
rate of wages as well as paying them entirely in goods, of which they
had a great stock and of which they thus relieved themselves at a high
profit. Add to all these causes of suffering and discontent among the
workmen the apprehension of still greater evils and the tyranny of the
butties or middlemen, and it will with little difficulty be felt that
the public mind of this district was well-prepared for the excitement of
the political agitator, especially if he were discreet enough rather
to descant on their physical sufferings and personal injuries than to
attempt the propagation of abstract political principles, with which it
was impossible for them to sympathise with the impulse and facility
of the inhabitants of manufacturing towns, members of literary and
scientific institutes, habitual readers of political journals and
accustomed to habits of discussion of all public questions. It generally
happens however that where a mere physical impulse urges the people
to insurrection, though it is often an influence of slow growth and
movement, the effects are more violent and sometimes more obstinate
than when they move under the blended authority of moral and physical
necessity, and mix up together the rights and the wants of Man.

However this may be, on the morning after the conversation at the Rising
Sun which we have just noticed, the population having as usual gone
to their work, having penetrated the pit and descended the shaft, the
furnaces all blazing, the chimneys all smoking,--suddenly there rose a
rumour even in the bowels of the earth, that the hour and the man had at
length arrived; the hour that was to bring them relief and the man that
was to bear them redress.

"My missus told it me at the pit-head when she brought me my breakfast,"
said a pikeman to his comrade, and he struck a vigorous blow at the
broadseam on which he was working.

"It is not ten mile," said his companion. "They'll be here by noon."

"There is a good deal to do in their way," said the first pikeman. "All
men at work after notice to be ducked, they say, and every engine to be
stopped forthwith."

"Will the police meet them before they reach this?"

"There is none: my missus says that not a man John of them is to be
seen. The Hell-cats as they call themselves halt at every town and offer
fifty pounds for a live policeman."

"I'll tell you what," said the second pikeman. "I'll stop my stint and
go up the shaft. My heart's all of a flutter, I can't work no more.
We'll have a fair day's wage for a fair day's work yet."

"Come along, I'm your man; if the doggy stop us, we'll knock him down.
The People must have their rights; we're driven to this, but if one
shilling a day is dropped, why not two?"

"Very true; the People must have their rights, and eight hours' work is
quite enough."
