
Then I returned to my lodgings full of desperate resolution, and
having made Strap acquainted with my fate, ordered him to pawn my
sword immediately, that I might be enabled to make another effort. This
affectionate creature no sooner understood my purpose, than, seized with
insupportable sorrow at the prospect of my misery, he burst into tears,
and asked what I proposed to do after the small sum he could raise on
the sword should be spent. "On my own account" said he, "I am quite
unconcerned; for, while God spares me health and these ten fingers, I
can earn a comfortable subsistence anywhere; but what must become of
you, who have less humility to stoop, and more appetites to gratify?"
Here I interrupted him, by saying, with a gloomy aspect, I should never
want a resource while I had a loaded pistol in possession. Stupified
with horror at this dreadful insinuation, he stood mute for some
time and then broke out into "God of his infinite mercy enable you
to withstand that temptation of the devil! Consider your immortal
soul--there's no repentance in the grave! O Lord! that we ever should
have come to this! Are we not enjoined to resign ourselves to the will
of Heaven?--where is your patience?--Durum patientia frango--you are but
a young man--there may be many good things in store for you--accidit
in puncto quo non speratur in anno--remember your uncle, Mr. Bowling;
perhaps he is now on his voyage homeward, pleasing himself with the
hopes of seeing and relieving you; nay, peradventure, he has already
arrived, for the ship was expected about this time." A ray of hope
shot athwart my soul at this suggestion; I thanked my friend for
this seasonable recollection, and, after having promised to take no
resolution till his return, dismissed him to Wapping for intelligence.

In his absence I was visited by Banter, who, being informed of my bad
luck at play, told me that fortune would probably be one day weary of
persecuting me. "In the meantime," said he, "here's a letter for you,
which I received just now inclosed in one from Freeman." I snatched
it with eagerness, and knowing the superscription to be of Narcissa's
handwriting, kissed it with transport, and, having opened it, read,


"It is with great difficulty that I have stolen, from the observation of
those spies who are set over me, this opportunity of telling you, that
I was suddenly carried away from Bath by my brother, who was informed of
our correspondence by Lord Quiverwit whom, I since understand, you have
wounded in a duel on my account. As I am fully convinced of your honour
and love, I hope I shall never hear of such desperate proofs of either
for the future. I am so strictly watched that it will be impossible
for you to see me, until my brother's suspicion shall abate, or Heaven
contrive some other unforeseen event in our behalf. In the meantime, you
may depend on the constancy and affection of

"Your own "Narcissa.

"P. S. Miss Williams, who is my fellow prisoner, desires to be
remembered to you. We are both in good health, and only in pain for you,
especially as it will be impracticable for you to convey any message
or letter to the place of our confinement; for which reason pray desist
from the attempt, that, by miscarrying, might prolong our captivity.
"N--."

This kind letter afforded me great consolation: I communicated it to
Banter, and, at the same time, showed him her picture: he approved of
her beauty and good sense, and could not help owning that my neglect
of Miss Snapper was excusable, when such a fine creature engrossed my
attention.

I began to be reconciled to my fate, and imagined, that, if I could
contrive means of subsisting until my uncle should arrive, in case he
were not already at home, he would enable me to do something effectual
in behalf of my love and fortune; I therefore consulted Banter about
a present supply, who no sooner understood that I had credit, with
a tailor, than he advised me to take off two or three suits of rich
clothes, and convert them into cash, by selling them at half-price to
a salesman in Monmouth Street. I was startled at this proposal, which
I thought savoured a little of fraud; he rendered it palatable, by
observing that, in a few months, I might be in a condition to do
everybody justice; and, in the meantime, I was acquitted by the honesty
of my intention. I suffered myself to be persuaded by his salvo, by
which my necessity, rather than my judgment, was convinced; and, when
I found there were no accounts of the ship in which my uncle embarked,
actually put the scheme in practice, and raised by it five-and-twenty
guineas, paying him for his advice with the old five.






CHAPTER LXI

I am arrested--carried to the Marshalsea--find my old Acquaintance beau
Jackson in that Jail--he informs me of his Adventures--Strap arrives,
and with difficulty is comforted--Jackson introduces me to a Poet--I
admire his Conversation and Capacity--am deeply affected with my
Misfortune--Strap hires himself as a Journeyman Barber

But this expedient was in a few weeks followed with a consequence I
did not foresee. A player, having purchased one of the suits that were
exposed to sale, appeared in it on the stage one night, while my tailor
unfortunately happened to be present. He knew it immediately, and,
inquiring minutely into the affair, discovered my whole contrivance:
upon which he came into my lodgings, and telling me that he was very
much straightened for want of money, presented his bill, which amounted
to fifty pounds. Surprised at which unexpected address, I affected to
treat him cavalierly, swore some oaths, asked if he doubted my honour,
and telling him I should take care whom I dealt with for the future,
bade him come again in three days. He obeyed me punctually, demanded his
money, and finding himself amused with bare promises, arrested me that
very day in the street. I was not much shocked at this adventure, which,
indeed, put an end to a state of horrible expectation: but I refused
to go to a sponging-house, where I heard there was nothing but the
most flagrant imposition: and, a coach being called, was carried to the
Marshalsea, attended by a bailiff and his follower, who were very much
disappointed and chagrined at my resolution.

The turnkey, guessing from my appearance that I had money in my pocket,
received me with the repetition of the Latin word depone, and gave me to
understand, that I must pay beforehand for the apartment I should choose
to dwell in. I desired to see his conveniences, and hired a small paltry
bed-chamber for a crown a week, which, in any other place, would not
have let for half the money. Having taken possession of this dismal
habitation, I sent for Strap, and my thoughts were busied in collecting
matter of consolation to that faithful squire, when somebody knocked at
my door, which I no sooner opened, than a young fellow entered in very
shabby clothes and marvellous foul linen. After a low bow, he called
me by name, and asked if I had forgotten him. His voice assisted me
in recollecting his person, whom I soon recognised to be my old
acquaintance, Jackson, of whom mention is made in the first part of my
memoirs. I saluted him cordially, expressed my satisfaction at finding
him alive, and condoled him on his present situation, which, however,
did not seem to affect him much, for he laughed very heartily at the
occasion of our meeting so unexpectedly in this place. Our mutual
compliments being past, I inquired about his amour with the lady of
fortune, which seemed to be so near a happy conclusion when I had the
pleasure of seeing him last: and, after an immoderate fit of laughter,
he gave me to understand that he had been egregiously bit in that
affair. "You must know," said he, "that a few days after our adventure
with the bawd, and her b--ches, I found means to be married to that same
blue lady you speak of, and passed the night with her at her lodgings,
so much to her satisfaction, that early in the morning, after a good
deal of snivelling and sobbing, she owned, that, far from being an
heiress of great fortune, she was no other than a common woman of the
town, who had decoyed me into matrimony, in order to enjoy the privilege
of a femme couverte; and that, unless I made my escape immediately, I
should be arrested for a debt of her contracting, by bailiffs employed
and instructed for that purpose. Startled at this intimation, I rose in
a twinkling, and taking leave of my spouse with several hearty damns,
got safe into the verge of the court, where I kept snug, until I was
appointed surgeon's mate of a man-of-war at Portsmouth; for which place
I set out on Sunday, went on board of my ship, in which I sailed to the
Straits, where I had the good fortune to be made surgeon of a sloop that
came home a few months after, and was put out of commission: whereupon,
I came to London, imagining myself forgotten, and freed from my wife and
her creditors, but had not been in town a week, before I was arrested
for a debt of hers, amounting to twenty pounds, and brought to this
place, where I have been fixed by another action since that time.
However, you know my disposition, I defy care and anxiety; and being
on the half-pay list, make shift to live here tolerably easy." I
congratulated him on his philosophy, and, remembering that I was in his
debt, repaid the money he formerly lent me, which, I believe, was far
from being unseasonable. I then inquired about the economy of the place,
which he explained to my satisfaction; and, after we had agreed to mess
together, he was just now going to give orders for dinner when Strap
arrived.

I never in my life saw sorrow so extravagantly expressed in any
countenance as in that of my honest friend, which was, indeed,
particularly adapted by nature for such impressions. When we were left
by ourselves, I communicated to him my disaster, and endeavoured to
console him with the same arguments he had formerly used to me, withal
representing the fair chance I had of being relieved in a short time by
Mr. Bowling. But his grief was unutterable: he seemed to give attention
without listening, and wrung his hands in silence; so that I was in a
fair way of being infected by his behaviour, when Jackson returned, and,
perceiving the deference I paid to Strap, although in a footman's
habit, distributed his crumbs of comfort with such mirth, jollity
and unconcern, that the features of the distressed squire relaxed by
degrees; he recovered the use of speech, and began to be a little more
reconciled to this lamentable event. We dined together on boiled beef
and greens, brought from a cook's shop in the neighbourhood, and,
although this meal was served up in a manner little corresponding with
the sphere of life in which I had lately lived, I made a virtue of
necessity, ate with good appetite, and treated my friends with a bottle
of wine, which had the desired effect of increasing the good humour
of my fellow prisoner, and exhilarating the spirits of Strap, who now
talked cavalierly of my misfortune.

After dinner Jackson left us to our private affairs; when I desired my
friend to pack up all our things, and carry them to some cheap lodgings
he should choose for himself in the neighbourhood of the Marshalsea,
after he had discharged my lodgings, for which purpose I gave him money.
I likewise recommended to him the keeping my misfortune secret, and
saying to my landlord, or any other who should inquire for me, that
I was gone into the country for a few weeks: at the same time I laid
strong injunctions upon him to call every second day upon Banter, in
case he should receive any letter for me from Narcissa, by the channel
of Freeman; and by all means to leave a direction for himself at my
uncle's lodgings in Wapping, by which I might be found when my kinsman
should arrive.

When he departed to execute these orders (which by the bye were
punctually performed that very night), I found myself so little seasoned
to my situation, that I dreaded reflection, and sought shelter from it
in the company of the beau, who, promising to regale me with a lecture
upon taste, conducted me to the common side, where I saw a number of
naked miserable wretches assembled together. We had not been here many
minutes, when a figure appeared, wrapped in a dirty rug, tied about his
loins with two pieces of list, of different colours, knotted together;
having a black bushy beard, and his head covered with a huge mass of
brown periwig, which seems to have been ravished from the crown of some
scarecrow. This apparition, stalking in with great solemnity, made
a profound bow to the audience, who signified their approbation by a
general response of "How d'ye do, doctor!" He then turned towards us,
and honoured Jackson with a particular salutation, upon which my friend,
in a formal manner, introduced him to me by the name of Mr. Melopoyn.
This ceremony being over, he advanced into the middle of the
congregation, which crowded around him, and hemming three times, to
my utter astonishment, pronounced with great significance of voice and
gesture, a very elegant and ingenious discourse upon the difference
between genius and taste, illustrating his assertions with apt
quotations from the best authors, ancient as well as modern. When he had
finished his harangue, which lasted a full hour, he bowed again to the
spectators; not one of whom (I was informed) understood so much as
a sentence of what he had uttered. They manifested, however, their
admiration and esteem by voluntary contributions, which Jackson told
me, one week with another, amounted to eighteen pence. This moderate
stipend, together with some small presents that he received for making
up differences and deciding causes amongst the prisoners, just enabled
him to breathe and walk about in the grotesque figure I have described.
I understood also, that he was an excellent poet, and had composed
a tragedy, which was allowed by everybody who had seen it to be a
performance of great merit: that his learning was infinite, his morals
unexceptionable, and his modesty invincible. Such a character could not
fail of attracting my regard; I longed impatiently to be acquainted with
him, and desired Jackson would engage him to spend the evening in my
apartment. My request was granted; he favoured us with his company, and,
in the course of our conversation perceiving that I had a strong passion
for the Belles Lettres, acquitted himself so well on that subject, that
I expressed a fervent desire of seeing his productions. In this point
too he gratified my inclination; he promised to bring his tragedy to my
room next day, and in the meantime, entertained me with some detached
pieces, which gave me a very advantageous idea of his poetical talent.
Among other things I was particularly pleased with some elegies, in
imitation of Tibullus; one of which I beg leave to submit to the reader
as a specimen of his complexion and capacity:--


Where now are all my flattering dreams of joy? Monimia, give my soul her
wonted rest;-- Since first thy beauty fixed my roving eye, heart-gnawing
cares corrode my pensive breast!

Let happy lovers fly where pleasures call, With festive songs beguile
the fleeting hour, Lead beauty through the mazes of the ball, Or press
her wanton in love's roseate bower:

For me, no more I'll range the empurpled mead, Where shepherd's pipe and
virgins dance around, Nor wander through the woodbine's fragrant shade,
To hear the music of the grove resound.

I'll seek some lonely church, or dreary hall, Where fancy paints the
glimmering taper blue, Where damps hang mouldering on the ivy'd wall,
And sheeted ghosts drink up the midnight dew,

There, leagued with hopeless anguish and despair, A while in silence
o'er my fate repair: Then, with a long farewell to love and care, To
kindred dust my weary limbs consign.

Wilt thou, Monimia, shed a gracious tear On the cold grave where all my
sorrows rest? Strew vernal flowers, applaud my love sincere, And bid the
turf lie easy on my breast?

I was wonderfully affected with this pathetic complaint, which seemed so
well calculated for my own disappointment in love, that I could not help
attaching the idea of Narcissa to the name of Monimia, and of forming
such melancholy presages of my passion, that I could not recover
my tranquillity: and was fain to have recourse to the bottle, which
prepared me for a profound sleep that I could not otherwise have
enjoyed. Whether these impressions invited and introduced a train of
other melancholy reflections, or my fortitude was all exhausted in
the effort I made against despondence, during the first day of my
imprisonment, I cannot determine; but I awoke in the horrors, and found
my imagination haunted with such dismal apparitions, that I was ready
to despair: and I believe the reader will own, I had no great cause to
congratulate myself, when I considered my situation. I was interrupted
in the midst of these gloomy apprehensions by the arrival of Strap, who
contributed not a little to the re-establishment of my peace, by letting
me know that he had hired himself as a journeyman barber; by which means
he would be able not only to save me a considerable expense, but even
make shift to lay up something for my subsistence, after my money should
be spent, in case I should not be relieved before.






CHAPTER LXII

I read Melopoyn's Tragedy, and conceive a vast Opinion of his Genius--he
recounts his Adventures

While we ate our breakfast together, I made him acquainted with the
character and condition of the poet, who came in with his play at that
instant, and, imagining we were engaged about business, could not be
prevailed upon to sit; but, leaving his performance, went away. My
friend's tender heart was melted at the sight of a gentleman and
Christian (for he had a great veneration for both these epithets) in
such misery; and assented with great cheerfulness to a proposal I made
of clothing him with the our superfluities; a task with which he charged
himself, and departed immediately to perform it.

He was to sooner gone than I locked my door, and sat down to the
tragedy; which I read to the end with vast pleasure, not a little
amazed at conduct of the managers who had rejected it. The fable, in
my opinion, was well chosen and naturally conducted, the incidents
interesting, the characters beautifully contrasted, strongly marked, and
well supported; the diction poetical, spirited and correct; the unities
of the drama maintained with the most scrupulous exactness; the opening
gradual and engaging, the peripeteia surprising, and the catastrophe
affecting. In short, I judged it by the laws of Aristotle and Horace,
and could find nothing in it exceptionable but a little too much
embellishment in some few places, which objection he removed to my
satisfaction, by a quotation of Aristotle's poetics, importing, that the
least interesting parts of a poem ought to be raised and dignified by
the charms and energy of diction.

I revered his genius, and was seized with an eager curiosity to know the
particular events of a fortune so unworthy of his merit. At that
instant Strap returned with a bundle of clothes, which I sent with my
compliments to Mr. Melopoyn, as s small token of my regard, and
desired the favour of his company to dinner. He accepted my present
and invitation, and in less than half-an-hour made his appearance in
a decent dress, which altered his figure very much to his advantage. I
perceived by his countenance that his heart was big with gratitude, and
endeavoured to prevent his acknowledgments, by asking pardon for the
liberty I had taken; he made no reply, but, with an aspect full of
admiration and esteem, bowed to the ground, while the tears gushed from
his eyes. Affected with these symptoms of an ingenuous mind, I shifted
the conversation, and complimented him on his performance, which I
assured him afforded me infinite pleasure. My approbation made him
happy. Dinner being served, and Jackson arrived, I begged their
permission for Strap to sit at table with us, after having informed them
that he was a person to whom I was extremely obliged; they were kind
enough to grant that favour, and we ate together with great harmony and
satisfaction.

Our meal being ended, I expressed my wonder at the little regard Mr.
Melopoyn had met with from the world: and signified a desire of hearing
how he had been treated by the managers of the playhouses, to whom I
understood from Jackson, he had offered his tragedy without success.
"There is so little entertaining in the incidents of my life," said he,
"that I am sure the recital will not recompense your attention; but,
since you discover an inclination to know them I understand my duty too
well to disappoint your desire.

"My father, who was a curate in the country, being by the narrowness of
his circumstances hindered from maintaining me at the university, took
the charge of my education upon himself, and laboured with such industry
and concern in the undertaking, that I had little cause to regret the
want of public masters. Being at great pains to consult my natural bias,
He discovered in me betimes an inclination for poetry; upon which he
recommended to me an intimate acquaintance with the classics, in the
cultivation of which he assisted me with a paternal zeal and uncommon
erudition. When he thought me sufficiently acquainted with the ancients,
he directed my studies to the best modern authors, French and Italian
as well as English, and laid a particular injunction upon me make myself
master of my mother tongue.

"About the age of eighteen, I grew ambitious of undertaking a work of
some consequence; and, with my father's approbation, actually planned
the tragedy you have read; but, before I had finished four acts, that
indulgent parent died, and left my mother and me in very indigent
circumstances. A near relation, compassionating our distress, took us
into his family, where I brought my fable to a conclusion; and, soon
after that period my mother quitted this life. When my sorrow for this
melancholy event had subsided, I told my kinsman, who was a farmer,
that, having paid my last duty to my parent, I had now no attachment
to detain me in the country, and therefore was resolved to set out
for London, and offer my play to the stage, where I did not doubt of
acquiring a large share of fame as well as fortune; in which case I
should not be unmindful of my friends and benefactors. My cousin was
ravished with the prospect of my felicity, and willingly contributed
towards the expense of fitting me out for my expedition.

"Accordingly I took a place in the waggon, and arrived in town, where I
hired an apartment in a garret, willing to live as frugally as possible,
until I should know what I had to expect from the manager, to whom I
intended to offer my play. For, though I looked upon myself as perfectly
secure of a good reception, imagining that a patentee would be as eager
to receive as I to present my production, I did not know whether or not
he might be pre-engaged in favour of another author, a circumstance
that would certainly retard my success. On this consideration, too, I
determined to be speedy in my application, and even to wait upon one of
the managers the very next day. For this purpose, I inquired my landlord
if he knew where either or both of them lived: and he, being curious
to know my business, and at the same time appearing to be a very honest
friendly man (a tallow chandler), I made him acquainted with my design,
upon which he told me that I went the wrong way to work; that I would
not find such easy access to a manager as I imagined; and that if I
delivered my performance without proper recommendation, it would be as
one to a thousand if ever it would be minded. "Take my advice," said he,
"and your business is done. One of the patentees is a good catholic,
as I am, and uses the same father who confesses me. I will make you
acquainted with this good priest, who is an excellent scholar, and if he
should approve of your play, his recommendation will go a great way
in determining Mr. Supple to bring it on the stage." I applauded his
expedient, and was introduced to the friar, who, having perused the
tragedy, was pleased to signify his approbation, and commended me in
particular for having avoided all reflections upon religion. He promised
to use all his influence with his son Supple in my behalf, and to inform
himself that very day at what time it was proper for me to wait upon him
with the piece. He was punctual in performing his engagement, and next
morning gave me to understand that he had mentioned my affair to the
manager, and that I had nothing more to do than to go to his house any
time in the forenoon, and make use of his name, upon which I should find
immediate admittance. I took his advice, put my performance in my bosom,
and, having received directions, went immediately to the house of Mr.
Supple, and knocked at the door, which had a wicket in the middle, faced
with a net-work of iron. Through this a servant having viewed me for
some time, demanded to know my business. I told him my business was
with Mr. Supple, and that I came from Mr. O'Varnish. He examined my
appearance once more, then went away, returned in a few minutes, and
said his master was busy, and could not be seen. Although I was a little
mortified at my disappointment, I was persuaded that my reception was
owing to Mr. Supple's ignorance of my errand: and, that I might meet
with no more obstructions of the same kind, I desired Mr. O'Varnish
to be my introductor the next time. He complied with my request, and
obtained immediate admittance to the manager, who received me with
the utmost civility, and promised to read my play with the first
convenience. By his own appointment I called again in a fortnight, but
he was gone out: I returned in a week after, and the poor gentleman
was extremely ill: I renewed my visit in a fortnight after that, and he
assured me he had been so much fatigued with business, that he had
not been able as yet to read it to an end, but he would take the first
opportunity: and, in the meantime, observed that what he had yet seen of
it was very entertaining. I comforted myself with this declaration a few
weeks longer, at the end of which I appeared again before his wicket,
was let in, and found him laid up with the gout. I no sooner entered
his chamber than, looking at me with a languishing eye, he said, "Mr.
Melopoyn, I'm heartily sorry for an accident that has happened during my
illness. You must know that my eldest boy, finding your manuscript upon
the table in the dining-room, where I used to read it, carried it into
the kitchen, and leaving it there, a negligent wench of a cook-maid,
mistaking it for waste paper, has expended it but a few leaves
in singing fowls upon the spit. But I hope the misfortune is not
irreparable, since, no doubt, you have several copies."

"I protest to you, my good friend, Mr. Random, I was extremely shocked
at this information; but the good-natured gentleman seemed to be so much
affected with my misfortune, that I suppressed my concern, and told him
that, although I had not another copy, I should be able to retrieve the
loss by writing another from my memory, which was very tenacious. You
cannot imagine how well pleased Mr. Supple was at this assurance; he
begged I would set about it immediately, and carefully revolve and
recollect every circumstance before I pretended to commit it to
paper, that it might be the same individual play that he had perused.
Encouraged by this injunction, which plainly demonstrated how much he
interested himself in the affair, I tasked my remembrance and industry,
and in three weeks produced the exact image of the former, which was
conveyed to him by my good friend Father O'Varnish, who told me next
day, that Mr. Supple would revise it superficially, in order to judge
of its sameness with the other, and then give his final answer. For
this examination I allotted a week: and, in full confidence of seeing it
acted in a little while, demanded an audience of the manager, when that
term was expired. But, alas! the season had slipped away insensibly. He
convinced me, that if my play had been put into rehearsal at the time,
it could not have been ready for performing until the end of March, when
the benefit nights came on; consequently, it would have interfered with
the interest of the players, whom it was not my business to disoblige.

"I was fain to acquiesce in these reasons, which, to be sure, were
extremely just; and to reserve my performance for the next season,
when he hoped I would not be so unlucky. Although it was a grievous
disappointment to me, who, by this time, began to want both money and
necessaries; having on the strength of my expectation from the theatre,
launched out into some extravagances, by which the sum I brought to
town was already almost consumed. Indeed, I ought to be ashamed at this
circumstance of my conduct; for my finances were sufficient, with
good economy, to have maintained me comfortably a whole year. You will
perhaps be amazed when I tell you that, in six months, I expended not a
farthing less than ten guineas: but, when one considers the temptations
to which a young man is exposed in this great city, especially if he
be addicted to pleasure, as I am, the wonder will vanish, or at least
abate. Nor was the cause of my concern limited to my own situation
entirely: I had written an account of my good reception to my kinsman
the farmer, and desired him to depend upon me for the money he had
kindly accommodated me with about the end of February, which promise
I now found myself unable to perform. However, there was no remedy but
patience: I applied to my landlord, who was a very good-natured man,
candidly owned my distress, and begged his advice in laying down some
plan for my subsistence; he readily promised to consult his confessor on
this subject, and, in the meantime, told me, I was welcome to lodge
and board with him until fortune should put it in my power to make
restitution.

"Mr. O'Varnish, being informed of my necessity, offered to introduce me
to the author of a weekly paper, who, he did not doubt, would employ
me in that way, provided he should find me duly qualified; but, upon
inquiry, I understood that this journal was calculated to foment
divisions in the commonwealth, and therefore I desired to be excused
from engaging in it. He then proposed that I should write something in
the poetical way, which I might dispose of to a bookseller for a pretty
sum of ready money, and, perhaps, establish my own character into the
bargain. This event would infallibly procure friends, and my tragedy
would appear next season to the best advantage, by being supported both
by interest and reputation. I was charmed with this prospect, and having
heard what friends Mr. Pope acquired by his pastorals, set about a work
of that kind, and in less than six weeks composed as many eclogues,
which I forthwith offered to an eminent bookseller, who desired me to
leave them for his perusal, and he would give an answer in two days. At
the end of that time, I went to him, when he returned the poems, telling
me, they would not answer his purpose, and sweetened his refusal by
saying there were some good clever lines in them. Not a little dejected
at this rebuff, which, I learned from Mr. O'Varnish, was owing to the
opinion of another author whom this bookseller always consulted on these
occasions, I applied to another person of the same profession, who told
me the town was cloyed with pastorals, and advised me, if I intended to
profit by my talents, to write something satirical or luscious, such as
the Button Hole, Shockey and Towner, The Leaky Vessel, etc, and yet this
was a man in years, who wore a reverend periwig, looked like a
senator, and went regularly to church. Be that as it will, I scorned
to prostitute my pen in the manner proposed, and carried my papers to a
third, who assured me that poetry was entirely out of his way; and asked
me if I had got never a piece of secret history, thrown into a series
of letters, or a volume of adventures, such as those of Robinson Crusoe,
and Colonel Jack, or a collection of Conundrums, wherewith to entertain
the plantations. Being quite unfurnished for this dealer, I had recourse
to another with as little success; and I verily believe, was rejected by
the whole trade.

"I was afterwards persuaded to offer myself as a translator, and
accordingly repaired to a person who was said to entertain numbers of
that class in his pay; he assured me, he had already a great deal of
that work on his hands, which he did not know what to do with; observed
that translations were a mere drug, that branch of literature being
overstocked with an inundation of authors from North Britain; and asked
what I would expect per sheet for rendering the Latin classics into
English. That I might not make myself too cheap, I determined to set a
high price upon my qualifications, and demanded half-a-guinea for every
translated sheet. "Half-a-guinea!" cried he, staring at me; then paused
a little, and said, he had no occasion for my service at present. I
found my error, and, resolving to make amends, fell one-half in my
demand; upon which he stared at me and told me his hands were full. I
attempted others without finding employment, and was actually reduced
to a very uncomfortable prospect, when I bethought myself of offering my
talents to the printers of half-penny ballads and other such occasional
essays, as are hawked about the streets. With this in view I applied to
one of the most noted and vociferous of this tribe, who directed me to a
person whom I found entertaining a whole crowd of them with gin, bread,
and cheese; he carried me into a little back parlour, very neatly
furnished, where I signified my desire of being enrolled among
his writers; and was asked what kind of composition I professed.
Understanding that my inclination leaned towards poetry, he expressed
his satisfaction, telling me one of his poets had lost his senses, and
was confined in Bedlam, and the other was become dozed with drinking
drams; so that he had not done anything tolerable these many weeks. When
I proposed that we should enter into terms of agreement, he gave me to
understand that his bargains were always conditional, and his authors
paid in proportion to the sale of their works.

"Having therefore settled these conditions, which (I do assure you) were
not very advantageous to me, he assigned me a subject for ballad, which
was to be finished in two hours; and I retired to my garret in order
to perform his injunction. As the theme happened to suit my fancy,
I completed a pretty sort of an ode within the time prescribed, and
brought it to him, big with hope of profit and applause. He read it in
a twinkling, and, to my utter astonishment, told me it would not do;
though indeed he owned I wrote a good hand, an spelled very well, but
my language was too high flown, and of consequence not at all adapted
to the capacity and taste of his customers. I promised to rectify that
mistake and in half an hour humbled my style to the comprehension of
vulgar readers; he approved of the alteration, and gave me some hopes
of succeeding in time, though he observed that my performance was very
deficient in the quaintness of expression that pleases the multitude:
however, to encourage me, he ventured the expense of printing and paper,
and, if I remember aright, my share of the sale amounted to fourpence
halfpenny.

"From that day I studied the Grub Street manner with great diligence,
and at length became such a proficient that my works were in
great request among the most polite of the chairmen, draymen,
hackney-coachmen, footmen, and servant maids: nay, I have enjoyed the
pleasure of seeing my productions adorned with cuts, pasted upon the
walls as ornaments in beer cellars and cobblers' stalls; and have
