heavy-armed soldiers and archers.  Here might be seen the black Ethiopian
with wooly matted hair, in which a few feathers were stuck--the handsome,
well proportioned "Son of the desert" from the sandy Arabian shore of the
Red Sea, who performed his wild war-dance flourishing his lance, with a
peculiar wriggle of his--hips pale Sardinians, with metal helmets and
heavy swords--light colored Libyans, with tattooed arms and ostrich-
feathers on their heads-brown, bearded Arabs, worshippers of the stars,
inseparable from their horses, and armed, some with lances, and some with
bows and arrows.  And not less various than their aspect were the tongues
of the allied troops--but all obedient to the king's word of command.

In the midst of the royal tents was a lightly constructed temple with the
statues of the Gods of Thebes, and of the king's forefathers; clouds of
incense rose in front of it, for the priests were engaged from the eve of
the battle until it was over, in prayers, and offerings to Amon, the king
of the Gods, to Necheb, the Goddess of victory, and to Menth, the God of
war.

The keeper of the lions stood by the Pharaoh's sleeping-tent, and the
tent, which served as a council chamber, was distinguished by the
standards in front of it; but the council-tent was empty and still, while
in the kitchen-tent, as well as in the wine-store close by, all was in a
bustle.  The large pavilion, in which Rameses and his suite were taking
their evening meal, was more brilliantly lighted than all the others; it
was a covered tent, a long square in shape, and all round it were colored
lamps, which made it as light as day; a body-guard of Sardinians,
Libyans, and Egyptians guarded it with drawn swords, and seemed too
wholly absorbed with the importance of their office even to notice the
dishes and wine-jars, which the king's pages--the sons of the highest
families in Egypt--took at the tent-door from the cooks and butlers.

The walls and slanting roof of this quickly-built and movable banqueting-
hall, consisted of a strong, impenetrable carpet-stuff, woven at Thebes,
and afterwards  dyed purple at Tanis by the Phoenicians.  Saitic artists
had embroidered the vulture, one of the forms in which Necheb appears, a
hundred times on the costly material with threads of silver.  The cedar-
wood pillars of the tent were covered with gold, and the ropes, which
secured the light erection to the tent-pegs, were twisted of silk, and
thin threads of silver.  Seated round four tables, more than a hundred
men were taking their evening meal; at three of them the generals of the
army, the chief priests, and councillors, sat on light stools; at the
fourth, and at some distance from the others, were the princes of the
blood; and the king himself sat apart at a high table, on a throne
supported by gilt figures of Asiatic prisoners in chains.  His table and
throne stood on a low dais covered with panther-skin; but even without
that Rameses would have towered above his companions.  His form was
powerful, and there was a commanding aspect in his bearded face, and in
the high brow, crowned with a golden diadem adorned with the heads of two
Uraeus-snakes, wearing the crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt.  A broad
collar of precious stones covered half his breast, the lower half was
concealed by a scarf or belt, and his bare arms were adorned with
bracelets.  His finely-proportioned limbs looked as if moulded in bronze,
so smoothly were the powerful muscles covered with the shining copper-
colored skin.  Sitting here among those who were devoted to him, he
looked with kind and fatherly pride at his blooming sons.

The lion was at rest--but nevertheless he was a lion, and terrible things
might be looked for when he should rouse himself, and when the mighty
hand, which now dispensed bread, should be clenched for the fight.  There
was nothing mean in this man, and yet nothing alarming; for, if his eye
had a commanding sparkle, the expression of his mouth was particularly
gentle; and the deep voice which could make itself heard above the clash
of fighting men, could also assume the sweetest and most winning tones.
His education had not only made him well aware of his greatness and
power, but had left him also a genuine man, a stranger to none of the
emotions of the human soul.

Behind Pharaoh stood a man, younger than himself, who gave him his wine-
cup after first touching it with his own lips; this was Mena, the king's
charioteer and favorite companion.  His figure was slight and yet
vigorous, supple and yet dignified, and his finely-formed features and
frank bright eyes were full at once of self-respect and of benevolence.
Such a man might fail in reflection and counsel, but would be admirable
as an honorable, staunch, and faithful friend.

Among the princes, Chamus sat nearest to the king;

     [He is named Cha-em-Us on the monuments, i. e., 'splendor in
     Thebes.' He became the Sam, or high-priest of Memphis.  His mummy
     was discovered by Mariette in the tomb of Apis at Saqqarah during ha
     excavations of the Serapeum at Memphis.]

he was the eldest of his sons, and while still young had been invested
with the dignity of high-priest of Memphis.  The curly-haired Rameri,
who had been rescued from imprisonment--into which he had fallen on his
journey from Egypt--had been assigned a place with the younger princes at
the lowest end of the table.

"It all sounds very threatening!"  said the king.  "But though each of
you croakers speaks the truth, your love for me dims your sight.  In
fact, all that Rameri has told me, that Bent-Anat writes, that Mena's
stud-keeper says of Ani, and that comes through other channels--amounts
to nothing that need disturb us.  I know your uncle--I know that he will
make his borrowed throne as wide as he possibly can; but when we return
home he will be quite content to sit on a narrow seat again.  Great
enterprises and daring deeds are not what he excels in;  but he is very
apt at carrying out a ready-made system, and therefore I choose him to be
my Regent."

"But Ameni," said Chamus, bowing respectfully to his father, "seems to
have stirred up his ambition, and to support him with his advice.  The
chief of the House of Seti is a man of great ability, and at least half
of the priesthood are his adherents."

"I know it," replied the king.  "Their lordships owe me a grudge because
I have called their serfs to arms, and they want them to till their
acres.  A pretty sort of people they have sent me!  their courage flies
with the first arrow.  They shall guard the camp tomorrow; they will be
equal to that when it is made clear to their understanding that, if they
let the tents be taken, the bread, meat and wines-skins will also fall
into the hands of the enemy.  If Kadesh is taken by storm, the temples of
the Nile shall have the greater part of the spoil, and you yourself, my
young high-priest of Memphis, shall show your colleagues that Rameses
repays in bushels that which he has taken in handfuls from the ministers
of the Gods."

"Ameni's disaffection," replied Chamus, "has a deeper root; thy mighty
spirit seeks and finds its own way--"

"But their lordships," interrupted Rameses, "are accustomed to govern the
king too, and I--I do not do them credit.  I rule as vicar of the Lord of
the Gods, but--I myself am no God, though they attribute to me the honors
of a divinity; and in all humility of heart I willingly leave it to them
to be the mediators between the Immortals and me or my people.  Human
affairs certainly I choose to manage in my own way.  And now no more of
them.  I cannot bear to doubt my friends, and trustfulness is so dear, so
essential to me, that I must indulge in it even if my confidence results
in my being deceived."

The king glanced at Mena, who handed him a golden cup--which he emptied.
He looked at the glittering beaker, and then, with a flash of his grave,
bright eyes, he added:

"And if I am betrayed--if ten such as Ameni and Ani entice my people into
a snare--I shall return home, and will tread the reptiles into dust."

His deep voice rang out the words, as if he were a herald proclaiming a
victorious deed of arms.  Not a word was spoken, not a hand moved, when
he ceased speaking.  Then he raised his cup, and said:

"It is well before the battle to uplift our hearts!  We have done great
deeds; distant nations have felt our hand; we have planted our pillars of
conquest by their rivers, and graven the record of our deeds on their
rocks.

     [Herodotus speaks of the pictures graven on the rocks in the
     provinces conquered by Rameses II., in memory of his achievements.
     He saw two, one of which remains on a rock near Beyrut.]

Your king is great above all kings, and it is through the might of the
Gods, and your valor my brave comrades.  May to-morrow's fight bring us
new glory!  May the Immortals soon bring this war to a close!  Empty your
wine cups with me--To victory and a speedy return home in peace!"

"Victory!  Victory!  Long life to the Pharaoh!  Strength and health!"
cried the guests of the king, who, as he descended from his throne, cried
to the drinkers:

"Now, rest till the star of Isis sets.  Then follow me to prayer at the
altar of Amon, and then-to battle."

Fresh cries of triumph sounded through the room, while Rameses gave his
hand with a few words of encouragement to each of his sons in turn.  He
desired the two youngest, Mernephtah and Rameri to follow him, and
quitting the banquet with them and Mena, he proceeded, under the escort
of his officers and guards, who bore staves before him with golden lilies
and ostrich-feathers, to his sleeping-tent, which was surrounded by a
corps d'elite under the command of his sons.  Before entering the tent he
asked for some pieces of meat, and gave them with his own hand to his
lions, who let him stroke them like tame cats.

Then he glanced round the stable, patted the sleek necks and shoulders of
his favorite horses, and decided that 'Nura' and 'Victory to Thebes'
should bear him into the battle on the morrow.

     [The horses driven by Rameses at the battle of Kadesh were in fact
     thus named.]

When he had gone into the sleeping-tent, he desired his attendants to
leave him; he signed Mena to divest him of his ornaments and his arms,
and called to him his youngest sons, who were waiting respectfully at the
door of the tent.

Why did I desire you to accompany me?"  he asked them gravely.  Both were
silent, and he repeated his question.

"Because," said Rameri at length, "you observed that all was not quite
right between us two."

"And because," continued the king, "I desire that unity should exist
between my children.  You will have enemies enough to fight with to-
morrow, but friends are not often to be found, and are too often taken
from us by the fortune of war.  We ought to feel no anger towards the
friend we may lose, but expect to meet him lovingly in the other world.
Speak, Rameri, what has caused a division between you?"

"I bear him no ill-will," answered Rameri.  "You lately gave me the sword
which Mernephtah has there stuck in his belt, because I did my duty well
in the last skirmish with the enemy.  You know we both sleep in the same
tent, and yesterday, when I drew my sword out of its sheath to admire the
fine work of the blade, I found that another, not so sharp, had been put
in its place."

"I had only exchanged my sword for his in fun," interrupted Mernephtah.
"But he can never take a joke, and declared I want to wear a prize that I
had not earned; he would try, he said, to win another and then--"

"I have heard enough; you have both done wrong," said the King.  "Even in
fun, Mernephtah, you should never cheat or deceive.  I did so once, and I
will tell you what happened, as a warning.

"My noble mother, Tuaa, desired me, the first time I went into Fenchu
--[Phoenicia: on monuments of the 18th dynasty.]--to bring her a pebble
from the shore near Byblos, where the body of Osiris was washed.  As we
returned to Thebes, my mother's request returned to my mind; I was young
and thoughtless--I picked up a stone by the way-side, took it with me,
and when she asked me for the remembrance from Byblos I silently gave her
the pebble from Thebes.  She was delighted, she showed it to her brothers
and sisters, and laid it by the statues of her ancestors; but I was
miserable with shame and penitence, and at last I secretly took away the
stone, and threw it into the water.  All the servants were called
together, and strict enquiry was made as to the theft of the stone; then
I could hold out no longer, and confessed everything.  No one punished
me, and yet I never suffered more severely; from that time I have never
deviated from the exact truth even in jest.  Take the lesson to heart,
Mernephtah--you, Rameri, take back your sword, and, believe me, life
brings us so many real causes of vexation, that it is well to learn early
to pass lightly over little things if you do not wish to become a surly
fellow like the pioneer Paaker; and that seems far from likely with a
