and carried short swords in their girdles.  On the right side of the
steps a division of the body-guard was stationed, armed with battleaxes,
daggers, bows, and large shields; on the left, were the Greek
mercenaries, armed in Ionian fashion.  Their new leader, our friend
Aristomachus, stood with a few of his own officers apart from the
Egyptians, by the colossal statues of Psamtik I., which had been erected
on the space above the steps, their faces towards the river.

In front of these statues, on a silver chair, sat Psamtik, the heir to
the throne: He wore a close-fitting garment of many colors, interwoven
with gold, and was surrounded by the most distinguished among the king's
courtiers, chamberlains, counsellors, and friends, all bearing staves
with ostrich feathers and lotus-flowers.

The multitude gave vent to their impatience by shouting, singing, and
quarrelling; but the priests and magnates on the steps preserved a
dignified and solemn silence.  Each, with his steady, unmoved gaze, his
stiffly-curled false wig and beard, and his solemn, deliberate manner,
resembled the two huge statues, which, the one precisely similar to the
other, stood also motionless in their respective places, gazing calmly
into the stream.

At last silken sails, chequered with purple and blue, appeared in sight.

The crowd shouted with delight.  Cries of, "They are coming!  Here they
are!"  "Take care, or you'll tread on that kitten,"  "Nurse, hold the
child higher that she may see something of the sight."  "You are pushing
me into the water, Sebak!"  "Have a care Phoenician, the boys are
throwing burs into your long beard."  "Now, now, you Greek fellow, don't
fancy that all Egypt belongs to you, because Amasis allows you to live on
the shores of the sacred river!"  "Shameless set, these Greeks, down with
them!" shouted a priest, and the cry was at once echoed from many mouths.
"Down with the eaters of swine's flesh and despisers of the gods!"

     [The Egyptians, like the Jews, were forbidden to eat swine's flesh.
     This prohibition is mentioned in the Ritual of the Dead, found in a
     grave in Abd-el-Qurnah, and also in other places.  Porphyr. de
     Abstin. IV.  The swine was considered an especially unclean animal
     pertaining to Typhon (Egyptian, Set) as the boar to Ares, and
     swineherds were an especially despised race.  Animals with bristles
     were only sacrificed at the feasts of Osiris and Eileithyia.  Herod.
     I. 2. 47.  It is probable that Moses borrowed his prohibition of
     swine's flesh from the Egyptian laws with regard to unclean
     animals.]

From words they were proceeding to deeds, but the police were not to be
trifled with, and by a vigorous use of their staves, the tumult was soon
stilled.  The large, gay sails, easily to be distinguished among the
brown, white and blue ones of the smaller Nile-boats which swarmed around
them, came nearer and nearer to the expectant throng.  Then at last the
crown-prince and the dignitaries arose from their seats.  The royal band
of trumpeters blew a shrill and piercing blast of welcome, and the first
of the expected boats stopped at the landing-place.

It was a rather long, richly-gilded vessel, and bore a silver sparrow-
hawk as figure-head.  In its midst rose a golden canopy with a purple
covering, beneath which cushions were conveniently arranged.  On each
deck in the forepart of the ship sat twelve rowers, their aprons attached
by costly fastenings.

     [Splendid Nile-boats were possessed, in greater or less numbers, by
     all the men of high rank.  Even in the tomb of Ti at Sakkara, which
     dates from the time of the Pyramids, we meet with a chief overseer
     of the vessels belonging to a wealthy Egyptian.]

Beneath the canopy lay six fine-looking men in glorious apparel; and
before the ship had touched the shore the youngest of these, a beautiful
fair-haired youth, sprang on to the steps.

Many an Egyptian girl's mouth uttered a lengthened "Ah" at this glorious
sight, and even the grave faces of some of the dignitaries brightened
into a friendly smile.

The name of this much-admired youth was Bartja.

     [This Bartja is better known under the name of Smerdis, but on what
     account the Greeks gave him this name is not clear.  In the
     cuneiform inscriptions of Bisitun or Behistun, he is called Bartja,
     or, according to Spiegel, Bardiya.  We have chosen, for the sake of
     the easy pronunciation, the former, which is Rawlinson's simplified
     reading of the name.]

He was the son of the late, and brother of the reigning king of Persia,
and had been endowed by nature with every gift that a youth of twenty
years could desire for himself.

Around his tiara was wound a blue and white turban, beneath which hung
fair, golden curls of beautiful, abundant hair; his blue eyes sparkled
with life and joy, kindness and high spirits, almost with sauciness; his
noble features, around which the down of a manly beard was already
visible, were worthy of a Grecian sculptor's chisel, and his slender but
muscular figure told of strength and activity.  The splendor of his
apparel was proportioned to his personal beauty.  A brilliant star of
diamonds and turquoises glittered in the front of his tiara.  An upper
garment of rich white and gold brocade reaching just below the knees, was
fastened round the waist with a girdle of blue and white, the royal
colors of Persia.  In this girdle gleamed a short, golden sword, its hilt
and scabbard thickly studded with opals and sky-blue turquoises.  The
trousers were of the same rich material as the robe, fitting closely at
the ankle, and ending within a pair of short boots of light-blue leather.

The long, wide sleeves of his robe displayed a pair of vigorous arms,
adorned with many costly bracelets of gold and jewels; round his slender
neck and on his broad chest lay a golden chain.

Such was the youth who first sprang on shore.  He was followed by Darius,
the son of Hystaspes, a young Persian of the blood royal, similar in
person to Bartja, and scarcely less gorgeously apparelled than he.  The
third to disembark was an aged man with snow-white hair, in whose face
the gentle and kind expression of childhood was united, with the
intellect of a man, and the experience of old age.  His dress consisted
of a long purple robe with sleeves, and the yellow boots worn by the
Lydians;--his whole appearance produced an impression of the greatest
modesty and a total absence of pretension.

     [On account of these boots, which are constantly mentioned, Croesus
     was named by the oracle "soft-footed."]

Yet this simple old man had been, but a few years before, the most envied
of his race and age; and even in our day at two thousand years' interval,
his name is used as a synonyme for the highest point of worldly riches
attainable by mankind.  The old man to whom we are now introduced is no
other than Croesus, the dethroned king of Lydia, who was then living at
the court of Cambyses, as his friend and counsellor, and had accompanied
the young Bartja to Egypt, in the capacity of Mentor.

Croesus was followed by Prexaspes, the king's Ambassador, Zopyrus, the
son of Megabyzus, a Persian noble, the friend of Bartja and Darius; and,
lastly, by his own son, the slender, pale Gyges, who after having become
dumb in his fourth year through the fearful anguish he had suffered on
his father's account at the taking of Sardis, had now recovered the power
of speech.

Psamtik descended the steps to welcome the strangers.  His austere,
sallow face endeavored to assume a smile.  The high officials in his
train bowed down nearly to the ground, allowing their arms to hang
loosely at their sides.  The Persians, crossing their hands on their
breasts, cast themselves on the earth before the heir to the Egyptian
throne.  When the first formalities were over, Bartja, according to the
custom of his native country, but greatly to the astonishment of the
populace, who were totally unaccustomed to such a sight, kissed the
sallow cheek of the Egyptian prince; who shuddered at the touch of a
stranger's unclean lips, then took his way to the litters waiting to
convey him and his escort to the dwelling designed for them by the king,
in the palace at Sais.

A portion of the crowd streamed after the strangers, but the larger
number remained at their places, knowing that many a new and wonderful
sight yet awaited them.

"Are you going to run after those dressed-up monkeys and children of
Typhon, too?"  asked an angry priest of his neighbor, a respectable
tailor of Sais.  "I tell you, Puhor, and the high-priest says so too,
that these strangers can bring no good to the black land!  I am for the
good old times, when no one who cared for his life dared set foot on
Egyptian soil.  Now our streets are literally swarming with cheating
Hebrews, and above all with those insolent Greeks whom may the gods
destroy!

     [The Jews were called Hebrews (Apuriu) by the Egyptians; as brought
     to light by Chabas.  See Ebers, Aegypten I.  p. 316.  H. Brugsch
     opposes this opinion.]

"Only look, there is the third boat full of strangers!  And do you know
what kind of people these Persians are?  The high-priest says that in the
whole of their kingdom, which is as large as half the world, there is not
a single temple to the gods; and that instead of giving decent burial to
the dead, they leave them to be torn in pieces by dogs and vultures."

     [These statements are correct, as the Persians, at the time of the
     dynasty of the Achaemenidae, had no temples, but used fire-altars
     and exposed their dead to the dogs and vultures.  An impure corpse
     was not permitted to defile the pure earth by its decay; nor might
     it be committed to the fire or water for destruction, as their
     purity would be equally polluted by such an act.  But as it was
     impossible to cause the dead bodies to vanish, Dakhmas or burying-
     places were laid out, which had to be covered with pavement and
     cement not less than four inches thick, and surrounded by cords to
     denote that the whole structure was as it were suspended in the air,
     and did not come in contact with the pure earth.  Spiegel, Avesta
     II.]

"The tailor's indignation at hearing this was even greater than his
astonishment, and pointing to the landing-steps, he cried:

"It is really too bad; see, there is the sixth boat full of these
foreigners!"

"Yes, it is hard indeed!"  sighed the priest, "one might fancy a whole
army arriving.  Amasis will go on in this manner until the strangers
drive him from his throne and country, and plunder and make slaves of us
poor creatures, as the evil Hyksos, those scourges of Egypt, and the
black Ethiopians did, in the days of old."

"The seventh boat!"  shouted the tailor.

"May my protectress Neith, the great goddess of Sais, destroy me, if I
can understand the king," complained the priest.  "He sent three barks to
Naukratis, that poisonous nest hated of the gods, to fetch the servants
and baggage of these Persians; but instead of three, eight had to be
procured, for these despisers of the gods and profaners of dead bodies
have not only brought kitchen utensils, dogs, horses, carriages, chests,
baskets and bales, but have dragged with them, thousands of miles, a
