
The boy shook his sunburnt head and smiled roguishly.

"Some one else sent you then?"  said Boges becoming more attentive.

"Yes, some one else."

"Ah! the Egyptian has sent a message to her brother-in-law?"

"Who told you that?"

"Nitetis spoke to me about it.  Here, give me what you have; I will give
it to Bartja at once."

"I was not to give it to any one but the prince himself."

"Give it to me; it will be safer in my hands than in yours."

"I dare not."

"Obey me at once, or--"

At this moment the king came up.  Boges thought a moment, and then called
in a loud voice to the whip-bearers on duty at the palace-gate, to take
the astonished boy up.

"What is the matter here?"  asked Cambyses.

"This fellow," answered the eunuch, "has had the audacity to make his way
into the palace with a message from your consort Nitetis to Bartja."

At sight of the king, the boy had fallen on his knees, touching the
ground with his forehead.

Cambyses looked at him and turned deadly pale.  Then, turning to the
eunuch, he asked: "What does the Egyptian Princess wish from my brother?"

"The boy declares that he has orders to give up what has been entrusted
to him to no one but Bartja."  On hearing this the boy looked imploringly
up at the king, and held out a little papyrus roll.

Cambyses snatched it out of his hand, but the next moment stamped
furiously on the ground at seeing that the letter was written in Greek,
which he could not read.

He collected himself, however, and, with an awful look, asked the boy who
had given him the letter.  "The Egyptian lady's waiting-woman Mandane,"
he answered; "the Magian's daughter."

"For my brother Bartja?"

"She said I was to give the letter to the handsome prince, before the
banquet, with a greeting from her mistress Nitetis, and I was to tell him
.  .  ."

Here the king stamped so furiously, that the boy was frightened and could
only stammer: "Before the banquet the prince was walking with you, so I
could not speak to him, and now I am waiting for him here, for Mandane
promised to give me a piece of gold if I did what she told me cleverly."

"And that you have not done," thundered the king, fancying himself
shamefully deceived.  "No, indeed you have not.  Here, guards, seize this
fellow!"

The boy begged and prayed, but all in vain; the whip-bearers seized
him quick as thought, and Cambyses, who went off at once to his own
apartments, was soon out of reach of his whining entreaties for mercy.

Boges followed his master, rubbing his fat hands, and laughing quietly to
himself.

The king's attendants began their work of disrobing him, but he told them
angrily to leave him at once.  As soon as they were gone, he called Boges
and said in a low voice: "From this time forward the hanging-gardens and
the Egyptian are under your control.  Watch her carefully!  If a single
human being or a message reaches her without my knowledge, your life will
be the forfeit."

"But if Kassandane or Atossa should send to her?"

"Turn the messengers away, and send word that every attempt to see or
communicate with Nitetis will be regarded by me as a personal offence."

"May I ask a favor for myself, O King?"

"The time is not well chosen for asking favors."

"I feel ill.  Permit some one else to take charge of the hanging-gardens
for to-morrow only."

"No!--now leave me."

"I am in a burning fever and have lost consciousness three times during
the day--if when I am in that state any one should  .  .  ."

But who could take your place?"

"The Lydian captain of the eunuchs, Kandaules.  He is true as gold, and
inflexibly severe.  One day of rest would restore me to health.  Have
mercy, O King!"

"No one is so badly served as the king himself.  Kandaules may take your
place to-morrow, but give hum the strictest orders, and say that the
slightest neglect will put his life in danger.--Now depart."

"Yet one word, my King: to-morrow night the rare blue lily in the
hanging-gardens will open.  Hystaspes, Intaphernes, Gobyras, Croesus and
Oropastes, the greatest horticulturists at your court, would very much
like to see it.  May they be allowed to visit the gardens for a few
minutes?  Kandaules shall see that they enter into no communication with
the Egyptian."

"Kandaules must keep his eyes open, if he cares for his own life.--Go!"

Boges made a deep obeisance and left the king's apartment.  He threw a
few gold pieces to the slaves who bore the torches before him.  He was so
very happy.  Every thing had succeeded beyond his expectations:--the fate
of Nitetis was as good as decided, and he held the life of Kandaules, his
hated colleague, in his own hands.

Cambyses spent the night in pacing up and down his apartment.  By cock-
crow he had decided that Nitetis should be forced to confess her guilt,
and then be sent into the great harem to wait on the concubines.  Bartja,
the destroyer of his happiness, should set off at once for Egypt, and on
his return become the satrap of some distant provinces.  He did not wish
to incur the guilt of a brother's murder, but he knew his own temper too
well not to fear that in a moment of sudden anger, he might kill one he
hated so much, and therefore wished to remove him out of the reach of his
passion.

Two hours after the sun had risen, Cambyses was riding on his fiery
steed, far in front of a Countless train of followers armed with shields,
swords, lances, bows and lassos, in pursuit of the game which was to be
found in the immense preserves near Babylon, and was to be started from
its lair by more than a thousand dogs.

     [The same immense trains of followers of course accompanied the
     kings on their hunting expeditions, as on their journeys.  As the
     Persian nobility were very fond of hunting, their boys were taught
     this sport at an early age.  According to Strabo, kings themselves
     boasted of having been mighty hunters in the inscriptions on their
     tombs.  A relief has been found m the ruins of Persepolis, on which
     the king is strangling a lion with his right arm, but this is
     supposed to have a historical, not a symbolical meaning.  Similar
     representations occur on Assyrian monuments.  Izdubar strangling a
     lion and fighting with a lion (relief at Khorsabad) is admirably
     copied in Delitzsch's edition of G.  Smith's Chaldean Genesis.
     Layard discovered some representations of hunting-scenes during his
     excavations; as, for instance, stags and wild boars among the reeds;
     and the Greeks often mention the immense troops of followers on
     horse and foot who attended the kings of Persia when they went
     hunting.  According to Xenophon, Cyrop. I.  2.  II. 4. every hunter
     was obliged to be armed with a bow and arrows, two lances, sword and
     shield.  In Firdusi's Book of Kings we read that the lasso was also
     a favorite weapon.  Hawking was well known to the Persians more than
     900 years ago.  Book of Kabus XVIII.  p.  495.  The boomerang was
     used in catching birds as well by the Persians as by the ancient
     Egyptians and the present savage tribes of New Holland.]




CHAPTER II.

The hunt was over.  Waggons full of game, amongst which were several
enormous wild boars killed by the king's own hand, were driven home
behind the sports men.  At the palace-gates the latter dispersed to their
several abodes, in order to exchange the simple Persian leather hunting-
costume for the splendid Median court-dress.

In the course of the day's sport Cambyses had (with difficulty
restraining his agitation) given his brother the seemingly kind order to
start the next day for Egypt in order to fetch Sappho and accompany her
to Persia.  At the same time he assigned him the revenues of Bactra,
Rhagae and Sinope for the maintenance of his new household, and to his
young wife, all the duties levied from her native town Phocaea, as pin-
money.

Bartja thanked his generous brother with undisguised warmth, but Cambyses
remained cold as ice, uttered a few farewell words, and then, riding off
in pursuit of a wild ass, turned his back upon him.

On the way home from the chase the prince invited his bosom-friends
Croesus, Darius, Zopyrus and Gyges to drink a parting-cup with him.

Croesus promised to join them later, as he had promised to visit the blue
lily at the rising of the Tistarstar.

He had been to the hanging-gardens that morning early to visit Nitetis,
but had been refused entrance by the guards, and the blue lily seemed now
to offer him another chance of seeing and speaking to his beloved pupil.
He wished for this very much, as he could not thoroughly understand her
behavior the day before, and was uneasy at the strict watch set over her.

The young Achaemenidae sat cheerfully talking together in the twilight in
a shady bower in the royal gardens, cool fountains plashing round them.
Araspes, a Persian of high rank, who had been one of Cyrus's friends, had
joined them, and did full justice to the prince's excellent wine.

"Fortunate Bartja!" cried the old bachelor, "going out to a golden
country to fetch the woman you love; while I, miserable old fellow, am
blamed by everybody, and totter to my grave without wife or children to
weep for me and pray the gods to be merciful to my poor soul."

"Why think of such things?"  cried Zopyrus, flourishing the wine-cup.
"There's no woman so perfect that her husband does not, at least once a
day, repent that he ever took a wife.  Be merry, old friend, and remember
that it's all your own fault.  If you thought a wife would make you
happy, why did not you do as I have done?  I am only twenty-two years old
and have five stately wives and a troop of the most beautiful slaves in
my house."

Araspes smiled bitterly.

"And what hinders you from marrying now?"  said Gyges.  "You are a match
for many a younger man in appearance, strength, courage and perseverance.
You are one of the king's nearest relations too--I tell you, Araspes, you
might have twenty young and beautiful wives."

"Look after your own affairs," answered Araspes.  "In your place, I
certainly should not have waited to marry till I was thirty."

"An oracle has forbidden my marrying."

"Folly?  how can a sensible man care for what an oracle says?  It is only
by dreams, that the gods announce the future to men.  I should have
thought that your own father was example enough of the shameful way in
which those lying priests deceive their best friends."

"That is a matter which you do not understand, Araspes."

"And never wish to, boy, for you only believe in oracles because you
don't understand them, and in your short-sightedness call everything that
is beyond your comprehension a miracle.  And you place more confidence in
anything that seems to you miraculous, than in the plain simple truth
that lies before your face.  An oracle deceived your father and plunged
him into ruin, but the oracle is miraculous, and so you too, in perfect
confidence, allow it to rob you of happiness!"

"That is blasphemy, Araspes.  Are the gods to be blamed because we
misunderstand their words?"

"Certainly: for if they wished to benefit us they would give us, with the
words, the necessary penetration for discovering their meaning.  What
good does a beautiful speech do me, if it is in a foreign language that I
do not understand?"

"Leave off this useless discussion," said Darius, "and tell us instead,
Araspes, how it is that, though you congratulate every man on becoming a
bridegroom, you yourself have so long submitted to be blamed by the
priests, slighted at all entertainments and festivals, and abused by the
women, only because you choose to live and die a bachelor?"

Araspes looked down thoughtfully, then shook himself, took a long draught
from the wine-cup, and said, "I have my reasons, friends, but I cannot
tell them now."

"Tell them, tell them," was the answer.

