sought Marsyas and learned from him for what purpose and at what hour
Iras had summoned Alexas.  His master was continually whispering with the
languishing Macedonian.

When Anukis returned, Barine seemed troubled because she brought no
tidings from her mother and Dion; but the Nubian entreated her to have
patience, and gave her some books and a spindle, that she might have
occupation in her solitude.  She, Anukis, must go to the kitchen, because
she had heard yesterday that the cook had bought some mushrooms, which
might be poisonous; she knew the fungi and wanted to see them.

Then, passing into Charmian's chamber, she glided through the corridor
which connected the apartments of Cleopatra's confidential attendants,
and slipped into Iras's room.  When Alexas entered she was concealed
behind one of the hangings which covered the walls of the reception-room.

After the Syrian had retired and Iras had been called away, Anukis
returned to Barine and said that the mushrooms had really been poisonous,
and of the deadliest species.  They had been cooked, and she must go out
to seek an antidote.  Since a precious human life might be at stake,
Barine would not wish to keep her.

"Go," said the latter, kindly.  "But if you are the old obliging
Aisopion, you won't object to going a little farther."

"And inquiring at the house near the Paneum garden," added Anukis.
"That was already settled.  Longing is also a poison for a loving heart,
and its antidote is good news."

With these laughing words she left her favourite; but as soon as she was
out of doors her black brow became lined with earnest thought, and she
stood pondering a long time.  At last she went to the Bruchium to hire a
donkey to ride to Kanopus, where she hoped to find Archibius.  It was
difficult to reach the nearest stand; for a great crowd had assembled on
the quay between the Lochias and the Corner of the Muses, and groups of
the common people, sailors, and slaves were constantly flocking hither.
But she at last forced her way to the spot and, while the driver was
helping her to mount the animal she had chosen, she asked what had
attracted the throng, and he answered:

"They are tearing down the house of the old Museum fungus, Didymus."

"How can that be?" cried the startled woman.  "The good old man!"

"Good?"  repeated the driver, scornfully.  "He's a traitor, who has
caused all the trouble.  Philostratus, the brother of the great Alexas,
a friend of Mark Antony, told us so.  He wanted to prove it, so it must
be true.  Hear the shouts, and how the stones are flying!  Yes, yes.  His
granddaughter and her lover set an ambush for the King Caesarion.  They
would have killed him, but the watch interfered, and now he lies wounded
on his couch.  If mighty Isis does not lend her aid, the young prince's
life will soon be over."

Then, turning to the donkey, he dealt him two severe blows on the right
and left haunches, shouting: "Hi, Grey!  It does one good to hear that
royal backs have room for the cudgel too."

Meanwhile, the Nubian was hesitating whether she should not first turn
the donkey to the right and seek Didymus; but Barine was threatened by
greater peril, and her life was of more value than the welfare of the
aged pair.  This decided the question, and she rode forward.

The donkey and his driver did their best, but they came too late;
for in the little palace at Kanopus, Anukis learned from the porter
that Archibius had gone to the city with his old friend Timagenes,
the historian, who lived in Rome, and seemed to have come to Alexandria
as an envoy.

Charmian, too, had been here, but also failed to find the master of the
house, and followed him.  Evil tidings-which, owing to the loss of time
involved, might prove fatal.  If the donkey had only been swifter!  True,
Archibius's stable was full of fine animals, but who was she that she
should presume to use them?  Yet she had gained something which rendered
her the equal of many who were born free and occupied a higher station--
the reputation for trustworthiness and wisdom; and relying upon this, she
told the faithful old steward, as far as possible, what was at stake, and
soon after he himself took her, both mounted on swift mules, to the city
and the Paneum garden.

He chose the nearest road thither through the Gate of the Sun and the
Kanopic Way.  Usually at this hour it was crowded with people, but to-day
few persons were astir.  All the idlers had thronged to the Bruchium and
the harbour to see the returning ships of the vanquished fleet, hear
something new, witness the demonstrations of joy, the sacrifices and
processions, and--if Fortune favoured--meet the Queen and relieve their
overflowing hearts by acclamations.

When the carriage turned towards the left and approached the Paneum,
progress for the first time became difficult.  A dense crowd had gathered
around the hill on whose summit the sanctuary of Pan dominated the
spacious garden.  Anukis's eye perceived the tall figure of Philostratus.
Was the mischief-maker everywhere?  This time he seemed to encounter
opposition, for loud shouts interrupted his words.  Just as the carriage
passed he pointed to the row of houses in which the widow of Leonax
lived, but violent resistance followed the gesture.

Anukis perceived what restrained the crowd; for, as the equipage
approached its destination, a body of armed youths stopped it.  Their
finely-formed limbs, steeled by the training of the Palaestra, and the
raven, chestnut, and golden locks floating around their well-shaped
heads, were indeed beautiful.  They were a band of the Ephebi, formerly
commanded by Archibius, and to whose leadership more recently Dion had
been elected.  The youths had heard what had occurred--that imprisonment,
perhaps even worse disaster, threatened him.  At any other time it would
scarcely have been possible to oppose the decree of the Government and
guard their imperilled friend, but in these dark days the rulers must
deal with them.  Though they were loyal to the Queen, and had resolved,
spite of her defeat, to support her cause, as soon as she needed them,
they would not suffer Dion to be punished for a crime which, in their
eyes, was an honour.  Their determination to protect him grew more eager
with every vexatious delay on the part of the city council to deal with a
matter which concerned one of their own body.  They had not yet decided
whether to demand a full pardon or only a mild sentence for the man who
had wounded the "King of kings," the son of the sovereign.  Moreover, the
quiet Caesarion, still subject to his tutor, had not understood how to
win the favour of the Ephebi.  The weakling never appeared in the
Palaestra, which even the great Mark Antony did not disdain to visit.
The latter had more than once given the youths assembled there proofs of
his giant strength, and his son Antyllus also frequently shared their
exercises.  Dion had merely dealt Caesarion with his clenched fist one of
the blows which every one must encounter in the arena.

Philotas of Amphissa, the pupil of Didymus, had been the first to inform
them of the attack and, with fiery zeal, had used his utmost power to
atone for the wrong done to his master's granddaughter.  His appeal had
roused the most eager sympathy.  The Ephebi believed themselves strong
enough to defend their friend against any one and, if the worst should
come, they knew they would be sustained by the council, the Exegetus, the
captain of the guard--a brave Macedonian, who had once been an ornament
of their own band--and the numerous clients of Dion and his family.
There was not a single weakling among them.  They had already found an
opportunity to prove this; for, though they had arrived too late to
protect Didymus's property from injury, they had checked the fury of the
mob whose passions Philostratus had aroused, and forced back the crowd
whom the Syrian led to Barine's dwelling to devote it to the same fate.

Another equipage was already standing before the door of Berenike's
house--one of the carriages which were always at the disposal of the
Queen's officials--when Anukis left Archibius's vehicle.  Had some of
Alexas's myrmidons arrived, or was he himself on the way to examine Dion,
or even arrest him?  The driver, like all the palace servants, knew
Anukis, and she learned from him that he had brought Gorgias, the
architect.

Anukis had never met the latter, though, during the rebuilding of
Caesarion's apartments, she had often seen him, and heard much of him;
among other things, that Dion's beautiful palace was his work.  He was
a friend of the wounded man, so she need not fear him.

When she entered the atrium she heard that Berenike had gone out to drive
with Archibius and his Roman friend.  The leech had forbidden his patient
to see many visitors.  No one had been admitted except Gorgias and one of
Dion's freedmen.

But time pressed; people of the same rank and disposition understand
one another; the old porter and the Nubian were both loyal to their
employers, and, moreover, were natives of the same country; so it
required only a few words to persuade the door-keeper to conduct her
without delay to the bedside of the wounded man.

The freedman, a tall, weather-beaten greybeard, simply clad, who looked
like a pilot, was waiting outside the sick-room.  He had not yet been
admitted to Dion's presence, but this did not appear to vex him, for he
stood leaning quietly against the wall beside the door, gazing at the
broad-brimmed sailor's hat which he was slowly turning in his hands.

Scarcely had Dion heard Anukis's name, when an eager "Let her come in"
reached her ears through the half-open door.

The Nubian waited to be summoned, but her dark face must have showed
distinctly that something important and urgent had brought her here, for
the wounded man added to his first words of greeting the expression of a
fear that she had no good news.

Her reply was an eager nod of assent, accompanied by a doubtful glance at
Gorgias; and Dion now curtly told the architect the name of the newcomer,
and assured her that his friend might hear everything, even the greatest
secret.

Anukis uttered a sigh of relief and then, in a tone of the most earnest
warning, poured forth the story of the impending danger.  She would not
be satisfied when he spoke of the Ephebi, who were ready to defend him,
and the council, which would make the cause of one of its members its
