his breath:

"Condemned criminals are usually granted, before their end, a favourite
dish.  I have no cause to wish Barine anything good; but I would not
grudge that.  You, on the contrary, seem to delight in pouring wormwood
on her last mouthful."

"Certainly," she answered, her eyes sparkling brightly.  "Malice is the
purest of pleasures; at least to me, when exercised on this woman."

The Syrian, with a strange smile, held out his hand, saying: "Keep your
good-will towards me, Iras."

"Because," she retorted with a  sneer, "evil may follow my enmity.  I
think so, too.  I am not especially sensitive concerning myself, but
whoever dares"--here she raised her voice--"to harm one whom I--Just
listen to the cheers!  How she carries all hearts with her!  Though Fate
had made her a beggar, she would still be peerless among women.  She is
like the sun.  The clouds which intrude upon her pathway of radiance are
consumed and disappear."

While uttering the last sentence she had turned towards Barine, whose ear
the sharp voice again pierced like a thorn, as she commanded her to
prepare for the examination.

Almost at the same moment the door, caught by the wind, closed with a
loud bang.  The "introducer"--[Marshal of the court.]--had opened it,
and, after a hasty glance, exclaimed:

"The audience will not be given in this meeting place for all the winds
of heaven!  Her Majesty desires to receive her late visitor in the Hall
of Shells."

With these words he bowed courteously to Barine, and ushered her and her
two companions through several corridors and apartments into a well-
heated anteroom.

Here even the windows were thoroughly protected from the storm.  Several
body-guards and pages belonging to the corps of the "royal boys" stood
waiting to receive them.

"This is comfortable."  said Alexas, turning to Iras.  "Was the winter we
have just experienced intended to fill us with twofold gratitude for the
delights of the mild spring in this blessed room?"

"Perhaps so," she answered sullenly, and then added in a low tone: "Here
at Lochias the seasons do not follow their usual course.  They change
according to the pleasure of the supreme will.  Instead of four, the
Egyptians, as you know, have but three; in the palaces on the Nile they
are countless.  What is the meaning of this sudden entry of summer?
Winter would have pleased me better."

The Queen--Iras knew not why--had changed her arrangements for Barine's
reception.  This vexed her, and her features assumed a gloomy,
threatening expression as the young beauty, casting aside her cloak and
kerchief, stood awaiting Cleopatra in a white robe of fine material and
perfect fit.  The thick, fair braids, wound simply around her shapely
head, gave her an appearance of almost childish youth, and the sight made
Iras feel as if she, and Cleopatra also, were outwitted.

In the dimly lighted atrium of the house near the Paneum garden, she had
noticed only that Barine wore something white.  Had it been merely a
night robe, so much the better.  But she might have appeared in her
present garb at the festival of Isis.  The most careful deliberation
could have selected nothing more suitable or becoming.  And did this vain
woman go to rest with costly gold ornaments?  Else how did the circlet
chance to be on her arm?  Each of Cleopatra's charms seemed to Iras, who
knew them all, like a valuable possession of her own.  To see even the
least of them surpassed by another vexed her; and to behold in yonder
woman a form which she could not deny was no less beautiful, enraged,
nay, pierced her to the heart.

Since she had known that because of Barine she could hope for nothing
more from the man to whose love she believed she possessed a claim dating
from their childhood, she had hated the young beauty.  And now to the
many things which contributed to increase her hostile mood, was added the
disagreeable consciousness that during the last few hours she had treated
her contemptibly.  Had she only seen earlier what her foe's cloak
concealed, she would have found means to give her a different appearance.
But she must remain as she was; for Chairman had already entered.  Other
hours, however, would follow, and if the next did not decide the fate of
the woman whom she hated, future ones should.

For this purpose she did not need the aid of Charmian, her uncle
Archibius's sister, who had hitherto been a beloved associate and
maternal friend.  But what had happened?  Iras fancied that her pleasant
features wore a repellent expression which she had never seen before.
Was this also the singer's fault?  And what was the cause?

The older woman's manner decided the question whether she should still
bestow upon her returned relative the love of a grateful niece.  No, she
would no longer put any restraint upon herself.  Charmian should feel
that she (Iras) considered any favour shown to her foe an insult.  To
work against her secretly was not in her nature.  She had courage to show
an enemy her aversion, and she did not fear Charmian enough to pursue a
different course.  She knew that the artist Leonax, Barine's father, had
been Charmian's lover; but this did not justify her favouring the woman
who had robbed her niece of the heart of the man whom she--as Charmian
knew--had loved from childhood.

Charmian had just had a long conversation with her brother, and had
also learned in the palace that Barine had been summoned to the Queen's
presence in the middle of the night; so, firmly persuaded that evil was
intended to the young woman who had already passed through so many
agitating scenes of joy and sorrow, she entered the waiting-room, and her
pleasant though no longer youthful face, framed in smooth, grey hair, was
greeted by Barine as the shipwrecked mariner hails the sight of land.

All the emotions which had darkened and embittered her soul were soothed.
She hastened towards her friend's sister, as a frightened child seeks its
mother, and Charmian perceived what was stirring in her heart.

It would not do, under existing circumstances, to kiss her in the palace,
but she drew Leonax's daughter towards her to show Iras that she was
ready to extend a protecting hand over the persecuted woman.  But Barine
gazed at her with pleading glances, beseeching aid, whispering amid her
tears: "Help me, Charmian.  She has tortured, insulted, humiliated me
with looks and words--so cruelly, so spitefully!  Help me; I can bear no
more."

Charmian shook her kind head and urged her in a whisper to calm herself.
She had robbed Iras of her lover; she should remember that.  Cost what it
might, she must not shed another tear.  The Queen was gracious.  She,
Charmian, would aid her.  Everything would depend on showing herself to
Cleopatra as she was, not as slander represented her.  She must answer
her as she would Archibius or herself.

The kindly woman, as she spoke, stroked her brow and eyes with maternal
tenderness, and Barine felt as if goodness itself had quelled the tempest
in her soul.  She gazed around her as though roused from a troubled
dream, and now for the first time perceived the richly adorned room in
which she stood, the admiring glances of the boys in the Macedonian corps
of pages, and the bright fire blazing cheerily on the hearth.  The
howling of the storm increased the pleasant sense of being under a firm
roof, and Iras, who had whispered to the "introducer" at the door, no
longer seemed like a sharp thorn or a spiteful demon, but a woman by no
means destitute of charm, who repulsed her, but on whom she had inflicted
the keenest pang a woman's heart can suffer.  Then she again thought of
her wounded lover at home, and remembered that, whatever might happen,
