will be remembered to his dying hour.  Had they been darted at me, I
should have cursed my life.

"They blanched even the Roman's cheeks.  He was lividly pale as he
completed what he deemed his duty.  His own aristocratic hands were
degraded to the menial task of searching the garments of a woman, the
Queen, for forbidden wares, poisons or weapons.  He was aided by one of
Caesar's freedmen, Epaphroditus, who is said to stand so high in the
favour of Octavianus.

"The scoundrel also searched Iras and Charmian, yet all the time both
Romans constantly spoke in cajoling terms of Caesar's favour; and his
desire to grant Cleopatra everything which was due a Queen.

"At last she was taken back to Lochias, but I felt like a madman; for
the image of the unfortunate woman pursued me like my shadow.  It was
no longer a vision of the bewitching sovereign nay, it resembled the
incarnation of despair, tearless anguish, wrath demanding vengeance.
I will not describe it; but those eyes, those flashing, threatening eyes,
and the tangled hair on which Antony's blood had flowed-terrible,
horrible!  My heart grew chill, as if I had seen upon Athene's shield the
head of the Medusa with its serpent locks.

"It had been impossible for me to warn her in time, or even to seize the
traitor's arm--I have already said so--and yet, yet her shining image
gazed reproachfully at me for my cowardly delay.  Her glance still haunts
me, robbing me of calmness and peace.  Not until I gaze into Helena's
pure, calm eyes will that terrible vision of the face, flooded by light
in the midst of the tomb, cease to haunt me."

His friend laid his hand on his arm, spoke soothingly to him, and
reminded him of the blessings which this terrible day--he had said so
himself--had brought.

Dion was right to give this warning; for Gorgias's bearing and the very
tone of his voice changed as he eagerly declared that the frightful
events had been followed by more than happy ones for the city, his
friend, and Barine.

Then, with a sigh of relief, he continued: "I pursued my way home like a
drunken man.  Every attempt to approach the Queen or her attendants was
baffled, but I learned from Charmian's clever Nubian that Cleopatra had
been permitted, in Caesar's name, to choose the palace she desired to
occupy, and had selected the one at Lochias.

"I did not make much progress towards my house; the crowd in front of the
great gymnasium stopped me.  Octavianus had gone into the city, and the
people, I heard, had greeted him with acclamations and flung themselves
on their knees before him.  Our stiff-necked Alexandrians in the dust
before the victor!  It enraged me, but my resentment was diminished.

"The members of the gymnasium all knew me.  They made way and, ere I was
aware of it, I had passed through the door.  Tall Phryxus had drawn my
arm through his.  He appears and vanishes at will, is as alert as he is
rich, sees and hears everything, and manages to secure the best places.
This time he had again succeeded; for when he released me we were
standing opposite to a newly erected tribune.

"They were waiting for Octavianus, who was still in the hypostyle of
Euergetes receiving the homage of the epitrop, the members of the
Council, the gymnasiarch, and I know not how many others.

"Phryxus said that on Caesar's entry he had held out his hand to his
former tutor, bade him accompany him, and commanded that his sons should
be presented.  The philosopher had been distinguished above every one
else, and this will benefit you and yours; for he is Berenike's brother,
and therefore your wife's uncle.  What he desires is sure to be granted.
You will hear at once how studiously the Caesar distinguishes him.  I do
not grudge it to the man; he interceded boldly for Barine; he is lauded
as an able scholar, and he does not lack courage.  In spite of Actium and
the only disgraceful deed with which, to my knowledge, Mark Antony could
be reproached--I mean the surader of Turullius--Arius remained here,
though the Imperator might have held the friend of Julius Caesar's nephew
as a hostage as easily as he gave up the Emperor's assassin.

"Since Octavianus encamped before the city, your uncle has been in
serious danger, and his sons shared his peril.  Surely you must know the
handsome, vigorous young Ephebi.

"We were not obliged to wait long in the gymnasium ere the Caesar
appeared on the platform; and now--if your hand clenches, it is only what
I expect--now all fell on their knees.  Our turbulent, rebellious rabble
raised their hands like pleading beggars, and grave, dignified men
followed their example.  Whoever saw me and Phryxus will remember us
among the kneeling lickspittles;  for had we remained standing we should
certainly have been dragged down.  So we followed the example of the
others."

"And Octavianus?" asked Dion eagerly.

"A man of regal bearing and youthful aspect; beardless face of the finest
chiselling, a profile as beautiful as if created for the coin-maker; all
the lines sharp and yet pleasing; every inch an aristocrat; but the very
mirror of a cold nature, incapable of any lofty aspiration, any warm
emotion, any tenderness of feeling.  All in all, a handsome, haughty,
calculating man, whose friendship would hardly benefit the heart, but
from whose enmity may the immortals guard all we love!

"Again he led Arius by the hand.  The philosopher's sons followed the
pair.  When he stood on the stage, looking down upon the thousands
kneeling before him, not a muscle of his noble face--it is certainly that
--betrayed the slightest emotion.  He gazed at us like a farmer surveying
his flocks and, after a long silence, said curtly in excellent Greek that
he absolved the Alexandrians from all guilt towards him: first--he
counted as if he were summoning individual veterans to reward them--from
respect for the illustrious founder of our city, Alexander, the conqueror
of the world; secondly, because the greatness and beauty of Alexandria
filled him with admiration; and, thirdly--he turned to Arius as he spoke
--to give pleasure to his admirable and beloved friend.

"Then shouts of joy burst forth.

"Every one, from the humblest to the greatest, had had a heavy burden
removed from his mind, and the throng had scarcely left the gymnasium
when they were again laughing saucily enough, and there was no lack of
biting and innocent jests.

"The fat carpenter, Memnon--who furnished the wood-work for your palace--
exclaimed close beside me that formerly a dolphin had saved Arius from
the pirates; now Arius was saving marine Alexandria from the robbers.  So
the sport went on.  Philostratus, Barine's first husband, offered the
best butt for jests.  The agitator had good reason to fear the worst; and
now, clad in black mourning robes, ran after Arius, whom but a few months
ago he persecuted with the most vindictive hatred, continually repeating
this shallow bit of verse:

          "'If he is a wise man, let the wise aid the wise.'

"Reaching home was not easy.  The street was swarming with Roman
soldiers.  They fared well enough; for in the joy of their hearts many a
prosperous citizen who saw his property saved invited individual
warriors, or even a whole maniple, to the taverns or cook-shops, and the
stock of wine in Alexandrian cellars will be considerably diminished to-
night.

"Many, as I have already said, had been quartered in the houses, with
orders to spare the property of the citizens; and it was in this way
that the misfortune with which I commenced my narrative befell the
grandmother.  She died before my departure.

"All the gates of the city will now stand open to you, and the niece of
Arius and her husband will be received with ovations.  I don't grudge
Barine the good fortune; for the way in which your noble wife, who had
cast her spell over me too, flung aside what is always dear to the
admired city beauty and found on the loneliest of islands a new world in
love, is worthy of all admiration and praise.  For yourself, I dread new
happiness and honours; if they are added to those which Fate bestowed
upon you in such a wife and your son Pyrrhus, the gods would not be
themselves if they did not pursue you with their envy.  I have less
reason to fear them."

"Ungrateful fellow!" interrupted his friend.  "There will be numerous
mortals to grudge you Helena.  As for me, I have already felt many a
slight foreboding; but we have already paid by no means a small tribute
to the divine ones.  The lamp is still burning in the sitting-room.
Inform the sisters of their grandmother's death, and tell them the
pleasant tidings you have brought us, but reserve until the morning a
description of the terrible scenes you witnessed.  We will not spoil
their sleep.  Mark my words!  Helena's silent grief and her joy at our
escape will lighten your heart."

And so it proved.  True, Gorgias lived over again in his dreams the
frightful spectacle witnessed the day before; but when the sun of the
2d day of August rose in full radiance over Alexandria and, early in
the morning, boat after boat reached the Serpent Island, landing first
Berenike and her nephews, the sons of the honoured philosopher Arius,
then clients, officials, and friends of Dion, and former favourite guests
of Barine, to greet the young pair and escort them from the refuge which
had so long sheltered them back to the city and their midst, new and
pleasant impressions robbed the gloomy picture of a large portion of its
terrors.

"Tall Phryxus" had rapidly spread the news of the place where Dion and
Barine had vanished, and that they had long been happily wedded.  Many
deemed it well worth a short voyage to see the actors in so strange an
adventure and be the first to greet them.  Besides, those who knew Barine
and her husband were curious to learn how two persons accustomed to the
life of a great capital had endured for months such complete solitude.
Many feared or expected to see them emaciated and careworn, haggard or
sunk in melancholy, and hence there were a number of astonished faces
among those whose boats the freedman Pyrrhus guided as pilot through the
shallows which protected his island.

The return of this rare couple to their home would have afforded an
excellent opportunity for gay festivities.  Sincerely as the majority of
the populace mourned the fate of the Queen, and gravely as the more
thoughtful feared for Alexandria's freedom under Roman rule, all rejoiced
over the lenient treatment of the city.  Their lives and property were
safe, and the celebration of festivals had become a life habit with all
classes.  But the news of the death of Didymus's wife and the illness of
the old man, who could not bear up under the loss of his faithful
companion, gave Dion a right to refuse any gay welcome at his home.

Barine's sorrow was his also, and Didymus died a few days after his wife,
with whom he had lived in the bonds of love for more than half a century
--people said, "of a broken heart."

So Dion and his young wife entered his beautiful palace with no noisy
festivities.  Instead of the jubilant hymenaeus, the voice of his own
child greeted him on the threshold.

The mourning garments in which Barine welcomed him in the women's
apartment reminded him of the envy of the gods which his friend had
feared for him.  But he often fancied that his mother's statue in the
