emanates from Him as light proceeds from the sun; this Mohammed, on the
contrary, is a sword made flesh!  For me, then, there is no choice but to
submit to superior strength; but I can still hate and loathe their
accursed and soul-destroying superstition.--And so I do, and so I shall,
to the last throb of this old heart, which only longs for rest, the
sooner the better....

"But you?  And your father?  Verily, verily, the man who, even for an
instant, ceases to hate unbelief or false doctrine has sinned for his
whole life on this side of the grave and beyond it; sinned against the
only true and saving faith and its divine Founder.  Blasphemous and
flattering praise of the piety and moderation of our foes, the very
antichrist incarnate, who kill both body and soul.--With these your
father fouled his heart and tongue. . ."

"Fouled?" cried Orion and the blood tingled in his cheeks.  "He kept his
heart and tongue alike pure and honorable; never did a false word pass
his lips.  Justice, justice to all, even to his enemies, was the ruling
principle, the guiding clue of his blameless life; and the noblest of the
heathen Greeks admired the man who could so far triumph over himself as
to recognize what was fine and good in a foe."

"And they were right," replied the patriarch, "for they were not yet
acquainted with truth.  In a worldly sense, even now, each of us may aim
at such magnanimity; but the man who forgives those who tamper with the
sacred truth, which is the bread, meat, and wine of the Christian's soul,
sins against that truth; and, if he is a leader of men, he draws on those
who look up to him, and who are only too ready to follow his example,
into everlasting fire.  Where your father ought to have been a
recalcitrant though conquered enemy, he became an ally; nay, so far as
the leader of the infidels was concerned, a friend--how many tears it
cost me!  And our hapless people were forced to see this attitude of
their chief, and imitated it.--Forgive their seducer, Merciful God!--
forming their conduct on his.  Thousands fell away from our saving faith
and went over to those, who in their eyes could not be reprobate, could
not be damned, since they saw them dwelling and working hand-in-hand with
their wise and righteous leader; and it was simply and solely to warn his
misguided people that I did not hesitate to wound my own heart, to raise
the voice of reproof at the grave of a dear friend, and to refuse the
honor and blessing of which his just and virtuous life rendered him more
worthy than thousands of others.  I have spoken, and now your foolish
anger must be appeased; now you will grasp the hand held out to you by
the shepherd of the souls entrusted to him with an easy and willing
heart."

And again he offered his hand to Orion, who, however, again took it
doubtfully, and instead of looking the prelate in the face, cast down his
eyes in gloomy bewilderment.  The patriarch appeared not to observe the
young man's repulsion and clasped his hand warmly.  Then he changed the
subject, speaking of the grieving widow, of the decadence of Memphis,
of Orion's plans for the future, and finally of the gems dedicated to
the Church by the deceased Mukaukas.  The dialogue had taken a calm,
conversational tone; the patriarch was sitting in the dead man's arm-
chair, and there was nothing forced or unnatural in his asking, in the
course of discussing the jewels, what had become of the great emerald.

Orion replied, in the same tone, that this stone was not, strictly
speaking, any part of his father's gift; but Benjamin expressed an
opposite opinion.

All the tortures Orion had endured since that luckless deed in the
tablinum revived in his soul during this discussion; however, it was some
small relief to him to perceive, that neither his mother nor Dame
Susannah seemed to have told the patriarch the guilt he had incurred by
reason of that gem.  Susannah, of course, had said nothing of the
incident in order to avoid speaking of her daughter's false evidence;
still, this miserable business might easily have come to the ears of the
stern old man, and to the guilty youth no sacrifice seemed too great to
smother any enquiry for the ill-fated jewel.  He unhesitatingly explained
that the emerald had disappeared, but that he was quite ready to make
good its value.  Benjamin might fix his own estimate, and name any sum he
wished for some benevolent purpose, and he, Orion, was ready to pay it to
him on the spot.

The prelate, however, calmly persisted in his demand, enjoined Orion to
have a diligent search made for the gem, and declared that he regarded it
as the property of the Church.  He added that, when his patience was at
an end, he should positively insist on its surrender and bring every
means at his disposal into play to procure it.

Orion had no choice but to say that he would prosecute his search for the
lost stone; but his acquiescence was sullen, as that of a man who accedes
to an unreasonable demand.

At first the patriarch took this coolly; but presently, when he rose to
take leave, his demeanor changed; he said, with stern solemnity:

"I know you now, Son of Mukaukas George, and I end as I began:
The humility of the Christian is far from you, you are ignorant of the
power and dignity of our Faith, you do not even know the vast love that
animates it, and the fervent longing to lead the straying sinner back to
the path of salvation.--Your admirable mother has told me, with tears in
her eyes, of the abyss over which you are standing.  It is your desire to
bind yourself for life to a heretic, a Melchite--and there is another
thing which fills her pious mother's heart with fears, which tortures it
as she thinks of you and your eternal welfare.  She promised to confide
this to my ear in church, and I shall find leisure to consider of it on
my return home; but at any rate, and be it what it may, it cannot more
greatly imperil your soul than marriage with a Melchite.

"On what have you set your heart?  On the mere joys of earth!  You sue
for the hand of an unbeliever, the daughter of an unbelieving heretic;
you go over to Fostat--nay, hear me out--and place your brain and your
strong arm at the service of the infidels--it is but yesterday; but I,
I, the shepherd of my flock, will not suffer that he who is the highest
in rank, the richest in possessions, the most powerful by the mere
dignity of his name, shall pervert thousands of the Jacobite brethren.
I have the will and the power too, to close the sluice gates against such
a disaster.  Obey me, or you shall rue it with tears of blood."

The prelate paused, expecting to see Orion fall on his knees before him;
but the young man did nothing of the kind.  He stood looking at him,
open-eyed and agitated, but undecided, and Benjamin went on with added
vehemence:

"I came to you to lift up my voice in protest, and I desire, I require,
I command you: sever all ties with the enemies of your nation and of your
faith, cast out your love for the Melchite Siren, who will seduce your
immortal part to inevitable perdition. . . ."

Till this Orion had listened with bowed head and in silence to the
diatribe which the patriarch had hurled at him like a curse; but at this
point his whole being rose in revolt, all self-control forsook him, and
he interrupted the speaker in loud tones:

"Never, never, never will I do such a thing!  Insult me as you will.
What I am, I will still be: a faithful son of the Church to which my
fathers belonged, and for which my brothers died.  In all humility I
acknowledge Jesus Christ as my Lord.  I believe in him, believe in the
God-made-man who died to save us, and who brought love into the world,
and I will remain unpersuaded and faithful to my own love.  Never will I
forsake her who has been to me like a messenger from God, like a good
angel to teach me how to lay hold on what is earnest and noble in life-
her whom my father, too, held dear.  Power, indeed, is yours.  Demand of
me anything reasonable, and within my attainment, and I will try to force
myself to obedience; but I never can and never will be faithless to her,
to prove my faith to you; and as to the Arabs...."

"Enough!"  exclaimed the prelate.  "I am on my way to Upper Egypt.  Make
your choice by my return.  I give you till then to come to a right mind,
to think the matter over; and it is quite deliberately that I bid you to
forget the Melchite.  That you, of all men, should marry a heretic would
be an abomination not to be borne.  With regard to your alliance with the
Arabs, and whether it becomes you--being what you are--to take service
with them, we will discuss it at a future day.  If, by the time I return,
you have thought better of the matter as regards your marriage--and you
are free to choose any Jacobite maiden--then I will speak to you in a
different tone.  I will then offer you my friendship and support; instead
of the Church's curse I will pronounce her blessing on you--the pardon
and grace of the Almighty, a smooth path to eternity and peace, and the
prospect of giving new joy to the aching heart of your sorrowing mother.
My last word is that you must and shall give up the woman from whom you
can look for nothing but perdition."

"I cannot, and shall not, and I never will!"  replied Orion firmly.

"Then I can, and shall, and will make you feel how heavily the curse
falls which, in the last resort, I shall not hesitate to pronounce upon
you!"

"It is in your power," said Orion.  "But if you proceed to extremities
with me, you will drive me to seek the blessing for which my soul thirsts
more ardently than you, my lord, can imagine, and the salvation I crave,
with her whom you hold reprobate, and on the further side of the Nile."

"I dare you!"  cried the patriarch, quitting the room with a resolute
step and flaming cheeks.




CHAPTER II.

Orion was alone in the spacious room, feeling as though the whole world
were sinking into nothingness after the rack of storm and tempest.  At
first he was merely conscious of having gone through a fearful
experience, which threatened to fling him far outside the sphere of
everything he was wont to reverence and hold sacred.  For love and honor
of his guardian angel he had declared war to the patriarch, and that
man's power was as great as his stature.  Still, the image of Paula rose
high and supreme above that of the terrible old man, in Orion's fancy,
and his father, as it seemed to him, was like an ally in the battle he
was destined to wage in his own strength.

The young man's vivid imagination and excellent memory recapitulated
every word the prelate had uttered.  The domineering old man, overflowing
with bigoted zeal, had played with him as a cat with a mouse.  He had
tried to search his soul and sift him to the bottom before he attacked
the subject with which he ought to have begun, and concerning which
he was fully informed when he offered him his hand that first time--
as cheerfully, too, as though he had no serious grievance seething in
his soul.  Orion resolved that he would cling fast to his faith without
Benjamin's interposition, and not allow his hold on the two other
Christian graces, Hope and Love, to be weakened by his influence.

By some miracle his mother had not yet told the prelate of his father's
curse, in spite of the anguish of her aching heart; and what a weapon
would not that have been in Benjamin's hand.  It was with the deepest
