her all through the city on foot and throw her into prison."

The faithful soul sobbed aloud and covered her face with her hands.
Terror fell upon them all; Joanna left the viridarium in speechless
dismay, and Martina exclaimed:

"What a horrible, vile country!  Good God, they are even falling on us
women.  Children, children--give me a seat, I feel quite ill.--In prison!
that beautiful, matchless creature dragged through the streets to prison.
If the warrant is all right she must go--she must!  Not an angel from
heaven could save her.  But that she should be marched through the town,
that noble and splendid creature, as if she were a common thief--it is
not to be borne.  So much as one woman can do for another at any rate
shall be done, so long as I am here to stand on two feet!--Katharina,
child, do not you understand?  Why do you stand gaping at me
as if I were a feathered ape?  What do your fat horses eat oats for?
What, you do not understand me yet?  Be off at once, this minute, and
have the horses put in the large closed chariot in which I came here, and
bring it to the door.--Ah!  At last you see daylight; now, take to your
heels and fly!"

And she clapped her hands as if she were driving hens off a garden-bed;
Katharina had no alternative but to obey.

Martina then felt for her purse, and when she had found it she added
confidently:

"Thank God!  I can talk to these villains!  This is a language," and she
clinked the gold pieces, intelligible to all.  "Come, where are the
rascals?"

The universal tongue had the desired effect.  The chief of the guard
allowed it to persuade him to convey Paula to prison in the chariot, and
to promise that she should find decent accommodation there, while he also
granted old Betta the leave she insisted on with floods of tears, to
share the girl's captivity.

Paula maintained her dignity and composure under this unexpected shock.
Only when it came to taking leave of Pulcheria and Mary, who clung to her
in frantic grief and begged to go with her and Betta to prison, she could
not restrain her tears.

The scribe had informed her that she was charged dy Bishop Plotinus with
having plotted the escape and flight of the nuns, and Joanna's knees
trembled under her when Paula whispered in her ear:

"Beware of Katharina!  No one else could have betrayed us; if she has
also revealed what Rufinus did for the sisters we must deny it,
positively and unflinchingly.  Fear nothing: they will get not a word out
of me."  Then she added aloud: "I need not beg you to remember me
lovingly; thanks to you both--the warmest, deepest thanks for all....
You, Pul. . . ."  And she clasped the mother and daughter to her bosom,
while Mary, clinging to her, hid her little face in her skirts, weeping
bitterly. . . .  "You, Dame Joanna, took me in, a forlorn creature, and
made me happy till Fate fell on us all--you know, ah! you know too well.
--The kindness you have shown to me show now to my little Mary.  And
there is one thing more--here comes the interpreter again!--A moment yet,
I beg!--If the messenger should return and bring news of my father or,
my God! my God!--my father himself, let me know, or bring him to me!--Or,
if I am dead by the time he comes, tell him that to find him, to see him
once more, was my heart's dearest wish.  And beg my father," she breathed
the words into Joanna's ear, "to love Orion as a son.  And tell them both
that I loved them to the last, deeply, perfectly, beyond words!"  Then
she added aloud as: she kissed each on her eyes and lips:  "I love you
and shall always love you--you, Joanna, and you, my Pulcheria, and you,
Mary, my sweet, precious darling."

At this the water-wagtail humed forward with outstretched arms, but Dame
Joanna put out a significantly warning hand; and they who were one in
heart clasped each other in a last embrace as though they were indeed but
one and no stranger could have any part in it.

Once more Katharina tried to approach Paula; but Martina, whose eyes
filled with tears as she looked on the parting, held her back by the
shoulder and whispered:

"Do not disturb them, child.  Such hearts spontaneously attract those for
whom they yearn.  I, old as I am, would gladly be worthy to be called."

The interpreter now sternly insisted on starting.  The three women
parted; but still the little girl held tightly to Paula, even when she
went up to the matron and kissed her with a natural impulse.  Martina
took her head between her hands, kissed her fondly, and said in a voice
she could scarcely control: "God protect and keep you, child!  I thank
Him for having brought us together.  A soul so pure and clear as yours is
not to be found in the capital, but we still know how to be friends to
our friends--at any rate I and my husband do--and if Heaven but grants me
the opportunity you shall prove it.  You never need feel alone in the
world; never, so long as Justinus and his wife are still in it.  Remember
that, child; I mean it in solemn earnest."

With this, she again embraced Paula, who as she went out to enter the
chariot also bestowed a farewell kiss on Eudoxia and Mandane, for they,
too, stood modestly weeping in the background; then she gave her hand to
the hump-backed gardener, and to the Masdakite, down whose cheeks tears
were rolling.  At this moment Katharina stood in her path, seized her arm
in mortified excitement, and said insistantly:

"And have you not a word for me?"

Paula freed herself from her clutch and said in a low voice: "I thank you
for lending me the chariot.  As you know, it is taking me to prison, and
I fear it is your perfidy that has brought me to this.  If I am wrong,
forgive me--if I am right, your punishment will hardly be lighter than my
fate.  You are still young, Katharina; try to grow better."

And with this she stepped into the chariot with old Betta, and the last
she saw was little Mary who threw herself sobbing into Joanna's arms.




CHAPTER XIV.

Susannah had never particularly cared for Paula, but her fate shocked her
and moved her to pity.  She must at once enquire whether it was not
possible to send her some better food than the ordinary prison-fare.
That was but Christian charity, and her daughter seemed to take her
friend's misfortune much to heart.  When she and Martina returned home
she looked so cast down and distracted that no stranger now would ever
have dreamed of comparing her with a brisk little bird.

Once more a poisoned arrow had struck her.  Till now she had been wicked
only in her own eyes; now she was wicked in the eyes of another.  Paula
knew it was she who had betrayed her.  The traitoress had been met by
treachery.  The woman she hated had a right to regard her as spiteful and
malignant, and for this she hated her more than ever.

Till now she had nowhere failed to find an affectionate greeting and
welcome; and to-day how coldly she had been repulsed--and not by Paula
alone, but also by Martina, who no doubt had noticed something, and whose
dry reserve had been quite intolerable to the girl.

It was all the old bishop's fault; he had not kept his promise that her
tale-bearing should remain as secret as a confession.  Indeed, he must
have deliberately revealed it, for no one but herself knew of the facts.
Perhaps he had even mentioned her name to the Arabs; in that case she
would have to bear witness before the judges, and then in what light
would she appear to Orion, to her mother, to Joanna and Martina?

She had not failed to understand that old Rufinus must have perished in
the expedition, and she was truly grieved.  His wife and daughter had
always been kind neighbors to her; and she would not have willingly
brought sorrow on them.  If she were called up to give evidence it might
go hard with them, and she wished no harm to any one but those who had
cheated her out of Orion's love.  This idea of standing before a court of
justice was the worst of all; this must be warded off at any cost.

Where could Bishop Plotinus be?  He had returned to Memphis the day
before, and yet he had not been to see her mother, to whom he usually
paid a daily visit.  This absence seemed to her ominous.  Everything
depended on her reminding the old man of his promise as soon as possible;
for if at the trial next morning--which of course, he must attend--he
should happen to mention her name, the guards, the interpreter, and the
scribe would invade her home too and then-horror!  She had given evidence
once already, and could never again go through all that had ensued.

But how was she to get at the bishop in the course of the night or early
to-morrow at latest?

The chariot had not yet returned, and if--it still wanted two hours of
midnight; yes--it must be done.

She began talking to her mother of the prelate's absence; Susannah, too,
was uneasy about it, particularly since she had heard that the old man
had come home ill and that his servant had been out and about in search
of a physician.  Katharina promptly proposed to go and see him: the
horses were still in harness, her nurse could accompany her.  She really
must go and learn how her venerable friend was going on.

Susannah thought this very sweet; still, she said it was very late for
such a visit; however, her spoilt child had said that she "must" and the
answer was a foregone conclusion.  Dame Susannah gave way; the nurse was
sent for, and as soon as the chariot came round Katharina flung her arms
round her mother's neck, promising her not to stay long, and in a few
minutes the chariot stopped at the door of the bishop's palace.  She bid
the nurse wait for her and went alone into the vast, rambling house.

The spacious hall, lighted feebly by a single lamp, was silent and
deserted, even the door-keeper had left his post; however, she was
familiar with every step and turning, and went on through the impluvium
into the library where, at this hour, the bishop was wont to be found.
But it was dark, and her gentle call met with no reply.  In the next
room, to which she timidly felt her way, a slave lay snoring; beside him
were a wine jar and a hand-lamp.  The sight somewhat reassured her.
Beyond was the bishop's bedroom, which she had never been into.  A dim
light gleamed through the open door and she heard a low moaning and
gasping.  She called the house-keeper by name once, twice; no answer.
The sleeping slave did not stir; but a familiar voice addressed her from
the bedroom, groaning rather than saying:

"Who is there?  Is he come?  Have you found him at last?"

The whole household had fled in fear of the pestilence; even the acolyte,
who had indeed a wife and children.  The housekeeper had been forced to
leave the master to seek the physician, who had already been there once,
and the last remaining slave, a faithful, goodhearted, heedless sot, had
been left in charge; but he had brought a jar of wine up from the
unguarded cellar, had soon emptied it, and then, overcome by drink and
the heat of the night, he had fallen asleep.

Katharina at once spoke her name and the old man answered her, saying
kindly, but with difficulty: "Ah, it is you, you, my child!"

She took up the lamp and went close to the sick man.  He put out his lean
arm to welcome her; but, as her approach brought the light near to him he
