'And if I do persevere?'

'Then--ah! what do I know? Who can tell how far malice can go? And
there are towers and bastilles where hope never enters. Moreover, your
researches underground are known.'

'Sir,' said Berenger, the heart-sinking quelled by the effort of
resistance, 'Madame de Selinville has my answer--I must take the
consequences. Tell her, if she truly wishes me well, the honourable way
of saving us would be to let our English friends know what has befallen
us.'

'You forget, M. le Baron, even if she could proclaim the dishonour of
her family, interference from a foreign power might only lead to a surer
mode of removing you,' said Aime, lowering his voice and shuddering.

'Even so, I should thank her. Then would the bitterest pang be taken
away. Those at our home would not deem us faithless recreants.'

'Thank her!' murmured the lad in an inward voice. 'Very well, sir, I
will carry her your decision. It is your final one. Disgrace, prison,
death--rather than freedom, love, wealth!'

'The semblance of dishonour rather than the reality!' said Berenger,
firmly.

The light-footed page disappeared, and in a few moments a very different
tread came up from below, and Philip appeared.

'What is it, Berry? Methought I heard a voice.'

'Forgive me, brother,' said Berenger, holding out his hand; 'I have
thrown away another offer.'

'Tush, the thing to pardon would be having accepted one. I only wish
they would leave us in peace! What was it this time?'

'A messenger through young Selinville. Strange, to trust her secrets to
that lad. But hush, here he is again, much sooner than I thought. What,
sir, have you been with your lady again?'

'Yes, sir,' the young said, with a trembling voice, and Berenger saw that
his eyes were red with weeping; 'she bids me tell you that she yields.
She will save you eve while you have and despite her! There is only one
thing---'

'And what is that?'

'You must encumber yourself with the poor Aime. You must let me serve
you instead of her. Listen, sir, it cannot be otherwise.' Then with a
brisker, more eager voice, he continued: 'Monsieur knows that the family
burial-place is Bellaise? Well, to-morrow, at ten o'clock, all the
household, all the neighbourhood, will come and sprinkle holy water on
the bier. The first requiem will be sung, and then will all repair to
the convent. There will be the funeral mass, the banquet, the dole.
Every creature in the castle--nay, in all the neighbourhood for twenty
miles round--will be at the convent, for the Abbess has given out that
the alms are to be double, and the bread of wheat. Not a soul will
remain here, save the two gendarmes on guard at that door, and the poor
Aime, whom no one will miss, even if any person could be distinguished
in their black cloaks. Madame la Comtesse has given him this key, which
opens a door on the upper floor of the keep, unknown to the guards, who,
for that matter, shall have a good tankard of spiced wine to console
and occupy them. Then is the way clear to the castle court, which is not
over looked by their window, the horses are in the stables, and we are
off,--that is if M. le Baron will save a poor youth from the wrath of M.
de Nid-de-Merle.'

'You are and honest fellow!' cried Philip, shaking him vehemently by the
hand. 'You shall go with us to England, and we will make a brave man of
you.'

'We shall owe you our lives,' said Berenger, warmly, 'and be ever bound
to you. Tell your lady that THIS is magnanimity; that now I truly thank
her as our preserver, and shall bless her all the days of the life she
gives us. But my servants?'

'Guibert is a traitor,' said Aime; 'he has been so ever since you
were at Paris. Breathe no word to him; but he, as a Catholic, shall be
invited to the funeral. Your stout Englishman should by all means be
with us.'

'My Norman also,' added Berenger,--'my dear foster-brother, who has
languished in the dungeon for three years;' and when the explanation had
been made, Aime assented, though half-unwillingly, to the necessity,
and presently quitted them to bear back their answer to his lady. Philip
shook his hand violently again, patted him on the back, so as almost
to take away his breath, and bade him never fear, they would be sworn
brothers to him for ever; and then threw up his hat into the air, and
was so near astonishing the donjon walls with a British hurrah, that
Berenger had to put his hand over his mouth and strangle the shout in
his very throat.

The chief of that night was spent in enlarging the hole in Osbert's
wall, so as to admit of his creeping through it; and they also prepared
their small baggage for departure. Their stock of money, though some had
been spent on renewing their clothes, and some in needful gratuities to
the servants and gendarmes, was sufficient for present needs, and they
intended to wear their ordinary dress. They were unlikely to meet any
of the peasants in the neighbourhood; and, indeed, Berenger had so
constantly ridden out in his black mask, that its absence, now that his
scars were gone, was as complete a change as could be effected in one
whose height was of unusual.

'There begins the kneel,' said Philip, standing at the window. 'It's our
joy-bell, Berry! Every clang seems to me to say, "Home! home! home!"

'For you, Phil,' said Berenger; 'but I must be satisfied of Eutacie's
fate first. I shall go first to Nissard--whither we were bound when we
were seized--then to La Rochelle, whence you may---'

'No more of that,' burst out Philip. 'What! would you have me leave you
now, after all we have gone through together? Not that you will find
her. I don't want to vex you, brother, on such a day as this, but you
conjurer's words are coming true in the other matter.'

'How? What mean you, Phil?'

'What's the meaning of Aime?' asked Philip. 'Even I am French scholar
enough for that. And who sends him?'

Meantime the court was already filling with swarms of persons of
every rank and degree, but several anxious hours had passed before
the procession was marshaled; and friars and monks, black, white, and
gray,--priests in rich robes and tall caps,--black-cloaked gentlemen and
men-at-arms,--all bearing huge wax tapers,--and peasants and beggars of
every conceivable aspect,--filed out of the court, bearing with them the
richly-emblazoned bier of the noble and puissant knight, the Beausire
Charles Eutache de Ribaumont Nid-de-Merle, his son walking behind in a
long black mantle, and all who counted kindred of friendship following
two and two; then all the servants, every one who properly belonged to
the castle, were counted out by the brothers from their windows, and
Guibert among them.

'Messieurs,' a low, anxious voice sounded in the room.

'We will only fetch Osbert.'

It was a terrible only, as precious moments slipped away before there
appeared in the lower chamber Berenger and Humfrey, dragging between
them a squalid wretch, with a skin like stained parchment over a
skeleton, tangled hair and beard, staring bewildered eyes, and fragments
of garments, all dust, dirt, and rags.

'Leave me, leave me, dear master,' said the object, stretching his whole
person towards the fire as they let him sink down before it. 'You would
but ruin yourself.'

'It is madness to take him,' said Aime, impatiently.

'I go not without him,' said Berenger. 'Give me the soup, Philip.'

Some soup and wine had been placed by the fire, and likewise a shirt and
a suit of Humfrey's clothes were spread before it. Aime burst out into
the yard, absolutely weeping with impatience, when, unheeding all his
remonstrances, his three companions applied themselves to feeding,
rubbing, and warming Osbert, and assuring him that the pains in his
limbs would pass away with warmth and exercise. He had been valiant
of heart in his dungeon; but his sudden plunge into upper air was like
rising from the grave, and brought on all the effects of his dreary
captivity, of which he had hardly been sensible when he had first
listened to the voice of hope.

Dazzled, crippled, helpless, it seemed almost impossible that he should
share the flight, but Berenger remained resolute; and when Aime returned
from his fourth frantic promenade, he was told that all was ready.

But for the strength of Berenger and Humfrey the poor fellow could never
have been carried up and up, nearly to the top of the keep, then along
a narrow gallery, then down again even to the castle hall, now empty,
though with the candle-sticks still around where the bier had been.
Aime knelt for a moment where the head had been, hiding his face; Osbert
rested in a chair; and Philip looked wistfully up at his own sword hung
over the chimney.

'Resume your swords, Messieurs,' said Aime, observing him; 'Madame
desires it; and take pistols also.'

They gladly obeyed; and when, after this short delay, they proceeded,
Osbert moved somewhat less painfully, but when they arrived at the
stable only four horses stood there.

'Ah! this miserable!' cried Aime, passionately, 'he ruins all my
arrangements.'

'Leave me,' again entreated Landry. 'Once outside, I can act the beggar
and cripple, and get back to Normandy.'

'Better leave me,' said Humfrey; 'they cannot keep me when you are out
of their clutches.'

'Help me, Humfrey,' said Berenger, beginning to lift his foster-brother
to the saddle, but there the poor man wavered, cried out that his head
swam, and he could not keep his seat, entreating almost in agony to be
taken down.

'Lean on me,' said Berenger, putting his arms round him. 'There! you
will be able to get to the Grange du Temple, where you will be in safe
shelter.'

'Sir, sir,' cried Aime, ready to tear his hair, 'this is ruin! My lady
meant you to make all speed to La Rochelle and there embark, and this is
the contrary way!'

'That cannot be helped,' said Berenger; 'it is the only safe place for
my foster-brother.'

Aime, with childish petulance, muttered something about ingratitude in
crossing his lady's plans; but, as no one attended to him, he proceeded
to unfasten his horse, and then exclaimed, half crying, 'Will no one
help me?'

'Not able to saddle a horse! a pretty fellow for a cavalier!' exclaimed
Philip, assisting, however, and in a few minutes they were all issuing
from a low side gate, and looking back with bounding hearts at the
drooping banner on the keep of Nid-de-Merle.

Only young Aime went with bowed head and drooping look, as though
pouting, and Berenger, putting Osbert's bridle into Humfrey's hand,
stepped up to him, saying, 'Hark you, M. de Selinville, I am sorry if
we seemed to neglect you. We owe you and your lady all gratitude, but
I must be the judge of my own duty, and you can only be with me if you
conform.'

The young seemed to be devouring his tears, but only said, 'I was vexed
to see my lady's plan marred, and your chance thrown away.'

'Of that I must judge,' said Berenger.

They were in a by-lane, perfectly solitary. The whole country was at the
funeral. Through the frosty air there came an occasional hum or murmur
from Berenger, or the tinkle of a cow-bell in the fields, but no human
being was visible. It was certain, however, that the Rotrous, being
Huguenots, and no vassals of Nid-de-Merle, would not be at the
obsequies; and Berenger, walking with swift strides, supporting Osbert
on his horse, continued to cheer him with promises of rest and relief
there, and listened to no entreaties from Philip or Humfrey to take one
of their horses. Had not Osbert borne him on his shoulders through the
butchery at Paris, and endured three years of dungeon for his sake?

As for Philip, the slow pace of their ride was all insufficient for his
glee. He made his horse caracole at every level space, till Berenger
reminded him that they might have far to ride that night, and even then
he was constantly breaking into attempts at shouting and whistling as
often repressed, and springing up in his stirrups to look over the high
hedges.

The Grange was so well concealed in its wooded ravine, that only when
close upon the gate the party became aware that this farm-yard, usually
so solitary, formed an exception to the general desertion of the
country. There was a jingle and a stamp of horses in the court, which
could hardly be daylight echoes of the Templars. Berenger feared that
the Guisards might have descended Rotrou, and was stepping forward to
reconnoiter, while young De Selinville, trembling, besought him not to
run into danger, but to turn and hasten to La Rochelle. By this time,
however, the party had been espied by two soldiers stationed at the
gate, but not before Berenger had had time to remark that they did not
wear either the gold _fleur-de-lys_ like his late guards, or the white
cross of Lorraine; nor had they the strange air of gay ferocity usual
with the King's mercenaries. And almost by instincts, at a venture, he
made the old Huguenot sign he had learnt form his father, and answered,
'For God and the Religion.'

The countersign was returned. 'Bearn and Bourbon is the word to-day,
comrade,' replied the sentinel. '_Eh quoi_! have you had an encounter,
that you bring a wounded man?'

'Not wounded, but nearly dead in a Guisard prison,' said Berenger, with
an unspeakable sense of relief and security, as the sentries admitted
them into the large walled court, where horses were eating hay, being
watered and rubbed down; soldiers snatching a hasty meal in corners;
gentlemen in clanking breastplates coming in and out of the house,
evidently taking orders from a young man in a gray and silver suit,
whose brown eagle face, thin cheeks, arched nose, and black eyes of
keenest fire, struck Berenger at once with a sense of recognition as
well as of being under a glance that seemed to search out everybody and
everything at once.

'More friends!' and the tone again recalled a flood of recollections. 'I
thank and welcome you. What! You have met the enemy--where is he?'

'My servant is not wounded. Sire,' said Berenger, removing his hat and
bending low. 'This is the effect of long captivity. We have but just
escaped.'

'Then we are the same case! Pardon me, sir, I have seen you before, but
for once I am at fault.'

'When I call myself De Ribaumont, your Grace will not wonder.'

'The dead alive! If I mistake not, it was in the Inferno itself that we
last met! But we have broken through the gates at last! I remember poor
King Charles was delighted to hear that you lived! But where have you
been a captive?'

'At Nid-de-Merle, Sire; my kinsmen accused me of treason in order to
hinder my search for my wife. We escaped even now during the funeral of
the Chevalier.'

'By favour of which we are making our way to Parthenay unsuspected,
though, by my faith, we gather so like a snowball, that we could be a
match for a few hundreds of Guisards. Who is with you, M. de Ribaumont?'

'Let me present to your Majesty my English brother, Philip Thistlewood,'
said Berenger, drawing the lad forward, making due obeisance, though
entirely ignorant who was the plainly-dressed, travel-soiled stranger,
so evidently a born lord of men.

'An Englishman is ever welcome,' was his gracious reception.

'And,' added Berenger, 'let me also present the young De Selinville, to
whom I owe my escape. Where is he, Philip?'

He seemed to be busy with the horses, and Berenger could not catch his
eye.

'Selinville! I thought that good Huguenot house was extinct.'

'This is a relation of the late Count de Selinville, my cousin's
husband, Sire. He arranged my evasion, and would be in danger at
Nid-de-Merle. Call him, Philip.'

Before this was done, however, the King's attention was otherwise
claimed, and turning to one of his gentlemen he said, 'Here, d'Augigne,
I present to you an acquaintance made in Tartarus. See to his
entertainment ere we start for Parthenay.'

Agrippa d'Aubigne, still young, but grave and serious-looking greeted
M. de Ribaumont as men meet in hours when common interests make rapid
friendships; and from him Berenger learnt, in a few words, that the King
of Navarre's eyes had been opened at last to the treachery of the court,
and his own dishonourable bondage. During a feverish attack, one night
when D'Aubigne and D'Armagnac were sitting up with him, his resolution
was taken; and on the first hunting day after his recovery, he, with
these two, the Baron de Rosny and about thirty more of his suite, had
galloped away, and had joined the Monsieur and the Prince of Conde at
Alencon. He had abjured the Catholic faith, declared that nothing except
ropes should bring him back to Paris, and that he left there the mass
and his wife--the first he could dispense with, the last he meant to
have; and he was now on his way to Parthenay to meet his sister, whom
he had sent Rosny to demand. By the time Berenger had heard this, he had
succeeded in finding honest Rotrou, who was in a state of great triumph,
and readily undertook to give Osbert shelter, and as soon as he should
have recovered to send him to head-quarters with some young men who
he knew would take the field as soon as they learnt that the King of
Navarre had set up his standard. Even the inroads made into the good
farmer's stores did not abate his satisfaction in entertaining the prime
hope of the Huguenot cause; but Berenger advanced as large a sum as
he durst out of his purse, under pretext of the maintenance of Osbert
during his stay at the Grange. He examined Rotrou upon his subsequent
knowledge of Isaac Gardon and Eutacie, but nothing had been heard of
them since their departure, now nearly three years back, except a dim
rumour that they had been seen at the Synod of Montauban.

'Well, my friend,' said Philip, when about to remount, 'this will do
rather better than a headlong gallop to Rochelle with Nid-de-Merle at
our heels.'

'If M. le Baron is safe, it is well,' said Aime shortly.

'Is Selinville there?' said Berenger, coming up. 'Here, let me take you
to the King of Navarre: he knew your family in Lauguedoc.'

'No, no,' petulantly returned the boy. 'What am I that he should notice
me? It is M. de Ribaumont whom I follow, not him or his cause.'

'Boy,' said Berenger, dismayed, 'remember, I have answered for you.'

'I am no traitor,' proudly answered the strange boy, and Berenger was
forced to be thus satisfied, though intending to watch him closely.




CHAPTER XL. THE SANDS OF OLONNE



    Is it the dew of night
    That on her glowing cheek
    Shines in the moonbeam?--
    Oh, she weeps, she weeps,
    And the good angel that abandoned her
    At her hell baptism, by her tears drawn down
    Resumes his charge... and the hope
         Of pardon and salvation rose
         As now she understood
         Thy lying prophecy of truth.--SOUTHEY


'M. de Ribaumont,' said Henry of Navarre, as he stood before the fire
after supper at Parthenay, 'I have been thinking what commission I could
give you proportioned to your rank and influence.'

'Thanks to your Grace, that inquiry is soon answered. I am a beggar
here. Even my paternal estate in Normandy is in the hands of my cousin.'

'You have wrongs,' said Henry, 'and wrongs are sometimes better than
possessions in a party like ours.'

Berenger seized the opening to explain his position, and mention that
his only present desire was for permission, in the first place, to send
a letter to England by the messenger whom the King was dispatching
to Elisabeth, in tolerable security of her secret countenance; and,
secondly, to ride to Nissard to examine into the story he had previously
heeded so little, of the old man and his daughter rescued from the waves
the day before La Sablerie was taken.

'If Pluto relented, my dear Orpheus, surely Navarre may,' said Henry
good-humouredly; 'only may the priest not be more adamantine than Minos.
Where lies Nissard? On the Sable d'Olonne? Then you may go thither with
safety while we lie here, and I shall wait for my sister, or for news of
her.'

So Berenger arranged for an early start on the morrow; and young
Selinville listened with a frown, and strange look in his dark eyes.
'You go not to England?' he said.

'Not yet?' said Berenger

'This was not what my Lady expected,' he muttered; but though Berenger
silenced him by a stern look, he took the first opportunity of asking
Philip if it would not be far wiser for his brother to place himself in
safety in England.

'Wiser, but less honest,' said Philip.

'He who has lost all here, who has incurred his grandfather's anger,'
pursued Aime, 'were he not wiser to make his peace with his friends in
England?'

'His friends in England would not like him the better for deserting his
poor wife's cause,' said Philip. 'I advise you to hold your tongue, and
not meddle or make.'

Aime subsided, and Philip detected something like tears. He had still
much of rude English boyhood about him, and he laughed roughly. 'A fine
fellow, to weep at a word! Hie thee back to feed my Lady's lap-dog, 'tis
all thou art fit for.'

'There spoke English gratitude,' said Aime, with a toss of the head and
flash of the eye.

Philip despised him the more for casting up his obligations, but had no
retort to make. He had an idea of making a man of young Selinville,
and his notion of the process had something of the bullying tendency of
English young towards the poor-spirited or cowardly. He ordered the boy
roughly, teased him for his ignorance of manly exercises, tried to cure
his helplessness by increasing his difficulties, and viewed his fatigue
as affectation or effeminacy. Berenger interfered now and then to guard
the poor boy from a horse-jest or practical joke, but he too felt
that Aime was a great incumbrance, hopelessly cowardly, fanciful, and
petulant; and he was sometimes driven to speak to him with severity,
verging on contempt, in hopes of rousing a sense of shame.

The timidity, so unusual and inexplicable in a youth of eighteen or
twenty, sowed itself irrepressibly at the Sands of Olonne. These were
not misty, as on Berenger's former journey. Nissard steeple was soon in
sight, and the guide who joined them on a rough pony had no doubt
that there would be ample time to cross before high water. There was,
however, some delay, for the winter rains had brought down a good many
streams of fresh water, and the sands were heavy and wet, so that their
horses proceeded slowly, and the rush and dash of the waves proclaimed
that the low of the tide had begun. To the two brothers the break and
sweep was a home-sound, speaking of freshness and freedom, and the salt
breeze and spray carried with them life and ecstasy. Philip kept as
near the incoming waves as his inland-bred horse would endure, and sang,
shouted, and hallooed to them as welcome as English waves; but Aime de
Selinville had never even beheld the sea before: and even when the
tide was still in the distance, was filled with nervous terror as each
rushing fall sounded nearer; and, when the line of white foamy crests
became more plainly visible, he was impelled to hurry on towards the
steeple so fast that the guide shouted to him that he would only bury
himself in a quicksand.

'But,' said he, white with alarm, and his teeth chattering, 'how can we
creep with those dreadful waves advancing upon us to drown us?'

Berenger silence Philip's rude laugh and was beginning to explain that
the speed of the waves could always be calculated by an experienced
inhabitant; and his voice had seemed to pacify Aime a little, when the
spreading water in front of a broken wave flowing up to his horse's
feet, again rendered him nearly frantic. 'Let us go back!' he wildly
entreated, turning his horse; but Berenger caught his bridle, saying,
'That would be truly death. Boy, unless you would be scorned, restrain
your folly. Nothing else imperils us.'

Here, however, the guide interposed, saying that it had become too late
to pursue their course along the curve of the shore, but they must at
once cut straight across, which he had intended to avoid, because of
the greater depth of a small river that they would have to cross, which
divided further out into small channels, more easily forded. They
thus went along the chord of the arc formed by the shore, and Aime was
somewhat reassured, as the sea was at first farther off; but before long
they reached the stream, which lost itself in many little channels in
the sands, so that when the tide was out there was a perfect network of
little streams dividing low shingly or grassy isles, but at nearly high
tide, as at present, many of these islets were submerged, and the strife
between river and sea caused sudden deepenings of the water in the
channels.

The guide eagerly explained that the safest place for crossing was not
by the large sandbank furthest inland and looking firm and promising--it
was a recent shifting performance of the water's heaping up, and would
certainly sink away and bury horse the channels on either side had
shingly bottoms, and were safe.

'This way,' called Berenger, himself setting the example, and finding no
difficulty; the water did not rise above his boots, and the current was
not strong. He had reached the shingly isle when he looked round for his
companions; Humfrey and Philip were close behind him; but, in spite
of the loud '_gare_!' of the guide, Aime, or his horse,--for each was
equally senseless with alarm,--were making inwards; the horse was trying
to tread on the sandbank, which gave way like the water itself, under
its frantic struggles--there was a loud cry--a shrill, unmistakable
woman's shriek--the horse was sinking--a white face and helpless form
were being carried out on the waves, but not before Berenger had flung
himself from his horse, thrown off his cloak and sword, and dashed into
the water; and in the lapse of a few moments he struggled back to
the island, where were Philip and Humfrey, leg-deep in water: the one
received his burthen, the other helped him to land.

'On, gentlemen, not a moment to lose,' cried the guide; and Berenger,
still panting, flung himself on his horse, held out his arms, gathered
the small, almost inanimate figure upon the horse's neck before him, and
in a few minutes more they had crossed the perilous passage, and were
on a higher bank where they could safely halt; and Philip, as he came to
help his brother, exclaimed, 'What a fool the boy is!'

'Hush!' said Berenger, gravely, as they laid the figure on the ground.

'What! he can't have been drowned in that moment. We'll bring him to.'

'Hands off!' said Berenger, kneeling over the gasping form, and adding
in a lower voice, 'Don't you see?' He would his hand in the long
drenched hair, and held it up, with cheeks burning like fire, and his
scar purple.

'A woman!--what?--who?' Then suddenly divining, he exclaimed, 'The
jade!' and started with wide eyes.

'Stand back,' said Berenger; 'she is coming to herself.'

Perhaps she had been more herself than he knew, for, as he supported her
head, her hand stole over his and held it fast. Full of consternation,
perplexity, and anger as he was, he could not but feel a softening pity
towards a creature so devoted, so entirely at his mercy. At the moment
when she lay helpless against him, gasps heaving her breast under her
manly doublet, her damp hair spread on his knees, her dark eyes in their
languor raised imploring his face, her cold hand grasping his, he
felt as if this great love were a reality, and as if he were hunting a
shadow; and, as if fate would have it so, he must save and gratify one
whose affection must conquer his, who was so tender, so beautiful--even
native generosity seemed on her side. But in the midst, as in his
perplexity he looked up over the gray sea, he seemed to see the picture
so often present to his mind of the pale, resolute girl, clasping her
babe to her breast, fearless of the advancing sea, because true and
faithful. And at that thought faith and prayer rallied once again round
his heart, shame at the instant's wavering again dyed his cheek; he
recalled himself, and speaking the more coldly and gravely because his
heart was beating over hotly, he said, 'Cousin, you are better. It is
but a little way to Nissard.'

'Why have you saved me, if you will not pity me?' she murmured.

'I will not pity, because I respect my kinswoman who has save our
lives,' he said steadying his voice with difficulty. 'The priests of
Nissard will aid me in sparing your name and fame.'

'Ah!' she cried, sitting up with a start of joy, 'but he would make too
many inquiries! Take me to England first.'

Berenger started as he saw how he had been misunderstood.

'Neither here nor in England could my marriage be set aside, cousin.
No; not priest shall take charge of you, and place you in safety and
honour.'

'He shall not!' she cried hotly. 'Why--why will you drive me from
you--me who ask only to follow you as a menial servant?'

'That has become impossible,' he answered; 'to say nothing of my
brother, my servant and the guide have seen;' and, as she remembered her
streaming hair, and tried, in dawning confusion, to gather it together,
he continued: 'You shrank from the eye of the King of Navarre. You
cannot continue as you have done; you have not even strength.'

'Ah! have you sailed for England,' she murmured.

'It had only been greater shame,' he said. 'Cousin, I am head of your
family, husband of your kinswoman, and bound to respect the reputation
you have risked for me. I shall, therefore, place you in charge of the
priest till you can either return to your aunt or to some other convent.
You can ride now. We will not wait longer in these wet garments.'

He raised her from the ground, threw his own dry cloak round her
shoulders and unmanageable hair, and lifted her on his horse; but, as
she would have leant against him, he drew himself away, beckoned Philip,
and put the bridle into his hands, saying, 'Take care of her. I shall
ride on and warm the priest.'

'The rock of diamond,' she murmured, not aware that the diamond had been
almost melting. That youthful gravity and resolution, with the mixture
of respect and protection, imposed as usual upon her passionate nature,
and daunted her into meekly riding beside Philip without a word--only
now and then he heard a low moan, and knew that she was weeping
bitterly.

At first the lad had been shocked beyond measure, and would have held
aloof as from a kind of monster, but Madame de Selinville had been the
first woman to touch his fancy, and when he heard how piteously she was
weeping, and recollected where he should have been but for her, as
well as all his own harshness to her as a cowardly boy, he felt himself
brutally ungrateful, and spoke: 'Don't weep so, Madame; I am sorry I was
rude to you, but you see, how should I take you for a woman?'

Perhaps she heard, but she heeded not.

'My brother will take good care to shield you,' Philip added. 'He will
take care you are safe in one of your nunneries;' and as she only wept
the more, he added, with a sudden thought, 'You would not go there; you
would embrace the Protestant faith?'

'I would embrace whatever was his.'

Philip muttered something about seeing what could be done. They were
already at the entrance of the village, and Berenger had come out to
meet them, and, springing towards him, Philip exclaimed, in a low voice,
'Berry, she would abjure her Popish errors! You can't give her up to a
priest.'

'Foolery, Philip,' answered Berenger, sternly.

'If she would be a convert!'

'Let her be a modest woman first;' and Berenger, taking her bridle, led
her to the priest's house.

He found that Pere Colombeau was preaching a Lent sermon, and that
nobody was at home but the housekeeper, to whom he had explained briefly
that the lady with him had been forced to escape in disguise, had been
nearly drowned, and was in need of refreshment and female clothing.
Jacinthe did not like the sound, but drenched clothes were such a
passport to her master's house, that she durst not refuse. Berenger
carried off his other companions to the cabaret, and when he had dried
