
No murrain passes from beast to beast, no mildew from fruit to fruit
with such rapidity as fear spreads from man to man. Those who had been
driven by the sharpest lashings of terror had run the fastest, and
reached the castle first. They had received those who followed them with
lamentation and outcries, and it was a pitiable sight to see how the
terrified crowd, in the midst of their loud declarations of resignation
to God's guidance and their pious prayers, wrung their hands, and at the
same time how painfully anxious each one was to hide the little property
he had saved first from the disapproval of his companions, and then from
the covetousness of the approaching enemy.

With Paulus came Sergius and Jeremias to whom, on the way, he had
spoken words of encouragement. All three did their utmost to revive the
confidence of the terrified men, and when the Alexandrian reminded them
how zealously each of them only a few weeks since had helped to roll the
blocks and stones from the wall, and down the precipice, so as to crush
and slay the advancing enemy the feeling was strong in many of them
that, as he had already proved himself worthy in defence, it was due to
him now to make him their leader.

The number of the men who rushed out of the tower was increasing, and
when Hermas appeared with his father on his back and followed by Miriam,
and when Paulus exhorted his companions to be edified by this pathetic
picture of filial love, curiosity tempted even the last loiterers in the
tower out into the open space.

The Alexandrian sprang over the wall, went up to Stephanus, lifted him
from the shoulders of the panting youth and, taking him on his own,
carried him towards the tower; but the old warrior refused to enter
the place of refuge, and begged his friend to lay him down by the wall.
Paulus obeyed his wish and then went with Hermas to the top of the tower
to spy the distance from thence.

As soon as he had quitted him, Stephanus turned to the anchorites who
stood near him, saying, "These stones are loose, and though my strength
is indeed small still it is great enough to send one of them over with
a push. If it comes to a battle my old soldier's eyes, dim as they are
now, may with the help of yours see many things that may be useful to
you young ones. Above all things, if the game is to be a hot one for the
robbers, one must command here whom the others will obey."

"It shall be you, father," interrupted Salathiel the Syrian. "You have
served in Caesar's army, and you proved your courage and knowledge of
war in the last raid. You shall command us."

Stephanus sadly shook his head and replied, "My voice is become too
weak and low since this wound in my breast and my long illness. Not
even those who stand nearest to me would understand me in the noise
of battle. Let Paulus be your captain, for he is strong, cautious and
brave."

Many of the anchorites had long looked upon the Alexandrian as their
best stay; for many years he had enjoyed the respect of all and on a
thousand occasions had given proof of his strength and presence of mind,
but at this proposal they looked at each other in surprise, doubt and
disapproval.

Stephanus saw what was passing in their minds.

"It is true he has erred gravely," he said. "And before God he is the
least of the least among us; but in animal strength and indomitable
courage he is superior to you all. Which of you would be willing to take
his place, if you reject his guidance."

"Orion the Saite," cried one of the anchorites, "is tall and strong. If
he would--"

But Orion eagerly excused himself from assuming the dangerous office,
and when Andreas and Joseph also refused with no less decision the
leadership that was offered them, Stephanus said:

"You see there is no choice left us but to be, the Alexandrian to
command us here so long as the robbers threaten us, and no longer. There
he comes--shall I ask him?"

A murmur of consent, though by no means of satisfaction, answered the
old man, and Paulus, quite carried away by his eagerness to stake
his life and blood for the protection of the weak, and fevered with a
soldier's ardor, accepted Stephanus' commission as a matter of course,
and set to work like a general to organize the helpless wearers of
sheepskin.

Some he sent to the top of the tower to keep watch, others he charged
with the transport of the stones; to a third party he entrusted the duty
of hurling pieces of rock and blocks of stone down into the abyss in
the moment of danger; he requested the weaker brethren to assemble
themselves together, to pray for the others and to sing hymns of praise,
and he concerted signs and passwords with all; he was now here, now
there, and his energy and confidence infused themselves even into the
faint-hearted.

In the midst of these arrangements Hermas took leave of him and of his
father, for he heard the Roman war-trumpets and the drums of the young
manhood of Pharan, as they marched through the short cut to meet
the enemy. He knew where the main strength of the Blemmyes lay and
communicated this knowledge to the Centurion Phoebicius and the captain
of the Pharanites. The Gaul put a few short questions to Hermas, whom he
recognized immediately, for since he had met him at the harbor of Raithu
he could not forget his eyes, which reminded him of those of Glycera;
and after receiving his hasty and decided answers he issued rapid and
prudent orders.

A third of the Pharanites were to march forward against the enemy,
drumming and trumpeting, and then retreat as far as the watch-tower as
the enemy approached over the plain. If the Blemmyes allowed themselves
to be tempted thither, a second third of the warriors of the oasis, that
could easily be in ambush in a cross-valley, were to fall on their left
flank, while Phoebicius and his maniple--hidden behind the rock on which
the castle stood--would suddenly rush out and so decide the battle.
The last third of the Pharanites had orders to destroy the ships of the
invaders under the command of Hermas, who knew the spot where they had
landed.

In the worst case the centurion and his men could retreat into the
castle, and there defend themselves till the warriors of the nearest
seaports--whither messengers were already on their way--should come to
the rescue.

The Gaul's orders were immediately obeyed, and Hermas walked at the head
of the division entrusted to him, as proud and as self-possessed as any
of Caesar's veterans leading his legion into the field. He carried a bow
and arrows at his back, and in his hand a battleaxe that he had bought
at Raithu.

Miriam attempted to follow the troops he was leading, but he observed
her, and called out, "Go up to the fort, child, to my father." And the
shepherdess obeyed without hesitation.

The anchorites had all crowded to the edge of the precipice, they looked
at the division of the forces, and signed and shouted down. They had
hoped that some part of the fighting men would be joined to them for
their defence, but, as they soon learned, they had hoped in vain.
Stephanus, whose feeble sight could not reach so far as the plain at the
foot of the declivity, made Paulus report to him all that was going
on there, and with the keen insight of a soldier he comprehended the
centurion's plan. The troop led by Hermas passed by below the tower,
and the youth waved and shouted a greeting up to his father. Stephanus,
whose hearing remained sharper than his sight, recognized his son's
voice and took leave of him with tender and loving words in as loud a
voice as he could command. Paulus collected all the overflow of the old
man's heart in one sentence, and called out his blessings through his
two hands as a speaking-trumpet, after his friend's son as he departed
to battle. Hermas understood; but deeply as he was touched by this
farewell he answered only by dumb signs. A father can find a hundred
words of blessing sooner than a son can find one of thanks.

As the youth disappeared behind the rocks, Paulus said, "He marches on
like an experienced soldier, and the others follow him as sheep follow
a ram. But hark!--Certainly--the foremost division of the Pharanites and
the enemy have met. The outcry comes nearer and nearer."

"Then all will be well," cried Stephanus excitedly. "If they only take
the bait and let themselves be drawn on to the plateau I think they are
lost. From here we can watch the whole progress of the battle, and
if our side are driven back it may easily happen that they will throw
themselves into the castle. Now not a pebble must be thrown in vain,
for if our tower becomes the central point of the struggle the defenders
will need stones to fling."

These words were heard by several of the anchorites, and as now the
war-cries and the noise of the fight came nearer and nearer, and one and
another repeated to each other that their place of refuge would, become
the centre of the combat, the frightened penitents quitted the posts
assigned to them by Paulus, ran hither and thither in spite of the
Alexandrian's severe prohibition, and most of them at last joined
the company of the old and feeble, whose psalms grew more and more
lamentable as danger pressed closer upon them.

Loudest of all was the wailing of the Saite Orion who cried with
uplifted bands, "What wilt Thou of us miserable creatures, O Lord? When
Moses left Thy chosen people on this very spot for only forty days, they
at once fell away from Thee; and we, we without any leader have spent
all our life in Thy service, and have given up all that can rejoice the
heart, and have taken every kind of suffering upon us to please Thee!
and now these hideous heathen are surging round us again, and will
kill us. Is this the reward of victory for our striving and our long
wrestling?"

The rest joined in the lamentation of the Saite, but Paulus stepped into
their midst, blamed them for their cowardice, and with warm and urgent
speech implored them to return to their posts so that the wall might be
guarded at least on the eastern and more accessible side, and that the
castle might not fall an easy prey into the hands of an enemy from
whom no quarter was to be expected. Some of the anchorites were already
proceeding to obey the Alexandrian's injunction, when a fearful cry, the
war-cry of the Blemmyes who were in pursuit of the Pharanites, rose from
the foot of their rock of refuge.

They crowded together again in terror; Salathiel the Syrian, had
ventured to the edge of the abyss, and had looked over old Stephanus'
shoulder down into the hollow, and when he rushed back to his
companions, crying in terror, "Our men are flying!"

Gelasius shrieked aloud, beat his breast, and tore his rough black hair,
crying out:

"O Lord God, what wilt Thou of us? Is it vain then to strive after
righteousness and virtue that Thou givest us over unto death, and dost
not fight for us? If we are overcome by the heathen, ungodliness and
brute force will boast themselves as though they had won the victory
over righteousness and truth!"

Paulus had turned from the lamenting hermits, perplexed and beside
himself, and stood with Stephanus watching the fight.

The Blemmyes had come in great numbers, and their attack, before which
the Pharanites were to have retired as a feint, fell with such force
upon the foremost division that they and their comrades, who had rushed
to their aid on the plateau, were unable to resist it, and were driven
back as far as the spot where the ravine narrowed.

"Things are not as they should be," said Stephanus. "And the cowardly
band, like a drove of cattle," cried Paulus in a fury, "leave the walls
unprotected, and blaspheme God instead of watching or fighting."

The anchorites noticed his gestures, which were indeed those of a
desperate man, and Sergius exclaimed: "Are we then wholly abandoned? Why
does not the thorn-bush light its fires, and destroy the evil-doers with
its flames? Why is the thunder silent, and where are the lightnings that
played round the peak of Sinai?

"Why does not darkness fall upon us to affright the heathen? Why does
not the earth open her mouth to swallow them up like the company of
Korah?"

"The Might of God," cried Dulas, "tarries too long. The Lord must
set our piety in a doubtful light, for He treats us as though we were
unworthy of all care."

"And that you are!" exclaimed Paulus, who had heard the last words,
and who was dragging rather than leading the feeble Stephanus to the
unguarded eastern wall. "That you are, for instead of resisting His
enemies you blaspheme God, and disgrace yourself by your miserable
cowardice. Look at this sick old man who is prepared to defend you, and
obey my orders without a murmur, or, by the holy martyrs, I will drag
you to your posts by your hair and ears, and will--"

But he ceased speaking, for his threats were interrupted by a powerful
voice which called his name from the foot of the wall.

"That is Agapitus," exclaimed Stephanus. "Lead me to the wall, and set
me down there."

Before Paulus could accede to his friend's wish the tall form of the
bishop was standing by his side. Agapitus the Cappadocian had in his
youth been a warrior; he had hardly passed the limits of middle age, and
was a vigilant captain of his congregation. When all the youth of Pharan
had gone forth to meet the Blemmyes, he had no peace in the oasis, and,
after enjoining on the presbyters and deacons that they should pray in
the church for the fighting men with the women and the men who remained
behind, he himself, accompanied by a guide and two acolytes, had gone up
the mountain to witness the battle.

To the other priests and his wife who sought to detain him, he had
answered, "Where the flock is there should the shepherd be!"

Unseen and unheard he had gained the castle-wall and had been a witness
to Paulus' vehement speech. He now stood opposite the Alexandrian with
rolling eyes, and threateningly lifted his powerful hand as he called
out to him:

"And dare an outcast speak thus to his brethren? Will the champion of
Satan give orders to the soldiers of the Lord? It would indeed be a joy
to you if by your strong arm you could win back the good name that your
soul, crippled by sin and guilt, has flung away. Come on, my friends!
the Lord is with us and will help us."

Paulus had let the bishop's words pass over him in silence, and raised
his hands like the other anchorites when Agapitus stepped into their
midst, and uttered a short and urgent prayer.

After the "Amen" the bishop pointed out, like a general, to each man,
even to the feeble and aged, his place by the wall or behind the stones
for throwing, and then cried out with a clear ringing voice that sounded
above all other noise, "Show to-day that you are indeed soldiers of the
Most High."

Not one rebelled, and when man by man each had placed himself at his
post, he went to the precipice and looked attentively down at the fight
that was raging below.

The Pharanites were now opposing the attack of the Blemmyes with
success, for Phoebicius, rushing forward with his men from their ambush,
had fallen upon the compact mass of the sons of the desert in flank
and, spreading death and ruin, had divided them into two bodies. The
well-trained and well-armed Romans seemed to have an easy task with
their naked opponents, who, in a hand to hand fight, could not avail
themselves of either their arrows or their spears. But the Blemmyes
had learned to use their strength in frequent battles with the imperial
troops, and so soon as they perceived that they were no match for their
enemies in pitched battle, their leaders set up a strange shrill cry,
their ranks dissolved, and they dispersed in all directions, like a heap
of feathers strewn by a gust of wind.

Agapitus took the hasty disappearance of the enemy for wild flight,
he sighed deeply and thankfully and turned to go down to the field of
battle, and to speak consolation to his wounded fellow-Christians.

But in the castle itself he found opportunity for exercising his
pious office, for before him stood the shepherdess whom he had already
observed on his arrival and she said with much embarrassment, but
clearly and quickly, "Old Stephanus there, my lord bishop--Hermas'
father for whom I carry water-bids me ask you to come to him; for his
wound has reopened and he thinks his end is near."

Agapitus immediately obeyed this call; he went with hasty steps towards
