he could command, a bright, sharply-defined patch of color tinged each
pale cheek, and he exclaimed in husky tones:

"Not another word! No attempt to move me, not a cry of lamentation!
Enough, and a thousand times too much, of that already. You have heard
me, and I now say again--me or Paula, Paula or me. Come what may in the
future, if you cannot so far control yourselves as never to mention her
in my presence, I--no, I do not swear, but when I have said a thing I
keep to it--I will go back to my old den and drag out life the richer by
a disappointment--or die, as my ruling goddess shall please."

With this he left the room, and little Mary raised her clenched right
fist and shook it after him, exclaiming: "Then let him go, hard-hearted,
unjust, old scarecrow! Oh, if only I were a man!" And she burst out
crying aloud. Heedless of the widow's reproof, she went on quite beside
herself: "Oh, there is no one more wicked than he is, Dame Joanna!
He wants to see her die, he wishes her to be dead; I know it, he even
wishes it! Did you hear him, Pul, he would be glad if the messenger's
horse went lame before he could save her? And now she is my Orion's
betrothed--I always meant them for each other--and they want to kill
him, too, but they shall not, if there is still a God of justice in
heaven! Oh if I--if I..." Her voice failed her, choked with sobs. When
she had somewhat recovered she implored Pulcheria and her mother to take
her to see Paula, and as they shared her wish they prepared to start for
the prison before it should grow dark.

The nearer they went to the market-place, which they must cross, the
more crowded were the streets. Every one was going the same way; the
throng almost carried the women with it; yet, from the market came, as
it were, a contrary torrent of shouts and shrieks from a myriad of human
throats. Dame Joanna was terrified in the press by the uproarious doings
in the market, and she would gladly have turned back with the girls, or
have made her way through by-streets, but the tide bore her on, and it
would have been easier to swim against a swollen mountain stream than
to return home. Thus they soon reached the square, but there they were
brought to a standstill in the crush.

The widow's terrors now increased. It was dreadful to be kept fast with
the young people in such a mob. Pulcheria clung closely to her, and
when she bid Mary take her hand the child, who thoroughly enjoyed the
adventure, exclaimed: "Only look, Mother Joanna, there is our Rustem. He
is taller than any one."

"If only he were by our side!" sighed the widow. At this the little girl
snatched away her hand, made her way with the nimbleness of a squirrel
through the mass of men, and soon had reached the Masdakite. Rustem had
not yet quitted Memphis, for the first caravan, which he and his little
wife were to join, was not to start for a few days. The worthy
Persian and Mary were very good friends; as soon as he heard that his
benefactress was alarmed he pushed his way to her, with the child, and
the widow breathed more freely when he offered to remain near her and
protect her.

Meanwhile the yelling and shouting were louder than ever. Every face,
every eye was turned to the Curia, in the evident expectation of
something great and strange taking place there.

"What is it?" asked Mary, pulling at Rustem's coat. The giant said
nothing, but he stooped, and to her delight, a moment later she had her
feet on his arms, which he folded across his chest, and was settling
herself on his broad shoulder whence she could survey men and things as
from a tower. Joanna laid her hand in some tremor on the child's little
feet, but Mary called down to her: "Mother--Pulcheria--I am quite sure
our old Horapollo's white ass is standing in front of the Curia, and
they are putting a garland round the beast's neck--a garland of olive."

At this moment the blare of a tuba rang out from the Senate-house across
the square, through the suffocatingly hot, quivering air; a sudden
silence fell and spread till, when a man opened his mouth to shout or to
speak, a neighbor gave him a shove and bid him hold his tongue. At this
the widow held Mary's ankles more tightly, asking, while she wiped the
drops from her brow:

"What is going on?" and the child answered quickly, never taking her
eyes off the scene:

"Look, look up at the balcony of the Curia; there stands the chief of
the Senate--Alexander the dyer of purple--he often used to come to see
my grandfather, and grandmother could not bear his wife. And by his
side--do you not see who the man is close by him?

"It is old Horapollo. He is taking the laurel-crown off his
wig!--Alexander is going to speak."

She was interrupted by another trumpet call, and immediately after a
loud, manly voice was heard from the Curia, while the silence was so
profound that even the widow and her daughter lost very little of the
speech which followed:

"Fellow-citizens, Memphites, and comrades in misfortune," the president
began in slow, ringing tones, "you know what the sufferings are which we
all share. There is not a woe that has not befallen us, and even worse
loom before us."

The crowd expressed their agreement by a fearful outcry, but they were
reduced to silence by the sound of the tuba, and the speaker went on:

"We, the Senate, the fathers of the city, whom you have entrusted with
the care of your persons and your welfare..."

At this point he was interrupted by wild yells, and cries could be
distinguished of: "Then take care of us--do your duty!"

"Money bags!"

"Keep your pledge!"

"Save us from destruction!"

The trumpet call, however, again silenced them, and the speaker went on,
almost beside himself with vehement excitement.

"Hearken! Do not interrupt me! The dearth and misery fall on our heads
as much as on yours. My own wife and son died of the plague last night!"

At this only a low murmur ran through the crowd, and it died away of its
own accord as the dignified old man on the balcony wiped his eyes and
went on:

"If there is a single man among you who can prove us guilty of
neglect--a man, woman, or child--let him accuse us before God, before
our new ruler the Khaliff, and yourselves, the citizens of Memphis; but
not now, my fellow-sufferers, not now! At this time cease your cries and
lamentations; now when rescue is in sight. Listen to me, and let us know
what you feel with regard to the last and uttermost means of deliverance
which I now come to propose to you."

"Silence! Hear him! Down with the noisy ones!" was heard on all sides,
and the orator went on:

"We, as Christians, in the first instance addressed ourselves to our
Father in Heaven, to our one and only divine Redeemer, and to His Holy
Church to aid us; and I ask you: Has there been any lack of prayers,
processions, pilgrimages, and pious gifts? No, no, my beloved
fellow-citizens! Each one be my witness--certainly not! But Heaven has
remained blind and deaf and dumb in sight of our need, yea as though
paralyzed. And yet no; not indeed paralyzed, for it has been powerful
and swift to move only to heap new woes upon us. Not a thing that human
foresight and prudence could devise or execute has remained untried.

"The time-honored arts of the magicians, sorcerers, and diviners, which
aforetime have often availed to break the powers of evil spirits, have
proved no less delusive and ineffectual. So then we remembered our
glorious forefathers and ancestors, and we recollected that a man lives
in our midst who knew many things which we others have lost sight of in
the lapse of years. He has made the wisdom of our forefathers his own in
the course of a long life of laborious days and nights. He has the key
to the writing and the secrets of the ancients, and he has communicated
to us the means of deliverance to which they resorted, when they
suffered from such afflictions as have befallen us in these dreadful
days; and this venerable man at my side, the wise and truthful
Horapollo, will acquaint us with it. You see the antique scrolls in his
hand: They teach us the wonders it wrought in times past."

Here the speaker was interrupted by a cry of: "Hail Horapollo, the
Deliverer!" and thousands took it up and expressed their satisfaction
and gratitude by loud shouting.

The old man bowed modestly, pointed to his narrow chest and toothless
mouth and then to the head of the Council as the man who had undertaken
to transmit his opinion to the populace; so Alexander went on:

"Great favors, my friends and fellow-citizens, must be purchased by
great gifts. The ancients knew this, and when the river--on which, as we
know only too well, the weal or woe of this land solely depends--refused
to rise, and its low ebb brought evils of many kinds upon its banks,
they offered in sacrifice the thing they deemed most noble of all the
earth has to show a pure and beautiful maiden.

"It is just as we expected: you are horrified! I hear your murmur, I see
your horror-stricken faces; how can a Christian fail to be shocked at
the thought of such a victim? But is it indeed so extraordinary? Have
we ever wholly given up everything of the kind? Which of us does not
entreat Saint Orion, either at home or under the guidance of the priests
in church, whenever he craves a gift from our splendid river; and this
very year as usual, on the Night of Dropping, did we not cast into the
waters a little box containing a human finger.

   [So late as in the XIV. century after Christ the Egyptian Christians
   still threw a small casket containing a human finger into the Nile
   to induce it to rise. This is confirmed by the trustworthy
   Makrizi.]

"This lesser offering takes the place of the greater and more precious
sacrifice of the heathen; it has been offered, and its necessity
has never at any time been questioned; even the severest and holiest
luminaries of the Church--Antonius and Athanasius, Theophilus and
Cyrillus had nothing to say against it, and year after year it has been
thrown into the waters under their very eyes.

"A finger in a box! What a miserable exchange for the fairest and purest
that God has allowed to move on earth among men. Can we wonder if the
Almighty has at last disdained and rejected the wretched substitute, and
claims once more for His Nile that which was formerly given? But where
is the mother, where is the father, you will ask, who, in our selfish
days, is so penetrated with love for his country, his province, his
native town, that he will dedicate his virgin daughter to perish in the
waters for the common good? What daughter of our nation is ready of her
own free will to die for the salvation of others?

"But be not afraid. Have no fears for the growing maiden, the very apple
of your eye, in your women's rooms. Fear not for your granddaughters,
sisters, playfellows and betrothed: From the earliest ages a stringent
law forbade the sacrifice of Egyptian blood; strangers were to perish,
or those who worshipped other gods than those in Egypt.

"The same law, citizens and fellow-believers, is incumbent on us. And
mark me well, all of you! Would it not seem as though Fate desired to
help us to bring to our blessed Nile the offering which for so many
centuries has been withheld? The river claims it; and, as if by a
miracle, it has been brought to our hand. For a crime which does not
taint her purity our judges have to-day condemned to death a beautiful
and spotless maiden--a stranger, and at the same time a Greek and a
heretic Melchite.

"This stirs you, this fills your souls with joyful thankfulness; I see
it! Then make ready for thy bridal, noble stream, Benefactor of our land
and nation! The virgin, the bride that thou hast longed for, we deck for
thee, we lead to thine embrace--she shall be Thine!

"And you, Memphites, citizens and fellow-sufferers," and the orator
leaned far over the parapet towards the crowd, "when I ask you for your
suffrages, when I appeal to you in the name of the senate, and of this
venerable sage...."

But here he was interrupted by the triumphant shout of the assembled
multitude; a thousand voices went up in a mighty, heaven-rending cry:

"To the Nile with her--the maiden to the Nile!"

"Marry the Melchite to the river! Bring wreaths for the bride of the
Nile, bring flowers for her marriage."

"Let us abide by the teaching of our fathers!"

"Hail to the councillor! Hail to the sage, Horapollo! Hail to our chief
Senator!"

These were the glad and enthusiastic shouts that rose in loud confusion;
and it was only on the north side, where the money-changers' tables
now stood deserted-for gold and silver had long since been placed in
safety--that a sinister murmur of dissent was heard. The little girl
in the Persian's arms had long since been breathing hard and deep.
She thought she knew whom that fiend up there had his eye upon for his
cursed heathen sacrifice; and as Mary bent down to Dame Joanna to see
whether she shared her hideous suspicion, she perceived that her eyes
and Pulcheria's were full of tears.--That was enough; she asked no
questions, for a new act in the drama claimed her attention.

Close to the money-changer's stalls a hand was lifted on high, holding
a crucifix, and the child could see it steadily progressing through the
crowd towards the Curia. Every one made way for the sacred symbol and
the bearer of it; and to Mary's fancy the throng parted on each side of
the advancing image of the Redeemer, as the waters of the Red Sea had
parted at the approach of the people of God. The murmurs in that part of
the square grew louder; the acclamations of the populace waxed fainter;
every voice seemed to fail, and presently a frail figure in bishop's
robes, small but rigidly dignified, was seen to mount the steps and
finally disappear within the portals of the Curia.

The turmoil sank like an ebbing wave to a low, enquiring mutter, and
even this died away when the diminutive personage, who looked the
taller, however, for the crucifix which he still held, came out on the
balcony, approached the parapet, and stretched forth the arm that held
the image above the heads of the foremost rows of the people.

At this Horapollo stepped up to Alexander, his eyes flashing with rage,
and demanded that the intruder should be forbidden to speak; but the
commanding eye of the new-comer rested on the dyer, who bowed his head
and allowed him to proceed. Nor did one of the senators dare to
hinder him, for every one recognized him as the zealous, learned, and
determined priest who had, since yesterday, filled the place of the
deceased bishop.

Their new pastor began, addressing his flock in as loud a voice as he
could command:

"Look on this Cross and hearken to its minister! You languish for the
blessing of Christ, and you follow after heathen abominations. The
superstitious triumph, through which I have struggled to reach you, will
be turned to howls of anguish if you stop your ears and are deaf to the
words of salvation.

"Yea, you may murmur! You will not reduce me to silence, for Truth
speaks in me and can never be dumb. I say to each of you that knows it
not: The staff of the departed Plotinus has been placed in my hands.
I would fain bear it with gentleness and mercy; but, if I must, I
will wield it as a sword and a scourge till your wounds bleed and your
bruises ache.

"Behold in my right hand the image of your Redeemer! I hold it up as a
wall between you and the heathen abomination which you hail with joy in
your blindness.

"Ye are accursed and apostate. Lift up your hearts, and look at Him who
died on the cross to save you. Verily He will not let him perish who
believeth in Him; but you! where is your faith? Because it is night ye
lament and cry: The Light is dead!' Because ye are sick ye say: 'The
physician cannot heal!'

"What are these blasphemies that I hear: 'The Lord and His Church
are powerless! Magic, enchantments, and heathen abominations may save
us.'--But, inasmuch as ye trust not in the true Saviour and Redeemer,
but in heathen wickedness, magic, and enchantments, punishment shall be
heaped on punishment; and so it will be,--I see it coming--till ye are
choked in the mud and seek with groans the only Hand that is able to
save.

"That whereby the blinded sons of men hope to escape from the evil,
that, and that only, is the source of their sufferings and I stand here
to stay that spring and dig a channel for its overflow.

"Children of Moloch ye try to be and I hope to make you Christians
again. But the maiden whom your fury would cast into the abyss of the
river is under the merciful protection of the supreme Church, for the
death of her body will bring death to your souls. Saint Orion turns from
you with horror! Away from the hapless victim! Away, I say, with your
accursed desires and sacrilegious hands!"

"And sit with them in our laps and wring them in prayer till they ache,
while want and the plague snatch away those that are left!" interrupted
the old man's voice, thin and feeble, but audible at a considerable
distance, and from the market-place thousands proclaimed their approval
by loud shouts.

The president of the senate had listened with a penitent mien and
bowed head, but now he recovered his presence of mind and exclaimed
indignantly:

"The people die, the town and country are going to ruin, plague and
horrors rise up from the river. Show us some other way of escape, or let
us trust to our forefathers and try this last means."

But the little man drew himself up more stiffly, pointed with his left
hand to the crucifix, and cried with unmoved composure:

"Believe, hope, and pray!"

"Perhaps you think that no evil is come upon us!" cried Alexander. "You,
to be sure, have seen no wife with glazing eyes, no child struggling
for breath...." And a fresh tumult came up from below, wilder and louder
than ever. Each one whose home or beasts had been blighted by death,
whose gardens and fields had perished of drought, whose dates had
dropped one by one from the trees, lifted up his voice and shrieked:

"The victim, the victim!"

"To the river with the maiden!"

"All hail to our deliverer, the wise Horapollo!" But others shouted
against them:

"Let us remain Christians! Hail to Bishop John!"

"Think of our souls!"

The prelate made an effort once more to rivet the attention of the
populace, and failing in this he turned to the senators and the
trumpeters, whom at length he succeeded in persuading to blow again and
again, and more loudly through their brazen tuba. But the call produced
no effect, for in the market square groups had formed on opposite sides,
and blows and wrestling threatened to end in a sanguinary street-riot.

The women succeeded in getting away from the scene of action under the
protection of the Masdakite, before the Arab cavalry rode across to
separate the combatants; but in the Curia Bishop John explained to the
Fathers that he would make every effort to prevent this inhuman and
unchristian sacrifice of a young girl, even though she was a Melchite
and under sentence of death. This very day a carrier pigeon should be
dispatched to the patriarch in Upper Egypt, and bring back his decision.

When, on this, Horapollo replied that the Khaliff's representative here
had signified his consent to the proceedings, and that even against the
will of the clergy the misery of the people must be put an end to, the
Bishop broke out vehemently and threatened all who had first suggested
this hideous scheme with the anathema of the Church. But Horapollo
retorted again with flaming eloquence, the desperate Senators took his
part, and the Bishop left the Curia in the highest wrath.




CHAPTER XIX.

Few things could be more intolerable to the gentle and retiring widow
than such a riot of the people. The unchained passion, the tumult, and
all the vulgar accessories that surrounded her there grieved her tender
nature; all through the old man's speech she had felt nothing but the
desire to escape, but as soon as she had acquired the certainty that
Paula was the hapless being whom her terrible house-mate was preparing
to hand over to the superstition of the mob, she thought no more of
getting home, but waited in the crush till at length she and the two
children could be conducted by Rustem to the prison, though the way
thither was through the most crowded streets.

Had the nameless horrors that hung over Paula already found their way to
her ears through the prisonwalls, or might it yet be her privilege to
be able to prepare the girl for the worst, and to comfort the victim
who must already have been driven to the verge of desperation by the
sentence of death?

On the previous day the chief warder had acceded without demur to her
wish to see Paula, for the Kadi had enjoined him to show her and Orion
all possible courtesy, but the Vekeel's threats made him now refuse to
admit Dame Joanna. However, while he was talking with her, his infant
son stretched out his arms to Pulcheria, who had played with him the day
before in her sweet way, and she now took him up and kissed him, thus
bringing a kindly feeling to three hearts at once; and most of all to
that of the child's mother who immediately interested herself for them,
and persuaded her husband to oblige them once more.

Pretty Emau had always waited on the mirthful Orion, under the palms by
her father's inn, more gladly than on most other guests; and her husband
who, after the manner of the Egyptians, was docile to his better half
though till now he had not been quite free from jealousy, was even more
ready to serve his benefactor's son since hearing that he was betrothed
to the fair Paula.

There was a great uproar in the large common prison to-day, as usual
when the judges had passed sentence of death on any criminal, and the
women shuddered as the miserable wretches hallooed and bellowed. Many
a shriek came up, of which it was hard to say whether it was the
expression of wild defiance or of bitter jesting, and no more suitable
accompaniment could be conceived to this terrific riot than the clank of
chains.

When the women reached Paula's cell their hearts throbbed painfully,
for within the door which the warder unlocked anguish and despair must
dwell.

The prisoner was standing at the window, pressing her brow against the
iron bars and listening to the lute played by her lover, which sounded,
amid the turmoil of the other prisoners, like a bell above the roar of
thunder and the storm. By the bed sat Betta on a low stool, asleep with
the distaff in her lap; and neither she nor her mistress heeded the
entrance of the visitors. A miserable lamp lighted the squalid room.

Mary would have flown to her friend, but Joanna held her back and called
Paula tenderly by name in a low voice. But Paula did not hear; her soul
was no doubt absorbed in anguish and the terror of death. The widow
now raised her voice, and the ill-fated girl turned round; then, with a
little cry of joy, she hastened to meet the faithful creatures who could
find her even in prison, and clasped first the widow, then Pulcheria,
then the child in a tender embrace. Joanna put her hands fondly round
her face to kiss it, and to see how far fear and affliction had altered
her lovely features, and a faint cry of astonishment escaped her, for
she was looking, not at a grief and terror-stricken face, but a glad and
calm one, and a pair of large eyes looked brightly and gratefully into
hers.

Had she not been told then what was hanging over her? Nay--for she at
once asked whether they had heard that she was condemned to die. And she
went on to tell them how things had gone with her at her trial, and how
her good Philip's friend and foster-father had suddenly and inexplicably
become her bitterest foe.

At this the others could not check their tears; it was Paula who had to
comfort and soothe them, by telling them that she had found a paternal
friend in the Kadi who had promised to intercede for her with the
Khaliff.

Dame Joanna could scarcely take it all in. This girl and her heroic
demeanor, in the face of such disaster, seemed to her miraculous. Her
trust was beautiful; but how easily might it be deceived! how insecure
was the ground in which she had cast the anchor of hope.

Even little Mary seemed more troubled than her friend, and threw herself
sobbing on her bosom. And Paula returned her fondness, and tried to
mollify Pulcheria as to the disgraceful conduct of their old housemate,
and smiled kindly at the widow when she asked where she had found such
composure in the face of so much misfortune, saying that it was from her
example that she had learnt resignation to the worst that could befall
her. Even in this dark hour she found more to be thankful for than to
lament over; indeed, it had brought her a glorious joy. And this for the
first time reminded Joanna and the girls that she was now betrothed, and
again she was clasped in their loving arms.

Just then the warder rapped; Paula rose thoughtfully, and exclaimed in a
low voice: "I have something to send to Orion that I dare not entrust to
a stranger: but now, now I have you, my Mary, and you shall take it to
him."

As she spoke she took out the emerald, gave it to the little girl, and
charged her to deliver it to her uncle as soon as they should be
alone together. In the little note which she had wrapped around it she
implored her lover to regard it as his own property, and to use it to
satisfy the claims of the Church.

The man was easily induced to take Mary to her uncle; and how happily
she ran on before him up to Orion's cell, how great was his joy at
seeing her again, how gratefully he pressed the emerald to his lips! But
when she exclaimed that her prophecy had been fulfilled, and that Paula,
was now his, his brow was knit as he replied, with gloomy regret, that
though he had won the woman he loved, it was only to lose her again.

"But the Kadi is your friend and will gain pardon from the Khaliff!"
cried the child.

"But then another enemy suddenly starts up: Horapollo!"

"Oh, our old man!" and the child ground her teeth. "If you did but know,
Orion!--And to think that I must live under the same roof with him!"

"You!" asked the young man.

"Yes, I. And Pulcheria, and Mother Joanna," and Mary went on to tell him
how the old man had come to live with them and Orion could guess from
various indications that she was concealing some important fact; so he
pressed her to keep nothing from him, till the child could not at last
evade telling him all she had seen and heard.

At this he lost all caution and self-control. Quite beside himself he
called aloud the name of his beloved, invoking in passionate tones the
return of the Governor Amru, the only man who could help them in this
crisis. His sole hope was in him. He had shown himself a real father to
him, and had set him a difficult but a noble task.

"Into which you have plunged over head and ears!" cried the child.

"I thought it all out while on my journey," replied Orion. "I tried
yesterday to write out a first sketch of it, but I lacked what I most
wanted: maps and lists. Nilus had put them all up together; I was to
have taken them with me on the voyage with the nuns, and I ordered that
they should be carried to the house of Rufinus...."

"That they should come to us?" interrupted the child with sparkling
eyes. "Oh, they are all there! I saw the documents myself, when the
chest was cleared out for old Horapollo, and to-morrow, quite early
to-morrow, you shall have them." Orion kissed her brow with glad haste;
then, striking the wall of his cell with his fist, he waited till
something had been withdrawn with a grating sound on the other side, and
exclaimed:

"Good news, Nilus! The plans and lists are found: I shall have them
to-morrow!"

"That is well!" replied the treasurer's thin voice from the adjoining
room. "We shall need something to comfort us! A prisoner has just been
brought in for having attacked an Arab horseman in a riot in the market
square. He tells me some dreadful news."

"Concerning my betrothed?"

"Alas! yes, my lord."

"Then I know it already," replied the young man; and after exchanging
a few words with his master with reference to the old man's atrocious
proposal, Nilus went on:

"My prison-mate tells me, too, that while he was in custody in the
guard-house the Arabs were speaking of a messenger from the governor
announcing his arrival at Medina, and also that he intended making only
a short stay there. So we may expect his return before long."

"Then he will have started long before the Kadi's messenger can have
arrived and laid the petition for pardon before the Khaliff!--We have
no hope but in Amru; if only we could send information to him on his
way...."

"He would certainly not tarry in Upper Egypt, but hasten his journey,
or send on a plenipotentiary," said the voice on the other side of the
wall. "If we had but a trusty man to despatch! Our people are scattered
to the four winds, and to hunt them up now...."

At this Mary's childish tones broke in with: "I can find a messenger."

"You? What are you thinking of, child?" said Orion. She did not heed his
remonstrance, but went on eagerly, quite sure of her own meaning:

"He shall be told everything, everything! Ought he to know what I heard
about your share in the flight of the sisters?"

"No, no; on no account!" cried Nilus and his master both at once; and
Mary understood that her proposition was accepted. She clapped her
hands, and exclaimed full of enterprise and with glowing cheeks:

"The messenger shall start to-morrow; rely on me. I can do it as well
as the greatest. And now tell me exactly the road he is to take. To make
sure, write the names of the stages on my little tablet.--But wait, I
must rub it smooth."

"What is this on the wax?" asked Orion. "A large heart with squares all
over it.--And that means?"

"Oh! mere nonsense," said the child somewhat abashed. "It was only to
show how my heart was divided among the persons I love. A whole half of
it belongs to Paula, this quarter is yours; but there, there, there,"
and at each word she prodded the wax with the stylus, "that is where I
had kept a little corner for old Horapollo. He had better not come in my
way again!"

Her nimble fingers smoothed the wax, and over the effaced heart--a
child's whim--Orion wrote things on which the lives of two human
beings depended. He did so with sincere confidence in his little ally's
adroitness and fidelity. Early next morning she was to receive a letter
to be conveyed to Amru by the messengers.

"But a rapid journey costs money, and Amru always chooses the road by
the mountains and Berenice," observed the treasurer. "If we put together
our last gold pieces they will hardly suffice."

"Keep them, you will want them here," said the little girl. "And
yet--there are my pearls, to be sure, and my mother's jewels--at the
same time...."

"You ought never to part from such things, you heart of gold!" cried
Orion.

"Oh yes, yes! What do I want with them? But Dame Joanna has my mother's
things in her keeping."

"And you are afraid to ask her for them?" asked the young man. He
appealed to Nilus, and when the treasurer had calculated the cost, Orion
took off a costly sapphire ring, which he gave to Mary, charging her
to hand it to Joanna. Gamaliel, the Jew, would lend her as much as she
would require on this gem. Mary joyfully took possession of the ring;
but presently, when the warder appeared to fetch her, her satisfaction
suddenly turned to no less vehement grief, and she took leave of Orion
as if they were parting for ever.

In the passage leading to Paula's cell the man suddenly stood still:
some one was approaching up the stairs.--If it should be the black
Vekeel, and he should find visitors in the prison at so late an hour!

But no. Two lamps were borne in front of the new-comers, and by their
light the warder recognized John, the new Bishop of Memphis, who had
often been here before now to console prisoners.

He had come to-night prompted by his desire to see the condemned
Melchite. Mary's dress and demeanor betrayed at once that she could not
belong to any official employed here; and, as soon as he had learnt
who she was, he whispered to his companion, an aged deacon who always
accompanied him when he visited a female prisoner: "We find her here!"
And when he had ascertained with whom the child had come hither at so
late an hour, he turned again to his colleague and added in a low voice:

"The wife and daughter of Rufinus! Just so: I have long had my eye
on these Greeks. In church once or twice every year!--Melchites in
disguise! Allied with this Melchite! And this is the school in which
the Mukaukas' granddaughter is growing up! An abominable trick! Benjamin
judged rightly, as he always did!" Then, in a subdued voice, he asked:

"Shall we take her away with us at once?" But, as the deacon made
objections, he hastily replied: "You are right; for the present it is
enough that we know where she is to be found."

The warder meanwhile had opened Paula's cell; before the bishop went in
he spoke a few kind words to the child, asking her whether she did not
long to see her mother; and when Mary replied: "Very often!" he stroked
her hair with his bony hand and said:

"So I thought.--You have a pretty name, child, and you, like your
mother, will perhaps ere long dedicate your life to the Blessed among
women, whose name you bear." And, holding the little girl by the hand,
he entered the cell. While Paula looked in amazement at the prelate who
came so late a visitor, Joanna and Pulcheria recognized him as the brave
ecclesiastic who had so valiantly opposed the old sage and the misled
populace, and they bowed with deep reverence. This the bishop observed,
and came to the conclusion that these Greeks perhaps after all belonged
to his Church. At any rate, the child might safely be left in their care
a few days longer.

After he had exchanged a few cordial words with them the widow prepared
to withdraw, and was about to take leave when he went up to her and
announced that he would pay her a visit the next day or the day after;
that he wished to speak with her of matters involving the happiness
of one who was dear to them both, and Dame Joanna, believing that he
referred to Paula, whispered:

"She has no idea as yet of the terrible fate the people have in store
for her. If possible, spare her the fearful truth before she sleeps this
night."

"If possible," repeated the prelate. Then, as Mary kissed his hand
before leaving, he drew her to him and said: "Like the Infant Christ,
every Christian child is the Mother's. You, Mary, are chosen before
thousands! The Lord took your father to himself as a martyr; your mother
has dedicated herself to Heaven. Your road is marked out for you, child,
reflect on this. To-morrow-no, the day after, I will see you and guide
you in the new path."

At these words Joanna turned pale. She now understood what the bishop's
purpose was in calling on her. At the bottom of the stairs, she threw
her arms round the child and asked her in--a low voice: "Do you pine for
the cloister--do you wish to go away from us like your mother, to think
of nothing but saving your soul, to live a nun in the holy seclusion
which Pulcheria has described to you so often?"

But this the child positively denied; and as Joanna's head drooped
anxiously and sadly, Mary looked up brightly and exclaimed: "Never fear,
Mother dear! Things will have altered greatly by the day after tomorrow.
Let the bishop come! I shall be a match for him!--Oh! you do not know me
yet. I have been like a lamb among you through all this misfortune and
serious trouble; but there is something more in me than that. You will
be quite astonished!"

"Nay, nay. Remain what you are," the widow said.

"Always and ever full of love for you and Pul. But I am a grand and
trusted person now! I have something very important to do for Orion
to-morrow. Something--Rustem will go with me.--Important, very
important, Mother Joanna. But what it is I must not tell--not even you!"

Here she was interrupted, for the heavy prison door opened for their
exit.

It was many hours before it was again unlocked to let out the bishop, so
long was he detained talking to Paula in her cell.

To his enquiry as to whether she was an orthodox Greek, or as the common
people called it, a Melchite, she replied that she was the latter;
adding that, if he had come with a view to perverting her from the
confession of her forefathers, his visit was thrown away; at the same
time she reverenced him as a Christian and a priest; as a learned man,
and the friend whom her deceased uncle had esteemed above every other
minister of his confession; she was gladly ready to disclose to him all
that lay on her soul in the face of death. He looked into the pure,
calm face; and though, at her first declaration, he had felt prompted to
threaten her with the hideous end which he had but just done his utmost
to avert, he now remembered the Greek widow's request and bound himself
to keep silence.

He allowed her to talk till midnight, giving him the whole history of
all she had known of joy and sorrow in the course of her young life;
his keen insight searched her soul, his pious heart rose to meet the
strength and courage of hers; and when he quitted her, as he walked
home with the deacon, the first words with which he broke a long silence
were:

"While you were asleep, God vouchsafed me an edifying hour through that
heretic child of earth."




CHAPTER XX.

When the door in the tall prison-wall was closed behind the women,
Joanna made her way through streets still sultry under the silence of
the night, Rustem following with the child.

The giant's good heart was devoted to Mary, and he often passed his
huge hand over his eyes while she told him all that the scene they had
witnessed meant, and the fearful end that threatened Paula. He broke
in now and again, giving utterance to his grief and wrath in strange,
natural sounds; for he looked up to his beautiful sick nurse as to a
superior being, and Mandane, too, had often remarked that they could
never forget all that the noble maiden had done for them.

"If only," Rustem cried at length, clenching his powerful fist, "If
only I could--they should see..." and the child looked up with shrewd,
imploring eyes, exclaiming eagerly:

"But you could, Rustem, you could!"

"I?" asked Rustem in surprise, and he shook his head doubtfully.

